AN HUMBLE TESTIMONY UNTO THE Goodness and Severity of God in his Dealing with
sinful Churches and Nations. Or, The only Way to deliver a Sinful Nation from
utter Ruin. BY Impendent Judgments, IN A DISCOURSE ON THE Words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Luke 13. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5.

Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my People
their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins. Isa. 58. 1. By JOHN
OWEN, D. D.

In publico Discrimine omnis homo Miles est.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultrey, near the
Church, 1681.

TO THE READER.
THE ensuing Discourse contains the Substance of sundry Sermons Preached in a
private Congregation. Some, who heard them, considering the Subject Matter
Treated of, and the Design in them, with respect unto the present state of
things in this Nation, did judge that it might be convenient and seasonable to
make them more public, for the Use and Benefit of others. But knowing how
remote I was for any such Intention in their first Composure, and how naked
they were of all Ornaments that might render them meet for public view, I was
unwilling for a season to comply with their Desires. Neither was it their
Importunity (which as they did not use, so I should not in this Case have
valued) but their Reasons that prevailed with me to consent, that they might be
Published by any that had a mind thereunto, which is all my Concernment
therein. For they said, that whereas the Land wherein we live, is filled with
Sin, and various Indications of God's displeasure thereon, yet there is an
unexemplified Neglect in calling the Inhabitants of it unto Repentance, for the
diverting of Impendent Judgments. The very Heathen, they said, upon less
Evidence of the Approaches of Divine Vengeance, than is now amongst us, did
always solemnly apply themselves to their Deities, for the turning it away.
Wherefore this Neglect amongst us, they supposed to be of such ill Abode, as
that the weakest and meanest Endeavor for Releif under it, might be of some
use; and of that nature I cannot but esteem this Discourse to be.

They added moreover, That whereas on various Accounts, there are continual
Apprehensions of public Calamities, all men's Thoughts are exercised about the
Ways of Deliverance from them. But whereas they fix themselves on various and
opposite Ways and Means for this End, the Conflict of their Counsels and
Designs increases our Danger, and is like to prove our Ruin. And the great
Cause hereof, is a general Ignorance and Neglect of the only true Way and
Means, whereby this Nation may be delivered from Destruction under the
Displeasure of God. For if their Thoughts did agree and center therein, as it
would Insensibly work them off form their present mutual destructive
Animosities; so also it is of such a Nature, as would lead them into a
Coalescency in those Counsels, whose Fruit would be the Establishment of Truth
with Righteousness and Peace. Now this Way is no other but sincere Repentance,
and universal Reformation in all sorts of Persons throughout the Nation.

That this is the only Way for the saving of this Nation from impendent
Judgments, and wasting Desolations, that this way will be effectual unto that
End, when all others shall fail, is asserted and proved in this Discourse, from
the Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ himself, to confront the Wisdom of
Politicians, who are otherwise minded, with a plain Word of Truth and Power.

It was hoped also by them, that some Intimation of their Duty, might be hereby
given unto those, who having the Ministerial Oversight of the Generality of the
People to Divert their Minds unto the Pet-Petty Differences and Contests,
whilst the Fire of Gods Displeasure for Sin, is ready to devour their
Habitations. And the Truth is, if they persist in their Negligence, if they
give not a public Evidence at this Season, of their Zeal for Repentance and
Reformation of Life, among all sorts of Persons, going before them in their
Example and Endeavors, unto the Promotion of them, I understand not how they
will give an Account of their Trust and Duty to God or Men.

And therefore were I worthy to give Advice to any of my Brethren in the
Ministry, who are in the same Condition with my self, as unto outward
Circumstances, it should be this only; Namely, That whilst others do seek to
obstruct them in the whole Discharge of their Duty, and to deprive the Church
of the Benefit of their Labors, they would by their own Personal Example, by
Peculiar Endeavors in their Congregations, among all that hear them, and on
every Occasion, so press the present Calls of God unto Repentance, and so
promote the Work of a visible Reformation, as eminently to help in saving of
the Nation from approaching Judgments, and therein, of them also who design
their Trouble; And I doubt not, but most of them are already engaged and
forward herein.

This shall be our Testimony, and our Peace, in whatever may befall us in this
World.

Let us not satisfy our selves, that our Congregations are in so good a
Posture, as that they may continue for our Lives; and so be like ill Tenants,
who care not if their Houses fall upon the Expiration of the Term of their
Interest in them. That Reparation is required of us, which may make them serve
for succeeding Generations.

And when any Church is so in observant of its own Decays, as to be negligent
of Endeavors for proportionable Reformation, if after a while, any will
deliver their own Souls, it must be by a Departure from them that hate to be
Reformed.

It is a fond Imagination, that Churches may render their Communion useless and
dangerous, only by Heresy, Tyranny, and False Worship; an Evil, Worldly,
Corrupt Conversation in the Generality of their Members, contrary to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, not opposed and contradicted, by a constant Endeavor
for sincere Reformation, is no less ruinous unto the Being of Churches, than
any of these other Evils.

On these and such like Considerations I was not willing that this plain
discourse should be exposed to public view; hoping that it might stir up
others of greater Abilities and Opportunities, more effectually to pursue the
same Design, I do not think it needful to make any Apology for the Plainness
both of the Matter and Style in this small Treatise.

The least Endeavor to attire a Discourse of this Nature, with the Ornaments
of Speech or Language, is even ridiculous; it is more fit to bear the Furrows
of Sighs and and Tears, than to be smoothed and flourished with the Oily
Colors of Elegance and Rhetoric.

And as for the obvious Plainness of the Matter contained in it, it is suited,
as I Judge, unto them whose Good is principally designed therein. Plain men
have sinned as well as others, though it may be, not unto so high a degree, nor
in such an Outrage of Excess. However, on many Considerations they are likely
first to suffer, unless impendent Judgments are diverted by Repentance.

I do but a little plead with every man for himself, and in his own Cause.
Neither however wise or learned men may be, is it meet in this Case to treat
them otherwise. It is to no purpose to make a fine Speech unto such as are
falling into a Lethargy; nor to discourse learnedly of the Art of Navigation,
unto them that are ready to perish in a Storm; they must be plain Words and
plain Things that are forcible in this Case. And these by whom they are
despised, from any Principle of Self-Elation, give but an uncomfortable
Indication of what will be the Issue of their Dangers.

Let therefore the Reader but heartily excuse, and pass by the Trouble which he
will be put unto by the frequent Mistakes of the Press, especially in
Mis-pointings, rendering the Sense sometimes obscure and unobvious; and I have
on the behalf of the Treatise it self, no more to desire of his forbearance.

Luke 13. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5. There were present at that season, some that told him
of the Galileans, whose Blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices. And
Jesus answering, said unto them* Suppose ye that these Galileans were Sinners
above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things?

I tell you Nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Or those Eighteen, upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell, and slew them; think ye
that they were Sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem?

I tell you Nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.


IT is a Part and Duty of Spiritual Wisdom, as also an Evidence of a due
Reverence of God, to take Notice of Extraordinary Occurrences in the
Dispensations of his Providence; for they are instructive warnings, and of
great importance in his Government of the World. In them the Voice of the Lord
cries unto the City, and the man of Wisdom shall see his Name. And there is a
Mark left on them, as profligate Persons, who will not see when his Hand is so
lifted up. An Example of this Wisdom is given us here in our Blessed Savior;
who on the Report that was made unto him of some severe Providential Accidents,
then newly fallen out, gives an Exposition of the Mind of God in them, with an
Application of them, unto the present Duty of them that heard him, and Ours
therein

Some things may be observed in General, to give Light into the Context, and
the Design of our Savior in this holy Discourse.

I. The Time when the Things mentioned did fall out, and wherein our Savior
passed this judgment on them.

1. It was a Time of great Sin; of the abounding of all sorts of Sins: The
Nation as such, in its Rulers and Rule; the Church as such, in its Officers,
Order and Worship; and the Generality of the People, in their Personal
Capacities, were all overwhelmed in provoking Sins, Hypocrisy, Oppression,
Cruelty, Superstition, Uncleanness, Persecution, Impenitency, and Security, all
proceeding from Unbelief, had filled the Land, and defiled it. We have a
sufficient Account of this State of things in the Story of the Gospel; so as
that it needs no other Confirmation. Yea, so wicked were the People, and so
corrupt the Church State, and so impenitent were the Generality of them
therein, that it suited the Rightousness and Holiness of God, to revenge on
that Generation, not only their own Sins, but the Sins also of all wicked
persecutors from the Foundation of the World; a thing which he does not do but
on high Provocations; Luke 11. 50. 51. That the Blood of all the Prophets,
which was shed from the Foundation of the World, may be required of this
Generation; from the Blood of Abel, unto the Blood of Zacharias, which perished
between the Altar and the Temple: Verily I say unto you, it shall be required
of this Generation.

There is in this Commination an Appearance of Severity, beyond the Rule
established, Exodus 20. 5. There God declares, That as he is a jealous God,
which Title he assumes to himself, with respect unto the highest Provocations,
that he will visit the Iniquity of the Fathers on the Children to the third and
fourth Generation of them that hate him. But here the Vengeance and Punishment
due unto the Sins of an hundred Generations, is threatened to be inflicted on
that which was present.

Something in our passage may be spoken for the Vindication of Divine Justice
herein, seeing we may be more concerned in that Divine Commination than the
most are aware.

1. The Case here is particular. That in the Commandmont respects the Common
Case of all false Worshippers, and their Posterity; but this respects
Persecution unto Blood and Death of the true Worshippers of God. Now though God
be very much provoked with the Sins of false Worshippers, yet he can either
bear with them, or pass over their Sins with lesser Punishments, or at least
for a long season; but when they come to Persecution and the Blood of them who
worship him in Spirit and in Truth, in his appointed season he will not spare
them; their own, and the Iniquities of their Predecessors, shall be avenged on
them which will be the end of the Antichristian Church State, after all its
present Triumph.

2. All those who from the beginning of the World suffered unto Blood, on the
account of Religion, suffered in the Cause of Christ, for their Faith in him,
and Confession of him, namely, as he was promised unto the Church. Unto him and
his Office did Abel, by Faith, bear Testimony in the Bloody Sacrifice that he
offered. So it is said that Moses, in his danger for killing the Egyptian,
hare the Reproach of Christ, because he did it in Faith of the Promised Seed,
which was Christ. They were therefore all slain in the Cause of Christ: And
whereas this Generation was to slay Christ himself, and did so, they did
therein approve of, and justify all the Blood that was shed in the same Cause
from the Foundation of the World; and made themselves justly liable unto the
Punishment due unto it. Hence our Savior tells them. Matthew. 23. 35. That They,
the Men of that Generation, slew Zechariah, who was actually slain many hundred
years before.

3. Our Blessed Savior mentions Abel, and Zechariah Particularly. This
Zechariah, called the son of Barachias, was undoubtedly the Zechariah mentioned
2 Chr. 24. 20, 21, 22. For concerning those two alone, it is observed, That the
one dead, and the other dying, cried for Vengeance. So God testifies of the
Blood of Abel, Genesis 4. 10. And Zechariah when he died, said, The Lord look upon
it, and require it. Hence the Apostle affirms, That Abel being dead, yet
speaks, Heb 11. 4. that is, his Blood did so, it did so then, and it spoke for
Vengance, as he intimates, Chapter 12, 24. It did so before and until the
Destruction of Jerusalem: For in the Rejection and absolute Destruction of
that Apostatized Church and People, the Blood of all that suffered under the
Old Testament, was expiated; Abel's Blood cries no more; nor does God look any
more on the Blood of Zechariah, to require it.

But the same Voice and Cry is now continued by another sort of Men; namely,
those who have suffered in the Cause of Christ, since his Coming, according to
the Promise, Rev. 6. 9. 10. And this Cry shall be continued until the appointed
Time does come for the utter Destruction of the Antichristian apostatized
Church State.

4. When a Sinful Church or people have passed the utmost Bounds of Divine
Patience and Forbearance, they shall fall into such abominable crying Sins and
Provocations, as shall render the utmost Vengeance beneath their Deserts. So
Josephus affirms of this Generation, after they had rejected and slain the Lord
Christ, that they fell into such an Hell of provoking Abominations, that if the
Romans had not come and destroyed them, God would have sent Fire and Brimstone
upon them from Heaven, as he did on Sodom.

And we may by the way, observe from hence.

It is a dangerous thing to live in the times of declining Churches, when they
are hastening unto their fatal Period in Judgments; such as will inevitably
befall them all and every one.

And it is so, for these three Reasons:

1. Because such Times are perilous through Temptations from the abounding of
the Lusts of Men, in all Uncleanness and Wickedness. So the Apostle states it,
2. Tim. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. If any think they are free from Danger, because as
yet they feel no Evil, whilst the Lusts of Men professing Christian Religion,
visibly and openly abound and rage in the World, they will be mistaken.

2. Though Destruction do not immediately befall them, yet when they have
passed the time of Divine Patience, designing their Reformation; they shall
precipitate themselves into Bloody Abominations as did the Church of the Jews.

3. Judgment shall at length overtake them, and God will revenge on them the
Sins and Provocations, especially the Persecutions and Blood of them that went
before them, and lead them into their Apostasy. So when he shall come to
destroy Mystical Babylon, or the Antichristian Church State, it is said, that
in her was found the Blood of the Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were
slain upon the Earth, Rev. 18. 24. Even the Blood of Saints, that was shed by
Pagan-Rome, shall be avenged on Antichristian Rome, after she has espoused the
Cause, and walked in the way of the other, justifying in her own Practice, what
they had done,

II. It was a Time wherein Judgments were near approaching; so our Savior
himself affirms it to have beeen, Luke 19. 42, 43, 44. Had thou known in this
thy Day, They had now but a Day, and that now almost ready to expire, though
they saw it not,) nor would believe it. But the day of their desolation
approached continually, and when the Apostle wrote his Epistle to the Hebrews,
was making its entrance upon them Chap. 10. 25. ye see the day approaching, And
we may hence learn That,

1. In the approaching of desolating Judgment on a sinful provoking Church or
Nation, God is pleased to give previous Intimations of his displeasure, as well
in the works of Providence, as by the Rule of his Word; such were those here so
interpreted by our Savior in such a Season.

This, I say, is the ordinary process of Divine Providence; and it may be no
Nation, Heathen or Christian ever utterly perished without Divine Warnings of
their approaching desolation: some indeed seem to be taken away with a sudden
surprisal, as God threatens, Psalm. 58. 9, 10, 11.

But this is from their own security, and not for want of Warnings; so the Old
World before the Flood, had warnings sufficient of their Destruction, by the
Preaching of Noah, and the building of the Ark, by which he condemned the
World, Heb. 11. 7. or left them unexcusable to divine Vengeance. Yet they took
no notice of these things, but were suprised with the Flood, as if they had
never heard or seen any thing that should give them warning of it, as our
Savior declares, Mat. 24. 38, 39. and when the time comes of the destruction
of Mystical-Babylon, she shall say in that very day wherein her Judgments come
upon her, I sit as a Queen, and shall see no sorrow; notwithstanding all her
warnings in the pouring out of the Vials of previous judgments, Rev. 18. 7, 8.

2. It is the height of security in such a time and season, either to neglect
the consideration of extraordinary Providence, or to miss-interpret them as
unto any thing, but Tokens of approaching Judgments, if not prevented.

Nothing can be questioned herein without an Arraignment of the Divine Wisdom
of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Interpretation and Application that he makes
of these Accidents. No doubt but they were neglected and despised by the most,
as common things; to take any great notice of such Occurrences, is esteemed
Pusillanimity or Superstition. So it is by many at this day, wherein all
things, as we shall see afterward, are filled with Tokens of divine
displeasure: But things will come shortly unto another account; in the mean
time it is safe to follow this Divine Example, so as to find out sacred
Warnings in such Providential Occurrences.

2. The Providential Accidents spoken of, are two, and of two sorts.

1. The first was that wherein the bloody Cruelty of men had an hand. The
Galileans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. When this was
done, on what occasion, and what was the number of the Persons so slain, the
Scripture is silent. However it is certain that it was done at Jerusalem; for
Sacrifices might not be offered any where else. Thither came the Galileans with
their Sacrifices; that is either the Beasts which they brought to the Priests
to offer for them; for they might not offer Sacrifices themselves, or the
Paschal Lamb, which they might slay themselves.

Whilst they were engaged in this work Pilate the bloody Roman Governor, on
what occasion or provocation is unknown, came upon them, and slew them in a
cruel manner, intimated in that Expression, that he mingled their Blood with
their Sacrifices. And this Providence is the more remarkable, in that it fell
out whilst they were engaged in their Sacred Worship; which carries an
Indication of Divine Severity. And it may be there was, as it is in the ruin
of Mankind every day, occasion taken for it, from the difference that was
between two wicked Governors, Pilate and Herod, unto whose Jurisdiction these
Galileans did belong, in whose blood Pilate thought to revenge himself on his
Enemy. However they both combined at last in the killing of Christ, as others
use to do in the World; and so made themselves Friends, leaving their Example
to their Successors.

2. The other was a mere Effect of divine Providence, the death of eighteen men
by the fall of a Tower in Siloam; that is a place of Waters, and a running
stream in Jerusalem it self. And our Lord Jesus Christ declares herein, not
only that all such Accidents are disposed by the Providence of God, but that he
speaks in them for our Instruction.

Both these, as they were Warnings, as we shall see, so they were Figures of
the approaching destruction of the City and People: for that in the first place
is the perishing here intended, as is manifest in the ensuing Parable, wherein
the Church State of the Jews is compared unto a barren Fig Tree, which was to
be cut down and destroyed. And accordingly that destruction did befall them,
partly by the bloody Cruelty of the Romans, and partly by the fall and ruin of
the Temple, Towers, and Walls of the City, both included in the Word,
likewise; ye shall likewise perish, or in like manner. But although they were
of various kinds, and men might evade the consideration of them on several
pretenses; the one being nothing but the Tyrannical Fury of Pilate, the other
only a somewhat unusual Accident, yet our Lord Jesus Christ finds out the hand
and Council of God in them both, and declares the same Language to be spoken in
them both. Signs of the same event are doubled to show the certainty of it,
like Pharaohs Dreams.

And we may observe; That

1. All sorts of unusual Accidents, or Effects of Providence in a season of Sin
and approaching Judgments, are of the same Indication, and ought to have the
same Interpretation.

So is the same Application made of both these different Signs and Warnings by
our Savior; they have, says he; the same Language, the same Signification.
There was nothing at this time more hardened the Jews unto their utter ruin,
than the false Application they made of Providential Signs and Warnings which
were all multiplied among them, as boding their good and deliverance, when they
were all Tokens of their approaching ruin. For when such things are rejected
as Warnings calling to Repentance and Reformation, as they were by them on a
presumption that they were Signs of Gods appearance on their behalf, they
became to be nothing but certain Forcrunners of greater Judgments, and
infallible Tokens of destruction; and so they will be to them likewise by whom
they are yet despised.

Secondly, God is pleased sometimes to give warnings of approaching Judgments,
not only as unto the matter of them, that they shall be accompanied with
severity; but also as unto the especial nature and manner of them; so was it
with these two Signs of Blood by the Sword, and Death by the fall of the Tower,
representing as in a Glass, that common calamity which was to befall the City
and Nation. And I pray God that the prodigious Appearance of fiery-Meteors,
like Swords, Armies, and Arms, with other things of the like nature may not be
sent to point out the very kind and nature of the Judgments which are coming on
England if not diverted; for as unto these Signs, not only the Scripture, but
all Heathen-Stories, are filled with an Account of them. Before the approach of
desolating Judgments, Nature the common Parent of Mankind, did always put
forth it self in irregular, unusual Actings, in fiery-Meteors, Comets,
Earthquakes, strange Appearances in the Air, Voices heard, and the like.

The brute Elements tremble at the approaches of God in his Judgment against
the Inhabitants of the Earth; so the Prophet expresses it, Hab. 3. 10. The
Mountains saw the and they trembled, the overflowings of thee Water passed by,
the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his hand on high.

They are as it were cast into a posture of trembling and Supplication. And
Aschylus an Heathen Poet in Justin Martyr, (...)
(...),
(...).


When the dreadful Eye of God ( in his Providence) is lifted up, all things
tremble before it.

Thirdly, In the Interpretation and application made of these severe Accidents
by our Savior in his divine Wisdom, we may observe.

1. Especial Judgments in such a season, befalling in any, do not prove an
especial Guilt, or provocation in them.

This our Savior expressly denies, and that with respect unto both the
Instances insisted on, and that distinctly, verse 2. v. 4. I do not hence
absolutely establish a general Rule as unto all Times and Persons. For.

1. The observation is here confined and limited, unto such a Season as that
under consideration; namely a time of provoking Sins in the generality of the
People, and approaching Judgments. In such a season no assignation of especial
Guilt ought to be made on especial Calamitous Sufferings.

2. Some Persons may be guilty of such daring presumptous Sins, that if they
are overtaken with especial Judgments in this World, it is the height of
Impiety not to own the especial revenging hand of God, in their destruction;
such was the Death of Herod, Acts 12, 22, 23.

2. Judgments on private men in such a season are warnings to the public. This
is intimated by our Savior in this place; Namely, that God uses a Sovereignty
herein, by singling out whom he pleases to make them Examples unto others;
this says he, was the sole reason, as far as you are concerned to judge or
know, why God brought these sore destructions upon them; namely, that by these
Warnings he might call you to Repentance. Yet I judge God does not ordinarily
exercise his Sovereignty in this kind, unless it be when all have deserved to
be destroyed; and then, as in the Sedition and Mutiny of Military Legions, they
decimated them, or slew some for an example and terror unto others; so God
calls out of a guilty multitude whom he pleases, to make previous Instances of
approaching Judgments.

3. Those who first fall under Judgments, are not always the worst that
Judgments shall befall, nor are the first Judgments usually the most severe; so
it is plain in these Instances. And because we have Instances of this nature
amongst us, we should consider how to make a right Judgment concerning them;
and these three things we may safely determine.

1. That those who suffered were Sinners also, These things were spoken on the
burning of several Persons to death, in one of the late Fires in London.
though they were not so only, or in an especial manner. This is necessary unto
the vindication of the Justice of God.

2. That he who has made them warnings unto us, might have made us warnings
unto them; herein his Sovereignty and Mercy toward us, who escape, is manifest.

3. That we also have an hand in that Guilt, forerunning such Providence so
far as there is any thing poenal in them. For such private previous Judgments
are the effect of public Provocations.

Fourthly, Here is a sure Rule, given us, of the Interpretation of severe
Providence in such a season, as that here intended. Such I mean as we have had
amongst us, in Plague, and Fire, and Blood; and such as we have the Signs and
Tokens of at this time in Heaven and Earth. For three things we are here taught
safely to conclude concerning them,

1. That they are warnings from God. This our Savior plainly declares in the
Interpretation and Application of these two Instances.

2. That their Voice and Language is a Call to Repentance and Reformation:
Except ye repent, etc.

3. When they are neglected as warnings, calling to Repentance, they change
their nature, and become certain Signs of approaching Destruction. And in the
observation of these Rules of Interpretation of Providential Severities, given
us by our Savior, we may be preserved from the excesses of neglecting on the
one hand, what is contained in them; and of rash judging of Men or Causes on
the other.

These things being premised for the opening of the words, the Truth wherein we
are instructed by them, appears to be this.

When a Land, a Nation, a City, a Church, is filled with sin, so as that God
gives them Warnings or Indications of his displeasure by previous Judgments; or
other extraordinary Signs, if they are not as Warnings complied withal by
Repentance and Reformation, they are Tokens of approaching Judgments, that
shall not be avoided,

This is that sacred Truth which our Lord Jesus Christ does here recommend to
our Observation. It is the great Rule of Divine Providence, with the especial
Seal of our Lord Christ annexed to it; I tell you Nay but unless you repent,
you shall all likewise perish. When Warnings for Instruction are not received,
they are Tokens of Destruction. This is a Truth which none almost deny, and
none almost believe. Had it been believed, many desolating Judgments in former
Ages had been prevented, Nations and Cities should have abode in Prosperity,
which are now sunk into Ruin, yea, into Hell. See Luke 19. 41, 42, 43, 44.
Mat. 11. 23. And were it believed in the days wherein we live, it would be the
means of saving a poor Nation from, otherwise inevitable ruin. The State is so
with us, that unless we repent, we shall perish. I do not prescribe unto the
Sovereignty of God in his Providential Administrations. He can if he please,
suffer all his Warnings to be despised, all his Calls neglected, yea scoffed
at, and yet exercise Forbearance toward us, as unto a speedy execution of
Judgment. But woe unto them with whom he so deals; for it has only this end,
that they may have a space to fill up the measure of their Iniquities, and so
be sitted for eternal Destruction, Romans 9. 22:

There is a threefold Issue and event of the State we have described.

1. When a sinful Church or Nation so atend unto Gods Warnings in previous
Judgments, and other Signs of his displeasure, as to comply with them by
Repentance and Reformation. This is a blessed Issue which will certainly divert
all impendent judgments; as shall be afterward declared.

2. When by reason of the neglect of them, and want of compliance with them,
God does bring distress and calamities upon a People in general. This is a sad
event. But however, under it God does often preserve a Seed and Remnant, which
being brought through the Fire, and thereby purged and purified, though but as
a poor and afflicted People, yet they shall be preserved as a Seed, and Reserve
for a better State of the Church, see Zach. 13. 8, 9. Isai. 6. 11. 12, 13.
Chap. 14. 6. Chap. 24. 13. Zeph. 3. 12. Ezekiel 5. 2, 12.

3. When God utterly forsakes a People, will regard them no more; but give them
up unto Idolatry, False-Worship, and all sorts of Wickedness. When he says,
Why should you be stricken any more, you will revolt more and more. This is the
sorest of Judgments. VVo unto them says the Lord, when I depart from them,
Hosea, 9. 12. Of such a People their shall be neither Hope nor Remnant, Ezekiel.
47. 11. Who would not rather see a Nation suffering under some Judgments as
the Effects of God's displeasure, for the neglect of his warnings, whereby it
may be purged and purified, and restored, than to be left under Idolatry and
all manner of Wickedness for ever.

But the way is here proposed for the avoidance of these Evils. And these
things will be more fully spoken unto afterward.

I shall first give some Evidences of the Truth laid down, and then the reason
of it, which will make way for what I principally intend.

I shall not insist on the especial kind of Warnings or Signs here mentioned,
but only on the general nature of divine Warnings by the Word or otherwise, in
such a season, as wherein an abounding of Sin is accompanied with great
evidences of approaching Judgments.

1. According unto this rule was the dealing of God with the Old World, which
is set forth unto us for an Example; see 1 Pet. 3. 20. with 2. 5.

The men of the Old World were a sinful provoking Generation. God gave them
warning of his displeasure by the Preaching of Noah, and other ways; during his
Ministry, the long suffering of God waited for the Repentance and Reformation.
For this was the end both of the Season, and of the Ministry granted unto them
therein: But when it was not complied withal, he brought the Flood on those
ungodly men.

2. So he dealt with the Church under the Old Testament. A Summary account is
given of it; 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16, 17. After a contempt of all Gods previous
warnings, with a neglect of Repentance and Reformation, the time came when
there was no remedy, but the City and Temple must be destroyed, and the People
be partly slain, and partly carried into Captivity. Accordingly there is a
general Rule established for all times and seasons, Prove, 29. 1.

3. Neither have his dealings been otherwise with the Churches of the New
Testament. All those of the first Plantation have been ruined and destroyed by
the Sword of God's displeasure, for impenitency under divine Calls and Warnings.

4. God gave an eminent instance hereof in the Ministry of Jeremiah the
Prophet; he gives him the Law of his Prophecy, Chap. 18, 7, 8. At what Instant
I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and
to pull down, and to destroy it, if that Nation against whom I have pronounced,
turn from their Evil, I will repent of the Evil that I thought to do unto them.
Here is the whole of the Truth laid down represented unto us. The Nation and
Kingdom especially intended, was that of the people and Church of the Jews.
Concerning them it is supposed, that they were evil, that Sin abounded amongst
them, In this State God gave them warning by the Ministry of Jeremiah as he did
otherwise also. The voice of these warnings was that they should repent them of
their Evil, and reform their ways. On a supposition whereof he promises to
remove the Judgments which they had deserved, and which were impendent over
them: upon their failure herein, he declares that fearful desolation should
befall them, as it did afterward, verse 16, 17. According to this Rule the
Prophet persisted in his Ministry The Sum of his Sermon? was this; It is a time
of great Sin and Provocation, these and these are your Sins; these are evident
Tokens of God's Displeasure against you, and of the near approaching of
desolating Judgments. In this State Repent, return and reform your ways, and
you shall be delivered: in case you do not, utter Destruction shall come upon
you.

But the Princes, the Priests and generally all the People set themselves
against him herein and would not believe his Word.

And by three things they countenanced themselves in their Unbelief and
Impenitency, that they should be delivered, although they did not repent nor
reform their VVays.

First, By their Privileges; that they were the only Church and People of God;
who had the Temple and his Worship amongst them: as if he should say, The best
reformed Church in the World. This they directly confront his Ministry withal,
Chap 7, 3, 4. They fear none of his Threatenings, they despise his Counsel for
their Safety, approve their ways and their doings, because they were the
Church, and had the Temple for their Security.

Secondly, By their own Strengh for War, and their Defense against all their
Enemies. They gloried in their Wisdom, their Might, and their Riches; as he
intimates. Chap. 9. 23.

Thirdly, By the Help and Aid which they expected from others, especially from
Egypt. And herein they thought once that they had prevailed against him, and
utterly disproved his Rule of Safety by Reformation only; for when the
Chaldeans besieged the City, by whom the Judgments he had threaned them withal,
were to be executed, Pharaoh the King of Egypt coming up against them, they
departed from Jerusalem for fear of his Army. Chapter 27, 5, 11. Hereon, no doubt,
they triumphed against him, and were satisfied that their own way for
Deliverance, was better than that troublesome way of Repentance and
Reformation, which he prescribed unto them. But he knew from whom he had his
Message, and that would be the Event of the false Hopes and Joys which they had
entertained: So he tells them, verse 9, 10. Deceive not your selves, saying,
the Chaldeans shall surely depart from us; for they shall not depart: For
though you had smitten the whole Army of the Chaldeans, that fight against you,
and their remained but wounded men amongst them, yet should they rise up every
man in his Tent, and burn this City with fire. Which accordingly came to pass.

And so will it be with any other People, against all Pleas and pretenses to
the contrary.

Let the Case be stated according as it is laid down in the Poposition, and
explained in the instance of Jeremiah.

Suppose a Church or People do abound with provoking Sins; that during the time
of God's Patience toward them, and Warning of them, there are Signs and Tokens
of his Displeasure, and of impendent Judgments; let them feed themselves so
long as they please with hopes of Deliverance and Safety, unless they comply
with the Calls of God unto Repentance and Reformation they will fall under
desolating Judgments, or be utterly forsaken of God for ever.

The Grounds and Reasons of this Rule and Order in Divine Dispensations, are
many, plain and obvious, which I shall not at large insist upon.

I shall only at present mention some of them, because those of the most
Evidence and Importance will accrue afterward unto our Consideration.

1. This Rule of proceeding is suited unto the Righteousness of God in the
Government of the World, in the inbred Light of the Minds of Men. This Notion.
That Judgment or Divine Vengeance will overtake impenitent Sinners, who have
been previously warned of their Sin, is that which we are not taught, which we
do not learn from one another, which is not only the Voice of Divine
Revelation, but that which is born with us, which is inseparable from our
Nature; the Light and Conviction whereof, neither with respect unto our selves
or others, we can avoid, this is the Voice of nature in Mankind Impenitent
Sinners, incurable by Warnings, are the proper Objects of divine Displeasure.
And the absolute impunity of such Persons, would be a great Temptation unto
Atheism, as the suspension of deserved Judgments on provoking Sinners, is with
some at this day. But ordinarily and finally God will not act contrary unto the
inbred Notions of his Righteousness the Government of the World, which he
himself has implanted in the Minds of Men. But as for the Times, Seasons and
Ways of the Execution of his Judgments, he has reserved them unto his own
Sovereignty.

2. It is needful unto the Vindication of the Faithfulness of God in his
Threatenings given out by Divine Revelation. By this he has always from the
beginning of the World, testified unto his own Holiness and Righteousness,
whereof they are the most proper Expressions. Those first recorded of them are
in the Prophecy of Enoch, Jude 14, 15, And they have been since continued in
all Ages. But whereas the Wisdom of God acting in Righteousness, hah been
accompanied with Patience and Forbearance, in the Accomplishment of these
Threatenings, there have been, and yet are Mockers and Scoffers at these Divine
Threatenings, as though they were a mere Noise, of no efficacy or signification.
So the Apostle declares the Thoughts of the Minds of Men profane and ungodly,
2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. Wherefore there is a Condecency unto the Divine Excellencies,
that God in his own Way and Time should vindicate his Faithfulness in all his
Threatenings.

3. God hereby manifests himself to be a God hearing Prayers, regarding the
Cries of his poor and distressed VVitnesses in the World. When the World
abounds in provoking Sins, especially in Blood and Persecution there is a
conjunct Cry unto God, of those that have suffered, and those that do suffer,
in Heaven and Earth, for Vengeance on obstinate impenitent Sinners. See Luke
18. 7, 8. with Rev. 6. 10. The Voices of all those, I say, who have suffered
unto Death in foregoing Ages, for the Testimony of Jesus, and are now in
Heaven, in a state of Expectancy of complete Glory, with all those of them,
whose Sighs and groans under their Oppressors, do at present ascend unto the
Throne of God, have the sense in them by Divine Interpretation, that Punishment
be inflicted on impenitent Sinners; as is plainly expressed by our Savior in
that Place of the Gospel, affirming that he will avenge his Elect speedily who
cry unto him Day and night. Herein God will vindicate his Glory, as the God
that hears Prayers.

4. A sense of this Divine Truth, is a great and effectual Means of God's Rule
in the Hearts of men in the World, setting Bounds to their Lusts, and
restraining that superfluity of Wickedness and Villainy, which would otherwise
take away the distinction as to Sin, between the Earth and Hell. If men can at
any time free themselves from the Terror and restraining Power of this
Consideration, that Vengeance is always approaching toward impenitent
Sinners, there is nothing so vile, so profane, so flagitious, as that they
would not wholly give up themselves unto it Eccles. 8. 11. Because Judgment is
not speedily executed against an evil Work, the Hearts of the Sons of Men is
wholly set in them to do evil. And God knows, that if Impunity in this World
should always accompany provoking Sinners, the Temptation would be too strong
and powerful for the Faith of weak Believers, which he will therefore relieve
by frequent instances of his Severity.

In a successive continuation of previous Judgments on impenitent sinners,
there is an incontroulable Evidence given of the certainty of that final
Judgments which all Mankind shall be called unto. So the Apostle proves it, and
intimates that it is a foolish thing, the effect of obstinacy in Sin, if men do
not learn the certain Determination and Approach of the Eternal Judgment, from
the Drowning of the Old World, the Conflagration of Sodom, with the like
Instances of Divine Severity, 2. Pet. 2. 3.

My present Enquiry hereon, is, what is our own Concernment in these things,
what are we for our own Good to learn by the Blessed Instruction given us by
our Lord Jesus Christ, in his Interpretation of the Providential Occurrences
mentioned in the Text.

And this I shall manifest by an impartial Enquiry into the things ensuing.

1. When does a Church, a Nation, a People, or City so abound in Sin, as to be
immediately and directly concerned in his Divine Warning, and what in
particular is the case of the Nation wherein we live, and our own therein?

2. Of what sort are those desolating Judgments which in one way and sense or
another are impendent with respect unto such a Church or Nation, and
consequently unto our selves at this season?

3. What warnings, Calls and Indications of Divine Displeasures, and the
Approach of calamitous distresses does God usually grant, and what he has
given, and is giving unto us at present?

4. What is the Equity, and wherein it does consist of thy Divine Constitution
here attested by our Blessed Savior, that in such a Case Repentance and
Reformation, and nothing else shall save and Deliver a Church, a People, a
Nation from Ruin.

5. Whereas this Rule is so holy, just and equal, whence is it that all sorts
of Men are so unwilling to comply with it, even in the utmost Extremity, when
all other Hopes do fail and perish; and whence is it so amongst our selves at
this Day?

6. What is required unto that Reformation, which may save any Nation, this
wherein we live, from desolating Calamities, when they are deserved?

7. From what Causes at present such a Reformation may be expected, and by what
means it may be begun and accomplished, so as to prevent our utter Ruin.

8. What is the Duty, what ought to be the frame of Mind in true Believers,
what their Walk and Work in such a season; that in case all Means of Delivery
do fail they may be found of Christ in Peace at his Coming; for it is but yet a
little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

These things are necessary to be inquired into, that we may help to beat out
the Paths of Truth and Peace, the only ways that lead unto our Deliverance. The
Nation is filled with Complaints and Fears, mutual Charges on one party and
another, as unto the Causes of our present Troubles and approaching dangers;
various designs and contrivances, with vain hopes and vehement desires of this
or that way or means of help and deliverance; cruel Hatreds and Animosities on
differences in Religion, designing no less than the extirpation of all that is
Good therein, do abound in it, by all means rending it self in pieces, wearying
it self in the largeness of its ways, and yet says not there is no hope. But
for the most part, the true Causes of all our Troubles and Dangers, with the
only Remedy of them, are utterly neglected. The World is filled, yea, the
better sort of men in it, with other designs, other discourses; we here rarely
of these things from the Pulpits (which are filled with Animosities about Petty
Interests, and private difference in the Approaches of public ruin) nor in
the Council of those who pretend to more Wisdom. Some shall think they shall
do great things their Wisdom and Counsel; some by their Authority and Power,
some by their Number, some by owning the best cause as they suppose, and with
many such like notions are the Minds of men possessed. But the truth is, the
Land abounds in Sin, God is angry, and risen out of his holy place, Judgment
lies at the Door, and in vain shall we seek for remedy or healing, any other
way than that purposed. This therefore we shall enquire into.

The first thing supposed in the proposition before laid down, was taken from
the Circumstance of the time wherein, and with reference whereunto our Lord
Jesus Christ delivered the Rule of the necessity of Repentance and Reformation,
unto an escape from total Destruction; and this was a time when Sin greatly
abounded in the Church an Nation. And this Supposition is the foundation of the
truth of the whole Assertion; for in other Cases it may not always hold. Our
first enquiry therefore must be,

When a People or Nation is so filled with Sin, or when does Sin so abound
among them, as in conjunction with the things afterward to be insisted on, to
render their Salvation or Deliverance impossible without Repentance and
Reformation? And it does so;

1. When all sorts of Sin abound in it. I do not judge that every particular
Sin, or kind of sinning that may be named, or may not be named, is required
hereunto; nor is it so, that there should be the same outrage in public Sins;
for instance, in Blood and Oppression, as there has been at some times, and in
some places of the World, the dark places of the Earth being silled with
Habitations of Cruelty; nor; is it so, that Sin does reign at that height, and
rage at that rate, as it did before the Flood, or in Sodom, or before the final
destruction of Jerusalem, or as it does in the Kingdom of Antichrist; for in
that case there is no room or place either for Repentance or Reformation; God
hides from them the things that concern their peace, that they may be utterly
and irrecoverably destroyed. But this I will grant is required hereunto;
namely, that no known Sin that is commonly passant in the World, can be
exempted from having a place in the public Guilt of such a Church or Nation.
If any such Sin be committed in the Roll of the Indictment, peace may yet dwell
in the Land. It would be too long, and not to my purpose, to draw up a
Catalogue of Sins, from the highest Atheism through the vilest uncleaness, unto
the lowest Oppression, that are found amongst us. I shall only say on the other
hand, that I know no provoking sin condemned as such, in the Book of God,
whereof instances may not be found in this Nation. Who dares make this a plea
with God for it, namely, that yet it is free and innocent from such and such
provoking Sins? Produce your Cause says the Lord, bring forth your strong
Reasons, says the King of Jacob; let us stand up if we can, and plead for our
selves herein. But the only way whereby we may come to plead with God in this
matter, is fully described, Isai. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 20. It must be Repentance
and Reformation, laying a ground for pleading and arguing with God for pardon
and Mercy, that must save this Nation if it be saved, and not a plea for
exemption from Judgments on the account of our Innocence. This is that which of
all things God most abhorred in the People of old, and which all the Prophets
testified against in them.

But yet to speak somewhat more Particularly unto the first part of the
Proposition in reference unto our selves.

There are four Sins, or four sorts of Sins, or ways in sinning, which unless
God prevent, will be the ruin of this Nation.

1. The first is Atheism, an abomination that these parts of the World were
unacquainted with all until these latter Ages. I do* not speak concerning
Speculative* or Opinionative Atheism, in them that deny the Being of God, or
which is all one, his righteous Government of the World; for it will not avail
any man to believe that God is, unless withal he believe that he is the
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Yet of this sort it is to be feared,
that there, are many amongst us, yea some that make great Advantages of
Religion, do live and talk as if they esteemed it all a Fable. But I speak of
that which is called Practical Atheism, when men live and act as if they were
influenced by prevalent thoughts, that there is no God: such the Nation is
replenished withal, and it exerts it self especially two ways.

1. In Cursed Oaths and blasphemous Execrations, whereby the highest contempt
is cast on the Divine Name and Being. The most excellent Thuanus, giving an
account of the Parisian Massacre, with the horrible Desolations that ensued
thereon, ascribes it in the first place unto the Anger of God, revenging the
horrid Oaths and monstrous Blasphemies, which from the Court, had spread
themselves over all the Nation. Histor. Lib. 53: Nor is it otherwise among us
at present, though not Generally amongst all, yet amongst many, and those
unpunished.

2. Boldness, Confidence, and security in sinning. Many are neither ashamed nor
afraid to act, avow, yea, and boast of the vilest of Sins, The awe that men
have of the Knowledge, Conscience and Judgment of others, concerning their evil
and filthy actions, is one means whereby God rules in the World for the
restraint of Sin. When the yoke hereof, is utterly cast away, and men proclaim
their Sins like Sodom, it is the height of Practical Atheism. Nor I think did
it ever more abound in any age, than in that wherein we live.

2. The loss of the Power of that Religion whose outward Form we do retain. We
are all Protestants, and will abide to be of the Protestant Religion; but
wherein? in the Confession and all the Outward Forms of the Rule and Worship of
the Church. But are men changed, renewed, converted to God by the Doctrine of
this Religion? are they made Humble, Holy, Zealous, fruitful in good Works by
it? have they experience of the power of it in their own Souls in its
transforming of them into the Image of God? Without these things it is of very
little avail what Religion men profess. This is that which is of evil Abode to
the Professors of the Protestant Religion at this day through the World. The
Glory, the Power, the Efficacy of it, are, if not lost and dead, yet greatly
decayed; and an outward Carcass of it, in Articles of Faith and Forms of
worship, does only abide. Hence have the Reformed Churches most of them a name
to live, but are dead; living only on a traditional Knowledge, Principles of
Education, Advantages and Interest, in all which the Roman Religion does every
way exceed them, and will carry the Victory, when the Contest is reduced unto
such Principles only. And unless God be pleased by some renewed Effusion of his
Blessed Spirit from above, to revive, and re-introduce a Spirit of Life,
Holiness, Zeal, readiness for the Cross, Conformity unto Christ, and Contempt
of the World, in and among the Churches which profess the Protestant Religion,
he will ere long take away the hedge of his protecting Providence, which now for
some Ages he has kept about them, and leave them for a spoil unto their
Enemies. So he threatens to do in the like case, Isai. 5. 5, 6. such is the
State described, 2 Timothy ^. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

3. Open Contempt and Reproach of the Spirit of God in all his Divine
Operations, is another Sin of the same dreadful Abode. Our Lord Jesus Christ
tells us, that he who speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in this World, neither in the World to come, Mat. 12. 32. That is,
those who persist in opposing or reproaching the holy Ghost, and his
dispensation and Operations under the New Testament, shall not escape vengeance
and punishment even in this World; for so it befell that Generation unto whom
he spoke. For continuing to do despite unto the Spirit of Grace, wrath at
length came upon them even in this World unto the utmost, which is the sense of
the place. Now scarcely where the Name of Christ was known, did this Iniquity
more abound, than it does at this day amongst us, For not only is the Divine
Person of the holy Spirit by some denied, and the substance of the preaching
and writing of many is to oppose all his peculiar Operations but they are all
made a Scoff, a Derision, and a Reproach openly and on all Occasions every day.
Especially as he is a Spirit of Regeneration and Supplication, he is the object
of Multiplied sober Blasphemies. This Iniquity will be revenged.

4. The abounding of Uncleanness, which having broken forth from a corrupt
Fountain, has overspread the Land like a Deluge, These Sins I say among others
have such a Predominancy among us, as to threaten perishing without Repentance.

Secondly, It is required, that all sorts and degrees of Persons, are concerned
in the Guilt of some of these provoking Sins. For Destruction is threatened unto
all; you shall all likewise perish, all, not universally, pro singulis generum,
but generally, pro generibus singulorum. Therefore all must be some way guilty
of them. And this they may be three ways.

1. Personally in their own Hearts, Lives and Practices, which includes a great
multitude.

2. By not hindering and preventing these Sins in others, so far as their duty
leads, and their power enables them unto. What number of Magistrates, of
Ministers, of Parents, of Masters of Families are comprised herein, is evident
unto all, especially Ministers, see Mal. 2, 7, 8. Jer. 23. 14, 15.

3. By not mourning for what they cannot help or remedy. For it is such alone
as shall be exempted from public Calamities, Ezekiel. 9. And this in some measure
takes us in all. And the due Consideration hereof, is necessary, upon a double
Account.

1. It is so unto the Manifestation of the Glory of God, in public Calamities
and Desolations; when the Sword slays suddenly, and destroys the righteous with
the wicked; one way or other, in one degree or another, we have all of us an
excess unto the Guilt of those things whereby such Judgments are procured, Who
can say he is innocent? who can complain of his share and interest in the
Calamities that are coming upon us? who can plead that he ought to be exempted?
There will be at last an eternal Discrimination of persons; but as unto
Temporal Judgments, we must own the Righteousness of God, if we also fall under
them.

And, 2. It is so, for the humbling of our Souls under a sense of Sin, which
would better become some of us, than feeding on the Ashes of Reserves for
Exemption in the Day of Distress.

Some may suppose that by reason of their Personal Freedom from those public
provoking Sins which abound in the Nation, that on one account or other, by one
means or other, they shall be safe, as in some High Place. whence they may look
down and behold others in Distress and Confusion. But it is to be feared their
Mistake will serve only to increase their Surprizal and Sorrow.

But yet farther, even the Practice of provoking Sins, abounds among all sorts
of Persons. I do not say that all Individuals amongst us, are guilty of them:
for were it so, our Case were irreparable, like that of Sodom, when there were
not ten righteous persons to be found in it, that is, such as were free from
the Guilt of those Sins, whose Cry came up to Heaven; for then there would be
no room for Repentance or Reformation. But whereas there are several sorts and
degrees of persons, some high and some low, some Rulers, and some Ruled, some
Rich, and some Poor, there is no Order, Sort, or Degree, in Court, City,
Country, Church, or Commonwealth, that are free from provoking Sins:
Individuals of all sorts may be so, but no entire sort is so; and this farther
entitles a Nation unto the condition enquired after,

Thirdly, It is so, when the World is fully of such Sins as are its own, as are
proper to it; and the Churches or Professors such as are peculiar unto them. If
either of these were free from their several Provocations, there might be yet
room for Patience and Mercy. And these are distinct.

The Sins of the World are, the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the eyes, and
the Pride of Life. Sensuality, Luxury, Uncleanness Covetousness, Ambition,
Oppression, and the like, with Security. In these things the Nation is fertile
toward its own Ruin.

The Sins peculiar unto Churches and Professors, are intimated by our Blessed
Saour, in his Charge on the Asian Churches Rev. 2, 3. Decays in Grace, Loss of
Faith and Love. Barreness in good Works, Deadness, Formality, Coldness in
profession, Self-Pleasing, Pride, Hypocrisy, Want of Zeal for God, and Delight
in him, Divisions among themselves, and Conformity unto the World. And some of
these things at present are so prevalent among us, that they can never be
sufficiently bewailed.

It is no small Evidence that the Day of the Lord is nigh at hand, because the
Virgins are all slumbring. And it is not unlikely that Judgment will begin at
the House of God. All Flesh has corrupted its ways; and therefore the End of
all, as to its present Condition, is at hand.

Fourthly, It is so, when the Sins of a People are accompanied with the highest
Aggravations that they are capable of in this World; and those arise from
hence, when they are committed against Warnings, Mercies and Patience. These
comprize the ways and means which God in his Goodness and Wisdom uses to
reclaim and recall men from their Sins: And by whomsoever they are despised,
they treasure up unto themselves wrath against the Day of wrath, and the
Revelation of the righteous Judgments of God, Romans 2. 4, 5. What can save a
People by whom the only Remedies of their Relief are despised? What Warnings
and Previous Judgments we have had in this Nation, shall be afterward spoken
unto. That there has been no effect, no fruit of them, is evident unto all.
Their Language is, Except ye repent ye shall perish. Who has complied with the
Calls of God herein? What Reformation has been engaged in on this account?
Have we not turned a deaf ear to all the Calls of God? who has mourned, who
has trembled, who has sought for an Entrance into the Chambers of Providence
in the Day of Indignation? By some these Warnings have been despised and
scoffed at, by some put off unto others, as their Concernment, not their own,
by the most neglected, or turned into matter of common Discourse, without
laying them to heart.

And as for Mercies, the whole Earth has been turned into a Stage for the
consumption of them on the Lusts of Men. The Nation has been soaked with
Showers of Mercies, enough to have made it very fruitful unto God; but through
a vicious malignant Humor in the hearts of Men, there have been truly brought
forth nothing but Pride, Vanity, Gallantry, Luxury, and Security in City and
Country every where. The Pestilent deceitful Art of Sin has turned the Means
of our Conversion unto God into instruments of Rebellion against God. How will
England answer for abused Mercies in the Day of Visitation? And in all these
things has the Patience also of God been abused, which has been extended unto
us, beyond all thoughts and Expectations. And yet Men of all sorts please
themselves, as if that they were over this or that difficulty, all would be
well again without any Return unto God.

Fifthly, These things render impendent Judgments inevitable without Repentance
and Reformation, when they are committed in a Land of Light and Knowledge. Such
the Land has been, and wherein yet there is any defect therein, it is a part
of the Sin and Punishment of the Nation. See Isa. 26. 10. From the Light that
was in it, it might well be esteemed a Land of Uprightness: But how has it
been rebelled against, hated, opposed, maligned and persecuted in all the
Fruits of it, is rather for the sake of some to be bewailed, than declared.

And thus much may suffice to be spoken unto the first Supposition in our
Proposition concerning the Sins of a Church, Nation or People, which
unavoidably expose them unto desolating Judgments, when God gives Indication of
their Approach, unless they are prevented by Repentance; and we have seen a
little, and but a little of what is our Concernment herein.

2. Our Second Enquiry is, Of what sort those Judgments are, which in a time of
great provocation, are to be looked on as impendent, and ready to seize on us.
And they are of three sorts.

1. Such as are Absolute, Decretory, and Universal.

There is mention in the Scripture of Judgments Threatened, which God has as it
were repented him of, and changed the Actings of his Providence, that they
should not be inflicted. See Amos 7, 3, 6. And there are Judgments threatened,
which have been diverted by the Repentance of Men; as it was in the Case of
Nineveh. But in this case, neither will God repent, nor shall man repent; but
those judgments shall be universal and unavoidable: And of this sort we have
three Instances recorded in Scripture, two are past, and one is yet for to come.

1. The first is that of the Old World: It is said. that upon their
Provocations, God repented him that he had made Man, on the Earth; that is, he
would deal with him as if he had done so, which must be by an universal
Destruction. He would not repent of the Evil he had determined; but positively
declared, that the End of all Flesh was come before him. Nor did Man repent;
for as our Savior testifies, they continued in their Security until the Day
that Noah entered into the Ark, Matthew. 24. Yet it may be observed, that after
things were come to that pass, that there was no possibility of turning away
the Judgment threatened, yet God exercised Forbearance toward them, and gave
them the outward Means of Repentance and Reformation, 1 Pet. 3. 20. They had
amongst them the Ministry of Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, and that
continued for a long season in the Patience of God.

[And let none please themselves, that they have the outward means of the
Ministry continued unto them; for not withstanding that fruit of Gods Patience,
their Destruction may be inevitable. For as God may grant unto them to satisfy
his own Goodness, and Glorisie his Patience, so unto them, it may be no other
End, but the hardening of them in their Sin, and the Aggravation of their Sins,
Isa. 6. 9. 10, 11, 12. And this Example of the Old World, is frequently
proposed, and that to Christians, to Professors, to Churches, to deliver them
from Security in a time of approaching Judgments.]

2. The second Instance hereof was in the Judaical Church State; the People,
Nation, Temple, Worship, and all that was valuable among them. This Judgment
also in its approach, was such, as with respect whereunto, God would not
repent, and Man could not repent, although a day, a time and space of
Repentance was granted unto them. So it is declared by our Lord Jesus Christ,
Luke 19. 41. 42, 43, 44, They had a Day, it was theirs in a peculiar manner, a
day of Patience and of the means of Conversion, in the Ministry of Christ and
his Apostles. Yet says he, the things of thy Peace are now hid from thee, so
as that they must irrecoverably and eternally perish. So is their State
described by the Apostle; 1 These. 2. 14. 15, 16.

But it may be said, if their Destruction was so absolutely determined, that it
was impossible it should be either longer suspended or diverted. Unto what end
did God grant them a Day, such a day of Grace and Patience which they could not
make use of? I answer he did it for the Manifestation of the Glory of his
Grace, Righteousness and Severity; and that these two ways.

1. In the Calling, Conversion, and gathering of his Elect out of the Perishing
multitude of them that were hardened. During the continuance of that day of
Grace, and Patience among them, for about the space of forty year, all the
Elect of that Generation were converted to God, and delivered from the Curse
that came upon the Church and Nation. For although I will not say, but some of
them might suffer, yea fall in the outward public Calamities of that season,
yet they were all delivered from the Wrath of God in them, and saved eternally.

Hereof the Apostle gives an account, Romans 11. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. It is
therefore in a time of great Provocations, no certain Evidence, that inevitable
public Judgments are not approaching, because the Word, and other means of
Grace, are effectual to the Conversion of some amongst us; for God may hereby
be gathering of his own unto himself, that way may be made for the pouring out
of his Indignation on them that are hardened,

2. He did it that he might be an Aggravation of their Sin, and a space to fill
up the measure of their Iniquity; to the Glory of his severity in their
Destruction; toward them that fell, Severity. They had time to contract all
the guilt mentioned by the Apostle, 1 These. 2. 14, 15, 16. and were brought
into the State and Condition described by the same Apostle; Heb. 10. 26, 27,
28, 29, 30. see Isaiah. 6, 10, 11. 12.

Of this Judgment and Destruction, that of the Old World was a Precedent and
Token; which was despised by those obdurate Sinners, 2 Pet. 3. 5, 6, 7.

3. The third Instance of a Judgment of this nature which is yet to come, is in
the Destruction of Antichrist, and the Idolatrous Kingdom of the great
Adultress, and the persecuting Beast. With respect hereunto also, God will not
repent, nor shall men do so; so that it is inevitable. So is it declared, Rev.
18. 8. This God has determined, and it shall be accomplished in its appointed
Season; for strong is the Lord God who Judges them, and none shall deliver
them out of his Hand; because of the improbability of it because of the great
Power of Babylon, in its self, and in its Allies, the Kings and Merchants of
the Earth. The Omnipotency of God is engaged to secure the Church of its
Destruction; strong is the Lord God who judges her. She also has her day,
wherein she will not, wherein she shall not repent. When God begins to execute
his Plagues against her, none that belong unto her will repent of any of their
Abominations, Rev. 9. 20. 21. and Chap. 16. 9, 11. Yet is there a day of
Patience continued unto this Idolatrous persecuting Church, partly that they
may fill up the measure of their Iniquities; and partly that God may by the
Word and means of Grace, gather out all his People from amongst them according
unto his Calls; Rev. 8. 14. And our slowness in coming forth from them, is
probably one means of prolonging the day of her desolation. And now the Lord
Jesus Christ seems to say unto his People, what the Angel said unto Lot, when
he led him out of Sodom; Make have to escape, for I cannot do any thing until
you are escaped, Genesis 19. 22. And I hope the time is approaching, wherein he
will deal with his People as the Angel dealt with Lot, v. 16. They are apt to
linger, and know not how to leave the outward Accommodation of the Babylonish
State, nor clear themselves of innumerable Prejudices received therein. But he
being merciful unto them, will at length lay hold on them by the Word of his
Power, and take them out of the City, in a complete Relinquishment of that
cursed State.

Now unto this sort of Judgments, there are two things concurring.

1. That there is a Determinate Decree concerning them.

That there is a a Judicial Obduration upon the People, whom they are
determined against, accompanying them; that no Calls to Repentance or
Reformation shall be complied withal, so as to divert them. I am satisied upon
such Evidence as I shall give afterward, that this is not the Condition of
England; howbeit, we have cause enough to tremble at the severest of Divine
Judgments.

Secondly, The second sort of Judgments are, such as are deservedly threatened,
and determined, yet so as that no Judicial hardness does absolutely go a long
with them, to make utterly void the proceeding Day of Grace and Patience, and
all Reformation impossible.

They cannot, they shall not be utterly removed by a total deliverance from
them, but yet they may have many Alleviations, and Mitigations; and be
sanctisied unto them whom they do befall; a full Instance hereof we have in the
Babylonish Captivity, as an Account is given us of it, 2 Kings 23. 25, 26, 27.
Like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to the Lord with all
his Heart, and with all his Soul, and with all his might, according to all the
Law of Moses never after him arose there any like him. Notwithstanding, the
Lord turned not from the fierceness of his wrath wherewith his Anger was
kind^ed against Judah, because of all their Pro^^cations that Manasseh had
provoked him withal. And the Lord said, I will removed Judah also out of my
sight, as I have removed Israel, and will cast off this City Jerusalem which I
have chosen, and the House of which I said, My Name shall be there.

God has decreed and determined to cast off Judah and Jerusalem for their Sin,
to bring a wasting Desolation upon them. When this Judgment was approaching,
Josiah endeavors a through Reformation of all things in the Land, Religious,
Civil, and Moral. Yet would not God revoke his Sentence of a great Calamity on
the whole Nation. The secret Reason hereof was, that the Body of the people was
Hypocritical in that Reformation, and quickly returned unto their former
Abomination, ver, 3. 10. Judah has not turned to me with her whole heart, but
feignedly says the Lord. See Chap. 4. 18. Howbeit this Reformation of Josiah
was accepted with God, and had its influence into the Mitigation or
Sanctification of the ensuing Desolation.

And this sort of Judgment is very different from that before insisted on: For,

1. It is but Partial; there is a Remnant always left among a People, that
shall escape it. So was there in those days; there was an Escape of it, a
Remnant, whom God delivered and preserved; which were as a Blessing in the
Cluster, on the Account whereof, the whole was not utterly destroyed, This the
Scripture very much insists on, Isai 65. 6, 7. Zech 3. 11, 12. Amos 9. 8, 9.

As it is not Total, so it is not Final; even in the severity of his Wrath God
designed the Recovery of that People again in the appointed Season; giving
Promises thereof unto them that feared him: And so it came to pass in the
return of their Captivity. See the History hereof Jer. 31. 32. God may have,
for our Sins, determined a desolating Calamity on this Nation; yet if there be
not a Judiciary hardness upon us, it may only be partial and recoverable, not
as it was with Israel 1 Kings 14. 10. See Jer. 4. 27. Chap. 5. 18. Chap. 30.
31, 32.

3. It was sanctified and blessed unto them who were upright and sincere, and
who endeavored the removal of it by Reformation, though they suffered in the
outward Calamity. The Good Figs, or those Typed by them, were carried into
Captivity; but the dealing of God with them therein, was in Mercy, Jer. 24. 5.
6, 7. I will (says God) set mine Eyes upon them for Good; I will build them
up, and not pull them down; and I will give them an heart to know me, that I am
the Lord, and they shall be my People, and I will be their God. Whatever was
their outward Condition, those internal, Spiritual Mercies and Privileges made
it sweet and useful unto them; The third part was brought through the Fire,
Zech 13. 8. 9.

4. God makes this sort of Judgment a Means fully to reclaim and reform them,
as many of those who in general suffer under them. They are Gods Furnace, but
not to burn; they purify and cleanse as Silver is tried, and not burn up as
Stubble is consumed: So was that Church by their Captivity, Purged from their
Idols for ever. And many other Differences of the like Nature might be assigned.

And in the Consideration of this sort of Judgments lies our Concernment. Who
knows but that God, for our horrible (...) and Contempt of the Gospel, with all
the cursed Immoralities and Abominations which have ensued thereon, and the
cold dead frame of Professors under various Means of Instruction, has
determined to bring a wasting Calamity on this Nation, and that he will not
turn away from the fierceness of this wrath, but it shall overtake us? If their
be a judicial Hardness upon the Land, so as that there is no Repentance, no
Reformation endeavored in this Day of Patience and Forbearance which we yet
enjoy, our Desolation will be total, unsanctified, irrevocable; and through
another People may be raised up to profess the Gospel in the Land, yet shall we
be unconcerned in the Mercy, So has it been before in this Nation, and in all
the Christian Nations of Europe. Woe unto us, if we thus betray the Land of our
Nativity; if we thus give it up to be an Hissing and Astonishment. Hearken not
unto vain words; this or that way we shall be delivered; it is the Day of our
Trial, and who knows what will be the Evening thereof? But on the other hand,
although a public Calamity should be determined irrevocably against us, if we
use the Day of Forbearance unto the Ends of it, in Repentance and Returning
unto God, we shall at length have all the Advantages beforementioned: it will
be but partial, it will be but for a time, it will be sanctified, it will
purify the Church, and restore it unto a more Glorious State than ever before.

3. There are judgments which are deserved, and threatened, but not decreed and
determined, which may be absolutely diverted and escaped. This sort of
Judgments is frequently mentioned in the Scripture, and so also are frequent
Deliverances from them, by the Ways and Means of Gods appointment.

And concerning them, we may observe,

1. That this Threatenings of approaching Judgments, which yet may be averted,
is a Declaration of the ordinary Rule of Divine Justice, according whereunto, a
Nation, or People, without an interposition of Sovereign Mercy, ought to be
destroyed.

God does not threaten, he does not give Warnings, Signs or Indications of
approaching Judgments, but when they are deserved, and may righteously be
executed; nor is there any known Rule of the Word, to give an Assurance of the
contrary. All that can be said, is, Who knows but that the Lord may repent and
turn from the fierceness of his Wrath?

2. The threatenings of them is an Ordinance of God, to call us unto the Use of
such Means as whereby they may be prevented.

He foretells our Destruction, that we may not be destroyed; as it was in the
Case of Nineveh. and this is the only Symptom whereby we find out and discern
the Nature of threatened impendent Judgments. If the Consideration of them, be
an Ordinance of God, stirring us up to the diligent Use of the Means whereby
they may be prevented, the Design of God is, to give in Deliverance in the
Issue. If it does not, they are inevitable. God holds the Balance yet in his
hand, and we know not which way we incline. The best prognostication we can
take, is from the frame of our own hearts,, under the Threatenings of them,

Here lies the Trial of this poor Land and Nation at this Day; Judgment is
deserved, Judgment is threatened, Judgment is approaching, the Clouds are the
Dust of his feet, If all sorts of Men turn not to God by Repentance, if we are
not humbled for our contempt of the Gospel, and outrage against it, if we leave
not our provoking Sins, Evil will overtake us; and we shall not escape. And yet
on the other hand, by a due Application unto him who holds the Balance in his
hand, Mercy may Glory against Justice, and we may have Deliverance.

Those great Men who suppose all things pervious unto their Wisdom, and
Conquerable by their Industry, who have a thousand flattering Contrivances, for
the safety of a Nation, cannot more despise these things, than I do all their
Councels without them. And when they shall be at a loss, and shall find one
Disappointment following on the Neck of another, those who attend unto the
Advice of God in this Case, shall find rest and Peace in their own Souls. And
as for them who scosf at these things, and say, Where is the Promise of his
Coming? (that is, in the way of Judgment) For since the Fathers fell asleep,
all things continue as they were from the Creation: there needs no regard unto
God in these things; trouble us not with the Fooleries of your Repentance and
Reformation, God will laugh at their Calamity, etc. Prove. 1. 26. to the End.

This is the Second thing we were to insist on for the Clearing and
Confirmation of the General Proposition before laid down.

III. Our third Enquiry is, What Evidences we have at present, or what Warnings
we have had of approaching Judgments? For this also belongs unto the
indispensable Necessity of Repentance and Reformation, upon the approaching of
Troubles. And they are the Ordinances of God unto that end; which, when they
are despised, desolating Judgments will ^nsue.

And we may unto this End, observe these things.

1. Ordinarily God does not bring wasting, desolating Judgments on any People,
Church or Nation, but that he gives them Warnings of their approach.

I say, he does not Ordinarily do so; for he may, if he please, surprise a
wiced, provoking Generation of men with the most dreadful Destructions; as he
did Sodom and Gomorrah of old: And very many daily are so surprised, as unto
their own Apprehensions; though really God had given them Signs of what was
coming upon them, but they regarded them not, and so perished as in a moment.
But ordinarily before he executes great and severe Judgments, he gives such
Indications, Signs and warnings of their coming as that men should be forced to
take notice of them, unless they be absolutely hardened and blinded. So he dealt
with the Old World, in the Building of the Ark, and the Ministry of Noah: so he
dealt with the Church under the Old Testament, in and by the Ministry of the
Prophets; See Amos 3. 6, 7, 8. And so he has done with all others, who have
had any Knowledge of him or of his ways. They that are wise may discern these
things, Hosea the last, Mat. 16. 3. Micah 6. 9. Dan. 12. 10. And in all Heathen
Stories of the times that passed over them, we find Remarks of strange
Indications of approaching Desolations. And he does it for two Ends.

1. For the Satisfaction of his own Goodness and Love to Mankind in the
Exercise of Patience and Forbearance unto the utmost, Hosea 6. 4. as also for
the Manifestation of the Glory of his Justice, when he comes to execute the
severity of his Wrath. When men are surprised with public Calamities, they
shall not be able to say, would none tell us of their approach, would none give
us warning of them? had we been told of the terror of the Lord in his
Judgments, we would have turned from our Iniquities, that we might have
escaped. In this case, it is usual with God in the Scripture to call Heaven and
Earth to Witness against Men, that he did warn them by various means of what
would befall them in the End. This is our principal reason why this weak, but
sincere Testimony for God is published. And this shall be an Aggravation of
their misery in the day of their distress, when they shall seriously reflect
upon themselves as unto their Folly, Guilt, and Obstinacy, in despising the
Warnings which they had received; which is a great part of the punishment of
the Damned in Hell, Ezekiel. 39. 23, 24.

2. God does it for the End under consideration; namely that they may be a
means to call a poor guilty People unto that Repentance and Reformation,
whereby impendent Judgments may be divertted

Secondly, There are five ways whereby God gives Warning of the approach of
desolating Judgments, When a Land is full of Sin.

1. He does it by a lesser previous Judgments and Severities: So was it in the
Instances in the Text. The destruction of some by the Sword, and the fall of a
Tower, was a Warning to the whole Nation of the approach of a public Calamity,
unless they repented. As particular Instances are given us hereof in the
Scripture, so we have a general account of this Method of Divine Providence,
Amos 4. 1, 2, 3, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. First God sent the Judgment of the
Grasshoppers, which eat up all the Grass of the Land, and so occasioned a
Famine. This Judgment being not improved unto Repentance, he called to contend
by Fire, which devoured the Great Deep, and did eat up a part, or consumed
their Treasure, devouring a part of their Substance. But when this also was
neglected, then came the Plumb-Line of a levelling Desolation.

2. He does it by extraordinary and preternatural Operations in the works of
Nature: such as are Comets, or Blazing-Stars, Fiery Meteors, dreadful
Phantsins or Appearances in the Air, Voices, Predictions of uncertain Original,
mighty Winds, Earthquakes, stopping the Course of Rivers, and the like. An
Account of these things, as they were to fortel and fore-signify the fatal
Destruction of Jerusalem, is given us by our Savior; Luke 21. 25, 26. And the
story of the Event in Josephus, is an admirable Exposition of this Prophecy of
our Blessed Savior; see Rev. 6. 13, 14. The Frame of Nature, is as it were
cast into a trembling disorder, upon the approaches of God in his wrath and
Fury, and puts it self forth in extraordinary signs of its astonishment;
trembling for the Inhabitants of the Earth, and calling on them to repent,
before the wrath of the terrible one do seize upon them. So in the Scripture,
the Seas, and Rivers, Mountains, and Hills are represented as mourning,
shaking, trembling at the presence of God; when he comes to execute his
Judgments, see Hab, 3. 6. 7, 8, 10 He drove asunder the Nations, and the
everlasting Mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow; Was the Lord
displeased against thy Rivers? Was thine Anger against thy Rivers? Was thy
wrath against the Sea? The Mountains saw thee and they trembled: the
overflowing of the Water passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his
hands on high.

The Mountains, Hills, Seas, Rivers, bowed, trembled, and lifted up their
hands, as crying for compassion, see Psalm. 97. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. By these Signs
and Tokens in Heaven and Earth does God give Warnings of his coming to judge
the Inhabitants of the Earth. God does not work these strange things in Heaven
above, and the Earth beneath, that they should be gazed at only, and made a
matter of talk; not that they should be Subjects of some men's Curiosity, and of
the Scorn of others. There is a voice in them all, a voice of God, and it will
be to their hurt by whom it is not heard and understood.

3. He does the same constantly by the Light of his Word. The general Rule of
Gods ordinary Dispensations of Providence is fully laid down in the Scripture.
God has magnified his Word above all his Name: so as that no Works of
Providence shall be unsuited to the Rule of the word, much less contrary to it,
or inconsistent with it. And if we were wise to make Application of it unto
present Affairs and Occasions, we should in most instances know in general what
God is doing. Of old it was said, Surely the Lord God will do nothing, that is,
in the way of Judgments, but he reveals his Secret to his Servants the
Prophets, Amos 3. 7. What they had by immediate Revelation, we may have in a
measure by the Rule of the word, and the Declaration which God has made
therein, how he will deal with a sinful provoking People. So having threatened
various sorts of Judgments, the Prophets adds, Search you out of the Book of
the Lord, and read, no one of these shall fail, Isai. 34. 16. That this great
means of Divine Warnings may be useful unto us, we are to consider,

1. What are the stable Rules given in the Scripture concerning Sin,
Repentance, Impenitence, and Judgments. Such Rules abound in it: And no
dispensations of Providence shall interfer with them; God will no give such a
Temptation unto Faith, that any of his works should be Contradictions unto his
Word. And if we will learn our present Condition from these Rules, it will be
an Antidote against Security.

2. Consider the Instances recorded therein of Gods dealings with sinful
provoking Nations and Churches, This God himself directed the People of old
unto, when they boasted of their Church Priviledges, sending them to Shiloh,
which he had destroyed. And when we find a Record in the Book of God concerning
his severity toward any Nation in our Circumstances, it is our duty to
believe, that he will deal so with us also, in his time, unless we repent.

3. Always bear in Mind our Infallible Guidance as unto Gods final dealing with
impenitent Sinners. This the whole Scripture constantly, equally, universally
witnesses unto; that it shall be eternal Destruction: and this will preserve us
from distracting Surprisals, when we find things fall out beyond our
Expectation in a way of Severity.

4. Consider those Signs, Marks and Tokens of Approaching Judgments, which are
set up in the World; which, whosoever does wisely consider, he will not fail in
his Prognostication of future Events. Among these, abounding in Sin with
Security, in such Persons, Nations, Cities and Churches, as God is pleased by
the Gospel to take near unto himself in a peculiar manner, is the most eminent.
For those Signs are Buoys fixed to show when we shall certainly make Shipwreck,
if we approach unto them. When these Rules are observed, when they are
diligently attended unto, and complied withal, so as that we receive
Instruction from them, I shall say with some confidence, that every Believer
shall know what God is doing in a way of Judgment, so far as is necessary unto
his Guidance in his own Duty, wherein he shall find acceptance, and not provoke
God in the neglect of it.

5. God has appointed the Ministry of the word unto the same end. The
principal End of the Ministry under the Gospel, is the Dispensation of the
word of Reconciliation. But neither is yet this work of giving warning of
approaching Judgments, exempted from that Office and Duty. Christ himself, in
his Ministry preaches here on this Subject. They are Watchmen and Overseers;
and their Duty herein is graphically expressed, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. When God places any as a Watchman for a People, one part of his Duty is to
look diligently after the approach of Dangers and Evils; such I mean, as come
on the account of Sin, and thereon to awaken and stir up the People to take
care of themselves, that they be not destroyed. The Shepard is not only to
provide good Pasture for his Sheep, but to keep them from danger. The Watchman
hearkened diligently, with much heed, and he cried a Lion, Isai. 21, 7, 8,
Having made a discovery of approaching danger, he cries out to the People to
warn them of it. But if the Watchmen are slothful, and sleepy, if they are dumb
Dogs and cannot bark when Evil comes, if they are light and treacherous
Persons, blind Guides that have no vision; if they also are under a spirit of
slumber and security, so as that the people are not warned by them of their
danger; this is one of the most severe Tokens of wrath approaching. It is a
great warning, when God takes away the Means of warning; when he says unto a
People, I will warn you no more, by giving them such watchmen as are neither
faithful, nor able to warn them, and by taking away those that are.

6. God gives warnings hereof, by bringing a people into such a Posture,
Condition, and Circumstances, as do in their own Nature tend unto Ruin Such
are cross Interests among themselves, incurable Divisions, contrary and
unsteddy Counsels, weakness in Spirit and Courage, mutual Distrusts, Effeminacy
through Luxury, with one or other insuparable entanglement; which are the Ways
and Means whereby Nations precipate themselves into calamitous Condition. In
general, as unto this previous warning of approaching Judgments, God threatens
to send among a People who are tending toward Ruin, a Moth and an Hornet. The
Moth he threatens Isai. 51. 8. Hosea 5. 12. Somewhat that shall eat up and
devour the Strength and Sinews of the Counsels of a Nation, as a Moth devoureth
a Garment. Whilst it lies still, it seems, it may be, to be sound and firm;
hold it up to the Light, and it appears full of holes, and is easily torn with
the Finger. So is it with a Nation; whatever outward Peace it seems to enjoy,
when it is decayed in the Wisdom and strength of its Counsels, it is easily
torn in pieces. And in like manner he sends the Hornet unto the same end, Exodus
23. 28, Deuteronomy. 7. 20. that is, that which shall vex, disquiet and torment them,
that they shall be ready every one to strike himself, or the next that he
meets withal; as many of these Hornets are at present among us.

These are some of the VVays whereby God warns a People, Church or Nation of
approaching Judgments.

It concerns us now to enquire how it is, how it has been with us, with
reference hereunto. And I say,

It is not necessary that God should use all these ways of Warning of a sinful
People, of approaching Desolations, if not prevented by Repentance: It is
enough unto the Ends of this Dispensation of Divine Wisdom and Goodness, if he
make use of some of them, or of any one of them in an eminent manner, Wherefore
if any of them have been wanting among us, yet if we have had others of them,
it is sufficient to render us excusable, if we repent not. But,

2, The Truth is, we have, upon the matter, had them all, and they have
abounded amongst us

We have had the previous Judgments of Plague, Fire and War.

Some may say, they were desolating Judgments themselves; and so indeed they
were: But whereas Sin still abounds, and no Reformation ensued upon them, in
any Places, among any sort of Persons, they were but Warnings of what is yet to
come, if not prevented. And their Language is, Except you repent, you shall all
likewise perish.

We have had a Multiplication of Signs in the Heaven above, and in the Earth
beneath; such as all Mankind have ever esteemed Forerunners of public
Calamities; and the more they are despised, the louder is their Voice to the
same purpose. God has continued hitherto his Word amongst us, wherein the
ordinary Rule of his Providence in these things is openly declared. And if
those unto whom the Declaration of the Word of God in the Dispensation of it is
committed, have not faithfully warned the People of their Danger, their Blood
may be found at their Door. Herein at present lies our greatest straight; The
Efficacy of all other Calls of God unto Repentance, depends much on the
Application of them unto the Souls and Consciences of Men in the Preaching of
the Word. But whilst by some this Work is despised, at least counted
unnecessary; by some it is neglected utterly, and others by reason of their
private Capacities, whereby they are disenabled to speak unto Magistrates,
Cities, or the Community of the People, Think not themselves concerned therein,
it is almost wholly laid aside. For what will some say, does this speaking unto
a few in a Retirement signify as unto a General Reformation of the People of
the Land? But whereas we have all sinned in one measure, Churches, and all
sorts of more strict Professors of Religion, it is every ones Duty to be
pressing these Warnings of God within his own Bounds and Precincts And if each
of us should prevail but with one, to return effectually to God, it will be
accepted with him, who in such a season, seeks for a man to stand in the gap,
to turn away his wrath; and will save a City for the sake for Ten, if they be
found therein. Let us not pretend that the Repentance and Reformation called
for, respects the public enormous Sins of the Nation, in Atheism,
Profaneness, Sensuality, Luxury, Pride, Oppression, Hatred of the Truth,
Contempt of the Ministry of the Gospel, and the like; they do so indeed, but
not only, they respect also the Decays in Faith, Love, Zeal, with Love of the
World, Conformity unto it, Lukewarmness, that are found amongst the most
eminent Professors of Religion. This is our present wound; here lies our
weakness; namely, in the want of a quick, active, zealous Ministry, to call and
stir up Magistrates and People to effectual Repentance and turning to God.
Unless this be given unto us, I fear we cannot be saved. If it be otherwise, if
we have a Ministry that really do attend unto their Duty in this Matter, I beg
their pardon for other apprehensions; but then I shall think it the most
pregnant Sign of approaching Destruction; seeing it is apparent unto all, that
their Endeavors have neither Fruit nor Success.

So far have we proceeded with our Proposition; Namely; That Sin abounds
amongst us; That Judgments are approaching; That God has given us manifold
Warnings of their so doing.

4. That which in the next Place we are to speak unto is, the Equity of this
Divine Constitution, that in the ordinary way of Gods Rule, and Dispensation of
his Providence Repentance and Reformation shall turn away impendent Judgments,
and procure unto a People a blessed Deliverance, and nothing else shall do it.
Except you repent you shall perish.

That upon Repentance they shall be saved and delivered, is intended in the
same Rule. This is the unalterable Law of Divine Providence; this shall do it,
and nothing else shall so do. The Wisdom and Power of Men shall not do it;
Fasting and Prayer, whilst we continue in our Sins, shall not do it. Repentance
alone is made the Condition of Deliverance in this State of things.

Upon this Rule, did God vindicate the Equity of his Ways against Repining
Israel, Ezekiel. 18. 29, 30, 31. Can any thing be more just and equal? Ruin and
utter Desolation are ready to fall upon the whole People: This you have
deserved by your Iniquities, and multiplied provocations. In strict Justice
they ought immediately to come upon you: But my ways are equal; I will not deal
with you in a way of strict Justice; I will do it in Equity, which is a meet
Temperature of Justice and Mercy. And this I make evident unto you herein, in
that, whilst the Execution of Judgment is only threatened and suspended, if you
make unto your selves a new Heart and a new Spirit, in sincere Repentance, if
you cast away all your Transgressions, by a thorough Reformation of your lives,
Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. What can be more Just, righteous. and equal?
Who can complain, if after all this, evil does overtake you, and you shall not
escape? The same he pleads again, Chap. 33. 10, 11. as in many other Places.

That this Divine Constitution, namely, That Repentance and Reformation shall
save a Church, People or Nation in the state before described, and that nothing
else shall do so, however men may please and pride themselves in their own
Imaginations, is equal, just and good, that it is meet it should be so, that it
has a condecencie unto the Divine Excellencies, and the Rule of Righteousness
in government, is evident for,

1. The Notion of this Rule is inbred in Mankind by Nature, as was mentioned
before. There is no man, unless he be Atheistically profligate, but when he
apprehends that Evil and Ruin, especially as unto his Life, is ready to
overtake him, and seize upon him, but he reflects on his Sins, and comes to
some Resolutions of forsaking them for the future, so he may be at present
delivered from his deplorable Condition. Now all this arises from these
indelible Notions ingrafted on the Minds of Men; that all evil of Punishment is
from God, that it is for Sin, that there is no way to avoid it but by
Repentance and Reformation: And those who will not improve this Natural Light,
with respects unto the Public, will be found, as it were, whether they will or
no, to comply with it, when it comes to be their own Case in particular. Herein
lies a thousand Testimonies unto the Equity of this Divine Constitution.

2. When this Rule is complied withal, when Repentance and Reformation do ensue
upon Divine warnings, whereby Peace with God is in some measure attained; it
will give men Trust and Confidence in him, with expectation of Divine Relief in
their Distress, which is the most effectual Means for men to be instrumental
unto their own Deliverance. And on the other side, when it is neglected, when
Evil approaches, Guilt and Terror will haunt the Minds of men, and they shall
not be able to entertain one thought of Divine Help, which will render them
heartless, Helpless, Senceless, and betray them into Cowardice and
Pusillanimity, however they may boast at present, If these two sorts are
opposed, ten shall chase an hundred, and an hundred put a thousand to flight.
And if any Nation do openly refuse a compliance with this Constitution, if God
should send an other to invade them in a way of Judgment, they would melt away
before them as Wax before the Fire. When Evils compass us about, and are ready
to seize upon us, a Reduction on the neglect of this Rule, will disturb our
Counsels, distract our Thoughts, distress our Minds, weaken our Confidence in
God, and dishearten the stoutest of the Sons of Men, giving them up a Prey to
their Enemies.

3. This Rule or Constitution has an impression of all Divine Excellencies
upon it; namely, of the Goodness, Patience, Wisdom, Righteousness and Holiness
of God.

If when Judgments are approaching, and deserved, men could divert them by
their Wisdom, Courage or Diligence, it would reflect Dishonor on God in the
Government of the World; see Isa. 22. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11: But in this way of the
Deliverance of any People, there is a Salvo for the Glory of, all the Divine
Excellencies, as is manifested unto all.

When therefore in this state, impendent Judgments are not absolutely
determined, yet so deserved, as that upon a Supposition of continuance in those
Sins whereby they are deserved, the Glory of Divine Justice cannot be
vindicated in the absolute impunity; and whereas God has now prepared all
things, and made them ready for their execution, all Means and Instruments
being girt unto the Work, his Sword is whetted, and his Arrows are fixed in the
bow, he will first give Warning, then give Space and Time for Repentance, and
requires no more for the laying aside of all his Preparations for Destruction,
surely his Ways are equal, kind, and full of Mercy,

If Men will look for, if they will expect Deliverance, without a compliance
with these good, Holy, Just, Gracious, Equal terms, they will find themselves
in the issue woefully deceived. And if after all this, we in this Nation should
be found in a neglect hereof, if the Nation should continue in its present
frame, wherein, of all other means of Safety, this seems to be least thought of
or regarded, what shall we plead for our selves? who shall pity us in the day
of Distress? Most men now despise these, things, but can their hearts endure,
or can their hands be strong in the Day that the Lord shall deal with them? But,

5. Whereas this Way, this Means of Deliverance is so just, so equal, so
reasonable, manifesting it self to the Consciences and Reason of Mankind, owned
by the very Heathens, and fully confirmed by Divine Revelation, our next
Enquiry must be, Whence it is that there is such an unreadiness, such an
unwillingness to comply with this Duty as there is? that so many difficulties
are esteemed to be in it; so as that there is little hope it will be found
among us in a prevalent degree?

If Men, especially such as are Great, and esteem themselves to be wise, are
told that this is the way to save and deliver the Nation, they turn away in a
wrath, as Naaman did, when the Prophet bid him Wash and be clean, when he would
have rather expected an Injunction of some Heroic Exploits: These are Thoughts
for weak and pusillanimous Souls, who understand nothing of State Affairs. But
it will ere long appear who is wisest, God or Men. But an hard thing it is to
prevail with any to think well of it, or to go about it, or to judge that it is
the only Balm for our Wounds.

To find out the Cause hereof, I shall briefly consider all sorts of Persons
who are concerned to plant this healing Tree, whose Root is Repentance, and
whose Fruit is Reformation of Life. And they are of three sorts.

1. Magistrates. 2. Ministers. 3. The People themselves

Unless there be a Concurrence of the Endeavors of them all in their several
Places and Duties, there will be no such public Work of Repentance and
Reformation wrought as is suited unto the turning away of Public Calamities.
But yet though it be the express Duty of them all, though it be their Interest,
though it cannot be omitted, but at their utmost peril, as unto Temporal and
Eternal Events, yet it is a mavelous hard and difficult work to prevail with
any of them to engage vigorously in it. Some do not think it necessary, some
after conviction of its Necessity, either know not how to go about it, or
linger in its undetaking, or are quickly wearied; some wish it were Done, so as
that they may not be at the Trouble of it.

Let us consider them Distinctly.

1. As unto Magistrates. When Jehoshaphat set himself to reform the Church, or
his Kingdom, to escape the Judgment that was denounced against them, he
appointed for Magistrates and Judges, men fearing God, and hating Covetousness:
And his charge unto them was, Let the Fear of the Lord be upon you; take heed
and do it; thus shall you do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully and with a
perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. 9. Without this, there will be no public
Reformation; and therefore the first Difficulty of it arises from this sort of
Persons, and that upon two Accounts.

First, That Magistrates themselves do live in Sin, and love it, and hate to be
personally reformed; yea take delight in them that openly live in Sin also,
which is the height of wickedness, Romans 1. 32. When Magistrates are profane
Swearers, or Scoffers, at the Power of Religion, or Drunkards, or unclean
Persons, or covetous Oppressors, a great Obstruction must needs be laid in the
way of public Repentance and Reformation; neither does this Difficulty at
present arise merely from their personal Sins and Miscarriages, but also from
the want of Conviction, and a Sense of their Duty in their Places, with the
Account which they must give thereof. For.

Secondly, They seem not to believe that the attempting of this Work is any
part of their Duty, or that they are concerned therein: Let it therefore be
never so reasonable, so Equal, so Important, so Necessary unto the Deliverance
and Salvation of any people, if those who should further it in the first place,
do obstruct and hinder it, it will be attended with Difficulties. Ill Examples
and Negligence have ruined this Nation.

Wherefore we may lay it down as an assured Truth, which the Text will confirm;

That unless Magistrates, who have the visible Conduct of the People, are
convinced, that it is their Duty to promote the Work of Repentance and
Reformation, at this time, by their own Example, and in the Discharge of their
Offices, the Case of this Nation is deplorable, and not to be relieved but by
Sovereign Grace and Mercy: For what shall the People do, when they see their
Guides, unto whose Pattern they conform themselves, utterly regardless of any
such thing? This is one Means of the Difficulty which is found among us, of
affecting the Minds of Men with this equal Constitution.

2. Those who are principally concerned herein, are Ministers, or those who
have the Administration of the Word and Ordinances of the Gospel committed unto
them. Unto these, is this Work given in charge, in an especial manner. They
have the principal means of Repentance and Reformation committed to their
management. From them is the beginning and carrying on of this Work expected
and required. Hereof, as unto their Sincerity and diligence, they must give an
Account at the last Day. And if this Spring be stopped, whence should the
refreshing Waters of Repentance and Reformation arise? But yet herein the
principal Difficulty of the whole Work does consist: For.

First, some there are pretending unto this Office in whom lies no small part
of the Evil that is to be Refomed. Persons who labor among the most forward to
sill up the measure of the Iniquities of this Nation; such as whose Ignorance.
Negligence, Profaneness and Debauchery, are in all their Effects transfused
and communicated unto all that are about them: Shall we expect that such
persons will be instrumental in the Reforming of others, who hate to be
reformed themselves? Jer. 23. 15. It was so of old. But,

Secondly, There are very few of this sort of Persons, who will be at the
charge of carrying on this Work. They may quickly find what it will cost them;
for unless they are Exemplary in it themselves, it is in vain once to attempt
the pressing of it upon others. They cannot go about it, without great
Retrenchings of that which they have esteemed their Liberty in the course of
their Conversations. All Compliance with unreformed persons, for secular Ends,
all Conformity unto the course of the World, in Jolities, and Pride of Life,
all Ostentation of Riches, Wealth and Power, all Self-seeking, and
Self-pleasing, all Lightness, and carnal Confidences, must utterly be cast
away: And not only so, but unless by uncessant Prayers and Supplications, with
Earnestness and Perseverance, they labor for fresh Annointings with the Spirit
of Grace in their own Souls, that Faith and Love and Zeal for God, and
Compassion for the Souls of Men, and Readiness for the Cross, may revive and
flourish in them, they will not be useful nor instrumental in this Work. And
is it any wonder, that the most of them think it better to suffer things to go
on at the present rate, than to venture at that which will cost them so dear in
its pursuit? The Truth is, I know very few, if any, who are meet and fit to
engage in this Work in a visible eminent manner: those who have the best,
almost the only oppertunities for it, seem to be asleep.

Thirdly, Besides the Charge they must be at themselves, they perceive the
Opposition they shall meet with all from others. They find that they shall not
only disoblige and provoke all sorts of Persons, and lose many of their useful
friends, but also expose themselves unto Obloquy, Scron Contempt and Reproach
of all sorts. He is a lost man in this world, who with out respect of Persons,
will engage seriously in this Work; every day he shall find one or other
displeased, if not provoked. This neither they nor their Families can well bear
withal. Indeed the hardest and most difficult Service that ever God called any
of his Ministers unto, excepting only Jesus Christ and his Apostles, has been
in the endeavoring the Reformation of back sliding or spiritually decayed
Churches. These are the two Witnesses which in all Ages have Prophesied in
Sackcloth. Such was the Ministry of Elijah, which brought him unto that
Conclusion, and an earnest longing to be delivered by Death from his Work and
Ministry, 2 Kings 19. 4. So, was that of Jeremiah, in the like Season, whereof
he so complains, Chap. 15. 10. John the Baptist in the same work, lost first
his Liberty, then his Life. And in after-Ages Chrysostom, for the same Cause
was hated by the Clergy, persecuted by the Court, and at length driven into
Banishment, where he died. Most men care not how little a share they have in
such a Work as this, whose Reward will reach them according to the Proportion
of their Engagement in it. All Churches, all Persons almost, would willingly be
let alone in the Condition wherein they are: They that would press them unto
due Refor^ation, ever were, and ever will be looked on as their Troublers.

Hence then it is, that our Wound is incurable. Few of this sort are convinced
of the present Necessity of this Duty; they hope things are indifferently well
with them and their Flocks, that they may endure their time well enough: Few
are willing to undergo the Charge and Trouble of it, to put all their present
Circumstances into Disorder, few have received an Anointing for thee; many are
able to dispute against any Attempts of it; and not a few have Expectations of
strange Deliverances without it; what is left us in this Case, shall afterward
be declared.

3. It is difficult also on the Account of the People that are to be Reformed.
It is hard to convince them of its Necessity; hard to persuade them to
endeavor it; hard to get them to perservere in Attempts for it.

Some of the Reasons hereof we may briefly consider: As,

1. That Self-Justification and Approbation of themselves, which all sorts of
persons, both by Nature, and by incurable Prejudices, are inclined unto, lie at
the bottom of this fatal Negligence. When they see all things amiss, they will
grant that there is some Reformation necessary; but that it is so for others,
and not for them. Those that are worse than they (as there are but few who do
not think on one pretense or other, that there are many worse than themselves)
they suppose this Duty is necessary unto; but not unto them. And if there are
none visibly so, yet they will make them and judge them so to be. But whilst
men have a form of Godliness, though they deny the power thereof they will
justify themselves from all need of Reformation. Churches will do so, and all
sorts of Professors of Religion will do so; especially if they have any
peculiar Notion or Practice, which they value themselves upon. So was it with
the Jews of old, Jer. 7. 6, 7. and with the Pharisees in the Days of our
Savior, John 9. 40. It is so at this Day; and it is a rare thing to meet with
any who will own themselves to stand in need of real laborious Reformation.

Hence it is that no Churches would ever Reform themselves, which have been the
cause of all Division and Separation, whereby some have been saved from a
general Apostasy. They all approve themselves in their State and Condition,
which is come to that height in the Papal Church that they boast themselves
infallible, and not capable of Reformation in any thing. I pray God secure
others from the like Presumption; it will be their Ruin by whom they are
entertained; yet so it is at this Day. Most Churches think they need more
Revenues, more Honor, more Freedom from Opposition, more Submission of all men
unto them; but they almost abhor the Thoughts that they stand in need of any
Reformation.

2. The Nature of the Work it self renders it difficult; for it requires a
general Change of the Course wherein men have been engaged; a thing as
difficult, as to cause the Streams of a mighty River to change their Course,
and run backward. Vicious habits must be subdued, Inclinations reveted in the
Mind by long Practice, and Custom, be cast out, ways of Conversation promoted
and strengthened by all sorts of Circumstances changed; which render the Work
unto some men impossible. So the Prophet declares it, Jer. 13. 23. Can the
Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good,
who are accustomed to Evil. Men cannot easily unlearn what they have been so
taught or accustomed unto. The mighty power of God on the Souls of Men, both as
unto individual Persons, and whole Societies, is required unto this Change; So
it may be wrought and not otherwise Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9.

3. The Advantage which many make unto themselves, by the present posture of
things, and fear of Alterations by Reformation, is a Mountain in the way, a
mighty Obstacle against entertaining serious Thoughts about it.

4. The Scripture most frequently casts the Cause hereof on men's Security in
their Earthly Enjoyments. This keeps them safe from hearing Gods Calls, or
taking notice of his warnings: And therefore it is laid down, as the Cause and
constant Forerunner of all desolating Judgments. It is at large insisted upon
by our Savior himself, Matthew. 24. 3^, ^8. (...) 17. 26.

Now this Security is like the Disease in the Body, which is commonly called
the Scurvy; It is not any single Distemper or Disease, but a Complication or
Concurrence of many prevalent Distempers. Security is not the Name of any one
vicious Habit or Inclination of the Mind, but it is a concurrent complication
of many* Spiritual Stupidity and Sloth, called a Spi^^t of Slumber, Love of the
world, carnal Wisdom, Groundless hopes of Life, all Proceeding from Unbelief,
do concur in its Constitution. And if a Practice in a Course of Sin, have for
some season ensued on these Principles, whereby Conscience comes to be seared,
or is made senceless, the Case of those in whom it is, is for the most part
remediless. And not a few of this sort are amongst us.

And many other Reasons there are, rendering this Work full of Difficulty,
though it be so necessary, so just and equal. As for those by whom all these
things are despised, and even scoffed at, something shall be spoken afterward
unto them, or concerning them.

But yet this Consideration ought not to deter any from endeavoring the
discharge of their own Duty herein: For as we have seen, it is indispensably
necessary, that we and the Nation may be saved from desolating Judgments; so we
shall see afterward how and by what means this Difficulty may be surmounted,
and those Obstacles removed out of the way. However, happy will they be, be
they ever so few, never so Poor, never so unknown to the World, whom God shall
find so doing, when he arises out of his Place to shake the Earth terribly

VI. I shall therefore in the next place, to bring all things nearer home,
enquire, What is the Nature of that Repentance and Reformation which at this
time God requires of us all, that we may not perish in his sore Displeasure.

After a Devastation made of the Treasure of the Roman Empire, by sundry
Tyrants successively, Vespasian coming to the Government, acquainted the
Senate, that there was need of so many Millions of Money, that the Empire might
stand; not that it might flourish and grow vigorus, whereunto much more was
required; but that it might be preserved from Dissolution and Ruin: And I
shall propose not what is requisite, to render the Church of God in this
Nation, orderly, beautiful, and vigorous, but only what is necessary, that it
may stand and live, by a Deliverance from Desolating Judgments. And,

1. The Repentance which in any Case, God requires absolutely, is that which
is internal, and real, in sincere Conversion unto himself accompanied with
Fruits meet for such Repentance. So is it declared, Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31 Therefore
I will judge you, O House of Israel, every one according unto his ways, says
the Lord God: Repent and turn your selves from all your Transgressions, so
Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Cast away from you all your Transgressions,
whereby you have Transgressed, and make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit, for
why will you die, O House of Israel? A new Heart, and a new Spirit, or real
internal Conversion unto God by the grace of the Covenant, is required in this
Repentance, as the Renunciation and Relinquishment of all Iniquities, must be
the Fruit of it. So also is it expressed, Isai. 1. 16, 17. Internal
purification of the heart, with the practice of universal Obedience, and
abstinence of all Sin, is that which God requires.

This is that Repentance which was the Subject of the Ministry of John the
Baptist; on the neglect whereof, he threatened the People with final Excision;
which accordingly not long after befell them, Mat. 3. 8, 9, 10. God does not
require a feigned Repentance, or that which is merely outward and temporary: In
this Case, see Joel 2. 12, 13. But,

2. Where there is Repentance and Reformation that are real in the Root or
Cause of them, which is an effectual Conviction of Sin, and Sense of ensuing,
approaching Judgments, giving testimony of Sincerity in its Fruits, by an
Abstinence from open Provoking Sins, and the performance of known Duties, unto
its Sincerity; in both which, a Sense and Reverence of God is owned, though it
be not in many, in the most, it may be in few, absolutely sincere and holy, yet
may it prevail to the turning away of threatened Judgments, at least for a
season.

These things therefore are required unto this Repentance.

1. A Real Conviction of Sin, in them that are called unto it, or do make
Profession of it. If this lie not in the Foundation, no expression of
Repentance, no Profession of Reformation is of any value in the Sight of God:
Yea, it is a Mocking of him, which is the highest Provocation. Men without this
Conviction, may be driven to somewhat that looks like Repentance and
Reformation; as the keeping of Days of Fasting or Humiliation, by outward Force
or Compulsion of Law; but there is nothing in what they do, of what we enquire
after. By such days and Ways they shall never save the Nation, Jerem. 3. 10.

2: A real Sense of Gods Displeasure, and the Approach of desolating Judgments.
It is not enough that we have a Conviction and Sense of our own Sins, but we
must have them also of the Sins of the Nation, whereby God is provoked to
Anger; and Apprehensions of his Displeasure are to influence our Minds in all
that we go about herein. Unless these abide and dwell in our Minds, unless they
accompany us continually in all our Ways and Occasions, rise and lie down with
us, we shall not cordially engage in this Duty

3. Real Reformation is an Abstinence from all known Sin, and the avowed Fruits
of a reformed Converstion are required hereunto, Mat. 3. 10.

4. That it be persisted in, Hos. 6. 1.

On these Suppositions, that this Repentance is useful unto the End proposed,
is made fully evident in the Instances of Nineveh, and of Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 27,
28, 29. Ahab in his Repentance and Humiliation, manifested a deep Sense of the
Guilt of Sin, and Divine Displeasure. See thou, says God, to Elijah, how he
humbles himself? It might easily be known and taken notice of. There is an
Humiliation described by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 58. v, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. which
God abhors, and which shall be profitable for nothing. Such have been the
Humiliations among us for the most part: But although it be the Duty of every
man, to endeavor that his Repentance and Reformation do consist in a sincere,
internal, cordial Conversion unto God, which the Divine Calls do intend;
without which, it will not be of advantage unto his own Soul, as unto his
eternal Condition; yet as unto the turning away of Temporal Calamities, at
least, as to the suspension of them, such a public Repentance and Reformation
as evidence themselves in their Fruits, do proceed from a real Sense of Sin and
Judgment, may be useful and prevalent. In brief, the Repentance which God
requires, with respect to his Covenant, that the Souls of men may be saved,
unto the Glory of his Grace by Jesus Christ, is eternal, spiritual,
supernatural, whereby the whole Soul is renewed, changed and turned unto
himself. But as God is the supreme Governor of the World in Temporal things,
with respect unto the Dispensation of his providence in Mercies and Judgments,
there may be a Repentance and Reformation, wherein his Glory is vindicated in a
visible compliance with his Calls and Warnings, and an Acknowledgment of him in
his righteous Judgments, which may be of Use unto the End proposed. Besides,
wherever there is a General Reformation of Life sincerely attempted, it is to
be believed, that in many it is spiritual and saving.

3. The Repentance and Reformation required, must be suited unto the State and
Condition of those who are called ther^unto. All are to consider what is amiss
in them, as unto their own State and Condition, Isai. 55. 7. Let the wicked
forsake his Way, and the unrigheous man his Thoughts, every one his own Way and
Thoughts in their present Condition.

Wherefore the Persons intended in this Call, are of two sorts.

1. Such as are wicked, as unto their State and Condition, persons unconverted,
unregenerate, not born of God.

And as are sincere Believers, really converted unto God.

The Call of God is unto both sorts: Repentance and Reformation are required of
them both: And they are so in a suitableness unto their different conditions

In each of these sorts, there are various Degrees of Sin and Provocation. Some
of the first sort are openly flagitious, public habitual Sinners, such as
whose Sins go beforehand unto Judgment, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 5. 24.
And some are more sober in their outward Conversation. The Call of God respects
them all in their several degrees of sinning. Let the wicked man forsake his
Ways, and the unrighteous man his Thoughts, those which are his own, which are
proper to him. None doubts, unless it be themselves, that the first sort ought
to reform themselves; the Generality of men cry out against them, and fear,
that for their Sins, especially if they be Persons in high places, the
Judgments of God will come upon the Land.

But if those of the other sort also, who are apt to justify themselves,
because they run not out unto the same Excess of Riot with them, do not apply
themselves unto the Repentance and Reformation which are proper unto their
State and Condition, the Will of God is not answered in his Warnings. Yet, it
is the Impenitency of this sort of men, that is the most dangerous Symptom at
this day in the Nation. Their unshaken Security keeps all that truly fear God
in a trembling posture.

6. It is so with Churches peculiarly reformed, and true Believers in them; as
also all other true Beleivers, who walk more at large. They also are called
unto Repentance and Reformation, and that according to their State, and their
respective degrees therein: For some are more Guilty than others, in decays of
Faith, Love, Zeal, Holiness and Fruitfulness in Obedience. with Conformity to
the World. And if their should be a public Reformation in the Nation, as to
outward provoking Sin; yet if these of this sort, do not reform themselves,
according as their Condition does require, the desired Deliverance would
scarcely be obtained. And woe be to such persons, if through their Neglect of
their Duty, the whole Nation should be exposed to Ruin. Wherefore,

4. The Reformation called for, as the condition of escaping of impendent
Judgments, must be Universal, at least General; amongst all sorts and Degrees,
all Orders and Estates of Men. All sorts have sinned, all sorts are threatened;
and therefore Repentance is required of all, if we would not perish. It is so
of Magistrates and Ministers, of Nobles and Common People in City and Country;
and that to be evidenced by its Fruits; so as that it may be said of us See you
not how they humble themselves.

But if this be so, some may be apt to say, It seems if All do not set their
Hearts and Hands unto this Work, if All sorts do not engage in it, there is no
good effect to be hoped or looked for: But when shall we see any such thing?
When shall we see the Generality of all sorts of men in this Nation cordially
to go about this Work of Repentance and Reformation? as good therefore let it
alone, as go about to attempt it.

I Answer, 1. If you cannot be content to perish with the impenitent and
unreformed, you may choose to do as they do: If you would avoid their
Punishment, you must avoid their Sin, especially their refusal to turn on the
Call of God.

2. Some must begin this Work, and be exemplary unto others. And blessed are
they of the Lord, who shall receive the Grace and Honor so to do, Let us not
then sit looking on others to see what they will do, but immediately engage
unto our own Duty.

3. The duty herein, of no one private Person, much less of whole Churches
shall be lost, though the Nation should not be reformed in general. For,

1, They shall deliver their own Souls and if they be not saved (as I believe
they would be in an eminent manner) from somewhat of the outward part of a
public Calamity, yet they should be from all the Wrath and Displeasure of God
in it.

2. A few, for ought I know, one man, may sometimes prevail with God, for the
suspending, at least of Judgments threatened unto a whole Nation. And hereby,

3. They shall give unto others a farther Season of Repentance, which God can
bless and make effectual unto them. There are therefore blessed Encouragements
unto all Churches, unto all individual persons to endeavor a compliance with
the present Calls of God, though the Body of the People should not be gathered.

VII. Our next Enquiry is, Whence, or from what Causes such a Reformation may
be expected, as may be useful unto the turning away of impendent Judgments? And
these Causes are either supreme, or Subordinate.

The Supreme Cause hereof, must be the Sovereign Grace of God, in fresh
Effusions of his Spirit on the Souls of Men, to turn them unto himself. Without
this, all other ways and means of attaining it will be in vain. This is every
where in the Scripture attested unto, as the only supreme efficient Cause of
the Conversion of Men unto God. And unto that State are things come to amongst
us, that unless we are made partakers of it in a somewhat more than ordinary
manner, our Breaches cannot be healed; Whether we have Grounds or no to expect
any such thing, shall be afterward considered: At present there seems to be no
other hopes of it, but only because it is a Sovereign Act of Divine Grace,
which has been exemplified in the Church of old. There seems indeed rather as
yet, to be a withdrawing drawing of the Communications of the Holy spirit in
effectually prevalent Grace, on the part of God, and a contempt of them, on the
part of Men: But Sovereignty can conquer all Obstacles. This way did God heal
and recover his Church of old when all other Means, all Mercies, Afflictions
and Judgments failed, Ezekiel. 36. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. And it may at
present be for a Lamentation, that this work of Grace is so disregarded by the
most, so despised by many, and so little cried for by the Residue. But without
it, in vain shall we use any other Remedies, we shall not be healed. It is not
the best Projections of men for Reformation by this or that Order or State of
things in Church or State, that without this, will be of advantage unto us.

The Subordinate Causes hereof, must be the diligent Discharge of their Duty,
by Magistrates and Ministers.

I shall but name these things, that I give no place to Complaints or
Indignation, though just and almost necessary. And,

First, As unto the Furtherance of it by Magistrates, it must consist in three
Things.

1. By evidencing that the Promotion of it is their Interest. Unless it be
understood so to be, whatever else they do in the Countenance of it, will be of
no Use nor Advantage. For this is that which the Generality will conform unto,
or comply with all. And if it be once understood, that Reformation is what they
desire, what they design, what they place their chief Interest in, as it was
with David, Hezekiah, Josiah, and others, it will have an Influence on the
People, not inferior unto what the Design of Jeroboam in pursuit of his
corrupt Interest, had on the people of Israel, to sin, All other Means are
dead, unless they are enlivened by an Evidence of Reality in the Minds of
Magistrates, and an high Concernment in the prosperity of their Work. Let them
make what Laws and Orders they please, appoint what outward Means they can
devise, unless it be made uncontroulably evident, that it is their Cordial
Design, and what they place their Chief Interest in, they will not be
available. Add hereunto,

2. The due Execution of Laws against Flagitious Immoralities. And,

3. An encouraging Example in their own persons; without which, all things will
grow worse and worse, whatever else be done. Men seem to be weary in some
measure, of the dismal Effects of Sin; but they seem not to be weary of Sin.
Unto this weariness, they yet want Motives, Encouragements and Examples. And it
is strange unto me, that in all our Fears and Dangers, in the Divisions of our
Councels, and Confusions amongst all sorts of Men, under an high Profession of
Zeal for the Protestant Religion, in the Nation, and the Preservation of it,
that this only Expedient for our Relief and Safety lies wholly neglected,

As unto Ministers, the Faithful Discharge of his Duty in Preaching, Prayer,
and Example is required hereunto. Should I stay to show the necessity hereof at
this season; as also what is required thereunto, what Care, what Diligence,
what Watchfulness, what Compassion, what Zeal, what Exercise of all
Gospel Grace, with the over-Neglect of these things among many, it would take
up a Volume, rather than become a Place in this present Enquiry.

But I proceed unto that which is more our immediate Concernment. Wherefore,

VIII. What if all these Means do fail? what if all Expectations from them be
in vain? What is incumbent on them in particular, who are really sensible of
these things; namely of the abounding of provoking Sins, and the near Approach
of deserved Judgments?

That which I design herein, is to give some Directions, as unto what Frame of
Heart ought to be found in us, and the Practice of what Duties we ought to be
found in at such a Season as this is. It is no common, no easy thing to wait
for the Lord in the way of his Judgments, Isai. 26, 8, 9. There is inward
Soul-work night and day, as well as outward Duties required unto it. That God
may be Glorified in a due manner, that we may be found in Peace, whatever be
the Event of things; that we may be useful unto others; and in all serve the
Will of God in our Generation, are all expected from us in a way of Duty,

Unto this End, the ensuing Directions may be made use of.

2. Take heed of stout-heartedness, and a Contempt or neglect thereby of Divine
Warnings. There is a Generation, who either really, or in pretense, are bold,
fearless, stout-hearted, regardless of these things; they seem to provoke and
dare God to do his utmost, all that he seems to threaten. So they speak, Isai.
5, 19. Let him make speed, and hasten his Work, that we may see it; and let the
Counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh, that we may know it. Here is much
talk indeed of the Judgments of God, and of their near Approach; When shall we
see them? why do not they come? when shall he bring forth his Work?

This has been the great Controversy between the Church and the wicked World
from the beginning of it. Those that truly feared God, were always testifying
that God would come, and take vengeance on them for their Impieties and
Impenitency. But because these Judgments were not speedily executed, the sinful
world did always despise their warnings, and scoff at their Message, So Enoch
the seventh from Adam, he Preached and Prophesied of these things; namely of
the Coming of God to take vengeance of ungodly men, Jude 14, 15. And this
Message was scoffed at, as is evident, because no Reformation ensued thereon,
until the Flood took them all away. So was it with Noah, and his Preaching; and
so it has been with all that fear God, in their several Generations; and this
was one especial thing that the Pagans laughed and mocked at the Primitive
Christians about; as is plain in Lucian's Philopatr. So the Apostle Peter gives
us an Account both of what was past, and what would afterward come to pass, 2
Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6. unto the End.

And such as these abound amongst us: All the Warnings of God have been turned
into Ridicule, previous Judgments despised, and Sin it self made a Scoff of.
But of all others, God most abhors this sort of Men. They are said to be far
from Righteousness, Isai. 46. 12. Unto such he speaks in his Wrath, Hear ye
despisers, wonder, and perish. Yea, the Scripture is full with the severest
Threatenings against this sort of men; nor shall any in the appointed season,
drink deeper of the Cup of Gods Indignation. See Isai: 28, 14, 15. Deuteronomy. 29.
19. 20. Such secure Despisers, such Scoffers at approaching Judgments, such
Deriders of the Signs and Tokens of them God will deal withal. And some there
are, who it may be, not from the same Spirit of open Profaneness, but out of
Prejudices, corrupt Arguings, pretended Observations of things past, Disbelief
of all they do not feel, and such like effects of long Security, do utterly
scorn and scoff at all these things. They account it a matter of Weakness,
Pusillanimity, or Superstition to concern themselves in these warnings of
Providence, or the explication of them by the Word: but their Judgment sleeps
not. And it may be observed, and will be found true, that when Judgments do
really approach, of all sorts of men, they are the most cowardly, distracted,
fearful and void of Counsel: For when God begins to deal with them, their
hearts cannot endure, nor their hands be strong, He smites through their loins,
and fills them with a Spirit of horror and fear, that they shall tremble
like the Leaves of the Forest. In that day you may say unto them, as Zebul did
to boasting Gaal, upon the Approach of Abimelech, his Enemy, Where is now thy
Mouth wherewith thou said, Who is Abimelech? Where is now your Mouth and your
Vauntings, with respect unto these Judgments of God? So Micaiah the Prophet
told Zedekiah the false Prophet, in his Boasting and Confidence of Success, 1
Kin. 22. 25. With all thy confidence and boasting, thou shall be one of the
first that shall endeavor to fly and hide thy self. Yea, this sort of persons
are commonly the most ridiculous and contemptible, when real Danger overtakes
them, of any sort of men in the world.

That which God requires of us in such a season, is called in Scripture
Trembling; They that tremble at my word. This he regards, this he accepts, this
he approves of, Isai. 66. 2, 5. Jer. 5. 22. It is not a weakening, an
astonishing, heartless consternation of Spirit that is intended; not such a
Dread and Terror as should obstruct us in the cheerful performance of Duty,
and preparation to comply with the will of God, Such is that mentioned, Deuteronomy.
18, 66, 67. which is the most severe of judgments. But it is an awful Reverence
of the Greatness and Holiness of God, in the way of his Judgments, casting out
all carnal Security, Self-confidence, and contempt of Divine warnings, so
bringing the soul into a submissive compliance with the will of God in all
things. But look well in the first place, that this Evil on no pretenses do
make any approach unto you.

If one Evil seems to be diverted, do not say with Agag, surely the bitterness
of Death is past; which will prove an entrance into this evil Frame, and so
grow regardless of your Duty: God expects other things from you. The Lion,
says he, has roared, who will not fear? Amos 3. 8. There is the Voice of a
Lion roaring for his Prey, in the present Divine Warnings: Take heed that you
despise not that, which when it comes to pass, you can neither abide, nor avoid.

2. Take heed of a Frame of heart that is regardless of these things We have a
sort of Men, who although they will not, they dare not openly, as others,
despise Divine Warnings, yet they see all things in such a Light, as suffers
them not to take Notice of any Concernment of their own in them, Psalm. 28. 5.
Jer. 36. 24. The Land is filled with Sin; it is true, but they are the Sins of
other men, not theirs; There are Tokens and Signs of Gods Displeasure in Heaven
above, and the Earth beneath, but men are not agreed whether these things be of
any signification or no; some say Yea, and some Nay; but they are new and
strange, and so are meet to be the Subject of Discourse; previous Judgments
have been upon us; they are but such Accidents as fall out frequently in the
world. But the Divisions among our selves, and contrivances of our Adversaries,
seem to threaten Ruin to the Nation; it may be so; but these things belong
unto our Rulers; and Men are divided about this also; some say one thing, and
some another: Some say there was a Plot, and some say there was none. In the
mean time, they are filled with their own Occasions, and will not be diverted
from them, unto any serious regard of God in his present Dispensations; like
the wild Ass in her occasion, who can turn her away? Jer. 1. 24. Of this Frame
the Prophet complains, as that which God will surely avenge, Isa. 26. 11. Lord,
when thy Hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see and be
ashamed, for their Envy at the People; yea the Fire of thine Enemies shall
devour them.

Others look on all things in another Light, and under another Notion; for
whereas it is part of our Sin and Punishment in this Nation, an evident fruit
of the Evil of our ways, that we are divided into Designing Parties the one
seeking the Ruin of the other, they consider all Providence as relating unto
such Differences. This gives them a zealous Concernment in them, and continued
Talk about them; but the Will, Work and Design of God in them is not laid to
heart.

Some are so well pleased with their present Advantages, in Promotions,
Dignities and Wealth, as their Interest, that they cannot endure to think of
these things. Whatever warnings are portended of approaching Judgments, they
look on them as the Threatenings of such as have ill will against them, and
would have these things to portend their Trouble: Guilt makes them fearful and
sensible: and they think it best to hide those things from themselves, which,
if they are so, they cannot remedy.

To free us from this Miscarriage also this unanswerableness unto the Mind of
God in his present Dispensation, we may consider,

1. That a deep consideration of, and Enquiry into the Mind of God in such a
season as we have described, is required of us in a way of Duty. It is our Sin
to neglect it, and that attended with many Aggravations. It is not a thing that
we may attend unto or omit as it seems convenient; but it is required as a Duty
of us, without which we cannot Glorify God in a due manner.

He that is not daily exercised with prevalent Thoughts about the present ways
of God in the Approach of his Judgments, lives in such a Neglect of Duty, as
will bring in a Negligence and Coldness in all other Duties whatsoever; for
this is certain, that when God calls unto any especial Duty in an extraordinary
way or manner, in any season, those by whom it is neglected, are really cold,
formal, and negligent in all other ordinary Duties whatever. That Grace which
will not be excited unto especial Duties on extraordinary occasions, is very
lifeless in all other things. This is the best Note to try, if not the Truth,
yet the Power of Grace. When it is in its vigor and due exercise, it makes the
Soul to be ready, inclinable and disposed unto all Intimations of the Divine
Will and Pleasure; as speaks the Psalmist; Thou shall guide me by thine Eye and
lead me with thy counsel. He attended to each Look and Guidance of Divine
Providence to company with it, when others must be forced with strong Curbs and
Bridles, like the Horse and Mule.

2. It is such a Duty, as whereunto real Wisdom and Diligence are required. We
think it needful to use our Wisdom about other things, our own Affairs: But in
this it is most necessary. The Voice of the Lord cries unto the City, the Man
of Wisdom shall see thy Name; Micah 6. 9. Ordinary, slight and transient
Thoughts will not answer this Duty. Such, all men that are sober cannot but
have; and their Discourse is answerable thereunto. But Consideration with
Diligence and Prudence is required of us: Let these Testimonies be consulted to
this purpose, Psalm. 65. 9. Deuteronomy. 12. 10. Hos. 4. last. Psalm. 107. 43. Prayer,
Study and Meditation are all diligently to be engaged herein.

2. Take heed of vain Confidences. Men are apt in such seasons, to fix on one
thing or other, wherewith they relieve and support themselves. And there is not
any thing that is more effectual to keep them off from this Duty, and the Frame
of Spirit which is required in them. If you speak with any man almost, you may
with a little heed discover wherein his Confidence does lie, and what it is
that he trusts unto. But says the Prophet unto such persons, The Lord has
rejected thy Confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them, Jer. 2. 37.

There are sundry sorts of vain Confidences wherewith men are apt to relieve
their Minds in such a season, so as to countenance themselves in their Security
and a Neglect of this especial Duty. Two in particular I shall only mention,
as I do only name the Heads of things, which might be much enlarged.

I. The first is some certain Privileges, whereon they trust for an exemption
from common Calamities: they are the Church, they are the People of God, they
are separated from the world, and persecuted by it; and hence there is a secret
Reserve in their Minds, that indeed they shall not be in trouble as other men.
So was it with the Jews of old; when they were threatened with the Judgments of
God for their Sins, and called thereon to Repentance, they justified themselves
in their ways, and despised all Divine warnings, on a Confidence they had in
their Church Priviledges. They cried against the Prophet, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these, and no evil
shall come nigh us, Jer. 7. 4. And in confidence hereof, namely, that they were
the Church, and enjoyed the Privileges belonging thereunto, and the solemn
Worship of God therein, they gave themselves up unto all abominable
Immoralities, under an Assurance of Impunity by their privileges as the
prophet upbraids them, v. 8. 9. Behold ye trust in lying words that cannot
profit. Will you steal, murder, and commit Adultery, and swear falsely, and burn
Incense unto Baal, and walk after other Gods whom ye know not; and say you shall
be delivered? At this day all sorts of men claim a Refuge in their privileges.
Those who design the Ruin of the Nation, and of all true Religion therein, do
it with Confidence of Success from hence, That they are the Church, That the
Temple of God is with them, That all the privileges belonging unto the Church
are theirs, and so are the Promises made unto it. And such is the infatuating
Efficacy of their prejudicate peswasion herein, that it has had two mavelous
Effects; the one against the Light of Nature, and the other against the
Fundamental Principals of Religion.

For first, Under the Influence of this confidence, they have engaged into as
vile Immoralities as ever were perpetrated under the Sun. Murder, Persecution,
Assassinations, Dying in Falsehoods, with a general Design to pursue the same
ways unto the utmost, in the Destruction of multitudes of innocent persons; as
they did formerly in Ireland. But what if they do all those Abominations? Yet
they are the Church; the promises and privileges of it are theirs, and all
they do is accepted with God; a principal tending directly to the vilest
Atheism.

Again, Although God in a mavelous, yea a miraculous manner, has discovered
and frustrated their Hellish Designs-and brought many of them into the Pit they
dug for others, yet they will accept of no Rebuke from God, but go on in an
obstinate Presumption that they are the Church, and shall prevail at last. And
that Church which shall prevail by these Means, no doubt they are. Some indeed
pretend highly to be the Church, but they lay claim, so far as I can find, to
no other Advantages thereby, but Dignities and Promotions. And others also are
apt to relieve themselves with this Confidence, that they are the People of
God, and shall have an especial interest in Deliverance on that Account. And I
say, far be it from me, to weaken any persuasion of Gods especial Regard of
those that are truly his. God has a peculiar People in the World, let the
World scoss at it whilst they please, unto whom all the Promises of the
Scripture, and all the Privileges of the Church do belong. These Promises they
ought to mix with Faith, and plead before God continually and they shall be all
accomplished toward them in the way and time of Gods appointment. Nor do any
sort of dissenting Professions, as they are called, that I know of, appropriate
this Right and Privilege unto themselves, unto the exclusion of others; but
extend it to all who are sincere Believers. But this is that which I say
concerning all sorts of men. That if an Apprehension or Persuasion, that they
are the Church or People of God, do keep them off from that Duty of Repentance
and Reformation, which God calls unto, it is a Confidence which God rejects,
and in which they will not prosper. I desire to ask of any, Has not the Church
sinned? Have not Prosessors sinned? Are there not sins amongst us against the
Lord our God, proper unto our State, and according to our Measure? If it be so,
our being the People of God, any of us, if we are so, unless we repent, does
only, as unto these Providential Dispensations, expose us unto his just
Severity, for Judgment must begin at the House of God; it must begin at us.
Take heed of this failing Reserve: I have observed much Security to arise from
hence, and great Negligence of known Duties. If you are the People of God, you
had the more need to tremble at his Judgments, and at the Tokens of his
displeasure. Especially ought it to be so with you at this Day, when God seems
in a peculiar manner to be displeased with the Rivers, as the Prophet speaks,
Hab. 3. 8. Those who should send forth streams of refeshment unto the Nation.
To me at present all things appear in that condition, That there is no Reserve
left as unto public Judgments, but only in Sovereign Grace and Mercy, to be
waited for in a way of Repentance and Reformation. As unto our privileges, God
speaks unto us, as he did to the people of old, concerning their Ornaments,
Exodus 33. 5. Put them off, that I may know to do unto you. We are to lay aside
our pleas and pretenses, betaking our selves to Sovereign Grace and Mercy alone.

2. Another Ground of vain confidence may be, an unjust Expectation of such an
Accomplishment of Scripture-Promises, Prophesies and Predictions, as are not
applicable unto our present Condition.

It is undeniable that there are such Promises, prophesies and predictions
concerning the Deliverance of the Church, the Ruin of its Adversaries, the
Glory and Beauty of the Kingdom of Christ, as those intended. For although the
most of that kind in the old Testament, are of a Spiritual Interpretation, and
have their Accomplishment in all the Elect in every Age, whatever be their
outward State and Condition; yet that there are such also as concern the State
of the Church in this World, and the Ruin of all its Antichristian Enemies,
with Peace and Glory ensuing thereon, cannot be denied.

And concerning them, we may observe sundry things, that we may not abuse them
into vain groundless Confidences in such a Season this as is.

1. That we ought to have a firm Faith of their Accomplishment in their proper
Season. The Rule of them all is that of the Prophet; I the Lord will hasten it
in his time, Isai. 60. 22. As it is also, Hab. 2. 2, 3. Though they seem to be
prolonged and tarry beyond their proper season, yet they have their fixed and
determinate time, beyond which they shall not tarry. And two things I would
offer on this Occasion.

1. That we are not only to believe their Accomplishment, but to be in the
Actual Exercise of Faith about it. For without this, we shall want a great
supportment of patient long-suffering in every time of Trial. And by this Faith
do we take in the Power and Comfort of things promised things not actually
enjoyed. For Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11 1. that which
gives a previous subsistence in the Mind and Soul, as unto the benefit and
comfort of them, of the things hoped for. And those whose Minds are exercised
unto these things, do know what benefit they have by such a preception of them.
They are carried sometimes by a way of believing into Communion with them who
lived in the Old World, as they had with us in the expectation of what we
enjoy; and into the same kind of Communion with those who herafter shall enjoy
the accomplishment of those Promises which may be yet afar off.

2. This Faith ought to be most firm when all things seem to conspire in
rendering the Accomplishment of such Promises not only improbable, but also
impossible, as unto present outward Causes, as in the State of things at this
day in the world. There are no visible or appearing means of the fulfilling any
of them; yet the whole World is joined in a conspiracy to defeat them; but true
Faith rises against those Oppositions, and is prevalent against them all.

For having God alone, his Power, Faithfulness and Truth for its Objects, it
values not the Opposition that men can make against them. That shall be done in
this kind, which God is able to do, let men do what they please. God laughs all
their proud Attempts to scorn, and so may the Virgin Daughter of Sion also.

2 It is our Duty to pray for the accomplishment of all the Promises and
Predictions that are on Record in the book of God concerning the Kingdom of
Christ and his Church in this World. God will do these things, yet for all of
them, he will be sought unto by the house of Israel. This has been the
Practice of Believers in all ages both under the Old Testament and the New,
Prayer for the accomplishment of Promises, has been the Life-breath of the
Church in all Ages; and Faith hereby brings in great refreshment unto the Soul.
And the greatest Evidence of its approach will be a plentiful effusion of the
holy Spirit in the hearts of Believers, be they few or more at any time in the
World, stirring them up and enabling them to pray effectually and fervently for
their accomplishment, as in the Example of Daniel, Chap. 9. 1, 2, 3. Wherefore,

3. There are three things considerable in such Promises and Predictions.

1. The Grace and Mercy that is in them.

2. The suitableness of that Grace and Mercy unto the State of Believers at any
time.

3. The Litteral Accomplishment of them in their outward Circumstance. The two
former belong unto us at all times, and we may plead with God in Faith, for the
Effects of them in all our Trials and Distresses.

With respect hereunto, it is, that the People of God have Faith in him against
the World, with all their Enemies and Oppressors, which they have been so
reproached withal, as the Lord Christ was with his Faith unto the same Purpose,
Psalm. 22. 8. When things seem to go evil with them, when they are shut up in
the hands of their Enemies and Oppressors, as the Lord Christ was upon the
Cross, the World is ready to approach them with their Confidence in God, and
there owning themselves to be his People; but they faint not herein. However
things may go for a season, they are secured of the Grace and Mercy which is
the Promises, which are suited unto all their Wants, all that they can desire
absolutely; yea, their full Deliverance, when it is best for them: But,

4. Remember, That as unto the Application of the Accomplishment of such
Promises and Predictions in their outward Effects, unto certain Times and
Seasons, many have been woefully mistaken, which has been the Ground and
occasion of very scandalous Miscarriages: The World has scarce seen greater
outrages of Sin and Wickedness that have been countenanced by this Pretense,
that such or such a time was now come, and that therein such and such things
were to be done by those who made such Interpretations and Applications. For
when such a Conceit befalls the Minds of men, it sets them loose from all Rules
but their own Inclinations And many have from such Apprehensions fallen under
sad and scandalous disappointments. Wherefore,

Such an Expectation or Confidence of the Events of Promises, Prophesies, and
Predictions, as hinders men from applying their Minds thoroughly unto the
present Duties that God calls for, is heedfully to be watched against. I have
heard many arguing and pleading for the strengthening of such Confidences, but
I never saw good effect of them; they please for the present, they profit not.

The Story of the Prophets Jeremiah and Hananiah, is applicable in this case,
Jer. 28. And it is certain that before the Final Destruction of Jerusalem,
that which principally hardened the People unto their utter Ruin, so as they
would hearken neither to the Voice of God nor man for their safety, was a
Presumption they had, that at that time their Messiah would come and save them,

6. Few know of what sort Day of the Lord will be, which they desire long for
an expect. We know how it proved unto the Church of the Jews, Mal. 3. 1. 2, A
Day may be coming, which, although it may be a glorious Issue, yet it may
consume all the Hopes that men have treasured up in their expectation of it.
But I will not touch farther on these things: My Design is only to take us all
off from such vain Confidences as may obstruct us in a diligent attendance unto
those Duties, which God at this season calls us unto; which shall be declared
immediately.

3. Some place their Confidence in secret Reserves which they have in
themselves, that however it go with others, yet they shall escape well enough.
They are rich, and they intend to be wise: They intend not to be engaged in any
thing Civil or Religious, that should prejudice them in their Possessions:
whilst things pass at the cheap rate of talking, they will be like unto others;
but when Trials come, they will make a safe Retreat. We have their character
and their Doom, Jer. 28. 15, 17, 18.

4. A Fourth Direction for our Deportment in such a season is, That we
diligently consider and search our own hearts, and ways, to find out and
understand how it is between God and our Souls. This Direction is given us Lam.
3. 39. 40. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of
his Sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. When
Trials and Punishments draw nigh, or are upon us, it is not our Business nor
Duty to lie complaining under them, but so to search and try our Ways, as to
turn unto the Lord. This is the first word of the voice of God in approaching
Judgments, Search your selves, try your hearts and your ways, try how it is
with you. At such a season to pass by the consideration of our selves, of our
State, of our Walk, of our Actions, in an ordinary manner, or with slight or
common thoughts, is to despise the Voice of God. God speaks aloud, the Voice of
God cries unto the City; he does so by the ways beforementioned; he speaks
articulately, distinctly, so as that a man of Wisdom may see his Name, and know
his mind; he speaks unto us; and says, Search now your selves.

And in this Search, respect is to be had unto the things ensuing.

1. In general, Search into your State and Condition; try whether it be built
on a good foundation; on the Rock by Faith; or on the Sand, by Profession only;
whether it will hold his Trial who will bring it to the Refiners fire; He shall
slay the Hypocrite with the breath of his mouth. And many dreadful Discoveries
will be made of the false and rotten States of men when the Lords day of Trial
shall come. This is one certain End of a fiery Trial; namely, to discover and
consume the Profession of Hypocrites, as has been done in part already.

2. With respect unto those Ways and Sins which are the peculiarly provoking
sins of Churches and Professors; such as the Lord Christ testifies his
Displeasure against in them, and which may have as great an influence into the
procurement of temporal Judgments, as the more flagitious Sins of open Sinners:
such are Decays in Love, Zeal and Fruits of Obedience, want of Delight, Warmth
and Life in the Ordinances of Gospel-VVorship: with Pride, Elation of Mind,
Self-conceit, and Barrenness in good Works. If we would know what are the Sins
in Churches and Professors, that the Lord Christ is so displeased with us, as
to threaten his departing from them, we cannot better learn it, than in the
Declaration of his Mind, which he makes unto the Churches of Asia, Rev 2 and 3.
And these are the things which he charge on them: For persons under the
Capacities of Church Members and Professors, to content themselves with such a
Search of their outward Actions and Duties, of all sorts, Religious, Moral and
Civil, as none may justly cast blame upon them, it know way answers the search
that God calls them unto. How is it as unto the inward frame of the heart? What
is the vigor and power of Faith and Love in you? how do they act themselves;
what is your real delight in the ways of God? Where is your Fruitfulness in
works of Charity and Mercy? Where is your readiness to forgive your Enemies?
Are there no Failings, no Decays in these things? Are there no Indispositions,
Deadness and Coldness in Duties, grown upon you? How is it as unto constant
Meditation on spiritual things, and the fixing your Affections on things that
are above? With respect unto these things, ought we to search our selves
diligently in such a Day as this is; and if we find our selves under Decays in
them, let us know of a truth that God calls us unto Repentance or pain of his
highest Displeasure.

For our parts, we cannot search into, we cannot judge the hearts of others,
any other way but by the Application of the Word unto their Consciences. But I
must needs say, That if men's outward Actions be an Indication of the inward
frame of their Minds, there is reason enough for the most of us to be jealous
over our selves herein.

2. With respect unto your Callings, Circumstances and Inclinations, and the
Sins that are peculiar unto them. There are Sins which are very apt to
insinuate themselves into the Callings and Circumstances of men, both of high
and low degree, that do easily beset them; as Hardness, Oppression, Severity
and Unmercifulness, in those that are great, and have large Possessions; and
Deceit, Equivocations, Overreaching, in those of more ordinary Employments. I
speak not of these at present: They are of the number of those which go
beforehand unto Judgment: But these things, namely, men's Callings,
Circumstances and Inclination are apt to influence their Mind with vicious
Habits, and to render their ways crooked. Pride of Life, Self-Conceit,
negligence in holy Duties, Destempered Passions and Lusts, devouring Cares,
carnal Fears, with other hurtful Evils, do spring from these things, if not
watched against. In reference unto them therefore are we called to search our
selves in Day wherein God is pleading with us. With respect unto them ought we
to be exceeding jealous over our selves; for verily they have rendered the VVays
and VValkings of the Generality of Professors a great provocation unto Christ
Jesus.

4. In an especial manner with a respect unto Love of the World, and conformity
thereunto. This is that which the Lord Jesus Christ will not always bear
withal in his Churches; for it lies in opposition unto the whole work of Faith,
and all the Precepts of the Gospel; It is not against this or that Command
only, but it is against the whole Design of the Gospel, and the Grace
administered therein.

Now at present concerning our outward Conformity unto the World there needs
no great Search to be made: it is open and evident unto all; so that as unto
Attire, Fashions, manner of ordinary Converse, Mispence of Time, Feastings of
rich ones, and Jolities, there is little difference left between Professors and
the World, which God will not long bear with them in; especially not in those
who have increased their wealth in, and grown into Conformity with the World,
whilst others under the same Profession, have been harrassed, imprisoned,
impoverished and ruined by the World. And as for inordinate Love unto the
World, I have spoken so often to it, treated so much of it, that I shall not
here again insist upon it: I shall only say, that when men grow proud,
high-minded, and value themselves according to the increase of their earthly
Enjoyments, and think themselves wronged if others do not also so value them,
it is in vain for them to pretend that their hearts do not inordinately cleave
unto the World, and the things of it.

The Self-Searching is the first Duty we are at this season called unto; and if
we are negligent or overly herein, we shall not answer the Mind and Will of
God in any one Duty or Instance of any other kind. We are therefore herein to
call in God and Men unto our Aid and Assistance as also to stir up our selves
unto it with Diligence and Perseverance. So the Psalmist, lest, he should not
be able to make a diligent effectual Examination of himself and his ways, cries
unto God, to search and try him, that he might be known unto himself,
especially with respect unto any evil way of Sin or wickedness, Psalm. 139. 23,
24. So we ought to cry for fresh Communications of the Holy Spirit of God in
his convincing Efficacy, to acquaint us thoroughly with our selves, and to
deliver us from all self-deceivings in this matter. For when we go about this
Search, a thousand Pretenses and arguings will arise, to the Concealment or
Countenance of Self and Sin, against a Discovery and Pursuit. Nothing can
remove and scatter them, but the power of the Holy Spirit acting in his
convincing Efficacy. The whole Deceit of the heart in such a season will be put
forth, to hide, palliate, excuse and countenance such Frames and actings as
ought to be seized on and brought to Judgment. There is need of the Candle of
the Lord to search the inward parts of the Belly, Prove. 20. 27. of Spiritual
Light, to look into the secret recesses of the Mind and affections, to discover
what is amiss in them. And there is need of Spiritual Strength, to cast down
all the Srong holds and Fortifications of Sin, which will be all set up at such
a time, and will not be demolished or scattered without powerful actings of
Grace. This therefore in the first place, we are to apply our selves unto, if
we intend any Success in this work of Self-Examination.

So also are we to pray, that the Word in the Preaching and Dispensation of it,
may be effectual unto the same End, that we may find it quick and powerful,
Heb. 4. 12. that it may so judge the Secrets of our Hearts, 1. Cor. 14. 25.
that we may fall down and judge our selves also. To hide our selves at such a
season,, from the power of the Word, is an open Evidence of a ruining Security.

This Work in the use of these Means, is to be called over and persisted in, if
we design a Compliance with the present Calls of God, or an Endeavor to be
found of him in Peace, when he comes.

5. To be deeply humbled before the Lord for our own Sins, with a
Relinquishment of them all thereon, is the principal part of our Duty in this
Season. This the whole Scripture testifies unto, speaking of these things.
Without this, all that we do, or can do, signifies nothing as unto a compliance
with the Calls of God. This is the End of the Search before insisted on. We are
to find out, to know every one the Plague, the stroke, the Disease of his own
Heart, so as to be humbled before the Lord for it.

And unto this Humiliation it is required,

1. That it be internal and sincere. There is an Humiliation commonly
expressing it self in the Observation of Days of Fasting and Prayer, which
oftentimes is but the Hanging down of the Head like a Bulrush for a Day.
However, it may be so carried sometimes, as to divert or prolong the Execution
of threatened Judgments: But that which God requires of us, is to be in the
fixed Affections of the Heart. When the Lord Christ comes to enjoin Repentance
and Reformation, he gives himself that Title, I am he that searches the Reins
and Hearts, Rev. 2. 23. It is an internal hidden work, which he looks after in
our Humiliation for Sin. So says David in the same Case; Thou requirest Truth
in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. Truth or Sincerity in the Affections, is that
which God regards in our Humiliation; which answers the Charge in the Prophet,
Rend your Hearts, and not your Garments: Inward Power, not outward Signs, are
accepted with God in this Matter. Let us every one take it on our own Souls,
every one charge his own Conscience in private with the performance of this
Duty: God will bear no longer with Pretenses; no outward Appearances or evanid
Affections in a temporary Humiliation for a Day, though in the Observation of
the most solemn Duties, required on such a Day, will answer the Mind of God
herein. For

2. It must be extraordinary. Humiliation for our own Sins, is a Duty
constantly incumbent on us. To walk humbly with God, is the principal thing
that he requires of us in this world, Micah 6. 9. Hereof Self-Abasement in a
sense of Sin is the Life and Soul, the Principle of all other Acts and Duties
belonging thereunto. But when the Calls of God are extraordinary, as they are
at this day, it is necessary that we attend hereunto in an extraordinary
manner. Failing in the necessary degrees of a Duty, renders it ineffectual and
unacceptable. If as unto Times and Seasons, VVays, Means and Manner of this
Duty, we do not apply our selves unto it with more than ordinary diligence, and
with great intention of Mind, we sail in what is expected from us. To deal with
God on extraordinary Occasions, in an ordinary frame of Spirit, is to despise
him, or argues at least no due Reverence of him in his Judgments, nor a due
apprehensions of our own Concerns in them.

3. It is required that Humiliation for Sin be accompanied with a
Relinquishment of Sin: He that confesses his Sins, and forsakes them, shall
find Mercy. Confession is grown a cheap and easy Labor, whether it be read
out of a Book, or discharged by virtue of Spiritual Gifts. Humiliation may be
pretended, when it is not; and expressed, when it is transitory, no way
answering the Mind and Will of God. But the real Relinquishment of sinful
frames, sinful ways, sinful neglects, can neither be pretended, nor represented
better than it is. He that thinks he has nothing to forsake, no evil way, no
sinful negligence, no frame of Heart, will be awakened to a better kowledge of
himself, when it is too late. This we may therefore evidently try our selves
by; what real Change has there been in us, in compliance with the Calls of
God? what have we relinquished in our ways, frames or actings? what vain
thoughts are utterly excluded, whereunto we have given entertainment? what
Passions or Affections have been reduced into Order, which have exceeded their
due Bounds and Measures? what vain Communication, formerly accustomed unto,
has been watched against and prevented? what Dissimulation in Love has been
cured or cast out? what irregular actings in our Persons, Families or Occasions
of Life have been forsaken? An Enquiry into these things, will give us real,
sensible Evidence, whether our Humillation for our own Sins be compliant with
the present Calls of God.

6. Another Duty of the Season is, That we mourn for the Sins of others; of
those especially in whom we are Providentially concerned; as Relations,
Churches, the whole People of the Land of our Nativity, with whom we are
engaged by manifold Bonds and Means of Conjunction. It is well known that this
sincere Mourning for the Sins of the Places and Times wherein we live, of the
People and Churches whereunto we do belong, is eminently approved of God, and a
Token unto themselves, in whom that sense is, of Deliverance in a Day of
Calamity, Ezekiel. 9. 4. 5, 6. To have Minds careless and regardless of the Sins
of other Men, is a great Evidence of want of Sincerity in our Profession of the
Detestation of Sin. Many Pretenses there are of it; as that they will not hear
us, we are not concerned in them; That they are wicked Enemies of God, and the
worse they are, the more will their Destruction be hastened: By such Pretenses
do men deceive their Souls into a neglect of this Duty, yea, unto provoking Sin
such as this is.

It is a Matter of Sorrow unto them that truly fear God, and have any
Concernment in his Glory, or the Honor of Christ, that the whole World, so
far as we know, is filled with all abominable provoking Sins; it lies under a
Deluge of Sin, as it lay of old under a Flood of Waters only here and there
appears an Ark, that is carried above it. Atheism, Anti Scripturism,
Disbelief of Gospel-Mysteries, Contempt of the Religion which they themselves
profess; amongst all sorts of Christians, the Loss of all Public Faith and
Trust; with a Litter of unclean Lusts Ambition, Pride, Covetousness, in many
who have the outward Conduct of the Church, have spread themselves over the
face of the Earth. When God thus deals with the World, when he gives it up
unto this open profligate Excess which now abounds in it, it becomes unto all
that truly fear him, a Place of Darkness and Sorrow, which calls for a mourning
Frame of Heart.

It is so much more as unto the Land of our Nativity. From a Conjunction with
this People in Blood, Language, Manners, Laws Civil Interests, Relations,
arising form the common Law of Nativity, in a Place limited and bounded by
Providence unto especial Ends, we cannot but have a great concernment in their
Good or Evil. It is greater from hence, that the same true Religion has been
professed in the whole Nation, with innumerable Privileges accompanying it.

On these and the like Considerations, the whole Nation is laid under the same.
Law of Providence for Good or evil.

In the Sin therefore of this People we are in a peculiar manner concerned; and
shall be so in their Sufferings.

Whether Sin abound in the Land at present, we have already made Enquiry; and
nothing, spoken before, shall be repeated. If we have not a sense of these
Provocations, if we endeavor not to affect our Hearts with them, and mourn
over them, we are very remote from that frame which God calls unto.

And this Mourning for the Sins of others from a double Spring.

Zeal for the Glory of God.

2. Compassion for the Souls of Men; yea, for the woeful calamitous State and
Condition which is coming upon them, even in this World.

Surely those who are true Believers cannot but be concerned in all the
Concerns of the Glory of God. If in all our Afflictions he is Afflicted, in all
the sufferngs of his Glory, we ought to suffer. In the blessed Direction given
us for our Prayers, as unto what we ought to pray for, that which in the first
place is prescribed, as that which principally and eminently we ought to insist
on, is the Glory of God in the Sanctification of his Name, the progressive
Coming of the Kingdom of Christ, and the Accomplishment of his Will by the
Obedience of men in the world. If we are sincere herein, if we are servent in
these Supplications, is it nothing unto us, when all these things are quite
contrary amongst us? when the Name of God is blasphemed, and all things whereon
he has placed his Name are derided; when the whole Internal Interest and
Kingdom of Christ are opposed, and the outward Court of the Temple, given every
where to be trodden down of the Gentiles? when all manner of Sins abound in
opposition unto the Will and Commands of God; when the Earth is almost as
unlike unto Heaven, as Hell it self; is their nothing to be mourned for herein?
We are for the most part selfish, and so it may go well with our selves,
according to the extent of our Relations and Circumstances, we are not greatly
moved with what befalls others. There is Evil enough herein; but shall we be
moreover so minded toward Jesus Christ, that whilst we are in safety, we care
not though his Concernments are in the utmost hazard? Do we love the Name of
God, the Ways of God, the Glory of God in his Kingdom and Rule, we cannot but
be deeply affected with the suffering of them all in these Days.

The other Spring of this Mourning-Frame, is Compassion for the Souls of
Sinners, and their Persons also in the Approach of Calamitous Desolations.

I am hastening to an End, and cannot insist on these things: This only I shall
say, He that can take a Prospect of the eternally miserable Condition of
Multitudes among whom we live, and the approaching Miseries, which, without
Repentance and Reformation will not be avoided, and not spend some Tears on
them, has a Heart like a Flint or Adamant, that is capable of no Impression.

7. It is a Season wherein we are called to a diligent, heedfull Attendance
unto the Duties of our Stations Places and Callings. Duties in our
Church-Relations, Duties in our Families; Duties in our Callings and manner of
Conversation in the World. This is the Advice given by the Apostle, with
respect unto such a season, 2 Pet. 3, 13, 14. Seeing that all these things
shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought ye to be, in all manner of
Conversation and Godliness: Wherefore be diligent that you may be found of him
in peace, without spot and blemish. Without a sacred Diligence in all these
Duties, we cannot be found in peace of the Lord Christ when he comes to judge
the world, and purify his Church with a fiery Trial.

Negligence, Coldness and Sloth in these things are Tokens of approaching
Judgments And of some of them at this day the Generality of Professors seem to
be almost weary of, and to attend unto them in a very indifferent and overly
manner. But we may know assuredly, that if we thrive not in our Diligence in
these things, if the vigor of our Spirits in Watchfulness be not engaged in
them, we are not compliant with the present Calls of God.

8. It is required of us that we cry earnestly, continually, with
preserverance, for such an Effusion of the Holy Spirit from above, as may
dispose and work the Inliabitants of the Land unto Repentance and Reformation.

That this is the only Way, the only Means of Releif, of a sanctified
Deliverance from Desolating Judgments. has been declared. And this is the only
Way which some of us have to help and assist the Nation in its Distress.
Wherefore by a constant continuance in Supplication for such Fffusion of the
Holy Spirit, we shall have a threefold Advantage.

1. We shall hereby discharge the Duty we owe unto the Land of our Nativity, in
such a way as none can deny or hinder.

We owe a Duty unto it on all good Accounts, Moral, Political, Spiritual. We
are, for the most of us, shut up from giving any other Assistance unto it, by
Advice, Counsel, or Action; this is that which none can hinder; wherein the
poorest may be as useful and serviceable as the Mighty. And if i^ be diligently
attended unto, it will be far above whatever can be contributed by Wisdom,
Wealth or Strength unto the same End. For by this Means we shall be saved or
perish.

2. It will preserve our own Hearts in the best frame for what we our selves
may be called unto. He that is earnest and sincere in his Supplications for the
Communication of the Spirit unto others, shall not want blessed supplies of him
in his own Soul: He will not withdraw from them, as unto themselves, who so
esteem, prize and value his Work toward others.

3. We shall hereby give Testimony unto God and his Grace, against the cursed
Profaneness of the world; who reject and despise this only Means of Relief and
Deliverance: For when all other Remedies fail, if God will not utterly forsake
a Church or People, he does constantly assign this, as the only Means of their
Safety. See Jer. 31. 31, 32. 33. Ezekiel. 11. 17, 18, 19. Chap. 36. 25, 26, 27.
This way the World despises, regards not; wherefore we can in nothing give
a greater Testimony unto God, than by insisting on this way, with Faith and
Patience, contemning the Reproaches of the world, on the Account of it.

9. Let us labor our selves to be exemplary in Reformation, thereby to promote
it among others. Let us plead and exhort what we will, unless we give an
Evidence in our own persons, of the necessity which we judge that there is of
present Reformation, we shall we be of little Use unto the Promotion of it.

Many Retrenchments of Liberty in Conversation may be made among the best of
us; many Duties may be attended with more diligence; many Causes Offense
avoided; many Evidences given of a deep sense of deserved Judgments, and of our
Reverence of the Name of God therein; much Fruitfulness in Charity and good
works be declared.

I have heard, that in the Country, where a man is looked on to be a wise man,
and a good Husband, among his Neighbors, they will n^te the times of his
Plowing, Sowing and manuring his Ground, and not undertake any thing, until
they find him going before them in it, And if men are looked on in a peculiar
manner as Professors of Religion at such a time as this, under Calls and
Warnings from God for Repentance and Reformation, the Eyes of other men will be
toward them, to see what they do on this Occasion. And if they find them as
unto all outward Appearance, careless and negligent, they will judge themselves
unconcerned, and abide in their Security. Wherefore, so far as I know, if such
persons be not exemplary, not only in Repentance. But also in the Evidence and
Demonstration of it, by its outward Fruits, they may be, and are the great
Obstructers of the Reformation of the Cities, Towns and places wherein they do
inhabit; nor can any contract the Guilt of a greater Sin. And if God should
bring an overflowing Scourge on the Inhabitants of this Land, because they have
not turned unto him at his Calls, it is most righteous that they should share
in the Judgment also, who were an Occasion of their Continuance in Security; a
Matter we have all just Cause to tremble at.

FINIS

