A Plain SERMON Preached to a Country Congregation In the beginning of the late
REBELLION IN THE WEST.

Published for the Instruction of Country People in their Duty to the King, and
the Refutation of some slanderous Reports raised upon the Preacher.

By Vin. Owen.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold, by Randolph Tailor (...) ^^^^^^ners-Hall. 1685.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THis plain Sermon Preached to a Country Congregation, without any design of
making it public, was drawn from me by the Clamors of some People against it,
and the Aspersions they cast upon me for it. The Occasion of Preaching it was
this; when I first heard the news of the late Rebels in the West, I thought it
my Duty to put my Parishioners in mind of their Duty to the King, and to
endeavor to confirm them in their Loyalty against all such Temptations as they
might (probably) meet with from evil minded men. To that end, I preached the
greatest part of what is here Printed the next Lords day, hoping that it might
do good, and being Confident that it would not give the least offense, because
I had more then once upon some Occasion or other, either in Preaching or
Catechizing, delivered the same things for substance, and offended no body by
it. But within two days after, I was told that some of my Parishoners had said.
I had made a bad Sermon the Sunday before, a Sermon that had little of the
Gospel in it; but why they thought so or what they faulted, or who those wise
men were, I could not learn from him that told it me: And the next day there
was a Report brought to my House, from a Village seven miles distant, That I
had Preached the best and greatest part of my Parishoners out of the Church.
This great lie I could not but wonder at, and being told that it was one of my
own Parish that brought it thither, and had (probably) carried it further, it
was some trouble to me. And upon second thought I resolved to Preach the same
Sermon again (as near as I could in the very same words) the next Lords day,
presuming that some of the more ignorant sort of People had misunderstood my
words, or that there was great need of inculating the same things to prevent
(if it were possible) the rising of any Seditious or Rebellious thoughts in any
of them, or to suppress them, if they were already risin, which some Storys
that were scattered abrord the Country, and were but to easily believed by the
common sort, did make me afraid of. Accordingly I did so, adding in the close
some few things upon the same Subject. But before that work was ended, I was
informd that I was become the talk of the County, and inquiring upon what
account, I heard it was for preaching Popery; and it was said by many, that I
was turning Papist, if not turned; and it was added that I had great
Correspondence with a Gentleman of the Popish Religion in my Parish, sent him
News and received News from him daily (though I had not seen nor heard from him
in several Months, and he was at that time (as I was informed) in Warwickshire)
and it was said in a Popish house not three-miles from me, That I had Preached
that the Pope was Supreme Head of the Church. How I resented these slanderous
Storys, the Reader may easily guess. That in a Parish where I had lived several
years, and taken no little pains, Preaching and Catechizing Constantly every
Lords day, and sometimes on other days; when I had wronged none but obliged all
so far as in me lay; where I had not been exact in requiring my dues, nor vexed
any with Law Suits, how obnoctious soever they were to them; where I had spent
almost all I had received in Hospitality and Charity; where I had forgiven many
wrongs, and sometimes so past them by, as not once to mention them to those
that did them, leaving them wholly to the Reproofs of their on Consciences; and
it short where I deserved not the least ill will (as many will bear me witness)
for which I must for ever glory to God, and I speak it not out of a humor of
boasting, but as constrained to it, to convince my slanderers of the greatness
of their sin; That in such a Parish (I say) I should find any so blockishly
ignorant in matters of Religion, so heedlss and inconsiderate as to call that
Popery which was downright against it; or so ill affected toward me as to
raise and spread abroad such slanderous Reports against me, at such a time, and
when they could not but know, that if the Rebels had been able to have brought
their forces amongst us, the Reports would have exposed me to their Fury, and
in all probability have cost me my life, if they could have gotten me into
their Hands; or that they should be so ill affected toward the King (when I am
sure they had been taught better) as for his sake to Persecute me thus with
their Tongues, all this I belive the Readerr will think was no light Affliction
to me. And yet this was not all, for as I had reason to believe that I had lost
all my labor of Love with many of them, and saw them in the ready way to lose
their own Souls; so by what I heard from some of my Reverend Brethren
concerning the Carriage of the people toward them, I saw plainly that the
Enemies of our Religion would draw no small Advantage from their Humor and
Doings, and that they were taking a direct Course to deprive themselves of that
Religion they seem so fond of. But how sadly soever I resented all this, and
more then this, I resolved to keep my Resentments to my self, and never to
declare them to any; and had done so, I beileve, if it had not come into my
thoughts, that my seeming unconcernedness might be interpreted to my prejudice,
and made an Argument against me that I was indeed very much inclined toward
Popery. Having therefore changed my Resolution, and begun to unbosom to my self
to some of my Friends, they told not that the best, if not the only way (the
Report being carried so far) to wipe of those Aspersions, and to make the
slanderers ashamed, was to Print my Sermon. This Advice (though not approved at
first) I resolved at length to follow, upon these Confederations; That I was
concerned to wipe them of, if I desired to do any good in the Country, the
name of a Papist being no less hated by the generality then that of the Devil,
and becoming every day more odious to them by the Storys that go about (with
how much truth I know not) of the threatening Speeches and insolent Actions of
some of them. That the Sermon, plain at it is, contains wholesome instructions,
and may do some good, with Gods blessing, both among Protestants and Papists;
for that some of both sorts will read it, who have read nothing else upon this
Subject, I am very Confident. That some who are too apt to slander the Clergy
may be restrained in some measure from it by what is here accounted for, and
others may become less forward to entertain any ill stories that are raised
concerning them. These and some other Reasons induced me to publish it, and to
put my Name to it, though I had formerly resolved that my Name should never be
put to any book. I have only one thing more to say as to this matter, viz. That
I have Printed nothing but what I Preached, from the beginning to the end of
the third particular concerning the Persons commanded to be subject; and have
left out nothing material, only some words here and there which I used in
speaking to explain my meaning, and make it more easy to be understood by
ignorant people; and that the close is a little of another Sermon Preached
afterward upon the latter part of the verse, for I continued to preach upon
the same Subject, till the news came that the Rebels were vanquished,

And now if this fall into the Hands of any of my Reverend Brethren of the
Clergy, I would desire them to consider with me how much we are concerned to
take heed to our selves, and to our Doctrine, in these Times; to Arm our
selves with Courage against all the ill Usage we are like to meet with, both
from those who are yet our own people, and from those that are not; to unite
all together in Love, to defend against all adversaryes our Common Interest, I
mean not our small Revenues, Reputations and the like, though these are not to
be slighted, but I mean our most Holy Religion, and the Laws of that best of
Churches to which we do belong, to implore Gods mercy daily toward our People,
and beg Pardon from him for their Abuse of the Gospel, and their vile treating
of us its unworthy Ministers: And earnestly to beseech him to kindle and
maintain in our hearts such a fervent Love to their Souls, which Christ has
redeemed with his most precious blood, that no discouragement we may receive
from any may be of force to render us careless of them, and make us cease to
labor with all our might for their everlasting Salvation. Amen.

From Mounstow the 20th. of July 1685.
A Plain SERMON Preached to a Country Congregation In the beginning of the late
REBELLION IN THE WEST, etc.
Romans 13. verse. 1. Let every Soul be Subject unto the Higher Powers.
THat you may understand these Words, and your own Duty, I must desire you to
Consider with me three things, viz.

1. What is here meant by the Higher Powers. 2. What it is to be Subject unto
them. 3. What is meant by every Soul.
1. What is here meant by the Higher Powers. And for the better understanding
of this, and that I may take occasion to suggest some things to you, which are
but too needful to be suggested in these days, I must desire you to note the
following Particulars.

1. By the Higher Powers we must understand Human Earthly Powers. Such as are
ordained of God for the Government of the World, and under God, take care of
the Public weal, being his Ministers, to encourage and reward those that do
good, and to punish those that do evil; to whom Tribute is therefore to be
paid, as a just Acknowledgment of their Care and Pains for the Common good.

This is so plain from the words of the Text, and those that follow them, that
I need not insist upon it. But this I have noted, to discover to you the folly
and wickedness of those, that oppose Government or Magistracy, as contrary to
the Gospel, and as an Usurpation upon Christian Liberty. That there were such
People in the very first Times of Christianity, is evident from what the
Apostle St. Peter in his second Epistle, Chap. 2. verse. 10. and the Apostle St.
Jude verse. 8. of his Epistle, do tell us. Where we read of Filthy Dreamers,
that defiled the Flesh, living in the Lust of uncleaness, and despised Dominion
[or Government] and speak evil of Dignitys: pretending (as we may probaly
gather from other places of Holy Scripture) that the Gospel freed them from all
obligation to Magistrates, as such, and that they were not bound to be subject
to them. That these men were of the Jews, and of the Sect of the Pharisees,
before their taking upon them the Profession of Christianity, I cannot affirm;
but it is probable that they were, for it is certain that the Pharisees were a
proud and ungovernable sort of People, so Pure and Holy, and so dear to God in
in their own conceit, that they thought it unfiting for them to be Subject, or
to pay Tribute to the Roman Emperors; And therefore as they did several times
Rebel, for they did always watch for opportunities to cast off the Roman Yoke.
And it is certain that as the Pharisees looked upon themselves to be Gods
peculiar People, and as such were not to acknowledge any Power over them, but
that of God, as only King and Ruler of his People; so these filthy Heretics
pretending themselves to be the chosen People of God, would own no King or
Ruler over them, but Christ, and as they were his Servants and Subjects, they
were a free People as to all other Powers; But however this may be, the
Apostles of our Lord esteemed their Doctrine so destructive to the peace and
welfare of human Society, and so scandalous to the Christian Profession, that
they thought they could not too often caution Christians against it, or bestow
too black a Character upon them that taught it. And yet notwithstanding all the
cautions they have given us in their Epistles, and the many hard things they
have written of them, we know that there have been many such People of late
years in this Kingdom, that will acknowledge no King over them but Christ, and
own no Government but what they call his, would be all Powers themselves, and
next to Christ, at his Right hand or Left hand. They account themselves so
perfect, that they esteem all Human Powers as needless, though all men see,
that they have not the least spark of that Perfection they do boast of, and
have as much need of Government, as the Horse and Mule of a Bit and Bridle.
They cry up Christian Liberty, and would make the World believe that Subjection
to Human Powers is contrary to it: but the Liberty they cry up is nothing else
but a Cloak for their Naughtiness (or maliciousness) and a pretense for them to
do what is good in their own Eyes; and you need not be remembered, that when
there was no King in Israel, and every man did so, there was nothing but
Outrage and Violenee and Confusion both among them and us. In short, the
Liberty they talk of is so far from being Christian Liberty, that it is
Antichristian Lawlesness, Rudeness, and Licentiousness; for Christ has taught
us Subjection to the Higher Powers, and has, assured us by his Apostle here,
that there is no Power but of God, and the Powers that be, are ordained of God.
And therefore if we be truly Christ's Servants, we shall be as truly the Kings
Subjects, and faithfully perform the Dutys of such, because Christ has so
commanded us.

2. By the Higher Powers you are not to understand any thing distinct from the
Persons in Power, but the Persons in Power themselves. This is evident from the
Context; for the Higher Powers in the Text are no other then the Ruders in the
3d. verse. which Rulers are called in the same verse the Powers. Besides Power
and Authority abstracted from the Persons in whom it is, cannot be said to do
what the Power or Powers, are said to do, viz. to commend, or encourage, aveng
or punish. Add to this, that the Apostle having mentioned the Power, verse. the
3. and the Praise which they that do well have from it, he adds immediately,
verse. the 4th. For he (that must needs be the Person in Power) is the Minister
of God to thee for good, and he bears not the Sword in vain, etc. Nor can we
think this use of the word strange, because it is thus used more than once in
the Holy Scriptures, (See Luke 12. verse. 11. and Chapter 8. of this Epistle,
verse 38. when the Principality and Powers mentioned, are certainly the the
Princes and Men in Power, which should permute Christ's Disciples for their
Faith) and because it is thus used frequently in Human Authors, as might easily
be showed you, if I did think it necessary. And indeed Common Reason will teach
us thus to interpret it; for Power separated from the Person in whom it is, is
but a Chimera or figment of the Brain, and serves to no purpose at all in the
lives of men. In Notion (as we say) they are distinct, and may be considered
assunder; but indeed they are one and the same and cannot possibly be divided.
And therefore they that resist the Persons of them that are in Power, resist
their Power and Authority too. The King of Syria that commanded his Captains,
to sight neither with small nor great, 1 King. ult. v. 31. 2 Samuel 17.1, 2. 1 Samuel 24.4.
but against Ahab did bid them fight against the King of Israel. And
Achitophels Counsel was not only against David, but against the King also. And
when David cut off the Skirts of Readiness Garment, his heart told him that he had
injured the King, the Anointed of the Lord. To say that Ahab, Saul or David
could be touched, wounded, slain, and their Power or Authority not violated, is
to speak superfine, nice, (and to use the common phrase of of some men)
unscriptural Nonscence; to mince and distinguish things into just nothing; the
Power and the Person in whom it is Seated being inseparable. And this I have
noted for the Condemnation of those who were the Authors of that Distinction
betwixt Power and Person, as if one might fight against the one, and not
against the other; And much more of those who could not only distinguish
betwixt the Power and the Person, but could Arm the Authority or Power against
the Person that bare it. For so in the late damnable Rebellion; the Commons
that raised it, did pretend the Kings Authority to take Arms against Himself;
and though they took his Person Prisoner, and cut off his Head, yet they
pretended that they did not design to hurt the King. A most Hellish Device, and
beyond any of old Achitophels, framed on purpose to overturn all settled
Goverments, and to bring Confusion and destruction upon all Human Society.
Against which our Laws have since very well provided, requiring all persons
admitted to Offices and Places of trust to abjure, or renounce upon Oath, the
Traiterous position of taking Arms by the Kings Authority against his Person.
Indeed it is hard to imagine that any rational People should ever entertain such
a Traiterous Position; the Authority which is for the safety of Subjects being
manifestly much more for the safety of the Sovereign. But what the Devil can do
in the world (by Gods permission) and what power he has over men, even wise men
in wordly matters, that love not the Truth in sincerity, but hold it in
unrighteousness is plain, as in other things, so in the prevalence of this
senceless Doctrine in the late Times, and by the backwardness of many to
renounce it even in ours.

3. When the Apostle says, that every Soul must be subject to the Higher
Powers, we must not understand it, as if he meant, that we must be subject to
all the Powers that are in any part of the world, and may take upon them to
command us; for what have we to do with the Powers of France, or Spain, or any
other Country, and what have they to do with us: but we must understand it of
our own Higher Powers, i. e. of those whom God has set over us, and are his
Ministers to us for our good. Other Powers have their people and subjects, and
they, and their Bounds are known. They are concerned only to command their own
Subjects, and their Subjects are concerned to obey them only: And let them see
to the Practice of their Duty: They have nothing to do with us, nor we with
them, but as we have Powers or Governors of our own, so we must be subject to
them, and them only. If therefore any Foreign Prince or Potentate shall take
upon him to command us, we may, we must, slight his commands, and resist his
Forces, if he uses any to compel us, that we may discharge or Duty to our own
King and Governor. God has not commanded us to Serve several Masters of
different interest and designs, nay he has forbidden it, in that he has set One
over us, and commanded us to be subject unto him. And this is the more to be
remembered by us, because of the Popes claim, what Power and Authority not only
over us, but over those Powers also, which are set over us, by Almighty God.
Believe the Pope, and you must believe that we are his subjects, and that the
King is so likewise, that he can depose him and give his Crown and Kingdom to
another, if he sees cause, that he can loose the Bond of our Allegiance, and
empower us to fight against him, and cast him out of his Throne. This Power the
Popes of Rome have claimed, but as we are sure Christ never gave it them, so we
cannot own any such Power in them but we must be guilty of the breach of our
Duty toward the King. And against the owning of any such Power, the Oath of
Supremacy is a necessary and wise Caution.

4. By the Higher Powers we must understand not only the Highest Power in the
Kingdom, i. e. the King, but the Powers, also that are subordinate to him, and
commissionated by him. It Is not said the Highest Power, or Higher Power, but
the Higher Powers, It Is not to one only, but to many that we must be subject,
but to those many, not as Coordinate, for such our Kingdom has not, but as
subordinate, as deriving Authority from one, i. e. the King, who is the
Supreme, or the Highest Power, in the Kingdom. And thus St. Peter may expound
St. Paul's meaning, 1 Pet. 2.13. where both these are expressed, and we are told,
that we must Submit to the King, as Supreme in his Kingdom, and to Governors,
as appointed by him. Which, as Beza notes, is added to prevent the cavil of
those who pretend obedience to the Supreme Magistrates, but despise his
Officers, and Ministers. And indeed Subjection to the Supreme Magistrate
carries this in it; Authority being derived from him, as the Head to them, as
his Hands and Instruments. Do men expect that the King should come to every one
of them, and deliver his will and pleasure to them in his own person? do they
think that he Himself can do every thing that is to be done for the welfare of
his Kingdom? Surely not. He must make use of others in most things, and do
great part of his work by them; and as he must do this; so what we do to them
is done as to himself; if we be subject to them acting by Authority from him,
we are subject to him; if we resist them we resist him. And this directly
opposes that Traitorous Position of some in these Kingdoms. That though it be
unlawful to take Arms against the King, yet it is lawful to take Arms against
those that are Commissionated by him. But against whom do they oppose
themselves when they oppose themselves against the Kings Commissioners? do they
not oppose those that Act by his Authority? And can they be resisted, and he
not be resisted, his Authority not violated? This is as much as to say, I strike
at a man's Legs or Arms, but not at the man, as if the man and his Legs or Arms
were not all one, as if those might be wounded, or cut off, and the man not
hurt.

5. Though we must not understand by the Apostles words, that it is our duty to
be subject to the Highest Power only, yet we must understand them thus, that it
is our Duty to be subject in the first place to the Highest, for here is an
Emphasis on the word Higher, and the Higher, is to be looked upon as the Power.
It Is true, the Kings Ministers are higher then we, and therefore we are to be
subject to them (as has been said) but the King is higher then they, and they,
as we, are to be subject to him. The Power they have is the Kings, and they
have no power against him, and therefore as long as they act under the King and
by his Authority, so long we are bound to he subject to them, but no longer.
And by this we may know what we are to do, in case it should happen that the
inferior Magistrates or Powers should divide from, and oppose themselves,
against the King, and require our Assistance. That we are to look upon the
Higher as the Power, and to be subject to him; If, as in old Time, the Barons
or any of the great Ones of the Kingdom should call you to join with them, as
being the Powers to whom you ought to be subject; you are to consider who is
higher, the Baron, or he that made him so. If any Parliament should (as once
you know a Parliament did) resist the King, and require your Assistance against
him, as having Power, or being the Powers; you are to consider who is the
Highest Power: who called them or made them to be a Parliament? was it not the
King by his Authority? who Establishes all their Acts, and gives them the
force of Laws? Is it not the King? who is it that can dissolve them and make
them nothing? Is it not the King? He therefore is to be looked upon as the
Higher Power, to whom we are to be subject.

6. When the Apostle requires every Soul to be Subject to the Higher Powers,
you must understand him, of those Powers that are lawfully and by true Right
such, and not by Usurpation. An Usurper can no more be said to be the Higher
Power, then one that drives thee out of thy house can be said to be the true
Owner of it. They only can be said to be the Higher Powers, whose right it is
to be so. And this, the word which is rendered Powers does import, as every one
knows that understands the Greek Tongue, and the words of the Apostle in the
later part of this verse show us, that we must understand him thus, the Powers
that we must be subject to, being such, as are of God, and ordained of God, and
the Ministers of God: Not every one that can get into the Throne, by any means
or Methods, is to be owned for our Sovereign, but He whose right it is to be in
the Throne. And I need not say, that our present Sovereign has apparently that
Right; because, besides the Crown's coming to him by a long lawful lineal
Descent, His Right thereunto has been publicly owned by the three Estates of
the Kingdom, Assembled in Parliament; every Kingdom should be to their King as
Bucephalus is said to have been to Alexander, he would carry none but his own
Master; so a Kingdom should bear none but its own lawful King and Governor.
Every one that attempts the Throne should be repelled, and he that usurps it
should be cast and thrown. There should be overturning, overturning,
overturning until he comes to take possession, whose Right it is, as it was in
the late times of Usurpation and Tyranny. The King therefore, our present King,
(for whose preservation and protection we do daily pray) and those that are in
Authority under him, are the Higher Powers whom the Apostle enjoins us to be
subject to; But,

7. You must note, that the Apostle does not say, that we must be subject to
the Higher Powers if they be so and so qualified, if they be of this or that
Religion; but without any such limitation, Let every Soul be subject to the
Higher Powers. Now when the Law distinguishes not, it is not for us to do it,
where God puts no limitation nor exception we ought not. It is a good note of
Beta's upon the words, that the Apostle did not use a Trope here, putting the
word Powers for them that have the Power rashly and unadvisedly; but that we
might know that it is our duty to be subject to them that are in Authority and
Power, how unworthy soever they may seem to us to be of that Power and
Authority. And Surely if ever any Person was unworthy of Power, Nero, who was
Roman Emperor when this Epistle was written, was unworthy of it, for by the
consent of all Writers, he was a mere Monster, a most filthy and cruel Tyrant;
and yet the Apostle charged Christians to be subject to him. And this
Observation I have made, because at this time some ignorant people, or worse
then ignorant, seem to think, That we are not bound to be subject to our
present King, because (as they say, speaking what they know not) he is not of
our Religion. But I beseech you, Brethren, to consider that Nero and those that
were in Authority under him were so far from being of the Christian Religion,
that they were bloody persecutors of it; and yet it was the Duty of Christians
then to be subject to them, and they were so really and heartily. And is it not
our Duty to be subject to a Christian Prince, for so our King is, to a Prince
that is so far from persecuting us for Religion, that he protects and defends
both us, and it, and has solemnly promised so to do; certainly it is. And if
we think not so, I am sure, we understand not the Religion of Christ, and do
but ill deserve that he should protect either us, or that which we call our
Religion, you see then who are the Higher Powers, whom we are to be subject to.
Let us now

II. Consider what it is to be subject to them. Let every Soul be subject or
let every Soul subject himself to the Higher Powers; for so the words may be
rendered, we should subject our selves to the Higher Powers, and not be forced
to it by them: the more free and ready our subjection is, the more acceptable
it is to God and them, but letting this pass at present, the words, are not a
permission barely as of a thing indifferent, nor Counsel merely as of a thing
expedient; but Imperative of a thing that is our Duty. And therefore you may
observe that the Apostle says afterward, v. 5. wherefore we must needs be
subject, there is a necessity laid upon us, we are under a Comamnd and an
Indispensible obligation to be so, not only for wrath, but sor Conscience sake.
Now the word, which we translate, to be subject, seems to me to be of large
signification, and to comprehend our whole Duty to the Higher Powers, all that
we are obliged to, as Inferiors or Subjects in our several stations or places,
with respect to them, the several parts or branches whereof we are taught in
other Texts of Scripture. I cannot but think it meet to mention briefly some of
the chiefest.

1. There must be a subjection of the soul to them so far as to entertain a
reverent esteem of them, and to do our Duty as Subjects readily and faithfully,
we must Reverence them for the place they are in, and the Authority they are
Inverted with, as having Gods Authority, and his Sword of Justice, and Vengance
for the punishment of evil doers and the praise of them that do well, we are
charged by Solomon to fear the Lord and the King, Prove. 24.21. Not the Lord
only, but the King also. Now as the Fear of the Lord is nothing else but such
an awful sense of his glorious Majesty and Power, as subjects our whole man to
his Will and Commandments; so the Fear of the King is nothing else but such an
inward Reverent esteem of his Place, Dignity and Authority, as makes us to
subject our selves unto him in all things that are not contrary to the will of
God. Again, the same Solomon commands us not to curse the King, no not in our
thoughts, Eccl. 10.20. i. e. to entertain no mean and contemptuous thoughts of
him, but to think as honorably of him as is possible, as of a Person whom
Almighty God, whose wisdom is greater than thine or mine, has thought good to
set over us, and to advance next to himself in Power and Dignity. And this
inward esteem of the Higher Powers is the Soul and Life of that Honor, which
the fifth Commandment enjoins us toward them; without which our outward
Subjection is but little worth in the sight of God, as proceeding not from
Conscience, but from force or fear of Punishment, and will as soon fail as that
shall be removed, They are therefore wicked men, who though they yield outward
Subjection to the Higher Powers, do yet in their hearts contemn them. These are
not Christ's Disciples, but Pope Hildebrands (or Gregory the Seventh) whose
Doctrine it was, that Kings had their beginning from men, who affected Rule by
the instigation of the Devil.

2. There must be a Subjection of the Tongue to the Higher Powers, i. e. we
must use our Tongues to their honor, to express and manifest the Reverence of
our hearts toward them. When Saint Paul was to speak for himself before King
Agrippa and Festus, he gave Agrippa frequently the Title of King; and though
Festus told him that he was beside himself, (which was enough to have stirred
an ordinary Patience) he gave him a modest, a sober Answer, with the Title of
most noble Festus. Act. 26.25. And of the same Saint Paul we read, Act. 23.5.
that when he had unadvisedly called the High Priest a Whited-wall, (being moved
by a blow most unjustly given him,) and was reprehended for it, he acknowledged
his fault, showing how we ought to speak to our Rulers by quoting a known Text
of Scripture, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People. Which
passage is the more to be remembered, because it shows that it is not unlawful
only to use unjust Reproaches, but even to speak reproachfully of the real
Failings of our Governors: It being unquestionable, that the High Priest was no
better than a Whited-wall, who pretending to judge according to the Law, did
contrary to the Law, command an innocent Person to be smitten. We must
therefore either not speak at all of the Higher Powers, or else speak well and
honorably of them. We are too bold when we make them the Subjects of our common
Discourses, too saucy when we presume to censure their Actions, and we take too
much upon us, when we pretend to fathom the Depth of their Policys, and to
condemn the wisdom of their proceedings. No Master will endure such Behavior
from his Servants, no Parent from his Children: And yet every ordinary Peasant,
every rude and thick-sculled Mechanic will be Prating of the Higher Powers, and
calling them to their Bar, as if they thought themselves able to teach them,
how to govern the Kingdom. In this it is that Rebellion begins, when once men
become so bold as to shoot the sharp Arrows of their Tongues against their
Governors, they usually proceed to take Arms into their hands. These unruly
Talkers do more against the Powers then the Angels of God dare to do: and if
you have any regard to what St. Peter and St. Jude have written, you must place
them in the same Rank with the Apostate Spirits, and the filthy Sodomites, see
the 2d. Epistle of St. Peter. Cap. 2. and read the Epistle of St. Jude.

3. Every Soul must be Obedient to the Higher Powers. Put them in mind (says
St. Paul to Titus Cap. 3. v. 1.) to be Subject to Principalities and Powers, to
obey Magistrates; we must obey all their just Laws, all their lawful Commands,
i.e. Whatsoever they require and enjoin, if we can do it without sinning
against God (whose Power is greater than theirs) we must do it. I say we must
do it, because when the Laws may be obeyed without sin, our disobedience is a
sin, and our suffering the penalty does not remove the sin, nor free us from
the Judgment of God. And this I have said, to show you the ill use that is
commonly made of a Distinction current among us, of Active and Passive
Obedience, as if men might break the just Laws of the King, and yet be good
Subjects, and not break this Commandment of God; because they suffer the
penalty, when they cannot avoid it. And so by the help of this Distinction
(which is none of the best) those that least respect Authority, would be
thought as Dutiful and Obedient Subjects, as they that are most observant of
the Laws. But as Almighty God the Supreme Ruler and Governor of the World, when
he gave Laws to mankind, did not intend that they should break them and dye; so
the Powers that he has set over us, have not made Laws that men may be
punished for breaking them, but that they may observe them for their own and
the public Good. And unless it be equally good to the King, that his Subjects
obey or be punished; unless it be all one to him whether they be benefitted by
the Laws, or made miserable, it cannot be thought that the Law is satisfied in
its main Intention, when the Subject is punished for the breach of it. It is
very true, that when any Law is contrary to any Command of God, Subjects are
not bound to Active obedience, for God must be obeyed rather than men; and then
the Passive Obedience or Submission to the Punishment is Sufficient; but when
the Law of the King is not contrary to any Command of God, the choosing of
Passive Obedience before Active is a real Contempt and Scandal.

4. Our Purses and Estates must be so far subject to the Higher Powers, as the
paying of Taxes, Tributes and Customs according as the Laws do require. When
the Question was proposed to our blessed Savior by some Jews, whether it were
lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar or not? He answered, Render unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, Math. 22.21. Customs and Tributes are Caesar's,
therefore Caesar must have them. And the Apostle here mentions it as an
Instance of our subjection to the Higher Powers. That we pay them Tribute,
verse. 7. Render to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to
whom Custom. And due they are to the Higher Powers, both in Justice and
Gratitude, for they are at the cost of our Defense and Protection, and the
Benefits we partake of by their care and pains are innumerable and invaluable.
They are Gods Ministers attending continually upon this very thing.

5. We ought to be subject in undertaking such Offices as the Higher Powers
shall call us to, and in discharging them faithfully for their honor and the
public good. Kings cannot do all things themselves, in their own Persons, but
must make use of others in several employments, and who can they better make
use of then their own subjects, and who are obliged to undertake them but they:
To those offices or employments that are mean and inferior the Dignity of Kings
is not to condescend; in those that are dangerous, the safety of their Persons
is not to be hazarded. The People of Israel would not consent that David their
King should go out with them to Battle, for fear of quenching their light, and
they looked upon him as worth many Thousands of them. The People are (...) they
are to assist their Prince with their bodies and their Purses in the service of
War.

6. We must be so subject to all their censures and punishments, as in no case
to resist them. If they lay heavy burdens upon us, oppress and wrong us, yea
persecute us even to death, we must not tumultuate and rebel against them.
There is no Power (says the Apostle here) but is of God, and the Powers that
be are ordained of God. They have their Authority from God and not from us, and
they are over us by Gods appointment, as his Ministers; and though God gave
them their Power for their subjects good, yet if they will abuse it, they are
responsible to God for it, and not to us, he has Power to punish them, but we
have none, and he will do it when, and in what manner, he sees good; and it is
better for us to leave him to do it who has said Vengeance is mine, and I will
repay, then to take upon us to do it our selves; and if we do so, we are sure
of a sufficient reward for our patient submission; but if we resist them, the
Apostle tells us, we resist the Ordinance of God, we are Rebellious not only
against our King, but against God himself, and therefore our resistance is
highly finful and damnable; for They that resist shall receive to themselves
Damnation. To which let me add the words of St. Peter 1 Epist. 2.20. Where
resistance is plainly forbidden even to an innocent Person. For what glory is
it, if when ye be buffeted for your Faults, ye shall take it patiently; but if
when ye do well and suffer for it, ye shall take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God, for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an example that ye should follow his steps, who did
no sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth; who when he was reviled, reviled
not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself [or his
cause] to him that judges righteously. This Doctrine the Apostles of our Lord
taught, and the example of their Lord and ours they followed, and so did all
Christians for above six hundred years after Christ, not only not Rebelling, or
Caballing, or Conspiring against the Higher Powers, when they were most of all
tempted to it, when they were persecuted and oppressed, killed and tormented,
spoiled of their goods, and every way most dispightfully used; but also
professing it to be unlawful. And therefore if any be not convinced, that this
is their Duty; if any do believe, and will take upon them, to maintain that
they may lawfully in any case, or for any cause, (suppose it be for Religion)
Rebel against, or in any tumultuous and violent ways, resist the Higher Powers,
they ought to be looked upon as wretched Apostates from one of the most
considerable points of the Christian Doctrine; as the maintainers of one of the
most pernicious and damnable Heresies that ever was brought into the world. Now
in the practice of these Dutys does our subjection to the Higher Powers mainly
consist and show it self; and if we will observe this precept of the Apostle,
it behooves us to take care that we be not wanting in any one of them.

III. I proceed now to show you what is meant by every Soul, or who are the
Persons who are bound to be subject to the Higher Powers. Concerning which
there is no doubt but by every Soul, the Apostle means every man by an usual
Synecdoche. It is possible indeed that the Apostle did make choice to speak
thus, putting the Soul for the man, to intimate that our subjection to the
Higher Powers, should be from the Heart and Soul, free, ready, cheerful; not by
constraint which is brutish; not merely Passive, but in all lawful things
Active, but it matters not whether he did so or not, for it is evident enough
from other places of Scripture, that it ought to be so; that which the Apostle
teaches concerning the subjection or obedience of Servants to their Masters,
Ephesians. 6.6.7. and Colos. 3.23. being applicable with advantage to the subjection
of all Inferiors to the Higher Powers. That which I think my self concerned to
note is, That all Persons without exception of any, ought to be subject to the
Higher Powers: Let every Soul (says the Apostle) an expression that includes
all and excludes none. And thus any unprejudiced man of common fences one would
think must understand it, for besides the force of the expression it self,
every Soul, the Apostles words afterward, whosoever resists the Powers --
and they that resist -- and will thou not he afraid of the Power -- And he is
the Minister of God to thee, etc. seem to be used on purpose to direct every
one that is not a Higher Power, or Ruder, to take the precept as given to
himself. And yet notwithstanding this the Popes of Rome and their Adherents for
several hundreds of years have made bold so to distinguish and limit the
Apostles words, as to exempt themselves, and all their Clergy, from subjection
to the Civil Powers. But what Warrant they have from God to do thus I am
altogether ignorant. We know that our Blessed Savior owned the Power of the
Roman Emperor, and those that were in Authority under him, and submitted
himself to it without pleading any exemption. For thus he answered Pilate when
he spoke to him of his Power, Thou could have no Power at all against me,
except it were given thee from above Joh. 19.11. And we are sure, that when the
Apostles were brought before Principalities and Powers for their faith sake,
they never excepted against their Power, but defended themselves and their
Doctrine before them; yea St. Paul did plainly own their Authority, and it is
written for our Instruction in this point Act. 25.10, 11. I stand (says he) at
Caesar's Judgment Seat, where I ought to be judged, [mark that] If I be an
offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to dye, I
appeal unto Caesar. Which Appealing unto Caesar was a plain owning of his
Authority over him. For the Liberty of Appealing to the Roman Emperor was a
privilege granted only to them that were free Citizens of Rome, and the
Apostle could not claim this but by owning himself a Citizen of Rome, and
therefore a subject to the chief Governor thereof. It is no less certain that
the Holy Fathers and Bishops of the Church, yea and of Rome too, for above six
hundreds years after Christ, did not only acknowledge themselves subject to the
Civil Powers, but did declare that they, and all men whatsoever, were bound to
be so. St. Chrysostom upon the Text says, that not only Seculars but Priests
and Monks are to be subject, and although thou be an Apostle, or an
Evangelist, or a Prophet; for this obedience to be sure will not destroy thy
piety. And if we may believe a Bishop of the Roman Church of late years, as we
reasonably may, other ancient Fathers as Euthymius, Theoderet, Theophylact,
etc. and all the Greek Doctors do agree with him. And Gregory, surnamed the
Great, Bishop of Rome, does so expound the Text. And Saint Bernard many years
afterward,) in his Epistle to a Bishop said thus. Every Soul (says the
Apostle) then must you also (speaking to the Bishop of Senona) be subject; who
has exempted you? He that does offer to exempt you, does but offer to deceive
you. And therefore let not the Church of Rome boast of her sincere delivering
to men the truly Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Doctrine: Let no Papist
boast of their Loyal Principles or Practices, or charge any Protestants with
Seditions and Traitorous Doctrines; with disloyal, Treasonable, and Rebellious
Practices, as confidently as if they themselves were innocent; for besides what
has now been discoursed, I doubt not to say, and do say it upon the Faith of a
Christian, That I know no Seditious or Rebellious Principle, no Doctrines
distructive to Government entertained and asserted by any called Protestants,
but the same have been asserted and taught by some Bishops of Rome and their
Adherents. But thanks be to God that the Church of England can be charged with
no such mischeivous and damnable Doctrines; whose Doctrine I am sure I have now
taught you, and as I do steadfastly believe it to he the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, so I doubt not, but by Gods Grace, I shall continue in the belief
of it to the end of my Life. Thus have I explained the words of my Text, and I
hope clearly and profitably with respect to the unhappy circumstances that this
Kingdom is at present under.

And now to conclude this Discourse in as few words as may be. Not to trouble
you with Complaints of the little Sense which many men have of their Duty to
the Higher Powers, which every wise and good man cannot but observe, and be
sadly and sorrowfully affected with: Let me in short propose some few Questions
to you, and if it be possible, to oblige you thereby seriously to consider what
it is, that so indisposes some (to use no harder a term) to honor, obey and
serve our present Lord the King, that they can hardly endure to be told, that
they ought to do so. Have any among you so little Knowledge of the Gospel,
after so many years enjoyment of it, as to think what has now been delivered to
be no part of the Gospel, which Christ's Ministers ought to Preach? Are you so
little able to distinguish between true Christian ( Protestant) Doctrine and
Popery, as to call the Preaching of Subjection to the Higher Powers Popery?
have you had the Holy Scriptures so many years in your Hands, in your own
Language, and pretended to make them, and them, only the Rule of your Faith and
Practice? and can you be ignorant of, or will you reject the truths now
delivered out of them, and writted so plainly in them, that none but those who
will shut their eyes can avoid seeing them? Has St. Paul so little credit with
us, when he tells us, That there is no Power but of God, and the Powers that be
are ordained of God, that we will not believe him? or can we possibly fasten
any other sense upon his words but this, that it is God that makes Kings, and
not men; That whatever they are as to their Personal Qualifications, Abilitys
for Government, or Religion, they have their Authority from God, and are his
Ministers? And if this be his meaning, have we not good reason to believe, that
if we despise them, we despise God; if we reproach and speak evil of them, we
reproach and blaspheme God; if we disobey their just Laws, we disobey God; if
we murmur, resist, rebel against the King, we murmur and rebel against God. And
can we think, that they can escape the Judgment of God, who do so? Can we have
such thoughts of God, as to imagine, that he is not concerned in a special
manner for the safety, the Rights and Interests of his own Vicegerents; and the
Defense and Maintenance of his own Authority in them for the Government of the
world? Are we yet to learn what the miserable Ends of Seditious, traiterous and
Rebellious Persons usually are? Has Liberty, Peace and Plenty made us so wanton
(for I am sure we yet have suffered no Oppression to make us mad, nor any want
but what our own Prodigality, idleness and viciousness have brought upon us)
that we care not what we do to bring confusion upon us? Are we such Sots and
Fools as to listen to the cursed whisperings of every Achitophel, and to dance
after the Pipe of every Shebah, that shall be so mad as to blow a Trumpet in
Israel, and say, we have no part in David, nor Inheritance in the Son of Jesse?
Can we propose any thing so good to our selves by overturning the, Present
Government, as to resolve to endure all the miseries of War, and to march
through a Sea of Blood for the compassing of it? Are not all our Interests more
safe and secure in the bosom of the Divine Providence whilst we continue quiet
in our several Places, and study to do our own Business, then they would be
under the Shields and Bucklers of the most famous Warriors, in the ways of
Treason and Rebellion? Is the Author and Protector of our most holy Religion
become so careless of it, or so weak and feeble, that we must needs sly to the
Devil to support it? shall we turn the Religion of the Cross in to a Religion
of the Sword, and change our Bibles for the Alchoran? Were all the holy men of
old, who could not fight for their Religion, even when they might have overcome
(so great were their numbers and their Resolution) but could dye for it, such
fools, that we think it madness to follow their Example? Have we been
reproaching the Church of Rome, for so many years, (and that justly) with their
Traiterous and Rebellious Principles and Practices, and shall we now lick, up
their Vomit, and justify all their Treasons and Rebellions by treading in their
steps? Is it the way to render our Profession lovely in the eyes of the world,
and to endear to it our Governors, to do thus? And can we hope to engage
Almighty God to take care of its preservation by the worst practices we dare be
Guilty of against his Vicegerent? In one word, can we take it to be the way to
Heaven, to break the Order of the Divine Providence in the Government of the
World, to set at naught so many plain and express Commands from Christ, and
dispising all the Blessings of Peace to endeavor all the ways we can after
confusion and destruction: we cannot surely be so unreasonable.

Let us therefore, I beseech you, show our selves Men and Christians,
Christians of the Communion of the best Church in the World, a Church built
upon a Rock, that can never fall, if we do not overthrow it our selves, by our
abuse of the Gospel, and all those Excellent means of Piety and Virtue which we
partake of in it. Let us fear the Lord, and the King, and not meddle with them
that are given to change; And being steadfastly persuaded, that Almighty God is
King over all, that He stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, and is Judge
among the Gods; that he will not only execute Judgment in another world, but
does Govern this, and consequently will either Protect us from Violence and
Persecution, or crown our Patience and avenge our Cause; let us always show our
selves good Christians by being Loyal Subjects: And to the constant Practice of
all that has been now taught, let us add our daily Prayers to God in the
behalf of our present Sovereign, That it may please God so to bless and
preserve him, that he may rule over us many years in the Fear of God, the
constant exercise of Piety, Justice and Mercy, and in Prosperity and Peace:
That he may continue to deserve the Hearts of all his Subjects, and ever have
them: That he may never give them any just cause for Jealousys and Suspicions,
and they never entertain any without Cause: That he may be happy by our
constant Practice of true Christian Loyalty, and we be so likewise by his
constant and effectual Care to maintain and promote the true Profession and
Practice of Religion, and the welfare of the Church of God. Amen.

FINIS.

