A FUNERAL SERMON. Opening the Nature and Grounds OF ASSURANCE, Occasioned by
the DEATH OF Mr. Philip King, Minister. Who Departed this Life, November, 8th.
1699.

By JONATHAN OWEN.

LONDON: Printed for: Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three-Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers-Chapel. 1700.

To the Church of Christ, Congregating in Dead-Mans-Place Southwark, the Author
wishes, that all Grace and Peace may abound.
Beloved in our Lord,
GOD by his merciful Providence has yet continued us together in the sacred
Bonds of the glorious Gospel; and it is my earnest Prayer and Desire, that we
may steadfastly keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace and Love.
Amongst the many Afflictions which have attended my Course in the Ministry,
this has been none of the least; to wit, the too little Service which I have
done for Christ and immortal Souls; yet I thankfully acknowledge to the God of
all Grace, it is none of my Fear, that I have labored altogether in vain; some
of you I have espoused to Christ, others by my Poor endeavors have been built
up in him; what the Blessed Apostle writes to the Corinthians is verified in
some measure amongst you, 1 Epist. 1. Chap. 27, 28. yea God is my Witness, I
would gladly spend and be spent for you, it is Ability and not Will which is
wanting to Answer your affectionate Expectations in all things; when your
Sympathy somewhat eased me, the Lord directed, you to one richly anointed for
his Masters Work: But ah alas! Mr. P. K. is removed in the Morning of his Days,
in the Twenty Fourth Year of his Age; when your Eyes and Heart were much upon
him, it may be too much, for to know Ministers after the Flesh is the speedy
way to be rid of them; those Feet which were beautiful in bringing
glad-tidings, shall walk with you and speak to you no more: O that all such
humbling Providence might be wisely improved! The Voice of the Rod speaks loud
and plain, comply with it for the Lord's sake; for what Reasons I was loath to
undertake this Province you know; but I can deny no reasonable Request to your
concurrant Desires; and now what you all would have, has not only come to your
Ear, but also to your Eye, and into your Hands; it may be this will abide with
many of you, when shortly it will be said of me, as now of the more Worthy,
that I am gone also: What may be the censures of some I know not, and if you be
profited I shall less Matter. This with hearty Prayers for each other; is what
I propound, and desire, whilst I am Living; and your

Unworthy Pastor, Jonathan Owen.

Books, lately Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers-Chapel.
MR. Adams's Funeral Sermon. A Discourse concerning the Redeemers Dominion over
the Invisible Worlds; some Part whereof was Preached on the Occasion of the
Death of John Houghton Esquire. Dr. Bates's Funeral Sermon. Mr. Mead's Funeral
Sermon. All Four by the Reverend Mr. John How. Of the Shortness of Time. By F.
Fuller. Mr. Bradford's Eight Sermons Preached at St. Paul's, at the Lecture
founded by the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire. Mr. Philip Henry's Life. Mr.
Reynold's Minister of Notingham his Life. Mr. Math. Henry's Discourse of
Meekness. Mr. Joseph Barrett's Funeral Sermon, to which is annexed his Life,
etc.
A FUNERAL SERMON: Opening the Nature and Grounds OF ASSURANCE, Occasioned by
the DEATH OF Mr. Philip King, Minister.
JOB XIX. XXV. For I know that my Redeemer lives.


HOLY Job was an eminent Instance of Grace, he had this singular Honor put
upon him, viz, Heavens Testimony that he was a non-such for true Piety, ver. 8.
Never was Saint upon Earth exercised with Afflictions like him; they came upon
him as the Waves of the Sea. The Sabbeans and the Caldeans, Wind and Storms
swept all away; his Wife seems to be spared only to add to his Sorrows; all
his Friends were miserable Comforters, such that added unto, and aggravated his
Calamities, Chap. 16.2. His admirable Patience does thus appear, to wit, in all
he exalted God, and debased himself, Chap. 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, and blessed be the Name of the Lord. Chap. 7.20. I have
sinned; there is his great Self-abasement. In this Chapter, he proceeds to
maintain his Integrity against Bildad; he charge Job very high, he loads him
with black Crimes, and numbers him with the vilest of Men, such that knew not
God, as you may see in Chap. 18. But to fall upon the Text, it contains the
Reason of his Defense and foregoing Option, and the Grounds of his inward
Support under all his outward Afflictions. Therein more Particularly you have
Two Things.

1. A full and Clear Confession of Job's Faith. Respecting the Person, Office,
and Glory of Jesus Christ; his Person, that he is really and truly God. So he
expressly calls him, In my Flesh shall I see God, ver. 26. His Office, a
Redeemer of lost and inthrald Sinners; his Glory, both Present and Future; his
Present Glory, a living Redeemer; his Future, in the latter part of the Verse,
He shall stand at the latter Day upon the Earth: i. e. He shall come in our
Nature to Judge the World, and Triumph over all his Enemies.

2. You have here, the Nature, Kind, and Degree of Holy Job's Faith, it was not
a common but a special Faith, not a dead but a living Faith, not a weak but
strong Faith, not a doubting but a Plerophory, a full Assurance of Faith, I
know that my Redeemer lives; having thus briefly opened the Words, behold an
Ocean of spiritual Matter presents it self, we may venture to Launch into it;
and how pleasant will it be, if we are wrapped up in the ravishing Contemplations
thereof, as the Deceased often was in such Work; and that remarkably, in his
last Discourses upon glorying in nothing but the Cross of Christ. The

Doct. They are great and rare Instances of Grace, who like Job, can say, They
know that their Redeemer lives, i. e. That can say it upon Scripture Grounds.
Would to God we were all come up to this Grace, since it is possible with a
Holy Ambition, let us aspire after it.

The Method of prosecuting this Point shall be thus, if the Lord will.

I. To Premise two Things for Illustration.

II. To set before you the Scripture Foundation of a well-grounded Assurance.

III. I shall confirm this Truth, by demonstrating the greatness and rarity of
this Grace.

IV. The Practical Improvement of the whole, with respect to the sad Occasion
thereof.

The two Things to be premised are these.

1. There are but few that can say from Scripture-Foundation, They know that
their Redeemer lives; this is not more sad then true, it is facile, easy and
common to repeat the Words, but it is peculiar and rare to find those who upon
the like footing as Job can thus express themselves; Zeph. 1.12. There God
speaks of searching Jerusalem as with Candles, which denotes the exactness of
the Scrutiny, so if we make the most diligent inquiry into the Lives and
Experiences of most Men and Women. O where are the Persons that can or may thus
warrantably declare themselves; I know that my Redeemer lives, among them that
profess Christ in a more exact way then others, that hear more of his Person,
Office, and Glory, as Redeemer; even among these it is a rare thing, most are
but come up to Hopes, and but few to the good Hope through Grace, that which
makes not ashamed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16.

2. For as I would awaken all, so I would not cast down any of Christ's weak
Lambs. We that Preach the Word, must with Boanerges Thunder, and with Barnabas
speak Consolation to you; therefore know, it is possible to be interested in
Christ, and not be fully assured of it; Assurance is not of the Essence of
Christianity, it is but accidental, like Benjamins Mess, it is a peculiar
Favor; they were as really Joseph's Brethren that had it not as he; you may be
of Christ's Brotherhood by adopting Grace, and yet be without it: If Assurance
were of the Essence of Grace, then none could be saved but such; this makes the
number of the Blessed Saints Ten Thousand Times fewer then they are, it
excludes all Dead Infants out of Heaven; indeed what the Apostle says is
remarkable, 1 John 5.10. He that believes on the Son of God, has the Witness
in himself: But consider, as it is spoken of Adult Persons, so it refers to the
Threefold Witness spoken off before; viz. the Spirit, the Water, and the
Blood, now every Adult Believer has this Witness in himself; but alas, it
oftentimes so falls out, that the Ear of Faith is so Deaf, and the Eye of Faith
so dim, and Hand of Faith so weak, that the renewed Believer neither hears,
sees, nor receives his own Mercy's as he ought; many a doubting Saint has got
safe to Glory, when carnal Confidents have dropped into Hell-Flames; a Child may
be born Heir to a great Estate, and by reason of his Infancy not know it; it as
Birth and Blood which gives right to it, not the present Sense and Knowledge of
the thing; this renders the Matter comfortable, the other makes the Thing sure;
thus much of what I thought needful to be Premised, but few know upon Scripture
Bottom, that their Redeemer lives, it is possible to be savingly interested in
Christ, and yet not know it certainly. I enter upon the second General.

2. What is that Scripture-Foundation, which this full Assurance of Faith (I
know, that my Redeemer lives) must be Built upon. Here take Notice, for it is
without Controversy; this Assurance has its Original in Grace, and not in
Nature; true, a natural Man may be endued with great Knowledge, his Head may be
full of Speculative Understanding about Divine Things, he may come under very
powerful and common workings of the Spirit, and yet be without a Foundation for
this; so much the Apostle declares, Heb. 6.4, 5. Now that I may set this
weighty Matter before you in the plain Light of the Word, to know that ones
Redeemer lives, it is and must be built upon this Threefold Foundation, viz.

1. The saving Knowledge of Christ. 2. The appropriating Acts of Faith. 3. And
the Witness of the Spirit.
1. Christ Jesus in his Person, Office and Glory as Redeemer must be revealed
to that Soul: Without this Manifestation of Christ no Man can say it; though
ignorant and confident Persons may Orally speak the Words, but he that does it
with this Faith, must know in whom he believes, 2 Timothy 1.12. The Glory of God,
in the Face, or Person of Jesus Christ, must shine into that Heart, 2 Cor. 6.4.
For God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined into our
Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of
Jesus Christ. All this is evident from Jobs Confession, let me consider it a
little farther.

1. He knew the Lord Jesus Christ in his Person; i. e. He knew him to be really
God, eternally, naturally, and essentially God, therefore he expressly so calls
him; ver. 26. Though after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh
shall I see God: Whom I shall see for my self. The glorious Display which
Christ will make of himself in the latter Day, all shall see, some to their
Eternal Horror and Confusion, and some to their Everlasting Joy; all the
redeemed shall see and enjoy Christ, then not one shall be disappointed or
missing; but those who are sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, they know it
assuredly; Whom I shall see for my self, ver. 27.

2. A well-grounded Assurance, includes, not only the Knowledge of Christ's
Person as God, but also an Acquaintance with his Offices as Redeemer in both
Natures, the Lord Jesus by Eternal and Foederal Agreement with his Father, is
become a Redeemer; Holy Job had the Knowledge and Foresight of this, he not
only acknowledges Christ to be a Redeemer, but he confesses him to be his
living Redeemer. Christ redeemeth his two ways, by Price and Power, by the
Price of Satisfaction paid to the Honor, Law, and Justice of God; to his
Honor, by the Death of one, who thought it no robbery to be equal with him,
Phil. 2.6. To his Law, by the perfect Obedience of Christ's own self, who was
under it, Gal 4.4. To his Justice, by being made a Curse, i. e. his enduring
the Substance thereof, Gal. 3.13. As thus by Price, so by Power the Lord Jesus
Christ redeems Souls, he has already conquered, Sin, Death, Hell, and the
Grave by his Almighty Power: He is now conquering Sinners to himself by the
Ministry of the Word and Spirit, and yet a little while, and the last Trump
shall sound, and the Dead in the Bowels of the Earth, and in Depths of the Sea,
shall hear his Voice and come to Judgment, John 5.28, 29. They that have done
good, to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil unto the
Resurrection of Damnation; then Christ will complete the Redemption of his
People, their Bodies and Souls shall be reunited, they shall all appear with
him in Glory.

3. As the Knowledge of Christ's Person and Office, is included in this
Assurance; so likewise, the Knowledge of his Present and Future Glory; to wit,
that he now lives, and shall stand upon the Earth at the latter Day; he
lives, there is much in that Expression; it Points at the Eternity, Fullness
and Power of Christ as Redeemer; his Eternity, that as God he has Life in and
from himself; his Fullness, that he has Life to give to all his Members; and
his Power, that, as he lives by his own self, so he will quicken the Dead, and
Judge the World in Righteousness; and show, that he has the Keys of Hell and
Death, Rev. 1.18. But,

2. In a well-grounded Assurance of an Interest in the living Redeemer; the
Faith of a renewed Soul must appropriate Christ to himself; see how Jobs Faith
wrought, he not only owns Christ to be a Redeemer; but his Faith cleaves fast
to him, it graples hard upon him, and it receives him with the whole Heart; my
Redeemer, therein lies the appropriating Act of his Faith; Luther was wont to
say, that the sweet of the Gospel lay much in Pronouns. My Lord, and my God,
says Thomas, John 20.28. Who loved me, and gave himself for me, says Paul,
Gal. 2.20. When Job lost all his earthly Enjoyments, he did not loose his
Interest in Christ; when he could not say my Wealth and worldly Substance, my
Living, Sons and Daughters; then in the Assurance of Faith, he could say, my
living Redeemer; when nothing upon Earth could yield him Comfort, then his
Faith fetched it from his living Redeemer; when he was stripped of all, this
remained, and indeed it is that good Part, which shall not be taken away, Luke
10.42.

3. To constitute a well-grounded Assurance of an Interest in the Living
Redeemer, there must be the Witness of the Spirit; the Spirit must not only
Witness to the Person and Office of Christ as Redeemer, but also unto a Man's
Personal Interest in him; not only did all the Prophets give Witness unto
Christ, Acts 10.44. But his Incarnation and Baptism, his Death, Resurrection
and Ascension, does put this Matter out of Doubt; (but herein Jobs Faith excels
ours,) he believed on the Redeemer to come in the Flesh, but we upon Him now
clothed with our Nature; he foresaw the Eternal Word to be made Flesh, but we
must believe upon Christ God manifest in the Flesh, 1 Tom. 3. last. and
received up into Glory. As this is the objective Faith of Assurance, so to
enable the Soul to say, my Redeemer lives, there must be the internal
subjective Witness of the Spirit, Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears Witness
with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God: Here you have two Things,
the Witness, and the Matter witnessed. The Witness is the Spirit, and the
Matter witnessed unto, is Adoption, and surely, Conscience enlightened and
sanctified, must (...) the Court where this Witness is heard and received; so
then, what can this Witness (...), but the Holy Spirits so inlightning the
Mind, and persuading the Will, that Conscience must conclude that Christ is
received, with the Privilege to be a Son of God, John 1.12. But as many as
received him to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God, even to them that
believe on his Name. Holy Job had this Witness within himself, and this bore
him up against all the reproaches of his miserable Comforters; thus you see
upon what Foundation this Assertion is built. Can we say, That we know our
Redeemer lives? then Christ in his Person, Christ in his Ofces, and Christ in
his Glory, as Redeemer, must be known to us, then Faith must thus appropriate
him, then the Spirit must thus Witness our personal Interest in him.

I proceed to the Third General.

3. Which is to Confirm the Doctrine, to wit, that they are great and rare
Instances of Grace, who can say with Holy Job, They know that their Redeemer
lives, i. e. that can say it upon Scripture Foundation; now that such
Instances are both great and rare, thus appears.

1. From their Paucity. 2. From their Excellency of Spirit. 3. From their
Christian Deportment, with respect to Death and Judgment; of these a little,
which also is their excelling.
1. If we consider the Paucity of these Instances they must be rare; the
scarcity of a thing oftentimes makes it rare; if Gold were as plenty as Silver,
it would be less valuable then it is; this celestial Jewel (a wellgrounded
Assurance) it is lodged in the Breast but of very few, more are Poor with much
Wealth, then are Rich in the full Assurance of Faith. Since Christ's Flock is
but little comparatively, as he assures us, Luke 12.32. Therefore the number of
sealed Souls cannot be great; as Holy Job was a non-such in his Day, so there
are but a few such in ours. Not many do attain to Assurance, and them that are
indulged with it, do not always hold it; it is got in great Diligence, and it
is kept with no less. This the Apostle plainly hints, Heb. 6.11, 12. And we
desire, that every one of you do show the same Diligence, to the full Assurance
of Hope unto the End; that ye be not slothful, but followers of them, who
through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. Who does not hence perceive,
that our utmost Diligence, and a well-grounded Assurance, are inseparably
Connext? Such Instances must be rare, because they are but few.

2. The rarity and greatness of such Instances of Grace, appears from their
Eminency of Spirit; and that, with Respect to their knowing, doing, and
suffering the Will of God; Scripture-certified Saints, are Persons of a choice
Spirit, when Holy Jobs Body was rough cast with Ulcers, Boils, and Sores, then
his precious Soul like the Kings Daughter was all glorious within, Psalm 45.13.
He upon the Dunghill, was in Gods esteem a rare Jewel. So the sacred Scriptures
style the Saints, Mal. 3.17. They shall be mine, says the Lord of Host, in
that Day when I make up my Jewels. What the Holy Ghost remarks concerning
Caleb, for his eminent Zeal, his undaunted Courage, and constant Obedience is
applicable unto these Darlings of Heaven, well assured Souls, Numb. 14.24. But
my Servant Caleb because he had another Spirit with him, and has followed me
fully, him will I bring into the Land whereinto he went, and his Seed shall
possess it. Mark, God seldom makes great Promises to the faithful, but his
Heart is also toward their Children, his Seed shall possess it; so in like
manner, those that are sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise; and therefore
can say, their Redeemer lives, they are Men and Women of choice and eminent
Spirits; and this excellency of Spirit chiefly consists in these three Things,
to wit.

1. In their clear knowing. 2. In their faithful doing. 3. In their patient
Suffering the Will of God; let me insist upon these a little.
1. They have another Spirit of Knowledge, than what other Persons commonly
have; That a Mind savingly enlightened in the great Truths of the Gospel is
necessary unto a well grounded Assurance, I need not stand to prove, Job
witnesses it in the Text, I know that my Redeemer lives, and you have read
what Paul says of himself to this Purpose, 2. Tim. 1.12. I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded, that be is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that Day. I shall not now insist upon the specific
Difference, which is between common and special Knowledge. You may be sure, it
is more then gradeal. Jobs Friends were Men of exquisite Parts, they were
endued with a great measure of excellent Understanding; but in all which they
have elegantly said, concerning the Nature, Perfections, Attributes, and
Providence of God, how little is there made of Christ the Redeemer? But see how
full, clear, and express Holy Job is in this Matter. Was Christ in our Nature a
living Redeemer, in the Decree, Purpose, and Promise of God the Father? This
Job knew. Was he actually to come in the Flesh, and therein to Die and Satisfy
for the Sins of his People? Job was not ignorant of this. Will he at the latter
Day stand upon the Earth, and appear in a most glorious Manner; and then shall
all that believe unto Salvation admire him, and see him for themselves? Why
Holy Job was instructed into all this, herein also lay his excellent Knowledge;
as Heaven gave a singular Testimony to his Godliness, so that of the Psalmist
was verified in him, Psalm 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear
him; and he will show them his Covenant. The Glory of God in the Face of Jesus
shone into his Heart, he knew him to be a Redeemer, and his living Redeemer.

2. As they have another Spirit of Knowledge, so also of Obedience unto the
revealed Will of God; (but mistake me not here,) I do not allege that our
Obedience is the Spring and Foundation of Gospel Assurance; no, no, the Faith
of Assurance looks higher; and through all this, to expect it from thence in
our imperfect State, is but lost labor; such will always be doubtful and
fluctuating about it; if Adams perfect Obedience did not secure the Love of God
to him, muchless can our imperfect; this Assurance comes in at the Door of
Faith, from Faiths eyeing of, from Faiths relying upon, and improving the
Person, Offices, and Glory of the Redeemer. Obedience cannot give it, but it
always evidenceth that it is well grounded. Remember I am showing the Rarity of
this Grace, from that excellent Spirit of Obedience, which goes along with it.
And this Obedience flows from the right Principles of Faith in Christ, and Love
to God; it is managed by the Rule of the Word, and prosecuted unto the Glory of
God. Thus they adorn the Doctrine of God their Savior in all things, thus they
observe whatsoever he has commanded them, and thus they desire to stand
complete in the whole Will of God; like as the Needle in the Compass, inclines
to the right Point, so such is the Divine Virtue of a well grounded Assurance,
it prompts the Subjects of it to respect every Divine Command. The Language of
their Holy Souls, is like to that of Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.9. Speak Lord for thy
Servant hears. Or like that of Saul, when our Lord spoke vocally unto him
from Heaven, and miraculously Converted him to the Faith of himself, Acts 9.6.
Lord, what will thou have me to do? No sooner was the Will and Work of his
persecuted Lord revealed unto him, but his whole Self, Soul and Body was
engaged in it, his Head and Heart shall contrive, his Mouth shall boldly speak,
and his Feet take many a weary step to propagate the glorious Gospel of the
Blessed Jesus. This is that eminency of Obedience which assured Souls are
inspired with.

3. As they have another Spirit of Eminency for knowing and doing, so they have
also for Suffering the Will of God; the Sovereign Lord of all Things, has
wisely ordered that his Servants should meet with Tribulations in this World, I
say with many, much, and great, Tribulations, John 16. last. In the World ye
shall have Tribulation. Acts 14.22. Through much Tribulation we must enter into
the Kingdom of God. Those that had washed their Robes, and made them White in
the Blood of the Lamb, are said to come out of great Tribulation, Rev. 7.14.
Now it is not the Moral Virtue, but the Christian Grace of Patience which
glorifies God in Afflictions; it is Patience excited by a living Faith,
Patience exerted by a Divine Love; such is that eminency of Spirit which is in
a well-grounded Assurance, they according to our Lords Injunction, In your
Patience possess ye your Souls, Luke 21.19. i. e. They enjoy themselves in
Christ, when they possess little or nothing else, Job was not only eminent for
his Faith of Assurance, but also for his singular and exemplary Patience;
others have been enabled to say, they know that their Redeemer lives: But none
(except Christ) did ever match him in Patience, though Job was not perfect and
without fault, yet he was a Non-such for Patience; in all his Afflictions, he
highly exalts the Sovereignty, Wisdom, Holiness and Justice of God; saying, The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job
1.21. in all his Tribulations, he greatly debased himself, saying, I have
sinned, Job 7.20. And therefore the Holy Ghost puts a special mark of Honor
upon him, James 5.10. We have heard of the Patience of Job: Well-assured Saints
are eminent Instances of Grace in regard of their patient Suffering the Will of
God; let me add one Argument more to confirm this Point.

3. The greatness and rarity of this Grace (a well grounded Assurance of an
Interest in Christ) further appears in their Triumphing over Death, Hell, and
the Grave, with their patient waiting for Christ's particular and general coming
to Judge the World. Christ has conquered Death, Hell, and the Grave on the
behalf of every true Believer; Romans 8.37. Nay in all these Things, we are more
then Conquerours through him that has loved us. This gashly Enemy, the grim
King of Terrors, Death, must shortly be encountered by every one of us; as
every Believer may, so them that are rightly assured can Triumph in Christ over
them; they like Paul can give Death a bold challenge to do its worst, 1 Cor.
15.55, 56, 57. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? The
sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law; but thanks be to
God, which gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ; Victory they
have by Free Gift through Jesus Christ, the Faith of Assurance often puts
Believers upon desiring and groaning to be dissolved and why, though
immediately after Death comes Judgment; yet being clothed upon, they shall not
be found naked of Christ's Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5.3. If so be that being
clothed, we shall not be found naked; hence it is that Believers, especially
such that are sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, they are said to Love,
and look for the appearing and comeing of Christ to Judgment, 2 Timothy 4.8.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge, shall give me at that Day, and not to me only, but unto
all them also that Love his appearing. So in Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered
to bear the Sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall be appear the
second Time, without Sin unto Salvation. They Love and look for Christ's
appearing, like as a loving Wife does for the pleasant return of her long
absent Husband: It could be no great Matter for Job to Die, for it was but to
go to his living Redeemer; it could be no terrifying Thing to him to appear at
the Bar of God, for he not only kept his Integrity unto the Last, but he knew
that his powerful Advocate and Days-man was his living Redeemer. Thus I have
finished the Doctrinal Part of this Observation; viz. They are great and rare
Instances of Grace, who can with Holy Job, upon Scripture Grounds say, They
know that their Redeemer lives. Now this Doctrine might be applied many Ways,
but to Contract:

1. Know that the greatness and rarity of this Grace is no effectual Bar to the
thing it self; though it be great Grace, and a special Favor, yet it is
possible and attainable; the Papists and Arminians err greatly by denying the
possibility of Assurance, in the true and proper Scripture Sense of it. Is not
the Effect of Christ's Righteousness apprehended by Faith, Peace, Quietness, and
Assurance for ever? Yea Isa. 32.17. Does not the Holy Ghost expressly say. These
things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that
ye may know, that ye have Eternal Life, 1 John 5.13. Is it not the special
Office of the Spirit to Witness and Seal up our Interest in Christ? 1 John 5.8.
There are Three that bear Witness in Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the
Blood, and these Three agree in one. Moreover, are not we required to give
Diligence, to make our Calling and Election sure? 2. Pet. 1.10. Let me add,
have not some of Christ's faithful Servants attained to it in this Life? if the
Deceased had not experienced this great Grace, if he had not been one of these
rare Instances, you had not been thus entertained, by this Subject at present.
Now that you may attain to this rich Grace, and have an experimental discerning
that you are in the blessed number of these rare Instances. Take this Advice.

1. Steadfastly believe, that a well grounded Assurance is attainable, but
withal take heed of the two common Extremes, which* abound much in this
present Age; viz. do not with some deny the possibility of the thing, nor with
others (who know not experimentally the way of the Spirit in working this) I
say, do not with them presume upon it without Scripture warrant, these both
must be carefully shunned; they are very hazardous, to the Peace, Comfort, and
welfare of immortal Souls.

2. Hope, that in the use of appointed means you may be favored with it. Say
not there is no hope, as God has not excluded you, so do not you shut out your
selves. The very command to give Diligence, imports a design and possibility of
the Thing; 2. Pet. 1.10. Give Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure.
Methinks the Grace and Authority herein contained, should move you to strive
and endeavor after it; yea to conclude though not for, yet in so doing it is
possible for you, and you in particular; do not only propound Grace necessary
to Salvation in the use of the means, but level and aim at this, even to know
like Job, That your Redeemer lives.

3. Would you attain to this Grace, viz. (a well grounded Assurance of your
interest in the living, Redeemer) then with Diligence attend to the Ministry of
the Word; even that which has a Testimony in your Consciences, that it is the
Ministry of the Gospel, and has the Administration of the Spirit going along
with it. Not only Faith, Romans 10.17. But also this Assurance comes by Hearing,
and what an encouraging Promise is that which you have in Hosea 6.3. Then shall
we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, his going forth is prepared as the
Morning, and he shall come unto us as the Rain, as the latter and the former
Rain unto the Earth. O what hold is here for Faith, mark, his going forth is
prepared, and prepared as the Morning; now how does the Morning go forth? Why
certainly, gradually, irresistably and exceeding comfortably? Why thus will the
Lord discover himself to the redeemed; but remember then, you must follow on,
not play fast and loose; take some steps and then turn out of the war, but you
must with this Promise, like a Staff in your hand, follow on to know the Lord.
In this his ordinary Way he seals up Believers unto the Day of Redemption: Is
Christ a living and Life giving Redeemer, then why may not you have Life in and
from him? Has he by the Price of his Blood, and the Power of his Spirit
redeemed precious Souls: Why may not the Virtue of the one, and the Power of
the other enclose and save you? Is he exalted in our Natures, then why may not
you be pitied and relieved by him? Will he stand upon the Earth in the latter
Day, and in a Triumphant Manner to Judge the World, then except the Judge be
your Advocate, you will perish for ever.

4. As the Gospel reveals Christ to poor Sinners, so put forth the Hand of
Faith and receive him; you are under command to believe, and that without
delay, 1 John 3. 23. No present Indisposition removes the Obligation, put not
those blocks in your Way, which Christ in the Gospel has removed. What though
Sinners are naturally impotent, yet who knows, but if you hearken, his Power
shall be exerted; the Poor Man did not Object his Hand was withered, but when
his Heart was toward Christ's Grace and Power: He found it went out with the
Command, and his withered hand was restored and made whole; see Mat. ^2.13. The
living Redeemer, is Lord of Life and Glory; when the Word went out of his
Mouth, you know how Thomas replied my Lord and my God, John 20.28.

5. Take heed of grieving the Spirit, but understand, and examine your selves
in the way of his sealing and consirming Souls. I shall not touch upon the
immediate and mediate Way of the Spirits Witness, you have not only heard, but
experienced the thing it self in both Parts. But ah alas, it is Ignorance of
this which makes some presume, and it is unacquaintedness with this which makes
thee safe in the Hands of Christ, to fear they shall be miserable for ever. O
that you were skilful in this matter, the Lord lead you into this Truth, viz.
The right way of the Spirits sealing and assuring Souls.

Now you will expect, that I should speak something of what has occasioned
this Subject; you know it is somewhat more than ordinary, two related to us,
both Interred in one Week, desired this Text might be spoke from. The one was a
Private Member, the other a Public Person; your choice and my Fellow-Helper in
the Work of the Gospel. It is not my way to speak much of the Dead, I had
rather that Persons Lives and Good Works, than my Lips, should be the Trumpets
of their Praises; but in this I may not be altogether silent, Mr. Philip King
for his Time and standing was a burning and shining Light, you could rejoice in
it but for a season; because a violent Fever extinguished his Lamp in the
Twenty Fifth Year of his Age. And now, when God is cutting off his faithful
Watchmen, shall not we that remain tell you what of the Night? It is evident,
God has a Controversy with us, for his Ambassadors are called home; not only
the Aged and Honorable whose Labors commend them to all judicious and
ingenious Christians: But also, our budding Hopes are cut off in great measure
by the surprising Death of the rising Generation; not only the Reverend Dr.
Bates, and Worthy Mr. Mead, but some of our hopeful Young Ones, Mr. S -- Mr.
King are gone also. Formerly God gave us many faithful Witnesses in Time of
restraint, but now we have Liberty, what have we else? Now our Elijah's Mantels
are dropped off, O that a double Portion of the Spirit might be upon the
succeeding Elisha's. But you of this Congregation, behold what the Lord has
done, and humbly enquire into the meaning of this sad Providence; does not this
Rod loudly call for the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace and Love?
conform to it for the Lords sake. I need not inform you, that the Deceased was
one of these rare Instances of Grace; was not his short abode with us a live
Comment upon this Text. Did not almost every Prayer, and every Sermon, declare
that he was upon the Celestial Wrings of a well grounded Assurance; and so
comsequently as they were for him: Indeed he was of an eminent Spirit for
powerful Godliness. I know not what Suffering-Work he was ever called out unto,
but his Acquaintance with the Mysteries of the Gospel, his Patience in
Sickness, and his Triumph in Death was all more than Ordinary; by these things
we have fair warning, God help us to take it, lest worst befall us; not
hardening, but teaching and humbling Afflictions are New Covenant Mercies. So
much for this Text, and Time, the Lord give you Understanding in all Things.

FINIS.

