A Vindication OF SOME PASSAGES IN A DISCOURSE Concerning Communion with GOD,
From the Exceptions of WILLIAM SHERLOCK, Rector of St. George Buttolph-Lane.

By the Author of the said Discourse. John Owen: D: D:

London, Printed for N. Ponder, at the Peacock in Chancery Lane, 1674.

A VINDICATION Of some PASSAGES IN A DISCOURSE Concerning Communion with GOD.
IT is now near twenty years; since I wrote and published a Discourse
concerning Communion with God. Of what Use and Advantage it has been to any*
as to their furtherance in the design aimed at therein, is left unto them to
judge, by whom it has been pe^^^d with any candid diligence. And I do know
that multitudes of Persons fearing God, and desiring to walk before him in
sincerity, are ready if occasion require to give Testimony unto the benefit
which they have received thereby; as I can also at any time produce the
Testimonies of Learned and Holy Persons, it may be as any I know living, both
in England and out of it, who owning the Truth contained in it, have highly
avowed its usefulness, and are ready yet so to do. With all other Persons, so
far as ever I heard, it passed at the rate of a tolerable acceptance with
Discourses of the same kind and nature. And however any thing or passage in it
might not possibly suit the Apprehensions of some; yet being wholly practical,
designed for popular edification, without any direct engagement into things
controversial, I looked for no opposition unto it or exception against it; but
that it would at least be suffered to pass at that rate of allowance, which is
universally granted unto that sort of Writings both of Ancient and Modern
Authors. Accordingly it so fell out and continued for many years, until some
Persons began to judge it their Interest, and to make it their business to
cavil at my Writings, and to load my Person with Reproaches. With what little
success as to their avowed designs, they have labored therein; how openly
their endeavors are sunk into contempt with all sorts of Persons pretending
unto the least Sobriety or modesty; I suppose they are not themselves
altogether unsensible* Among the things which this sort of Men sought to make
an Advantage of against me, I found that two or three of them began to reflect
on that Discourse, though it appeared they had not satisfied themselves what as
yet to fix upon, their nibling Cavils being exceedingly ridiculous.

But yet from those Intimations of some Men's good will toward it, sufficient
to provoke the Industry of such as either needed their Assistance, or valued
their Favor, I was in expectation that one or other would possess that
Province, and attempt the whole Discourse or some parts of it. Nor was I
dissatisfied in my Apprehensions of that design. For being earnestly solicited
to suffer it to be Reprinted, I was very willing to see what either could or
would be objected against it, before it received another Impression. For
whereas it was Written now near twenty years ago, when there was the deepest
Peace in the minds of all Men about the Things treated of therein, and when I
had no Apprehension of any dissent from the Principal Design, Scope, and Parts
of it by any called Christians in the World, the Socinians only excepted, (whom
I had therein no regard unto) I thought it highly probable, that some things
might have been so expressed as to render a Review and Amendment of them more
than ordinarily necessary. And I reckoned it not improbable, but that from one
malevolent Adversary, I might receive a more instructive Information of such
escapes of Diligence, than I could do in so long a Time from all the more
impartial Readers of it; for as unto the substance of the Doctrine declared in
it, I was sufficiently secure not only of its Truth, but that it would
immoveably endure the rudest assaults of such oppositions as I did expect. I
was therefore very well satisfied when I heard of the publishing of this
Treatise of Mr. Sherlock's, which, as I was informed, and since have found
true, was principally intended against my self, and that Discourse, that is,
that Book, because I was the Author of it, which will at last prove to be its
only Guilt and Crime. For I thought I should be at once now satisfied, both
what it was which was so long contriving against it whereof I could give no
conjecture, as also be directed unto any such mistakes as might have befallen
me in matter or manner of Expression, which I would or might rectify before the
Book received another Edition. But upon a View and Perusal of this Discourse, I
found my self under a double surprisal. For first in reference to my own, I
could not find any thing, any Doctrine, any Expressions, any Words reflected
on, which the Exceptions of this Man do give me the least occasion to alter, or
to desire that they had been otherwise either expressed or delivered; not any
thing which now after near twenty years, which I do not still equally approve
of, and which I am not yet ready to justify. The other part of my Surprisal
was somewhat particular, though in Truth it ought to have been none at all. And
this was with respect unto those Doctrinal Principles which he manageth his
oppositions upon. A surprisal they were unto me, because Wild, Uncouth,
Extravagant, and contrary to the common Faith of Christians; being all of them
traduced, and some of them transcribed from the Writings of the Socinians; yet
ought not to have been so, because I was assured that an opposition unto that
Discourse could be managed on no other. But however the Doctrine maintained by
this Man, and those opposed or scorned by him, are not my special concernment.
For what is it to me what the Rector of etc. Preaches or Publishes, beyond my
Common Interest in the Truths of the Gospel with other Men as great strangers
unto him as my self, who to my knowledge never saw him, nor heard of his Name
till infamed by his Book. Only I shall take leave to say, that the Doctrine
here published and Licensed so to be, is either the Doctrine of the present
Church of England; or it is not: If it be so, I shall be forced to declare that
I neither have, nor will have any Communion therein, and that as for other
Reasons, so in particular, because I will not renounce or depart from that
which I know to be the True Ancient and Catholic Doctrine of this Church; if
it be not so, as I am assured with respect unto many Bishops and other Learned
Men, that it is not, it is certainly the concernment of them who preside
therein, to take care that such kind of Discourses be not countenanced with the
stamp of their public Authority, lest they and the Church be represented unto
a great disadvantage with many.

It was some Months after the publishing of this Discourse, before I
entertained any thoughts of taking the least notice of it; yea I was resolved
to the contrary, and declared those Resolutions as I had occasion. Neither was
it until very lately, that my second Thoughts came to a compliance with the
desires of some others, to consider my own peculiar concernment therein, And
this is all which I now design; for the examination of the Opinions which this
Author has veuted under the countenance of public License, whatever they may
think, I know to be more the concernment of other Men than mine. Nor yet do I
enter into the Consideration of what is written by this Author with the least
respect unto my self or my own reputation, which I have the satisfaction to
conceive not to be prejudiced by such pitiful Attempts; nor have I the least
desire to preserve it in the minds of such Persons as wherein it can suffer on
this occasion. But the Vindication of some sacred Truths petulantly traduced by
this Author seems to be cast on me in an especial manner; because he has
opposed them, and endeavored to expose them to scorn as declared in my Book;
whence others more meet for this work might think themselves discharged from
taking notice of them. Setting aside this consideration I can freely give this
sort of Men leave to go on with their Revilings and Scoffings until they are
weary or ashamed, which as far as I can discern upon Consideration of their
Ability for such a Work, and their Confidence therein, is not like to be in
haste: At least they can change their course, and when they are out of breath
in pursuit of one sort of calumnies, betake themselves unto another. Witness
the late malicious, and yet withal ridiculous Reports that they have divulged
concerning me even with respect unto Civil Affairs, and their industry therein.
For although they were such as had not any thing of the least probability or
likelihood to give them countenance, yet were they so impetuously divulged, and
so readily entertained by many, as made me think there was more than the common
artifices of Calumny employed in their raising and improvement, especially
considering what Persons I can justly charge those Reports upon. But in this
course they may proceed whilst they please and think convenient; I find my self
no more concerned in what they Write or say of this Nature than if it were no
more; But (...),
(...).


It is the Doctrine traduced only that I am concerned about, and that as it
has been the Doctrine of the Church of England.

It may be, it will be said, (for there is no security against Confidence and
Imodesty backed with secular Advantages) that the Doctrinal Principles asserted
in this Book are agreeable with the Doctrine of the Church in former Times, and
therefore those opposed in it, such as are condemned thereby. Hereabout I shall
make no long contest with them who once discover that their Minds are by any
means emboldned to undertake the Defense of such shameless Untruths. Nor shall
I multiply Testimonies to prove the Contrary, which others are more concerned
to do, if they intend not to betray the Religion of that Church, with whose
Preservation and Defense they are entrusted. Only because there are Ancient
Divines of this Church, who I am persuaded will be allowed with the most to
have known as well the Doctrine of it, and as firmly to have adhered thereunto,
as this Author, who have particularly spoken unto most of the Things which he
has opposed or rather reproached, I shall transcribe the Words of one of them,
whereby he, and those who employ him, may be minded with whom they have to do
in those things. For as to the Writers of the Ancient Church there is herein no
regard had unto them. He whom I shall Name is Mr. Hooker, and that in his
Famous Book of Ecclesiastical Policy, who in the 5th Book thereof and 56
Paragraph, thus discourses.

We have hitherto spoken of the Person and of the presence of Christ.
Participation is that mutual inward hold which Christ has of us and we of him,
in such sort that each possesses other by way of special Interest, Property,
and Inherent Copulation. And after the interposition of some things concerning
the mutual in-being and Love of the Father and the Son, he thus proceeds. We
are by Nature the Sons of Adam. When God Created Adam he Created us, and as
many as are descended from Adam have in themselves the Root out of which they
Spring. The Sons of God we neither are, all, nor any of Us otherwise than only
by Grace and Favor. The Sons of God have Gods own Natural Son as a second Adam
from Heaven, whose Race and Progeny they are by Spiritual and Heavenly Birth.
God therefore loving Eternally his Son, he must needs Eternally in him have
loved and preferred before all others, them which are Spiritually sithence
descended and sprung out of him. These are in God as in their Savior and not
as in their Creator only. It was the Purpose of his saving Goodness, his Saving
Power, and his Saving Wisdom which inclined it self toward them. They which
thus are in God eternally, by their intended admission to Life, have by
Vocation or Adoption, God actually now in them, as the Artificer is in that
Work which his hand does presently frame. Life as all other Gifts and Benefits
grows originally from the Father, and comes not to Us but by the Son, nor by
the Son to any of Us in particular, but through the Spirit. For this cause the
Apostle wishes to the Church of Corinth the Grace our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Love of God, and the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost: which three Saint Peter
comprehends in one, the Participation of the Divine Nature. We are therefore
in God through Christ Eternally, according to that intent and purpose whereby
we are chosen to be made his in this present World, before the World it self
was made. We were in God through the knowledge which is had of Us, and the Love
which is born toward Us from Everlasting. But in God we actually are no longer
than only from the Time of our Actual Adoption into the Body of his true
Church, into the Fellowship of his Children. For his Church he knows and
loves, so that they that are in the Church are thereby known to be in him. Our
being in Christ by Eternal foreknowledg Saves Us not, without our actual and
real Adoption into the Fellowship of his Saints in this present World. For in
him we actually are by our actual incorporation into that society which has
him for their head and does make together with him one Body. (He and they in
that respect having one Name) For which cause by virtue of this Mystical
conjunction, we are of him and in him, even as though our very flesh and bones
should be made continuate with his. We are in Christ because he knows and
Loves Us even as parts of himself. No Man is actually in him but they in whom
he actually is. For he which has not the Son of God has not life. I am the
Vine and you are the Branches, he which abides in Me and I in him, the same
brings forth much Fruit; but the Branch severed from the Vine withers. We
are therefore adopted Sons of God to Eternal Life, by Participation of the only
begotten Son of God, whose Life is the Wellspring and Cause of ours. It is too
cold an Interpretation, whereby some Men expound our being in Christ, to import
nothing else but only that the self-same Nature which makes Us to be Men; is
in him and makes him Man as We are. For what Man is there in the World which
has not so far forth Communion with Jesus Christ. It is not this can sustain
the weight of such sentences as speak of the Mystery of our Coherence with
Jesus Christ. The Church is in Christ as Eve was in Adam. Yea by Grace we are
every of Us in Christ, and in his Church, as by Nature we are in those our
first Parents. God made Eve of the Rib of Adam; and his Church he formed out of
the very flesh, the very wound and bleeding side of the Son of Man. His Body
crucified and his Blood shed for the Life of the World, were the true Elements
of that Heavenly being which makes Us such as himself is of whom we come. For
which cause the words of Adam may be fitly the Words of Christ concerning his
Church, Flesh of my flesh and Bone of my Bones; a true Native Extract out of
mine own Body. So that in him, even according to his Manhood, we according to
our Heavenly being, are as Branches in that Root out of which they grow. To all
things he is Life, and to Men Light as the Son of God, to the Church both Life
and Light Eternal by being made the Son of Man for Us, and by being in Us a
Savior whether we respect him as God or as Man. Adam is in us as an original
Cause of our Nature, and of that Corruption of Nature which causes Death.
Christ as the Cause Original of Restoration to Life. The Person of Adam is not
in us but his Nature, and the Corruption of his nature derived into all Men by
Propagation. Christ having Adam's Nature as we have, but incorrupt deriveth not
Nature but incorruption, and that immediately from his own Person into all that
belong unto him. As therefore we are really partakers of the Body of Sin and
Death received from Adam, so except we be truly partakers of Christ, and as
really possessed of his Spirit, all we speak of Eternal Life is but a Dream.
That which quickneth us, is the Spirit of the Second Adam, and his Flesh that
wherewith he quickneth. That which in him made our Nature incorrupt was the
Union of his Deity with our Nature. And in that respect the Sentence of Death
and Condemnation which only takes hold upon sinful flesh, could no way
possibly extend unto him. This caused his Voluntary Death for others, to
prevail with God and to have the force of an Expiatory Sacrifice. The Blood of
Christ, as the Apostle witnesses, does therefore take away Sin, because
through the Eternal Spirit he offered himself unto God without spot; as that
which sanctified our nature in Christ, that which made it a Sacrifice available
to take away sin, is the same which quickneth it, raised it out of the Grave
after Death, and exalted it unto Glory. Seeing therefore Christ is in Us as a
quickening Spirit, the first degree of Communion with Christ must needs consist
in the participation of his Spirit which Cyprian in that respect well terms
germanissimam Societatem, the highest and truest Society that can be between
Man, and him which is both God and Man in One. These things Saint Cyril duly
considering reproves their Speeches, which taught that only the Deity of
Christ is the Vine, whereupon we by Faith do depend as Branches, and that
neither his Flesh nor our Body are comprised in this Resemblance. For does any
Man doubt but that even from the flesh of Christ our very Bodies do receive
that Life which shall make them Glorious at the Latter Day, and for which they
are already accounted parts of his Blessed Body? Our Corruptible Bodies could
never live the Life they shall live, were it not that here they were joined
with his Body which is incorruptible, and that his is in ours as a Cause of
Immortality, a cause by removing through the Death and Merit of his own flesh
that which hindered the Life of Ours. Christ is therefore both as God and as Man
that true Vine whereof we both Spiritually and Corporeally are Branches. The
Mixture of his Bodily S^bstance with ours is a thing which the Ancient Fathers
disclaim. Yet the Mixture of his Flesh with ours they speak of to signify what
our very Bodies through Mystical Conjunction do receive from that Vital
Efficacy which we know to be in his; and from Bodily Mixtures they borrow
diverse similitudes rather to declare the Truth than the manner of Coherence
between his sacred and the sanct^fyed Bodies of Saints. Thus much no Christian
Man will deny, that when Christ sanctified his own flesh giving as God, and
taking as Man the Holy Ghost, he did not this for himself only, but for our
sakes, that the Grace of Sanctification and Life, which was first received in
him* might pass from him* to his whole Race, as Malediction came from Adam unto
all Mankind. Howbeit* because the work of his Spirit to those Effects, is in us
prevented by Sin and Death, possessing us before, it is of necessity, that as
well our present Sanctification unto ne^ness of Life, as the future
restoration of our Bodies, should presuppose a participation of the Grace,
Efficacy, Merit or Virtue of his Body and Blood; without which Foundation first
laid there is no Place for those other operations of the Spirit of Christ to
ensue. So that Christ imparteth plainly himself by degrees. It pleases him* in
Mercy* to account himself incomplete and maimed without us, But most assured we
are* that we all receive of his fullness, because he is in Us as a Moving and
Working Cause* from which many blessed Effects are really found to ensue. And
that in Sundry both kinds and Degrees, all tending to Eternal Happiness. It
must be confessed, that of Christ working as Creator and as Governor of the
World by Providence all are Partakers, not all Partakers of that Grace whereby
he inhabiteth whom he Saves. Again, as he dwells not by Grace in all, so
neither does he equally work in all them in whom he dwells Whence is it (
says Saint Augustine) that some be Holier than others are* but because God does
dwell in some more plentifully than in others. And because the Divine substance
of Christ is equally in all, his Human Substance equally distinct from all, it
appears that the participation of Christ, wherein there are many Degrees and
Differences, must needs consist in such Effects, as being derived from both
Natures of Christ really into Us, are made our own, and we by having them in us
are truly said to have him from whom they come; Christ also more or less to
Inhabit and impart himself, as the Graces are fewer or more, greater or
smaller, which really flow into us from Christ, Christ is whole with the whole
Church and whole with every part of the Church, as touching his person, which
can no way divide it self or be possessed by Degrees and Portions. But the
participation of Christ imports, besides the presence of Christ's Person, and
besides the Mystical Copulation thereof with the parts and Members of his whole
Church, a true actual Influence of Grace whereby the life which we live
according to Godliness is his, and from him we receive those perfections
wherein our Eternal Happiness consists. Thus we participate Christ partly by
Imputation, as when those things which he did and suffered for us are imputed
unto us for Righteousness; Partly by habitual and real Infusion, as when Grace
is inwardly bestowed while we are on Earth, and afterward more fully both our
Souls and Bodies made like unto his in Glory. The first thing of his so infused
into our hearts in this Life is the Spirit of Christ, whereupon because the
rest of what kind soever do all both necessarily depend and infallibly also
ensue, therefore the Apostles term it sometimes the Seed of God, sometimes the
Pledge of our Heavenly Inheritance, sometimes the hansel or earnest of that
which is to come. From hence it is that they which belong to the Mystical Body
of our Savior Christ, and be in number as the Stars in Heaven, divided
sucessively by reason of their Mortal Condition into many Generations, are
notwithstanding coupled every one to Christ their Head, and all unto every
particular person amongst themselves, in as much as the same Spirit which
anointed the Blessed Soul of our Savior Christ, does so formalize, unite, and
actuate his whole Race, as if both he and they were so many Limbs compacted
into one Body, by being all with one and the same Soul quickened. That wherein
we are partakers of Jesus Christ by Imputation are each equally unto all that
have it. For it consists in such Acts and Deeds of his, as could not have
longer continuance, than while they were in doing; nor at that very time belong
unto any other but to him from whom they came; and therefore how Men either
then or before or sithence should be made partakers of them, there can be no
way imagined, but only by Imputation. Again a Deed must either not be imputed
to any, but rest altogether in him whose it is, or if at all it be imputed,
they which have it by Imputation must have it such as it is, whole. So that
Degrees being neither in the personal presence of Christ, nor in the
participation of those Effects which are ours by Imputation only, it rests
that we wholly apply them to the participation of Christ's infused Grace:
although even in this kind also the First beginning of Life, the Seed of God,
the First Fruits of Christ's Spirit be without Latitude. For we have hereby
only the being of the Sons of God, in which number how far soever one may seem
to excel another, yet touching this that all are Sons, they are all Equals;
some happily better Sons than the rest are, but none any more a Son than
another. Thus therefore we see how the Father is in the Son and the Son in the
Father, how both are in all things and all in them; what Communion Christ has
with his Church, how his Church and every Member thereof, is in him by Original
Derivation, and he personally in them by Way of Mystical Association, wrought
through the Gift of the Holy Ghost, which they that are his receive from him,
and together with the same, what benefit soever the Vital Force of his Body and
Blood may yield. Yea by Steps and Degrees, they receive the complete Measure of
all such Divine Grace as does sanctify and save throughout, till the Day of
their Final Exaltation to a state of Fellowship in Glory with him, whose
partakers they now are in those things that tend to Glory.

This one Testimony ought to be enough unto this sort of Men, whilst they are
at any consistency with their own Reputation. For it is evident that there is
nothing concerning personal Election, Effectual Vocation, Justification by the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, Participation of him, Union of
Believers unto and with his Person, Derivation of Grace from him, etc. which
are so reproached by our present Author, but they are asserted by this great
Champion of the Church of England, who undoubtedly knew the Doctrine which it
owned and in his Days approved, and that in such words and Expressions as
remote from the sentiments, or at least as unsavory to the Palats of these
Men, as any they except against in others.

And what themselves so severely charge on us in point of Discipline, that
nothing be spoken about it until all is answered that is written by Mr Hooker
in its Defense, may I hope not immodestly be so far returned, as to desire them
that in point of Doctrine they will grant us Truce, until they have moved out
of the way what is writ^en to the same purpose by Mr. Hooker. Why do not they
speak to him to leave fooling, and to speak sense as they do to others? But let
these things be as they are. I have no especial Concernment in them, nor shall
take any farther notice of them, but only as they influence the Exceptions
which this Author makes unto some passages in that Book of mine. And in what I
shall do herein, I shall take as little Notice as may be of those Scurrilous
and Reproachful Expressions which either his Inclination or his Circumstances
induced him to make use of. If he be pleased with such a course of procedure, I
can only assure him that as to my Concernment, I am not displeased, and so he
is left unto his full Liberty for the Future.

The first thing he quarrels about is my asserting the Necessity of
Acquaintance with the person of Christ, which Expression he frequently makes
use of afterward in a way of Reproach. The Use of the Word Acquaintance in
this Matter is Warranted by our Translation of the Scripture, and that
properly, where it is required of Us to acquaint our selves with God. And that
I intended nothing thereby but the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, is evident beyond
any pretense to the contrary to be suggested by the most subtle or Inventive
Malice. The Crime therefore wherewith I am here charged, is my Assertion that
it is necessary that Christians should know Jesus Christ, which I have
afterward increased, by affirming also that they ought to Love him. For by
Jesus Christ all the World of Christians intend the person of Christ, and the
most of them, all of them, the Socinians only excepted, by his Person the Word
made Flesh, or the Son of God Incarnate, the Mediator between God and Man. For
because the Name Christ is sometimes used Metonymically to conclude thence that
Jesus Christ is not Jesus Christ, or that it is not the Person of Christ that
is firstly and properly intended by that name in the Gospel, is a lewd and
impious Imagination. And we may as well make Christ to be only a Light within
Us, as to be the Doctrine of the Gospel without Us. This Knowledge of Jesus
Christ, I aver to be the only Fountain of all Saving Knowledge, which is farther
reflected on by this Author. And he adds (no doubt out of respect unto Me) that
he will not envy the Glory of this discovery unto its Author, and therefore
honestly confesses that he met with it in my Book. But what does he intend?
whither will Prejudice and Corrupt Designs carry and transport the Minds of
Men? Is it possible that he should be ignorant that it is the Duty of all
Christians to know Jesus Christ, to be acquainted with the person of Christ,
and that this is the Fountain of all Saving Knowledge, until he met with it in
my Book about Communion with God, which I dare say he looked not into, but only
to find what he might except against? It is the Holy Ghost himself that is the
Author of this Discovery, and it is the great Fundamental Principle of the
Gospel. Wherefore surely this cannot be the Man's intention, and therefore we
must look a little further to see what it is that he aims at. After then the
Repetition of some Words of mine he adds as his sense upon them page 39. So
that it seems the Gospel of Christ makes a very imperfect and obscure Discovery
of the Nature, Attributes, and the Will of God, and the Methods of our
Recovery. We may thoroughly understand whatever is revealed in the Gospel, and
yet not have a clear and Saving Knowledge of these things, until we get a more
intimate Acquaintance with the Person of Christ. And again page 40. I shall
show you what additions these Men make to the Gospel of Christ by an
Acquaintance with his Person; and I confess I am very much beholding to this
Author, for acknowledging whence they fetch all their Orthodox and
Gospel-Mysteries, for I had almost pored my Eyes out with seeking for them in
the Gospel, but could never find them; but I learn now that indeed they are not
to be found there unless we be first acquainted with the Person of Christ. So
far as I can gather up the sense of these loose Expressions it is, that I
assert a knowledge of the Person of Jesus Christ, which is not revealed in the
Gospel, which is not taught Us in the Writings of Moses, the Prophets, or
Apostles, but must be had some other way. He tells me afterward page 41. That
I put in a Word fallaciously which expresses the contrary, as though I
intended another Knowledge of Christ than what is declared in the Gospel. Now he
either thought that this was not my Design or Intention, but would make use of
a pretense of it for his Advantage unto an end aimed at, which what it was I
know well enough, or he thought indeed that I did assert and maintain such a
knowledge of the Person of Christ as was not received by Scripture-Revelation.
If it was the first, we have an Instance of that new Morality which these new
Doctrines are accompanied withal; if the latter, he discovers how meet a person
he is to treat of things of this Nature. Wherefore to prevent such scandalous
Miscarriages or futilous Imaginations for the future, I here tell him that if
he can find in that Book, or any other of my Writings, any Expression or Word
or Syllable intimating any Knowledge of Christ, or any Acquaintance with the
Person of Christ, but what is revealed and declared in the Gospel, in the
Writings of Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles, and as it is so revealed and
declared, and learned from thence, I will publicly burn that Book with my own
hands to give him and all the World Satisfaction. Nay I say more, if an Angel
from Heaven pretend to give any other knowledge of the Person of Christ but what
is revealed in the Gospel, let him be accursed. And here I leave this Author to
consider with himsef, what was the true occasion why he should first thus
represent himself unto the World in Print by the avowing of so unworthy and
Notorious a Calumny.

Whereas therefore by an Acquaintance with the Person of Christ, it is
undeniably evident; that I intended nothing but that Knowledge of Christ which
it is the Duty of every Christian to labor after, no other but what is
revealed, declared and delivered in the Scripture, as almost every Page of my
Book does manifest where I treat of these things: I do here again with the good
Leave of this Author assert, that this knowledge of Christ is very necessary
unto Christians, and the Fountain of all Saving Knowledge whatever. And as he
may if he please review the Honesty and Truth of that Passage page 38. So that
our Acquaintance with Christ's Person in this Man's Divinity signifies such a
Knowledge of what Christ is, has done and suffered for Us, from whence we may
learn those greater, deeper, and more Saving Mysteries of the Gospel, which
Christ has not expressly revealed to Us; So I will not so far suspect the
Christianity of them with whom we have to do, as to think it necessary to
confirm by Texts of Scripture either of these assertions, which whoever denies
is an open Apostate from the Gospel.

Having laid this Foundation in an equal Mixture of that Truth and Sobriety
wherewith Sundry late Writings of this Nature, and to the same Purpose, have
been stuffed, he proceeds to declare what desperate Consequences ensue upon the
Necessity of that Knowledge of Jesus Christ which I have asserted, addressing
himself thereunto, page 40.

Many Instances of such dealings, will make me apt to think that some Men,
whatever they pretend to the contrary, have but little Knowledge of Jesus Christ
indeed. But whatever this Man thinks of him, an Accouut must one Day be given
before and unto him of such false Calumnies as his Lines are stuffed withal.
Those who will believe him that he has almost pored out his Eyes in reading
the Gospel with a Design to find out Mysteries that are not in it, are left by
me to their Liberty. Only I cannot but say that his way of Expressing the study
of the Scripture is such as becomes a Man of his Wisdom, Gravity and
Principles. He will I hope one day be better acquainted with what belongs unto
the due Investigation of sacred Truth in the Scripture, than to suppose it
represented by such Childish expressions. What he has Learned from me I know
not, but that I have any where taught that there are Mysteries of Religion that
are not to be found in the Gospel, unless we are first acquainted with the
Person of Christ, is a Frontless and Impudent Falsehood. I own no other, never
taught other knowledge of Christ, or acquaintance with his Person, but what is
revealed and declared in the Gospel; and therefore no Mysteries of Religion can
be thence known and received before we are acquainted with the Gospel it self.
Yet I will mind this Author of that whereof if he be ignorant, he is unfit to
be a Teacher of others, and which if he deny, he is unworthy the Name of a
Christian; Namely, that by the Knowledge of the Person of Christ; the great
Mystery of God manifest in the Flesh, as revealed and declared in the Gospel,
we are led into a clear and full understanding of many other Mysteries of Grace
and Truth which are all centred in his Person, and without which we can have no
true nor sound understanding of them. I shall speak it yet again, that this
Author if it be possible may understand it; or however, that he and his
Copartners in Design may know that I neither am nor ever will be ashamed of
it; that without the Knowledge of the Person of Christ which is our
Acquaintance with him, as we are commanded to acquaint our selves with God, as
he is the Eternal Son of God Incarnate, the Mediator between God and Man with
the Mystery of the Love, Grace and Truth of God therein, as revealed and
declared in the Scripture; there is no true useful Saving Knowledge of any
other Mysteries or Truths of the Gospel to be attained. This being the
substance of what is asserted in my Discourse, I challenge this Man, or any to
whose pleasure and Favor his endeavors in this kind are Sacrificed to assert
and maintain the contrary, if so be they are indeed armed with such a
Confidence as to impugn the Foundations of Christianity.

But to evince his Intention he transcribeth the ensuing passages out of my
Discourse, page 41. The sum of all true Wisdom and Knowledge may be reduced to
these three Heads. (1) The Knowledge of God his Nature and Properties.

(2) The Knowledge of our selves with reference to the will of God concerning
us.

(3) Skill to walk in Communion with God. In these three is summed up all True
Wisdom and Knowledge, and not any of them is to any purpose to be obtained or
is manifested but only in and by the Lord Christ.

This whole passage I am far from disliking upon this Representation of it, or
any Expression in it. Those who are not pleased with this distribution of
spiritual Wisdom, may make use of any such of their own wherewith they are
better satisfied. This of mine was sufficient unto my purpose. Hereon this
censure is passed by him. Where, By, is fallaciously added to include the
Revelations Christ has made, whereas his first undertaking was to show how
impossible it is to understand these things savingly and clearly
notwithstanding all these Revelations God has made of himself and his will by
Moses and the Prophets and by Christ himself without an acquaintance with his
person. The fallacy pretended is merely of his own coyning^ my words are plain
and s^ited unto my own purpose, and to declare my mind in what I intend; which
he openly corrupting or not at all understanding, frames an end never thought
of by me, and then feigns fallacious means of attaining it. The knowledge I
mean is to be learned by Christ, neither is any thing to be learned in him but
what is learned by him. I do say indeed now whatever I have said before, that
it is impossible to understand any sacred Truth savingly and clearly without
the knowledge of the Person of Christ, and shall say so still, let this Man and
his Companions say what they will to the contrary; but that in my so saying I
exclude the consideration of the Revelations which Christ has made, or that
God has made of himself by Moses and the Prophets, and Christ himself, the
principal whereof concern his Person, and whence alone we come to know him, is
an Assertion becoming the modesty and Ingenuity of this Author. But hereon he
proceeds and says, that as to the first head he will take notice of those
peculiar Discoveries of the Nature of God of which the world was ignorant
before, and of which Revelation is wholly silent, but are now clearly and
savingly Learned from an Acquaintance with Christ's Person. But what in the mean
time is become of Modesty, Truth and Honesty? Do men reckon that there is no
Account to be given of such falsifications? Is there any one Word or Tittle in
my discourse, of any such knowledge of the Nature or Properties of God as
whereof Revelation is wholly silent? What does this Man intend? Does he either
not at all understand what I say, or does he not care what he says himself?
What have I done to him? wherein have I injured him? how have I provoked him
that he should sacrifice his Conscience and Reputation unto such a Revenge?
must he yet hear it again? I never thought, I never owned, I never wrote, that
there was any Acquaintance to be obtained with any property of the Nature of
God by the knowledge of the Person of Christ, but what is Taught and Revealed
in the Gospel; from whence alone all knowledge of Christ, his Person, and his
Doctrine, is to be Learned. And yet I will say again, if we Learn not thence to
know the Lord Christ, that is, his Person, we shall never know any thing of
God, our Selves, or our Duty, clearly and savingly (I use the words again,
notwithstanding the Reflections on them, as more proper in this Matter than any
used by our Author in his Eloquent Discourse) and as we ought to do. From hence
he proceeds unto weak and confused Discourses about the Knowledge of God and
his Properties without any Knowledge of Christ. For he not only tells us what
reason we had to believe such and such things of God, if Christ had never
appeared in the World (take care I pray that we be thought as little beholding
to him as may be) but, that Gods readiness to Pardon, and the like are plainly
revealed in the Scripture, without any farther Acquaintance with the Person of
Christ. Page 43. What this farther Acquaintance with the person of Christ
should mean, I do not well understand: It may be any more Acquaintance with
respect unto some that is necessary; It may be without any more ado as to an
acquaintance with him. And if this be his Intention, (as it must be if there be
sense in his words,) that God's read^ness to pardon Sinners is revealed in the
Scripture without respect unto the Person of Jesus Christ, it is a piece of
dull Socin^anism, which because I have sufficiently confuted else where, I
shall not here farther discover the folly of. For a Knowledge of God's
Essential Properties by the Light of Nature, it was never denied by me, yea I
have written and contended for it in another way than can be impeached by such
trifling Declamations. But yet with his good leave, I do yet bel^eve that there
is no saving Knowledge of or acquaintance with God, or his Properties, to be
attained, but in and through Jesus Christ, as revealed unto us in the Gospel.
And this I can confirm with Testimonies of the Scripture, Fathers, Schoolmen,
and Divines of all sorts, with Reasons and Arguments, such as I know this
Author cannot Answer. And whatever great apprehensions he may have of his Skill
and Abilities to know God and his Properties by the Light of Nature, now he
neither knows nor is able to distinguish, what he Learns from thence, and what
he has imbibed in his Education from an Emanation of Divine Rvelation; yet, I
believe there were as wise men as himself amongst those Ancient Philosophers
concerning whom and their enquiries into the Nature of God, our Apostle
pronounces those censures, Romans 1. 1 Cor. 1.

But on this goodly Foundation he proceeds unto a particular Inference, page
44. saying; And is not this a Confident Man to tell us that the Love of God to
Sinners, and his Pardoning Mercy could never have entered into the Heart of Man,
but by Christ; when the experience of the whole World confutes him? For
whatever becomes of his new Theories, both Jews and Heathens who understood
nothing at all of what Christ was to do in order to our Recovery, did believe
God to be Gracious and Merciful to Sinners, and had reason to do so; because
God himself had assured the Jews that he was a Gracious and Merciful God,
pardoning Iniquity, Transgressions and Sins. And those natural Notions Heathens
had of God, and all those Discoveries God had made of himself in the works of
Creation and Providence, did assure them that God is very Good, and it is not
possible to understand what Goodness is, without pardoning Grace.

I beg his Excuse; Truth and good Company will give a modest Man a little
Confidence sometimes. And against his Experience of the whole World, falsely
pretended, I can oppose the Testimonies of the Scripture, and all the Ancient
writers of the Church, very few excepted. We can know of God only what he has,
one way or other, revealed of himself and nothing else. And I say again that
God has not revealed his Love unto Sinners, and his Pardoning Mercy, any other
way but in and by Jesus Christ. For what he adds as to the knowledge which the
Jews had of these things by Gods Revelation in the Scripture; when he can prove
that all those Revelations or any of them had not respect unto the Promised
Seed the Son of God to be exhibited in the Flesh to destroy the works of the
Devil, he will speak somewhat unto his Purpose. In the mean time, this
insertion of the consideration of them who enjoyed that Revelation of Christ,
which God was pleased to build his Church upon under the old Testament is weak
and impertinent. Their apprehensions I acknowledge concerning the Person of
Christ, and the specialty of the work of his Mediation, were dark and obscure;
but so also proportionably was their Knowledge of all other Sacred Truths,
which yet with all Diligence they enquired into. That which I intended is
expressed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.9. It is written Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man, the things which God has
prepared for them that Love him; but God has revealed them unto us by his
Spirit. What a Confident Man was this Apostle, as to affirm that the things of
the Grace and Mercy of God did never enter into the heart of Man to conceive,
nor would so have done, had they not been revealed by the Spirit of God in the
Gospel through Jesus Christ.

But this is only a Transient Charge, there insues that which is much more
severe, page 45. As for Instance he tells us, that in Christ, ( that is, in his
Death and Sufferings for our sins) God has manifested the Naturalness of this
Righteousness (i. e. Vindictive Justice in punishing Sin) that it was
impossible that it should be diverted from Sinners without the interposing of a
Propitiation, that is, that God is so Just and Righteous, that he cannot pardon
sin without satisfaction to his Justice. Now this indeed is such a Notion of
Justice as is perfectly New, which neither Scripture nor Nature acquaints us
with. For all Mankind have accounted it an Act of Goodness without the least
suspicion of injustice in it, to remit injuries and offenses without exacting
any punishment; that he is so far from being Just, that he is cruel and savage
who will remit no offense till he has satisfied his Revenge. The Reader who is
in any measure or degree acquainted with these things, knows full well what is
intended by that which I have asserted. It is no more but this; that such is
the Essential Holiness and Righteousness of the Nature of God, that considering
him as the Supreme Governor and Ruler of all Mankind, it was inconsistent with
the Holiness and Rectitude of his Rule, and the Glory of his Government, to
pass by sin absolutely, or to pardon it without Satisfaction, Propitiation, or
Atonement. This I said was made Evident in the Death and Sufferings of Christ,
wherein God made all our Iniquities to meet upon him, and spared him not, that
we might obtain Mercy and Grace. This is here now called out by our Author as a
very dangerous or Foolish Passage in my Discourse, which he thought he might
highly advantage his Reputation by Reflecting upon. But as the Orator said to
his Adversary, Equidem vehementer laetor eum esse me, in quem tu cumcuperes,
nullam contumeliam jacere potueris, quae non ad maximam partem civium
conveniret. So it is here fallen out; If this man knows not that this is the
Judgment of the generality of the most Learned Divines of Europe, upon the
matter of all who have engaged with any success against the Socinians one or
two only excepted, I can pity him, but not relieve him in his unhappiness,
unless he will be pleased to take more pains in reading good Books, than as yet
he appears to have done. But for the thing it self, and his Reflections upon
it, I shall observe yet some few things and so pass on. As first, the
opposition that he makes unto my Position is nothing but a crude Assertion of
one of the meanest and most absurd Sophisms which the Socinians use in this
Cause; Namely, that every one may remit injuries and offenses as he pleases
without exacting any Punishment. Which as it is true in most Cases of Injuries
and offenses against Private Persons, wherein no others are concerned but
themselves, nor are they obliged by any Law of the Community to pursue their
own Right; so with respect unto Public Rulers of the Community, and unto such
Injuries and offenses as are done against supreme Rule, tending directly unto
the Dissolution of the Society centring in it, to suppose that such Rulers are
not obliged to inflict those punishments which Justice and the preservation of
the Community does require, is a fond and ridiculous Imagination; destructive
if pursued unto all Humane Society, and rendering Government an useless thing in
the World. Therefore what this Author (who seems to understand very little of
these things) adds, that Governors may spare or punish as they see Reason for
it; if the Rule of that Reason and Judgment be not that Justice which respects
the Good and Benefit of the Society or Community, they do amiss and sin in
sparing and punishing, which I suppose he will not ascribe unto the Government
of God. But I have fully debated these things in sundry writings against the
Socinians, so that I will not again enlarge upon them without a more important
occasion. It is not improbable but he knows where to find those Discourses, and
he may when he pleases exercise his skill upon them. Again, I cannot but
remarque upon the Consequences that he charge this Position withal, and yet I
cannot do it without begging pardon for repeating such horrid and desperate
Blasphemies; page 46. The Account says he, of this is very plain because the
Justice of God has glutted it self with Revenge on sin in the Death of Christ,
and so henceforward we may be sure he will be very kind, as a Revengful man is
when his Passion is over. page 47, The sum of which is that God is all Love and
Patience when he has taken his fill of Revenge, as others use to say that the
Devil is very good when he is pleased. page 59, The Justice and Vengeance of
God, having their Actings assigned them to the full, being glutted and satiated
with the Blood of Christ, God may, etc. I desire the Reader to remember that
the Supposition whereon all these inferences are built is only that of the
Necessity of the Satisfaction of Christ with respect unto the Holiness and
Righteousness of God as the Author of the Law, and the supreme Governor of
Mankind. And is this Language becoming a Son of the Church of England? Might it
not be more justly expected from a Jew or a Mahumetan, from Servetus or
Socinus, from whom it is borrowed, than from a Son of this Church, in a Book
published by License and Authority? But it is to no purpose to complain; those
who are pleased with these things let them be so. But what if after all, these
impious Blasphemous consequences do follow as much upon this Author's opinion
as upon mine, and that with a greater show of Probability? And what if
forgetting himself within a few Leaves, he says the very same thing that I do,
and casts himself under his own severest Condemnation? For the first* I presume
he owns the Satisfaction of Christ, and I will suppose it until he directly
denies it; therefore also he owns and grants that God would not pardon any sin,
but upon a supposition of a previous satisfaction made by Jesus Christ. Here
then lies all the difference between us; that I say God could not with respect
unto his Holiness and Justice as the Author of the Law and Governor of the
World, pardon sin absolutely without Satisfaction; he says that although he
might have done so without the least diminution of his Glory, yet he would not,
but would have his Son by his Death and suffering to make Satisfaction for Sin.
I leave it now not only to every learned and impartial Reader, but to every Man
in his Wits who understands common sense, whether the Blasphemous Consequences
which I will not again defile Ink and Paper with the Expression of, do not seem
to follow more directly upon his Opinion than mine. For whereas I say not, that
God requires any thing unto the Exercise of Grace and Mercy but what he grants
that he does so also. Only I say he does it because requisite unto his Justice,
he because he chose it by a free Act of his Will and Wisdom when he might have
done otherwise without the least disadvantage unto his Righteousness or Rule,
or the least Impeachment to the Glory of his Holiness, the odious Blasphemies
mentioned do apparently seem to make a nearer approach unto his Assertion than
unto mine. I cannot proceed unto a farther Declaration of it, because I abhor
the Rehearsal of such horrid Profaneness. The Truth is, they follow not in the
Least (if there be any thing in them but odious Satanical Exprobrations of the
Truth of the Satisfaction of Christ) on either Opinion; though I say this
Author knows not well how to discharge himfelf of them. But what if he be all
this while ^^ly roving in his Discourse about the things that he has no due
comprehension of, merely out of a transporting desire to gratify himself and
others in traducing and making Exceptions against my Writings! What if when he
comes a little to himself and expresses the Notions that have been instilled
into him, he says expressly as much as I do, or have done in any place of my
writings? It is plain he does so, page 49. in these words: As for sin, the
Gospel assures us that God is an irreconcilable Enemy to all Wickedness, it
being so contrary to his own most Holy Nature, that if he have any love for
Himself, and any esteem for his own Perfections and Works, he must hate Sin
which is so unlike himself, and which destroys the beauty and perfection of his
Workmanship. For this End he sent his Son into the World to destroy the works
of the Devil, etc. Here is the Substance of what at any time in this Subject I
have pleaded for. God is an irreconcilable Enemy to all wickedness, that it is
contrary to his Holy Nature, so that he must ^ate it, and therefore sends his
Son, etc. If Sin be contrary to Gods Holy Nature, if he must hate it unless he
will not Love, himself nor value his own perfections, and therefore sent his
Son to make Satisfaction, we are absolutely agreed in this matte^, and our
Author has lost operam and oleum in his attempt. But for the matter it self,
if he be able to come unto any consistency in his thoughts, or to know what is
his own mind therein; I do hereby acquaint him, that I have written one entire
Discourse on that Subject, and have lately reinforced the same Argument in my
Exer^itations on the Epistle to the Hebrews, wherein my Judgment in this Point
is declared and maintained. Let him attempt an Answer if he please unto them,
or do it if he can. What he farther discourses on this Subject, page 46, 47.
consists only in odious Representations and vile Reflections on the Principal
Doctrines of the Gospel, not to be mentioned without offense and Horror. But
as to me he proceeds to except after his Scoffing manner against another
Passage, page 47, 48. But however sinners have great Reasons to rejoice in it,
when they consider the Nature and End of God's Patience and forbearance toward
them, viz. That it is God's taking a Course in his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness
that we should not be destroyed notwithstanding our Sins; that as before the
least Sin could not escape without Punishment, Justice being so natural to God,
that he cannot forgive without Punishing: So the Justice of God being now
satisfied by the Death of Christ the greatest Sins can do us no hurt, but we
shall escape with a notwithstanding our Sins, this it seems we learn from an
Acquaintance with Christ's Person, though his Gospel instructs us* otherwise,
that without Holiness no Man shall see God. But he is here again at a Loss, and
understands not what he is about. That whereof he was discoursing, is the
necessity of the Satisfaction of Christ, and that must be it which he makes
his Inference from. But the Passage he insists on, he lays down as expressive
of the End of God's Patience and forbearance toward Sinners, which here is of
no Place nor Consideration. But so it falls out that he is seldom at any
agreement with himself in any Parts of his Discourse; the Reason whereof I do
somewhat more than guess at. However, for the Passage which he cites out of my
Discourse, I like it so well, as that I shall not trouble my self to inquire
whether it be there or no, or on what occasion it is introduced. The Words are,
that God has in his Justice, Wisdom and Goodness taken a Course that we
should not be destroyed, notwithstanding our Sins, (that is to save Sinners)
for he that believes although he be a Sinner, shall be saved; and he that
believes not, shall be damned, as one has assured us, whom I desire to
believe and trust unto. If this be not so, what will become of this Man and my
self, with all our Writings; for I know that we are both Sinners; and if God
will not save us, or deliver us from destruction notwithstanding our Sins, that
is, pardon them through the bloodshedding of Jesus Christ, wherein we have
Redemption even the forgiveness of Sins, it had been better for us that we had
never been born. And I do yet again say, that God does not, that he will not
pardon the least Sin without respect unto the Satisfaction of Christ, according
as the Apostle declares, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20, 21. And the Expression which must
be set on the other side, on the supposition thereof the greatest Sin can do us
no harm, is this Man's addition, which his usual respect unto Truth has
produced. But withal, I never said, I never wrote, that the only supposition of
the Satisfaction of Christ is sufficient of it self to free us from Destruction
by Sin.

There is moreover required on our Part, Faith and Repentance, without which we
can have no Advantage by it, or Interest in it. But he seems to understand by
that Expression notwithstanding our Sins, though we should live and dye in our
Sins without Faith, Repentance, or New-Obedience. For he supposes it
sufficient to manifest the Folly of this Assertion, to mention that Declaration
o^ the mind of Christ in the Gospel, that without Holiness no Man shall see
God. I wonder whet^er he thinks that those who believe the Satisfaction of
Christ, and the Necessity thereof, wherein God made him to be Sin who knew no
Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, do believe that the
Personal Holiness of Men is indispensibly necessary unto the pleasing and
enjoyment of God: If he suppose that the Satisfaction o^ Christ and the
necessity of o^r Personal Holiness are really inconsistent, he m^st be treated
in another manner; If he suppose that although they are consistent, yet those
whom he opposes do so trust to the Satisfaction of Christ, as to judge, that
Faith, Repentance and Holiness are not indispensibly necessary to salvation, he
manifests how well skilled he is in their Principles and Practices. I have
always looked on it as a piece of the highest disingenuity among the Quakers,
that when any one pleads for the Satisfaction of Christ or the Imputation of
his Righteousness, they will clamorously cry out and hear nothing to the
contrary, yea you are for the Saving of polluted, defiled Sinners; let men live
in their Sins and be all foul within, it is no matter, so long as they have a
Righteousness and a Christ without them. I have I say always looked upon it as
a most disingenuous procedure in them, seeing no one is Catechized amongst us,
who knows not that we press a necessity of Sanctification and Holiness, equal
with that of Justification and Righteousness. And yet this very course is here
steered by this Author. Contrary to the constant Declaration of the Judgments
of them with whom he has to do, contrary to the common evidence of their
Writings, Preaching, Praying, D^sputing unto another purpose, and that without
relieving or coun^enancing himself by any one Word or Expression used or
utterred by them, he charge, as though they made Holiness a very indifferent
thing and such as it does not much concern any Man whether he have an Interest
in or no. And I know not whether is more marvelous unto me, that some Men can
so far concoct all Principles of Conscience and Modesty as to publish such
slanderous Untruths, or that others can take contentment and satisfaction
therein, who cannot but understand their Disingenuity and Falsehood.

His proceed in the same Page is to Except against that Revelation of the
Wisdom of God, which I affirm to have been made in the Person and Sufferings
of Christ, which I thought I might have asserted without offense. But this Man
will have it, that there is no Wisdom therein, if Justice be so Natural to God
that nothing could satisfy him but the Death of his own Son. That any thing
else could satisfy Divine Justice but the sufferings and Death of the Son of
God, so far as I know he is the first that found out or discovered, if he has
yet found it out. Some have imagined that God will pardon Sin, and does so,
without any satisfaction at all. And some have thought that other ways of the
Reparation of Lost Mankind were possible without this Satisfaction of Divine
Justice, which yet God in his Wisdom determined on. But that Satisfaction
could be any otherwise made to Divine Justice, but by the Death of the Son of
God Incarnate, none have used to say who know what they say in these things.
But Wisdom, he says, consists in the choice of the best and fittest means to
attain an End when there were more ways than one of doing it; but it requires
no great Wisdom to choose when there is but one possible way. Yea this it is to
measure God, things Infinite and Divine, by our selves. Does this Man think
that God's Ends as ours have an Existence in themselves out of him, antecedent
unto any Acts of his Divine Wisdom? Does he imagine that he ballanceth Probable
means for the attaining of an end, choosing some and rejecting others? Does he
surmise that the Acts of Divine Wisdom with respect unto the End and Means are
so really distinct, as the one to have a Priority in time before the others?
Alas, that Men should have the Confidence to publish such slight and crude
Imaginations! Again, the Scripture which so often expresses the Incarnation of
the Son of God, and the whole work of his Mediation thereon, as the Effect of
the Infinite Wisdom of God, as that wherein the Stores, Riches and Treasures of
it are laid forth, does no where so speak of it in comparison with other means
not so suited unto the same end, but absolutely and as it is in its own Nature;
unless i^ be when it is compared with those Typical Institutions which being
appointed to resemble it, some did rest in. And lastly, whereas there was but
this one way for the Redemption of Mankind and the Restoration of the Honor
of Gods Justice and Holiness, as he is the Supreme Lawgiver and Governor of
the Universe; and whereas this one way was not in the least pervious unto any
Created Understanding Angelical or Humane, nor could the least of its Concerns
have ever entered into the Hearts of any, nor it may be shall they ever know, or
be able to find it out unto perfection, but it will be left the Object of their
Admiration unto Eternity; if this Author can see no Wisdom or no great Wisdom
in the finding out and appointing of this way, who can help it? I wish he would
more diligently attend unto their Teachings who are able to instruct him
better, and from whom, as having no prejudice against them, he may be willing
to Learn.

But this is the least Part of what this worthy Censurer of Theological
Discourses rebukes and corrects. For, whereas I had said that we might Learn
our Disability to answer the mind and will of God in all or any part of the
obedience he requires, that is, without Christ, or out of him; he adds, that
is, that it is impossible for us to do any thing that is Good, but we must be
acted like Machines by an External Force, by the irresistible Power of the
Grace and Spirit of God. This I am sure is a new Discovery, we Learn no such
thing from the Gospel, and I do not see how he proves it from an Aquaintance
with Christ. But if he intends what he speaks, we can do no good but must be
acted like Machines by an External Force, and charge this on me, it is a
false accusation proceeding from Malice or Ignorance or a Mixture of both. If
he intend that we can of our selves do any thing that is spiritually good and
acceptable before God, without the efficacious working of the Spirit and Grace
of God in us, which I only deny, He is a Pelagian, and stands anathematized by
many Councils of the Ancient Church. And for what is my Judgment about the
Impotency that is in us by Nature unto any Spiritual Good, the Necessity of the
Effectual Operation of the Spirit of God in and to our Conversion, with his
Aids and Assistances of Actual Grace in our whole Course of Obedience, which is
no other but that of the Ancient Church, the most Learned Fathers, and the
Church of England it self in former days, I have now sufficiently declared and
confirmed it in another Discourse, whither this Author is remitted either to
Learn to speak Honestly of what he opposes, or to understand it better, or to
Answer it if he can,

He adds! But still there is a more Glorious Discovery than this behind, and
that is, the Glorious End whereunto sin is appointed and ordained (I suppose he
means by God) is discovered in Christ, viz. For the Demonstration of God's
Vindictive Justice, in measuring out to it a meet Recompense of Reward; and for
the Praise of God*s Glorious Grace in the Pardon and Forgiveness of it; that
is, that it could not be known how Just and severe God is, but by punishing
Sin, nor how Good and Gracious God is, but by pardoning of it; and therefore
lest his Justice and Mercy should never be known to the World he appoints and
ordains Sin to this End; That is, Decrees that Men shall Sin that he may make
some of them the Vessels of his Wrath and the Examples of his fierce Vengeance
and Displeasure, and others the Vessels of his Mercy, to the Praise and Glory
of his free Grace in Christ. This indeed is such a Discovery, as Nature and
Revelation could not make, page 51. which in the next Page he calls God's
truckling and bartering with Sin and the Devil for his Glory.

Although there is nothing in the words here reported as mine, which is not
capable of a fair Defense, seeing it is expressly affirmed, that God set forth
his Son to be a Propitiation to declare his Righteousness, yet I know not how
it came to pass that I had a mind to turn unto the Passage it self in my
Discourse, which I had not done before on any occasion, as not supposing that
he would falsify my Words, with whom it was so easy to pervert my meaning at
any Time, and to reproach what he could not confute. But that I may give a
Specimen of this Man's Honesty and Ingenuity, I shall transcribe the Passage
which he excepts against, because I confess it gave me some surpr^sal upon its
first Perusal. My words are these. There is a Glorious End whereunto Sin is
appointed and ordained, discovered in Christ, that others are unacquainted
withal. Sin in its own Nature tends merely to the Dishonor of God, the
Debasement of his Majesty and the Ruin of the Creature in whom it is. Hell it
self is but the filling of wretched Creatures with the Fruit of their own
devices. The Comminations and Threats of God in the Law do manifest one other
end of it, even the Demonstration of the Vindictive Justice of God in measuring
out unto it a meet Recompense of Reward, But here the Law stays, and with it
all other Light, and Discovers no other Use or End of it at all. In the Lord
Jesus Christ there is the Manifestation of another and more Glorious End, to
wit, the Praise of Gods Glorious Grace in the Pardon and Forgiveness of it. God
having taken order in Christ, that that thing which tended merely to his
Dishonor, should be managed to his Infinite Glory, and that which of all
things he desires to exalt, even that he may be known and believed to be a God
Pardoning Iniquity Transgression and Sin. Such was my Ignorance, that I did not
think that any Christian, unless he were a professed Socinian, would ever have
made Exceptions against any thing in this Discourse, the whole of it being
openly proclaimed in the Gospel and confirmed in the particulars by sundry
Texts of Scripture, quoted in the Margent of my Book, which this Man took no
notice of. For the Advantage he would make from the Expression about the End
whereunto Sin is Appointed and Ordained, it is Childish and Ridiculous. For
every one who is not wilfully blind, must see that by Ordained I intended not
any Ordination as to the Futurition of Sin, but the Disposal of Sin to its
Proper End being Committed, or to ordain it unto its End upon a Supposition of
its Being, which quite spoils this Authors ensuing Harangue. But my Judgment in
this matter is better expressed by another than I am able to do it my self, and
therefore in his words I shall represent it. It is Augustine, Says he,
Saluberrime confitemur quod rectissime credimus, Deum Dominumque rerum omnium
qui creavit omnia bona valde, and mala ex bonis exortura esse praescivit, and
scivit magis ad suam omnipotentissimam bonitatem pertinere, etiam de malis
benefacere, quam mala esse non sinere; sic ordinasse Angelorum and hominum
vitam, ut in ea prius ostenderet quid posset eorum liberum Arbitrinm, deinde
quid posset suae Gratiae beneficium Justitiaeque judicium.

This our Author would have to be God's bartering with Sin and the Devil for
his Glory; the bold impiety of which expression among many others, for whose
necessary expression I crave pardon, manifests with what frame of Spirit, with
what Reverence of God himself and all holy things, this Discourse is managed.

But it seems I add, that the Demonstration of God's Justice in Measuring out
unto Sin a meet Recompense of Reward is Discovered in Christ, as this Author
says. Let him read again; The Comminations and Threatenings of God in the Law,
etc. If this Man were acquainted with Christ, he could not but Learn somewhat
more of Truth and Modesty unless he be wilfully stupid. But what is the Crime
of this Paragraph? That which it teaches is, that Sin in its own Nature has
no End, but the dishonor of God, and the Eternal Ruin of the Sinner. That by
the Sentence and Curse of the Law God has manifested that he will Glorify his
Justice in the Punishing of it, as also that in and through Jesus Christ he
will Glorify Grace and Mercy in its Pardon on the Terms of the Gospel. What
would he be at? If he have a mind to quarrel the Bible, and to conflict the
Fundamental Principles of Christianity, to what purpose does he cavil at my
obscure Discourses, when the proper Object of his Displeasure lies plainly
before him.

Let us proceed yet a little farther with our Author, although I confess my
self to be already utterly wearied with the Perusal of such Vain and Frivolous
Imaginations. Yet thus he goes on page 53. Thus much for the Knowledge of our
selves with respect to Sin which is hid only in the Lord Christ. But then we
Learn what our Righteousness is, wherewith we must appear before God, from an
Acquaintance with Christ. We have already Learned how unable we are to make
atonement for our Sins, without which they can never be forgiven, and how
unable we are to do any thing that is Good, and yet nothing can deliver us from
the Justice and Wrath of God but a full satisfaction for our sins, and nothing
can give us a Title to a Reward but a perfect and unsinning Righteousness. What
should we do in this Case? how shall we escape Hell, or get to Heaven, when we
can neither Expiate for our part Sins or do any Good for the Time to come? Why,
here we are relieved again by an Acquaintance with Christ. His death Expiates
former Iniquities, and removes the whole guilt of Sin. But this is not enough,
that we are not Guilty, we must also be actually Righteous, not only all Sin is
to be answered for, but all Righteousness is to be fulfilled. Now this
Righteousness we find only in Christ, we are reconciled to God by his Death,
and saved by his Life. That actual Obedience he yielded to the whole Law of God
is that Righteousness whereby we are saved; we are Innocent by Virtue of his
Sacrifice and Expiation and righteous with his Righteousness.

What is here interposed, that we cannot do any Good for the Time to come, must
be interpreted of our selves without the Aid or Assistance of the Grace of God.
And the Things here reported by this Author, are so expressed and represented,
to expose them to Reproach and Scorn, to have them esteemed not only false but
ridiculous. But whether he be in his Wits or no, or what he intends so to
traduce and scoff at the Fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel, I profess I know
not. What is it he would deny? What is it he would assert? Are we able to make
an Atonement for our Sins? Can we be forgiven without an Atonement? Can we of
our selves do any good without the Aid and Assistance of Grace? Can any Thing
we do be a full Satisfaction for our Sins, or deliver us from the wrath of God*
that is the Punishment due to our Sins? Does not the Death of Christ expiate
former Iniquities, and remove the whole Guilt of Sin? Is the contrary to these
things the Doctrine of the Church of England? Is this the Religion which is
Authorized to be Preached, and are these the Opinions that are Licensed to be
publshed unto all the World? But as I observed before, these things are other
Men's Concernment more than mine, and with them I leave them. But I have said,
as he quotes the Place, that we are reconciled to God by the Death of Christ,
and saved by his Life, that actual Obedience which he yielded to the whole Law
of God. As the former part of these words are expressly the Apostles, Romans 5.10.
and so produced by me; so the next words I add, are these of the same Apostle,
if so be we are found in him, not having on our own Righteousness which is of
the Law, but the Righteousness which is of God by Faith; which he may do well
to consider, and answer when he can.

Once more and I shall be beholding to this Author for a little respite of
severity, whilst he diverts to the Magisterial Reproof of some other persons.
Thus then he proceeds, page 55. The third part of our Wisdom is to walk with
God, and to that is required Agreement, Acquaintance, a Way, Strength,
Boldness, and aiming at the same End, and all these with the Wisdom of them are
hid in Jesus Christ. So far are my words, to which he adds. The sum of which in
short is this, that Christ having expiated our Sins, and fulfilled all
Righteousness for us, though we have no personal Righteousness of our own, but
are as contrary unto God as Darkness is to Light, and Death to Life, and an
Universal Pollution and Defilement, to an Universal and Glorious Holiness, and
Hatred to Love, yet the Righteousness of Christ is a sufficient, nay the only
Foundation of our Agreement, and upon that of our walking with God; though St.
John tells us if we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we
lie and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Light, as God is in the Light,
then have we fellowship one with another, and then the Blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanses us from all Sins, 1 John Chap. 1. v. 6, 7. And our only
Acquaintance with God, and Knowledge of him is hid in Christ, which his Word
and Works could not discover, as you heard above. And he is the only way
wherein we must walk with God, and we receive all our strength from him, and he
makes us bold and confident too, having removed the Guilt of Sin, that now we
may look Justice in the Face, and whet our Knife at the Counter-Door, all our
Debts being discharged by Christ, as these bold Acquaintances and Familiars of
Christ use to speak. And in Christ we design the same End that God does, which
is the Advancement of his own Glory, that is, I suppose by trusting unto the
Expiation and Righteousness of Christ for Salvation, without doing any thing
our selves, we take Care that God shall not be wronged of the Glory of his free
Grace, by a Competition of any Merits and Deserts of our own.

What the Author affi^ms to be the sum of my Discourse, in that Place which
indeed he does not transcribe, is as to his Affirmation of it as contrary to
God as Darkness is to Light, or Death to Life, or Falsehood to the Truth, that
is, it is Flagitiously false. That there is any Agreement with God, or walking
with God for any Men who have no Personal Righteousness of their own, but are
contrary to God, etc. I never thought, I never wrote, nor any thing that should
give the least Countenance unto a suspicion to that Purpose. The necessity of
an Habitual and Actual Personal Inherent Righteousness, of Sanctification and
Holiness, of Gospel-Obedience, of Fruitfulness in Good Works, unto all who
intend to walk with God or come to the Enjoyment of him, I have asserted and
proved with other manner of Arguments than this Author is acquainted withal.
The Remainder of his Discourse in this Place is composed of Immorality and
Profaneness. To the First I must refer his Charge, that our only Acquaintance
with God and Knowledge of him, is hid in Christ, which his Word could not
discover; as he again expresses it, page 98, 99. But that the Reverend Doctor,
confessed the plain Truth, that their Religion is wholly owing to an
Acquaintance with the Person of Christ, and could never have been clearly and
savingly Learned from his Gospel, had they not first grown acquainted with his
Person, which is plainly false. I own no Knowledge of God, nor of Christ, but
what is revealed in the Word, as was before declared. And unto the other Head
belongs the most of what ensues. For what is the intendment of those Reproaches
which are cast on my supposed Assertions? Christ is the only way wherein or
whereby we must walk with God: Yes, so he says, I am the way, there is no
coming to God but by me; he having consecrated for us in himself a New and
Living Way of drawing nigh to God. We receive all our strength from him, Yes
For he says without me ye can do nothing. He makes us bold and confident also,
having removed the Guilt of Sin; So the Apostle tells us, Heb. 10.19, 20, 21,
22. What then? What follows upon these plain Positive Divine Assertions of the
Scripture? Why then we may look J^stice in the Face, and whet our Knife at the
Counter-Door. Goodly Son of the Church of England; Not that I impu^e these
Profane Scoffings unto the Church i^self, which I shall never do until it be
discovered that the Rulers of it do give approbation to such Abominations; But
I would mind the Man of his Relation to that Church which to my Knowledge
teaches better Learning and Manners.

From page 57. to the End of his second Section, page 75. he gives us a Scheme
of Religion which in his Scoffing Language, he says, Men Learn from an
Acquaintance with the Person of Christ, and affirms that there needs no more to
Expose it to Scorn with considering Men than his proposal of it, which therein
he owns to be his Design. I know not any peculiar concernment of mine therein,
until he comes toward the Close of it which I shall particularly consider. But
the Substance of the Religion which he thus avowedly attempts to expose to
scorn, is the Doctrine of God's Eternal Election; of his Infinite Wisdom in
sending his Son to declare his Righteousness for the forgiveness of Sins, or in
satisfying his Justice, that Sin might be pardoned to the praise of the Glory
of his Grace; of the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto them tha^
do believe; of a sense of Sin, Humiliation for it, looking unto Christ for Life
and Salvation as the Israelites looked up to the Brazen Serpent in the
Wilderness; of going to Christ by Faith for healing our Natures and cleansing
our sins, with some other Doctrines of the same Importance. These are the
Principles which according to his Ability he Sarcastically traduceth and
endeavors to reflect Scorn upon, by the false Representation of some of
them, and debasing others, with an intermixture of Vile and Profane
Expressions. It is not impossible but that some or other may judge it their
Duty to rebuke this horrible (and yet were it not for the Ignorance and
Profaneness of some men's minds, every way contemptible) Petulancy. For my part
I have other things to do, and shall only add that I know no other Christian
State in the World wherein such Discourses would be allowed to pass under the
signature of Public Authority. Only I wish the Author more Modesty and
Sobriety than to attempt, or suppose he shall succeed, in exposing to Scorn the
avowed Doctrine in general of the Church wherein he Lives, and which has in
the parts of it been asserted and defended by the Greatest and most Learned
Prelates thereof, in the foregoing Ages, such as Jewel, Whitgift, Abbot,
Morton, Usher, Hall, Davenant, Prideaux, etc. With the most Learned Persons of
its Communion, as Reynolds, Whittaker, Hooker, Sutcliff, etc. and others
innumerable* testified unto in the Name of this Church by the Divines, sent by
Public Authority to the Synod of Dort, taught by the Principal Practical
Divines of this Nation, and maintained by the most Learned of the Dignified
Clergy at this Day. He is no doubt at Liberty to dissent from the Doctrine of
the Church and of all the Learned Men thereof: But for a young Man to suppose,
that with a few loose idle words he shall expose to Scorn, that Doctrine which
the persons mentioned and others innumerable, have not only explained,
confirmed, and defended with pains indefatigable, all kind of Learning and
Skill, Ecclesiastical, Philosophical, and Theological, in Books and Volumes
which the Christian World as yet knows, peruseth and prizeth, but also lived
long in fervent Prayers to God for the Revelation of his Mind and Truth unto
them, and in the Holy Practice of Obedience suited unto the Doctrines they
Professed, is somewhat remote from that Christian Humility which he ought not
only to exercise in himself, but to give an Example of unto Others. But if this
be the Fruit of despising the Knowledge of the Person of Chrst, of the
Necessity of his Satisfaction, of the Imputation of his Righteousness, of Union
unto his Person as our Head, of a sense of the Displeasure of God due to Sin,
of the Spirit of Bondage and Adoption, of the Corruption of Nature, and our
Disability to do any thing that is spiritually Good without the effectual Ayds
of Grace; If these I say, and the like Issues of appearing Pride and Elation of
Mind, be the Fruit and Consequent of rejecting these Principles of the Doctrine
of the Gospel, it manifests that there is, and will be a proportion between the
Errors of Men's Minds, and the depravation of their Affections. It were a most
easy task to go over all the particulars mentioned by him, and to manifest how
foully he has prevaricated in their Representation, how he has cast contempt
on some Duties of Religion indispensibly necessary unto Salvation, and brought
in the very words of the Scripture and that in the true proper sense and
intendment of them, according to the Judgment, of all Christians, Ancient and
Modern, as that of Looking to Christ, as the Israelites looked to the Brazen
Serpent in the Wilderness, to bear a share and part in his Scorn and Contempt;
as also to defend and vindicate not his odious disingenious Expressions, but
what he invidiously designeth to Expose, beyond his Ability to gainsay or with
any pretense of sober Learning to reply unto. But I give it up into the hands
of those who are more concerned in the Chastisment of such Imaginations. Only I
cannot but tell this Author what I have Learned by long Observation, Namely,
that those who in opposing others make it their Design to, and place their
Confidence in false Representations and invidions Expressions of their
Judgments and Opinions, waving a true Stating of the things in Difference, and
weighing of the Arguments wherewith they are confirmed, whatever pretense they
may make of Confidence and Contempt of them with whom they have to do; Yet this
way of writing proceeds from a secret sense of their disability to maintain
their own Opinions, or to reply to the Reasonings of their Adversaries in a
fair and lawful Disputation; or from such depraved Affections as are sufficient
to deter any sober Person from the least Communication in those Principles
which are so pleaded for. And the same I must say of that kind of Writing which
in some late Authors fills up almost every Page in their Books, which beyond a
Design to load the persons of Men with Reproaches and Calumnies, consist only
in the Collecting of passages here and there, up and down, out of the writings
of others, which as cut off from the Body of their Discourses and Design of the
Places which they belong unto, may with a little Artifice either of Addition or
Detraction, with some false Glosses, whereof we shall have an immediate
Instance, be represented weak or untrue or improper or some way or other
obnoxious to Censure. When Diligence, Modesty, Love of Truth, Sobriety, true
use of Learning, shall again visit the World in a more plentiful manner, though
Differences should continue amongst us; yet men will be enabled to manage them
honestly, without contracting so much Guilt on themselves, or giving such
fearful Offense and Scandal unto others: But I return.

That wherein I am particularly concerned is the Close wherewith he winds up
this Candid Ingenious Discourse, page 74. He quotes my Words, That the Soul
consents to take Christ on his own Terms to save him in his own way: and says,
Lord I would have had thee, and Salvation in my way, that it might have been
partly of mine Endeavors, and as it were by the works of the Law (that is by
obeying the Laws of the Gospel) but I am now willing to receive Thee, and to be
saved in thy way, merely by Grace (that is without doing any thing, without
obeying Thee). The most contented Spouse, certainly that ever was in the World,
to subm^t to such hard conditions as to be saved for nothing. But what a pretty
Complement does the Soul make to Christ after all this, when she adds; And
though I would have walked according to my own mind, yet now I wholly give up
my self to be ruled by the Spirit.

If the Reader will be at the pains to look on the Discourse whence these
passages are taken, I shall desire no more of his favor but that he profess
himself to be a Christian and then let him freely pronounce whether he find any
thing in it obnoxious to Censure. Or I desire that any Man who has not
forfeited all Reason and Ingenuity unto Faction and Party, if he differ from
me, truly to state wherein, and oppose what I have said, with an Answer unto
the Testimonies wherewith it is confirmed, referred unto in the Margent of my
Discourse. But the way of this Authors proceeding, if there be no plea to be
made for it from his Ignorance and unacquaintedness not only with the Person of
Christ, but with most of the other things he undertakes to write about, is
altogether unexcusable. The way whereby I have expressed the consent of the
Soul in the receiving of Jesus Christ to be Justified, Sanctified, Saved by
him, I still avow, as suited unto the mind of the Holy Ghost, and the
Experience of them that really believe. And whereas I added that before
Believing the Soul did seek for Salvation by the works of the Law, as it is
natural unto all, and as the Holy Ghost affirms of some, whose words alone I
used and expressly quoted that Place from whence I took them, namely Romans 9.31,
32. This Man adds as an Exposition of that Expression, that is by obeying of
the Laws of the Gospel. But he knew that these were the words of the Apostle,
or he did not? If he did not, nor would take notice of them so to be although
directed to the place from whence they are taken, it is evident how meet he is
to debate matters of this Nature and Concernment, and how far he is yet from
being in danger to Pore out his Eyes in reading the Scripture, as he pretends.
If he did know them to be his words, why does he put such a sense upon them as
in his own Apprehension is derogatory to Gospel-obedience? Whatever he thught
of before and, it is likely he will now say, that it is my sense, and not the
Apostles which he intends. But how will he prove that I intended any other
sense than that of the Apostle? How should this appear? Let him if he can,
produce any Word in my whole Discourse intimating any other sense. Nay, it is
evident that I had no other intention but only to refer unto that Place of the
Apostle and the proper sense of it, which is to express the Mind and actings of
those who being ignorant ignorant of the Righteousness of God, go about to
establish their own Righteousness, as He farther explains himself, Romans 10.3,
4. That I could not intend Obedience unto the Laws of the Gospel is so evident
that nothing but abominable Prejudice or ignorance could hinder any Man from
discerning it. For that Faith which I expressed by the Soul's consent to take
Christ as a Savior and a Ruler, is the very first Act of Obedience unto the
Gospel; So that therein or thereon to exclude Obedience unto the Gospel, is to
deny what I assert, which under the favor of this Author I understand my self
better than to do. And as to all other Acts of Obedience unto the Laws of the
Gospel, following and proceeding from sincere Believing, it is openly evident
that I could not understand them, when I spoke only of what was antecedent unto
them. And if this Man knows not what transactions are in the Minds of many
before they do come unto the Acceptance of Christ on his own Terms, or believe
in him according to the Tenor of the Gospel, there is Reason to pity the
People that are committed unto his Care and Instruction, what regard soever
ought to be had unto himself. And his Pitiful trifling in the Exposition he
adds of this Passage to be saved without doing any thing, without obeying Thee,
and the Law, do but increase the Guilt of his Prevarications. For the words
immediately added in my Discourse are, and although I have walked according
unto mine own Mind, yet now I wholly give up my self to be ruled by thy Spirit,
which unto the Understanding of all Men who understand any thing in these
Matters, signify no less than an Engagement unto the Universal relinquishment
of Sin, and entire Obedience unto Jesus Christ in all things. But this faith
He, is a pretty Complement that the Soul makes to Christ after all. But why is
this to be esteemed only a pretty Complement? It is spoken at the same Time,
and as it were with the same Breath, there being in the Discourse no Period
between this Passage and that before. And why must it be esteemed quite of
another Nature, so that herein the Soul should only Complement, and be real in
what is before expressed? what if one should say it was real only in this
latter Expression and Engagement, that the former was only a Pretty Complement?
May it not with respect unto my sense and intention (from any thing in my words
or that can be gathered from them or any Circumstances of the Place) be spoken
with as much regard unto Truth and Honesty? What Religion these Men are of I
know not; if it be such as teaches them these Practices and Countenanceth them
in them, I openly declare that I am not of it, nor would be so for all that
this World can afford. I shall have done, when I have desired him to take
notice, that I not only believe and maintain the necessity of Obedience unto
all the Laws, Precepts, Commands, and Institutions of the Gospel, of Universal
Holiness, the Mortification of all Sin, Fruitfulness in good Works, in all that
intend or design Salvation by Jesus Christ, but also have proved and confirmed
my Persuasion and Assertions by better and more Cogent Arguments than any,
which by his Writings he seems as yet to be acquainted withal. And unless he
can prove that I have spoken or written any thing to the contrary, or he can
disprove the Arguments whereby I have confirmed it, I do here declare him a
person altogether unfit to be dealt withal about things of this Nature, his
Ignorance or Malice being Invincible; nor shall I on any Provocation ever
hereafter take notice of him until he has mended his Manners.

His third Section page 76. consists of three parts; First, that some (wherein
it is apparent, that I am chiefly if not only intended) do found a Religion
upon a pretended acquaintance with Christ*s Person without and besides the
Gospel, whereunto he opposes his running Title of, no Acquaintance with Christ
but by Revelation. Secondly, a Supposition of a Scheme of Religion drawn from
the Knowledge of Christ's Person whereunto he opposes another which he he
judges better. Thirdly, an Essay to draw up the whole Plot and Design of
Christianity with the method of the Recovery of Sinners unto God. In the first
of these I suppose that I am, if not solely, yet principally intended;
especially considering what he affi^ms, page 98, 99 Namely, that I plainly
confess our Religion is wholly owing unto acquaintance with the Person of
Christ, and could never have been clearly and savingly Learned from the Gospel
had we not first grown acquainted with his Person. Now herein there is an
especial Instance of that Truth and Honesty wherewith my Writings are
entertained by this sort of Men. It is true, I have asserted that it is
necessary for Christians to know Jesus Christ, to be acquainted with his
Person, that is (as I have fully and largely declared it in the Discourse
excepted against) the Glory of his Divine Nature, the Purity of his Humane, the
Infinite Condescension of his Person in the Assumption of our Nature, his Love
and Grace, etc. as is at large there declared. And now I add that he by whom
this is denied, is no Christian. Secondly I have taught that by this Knowledge
of the Person of Christ, or an Understanding of the great Mystery of Godliness,
God Manifested in the Flesh, which we ought to pray for and labor after, we
come more fully and clearly to understand sundry other important Mysteries of
Heavenly Truth, which without the Knowledge of Christ we cannot attain unto.
And how impertinent this Man's Exceptions are against this Assertion we have
seen already. But Thirdly, that this Knowledge of Christ or Acquaintance with
him, is to be attained before we come to know the Gospel, or by any other Means
than the Gospel, or is any other but the Declaration that is made thereof in
and by the Gospel was never thought, spoken, or written by me, and is here
falsely supposed by this Author as elsewhere falsely charged on me. And I again
challenge him to produce any one Letter or Tittle out of any of my Writings to
give Countenance unto this frontless Calumny. And therefore although I do not
like his Expression page 77. Whoever would understand the Religion of our
Savior, must learn it from his Doctrine, and not from his Person, for many
Reasons I could give; yet I believe no less than he, that the efficacy of
Christ's Mediation depending on God's Appointment, can be known only by
Revelation, and that no Man can draw any one Conlusion from the Person of
Christ, which the Gospel has not expressly taught; because we can know no more
of its excellency, worth and works than what is there revealed; whereby he may
see how ^iserably Ill Will, Malice, or Ignorance have betrayed him into the
futilous pains of writing this Section upon a contrary supposition falsely
imputed unto me. And as for his drawing Schemes of Religion I must tell him,
and let him disprove it if he be able, I own no Religion, no Article of Faith,
but what are taught expressly in the Scripture, mostly confirmed by the ancient
General Councils of the Primitive Church, and the Writings of the most Learned
Fathers against all sorts of Heret^cks, especially the Gnostics, Photinians
and Pelagians, consonant to the Articles of the Church of England, and the
Doctrine of all the Reformed Ch^rches of Europe. And if in the Exposition of
any place of Scripture I dissent from any, that for the Substance of it own the
Religion I do, I do it not without Cogent Reasons from the Scripture it self;
and where, in any opinions which Learned Men have, and it may be always had
different Apprehensions about, which has not been thought to prejudice the
Unity of Faith amongst them, I hope I do endeavor to manage that dissent with
that Modesty and Sobriety which becomes me. And as for the Schemes, Plots, or
Designs of Religion or Christianity given us by this Author, and owned by him,
it being taken pretendedly from the Person of Christ, when it is hoped that he
may have a better to give us from the Gospel, seeing he has told us we must
Learn our Religion from his Doctrine and not from his Person; besides that it
is liable unto Innumerable Exceptions in particular which may easily be given
in against it, by such as have nothing else to do, w^ereas it makes no mention
of the effectual Grace of Christ and the Gospel for the Conversion and
Sanctification of Sinners, and the necessity thereof unto all Acts of Holy
Obedience, it is merely Pelagian, and stands Anathematised by sundry Councils
of the Ancient Church. I shall not therefore concern my self farther in any
Passages of this Section, most of them wherein it reflects on others standing
in competition for Truth and Ingenuity with the Foundation and Design of the
whole. Only I shall say that the Passage of 88, 89. This made the Divine
Goodness so restlesly zealous and concerned for the Recovery of Mankind;
various ways be attempted in former Ages, but with little success, as I
observed before, but at last God sent his own Son our Lord Jesus Christ into
the World, without a very Cautious Explanation and Charitable Construction, is
false, scandalous and blasphemous. For allow this Author, who contends so
severely for Propriety of Expressions against Allusions and Metaphors, to say
that the Divine Goodness was restlesly Zealous and Concerned (for indeed such
is our Weakness that whether we will or no, we must sometimes learn and teach
Divine things, in such words as are suited to convey an Apprehension of them
unto our Minds, though in their Application unto the Divine Nature, they are
incapable of being understood in the Propriety of their Signification, though
this be as untowardly expressed as any thing I have of late met withal) yet
what color can be put upon, what excuse can be made for this Doctrine, That
God in former Ages by various ways attempted the Recovery of mankind but with
little success I know not. Various attempts in God for any End without Success,
do not lead the Mind into right Notions of his Infinite Wisdom and Omnipotency.
And that God by any way at any time attempted the Recovery of Mankind
distinctly and separately from the sending of his Son, is lewdly false.

In the greatest part of his fourth Section entitled, how Men pervert the
Scripture to make it comply with their fancy, I am not much concerned, save
that the Foundation of the whole and that which animates his Discourse from
first to last is laid in an Impudent Calumny, namely, that I declare that our
Religion is wholly owing to an acquaintance with the Person of Christ, and
could never have been clearly and savingly Learned from his Gospel, had we not
first grown acquainted with his Person. This shameless Falsehood is that alone
whence he takes occasion and confidence to reproach my self and others, to
condemn the Doctrine of all the Reformed Churches, and openly to traduce and
vilify the Scripture it self. I shall only briefly touch on some of the
impotent dictates of this great Corrector of Divinity and Religion? His
Discourse of accommodating Scripture-Expressions to Men's own Dreamns, page 99,
100.101. being such as any Man may use concerning any other men on the like
occasion if they have a mind unto it, and intend to have no more regard to
their Consciences than some others seem to have, may be passed by, page 102. He
falls upon the ways of expounding Scripture among those whom he sets himself
against, and positively affirms, that there are two ways of it in great Vogue
among them. First, by the sound and Clink of the words and Phrases which, as he
says, is all some Men understand by keeping a Form of Sound words. (2) When
this will not do, they reason about the sense of them from their own
preconceived Notions and Opinions, and prove that this must be the meaning of
Scripture, because otherwise it is not reconcilable to their Dreams, which is
called expounding Scripture by the Analogy of Faith.

Thus far he; and yet we shall have the same Man not long hence pleading for
the Necessity of Holiness. But I wish for my part he would take notice, that I
despise that Holiness and the Principles of it, which will allow Men to Coin,
Invent and publish such notorious untruths against any sort of Men whatever.
And whereas by what immediately follows, I seem to be principally intended in
this Charge, as I know the Untruth of it, so I have published some Expositions
on some Parts of the Scripture to the Judgment of the Christian World, to which
I appeal from the Censures of this Man and his Companions, as also for those
which if I Live and God will I shall yet publish: and do declare that for
Reasons very satisfactory to my Mind, I will not come to him nor them, to learn
how to expound the Scripture.

But he will Justify his Charge by particular Instances, telling us, page 102.
Thus when Men are possessed with a Fancy of an acquaintance with Christ's
Person, then to know Christ can signify nothing else but to know his Person,
and all his Personal Excellencies, and Beauties, Fullness and Pretiousness,
etc. And when Christ is said to be made Wisdom to us, this is a plain proof
that we must Learn all our spiritual Wisdom from an acquaintance with his
Person* though some duller Men can understand no more by it than the Wisdom of
those Revelations Christ has made of God's Will to the World. I would beg of
this Man that if he has any regard unto the Honor of Christian Religion or
Care of his own Soul he would be tender in this matter, and not reflect with
his usual disdain upon the Knowledge of the Person of Christ. I must tell him
again, what all Chritians believe, Jesus Christ is Jesus Christ, the Eternal
Son of God Incarnate. The Person of Christ is Christ himself, and nothing else.
His personal Excellencies are the properties of his Person, as his two Natures
are united therein, and as he was thereby made Meet to be the Mediator between
God and Man. To know Christ in the Language of the Scripture, the whole Church
of God ancient and present, in Common Sense and Understanding, is to know the
Person of Christ as revealed and declared in the Gospel with respect unto the
Ends for which he is proposed and made known therein. And this Knowledge of
him, as it is accompanied with and cannot be without the Knowledge of his Mind
and Will declared in his Precepts, Promises and Institutions, is effectual to
work and produce in the Souls of them who so know him, that Faith in him, and
Obedience unto him, which he does require. And what would this Man have? He who
is otherwise minded has renounced his Christianity if ever he had any. And if
he be thus persuaded, to what purpose is it to set up and combat the Mormoes
and Chimaeras of his own Imagination? well then I do maintain that to know
Christ according to the Gospel, is to know the Person of Christ, for Christ and
his Person are the same. Would he now have me to prove this by Testimonies or
Arguments or the consent of the Ancient Church? I must beg his Excuse at
present and so for the future, unless I have occasion to deal with Gnostics,
Familists, or Quakers. And as for the latter Clause wherein Christ is said to
be made Wisdom unto us, he says, some Duller Men can understand no more by it
than the Wisdom of those Revelations Christ has made of God's will to the
World, who are dull Men indeed, and so let them pass.

His ensuing Discourses in page 103, 104 105. contain the Boldest Reflections
on; and openest Derisions of the Expressions and way of Teaching spiritual
things warranted in and by the Scripture, that to my Knowledge I ever read in a
Book Licensed to be Printed by public Authority. As in particular the
Expressions o^ Faith in Christ by coming unto him and receiving of him, which
are the Words of the Holy Ghost, and used by him in his Wisdom to instruct us
in the Nature of this Duty, are amongst others the Subjects of his Scorn* The
First part of it, though I remember not to have given any occasion to be
particularly concerned in it, I shall briefly consider, page 103. Thus when Men
have first Learned from an acquaintance with Christ, to place all their hopes
of Salvation in a personal Union with Christ, from whom they receive the free
Communications of Pardon and Grace, Righteousness and Salvation, what more
plain Proof can any Man who is resolved to believe this, desire of it than 1
John 5.12. He that has the Son has Life, and he that has not the Son has
not Life. And what can having the Son signify but having an Interest in him,
being made one with him, though some will be so perverse as to understand it of
believing, and having his Gospel. But the Phrase of having the Son confutes
that dull and Moral Interpretation, especially when we remember it is called,
being in Christ, and abiding in him, which must signify a very near Union
between Christ's Person and Us.

I suppose that Expression of Personal Union sprung out of Design, and not out
of Ignorance; for if I mistake not, he does somewhere in his Book take notice
that it is disclaimed, and only an Union of Believers with or unto the Person
of Christ asserted. Or if it be his mistake all comes to the same Issue.
Personal or Hypostatical Union is that of different Natures in the same Person,
giving them the same singular subsistence. This none Pretend unto with Jesus
Christ; but it is the Union of Bevers unto the Person of Christ which is
spiritual and Mystical, whereby they are in him and he in them, and so are one
with him, their Head, as Members of his Mystical Body, which is pleaded for
herein, with the free Communications of Grace, Righteousness and Salvation, in
the several and distinct ways whereby we are capable to receive them from him,
or be made partakers of them, we place all hopes of Salvation. And we do Judge
moreover that he who is otherwise minded must betake himself unto another
Gospel, for he completely renounceth that in our Bibles. Is this our Crime,
that which we are thus charged with, and trad^ced for? Is the Contrary hereunto
the Doctrine that the present Church of England approves and instructs her
Children in? Or does any Man think that we will be scared from our Faith and
Hope, by such weak and frivolous Attempts against them? Yea, but it may be, it
is not so much the thing it self, as the miserable Proof which we produce from
the Scripture in the Confirmation of it, for we do it from that of the Apostle
1 John 5.12. If he think that we prove these things only by this Testimony he
is mistaken at his wonted rate. Our Faith herein is built upon innumerable
express Testimonies of the Scripture, indeed the whole Revelation of the Will
of God and the way of Salvation by Jesus Christ in the Gospel. Those who prove
it also from this Text, have sufficient Ground and Reason for what they plead.
And notwithstanding the pleasant scoffing humor of this Author, we yet say
that it is Perverse Folly for any one to say, that the having of the Son or
Christ, expressed in the Text, does intend either the having an Interest in him
and Union with him, or the obeying of his Gospel, exclusively to the other;
these being inseparable and included in the same Expression. And as to what he
adds about being in Christ and abiding in him* which are the greatest
Privileges of Believers, and that as expressed in words taught by the Holy
Ghost, it is of the same strain of profaneness with much of what ensues, which
I shall not farther enquire into.

I find not my self concerned in his ensuing Talk, but only in one Reflection
on the words of the Scripture, and the Repetition of his old Putid and
shameless Calumny, page 108. until we come to page 126. Where he arraigns an
Occasional Discourse of mine about the Necessity of Holiness and good works,
wherein he has only filched out of the whole what he thought be could wrest
unto his End, and scoffingly descant upon. I shall therefore for once
transcribe the whole Passage as it lies in my Book, and refer it to the
Judgment of the Reader, page 206.

The second Objection is, that if the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ to
the Law, be imputed unto us, then what need we yield obedience our selves? To
this also I shall return answer as briefly as I can, in the ensuing
observations: Then

1. The placeing of our Gospel-Obedienceon the right foot of account, that it
may neithr be exalted into a State, Condition, Use, nor End, not given it of
God; nor any Reason, Cause, Motive, End, Necessity of it on the other hand,
taken away, weakened or impaired, is a matter of great importance. Some make our
Obedience, the works of Faith, our Works, the Matter or Cause of our
Justification; some the Condition of the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ, s^^^ the Qualification of the person Justified, on the one hand; some
exclude all the necessity of them, and turn the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness, on the other. To debate these Differences, is not my present
Business: only I say, on this and other Accounts, the right stating of our
Obedience, is of great importance as to our walking with God.

2. We do by no means, assign the same Place, Condition, State and Use, to the
Obedience of Christ imputed to us, and our Obedience performed to God. If we
did, they were really inconsistent. And therefore those who affirm that our
Obedience is the Condition or Cause of our Justification, do all of them deny
the Imputation of the Obedience of Christ unto us. The Righteousness of Christ
is imputed to us, as that on the account whereof we are Accepted, and esteemed
R^ghteous before God, and are really so, though not inherently. We are as truly
Righteous with the Obedience of Christ, imputed to us, as Adam was or could
have been by a complete Righteousness of his own performance. So Romans 5.18. By
his Obedience we are made Righteous; made so truly, and so accepted, as by the
Disobedience of Adam we are truly made Trespassers and so accounted. And this
is that which the Apostle desires to be found in, in opposition to his own
Righteousness Phil. 3.9. But our own Obedience is not the Righteousness
whereupon we are accepted and justified before God; although it be acceptable
to God, that we should abound therein. And this Distinction the Apostle does
evidently deliver and confirm, so as nothing can be more clearly revealed, Ephesians.
2.8, 9, 10. For by Grace we are saved through Faith, and this not of our
selves. It is the Gift of God. Not of works, lest any Man should boast. For we
are his workmanship, Created in Christ Jesus unto Good Works which God has
prepared that we should walk in them. We are saved, or Justified (for that it
is whereof the Apostle treats) by Grace through Faith, which receives Jesus
Christ and his Obedience, not of Works lest any Man should Boast: but what
Works are they which the Apostle intends? The Works of Believers, as in the
very beginning of the next words, is manifest; for we are; we Believers with
our Obedience and our Works, of whom I speak: yea, but what need then of Works;
need still there is, We are the Workmanship, etc. Two things the Apostle
intimates in these words.

1. A Reason why we cannot be saved by Works: Namely, because we do them not
in, or by our own strength, which is necessary we should do if we will be saved
by them, or Justified by them: but this is not so says the Apostle, for We are
the Workmanship of God, etc. all our Works are wrought in us, by full and
effectual undeserved Grace.

2. An Assertion of the Ncessity of good Works, notwithstanding that we are not
saved by them, and that is, that God has Ordained that we shall walk in them:
which is a sufficient Ground of our Obedience whatever be the Use of it.

If you will say then, what are the true and proper Gospel-Grounds, Reasons,
Uses, and Motives of our Obedience, whence the Necessity thereof may be
demonstrated, and our Souls be stirred up, to abound and be fruitful therein? I
say they are so many and ly so deep in the Mystery of the Gospel, and
Dispensation of Grace, spread themselves so throughout the whole Revelation of
the Will of God unto us, that to handle them fully and distinctly, and to give
them their due weight, is a thing that I cannot engage in, lest I should be
turned aside from what I principally intend. I shall only give you some brief
heads of what might at large be insisted on.

1. Our universal Obedience, and good Works, are indispensibly Necessary from
the Sovereign Appointment and Will of God: Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

1. In General: This is the Will of God even our Sanctification, or Holiness, 1
These. 4.3. This is that which God Wills, which he requires of us, that we be
Holy, that we be Obedient, that we do his Will as the Angels do in Heaven: The
Equity, Necessity, Profit and Advantage of this ground of our Obedience, might
at large be insisted on. And were there no more, this might suffice alone. If
it be the Will of God, it is our Duty.

1. The Father has Ordained or appointed it: It is the Will of the Father
Ephesians. ^.10. The Father is spoken of Personally; Christ being mentioned as
Mediator.

2. The Son has ordained and appointed it as Mediator, John 15.16. I have
Ordained you that you should bring forth Fruit, (of Obedience) and that it
should remain. And,

3. The Holy Ghost appoints and Ordains Believers to Works of Obedience and
Holiness, and to work Holiness in others: so in particular, Acts 13.2. He
appoints and designs Men to the great Work of Obedience in preaching the
Gospel, and in sinning Men sin against him.

2. Our Holiness, our Obedience, Work of Righteousness, is one Eminent and
Especial End of the peculiar Dispensation of Father, Son, and Spirit, in the
Business of Exalting the Glory of God in our Salvation: of the Electing Love of
the Father: the purchasing Love of the Son: and the Operative Love of the
Spirit.

1. It is a peculiar End of the Electing Love of the Father* Ephesians. 1.4. He
has chosen us that we should be Holy and unblameable. So, Isa. 4.3, 4. His aim
and design in choosing of us was, that we should be Holy, and unblameable
before him in Love. This he is to accomplish, and will bring about in them that
are his. He chooses us to Salvation, through the Sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the Truth: 2 These. 2.12. This the Father designed as the first
and immediate End of Electing Love; And proposes the consideration of that
Love, as a Motive to Holiness, 1 John 4.8, 9, 10.

2. It is so also of the Exceeding Love of the Son, whereof the Testimonies are
innumerable. I shall give but one or two, Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good Works. This was his Aim, his Design, in giving himself
for us: as Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Christ Loved the Church and gave himself for it,
that he might Sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word:
that he might present it to himself a Glorious Church, not having spot or
Wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be Holy and without blemish, 2
Cor. 5.15. Romans 6.5.

3. It is the very work of the Love of the Holy Ghost: his whole work upon us,
in us, for us consists in preparing of us for Obedience, enabling of us
thereunto, and bringing forth the fruits of it in us: and this he does in
opposition to a Righteousness of our own, either before it, or to be made up by
it: Tit. 3.5. I need not insist on this; The fruits of the Spirit in us are
known, Gal. 5.22.

And thus have we a twofold bottom of the Necessity of our Obedience, and
personal Holiness: God has appointed it: He requires it. And it is an eminent
immediate End of the distinct Dispensation of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in
the Work of our Salvation. If God's Sovereignty over us is to be owned; if his
Love toward us be to be regarded, if the whole Work of the ever-blessed
Trinity, for us, in us, be of any Moment, our Obedience is necessary.

3. It is Necessary in respect of the End thereof: and that whether you
consider God, our Selves, or the World.

1. The End of our obedience in respect of God, is his Glory and Honor, Mal.
1.6. This is God's Honor, all that we give him. It is true he will take his
Honor from the Stoutest and Proudest Rebel in the World: but all we give him,
is in our Obedience. The Glorifying of God by our Obedience, is all that we are
or can be. Particularly,

1. It is the Glory of the Father, Mat. 5.16. Let your Light so shine before
Men, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. By our walking in the Light of Faith, does Glory arise to the Father.
The Fruits of his Love, of his Grace, of his Kindness, are seen upon us, and
God is Glorified in our Behalf: And

2. The Son is Glorified thereby. It is the Will of God, that as all Men Honor
the Father, so should they Honor the Son, John 5.23. and how is this done? by
believing in him, John 14.1. obeying of him. Hence, John 17.10. He says he is
Glorified in Believers: and prays for an increase of Grace and Union for them,
that he may yet be more Glorified, and all might know that as Mediator he was
sent of God.

3. The Spirit is Glorified also by it: He is grieved by our Disobedience, Ephesians.
4.30. And therefore his Glory is in our bringing forth Fruit. He dwells in us
as in his Temple, which is not to be defiled: Holiness becomes his Habitation
for ever.

Now if this that has been said, be not sufficient to evince a necessity of
our Obedience, we must suppose our selves to speak with a sort of Men, who
regard neither the Sovereignty, nor Love, nor Glory of God, Father, Son, or
Holy Ghost. Let Men say what they please, though our Obedience should be all
lost, and never regarded, which is impossible, (for God is not unjust to forget
our Labor of Love) yet here is a sufficient bottom, ground and Reason of
yielding more Obedience unto God, than ever we shall do, whilst we live in this
World. I speak also only of Gospel-Grounds of Obedience, and not of those that
are Natural and Legal, which are indispensible to all Mankind.

2. The End in respect of our selves immediately, is threefold, 1. Honor. 2.
Peace. 3. Usefulness.

1. Honor, It is by Holiness that we are made like, unto God, and his Image is
renewed again in us. This was our Honor at our Creation; this exalted us above
all our Fellow Creatures here below; we were made in the Image of God. This we
lost by Sin, and became like the Beasts that perish. To this Honor of
Conformity to God, of bearing his Image, are we exalted again by Holiness
alone. Be ye Holy says God, because I am Holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. And be you perfect,
that is, in doing good, as your Heavenly Father is Perfect, Math. 5.48 in a
Likeness and Conformity to him. And herein is the Image of God renewed: Ephesians.
4.23, 24. Therein we put on the New Man which after God is created in
Righteousness and Holiness of Truth. This was that which originally was
attended with Power and Dominion; is still all that is Beautiful or Comely in
the World; How it makes Men Honorable and Precious in the sight of God, of
Angels, of Men, how alone it is that which is not despised, which is of Price
before the Lord; what contempt and Scorn He has of them in whom it is not, in
what Abomination he has them and all their ways, might easily be evinced.

2. Peace; by it we have Communion with God, wherein Peace alone is to be
enjoyed. The wicked are like a troubled Sea that cannot rest, and there is no
Peace to them, says my God: Isa. 48.21. There is no Peace, Rest, or Quietness,
in a Distance, Separation, or Alienation from God. He is the Rest of our Souls:
In the Light of his Countenance is Life and Peace. Now if we walk in the Light
as he is Light, we have Fellowship one with another, 1 John 1.7. and verily our
Fellowship is with the Father, and with the Son Jesus Christ, v. 3. He that
walks in the Light of new Obedience, he has Communion with God, and in his
Presence is fullness of Joy for ever: without is there nothing but darkness, and
wandering and Confusion.

3. Usefulness; a man without Holiness is good for nothing: Ephraim, says the
Propbet, is an empty Vine, that brings forth Fruit to it self. And what is such
a Vine good for? Nothing, says another Prophet; a man cannot make a pin of it,
so much as to hang a Vessel on: A barren tree is good for nothing, but to be
cut down for the Fire. Notwithstanding the seeming Usefulness of men, who serve
the Providence of God in their Generations, I could easily manifest that the
World and the Church might want them and that indeed in themselves they are
Good for nothing: only the Holy man is commune bonum.

3. The End of it in respect of others in the world is manifold.

1. It serves to the Conviction, and stopping the mouths of some of the Enemies
of God, both here and hereafter. Here 1. Pet. 3.16. Keeping a good Conscience,
that wherein they speak against you as Evil Doers they may be ashamed,
beholding your good Conversation in Christ. By our keeping of a good
Conscience, Men will be made ashamed of their false Accusations. That whereas
their Malice and Hatred of the ways of God, has provoked them to speak all
manner of evil of the Profession of them; by the Holiness and Righteousness of
the Saints, they are convinced, and made ashamed, as a Thief is when he is
taken, and driven to acknowledge that God is amongst them, and that they are
wicked themselves, Joh. 17.23.2. Hereafter it is said that the Saints shall
judge the World: It is on this as well as upon other Considerations. Their Good
Works, their Righteousness, their Holiness shall be brought forth, and
manifested to all the World, and the Righteousness of God's Judgments against
Wicked Men, be thence evinced; See, says Christ; these are they that I own,
whom you so despised and abhorred; and see their Works following them, this and
that they have done, when you wallowed in your Abominations, Math. 25.42, 43.

2. The Conversion of others, 1 Pet. 2.12. Having your Conversation honest
among the Gentiles, that wherein they speak against you as Evil Doers,
beholding your good works, they may Glorify God in the day of Visitation, Mat.
5.17. Even Revilers, Persecutors, Evil speakers, have been overcome by the
Constant holy walking of Professors, and when their Day of Visitation has
come, have Glorified God on that Account, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.

3. The Benefit of all: Partly in keeping of Judgments from the Residue of Men,
Genesis 18.32, 33.
as ten good Men would have preserved Sodom: Partly, by their real
Communication of Good to them with whom they have to do in their Generation.
Holiness makes a man a Good Man; Useful to all, and others eat of the Fruits of
the Spirit, that he brings forth continually.

4. It is Necessary in respect of the State and Condition of Justified Persons;
and that whether you consider their Relative State of acceptance, or their
State of Sanctification.

1. They are Accepted and received into Friendship, with an Holy God; a God of
Purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; who hates every unclean thing. And is it not
Necessary, that they should be Holy who are admitted into his Presence, walk in
his Sight, yea lie in his Bosom? should they not with all Diligence cleanse
themselves from all Pollution of Flesh and Spirit, and perfect Holiness in the
fear of the Lord.

2. In respect of Sanctification; we have in us a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17.
This New Creature is fed, cherished, nourished, kept alive by the Fruits of
Holiness: to what End has God given us New Hearts, and New Creatures? Is it
that we should kill them, stifle the Creature that is found in us, in the Womb?
That we should give him to the Old Man to be devoured?

5. It is necessary in respect of the proper place of Holiness in the New
Covenant, and that is twofold.

1. Of the Means unto the End: Romans 6.23. Heb. 11.6. Genesis 15.1. Psalm. 19.11.58,
11. Mat. 5.12. Chap. 10.14. To. 4.4. Col. 2.18. Chap. 3.24. Heb. 10.35. Chapter
11.26.
God has appointed that Holiness, shall be the Means, the Way, to that Eternal
Life, which as in it self and Originally is his Gift, by Jesus Christ, so with
regard to his Constitution of our Obedience, as the Means of attaining it, is a
reward: and God in bestowing of it a Rewarder. Though it be neither, the Cause,
Matter, nor Condition of our Justification, yet it is the Way appointed of God,
for us to Walk in, for the obtaining of Salvation: 2. Pet. 2.51.
And therefore he that has hope of Eternal Life, purifies himself, as He is
pure: and none shall ever come to that End, who walks not in the Way: for
without Holiness it is impossible to see God.

2. It is a Testimony and Pledge of Adoption: a sign and Evidence of Grace,
that is, of Acceptance with God. And 3. The whole Expression of our
Thankfulness. Now there is not one of all these Causes and Reasons of the
Necessity, the indispensible necessity of our Obedience, good Works, and
Personal Righteousness, but would require a more large Discourse to unfold and
explain, than I have allotted to the Proposal of them all. And innumerable
others there are of the same import, that I cannot name. He that upon these
Accounts does not think Universal Holiness and Obedience to be of indispensible
necessity, unless also it be exalted into the Room of the Obedience and
Righteousness of Christ, let him be filthy still.

I confess this whole Discourse proceeds on the Supposition of the Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ unto us, for our Justification. And herein I
have as good Company as the Prelacy and whole Church of England can afford;
Sundry from among them having written large Discourses in its Confirmation, and
the rest having till of late approved of it in others. I wish this Man, or any
of his Companions in Design, would undertake the answering of Bishop Downham on
this Subject. No Man ever carried this Matter higher than Luther, nor did he in
all his writings more positively and plainly contend for it, than in his
Comment on the Epistle to the Galatians. Yet was that Book translated into
English by the Approbation of the then Bishop of London who also prefixed
himself a Commendatory Epistle unto it. The judgment of Hooker we have heard
before. But what need I mention in particular any of the rest of those Great
and Learned Names who have made famous the profession of the Church of England
by their writings throughout the World. Had this Man in their days treated this
Doctrine with his present scoffing Petulancy he had scarce been Rector of St.
George Buttolph-Lane, much less filled with such hopes and expectations of
future Advancements, as it is not impossible that he is now possessed with,
upon his memorable Atchievments. But on this supposition I do first appeal to
the Judgment of the Church of England it self, as to the Truth of the Doctrine
delivered in my Discourse, and the Principles which this Man proceeds on in
his Exceptions against it. 2. Though it be but a part of a Popular Discourse
and never intended for Scholastic Accuracy, yet as to the Assertions contained
in it, I challenge this Author to take and allow the ordinary usual sense of
the Words with the open Design of them, and to answer them when he can. And. 3.
In the mean time I appeal unto every indifferent Reader whether the mere
perusal of this whole Passage, do not cast this Man's Futilous Cavils out of
all Consideration: so that I shall content my self with very few Remarques upon
them.

First upon my asserting the necessity of Good Works he adds, A very suspicious
Word, which methinks these Men should be afraid to name. And why so? We do
acknowledge that we do not seek for Righteousness by the Works of the Law. We
design not our Personal Justification by them, nor to merit Life or Salvation,
but betake our selves unto what even Bellarmine himself came to at Last as the
safest Retreat, namely the Merits and Righteousness of Christ. But for
Attendance unto them, Performance of them, and fruitfulness in them, we are not
afraid nor ashamed at any Time to enter into Judgment with them by whom we are
traduced. And as I have nothing to say unto this Author who is known unto me
only by that Portraicture and Character which he has given of himself in this
Book, which I could have wished for his own sake had been drawn with a mixture
of more Lines of Truth and Modesty; so I know there are not a few, who in the
Course of a Vain Worldly Conversation, whilst there is scarce a Back or Belly
of a Disciple of Christ that blesses God upon the account of their Bounty or
Charity, (the Footsteps of Levity, Vanity, Scurrility, and Profaneness, being
moreover left upon all the Paths of their haunt) are wont to declaim about
Holiness, Good Works and Justification by them, which is a ready way to
instruct men to Atheism, or the scorn of every thing that is professed in
Religion. But yet 2. He shows how impotent and impertinent our Arguments are
for the Proof of the Necessity of Holiness. And as to the first of them from
the Commands of God, he says, that if after all these Commands, God has left
it indifferent whether we obey him or no, I hope such Commands cannot make
Obedience Necessary. Wonderful Divinity! A Man must needs be well acquainted
with God and himself who can suppose that any of his Commands shall leave it
indifferent, whether we will obey them or no. Yea, but will he damn Men if they
do not obey his Commands for Holiness? Yes, yes, no doubt he will do so. Yea,
but we may be notwithstanding this Command Justified and Saved without this
Holiness; False and Impertinent. We are neither Justified nor saved without
them, though we are not Justified by them, nor saved for them.

Unto my Inforcement of the Necessity of Holiness from the Ends of God in
Election and Redemption, he Replies page 127. The Father has Elected us to be
Holy and the Son Redeemed us to be Holy. But will the Father Elect and the Son
Redeem none but those who are Holy, and Reject and Reprobate all others? Does
this Election and Redemption, suppose Holiness in us, or is it without any
regard to it? For if we be Elected and Redeemed without any regard unto our own
being Holy, our Election and Redemption is secure whether we be Holy or not.
Wonderful Divinity again! Election and Redemption suppose Holiness in us. We
are Elected and Redeemed with regard unto our own Holiness; that is
antecedently unto our Election and Redemption: For Holiness being the Effect
and Fruit of them, is that which he opposes. Not many Pages after this, he
falls into a great Admiration of the Catechism of the Church of England, which
none blamed that I know of, as to what is contained in it. But it were to be
wished that he had been well instructed in some others, that he might not have
divulged and obtruded on the World such Crude and Palpable Mistakes. For this
Respect, of Redemption at least, unto an Antecedent Holiness in us, that is
antecedent unto it, is such a piece of Foppery in Religion as a Man would
wonder how any one could be guilty of, who has almost pored out his Eyes in
Reading the Scripture. All the remaining Cavils of this Chapter are but the
Effects of the like fulsom Ignorance. For out of some Passages scraped together
from several parts of my Discourse, (and those not only cut off from their
proper scope and End which is not mentioned by him at all, but also mangled in
their Representation) he would frame the Appearance of a Contradiction between
what I say on the one hand, that there is no Peace with God to be obtained by
and for Sinners but by the Atonement that is made for them in the Blood of
Jesus Christ, with the Remission of Sin and Justification by Faith which ensue
thereon; which I hope I shall not live to hear denied by the Church of England,
and the Necessity of Holiness and Fruitfulness in Obedience, to maintain in our
own Souls a sense of that Peace with God which we have being Justified by
Faith. And he who understands not the Consistency of those things has little
Reason to despise good Catechisms, whatever thoughts he has had of his own
Sufficiency.

The whole Design of what remains of this Section, is to insinuate that there
can be no Necessity of Holiness or Obedience unto God unless we are Justified
and saved thereby, which I knew not before to to have been, nor indeed do yet
know it to be the Doctrine of the Church of England. But be it whose it will, I
am sure it is not that of the Scripture, and I have so disproved it in other
Discourses which this Man may now see if he please, as that I shall not here
again reassume the same Argument. And although I am weary of consulting this
woeful mixture of Disingenuity and Ignorance, yet I shall mark somewhat on one
or two Passages more, and leave him if he please unto a due Apprehension that
what remains is unanswerable Scoffing.

The First is that of Page 131. But however Holiness is Necessary with respect
to Sanctification, we have in us a New Creature, 2. Cor. 5.17. This new
Creature is fed, Cherished, Nourished and kept alive, by the Fruits of
Holiness, To what End has God given us new Hearts and New Natures? Is it that
we should Kill them, stifle the Creature that is formed in us, in the Womb?
That we should give him to the old Man to be devoured. The Phrase of this is
admirable and the Reasoning unanswerable. For if Men be New Creatures they will
certainly live new Lives, and this makes Holiness absolutely necessary by the
same Reason that every thing necessarily is what it is, but still we enquire
after a Necessary Obligation to the Practice of Holiness, and that we cannot
yet discover.

The Reader will see easily how this is picked out of the whole Discourse as
that which he imagined would yield some Advantage to reflect upon. For let him
pretend what he please to the Contrary, he has laid this End too open to be
denied, and I am no way solicitous what will be his success therein. Had he
aimed at the Discovery of Truth he ought to have examined the whole of the
Discourse, and not thus have rent one piece of it from the another. As to the
Phrase of Speech which I use, it is I acknowledge Metaphorical, but yet being
used only in a Popular way of Instruction is sufficiently warranted from the
Scripture which administers occasion and gives Countenance unto every
Expression in it, the whole being full well understood by those who are
Exercised in the Life of God. And for the Reasoning of it, it is such as I know
this man cannot Answer. For the New Creature, whatever he may fancy, is not a
new Conversation nor a Living Holily, but it is the Principle and Spiritual
Ability produced in Believers by the Power and Grace of the Holy Ghost,
enabling them to walk in newness of Life and Holiness of Conversation. And this
Principle being bestowed on us, wrought in us, for that very End, it is
necessary for us unless we will neglect and despise the Grace which we have
received, that we walk in Holiness and abound in the Fruits of Righteousness
whereunto it leads and tends. Let him answer this if he can, and when he has
done so, answer the Apostle in like manner, or scoff not only at me but at him
also.

The last passage I shall remarque upon in this Section is what he gives us as
the sum of the whole, Page 135. The sum of all is, that to know Christ is not
to be thus acquainted with his Person, but to understand his Gospel in its full
Latitude and Extent. It is not the Person but the Gospel of Christ which is the
Way, the Truth and the Life, which directs us in the way to Life and Happiness.
And again this acquaintance with Christ's Person, which these Men pretend to is
only a work of Fancy, and teaches Men the Arts of Hypocrisy, etc.

I do not know that ever I met with any thing thus crudely asserted among the
Quakers in contempt of the Person of Christ. For whereas he says of himself
expressly I am the Way, the Truth and the Life, to say he is not so (for Jesus
Christ is his Person and nothing else) carries in it a bold Contradiction, both
parts of which cannot be true. When the Subject of a Proposition is owned,
there may be great Controversy about the sense of the Predicate; as when Christ
says he is the Vine. There may be so also about the Subject of a Proposition,
when the Expression is of a third Thing, and dubious; as where Christ says this
is my Body. But when the person speaking is the Subject, and speaks of himself,
to deny what he says, is to give him the Lie. I am the Way, and the Truth and
the Life, says Christ; He is not says our Author, but the Gospel is so. If he
had allowed our Lord Jesus Christ to have spoken the Truth, but only to have
added, though he was so, yet he was so no otherwise but by the Gospel, there
had been somewhat of modesty in the Expression. But this saying that the Person
of Christ is not, the Gospel is so, is intolerable. It is so however, that this
young Man without consulting, or despising the Exposition of all Divines
Ancient or Modern, and the Common sense of all Christians should dare to
obtrude his crude and indigested Conceptions upon so great a Word of Christ
himself, countenanced only by the corrupt and false glosses of some obscure
Socinians, which some or other may possibly in due time mind him of; I have
other work to do.

But according to his Exposition of this Heavenly Oracle, what shall any one
imagine to be the sense of the Context where I and Me spoken of Christ do so
often occur. Suppose that the words of that whole Verse I am the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, no Man comes to the Father but by me, have this sense;
not Christ himself is the Way, Truth and the Life, but the Gospel; No man
comes to the Father but by Me, that is, not by me, but by the Gospel; must not
all the Expressions of the same nature in the Context have the same Exposition,
as namely Verse 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me; that is, not in me but
in the Gospel? I go to prepare a place for you; That is, not I do so but the
Gospel. Ver. 3. I will come again and receive you to my self; That is, not I
but the Gospel will do so; And so of all other things which Christ in that
place seems to speak of himself. If this be his way of Interpreting Scripture,
I wonder not that he blames others for their Defect and miscarriages therein.

When I first considered these two last Sections, I did not suspect but that he
had at least truly represented my Words which he thought meet to reflect upon
and Scoff at; as knowing how easy it was for any one whose Conscience would
give him a Dispensation for such an undertaking, to pick out sayings and
Expressions from the most Innocent Discourse, and odiously to propose them as
cut off from their proper Coherence; and under a Concealment of the End and the
Principal Sense, designed in them. Wherefore I did not so much as read over the
Discourse excepted against, only once or twice observing my words as quoted by
him, not directly to comply with what I knew to be my sense and intention, I
turned unto the particular Places to discover his Prevarication. But having gone
through this ungrateful task, I took the Pains to read over the whole
Digression in my Book which his Exceptions are Levelled against; And upon my
review of it, my Admiration of his dealing was not a little increased I cannot
therefore but desire of the most Partial Adherers unto this Censurer of other
Men's Labors, Judgments, and Expressions, but once to read over that Discourse,
and if they own themselves to be Christians, I shall submit the whole of it,
with the consideration of his Reflections upon it, unto their Judgments. If
they refuse so to do, I let them know I despise their Censures, and do look on
the satisfaction they take in this Man's scoffing Reflections, as the Laughter
of Fools, or the Crackling of Thorns under a Pot. For those who will be at so
much pains to undeceive themselves, they will find that that Expression of the
Person of Christ is but once or twice used in all that long Discourse, and that
occasionally, which by the outcrys here made against it, any one would suppose
to have filled up almost all the Pages of it. He will find also that I have
owned and declared the Revelation that God has made of himself, the properties
of his Nature, and his Will in his works of Creation and Providence in its full
Extent and Efficacy; and that by the Knowledge of God in Christ which I so much
insist upon, I openly, plainly, and declaredly, intend nothing but the
Declaration that God has made of himself in Jesus Christ by the Gospel,
whereof the Knowledge of his Person the Great Mystery of Godliness, God
manifested in the Flesh, with what he did and suffered, as the Mediator between
God and Man, is the chiefest Instance; in which Knowledge consists all our
Wisdom of Living unto God. Hereon I have no more to add, but that he by whom
these things are denied or derided, does openly renounce his Christianity. And
that I do not lay this unto the Charge of this doughty Writer, is because I am
satisfied that he has not done it out of any such design, but partly out of
Ignorance of the things which he undertakes to write about, and partly to
satisfy the malevolence of himself and some others against my Person which sort
of depraved Affections where Men give up themselves unto their prevalency, will
blind the Eyes, and pervert the Judgments of Persons as wise as he.

In the First Section of his fourth Chapter I am not particularly concerned,
and whilst he only vents his own conceits, be they never so idle or
Atheological, I shall never trouble my self either with their Examination or
Confutation. So many as he can persuade to be of his Mind, That we have no
Union with Christ but by Virtue of Union with the Church, the contrary whereof
is absolutely true; That Christ is so an Head of Rule and Government unto the
Church, as that he is not an Head of Influence and supplies of Spiritual Life,
contrary to the Faith of the Catholic Church in all Ages; That these
assertions of his have any Countenance from Antiquity or, the least from the
Passages quoted out of Chrysostom by himself; That his Glosses upon many Texts
of Scripture, which have an admirable Coincidence with those of two other
persons whom I shall name when Occasion requires it; are sufficient to affix
upon them the sense which he pleads for, with many other things of an Equal
Falsehood and Impertinency wherewith this Section is stuffed, shall without any
farther trouble from me be left to follow their own Inclinations. But yet
notwithstanding all the great Pains he has taken to Instruct us in the Nature
of the Union between Christ and Believers, I shall take leave to prefer that
given by Mr. Hooker before it, not only as more true and agreeable unto the
Scripture, but also as better expressing the Doctrine of the Church of England
in this matter. And if these things please the present Rulers of the Church,
wherein upon the matter Christ is shuffled off, and the whole of our Spiritual
Union is resolved into the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Rule of the Church
by Bishops and Pastors; let it imply what Contradiction it will, as it does the
Highest, seeing it is by the Doctrine of the Gospel that we are taught our
Union with Christ, and his Rule of the Church by his Laws and Spirit, I have
only the the Advantage to know somewhat more than I did formerly, though not
much to my Satisfaction.

But he that shall consider what reflections are cast in this Discourse, on the
necessity of Satisfaction to be made unto Divine Justice, and from whom they
are borrowed; the miserable weak Attempt that is made therein, to reduce all
Christ's mediatory Actings unto his Kingly Office, and in particular his
Intercession; the faint mention that is made of the Satisfaction of Christ,
clogged with the addition of Ignorance of the Philosophy of it, as it is
called, well enough complying with them who grant that the Lord Christ did what
God was satisfied withal, with sundry other things of the like nature; will not
be to seek whence these things come, nor whither they are going, nor to whom
our Author is beholden for most of his rare Notions, which it is an easy thing
at any time to acquaint him withal.

The second Section of this Chapter is filled principally with Exceptions
against my Discourse, about the Personal Excellencies of Christ as Mediator, if
I may not rather say with the Reflections on the Glory of Christ himself. For
my own Discourse upon it I acknowledge to be weak, and not only inconceiveably
beneath the Dignity and Merit of the Subject, but also far short of what is
taught and delivered by many Ancient Writers of the Church unto that purpose.
And for his Exceptions they are such a Composition of ignorance and spite, as
is hardly to be paralel'd. His Entrance upon his Work is page 200. as follows.
Secondly, Let us enquire what they mean by the Person of Christ, to which
Believers must be united. And here they have outdone all the Metaphysical
Subtilties of Suarez, and have found out a Person for Christ distinct from his
Godhead and Manhood; for there can be no other Sense made of what Dr. Owen
tells us, that by the Graces of his Person he does not mean the Glorious
Excellencies of his Deity considered in it self, abstracting from the Office
which for us as God and Man be undertook, nor the outward appearance of his
Humane Nature when he conversed here on Earth, nor yet as now Exalted in Glory,
but the Graces of the Person of Christ, as he is vested with the Office of
Mediation; his Spiritual Eminency, Comeliness, Beauty, as appointed and
anointed by the Father unto that Great Work of bringing home all his Elect into
his Bosom. Now unless the Person of Christ as Mediator, be distinct from his
Person as God-Man all this is Idle talk. For what Personal Graces are there in
Christ as Mediator, which do not belong to him either as God or Man? There are
some things indeed which our Savior did, and suffered, which he was not
obliged to, either as God or Man, but as Mediator, but surely he will not call
the Peculiar Duties and Actions of an Office Personal Graces.

I have now learned not to trust unto the Honesty and Ingenuity of our Author,
as to his Quotations out of my Book, which I find that he has here mangled and
altered as in other Places, and shall therefore transcribe the whole Passage in
my own Words, Page 51. It is Christ as Mediator of whom we speak; and therefore
by the Grace of his Person I understand not; First, the Glorious Excellencies
of his Deity considered in it self, abstracting from the Office which for us as
God and Man be undertook. 2. Nor the outward appearance of his humane Nature,
neither when he conversed here on Earth bearing our Infirmities, whereof by
reason of the Charge that was laid upon him, the Prophet gives quite another
Character, Isa. 52, 14. Concerning which some of the Ancients are very Poetical
in their Expressions; nor yet as now exalted in Glory, a Vain Imagination
whereof, makes many bear a false, a Corrupted respect unto Christ, even upon
Carnal Apprehensions of the mighty Exaltation of the Humane Nature, which is
but to know Christ after the Flesh, a Mischief much improved by the Abomination
of Foolish Imagery. But this is that which I intend; the Graces of the Person
of Christ as he is vested with the office of Mediation, his Spiritual Eminency,
Comelyness and Beauty etc. Now in this respect the Scripture describes him as
exceeding Excellent Comely and Desirable, far above comparison with the
choycest Chiefest Created Good or any Endowment imaginable: which I prove at
large from Psalm. 45.2. Isa. 4.2. Cant. 5.9. adding on Explanation of the whole.

In the Digression, some Passages whereof he carps at in this Section, my
Design was to declare, as was said, somewhat of the Glory of the Person of
Christ: To this End I considered both the Glory of his Divine and the many
Excellencies of his humane Nature. But that which I principally insisted on was
the Excellency of Person as God and Man in one, whereby he was meet and able to
be the Mediator between God and Man, and to effect all the great and blessed
Ends of his Mediation. That our Lord Jesus Christ was God, and that there were
on that account in his Person the Essential Excellencies and Properties of the
Divine Nature, I suppose he will not deny. Nor will he do so, that he was truly
Man, and that his Humane Nature was endowed with many Glorious Graces and
Excellencies which are Peculiar thereunto. That the^e is a distinct
Consideration of his Person as both these Natures are united therein, is that
which he seems to have a mind to except against. And is it meet that any one
who has ought else to do, should spend any moments of that Time which he knows
how better to improve, in the pursuit of a Man's Impertinencies, who is so
bewildred in his own Ignorance and Confidence, that he knows neither where he
is, nor what he says. Did not the Son of God by assuming our Humane Nature,
continuing what he was, become what he was not? Was not the Person of Christ by
the Communication of the Properties of each Nature in it and to it, a Principle
of such operations as he could not have wrought either as God or Man,
separately considered? How else did God Redeem his Church with his own Blood?
Or how is that true which he says John 3.13. And no Man has ascended up to
Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man which is in
Heaven? Was not the Union of the two Natures in the same Person (which was a
Property neither of the Divine nor Humane Nature, but a distinct ineffable
Effect of Divine Condescension, Wisdom and Grace which the Ancients Unanimously
call the Grace of Union whose Subject is the Person of Christ) that whereby he
was fit, mee^ and able for all the Works of his Mediation? Does not the
Scripture moreover propose unto our Faith and Consolation the Glory, Power and
Grace of the Person of Christ as he is God over all blessed for ever, and his
Love, Sympathy, Care, and Compassion as Man, yet all acting themselves in the
one and self same Person of the Son of God? Let him read the first Chap. of the
Epistle to the Hebrews and see what account he can give thereof. And are not
these such Principles of Christian Religion as no Man ought to be ignorant of,
or can deny without the Guilt of the Heresies condemned in the first General
Councils? And they are no other Principles which my whole Discourse excepted
against, does proceed. upon. But says our Author, unless the Person of Christ
as Mediator be distinct from his Person as God Man all this is idle Talk. Very
Good! and why so? Why, what Personal Graces are there in Christ as Mediator
which do not belong unto him either as God or Man? But is he not ashamed of
this Ignorance? Is it not a Personal Grace and Excellency that he is God and
Man in one Person which belongs not to him either as God or Man? And are there
not Personal Operations innumerable depending hereon, which could not have been
wrought by him either as God or Man, as raising himself from the Dead by his
own Power and Redeeming the Church with his Blood Are not most of the
Descriptions that are given us of Christ in the Scripture, most of the
Operations which are assigned unto him such as neither belong unto, nor proceed
from the Divine or Humane Nature, separately considered, but from the Person of
Christ as both these Natures are united in it. That which seems to have led him
into the Maze, wherein he is bewildred in his ensuing Discourse, is, that
considering there are but two Natures in Christ the Divine and the Humane, and
Nature is the Principle of all Operations, he supposed that nothing could be
said of Christ, nothing ascribed to his Person, but what was directly formally
predicated of one of his Natures, distinctly considered. But he might have
easily enquired of himself, that seeing all the Properties and Acts of the
Divine Nature are absolutely Divine, and all those of the Humane Nature
absolutely Humane, whence it came to pass that all the Operations and Works of
Christ as Mediator are Theandrical. Although there be nothing in the Person of
Christ but his Divine and Humane Nature, yet the Person of Christ is neither
his Divine Nature nor his Humane. For the Humane Nature is and ever was of it
self (...), and the Divine to the complete Constitution of the Person of the
Mediator in and unto its own Hypostasis assumed the Humane, so that although
every Energy or Operation be (...), and so the distinct Natures are distinct
Principles of Christ's operations, yet his Person is the Principal or only
Agent, which being God-Man, all the Actions thereof by virtue of the
Communication of Properties of both Natures therein are Theandrical; And the
Excellency of this Person of Christ wherein he was every way fitted for the
work of Mediation I call sometimes his Personal Grace, and will not go to him
to Learn to speak and express my self in these things. And it is most false
which he affirms page 203. That I distinguish the Graces of Christ's Person as
Mediator, from the Graces of his Person as God and Man. Neither could any Man
have run into such an Imagination, who had competently understood the things
which he speaks about. And the bare proposal of these things is enough to
defeat the Design of all his ensuing Cavils and Exceptions.

And as to what he closes withal, that Surely I will not call the peculiar
Duties and Actions of an office Personal Graces; I suppose that he knows not
well what he intends thereby. Whatever he has fancied about Christ being the
Name of an Office, Jesus Christ of whom we speak is an Person and not an
Office. And there are no such things in rerum natura as the actions of an
Office. And if by them he intends the Actions of a Person in the discharge of
an Office, whatever he calls them, I will call the Habits in Christ from whence
all his Actions in the performance of his Office do proceed, Personal Graces,
and that whether he will or no. So he is a merciful, faithful and compassionate
High Priest, Heb. 2.17. 4.15. 5.2. And all his Actions in the discharge of his
Office of Priesthood being principled and regulated by those Qualifications, I
do call them his Personal Graces, and do hope that for the future I may obtain
his leave so to do. The like may be said of his other Offices.

The Discourse which he thus raves against is Didactical and accommodated unto
a Popular way of Instruction, and it has been hitherto the common Ingenuity of
all Learned Men to give an Allowance unto such Discourses, so as not to exact
from them an accuracy and propriety in Expressions, such as is required in
those that are Scholastical or Polemical. It is that which by common consent is
allowed to the Tractates of the Ancients of that Nature, especially where
nothing is taught but what for the substance of it is consonant unto the Truth.
But this Man attempts not only a Severity in nibling at all Expressions which
he fancyeth liable unto his Censures; but with a disingenuous Artifice waving
the Tenor and Process of the Discourse, which I presume he found not himself
able to oppose, he takes out sometimes here, sometimes there, up and down
backward and forward, at his Pleasure, what he will, to put if it be possible
an ill Sense upon the whole. And if he have not hereby given a sufficient
Discovery of his good will toward the doing of somewhat to my disadvantage, he
has failed in his whole Endeavor. For there is no Expression which he has
fixed on as the Subject of his Reflections, which is truly mine; but that as
it is used by me, and with respect unto its End, I will defend it against him
and all his Copartners, whilst the Scripture may be allowed to be the Rule and
Measure of our Conceptions and Expressions about Sacred things. And although at
present I am utterly wearied with the consideration of such sad Triflings I
shall accept from him the kindness of an Obligation to so much Patience as is
necessary unto the perusal of the ensuing Leaves wherein I am concerned.

First; Page 202. He would pick something if he knew what out of my Quotations
of Cant. 5.9. to express or illustrate the Excellency of Christ, which first he
calls an Excellent Proof by way of scorn. But as it is far from being the only
Proof produced in the Confirmation of the same Truth, and is applied rather to
illustrate what was spoken then to prove it; yet by his favor, I shall make
bold to continue my apprehensions of the occasional Exposition of the words
which I have given in that Place, until he is pleased to acquaint me with a
better, which I suppose will be long enough. For what he adds; But however
White and Ruddy belong to his Divine and Humane Nature, and that without regard
to his Mediatory Office, for he had been White in the Glory of his Deity, and
Ruddy with the Red Earth of his Humanity, whether he had been considered as
Mediator or not; it comes from the same spring of skill and Benevolence with
those before. For what wise talk is it of Christ's being God and Man without the
Consideration of his being Mediator, as though he were ever, or ever should
have been God and Man, but with respect unto his Mediation. His Scoff at the
red Earth of Christ's Humanity represented as my words, is grounded upon a
palpable falsification. For my words are, He was also ruddy in the Beauty of
his Humanity. Man was called Adam from the red Earth whereof he was made. The
word here used, points him out as the second Adam, partaker of Flesh and Blood,
because the Children also partook of the same. And if he be displeased with
these Expressions, let him take his own time to be pleased again, it is that
wherein I am not concerned. But my fault which so highly deserved his
Correction is, that I apply that to the person of Christ which belongs unto his
Natures. But what if I say no such thing, or had no such Design in that place?
For although I do maintain a distinct Consideration of the Excellency of
Christ's person, as comprising both his Natures united, though every real thing
in his person belongs formally and radically unto one of the Natures, (those
other Excellencies being the Exurgency of their Union) whereby his person was
fitted and suited unto his Mediatory operations, which in neither nature singly
considered he could have performed, and shall continue to maintain it against
whosoever dares directly to oppose it; yet in this place I intended it not,
which this man knew well enough, the very next words unto what he pretends to
prove it being, The beauty and comeliness of the Lord Jesus Christ in the Union
of both these in one Person shall afterward be declared. And so we have an
equality in Judgment and Ingenuity throughout this Censure.

Hence he leaps to page 64. of my Book, thence backwards to 53. and then up and
down I know not how nor whither. He begins with page 64. And in his first
Digression concerning the Excellency of Christ Jesus, to invite us to Communion
with him in a Conjugal Relation, he tells us that Christ is exceeding Excellent
and Desirable in his Deity, and the Glory thereof; He is Desirable and Worthy
our Acceptance as considered in his Humanity, in his Freedom from Sin, Fullness
of Grace, etc. Now though this look very like a Contradiction, that by the
Graces of his Person he meant neither the Excellencies of his Divine nor Humane
Nature, yet he has a Salvo which will deliver him both from Contradiction and
from Sense, that he does not consider these Excellencies of his Deity or
Humanity as abstracted from his Office of Mediator; though he might if he
pleased: For he considers those Excellencies which are not peculiar to the
Office of Mediation, but which would have belonged unto him as God and Man,
whether he had been Mediator or not; But what becomes of his Distinction of the
Graces of Christ's Person as Mediator, from the Graces of his Person as God and
Man, when there are no personal Graces in Christ but what belong to his Deity
or his Humanity.

I am sufficiently satisfied that he neither knows where he is, nor what he
does, or has no due comprehension of the things he treats about. That which he
opposes, if he intend to oppose any thing by me asserted, is, that whereas
Christ is God, the Essential properties of his Divine Nature are to be
considered as the formal Motive unto, and Object of Faith, Love, and Obedience;
and whereas he is Man also, his Excellencies in the Glorious Endowment of his
Humane Nature, with his Alliance unto us therein, and his Furniture of Grace
for the Discharge of his Office, are proposed unto our Faith and Love in the
Scripture, And of these things we ought to take a distinct Consideration; our
Faith concerning them being not only Taught in the Scripture, but fully
confirmed in the Confessions and Determinations of the Primitive Church. But
the Person of Christ wherein these two Natures are united, is of another
distinct Consideration, and such things are spoken thereof as cannot under any
single Enunciation be ascribed unto either Nature, though nothing be so, but
what formally belongs unto one of them, or is the necessary consequent and
Exurgency of their Union. See Isa. 9.6. 2 Timothy 3.16. John 1.14. It is of the
Glory of the Word of God made Flesh, that I discourse. But this Man talks of
what would have belonged to Christ as God-Man, whether he had been Mediator or
not, as though the Son of God either was, or was ever designed to be, or can be
considered as God-Man, and not as Mediator. And thence he would relieve himself
by the Calumny of assigning a Distinction unto me between the Graces of
Christ's person as Mediator, and the Graces of his person as God and Man, that
is one person, which is a mere figment of his own misunderstanding. Upon the
whole he comes to that accurate Thesis of his own, that there are no personal
Graces in Christ but what belong to his Deity or Humanity, Personal Graces
belonging unto the Humanity or Humane Nature of Christ, that Nature being
(...), or such as has no personal subsistence of its own, is a Notion that
those may thank him for who have a mind to do it. And he may do well to
consider what his thoughts are of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, mentioned
Phill. 2.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

But he will now discover the Design of all these things, and afterward make it
good by Quotations out of my Book. The first he does page 203. and onwards, But
whatever becomes of the sense of the Distinction, there is a very deep fetch in
it, the observing of which will discover the whole mystery of the Person of
Christ, and our Union to him. For these men consider that Christ saves us as he
is our Mediator, and not merely considered as God or Man, and they imagine that
we receive Grace and Salvation from Christ's Person, just as we do water out of
a Conduit, or a Gift and Largess from a Prince, that it flows to us from our
Union to his person, and therefore they dress up the Person of the Mediator
with all those personal Excellencies and Graces which may make him a fit
Savior, that those who are thus united to his Person, of which more in the
next Section, need not fear missing of Salvation. Hence they ransack all the
boundless perfections of the Deity, and whatever they can find or fancy speaks
any Comfort to Sinners, this is presently a personal Grace of the Mediator.
They consider all the Glorious effects of his Mediation, and whatever Great
things are spoken of his Gospel, or Religion, or Intercession for us, these
serve as personal Graces; so that all our hopes may be built not on the Gospel
Covenant, but on the Person of Christ; so that the Dispute now lies between the
Person of Christ and his Gospel, which must be the Foundation of our Hope,
which is the way to life and happiness.

First, We do consider and Believe that Christ saves us as a Mediator, that is,
as God and Man in one person, exercising the Office of a Mediator, and not
merely as God or Man. This we believe with all the Catholic Church of Christ,
and can with boldness say, he that does not so, let him be Anathema Maranatha.
Secondly, We do not imagine, but believe from the Scripture, and with the whole
Church of God, that we receive Grace and Salvation from the Person of Christ,
in those distinct ways wherein they are capable of being received; and let him
be anathema who believes otherwise. Only whether his putting of Grace and
Salvation into the same way of Reception, belong unto his Accuracy in
expressing his own Sentiments, or his Ingenuity in the representation of other
Men's words, I leave undetermined. The Similitudes he uses to express our Faith
in these things, show his good will toward Scoffing and Profaneness. We say,
there is real Communication of Grace from the person of Christ as the Head of
the Church unto all the Members of his Mystical Body by his Spirit, whereby
they are quickened, sanctified, and enabled unto all Holy Obedience, and if it
be denied by him he stands anathematized by sundry Counsels of the Ancient
Church. We say not, that we receive it as water out of a Conduit, which is of a
limited determined Capacity, whereas we say the person of Christ by reason of
his Deity is an immense Eternal living Spring or Fountain of all Grace. And
when God calls himself a Fountain of living water, and the Lord Christ calls
his Spirit communicated to Believers living Water, under which Apellations he
was frequently promised in the Old Testament, as also the Grace and Mercy of
the Gospel the waters of Life, inviting us to receive them, and to drink of
them, this Author may be advised to take heed of Profane Scoffing at these
things. Whether any have said that we receive Grace and Salvation from Christ
as a Gift or Largess from a Prince I know not; if they have the sole defect
therein is that the Allusion does no way sufficiently set forth the freedom and
bounty of Christ in the Communication of them unto Sinners, and wherein else it
offends, let him soberly declare if he can. This is the Charge upon us in point
of Faith and Judgment, which in one word amounts to no more but this, that we
are Christians, and so by the Grace of God we intend to continue, let this man
deride us whilst he pleases. His next Charge concerns our Practice in the
pursuit of these dreadful Principles, which by their Repetition he has exposed
to scorn. And therefore they dress up etc. What does this poor man intend? What
is the Design of all this Profaneness? The Declaration of the Natures and
Person of Christ, of his Grace and work, the ascribing unto him what is
directly and expressly in terms ascribed unto him in the Scripture, or relating
as we are able, the Description it gives of him, is here called dressing up the
person of the Mediator with all those personal Graces that may make him a fit
Savior.

The Preparation of the Person of Christ to be a fit and meet Savior for
Sinners, which he profanely compares to the Dressing up of -- is the Greatest,
most Glorious and Admirable Effect that ever Infinite Wisdom, Goodness, Power
and Love wrought and produced, or will do so unto Eternity. And those on whom
he reflects, design nothing, do nothing in this Matter, but only endeavor
according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ which they have received, to
declare and explain what is revealed and taught in the Scripture thereof; and
those who exceed the bounds of Scripture Revelation herein, (if any do so) we
do abhor. And as for those who are united unto Christ, although we say not
that they need not fear missing of Salvation, seeing they are to be brought
unto it not only through the Exercise of all Graces, whereof Fear is one, but
also through such Trials and Temptations as will always give them a Fear of
heed and Diligence, and sometimes such a Fear of the Event of things, as shall
combat their Faith, and shake its firmest Resolves, yet we fear not to say,
that those who are really united unto Jesus Christ, shall be assuredly saved,
which I have proved elsewhere beyond the fear of any Opposition from this
Author or others like minded. 4ly, He adds hence, They ransack, etc. But what
is the meaning of these Expressions? Does not the Scripture declare, that
Christ is God as well as Man? Does it not build all our Faith, Obedience and
Salvation on that Consideration? Are not the Properties of the Divine Nature
every where in the Scripture declared and proposed unto us, for the
ingenerating and establishing Faith in us, and to be the Object of, and
Exercise of all Grace and Obedience? And is it now become a Crime, that any
should seek to declare and instruct others in these things from the Scripture,
and to the same End for which they are therein revealed? Is this with any
Evidence of Sobriety to be traduced as a ransacking the boundless Perfections
of the Divine Nature, to dress up the Person of the Mediator? Is he a
Christian, or does he deserve that Name, who contemns or despises the
Consideration of the Propertyes of the Divine Nature in the Person of Christ?
(See Isa. 6.1, 2, 3. Joh. 12.41. Isa. 9.6. Joh. 1.14. Phil. 2.6. etc.) or shall
think that the Grace or Excellencies of his Person do not principally consist
in them, as the Humane Nature is united thereunto. 5ly, They consider all the
Glorious Effects of his Mediation. All the Effects of Christ's Mediation, all
the Things that are spoken of the Gospel, etc. do all of them declare the
Excellency of the Person of Christ, as Effects declare their Cause, and may and
ought to be considered unto that end as Occasion does require. And no otherwise
are they considered by those whom he does oppose. 6ly But the End of these
strange Principles and Practices he tells us is, that all our hopes may be
built, not on the Gospel Covenant, but on the Person of Christ. But I say
again, what is it that this Man intends? What is become of a common Regard to
God and Man? who do so build their hopes on Christ as to reject or despise the
Gospel Covenant, as he calls it, though I am afraid should he come to explain
himself, he will be at a loss about the true Nature of the Gospel Covenant, as
I find him to be about the Person and Grace of Christ. He tells us indeed,
that not the Person of Christ, but the Gospel is the Way, did we ever say, not
the Covenant of Grace but the Person of Christ is all we regard? But whence
comes this causeless Fear and Jealousy; or rather this evil Surmise, that if
any endeavor to exalt the Person of Christ, immediately the Covenant of the
Gospel (that is in truth the Covenant which is declared in the Gospel) must be
discarded? Is there an inconsistency between Christ and the Covenant? I never
met with any who was so fearful and jealous least too much should be ascribed
in the matter of our Salvation to Jesus Christ; and when there is no more so,
but what the Scripture does expressly and in words assign unto him and affirm
of him, instantly we have an Outcry that the Gospel and the Covenant are
rejected, and that a Dispute lies between the Person of Christ and his Gospel.
But let him not trouble himself, for as he cannot, and as he knows he cannot
produce any one word or one syllable out of any Writings of mine, that should
derogate any thing from the Excellency, Nature, Necessity or Use of the New
Covenant, so though it may be he do not, and does therefore fancy and dream of
Disputes between Christ and the Gospel, we do know how to respect both the
Person of Christ and the Covenant, both Jesus Christ and the Gospel in their
proper places. And in particular we do know, that as it is the Person of Christ
who is the Author of the Gospel, and who as Mediator in his Work of Mediation
gives Life and Efficacy and Establishment unto the Covenant of Grace, so both
the Gospel and that Covenant do declare the Glory, and design the Exaltation of
Jesus Christ himself. Speaking therefore comparatively, all our hopes are built
on Jesus Christ, who alone fills all things; yet also we have our hopes in
God through the Covenant declared in the Gospel, as the way designing the Rule
of our Obedience, securing our Acceptance and Reward. And to deal as gently as
I can warrant my self to do with this Writer, the Dispute he mentions between
the Person of Christ and the Gospel, which shall be the Foundation of our Hope,
is only in his own fond imagination, distempered by Disingenuity and
Malevolence. For if I should charge what the appearrance of his Expressions
will well bare, what he says seems to be out of a Design influenced by
Ignorance or Heresy, to exclude Jesus Christ God and Man from being the
principal Foundation of the Church, and which all its hopes are built upon.
This being the sum of his Charge I hope he will fully prove it in the
Quotations from my Discourse, which he now sets himself to produce; assuring
him that if he do not, but come short therein, setting aside his odious and
foppish profane Deductions, I do aver them all in plain terms, that he may
on his next occasion of Writing, save his labor in searching after what he may
oppose. Thus therefore he proceeds page 205.

To make this appear, I shall consider that account which Dr. Owen gives us of
the personal Graces and Excellencies of Christ, which in general consist in
three things; First, his Fitness to save, from the Grace of Union, and the
proper and necessary Effects thereof. Secondly, his Fullness to save from the
Grace of Communion, or the free Consequences of the Grace of Union; and
Thirdly, his Excellency to endear, from his complete suitableness to all the
wants of the Souls of men. First, That he is fit to be a Savior from the Grace
of Union; and if you will understand what this strange Grace of Union is, it is
the uniting the Nature of God and Man in one Person, which makes him fit to be
a Savior to the uttermost; He lays his hand upon God, by partaking of his
Nature; and he lays his hand on us, by partaking of our Nature; and so becomes
a Dayes-man or Vmpire between both. Now though this be a great Truth, that the
Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in Christ did excellently qualify him
for the Office of a Mediator, yet this is the Unhappiest man in Expressing and
proving it, that I have met with; For what an untoward Representation is this
of Christ's Mediation, That he came to make Peace, by laying his hands on God
and Men, as if he came to part a Fray or Scuffle; and he might as well have
named Genesis 1.1. or Matthew. 1.1. or any other place of Scripture for the proof of
it, as those he mentions.

To what End it is that he cites these Passages out of my Discourse, is
somewhat difficult to divine. Himself confesses that what is asserted, (at
least in one of them) is a great Truth, only I am the unhappiest man in
expressing and proving it that ever he met with. It is evident enough to me,
that he has not met with many who have treated of this Subject, or has little
understood those he has met withal; so that there may be yet some behind as
unhappy as my self. And seeing he has so good a Leisure from other Occasions,
as to spend his Time in telling the world how unhappy I am in my Proving and
Expressing of what himself acknowledges to be true, he may be pleased to take
notice, that I am now sensible of my own unhappiness also, in having fallen
under a Diversion from better Employments by such sad and woeful
Impertinencies. But being at once charged with both these misadventures,
untowardness in Expression, and weakness in the Proof of a plain Truth, I shall
willingly admit of Information to mend my way of writing for the future. And
the first Reflection he casts on my Expressions, is my calling the Union of the
two Natures in Christ in the same Person, the Grace of Union, for so he says,
If you would understand what this strange Grace of Union is. But I crave his
Pardon in not complying with his Directions, for my Companyes sake. No man who
has once consulted the Writings of the Ancients on this Subject, can be a
stranger unto (...), and Gratia Vnionis, they so continually occur in the
Writings of all sorts of Divines both Ancient and Modern. Yea but there is yet
worse behind; for what an untoward Representation is this of Christ's Mediation,
that he came to make Peace by laying his hands on God and Men, as if he came to
part a fray or scuffle. My words are, the Uniting of the Natures of God and Man
in one Person, made him fit to be a Savior to the uttermost; he laid his hand
upon God by partaking of his Nature, Zach. 13.7. And he lays his hand upon us
by partaking of our Nature, Heb. 2.14, 16. and so becomes a Dayes-man or Vmpire
between both. See what it is to be adventurous. I doubt not but that he thought
that I had invented that Expression, or at least that I was the first who ever
applied it unto this Interposition of Christ between God and Man. But as I took
the words, and so my warranty for the Expression from the Scripture, Job 9.33.
So it has commonly been applied by Divines in the same manner, particularly by
Bishop Usher (in his Immanuel, p. 8, 9. as I remember) whose Unhappiness in
expressing himself in Divinity, this man needs not much to bewayl. But let my
Expressions be what they will, I shall not escape the unhappiness of weakness
in my Proofs, for I might, he says, as well have quoted Genesis 1.1. and Matthew.
1.1. for the Proof of the Unity of the Divine and Humane Nature in the Person
of Christ, and his Fitness thence to be a Savior, as those I named, viz. Zach.
13.7. Heb. 2.14, 16. Say you so; why then I do here undertake to maintain the
Personal Union, and the fitness of Christ from thence to be a Savior, from
these two Texts, against this Man and all his Fraternity in Design. And at
present I cannot but wonder at his Confidence, seeing I am sure be cannot be
ignorant that one of these Places at least, namely that of Heb. 2.16. is as
much, as frequently, as vehemently pleaded by all sorts of Divines Ancient and
Modern, to prove the Assumption of our Humane Nature into Personal subsistence
with the Son of God, that so he might be (...), fit and able to save us, as any
one Testimony in the whole Scripture. And the same Truth is as evidently
contained and expressed in the former, seeing no man could be the Fellow of the
Lord of Hosts, but he that was partaker of the same Nature with him, and no one
could have the sword of God upon him to smite him, which was needful unto our
Salvation, but he that was partaker of our Nature, or Man also. And the mere
recital of these Testimonies was sufficient unto my purpose in that place,
where I designed only to declare and not dispute the Truth. If he yet think
that I cannot prove what I assert from these Testimonies, let him consult my
Vindiciae Evangelicae, where according as that work required I have directly
pleaded these Scriptures to the same purpose, insisting at large on the
Vindication of one of them, and let him answer what I have there pleaded, if he
be able. And I shall allow him to make his Advantage unto that purpose, if he
please, of whatever Evasions the Socinians have found out to escape the force
of that Testimony. For there is none of them of any note, but have attempted by
various Artifices to shield their Opinion in denying the Assumption of our
Humane Nature into personal Union with the Son of God, and therewithal his
Praeexistence unto his Nativity of the blessed Virgin, from the Divine Evidence
given against it in that place of Heb. 2.16. which yet (if this Author may be
believed) does make no more against them than Genesis 1.1. Wherefore, this severe
Censure, together with the Modesty of the Expression, wherein Christ making
Peace between God and Man is compared to the Parting of a Fray or Scuffle, may
pass at the same Rate and Value with those which are gone before.

His ensuing Pages are taken up for the most part with the transcription of
Passages out of my Discourse, raked together from several Places at his
pleasure. I shall not impose the needless Labor on the reader of a third
Perusal of them; nor shall I take the pains to restore the several Passages to
their proper Place and Coherence, which he has rent them from, to try his
skill and strength upon them separately and apart. For I see not that they
stand in need of using the least of their own circumstantial Evidence in their
Vindication. I shall therefore only take notice of his Exceptions against them.
And page 207. whereas I had said on some Occasion, that in such a supposition
we could have supplies of Grace only in a moral Way, it falls under his
Derision in his Parenthesis (and that is a very pitiful way indeed.) But I
must yet tell him by the way, that if he allow of no supplies of Grace but in a
Moral way, he is a Pelagian, and as such stands condemned by the Catholic
Church. And when his Occasions will permit it, I desire he would answer what is
written by my self in another Discourse, in the Refutation of this Sole Moral
Operation of Grace, and the Assertion of another way of the Communication of it
unto us. Leave fooling, and the Unhappiest man in expressing himself that ever
I met with, will not do it; He must betake himself to another Course, if he
intend to engage into the handling of things of this Nature. He adds, whereas
I had said, the Grace of the Promises, (of the Person of Christ you mean:) I
know well enough what I mean, but the Truth is I know not well what he means;
nor whether it be out of ignorance, that he does indeed fancy an Opposition
between Christ and the Promises, that what is ascribed unto the one, must needs
be derogated from the other, when the Promise is but the Means and Instrument
of conveying the Grace of Christ unto us* or whether it proceed from a real
Dislike, that the Person of Christ, that is, Jesus Christ himself should be
esteemed of any Use or Consideration in Religion, that he talks at this rate.
But from whence ever it proceeds, this cavilling Humor is unworthy of any Man
of Ingenuity or Learning. By his following Parenthesis (a World of Sin is
something) I suppose I have somewhere used that Expression, whence it is
reflected on; but he quotes not the place, and I cannot find it. I shall
therefore only at present tell him, as (if I remember aright) I have done
already, that I will not come to him nor any of his Companions, to learn to
Express my self in these things; and moreover, that I despise their Censures.
The Discourses he is carping at, in particular in this place, are neither
Doctrinal nor Argumentative, but consist in the Application of Truths before
proved unto the Minds and Affections of men. And (as I said) I will not come to
him nor his Fraternity, to learn how to manage such a subject, much less a
Logical and Argumentative way of Reasoning; nor have any inducement thereunto
from any thing that as yet I have seen in their Writings. It also troubles him
page 208. That whereas I know how unsuited the best and most accurate of our
Expressions are unto the true Nature and Being of Divine things, as they are in
themselves, and what need we have to make use of Allusions, and sometimes less
proper Expressions, to convey a sense of them unto the Minds and Affections of
men, I had once or twice used that (...), if I may so say, which yet if he had
not known used in other good Authors, treating of things of the same Nature, he
knew I could take protection against his severity under the Example of the
Apostle using words to the same Purpose, upon an alike Occasion, Heb. 7. But at
length he intends to be serious, and from those words of mine, Here is Mercy
enough for the greatest, the oldest, the stubbornest Transgressor; he adds,
Enough in all Reason this, what a Comfort is it to Sinners to have such a God
for their Savior, whose Grace is boundless and bottomless, and exceeds the
largest Dimensions of their Sins, though there be a world of sin in them. But
what now if the Divine Nature it self have not such an endless boundless,
bottomless Grace and Compassion as the Doctor now talks of? For at other times,
when it serves his turn better, we can hear nothing from him but the
Naturalness of Gods Vindictive Justice. Though God be rich in Mercy, he never
told us, that his Mercy was so boundless and bottomless; he had given a great
many Demonstrations of the severity of his Anger against sinners, who could not
be much worse than the Greatest, the Oldest and stubbornest Transgressors.

Let the Reader take notice, that I propose no Grace in Christ unto or for such
Sinners, but only that which may invite all sorts of them, though under the
most discouraging Qualifications, to come unto him for Grace and Mercy by Faith
and Repentance. And on supposition that this was my sense, as he cannot deny it
to be, I add only in Answer, that this his profane scoffing at it, is that
which reflects on Christ, and his Gospel, and God himself, and his Word, which
must be accounted for. See Isa. 55.7. 2dly, For the Opposition which he
childishly frames between Gods Vindictive Justice and his Mercy and Grace, it
is answered already. 3dly, It is false, that God has not told us, that his
Grace is boundless and bottomless in the sense wherein I use those words,
sufficient to pardon the greatest, the oldest, the stubbornest of sinners;
namely, that turn unto him by Faith and Repentance. And he who knows not how
this consists with Severity and Anger against impenitent sinners, is yet to
Learn his Catechism. But yet he adds further, page 208, 209. Supposing the
Divine Nature were such a bottomless Fountain of Grace, how comes this to be a
Personal Grace of the Mediator: For a Mediator as Mediator, ought not to be
considered as the Fountain, but as the Minister of Grace; God the Father
certainly ought to come in for a share at least, in being the Fountain of
Grace, though the Doctor is pleased to take no notice of him. But how excellent
is the Grace of Christ's Person, above the Grace of the Gospel, for that is a
bounded and limited thing, a straight Gate and narrow Way, that leads unto
Life. There is no such Boundless Mercy as all the sins in the World cannot
equal its Dimensions, as will save the Greatest, the Oldest, and the
stubbornest Transgressors.

I beg the Reader to believe, that I am now so utterly weary with the
Repetition of these impertinencies, that I can hardly prevail with my self to
fill my Pen once more with Ink about them. And I see no reason now to go on,
but only that I have begun. And on all accounts I shall be as brief as
possible. I say then First, I did not consider this boundless Grace in Christ
as Mediator, but considered it as in him who is Mediator, and so the Divine
Nature with all its Properties are greatly to be considered in him, if the
Gospel be true. But 2dly, It is untrue, that Christ as Mediator is only the
Minister of Grace, and not the Fountain of it; for he is Mediator as God and
Man in one Person. 3dly, To suppose an exemption of the Person of the Father
from being the Fountain of Grace absolutely, in the Order of the Divine
Subsistence of the Persons in the Trinity, and of their Operations suited
thereunto, upon the Ascription of it unto the Son, is a fond Imagination, which
could befall no man who understands any thing of things of this Nature. It does
as well follow, that if the Son created the World, the Father did not; if the
Son uphold all things by the Word of his Power, the Father does not; that is,
that the Son is not in the Father, nor the Father in the Son. The Acts indeed
of Christ's Mediation respect the Ministration of Grace, being the procuring and
communicating Causes thereof; but the Person of Christ the Mediator is the
Fountain of Grace. So they thought who beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the
only begotten of the Father full of Grace and Truth. But the especial Relation
of Grace unto the Father as sending the Son, unto the Son as sent by him and
incarnate, and unto the Holy Spirit as proceeding from and sent by them both, I
have elsewhere fully declared, and shall not in this place (which indeed will
scarce give Admittance unto any thing of so serious a nature) again insist
thereon. 4thly, The Opposition which he would again set between Christ and the
Gospel, is impious in it self, and if he thinks to charge it on me openly
false. I challenge him and all his Accomplices, to produce any one word out of
any Writing of mine, that from a Plea or pretense of Grace in Christ, should
give Countenance unto any in the neglect of the least Precept given, or Duty
required in the Gospel. And notwithstanding all that I have said or taught,
concerning the Boundless, Bottomless Grace and Mercy of Christ toward
believing, humble, penitent Sinners, I do believe the Way of Gospel Obedience
indispensibly required to be walked in by all that will come to the Enjoyment
of God, to be so narrow, that no Revilers, nor false Accusers, nor Scoffers,
nor Despisers of Gospel Mysteries, continuing so to be, can walk therein. But
that there is not Grace and Mercy declared and tendered in the Gospel also, unto
all sorts of sinners, under any qualifications whatever, who upon its
Invitation will come to God through Christ, by Faith and Repentance, is an
impious Imagination.

A Discourse much of the same Nature follows, concerning the Love of Christ,
after he has treated his Person and Grace at his pleasure. And this he takes
occasion for, from some Passages in my Book (as formerly) scraped together from
several places, so as he thought fit and convenient unto his Purpose. Page 209.
Thus the Love of Christ is an Eternal Love, because his Divine Nature is
Eternal; and it is an Unchangeable Love because his Divine Nature is
Unchangeable; and his Love is Fruitful, for it being the Love of God, it must
be effectual and fruitful in producing all the things which he wills unto
his Beloved. He loves Life, Grace, Holiness into us, loves us into Covenant,
loves us into Heaven. This is an Excellent Love indeed, which does all for us,
and leaves nothing for us to do. We owe this Discovery to an Aquaintance with
Christ's Person, or rather with his Divine Nature, for the Gospel is very
silent in this matter. All that the Gospel tells us is, that Christ Loves
Sinners so as to die for them, that he Loves Good men who believe and obey his
Gospel, so as to save them, that he continues to Love them while they
contitinue to be good, but hates them when they return to their old Vices; and
therefore I say there is great Reason for Sinners to fetch their Comforts not
from the Gospel, but from the Person of Christ, which as far excells the
Gospel, as the Gospel excells the Law.

I do suppose the Expressions mentioned are for the substance of them in my
Book, and shall therefore only enquire what it is in them which he excepteth
against, and for which I am reproachched, as one that has an Acquaintance with
Christ's person, which is now grown so Common and Trite an Expression, that
were it not condited unto some Men's Pallats by its Profaneness, it would argue
a great barrenness in this Author's Invention, that can vary no more in the
Topic of Reviling. It had been well if his Licenser had accommodated him with
some part of his Talent herein. But what is it that is excepted against? Is it,
that the love of Christ as he is God is Eternal? or is it that it is
Unchangeable? or is it that it is Fruitful or effective of Good things unto the
persons Beloved? The Philosopher tells us, that to Love for any one is, (...).
It is this Efficacy of the Love of Christ which must bear all the present
Charge. The meaning of my words therefore is, that the Love of Christ is unto
us the Cause of Life, Grace, Holiness, and the Reward of Heaven. And because it
is in the Nature of Love to be effective, according unto the Ability of the
person Loving, of the Good which it wills unto the Object beloved, I expressed
it as I thought meet, by Loving these things to us. And I am so far on this
occasion, and the severe Reflection on me for an Acquaintance with Christ from
altering my thoughts, that I say still with Confidence, he who is otherwise
minded, is no Christian. And if this Man knows not how the Love of Christ is
the Cause of Grace and Glory, how it is effective of them, and that in a
perfect consistency with all other Causes and means of them, and the Necessity
of our Obedience, he may do well to abstain a little from Writing, until he is
better informed. But, says he, this is an Excellent Love indeed, which does
all for us, and leaves us nothing to do. But who told him so? who ever said so?
Does he think that if our Life, Grace, Holiness, Glory, be from the Love of
Christ Originally, Causally, by virtue of his Divine Gracious operations in us
and toward us, that there is no Duty incumbent on them who would be made
partakers of them, or use, or improve them unto their proper ends? Shall we
then to please him say, that we have neither Life, nor Grace, nor Holiness, nor
Glory, from the Love of Christ, but whereas most of them are our own Duties, we
have them wholly from our selves? Let them do so who have a mind to renounce
Christ and his Gospel; I shall come into no Partnership with them. For what he
adds, all that the Gospel teaches us, etc. He should have done well to have
said, as far as he knows, which is a Limitation with a witness. If this be all
the Gospel which the Man knows and Preaches, I pity them whom he has taken
under his Instruction. Does Christ in his Love do nothing unto the quickening
and Conversion of Men? Nothing to the Purification and Sanctification of
Believers? Nothing as to their Consolation and Establishment? Nothing as to the
Administration of strength against Temptations? Nothing as to Supplies of Grace
in the increase of Faith, Love and Obedience, etc. This Ignorance or
Profaneness is greatly to be bewailed, as his ensuing Scoff repeated now usque
ad Nauseam, about an opposition between Christ and his Gospel, is to be
despised. And if the Lord Christ has no other Love but what this man will
allow, the state of the Church in this world depends on a very slender thread.
But attempts of this Nature will fall short enough of prevailing with sober
Christians to foregoe their Faith and Persuasion, that it is from the Love of
Christ, that Believers are preserved in that condition wherein he does and will
approve of them. Yea, to suppose that this is all the Grace of the Gospel, that
whilst me, are good Christ loves them, and when they are bad he hates them,
both which are true, and farther that he does by his Grace neither make them
Good, nor preserve them that are so made, is to renounce all that is properly
so called.

He yet proceeds, first to evert this Love which I asserted, and then to
declare his own Apprehensions concerning the Love of Christ. The first in the
ensuing words, Page 210. But methinks this is a very odd way of arguing from
the Divine Nature; For if the Love of Christ as God be so Infinite, Eternal,
Unchangeable, Fruitful, I would willingly understand how Sin, Death and Misery
came into the World. For if this Love be so Eternal and Unchangeable, because
the Divine Nature is so, then it was always so; For God always was what he
is, and that which is Eternal could never be other than it is now; and why
could not this Eternal, and Unchangeable, and Fruitful Love, as well preserve
us from falling into Sin, and Misery, and Death, as love Life and Holiness into
us? For it is a little odd, first to love us into Sin and Death, that then he
may love us into Life and Holiness; which indeed could not be, if this Love of
God were always so unchangeable and Fruitful as this Author persuades us it
is now; For if this Love had always loved Life and and Holiness into us, I
cannot conceive how it should happen, that we should sin and dye.

It is well if he know what it is that he aims at in these Words; I am sure
what he says does not in the least impeach the Truth which he designs to
oppose. The Name and Nature of God are every where in the Scripture proposed
unto us, as the Object of and Encouragement unto our Faith, and his Love in
particular is therein represented unchangeable, because he himself is so. But
it does not hence follow, that God loves any one Naturally or Necessarily. His
Love is a free Act of his Will, and therefore though it be like himself, such
as becomes his Nature, yet it is not necessarily determined on any Object, nor
limited as unto the Nature, Degrees and Effects of it. He Loves whom he
pleases, and as unto what End he pleases. Jacob he loved, and Esau he hated;
and those Effects which from his Love, or out of it, he will communicate unto
them, are various, according to the Council of his Will. Some he Loves only as
to Temporal and Common Mercies, some as to spiritual Grace and Glory, for he
has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy. Wherefore, it is no way contrary unto
and inconsistent with the Eternity, the Immutability and Fruitfulness of the
Love of God, that he suffered Sin to enter into the World, or that he does
dispense more Grace in Jesus Christ under the New Testament than he did under
the Old. God is always the same that he was. Love in God is always of the
same Nature that it was; But the Objects, Acts and Effects of this Love, with
the Measures and Degrees of them, are the Issues of the Council or free
Purposes of his Will. Want of the understanding hereof, makes this man imagine
that if Gods Love in Christ wherewith he loves us, be Eternal and Fruitful,
then must God necessarily, always, in or out of Christ, under the Old or New
Covenant, love all Persons, Elect or not Elect, with the same Love as to the
Effects and Fruits of it, which is a wondrous profound Apprehension. The Reader
therefore if he please may take notice, that the Love which I intend, and
whereunto I ascribe those Properties, is the especial Love of God in Christ
unto the Elect. Concerning this himself says, that he loves them with an
everlasting Love, and therefore draws them with loving Kindness, Jerem. 31.3.
which Love I shall be bold to say, is Eternal and Fruitful. And hence, as he
changes not, whereon the Sons of Jacob are not consumed, Mal. 3.6. there being
with him neither variableness nor shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. so accordingly
he has in this matter, by his Promise and Oath, declared the Immutability of
his Council, Heb. 6.17, 18. which seems to intimate that his Love is
unchangeable. And whereas this Eternal Love is in Christ Jesus as the Way and
Means of making it certain in all its Effects, and with respect unto its whole
Design, it is fruitful in all Grace and Glory, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. And if he
cannot understand how notwithstanding all this, Sin so entered into the World
under the Law of Creation and the first Covenant, as to defeat in us all the
Benefits thereof, at present I cannot help him. For as I am sure enough he
would scorn to learn any thing of me, so I am not at leisure to put it to the
trial.

His own Account of the Love of God succeeds, page 211. Not that I deny, that
the Love of God is Eternal, Unchangeable, Fruitful; that is, that God was
always Good, and always continues Good, and manifests his Love and Goodness
in such ways as are suitable to his Nature, which is the Fruitfulness of it.
But then the Unchangeableness of Gods Love, does not consist in being always
determined to the same Object, but that he always loves for the same Reason;
that is, that he always loves true Virtue and Goodness wherever he sees it,
and never ceases to love any Person till he ceases to be Good; and then the
Immutability of his Love is the Reason why he loves no longer. For, should he
love a Wicked man, the Reason and Nature of his Love would change; and the
Fruitfulness of Gods Love with respect to the Methods of his Grace and
Providence, does not consist in producing what he loves by an Omnipotent and
Irrisistble Power, for then Sin and Death could never have entered into the
World, but he Governs and does good to his Creatures in such Ways as are most
suitable to their Natures. He governs Reasonable Creatures by Principles of
Reason, as he does the Material World by the necessary Laws of Matter, and
Brute Creatures by the Instincts and Propensities of Nature.

This may pass for a Systeme of his Divinity, which how he will reconcile unto
the Doctrine of the Church of England in her Articles, she and he may do well
to consider. But whatever he means by the Love of God always determined unto
the same Object, it were an easy thing to prove beyond the reach of his
Contradiction, that Persons are the Objects of Gods Eternal Love as well as
Things and Qualifications are of his Approbation, or that he loves some Persons
with an Everlasting and Unchangeable Love, so as to preserve them from all
ruining Evils, and so as they may be always meet Objects of his approving Love
unto his Glory. And whereas these things have been debated and disputed on all
hands with much Learning and Diligence, our Author is a very happy man, if with
a few such loose Expressions as these repeated, he thinks to determine all the
Controversies about Election and Effectual Grace, with Perseverance on the
Pelagian side. The Hypothesis here maintained, that because God always, and
unchangeably approves of what is Good in any, or of the Obedience of his
Creatures, and disapproves or hates sin, condemning it in his Law; that
therefore he may love the same Person one day and hate him another,
notwithstanding his Pretenses that he is constant unto the Reason of his Love,
will inevitably fall into one of these Conclusions; either that God indeed never
loves any Man be he who he will, or that he is changeable in his Love upon
outward external Reasons as we are; and let him choose which he will own. In
the mean time, such a Love of God toward Believers as shall always
effectually preserve them meet Objects of his Love and Approbation, is not to
be baffled by such trifling impertinencies. His next Reflection is on the
Manner of Gods Operations in the Communication of Grace and Holiness, which he
says, is not by an omnipotent and Irresistible Power, confirming his Assertion
by that Consideration, that then Sin and Death could never have entered into the
World, which is resolved into another sweet supposition, That God must needs
act the same Power of Grace toward all men, at all times, under each Covenant,
whether he will or no. But this it is to be a happy Disputant, all things
succeed well with such Persons which they undertake. And as to the Manner of
the Operation of Grace, how far Grace it self may be said to be Omnipotent, and
in its Operations irresistible, I have fully declared there where he may oppose
and refute it if he have any Mind thereunto. His present Attempt against it in
those words, that God governs Reasonable Creatures by Principles of Reason, is
so weak in this Case and impertinent, that it deserves no Consideration. For
all the Operations of Divine Grace are suited unto the Rational Constitution of
our Beings; neither was ever man so wild as to fancy any of them such as are
inconsistent with, or do offer force unto the Faculties of our Souls in their
Operations. Yea that which elevates, aids and assists our Rational Faculties in
their Operations on and toward their proper Objects, which is the work of
Efficacious Grace, is the principal Preservative of their Power and Liberty,
and can be no way to their Prejudice. And we do moreover acknowledge, that
those Proposals which are made in the Gospel unto our Reason, are eminently
suited to excite and prevail with it unto its proper Use and Exercise, in
compliance with them. Hence, although the Habit of Faith or Power of Believing,
be wrought in us by the Holy Ghost, yet the Word of the Gospel is the Cause and
Means of all its Acts, and the whole Obedience which it produces. But if by
governing Reasonable Creatures by the Principle of Reason, he intends that God
deals no otherwise by his Grace with the Souls of men, but only by proposing
Objective Arguments and Motives unto a Compliance with his Will, without
internal Aids and Assistances of Grace, it is a gross piece of Pe^^gianisme,
destructive of the Gospel, sufficiently confuted elsewhere; and he may explain
himself as he pleases.

His proceed is to transcribe some other Passages taken out of my Book, here
and there, in whose repetition he inserts some impertinent Exceptions. But the
design of the whole is to state a Controversy as he calls it between us and
them, or those whom he calls They and We, whoever they be. And this upon the
Occasion of my mentioning the fullness of Grace, Life and Righteousness that is
in Christ, he does in these Words, page 215. They say, that these are the
Personal Graces of Christ as Mediator, which are inherent in him, and must be
derived from his Person; we say, they signify the Perfection and Excellency of
his Religion, as being the most perfect and complete Declaration of the Will of
God, and the most powerful Method of the Divine Wisdom, for the reforming of
the World, as it prescribe^ the only Righteousness which is (...) ^ble to God,
and directs us in the only way to Life and Immortality.

I shall not absolutely accept of the Terms of this Controversy as to the
state of it on our part proposed by him, and yet I shall not much vary from
them. We say therefore, that Jesus Christ being full of all Grace, Excellencies
and Perfections, he communicates them unto us, in that Degree as is necessary
for us, and in proportion unto his abundant Charity and Goodness toward us.
And we Christians as his Body or fellow Members of his Humane Nature, receive
Grace and Mercy flowing from him to us. This state of the Controversy on our
side I suppose he will not refuse, nor the terms of it; but will own them to be
ours, though he will not it may be allow some of them to be Proper or
Convenient. And that he may know who his They are, who are at this End of the
Difference, he may be pleased to take notice, that these words are the whole
and entire Paraphrase of Dr. Hammond on Joh. 1.16. the first Testimony he
^^^^rtakes to answer. And when this Author has replied to Mr. Hooker, Dr.
Jackson and Him, and such other Pillars of the Church of England as concur
with them, it will be time enough for me to consider how I shall defend my self
against him. Or if he will take the Controversy on our part in Terms more
directly Expressive of my Mind, It is the Person of Christ is the Fountain of
all Grace to the Church, as he well observes my Judgment to be, and that from
him all Grace and Mercy is derived unto us; And then I do maintain, that the
They whom he opposes, are not only the Church of England, but the whole
Catholic Church in all Ages. Who the We are on the other hand, who reject this
Assertion, and believe that all the Testimonies concerning the fullness of Grace
in Christ, and the Communication thereof unto us, do only declare the
Excellency of his Religion, is not easy to be conjectured. For unless it be
the People of Racow, I know not who are his Associates. And let him but name
three Divines of any Reputation in the Church of England since the Reformation,
who have given the least Countenance unto his Assertions, Negative or Positive,
and I will acknowledge that he has better Associates in his Profession, than
as yet I believe he has. But that Jesus Christ himself, God and Man in one
Person, the Mediator between God and Man, is not a Fountain of Grace and Mercy
to his Church, that there is no real internal Grace communicated by him, or
derived from him unto his Mystical Body, that the Fullness which is in him, or
said to be in him, of Grace and Truth, of unsearchable Riches of Grace, etc. is
nothing but the Doctrine which he taught, as the most complete and perfect
Declaration of the Will of God, are Opinions that cannot be divulged under
pretense of Authority, without the most pernicious scandal to the present
Church of England. And if this be the Man's Religion, that this is all the
Fullness we receive from Christ, A perfect Revelation of the Divine Will
concerning the Salvation of Mankind, which contains so many excellent Promises
that it may well be called Grace, and prescribes such a plain and simple
Religion, so agreeable to the natural Notions of Good and Evil, that it may
well be called Truth; that complying with its Doctrine, or yielding Obedience
unto its Precepts, and believing the Promises which it gives, in our own
strength, without any real Aid, Assistance or Communication of internal saving
Grace from the Person of Jesus Christ, is our Righteousness before God, whereon
and for which we are Justified, I know as well as he whence it came, and
perhaps better than he whither it will go.

The remaining Discourse of this Chapter consists of two parts; First an
Attempt to disprove any Communication of real internal Grace from the Lord
Christ unto Believers for their Sanctification. Secondly, an Endeavor to
refute the Imputation of his Righteousness unto us for our Justification. In
the first he contends, that all the Fullness of Grace and Truth said to be in
Christ, consists either in the Doctrine of the Gospel, or in the Largeness of
his Church; In the latter, that Faith in Christ is nothing but Believing the
Gospel, and the Authority of Christ who revealed it, and by yielding Obedience
whereunto, we are justified before God on the account of an internal inherent
Righteousness in our selves. Now these are no small Undertakings; the first of
them being expressly contrary to the sense of the Catholic Church in all
Ages; For the Pelagians and the Socinians are by common Agreement excluded from
an Interest therein; And the latter of them contrary to the plain Confessions
of all the Reformed Churches, with the constant Doctrine of this Church of
England, and therefore we may justly expect that they should be managed with
much strength of Argument, and evident Demonstration. But the Unhappiness of it
is, I will not say his, but ours, that these are not things which our Author as
yet has accustomed himself unto; and I cannot but say, that to my knowledge I
never read a more weak loose and impertinent Discourse, upon so weighty
Subjects, in my whole Life before: He must have little to do, who can afford
to spend his Time in a particular Examination of it, unless it be in the
Exposition of those places which are almost Verbatim transcribed out of
Schlictingius. Besides, for the first Truth which he opposes, I have confirmed
it in a Discourse which I suppose may be made public before this come to View,
beyond what I expect any sober Reply unto from him. Some Texts of Scripture
that mention a Fullness in Christ, he chooses out to manifest (to speak a Word
by the way) that indeed they do not intend any such Fullness in Christ himself.
And the first is Joh. 1.16. The Exposition whereof which he gives, is that of
Schlictingius, who yet extends the import of the words beyond what he will
allow. The Enforcement which he gives unto his Exposition by comparing the 14
and 17 Verses with the 16. is both weak and contradictory of it self. For the
words of the 14 Verse, are The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and
we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth; It is evident beyond contradiction, that the Expression full
of Grace and Truth is Exegetical of his Glory, as the only begotten of the
Father, which was the Glory of his Person, and not the Doctrine of the Gospel.
And for the opposition that is made between the Law given by Moses, and the
Grace and Truth which came by Jesus Christ, I shall yet rather adhere to the
sense of the Ancient Church, and the most Eminent Doctors of it, which if he
knows not it to be concerning the Effectual Communication of real renewing
sanctifying Grace by Jesus Christ, there are ^now who can inform him, rather
than that woeful gloss upon them, his Doctrine is called Grace, because
accompanied with such Excellent Promises, and may well be called Truth, because
so agreeable to the Natural Notions of Good and Evil; which is the Confession
of the Pelagian unbelief; but these things are not my present concernment. For
the latter part of his Discourse in his opposition unto the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, as he does not go about once to state or declare the
sense wherein it is pleaded for, nor produces any one of the Arguments
wherewith it is confirmed, and omitteth the mention of most of the particular
Testimonies which declare and establish it; so as unto those few which he takes
notice of, he expressly founds his Answers unto them in that woeful Subterfuge,
that if they are capable of another Interpretation, or having another sense
given unto them, then nothing can be concluded from them to that purpose, by
which the Socinians seek to shelter themselves from all the Testimonies that
are given to his Deity and Satisfaction. But I have no concernment, as I said,
either in his Opinions or his way of Reasoning, and do know that those who have
so, need not desire a better Cause, nor an easier Adversary to deal withal.

In his third Section page 279. he enters upon his exceptions unto the Union of
Believers unto Jesus Christ, and with great modesty at the entrance of his
Discourse, tells us. First, how these men with whom he has to do, have
fittted the Person of Christ unto all the wants and necessities of the sinner,
which yet if he denies God himself to have done, he is openly injurious unto
his Wisdom and Grace. The very first Promise that was given concerning him, was
that he should save sinners from all their wants, evils and miseries, that
might, did, or could befall them by the entrance of sin. But thus it falls out,
when men will be talking of what they do not understand. Again, he adds, how
he has Explained the Scripture Metaphors whereby the Union between Christ and
Christians is represented, but that these men in stead of explaining of those
Metaphors, turn all Religion into an Allegory. But what if one should now tell
him, that his Explanation of these Metaphors, is the most absurd and
irrational, and argues the most fulsome ignorance of the Mystery of the Gospel
that can be imagined, and that on the other side those whom he traduceth, do
explain them unto the understanding and experience of all that believe, and
that in a way suited and directed unto by the Holy Ghost himself, to farther
their Faith, Obedience and Consolation; as far as I perceive, he would be at no
small loss how to relieve himself under this censure. The first thing he begins
withal, and wherein in the first place I fall under his Displeasure, is about
the Conjugal Relation between Christ and Believers, which he treats of page
280. As for Example (says he) Christ is called an Husband, the Church his
Spouse; and now all the invitations of the Gospel, are Christ's wooing and
making love to his Spouse; and what other men call believing the Gospel of
Christ, whereby we devote our selves to his Service, these men call that
consent and contract which makes up the Marriage betwixt Christ and Believers.
Christ takes us for his Spouse, and we take Christ for our Husband, and that
with all the Solemnities of Marriage, except the Ring, which is left out as an
Antichristian Ceremony; Christ saying thus, This is that we will consent unto,
that I will be for thee, and thou shall be for me and not for another. Christ
gives himself to the Soul with all his Excellencies, Righteousness,
Preciousness, Graces, and Eminencies, to be its Savior, Head and Husband, to
dwell with it in this Holy Relation; and the Soul likes Christ for his
Excellencies, Graces, Suitableness, far above all other Beloveds whatsoever,
and accepts of Christ by the Will, for its Husband, Lord and Savior. And thus
the Marriage is completed, and this is the Day of Christ's Espousals, and of
the Gladness of his Heart; and now follow all mutual conjugal Affections, which
on Christ's part consist in Delight, Valuation, Pity, Compassion, Bounty; on the
Saints part, in Delight, Valuation, Chastity, Duty. But I have already
corrected this fooling with Scripture Metaphors and Phrases.

It might perhaps not unbecome this Author to be a little more sparing of his
Correction, unless his Authority were more then it is, and his skill also in
the mannagement of it. For at present those whom he attempts upon, are
altogether insensible of any Effects of his severity. But whereas he seems much
at a loss how to evidence his own Wisdom, any other way than by calling them
Fools with whom he has to do, it is sufficient to plead his Excuse. But what
is it, that he is here so displeased at, as unfit for a Man of his Wisdom to
bear withal, and therefore calls it Fooling? Is it that there is a conjugal
Relation between Christ and the Church? That he is the Bridegroom and Husband
of the Church, and that the Church is his Bride and Spouse? That he becomes so
unto it by a voluntarily Gracious Act of his Love, and that the Church enters
into that Relation with him by their acceptance of him in that Relation, and
voluntarily giving up themselves unto him in Faith, Love, and Obedience suited
thereunto? Is it that he loves his Church and cherishes it as an Husband? Or
that the Church gives up it self in chaste and holy obedience unto him as her
Spouse? Or is it my way and manner of expressing these things wherewith he is
so provoked? If it be the latter, I desire he would for his own satisfaction
take notice, that I contemn his censures, and appeal to the Judgment of those
who have more understanding and experience in these things, than for ought I
can discern by his Writings, he has yet attained unto. If it be the former,
they are all of them so proved and confirmed from the Scripture in that very
Discourse which he excepteth against, as that he is not able to answer or reply
one serious word thereunto. Indeed to deny it, is to renounce the Gospel, and
the Catholic Faith. It is therefore to no purpose for me here to go over again
the Nature of this Relation between Christ and the Church, wherein really and
truly it does consist, what it is the Scripture instructs us in thereby, what
is that Love, Care, and Tenderness of Christ which it would have us thence to
Learn, and what is our own duty with, respect thereunto, together with the
Consolation thence arising; the whole of this work is already discharged in
that discourse which these impertinent Cavils are raised against, and that
suitably to the sense of the Church in all Ages, and of all sound Expositors of
those very many places of Scripture which I have urged and insisted on to that
purpose. Let him if he please a little lay aside the severity of his
Corrections, and befooling of Men, and answer any Material passage in the whole
discourse if he be able, or discover any thing in it not agreeable to the
Analogy of Faith, or the sense of the Ancient Church, if he can. And though he
seem both here and in some of his ensuing pages, to have a particular (...) of
what is cited or improved ou^ of the Book of Canticles to this purpose; yet if
he either deny, that that whole Book does mystically express the conjugal
Relation that is between Christ and his Church, with their mutual affections
and delight in each other; or that the places particularly insisted on by me,
are not duly applied unto their proper intention; I can at least confirm them
both, by the Authority of such persons as whose Antiquity and Learning will
exercise the utmost of his confidence in calling them Fools for their pains.

From hence for sundry Pages he is pleased to give me a little respite, whilst
he diverts his severity unto another, unto whose Will and Choice what to do in
it, I shall leave his peculiar Concern, as knowing full well how easy it is
for him to vindicate what he has written on this Subject from his impertinent
Exceptions, if he please. In the mean time, if this Author supposes to add
unto the Reputation of his Ingenuity and Modesty, by assaulting with a few
pitiful Cavils a Book written with so much Learning, Judgment and Moderation,
as that is which he excepts against, not daring in the mean time to contend
with it in any thing of the Expository, or the Argumentative part of it, but
only to discover a malevolent desire to obstruct the use which it has been of,
and may yet further be to the Church of God, I hope he will not find many
Rivals in such a Design. For my part, I do suppose it more becoming Christian
Modesty and Sobriety, where men have labored according to their Ability in the
Explication of the Mysteries of Christian Religion, and that with an avowed
intention to promote Holiness and Gospel Obedience, to accept of what they have
attained, wherein we can come unto a Compliance with them, then passing by
whatever we cannot but approve of, or are not able to disprove, to make it our
Business to cavil at such Expressions as either we do not like, or hope to
pervert and abuse to their disadvantage.

Page 296. he returns again to my Discourse, and fiercely pursues it for sundry
Leafs* in such a Manner as becomes him, and is usual with him. That part of my
Book which he deals withal, is from page 176. unto page 187. And if any person
of Ingenuity and Judgment will be pleased but to peruse it, and to compare it
with this man's Exceptions, I am secure it will need no farther Vindication; but
as it is represented in his Cavilling way, it is impossible for any man either
to conceive what is the true Design of my Discourse, or what the Arguments
wherewith what I assert is confirmed, which he does most unduely pretend to
give an Account of. For he so chops and changes and alters at his pleasure,
going backwards and forwards, and that from one thing to another, without any
regard unto a Scholastic or Ingenuous Debate of any thing that might be called
a Controversy, merely to seek out an Appearance of Advantage to vent his
cavilling Exceptions, as no Judgment can Rationally be made of his whole
Discourse, but only that he had a mind to have cast Aspersions on mine if he
had known how. But such stuff as it is, we must now take the Measure of it,
and consider of what Use it may be. And first he quotes those words from my
Book, That Christ fulfilled all Righteousness as he was Mediator, and that
whatever he did as Mediator he did it for them whose Mediator he was, or in
whose stead, and for whose Good he executed the Office of a Mediator before
God; and hence it is, that his complete and perfect Obedience to the Law is
reckoned to us. He adds, This is well said, if it were as well proved. And
because this is a Matter of great consequence, I shall first examine those
Reasons the Doctor alleadges to prove that Christ fulfilled all Righteousness
as he was Mediator, in their stead whose Mediator he was.

These Assertions are gathered up from several places in my Discourse; though
page 182. is cited for them all. And if any one find himself concerned in these
things, I may demand of him the Labor of their perusal in my Book it self; and
for those who shall refuse a Compliance with so reasonable a Request, I do not
esteem my self obliged to tender them any farther satisfaction. However I say
again, that the Lord Christ fulfilled all Righteousness as Mediator, and that
what he did as Mediator, he did it for them whose Mediator he was, or in whose
stead and for whose Good he executed the Office of a Mediator before God. He
says, it is well said, if it were as well proved. I say it is all proved in
the Places where it is asserted, and that with such Testimonies and Arguments
as he dares not touch upon. And although he pretends to examine the Reasons
that I allege, to prove that Christ fulfilled all Righteousness as he was
Mediator, in their stead whose Mediator he was, yet indeed he does not do so.
For First, I say no such thing as he here feigns me to say, namely, that Christ
as Mediator fulfilled all Righteousness in our stead, but only that Christ
being the Mediator in our stead, fulfilled all Righteousness for us; which is
another thing, though perhaps he understands not the difference. Nor does he so
much as take notice of that Testimony which is immediately subjoyned unto the
words he cites, in the Confirmation of them. But he will disprove this
Assertion, or at least manifest that it cannot be proved. And this he enters
upon page 297. As for the first, we have some Reason to require good proof of
this, since the Notion of a Mediator includes no such thing. A Mediator is one
who interposeth between two differing Parties, to accommodate the Difference;
but it was never heard of yet, that it was the Office of a Mediator to perform
the Terms and Conditions himself. Moses was the Mediator of the first Covenant,
Gal. 3.9. And his Office was to receive the Law from God, to deliver it to the
People; to command them to observe those Rights and Sacrifices and Expiations
which God had ordained, but he was not to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law
for the whole Congregation. Thus Christ is now the Mediator of a better
Covenant, and his Office required, that he should preach the Gospel, which
contains the Terms of Peace and Reconciliation between God and Men; and since
God would not enter into Covenant with Sinners, without the Intervention of a
Sacrifice, he dies too, as a Sacrifice and Propitiation for the sins of the
World.

I yet suppose that he observed not the Inconsistencies of this Discourse, and
therefore shall a little mind him of them, although I am no way concerned in it
or them. For, First he tells us, That a Mediator is one who interposeth between
two differing Parties, to accommodate the Difference; and then gives us an
Instance in Moses, who is called a Mediator in receiving the Law, but did
therein no way interpose himself between differing Parties, to reconcile them.
Secondly, from the Nature of the Mediation of Moses, he would describe the
Nature of the Mediation of Christ; which Socinian Fiction I could direct him to
a sufficient Confutation of; but that, Thirdly, He rejects it himself in his
next words, that Christ as a Mediator was to dye as a Sacrifice, and
Propitiation for the Sins of the World, which renders his Mediation utterly of
another Kind and Nature than that of Moses. The mistake of this Discourse is,
that he supposes that men do argue from the general Nature of the Office of a
Mediator and the Work of Mediation in this Matter; when that which they do
intend hence to prove, and what he intends to oppose, is from the special
Nature of the Mediatory Office and Work of Christ, which is peculiar, and has
sundry things essentially belonging unto it, that belong not unto any other
kind of Mediation whatever, whereof himself gives one signal Instance.

In his ensuing pages, he wonderfully perplexeth himself in gathering up
sayings backward and forward in my discourse to make some advantage to his
purpose, and hopes that he is arrived at no less success than a discovery of I
know not what Contradictions in what I have asserted. As I said before, so I
say again, that I refer the determination and judgment of this whole matter
unto any one who will but once read over the discourse excepted against. But
for his part, I greatly pity him, as really supposing him at a loss in the
sense of what is yet plainly delivered. And I had rather continue to think so,
than to be relieved by supposing him guilty of such gross prevarications, as he
must be, if he understands what he treats about. Plainly I have showed, that
there was an especial Law of Mediation which Christ was subject unto, as the
Commandment of the Father. That he should be incarnate, that he should be the
King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church, that he should bear our Iniquities,
make his Soul an offering for sin, and give his life a ransom for many; were
the principal parts of this Law. The whole of it I have lately explained in my
Exercitations unto the second part of the Exposition on the Epistle to the
Hebrews, whereon if he please he may exercise and try his Skill, in a way of
opposition. This Law our Lord Jesus Christ did not yield obedience to in our
stead, as though we had been obliged originally unto the duties of it, which we
neither were nor could be; although what he suffered penally in any of them was
in our stead, without which consideration, he could not have righteously
suffered in any kind. And the following trivial Exception of this Author about
the Obligation on us to lay down our Lives for the Brethren, is meet for him
to put in; seeing we are not obliged so to dye for any one, as Christ dyed for
us. Was Paul crucified for you? But secondly, Christ our Mediator, and as
Mediator was obliged unto all that obedience unto the Moral and all other Laws
of God, that the Church was obliged unto; and that which I have asserted hereon
is, that the Effects of the former obedience of Christ are communicated unto
us, but the latter obedience it self is imputed unto us, and have proved it by
those Arguments which this Man does not touch upon. All this is more fully,
clearly, and plainly declared in the discourse it self, and I have only
represented so much of it here again, that it might be evident unto all how,
frivolous are his Exceptions. It is therefore to no purpose for me to
transcribe again the Quotations out of my Book, which he fills up his pages
with, seeing it is but little in them which he excepteth against, and whoever
pleases may consult them at large in the places from whence they are taken.
Or, because it is not easy to find them out singly, they are so picked up and
down backwards and forwards, curtailed and added to at pleasure, any one may in
a very little space of time read over the whole unto his full satisfaction. I
shall therefore only consider his exceptions, and have unto an end of this
fruitless trouble wherein I am most unwillingly engaged by this man's
unsuspected Disingenuity and Ignorance.

After the Citation of some Passages, he adds page 301. This methinks is very
strange, that what he did as Mediator, is not imputed unto us, but what he did
not as our Mediator; but as a Man subject to the Law that is imputed to us, and
reckoned as if we had done it, by reason of his being our Mediator. And it is
as strange to the full that Christ should do whatever was required of us, by
virtue of any Law when he was neither Husband, nor Wife, nor Father, Merchant,
nor Tradesman, Seaman nor Soldier, Captain or Lieutenant; much less a Temporal
Prince and Monarch. And how he should discharge the Duties of these Relations
for us, which are required of us by certain Laws, when he never was in any of
these Relations, and could not possibly be in all, is an Argument which may
Exercise the subtilty of Schoolmen, and to them I leave it.

It were greatly to be desired that he would be a little more heedful, and with
attention read the Writings of other Men, that he might understand them before
he comes to make such a bluster in his opposition to them. For I had told him
plainly, That though there was a peculiar Law of Mediation, whose Acts and
Duties we had no obligation unto, yet the Lord Christ even as Mediator was
obliged unto, and did personally perform all Duties of Obedience unto the Law
of God, whereunto we were subject and obliged, page 181. Sec. 14. And it is
strange to apprehend how he came to imagine that I said he did it not as our
Mediator, but as a Private Man. That which possibly might cast his thoughts
into this disorder was, that he knew not that Christ was made a Private Man as
Mediator, which yet the Scripture is sufficiently express in. For the following
Objections that the Lord Christ was neither Husband nor Wife, Father nor
Tradesman, etc. wherein yet possibly he is out in his Account, I have
frequently smiled at it when I have met with it in the Socinians, who are
perking with it at every turn; but here it ought to be admired. But yet without
troubling those Bugbears the Schoolmen, he may be pleased to take notice, that
the Grace of Duty and Obedience in all Relations is the same, the Relations
administering only an External Occasion unto its Peculiar Exercise. And what our
Lord Jesus Christ did in the fulfilling of all Righteousness in the
Circumstances and Relations wherein he stood, may be imputed to us for our
Righteousness in all our Relations, every Act of Duty and Sin in them
respecting the same Law and Principle. And hereon all his following Exceptions
for sundry pages, wherein he seems much to have pleased himself, do fall to
nothing, as being resolved into his own Mistakes, if he does not prevaricate
against his Science and Conscience. For the sum of them all he gives us in
these words, page 304. That Christ did those things as Mediator, which did not
belong to the Laws of his Mediation; which in what sense he did so, is fully
explained in my Discourse. And I am apt to guess, that either he is deceived,
or does design to deceive in expressing it by the Laws of his Mediation, which
may comprize all the Laws which as Mediator he was subject unto; and so it is
most true, that he did nothing as Mediator, but what belonged unto the Laws of
his Mediation. But most false, that I have affirmed that he did. For I did
distinguish between that peculiar Law which required the public Acts of his
Mediation, and those other Laws which as Mediator, he was made subject unto.
And if he neither does nor will understand these things when he is told them,
and they are proved unto him beyond what he can contradict, I know no reason
why I should trouble my self with one that contends with his own Mormoes,
though he never so lewdly or loudly call my Name upon them. And whereas I know
my self sufficiently subject unto Mistakes and Slips, so when I actually fall
into them, as I shall not desire this man's Forgiveness, but leave him to
exercise the utmost of his severity, so I despise his ridiculous attempts to
represent Contradictions in my Discourse, page 306. All pretenses whereunto are
taken from his own Ignorance or feigned in his Imagination. Of the like Nature
are all his ensuing Cavils; I desire no more of any Reader, but to peruse the
places in my Discourse which he carpeth at, and if he be a Person of ordinary
understanding in these things, I declare that I will stand to his Censure and
Judgment, without giving him the least farther Intimation of the sense and
Intendment of what I have written, or Vindication of its Truth. Thus whereas I
had plainly declared that the way whereby the Lord Christ in his own Person
became obnoxious and subject unto the Law of Creation, was by his own voluntary
antecedent Choice, otherwise than it is with those who are inevitably subject
unto it by Natural Generation under it, as also that the Hypostatical Union in
the first instant whereof the Humane Nature was fitted for Glory, might have
exempted him from the Oblgation of any outward Law whatever, whence it appears
that his consequential Obedience, though Necessary to himself, when he had
submitted himself unto the Law (as Lo I come to do thy Will O God) was
designedly for us, he miserably perplexeth himself, to abuse his credulous
Readers with an Apprehension that I had talked like himself, at such a rate of
Nonsense as any one in his Wits must needs despise. The meaning and sum of my
Discourse he would have to be this. Page 308. That Christ had not been bound to
live like a man, had he not been a Man; with I know not what futulous Cavils of
the like nature; when all that I insisted on, was the Reason why Christ would
be a Man, and live like a Man, which was that we might receive the Benefit and
Profit of his Obedience as he was our Mediator. So in the close of the same
wise Harangue, from my saying, That the Lord Christ by virtue of the
Hypostatical Union might be exempted as it were, and lifted above the Law,
which yet he willingly submitted unto, and in the same instant wherein he was
made of a Woman, was made also under the Law, whence Obedience unto it became
Necessary unto him, the man feigns I know not what Contradictions in his Fancy,
whereof there is not the least Appearance in the words unto any one who
understands the Matter expressed in them. And that the Assumption of the Humane
Nature into Union with the Son of God, with submission unto the Law thereon to
be performed in that Nature, are distinct parts of the Humiliation of Christ, I
shall prove when more serious Occasion is administered unto me.

In like manner he proceeds to put in his Exceptions unto what I discoursed
about the Laws that an innocent man is liable unto. For I said, that God never
gave any other Law to an Innocent person, but only the Law of his Creation,
with such Symbolical precepts as might be instances of his obedience thereunto.
Something he would find fault with, but well knows not what, and therefore
turmoiles himself to give countenance unto a putid Cavil. He tells us, That it
is a great favor that I acknowledge page 310. that God might add what
Symbolls he pleased unto the Law of Creation. But the childishness of these
impertinencies is shameful. To whom I pray is it a favor, or what does the
man intend by such a senseless scoff? Is there any word in my whole discourse
intimating that God might not in a state of Innocence give what positive Laws
he pleased unto innocent persons, as means and ways to express that obedience
which they owed unto the Law of Creation? The task wherein I am engaged is so
fruitless, so barren of any good use in contending with such impertinent
effects of malice and ignorance, that I am weary of every word I am forced to
add in the pursuit of it, but he will yet have it that an Innocent person such
as Christ was absolutely, may be obliged for his own sake to the observation of
such Laws and institutions as were introduced by the occasion of sin, and
respected all of them the personal sins of them that were obliged by them;
which if he can believe he is at Liberty for me to persuade as many as he can
to be of his mind, whilst I may be left unto my own Liberty and Choice, yea to
the necessity of my mind in not believing contradictions. And for what he adds
that I know those who conceit themselves above all forms of External Worship, I
must say to him that at present personally I know none that do so, but fear
that some such there are, as also others who despising not only the ways of
External Worship appointed by God himself, but also the Laws of internal Faith
and Grace, do satisfy themselves in a Customary observance of Forms of
Worship of their own devising.

In his next attempt he had been singular, and had spoken something which had
looked like an Answer to an Argument, had he well laid the Foundation of his
procedure. For, that Position which he designeth the Confutation of, is thus
laid down by him as mine, There can be no reason assigned of Christ's Obedience
unto the Law, but only this, that he did it in our stead; whereas my words are,
That the end of the Active Obedience of Christ cannot be assigned to be that he
might be fit for his Death and Oblation. And hereon what is afterward said
against this particular End, he interprets as spoken against all other Ends
whatever, instancing in such as are every way consistent with the Imputation of
his Obedience unto us, which could not be, had the only End of it been for
himself to fit him for his Death and Oblation. And this wilful mistake is
sufficient to give occasion to combat his own. Imaginations for two or three
pages together. page 314. He pretends unto the recital of an Argument of mine
for the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ with the like pretense of
attempting an answer unto it. But his design is not to manage any controversy
with me, or against me, but as he phraseth it, to expose my mistakes. I cannot
therefore justly expect from him so much as common Honesty will require, in
case the real handling of a Controversy in Religion had been intended. But his
way of procedure so far as I know and understand may be best suited unto his
design. In this place he does neither fairly nor truly report my words, nor
take the least notice of the Confirmation of my Argument, by the removal of
Objections whereunto it seemed liable, nor of the Reasons and Testimonies
whereby it is farther proved; but taking out of my Discourse what expressions
he pleases, putting them together with the same Rule, he thinks he has
sufficiently exposed my mistakes, the thing he aimed at. I have no more
concernment in this matter, but to refer both him and the Reader to the places
in my Discourse reflected on; Him truly to report and Answer my Arguments if he
be able, and the Reader to judge as he pleases between us. And I would for
this once desire of him, that if he indeed be concerned in these things, he
would peruse my Discourse here raved at, and determine in his own Mind, whether
I confidently affirm what is in Dispute (that is, what I had then in Dispute;
for who could divine so long ago what a Doughty Disputant this Author would by
this time sprout up into) and that this goes for an Argument, or that he
impudently affirms me so to do, contrary unto his Science and Conscience, if he
had not quite pored out his Eyes before he came to the End of a page or two in
my Book. And for the state of the Question here proposed by him, let none
expect that upon so slight an occasion I shall divert unto the discussion of
it. When this Author or any of his Consorts in design, shall Soberly and
Heartily without scoffing or railing, in a way of Argument or Reasoning
becoming Divines, and Men of Learning, answer any of those many Writings which
are extant against that Socinian Justification which he here approves and
contends for, or those written by the Divines of the Church of England on the
same subject, in the proof of what he denies, and confutation of what he
affirms, they may deserve to be taken notice of in the same Rank and Order with
those with whom they associate themselves. And yet I will not say but that
these cavilling Exceptions giving a sufficient Intimation of what some Men
would be at, if Ability and Opportunity did occurr, may give occasion also unto
a renewed Vindication of the Truths opposed by them, in a way suited unto the
Use and Edification of the Church, in due time and Season.

From page 185. of my Book, he retires upon his new Triumph unto page 176. as
hoping to hook something from thence, that might contribute unto the
fartherance of his Ingenious Design, although my Discourse in that place have
no Concernment in what he treats about. But let him be heard to what purpose
he pleases. Thus therefore he proceeds page 315. The Dr. makes a great
flourish with some Scripture Phrases, that there is almost nothing that Christ
has done, but we are said to do it with him, we are Crucified with him, we are
Dead with him, Buried with him, Quickened together with him; In the actings of
Christ there is by Virtue of the Compact between him as Mediator and the
Father, such an assured Foundation laid, that by Communication of the Fruit of
these Actings unto those in whose stead he performed them, they are said in the
participation of these Fruits to have done the same things with him. But he is
quite out in the reason of these Expressions, which is not that we are
accounted to do the same things which Christ did; for the things here mentioned
belong to the peculiar Office of his Mediation, which he told us before were
not reckoned as done by us, but because we do somethings like them; our dying
to Sin is a Conformity to the Death of Christ, and our walking in newness of
Life, is our Conformity to his Resurrection, and the consideration of the Death
and Resurrection of Christ, is very powerful to engage us to dye to Sin, and to
rise unto a new Life; and this is the true Reason of these Phrases.

Any man may perceive from what he is pleased here himself to report of my
words, that I was not treating about the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ, which he is now inveighing against. And it will be much more evident
unto every one that shall cast an eye on that discourse; but the design of this
confused rambling I have been forced now frequently to give an account of, and
shall if it be possible trouble the Reader with it no more. The present
difference between us, which he was ambitious to represent, is only this, that
whereas it seems he will allow that those expressions of our being crucified
with Christ, dead with him, buried with him, quickened with him, do intend
nothing but only our doing of something like unto that which Christ did, I do
add moreover, that we do those things by the virtue and efficacy of the Grace
which is communicated unto us from what the Lord Christ so did and acted for
us, as the Mediator of the New Covenant, whereby alone we partake of their
power, communicate in their virtue, and are conformed unto him as our Head;
wherein I know I have, as the Testimony of the Scripture, so the Judgment of
the Catholic Church of Christ on my side, and am very little concerned in the
censure of this person that I am quite out in the reason of those expressions.

For what remains of his Discourse so far as I am concerned in it, it is made
up of such Expositions of some Texts of Scripture, as issue for the most part
in a direct contradiction to the Text it self, or some express passages of the
Context. So does that of Gal. 4.4, 5. which he first undertakes to speak unto,
giving us nothing but what was first invented by Crellius in his Book against
Grotius, and is almost translated Verbatim out of the Comment of Schlicting.
upon the place; the remainder of them corruptly Socinianising, against the
sense of the Church of God. Hereunto are added such pitiful Mistakes, with
Reflections on me for distinguishing between Obeying and Suffering, (which
Conceit he most profoundly disproves by showing that one may Obey in Suffering,
and that Christ did so, against him who has written more about the Obedience
of Christ in Dying, or laying down his Life for us, than he seems to have read
on the same subject, as also concerning the Ends and Uses of his Death, which I
challenge him and all his Companions to answer and disprove if they can) as I
cannot satisfy my self in the farther Consideration of, no not with that speed
and haste of Writing now used, which nothing could give countenance unto, but
the meanness of the Occasion, and unprofitableness of the Argument in hand.
Wherefore, this being the manner of the Man, I am not able to give an Account
unto my self or the Reader of the mispence of more Time in the Review of such
Impertinencies; I shall add a few things and conclude.

First, I desire to know, whether this Author will abide by what he asserts, as
his own Judgment, in opposition unto what he puts in his Exception against in
my Discourse, page 320. All the Influence which the Sacrifice of Christ's Death,
and the Righteousness of his Life, that I can find in the Scripture is, that to
this we owe the Covenant of Grace; that is, as he afterward explains himself,
That God would for the sake of Christ enter into a New Covenant with Mankind,
wherein he promises Pardon of Sin and Eternal Life to them that Believe and
Obey the Gospel. I leave him herein to his second thoughts, for as he has now
expressed himself, there is no Reconciliation of his Assertion to common sense,
or the fundamental Principles of Christian Religion. That God entered into the
New Covenant Originally only for the sake of those things whereby that Covenant
was ratified and confirmed, and that Christ was so the Mediator of the New
Covenant, that he dyed not for the Redemption of Transgressions under the first
Covenant, whereby the whole Consideration of his Satisfaction and of Redemption
properly so called, is excluded, that there is no Consideration to be had of
his Purchase of the Inheritance of Grace and Glory, with many other things of
the same importance, and that the Gospel or the Doctrine of the Gospel is the
New Covenant, which is only a perspicuous Declaration of it, are things that
may become these New Sons of the Church of England, which the Elder Church
would not have borne withal.

Secondly, The Reader may take notice, that in some other Discourses of mine
now published, which were all of them finished before I had the Advantage to
peruse the Friendly and Judicious Animadversions of this Author, he will find
most of the Matters which he excepts against, both cleared, proved and
vindicated. And that those Principles which he directs his Opposition against,
are so established, as that I neither expect nor fear any such Assault upon
them from this sort of Men, as becomes a serious Debate on things of this
Nature.

Thirdly, That I have confined my self in the Consideration of this Authors
Discourse unto what I was Personally concerned in, without looking at or
accepting of the Advantages which offered themselves of reflecting upon him,
either as unto the Matter of his Discourses, or unto the Manner of Expressing
himself in its Delivery. For, (besides that I have no mind, and that for many
Reasons, to enter voluntarily into any Contest with this man) the Mistakes
which he has apparently been led unto by Ignorance or Prejudice, his fulsome
Errors against the Scripture, the Doctrine of the Ancient Church, and the
Church of England, are so multiplied and scattered throughout the whole, that a
Discovery and Confutation of them will scarce deserve the expense of Time that
must be wasted therein, until a more plausible Countenance or strenuous
Defense be given unto them. And as for what he aims at, I know well enough
where to find the whole of it, handled with more Civility and appearance of
Reason, and therefore when I am free or resolved to treat concerning them, I
shall do so in the Consideration of what is taught by his Authors and Masters,
and not of what he has borrowed from them.

Fourthly, I shall assure the Reader, that as a Thousand of such trifling
Cavillers or Revilers, as I have had some to deal withal, shall neither
discourage nor hinder me in the remaining service which I may have yet to
fulfill in the Patience of God for the Church of Christ, and Truth of the
Gospel; nor it may be occasion me any more to divert in the least unto the
Consideration of what they whisper or clamor, unless they are able to betake
themselves unto a more sober and Christian way of handling things in
Controversy; so if they will not or dare not foregoe this supposed Advantage
of Reproaching the Doctrine of Nonconformists, under which Pretense they openly
and as yet securely scorn and deride them, when they are all of them the avowed
Doctrines of all the Reformed Churches, and of this of England in particular;
and if they think it not meet to oppose themselves and Endeavors, unto those
Writings which have been composed and published professedly in the Declaration
and Defense of the Truth scoffed at and impugned by them, but choose rather to
exercise their Skill and Anger on Passages rent out of Practical Discourses,
accommodated in the Manner of their Delivery unto the Capacity of the Community
of Believers, as it is fit they should be; I do suppose that at one time or
other, from one hand or another, they may meet with some such Discourse
concerning Justification, and the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, as
may give them Occasion to be quiet, or to Exercise the best of their Skill and
Industry in an Opposition unto it; As many such there are already extant, which
they wisely take no Notice of, but only rave against Occasional Passages in
Discourses of another Nature; unless they Resolve on no Occasion to foregoe the
Shelter they have betaken themselves unto.

FINIS.

