ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS

SAPIENTIAE ET FELICITATIS.

blazon of Oxford University
To (...) being by us approved and appointed Collectors of the Moneys due to
His Majesty, By virtue of a late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the
raising Money by a Poll, and otherwise to enable His Majesty to enter into an
actual War against the French King, and for Prohibiting several French
Commodities. UNIVERS. OXON.ss.
THESE are in his Majesty's name, (...) will and require you, that you speedily
Collect and Levy of the several and respe^^ive person or persons, in the
Estreat or Assessment hereunto annexed, mentioned, the several and respective
Sum and Sums of Money on them respectively Rated or A^sessed; And to that end,
you are by the said Act, required to make demand thereof of ^he Parties
themselves, or at the place of their last abode within six days after the
receipt ^^ereof; And if any person or persons shall refuse to pay upon your
demand the several ^^um or Sums, and proportions in the said Estreat or
Assessment mentioned, on him, her, or them respectively Assessed, and by the
said Act appointed for such person to pa^^, you are thereby authorized and
required for non-payment thereof, to distrain the pers^^n or persons refusing,
by his or their Goods or Chattels; and the distress so taken, to ^^eep by the
space of four days at the Cost and Charges of the owner thereof; And if the
owner do not pay the same within the said four days, then the said distress is
thereby dir^^cted to be appraised by three or two of the Inhabitants where the
said distress is take^^ and there by you to be sold for payment of the said
Money; and the overplus coming (...) the said Sale; (if any be) over and above
the charges of taking, and keeping the said d^tress, you are immediately to
restore to the owner thereof; And whereas it is provided by the said Act, that
if any person or persons, shall refuse, or neglect to pay the Sum or Sums so
Assessed, by the space of 20 days after demand, as aforesaid, where no
sufficient dist^ess can or may be found, whereby the same may be levied; that
the said person or persons, should by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of
three or more of the Commissioners by the said Act appointed, be committed to
the Common Goal, there to be kept without Bail o^ Mainprize, until payment
shall be made; you are therefore hereby required, immediatelo^ after the said
20 days, to return unto Us, or any Three of the Commissioners by the said Act
appointed for this University, the Names of the person and persons in the said
Estreat or Assessment mentioned, who shall so neglect, or refuse to pay the Sum
or Sums o^ him or them Assessed, by the space of 20 days after demand, and no
sufficient distress can be found, whereby the same may be levied, that so such
further Order may be taken therein, as by the said Act is directed. And all
Constables, Head-boroughs, Tything-men, and other His Majesty's Officers, are
by the said Act required, and enjoined to be respectively aiding and assisting
in the execution thereof; And the respective Parents, Guardians and Tutors of
every person under the Age of 21 years, are upon default of such person, and
upon demand to pay what is due by the said Act, for every such person residing
in their Family, or under their Tuition: And you are hereby further required,
to take such speedy and effectual Order and care in the Premises, that you fail
not to Levy, and pay in the total Sum in the said Estreat or Assessment
mentioned, to the Receiver General to be appointed by h^s Majesty at or before
the 12 day of June now next coming; hereof you are not to fail, as you will
answer the contrary at your utmost Peril.

Given under our Hands and Seals the tenth day of May in the Thirtieth Year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque
Dom. 1678. Jo: Nicholas. Vi. Can seal ^m Lan(...) seal Ben: Cooper seal Richard
Wit seal



