Thanksgivings.
M. THe Names of the Just shall be had in everlastin remembrance;


P. Their Works and their Praise shall follow them.


M. To do good and distribute they have not forgotten;


P. With such Sacrifice God is well pleased.


M. Their Memorial shall be celebrated among us;


P. Such honor have all those Saints.


M. All land and glory be to the Lord;


P. Who has given such ability and such hearts unto men.


For the Founder.
O Almighty and most Merciful Father, who by thy great Power and Wisdom have
created all things, and by thine inestimable Love, and most bountiful Goodness
do sustain and provide for the same; especially for Man, whom thou have made
after thine own Similitude; and for his good have not only made all other
Creatures, but also have ordained and commanded that one man should be helpful
to another: according to which thy Providence thou have stirred up the mind of
HENRY CHICHLEY sometime Archbishop of Canterbury, for the releife of the
distressed and increase of learning and Godliness, to Found this our College
endowed with liberal Maintenance for thy Servants; We yield Thee all humble and
hearty thanks, for this thine inestimable Bounty and Fatherly goodness most
humbly beseeching Thee, that the remembrance of these thy benefits may never
slip out of our minds; but that we may daily grow more and more in thankfulness
toward Thee, and rightly use these blessings which Thou have bestowed upon us,
by the hand of thy Servant, both to thy honor and glory, and the profit of the
Church and Commonwealth wherein Thou have placed us. ^rant this, O dear
Father, for the love of thine only Son our Savior Jesus Christ; to whom with
Thee, and the Holy ^host, be all honor and praise, now and for evermore. Amen.

For Be^^^^ctours.
MOst bountiful Lord God, who of thine especia^^ goodness have ordained Ma^^
not only to receive, but dispen^^ thy Benefits; We further give ^hee praise and
thanks, for all ^^her thy worthy Inst^^uments, ^y whose hands thou ^ast been
^leas'd to be good unto us, Such as were Reginald Poo^^ Archbishop of
Canterbury; Sir William Peeter; Robert Honywood, Doctor of Laws; Richard
Bartlet, Doctor of Physic; Thomas Gwynne, Doctor of Laws; Mr. E^ward Napper,
together with all other our bounteous Benefa^^ors, whose Names and Mem^rys we
shall ever honor and record, in Testimony of our Thankfulness, for these and
every other of thy daily Blessings, by thy Providence thus continued and
multiplied unto us. And now hereunto grant, O gracious Father, that neither our
abuse of these thy Favors cause thee to blast what we have received, nor our
unthankfulness provoke thee, to shut up the hearts of future Successions from
us. But let this Place, which Thou have founded and endowed for thine own
^lory, be still the fruitful Mother of more happy Children; who both by their
Knowledge may confirm the Peoples Faith, and by their Lives inflame their
Charity. Be it so, for his sake, whose unspeakable Bounty gave us himself, even
Jesus Christ, thy Son our Savior; to whom with Thee, and the Holy Spirit, be
ascribed all Honor and ^lory, throughout all, ^enerations for evermore. Amen.


