ORDERS AGREED UPON BY THE HEADS OF HOUSES FOR THE PREVENTING AND QUENCHING OF
FIRE.
THAT Fifty pounds be forthwith raised by the University, and the respective
Colleges, (of which sum the University is to pay Ten pounds,) for providing
Engines, Ladders, etc.

That the Governors of the respective Colleges, do deal effectualy with their
Tenants, within the University, that with all Convenient speed, both their
dwelling houses, and out houses be Slatted or Tyled; and that no Lease be
hereafter renewed to any such Tenant, who shall refuse or neglect to Slat or
Tyle their said houses accordingly.

That every College and Hall, provide a convenient number of Buckets and
Ladders; and signify what provision they have made unto the Vice Chancellor,
within one Month after the Publication of these Orders; and as often as any of
them shall be lost or decayed, that the same number be immediately completed,
and made up again.

That the Governors of the respective Colleges and Halls, do engage all
Bakers, Brewers, Cooks, Chandlers and others with whom they have any dealing,
forthwith to remove their Wood-piles, and Fuel of all forts, a convenient
distance from the City, or otherwise to provide houses Slatted or tyl'd to
secure their Fuel, Hay, Straw etc. (as much as is possible) from all danger of
Fire. And that the Chandlers be also engaged to remove their melting houses, to
places where they may not annoy nor endanger their Neighbors. And in case they
or any of the foresaid persons shall refuse or neglect to do accordingly, that
then the Heads of Houses shall forbid all trading and dealing with them, for
their respective Colleges and Halls.

That all Governors of Colleges and Halls, take effectual care, that all
sorts of Fuel, Hay etc. within the precincts of their respective Houses be
covered as aforesaid, or else so placed that they may not endanger any
Buildings.

That diligent care be likewise taken that all Chimneys be swept yearly before
the Feast of All Saints, and that no Fire be carried about either from the
Kitchen, or from Chamber to Chamber in open shovells, but only in covered pans
or any Candles carried into Wood-houses, or Places where any kind of fuel lies,
except in Lanthorns, and that a severe penalty be inflicted by order of the
respective Governors, upon all who shall presume to offend in these
particulars. And furthermore, that all Scholars be frequently admonished to
take care, that at night the fire in their Chambers be quenched or securely
covered, and that they place not their Candles at their Beds-heads: and to that
end the respective Governors are desired to command some Officer of the House,
to visit all Chambers and cause all Boards, which are placed for that purpose
at any Beds-head, to be removed and taken away, and likewise strictly to
prohibit the use of hanging Candlesticks.

That when any new Buildings are erected, care be taken that no Timber be laid
under the hearths of the Chimneys.

That when any Fire shall happen in any College, or in the City, the
respective Governors cause their Buckets and Ladders, to be brought with all
speed, to some place nere the Fire, where they may be ready for use, and
appoint some discreet person to see them disposed off.

That when any Fire shall happen abroad, the respective Governors take care to
restrain the Scholars under their commands from going out, excepting such who
will be assistant in quenching the Fire; and because at such times many wicked
Persons, take an opportunity, to break open Chambers, and commit other
villainies; that the College Gates be kept shut (especially if the Fire happen
in the night) and none admitted but such who are well known to the Porter, or
such persons as the Governor of the House shall appoint to assist him.

That no Scholars presume upon any occasion to let off Rockets or any other
kinds of Fireworks.

That these Orders be hung up in a Frame in the Halls of the respective Houses,
that so all Persons concerned may from time to time take notice of them.

P. MEWS Vice-Cancell.
October. 23, 1671.

