LETTER To a FRIEND, Reflecting upon the Present Condition of this NATION, And
Demonstrating, An EXCLUSION OF His Royal Highness FROM THE SUCCESSION, To be
Unlawful and Unjust.
SIR,
THE imparting of melancholy reflections, though it seldom offords a cure, yet
it generally promotes an case to the Patient, especially when it is certain; the
Confident will not only give his pity, but both his Intrest and Friendship will
engage him an equal Participant. This considered encouragement does not a
little prompt a relation, Sir, to you, what rational grounds I have to fear the
very Basis of our Government. the best of Governments is in too great dangerof
suffering under the ill wishes, and endeavors of some amongst us, unhappily
successful to it is mighty disadvantage. It Is as strange, as true, that now even
whilst our just wounds caused by rebellion are fresh upon us, that now even
before the smart of Judgment for disloyalty be over, we should with the
fiercest precipicious zeal, and madness, use the direct means to make those
wounds bleed afresh, to multiply those smarts, as if our own misery, our own
misfortunes were the only Object of our most eager desires. He Is now pointed at
as ridiculous, derided for singularity, and want of insight into things, denied
to be a member of the honest well meaning party, who cannot speak, as well as
sit with patience and delight to have erreverent speeches of superiors, evil
speeches of Dignities. Our King the best of Princes, his Councels are
anticipated, his designs foreseen, and his managements exposed, his Majesty
is represented popishly affected, a favourer of popish Rebels, yet the same
persons confess, 'twas his life was sought for, as the only way to extirpate
Protestantism, and to propagate Popery. The Duke he must be condemned for a
Papist, and must suffer nothing less than disinherison. The Clergy likewise are
tainted with the disease, and accused of instilling ill Principles into their
Auditors, of being abettors in the bringing in French-government, and Tyranny.
That these, and such as these are the continual divulged judgments and
reproaches of too many wherever we come, its being so well known supersedes any
need of proof.

Yet those very men are so violent against Romanists, they would have them even
condemned unheard; because (and for no other reason if we will or can believe
them) Romanists are Traitors, and endeavor the eradicating of the Protestant
Religion. But would they have us believe them loyal, because they vent grievous
exclamations against Traitors, when at the same time they openly show
themselves to be such? Would they havens presume then Champions for the
Protestant Religion, because they proclaim a fiery Zeal for the preservation
thereof, when at the same time they do what in them lies to overthrow it, by
that ready way of aspersing the Clergy, and bringing other Odiums upon the
Church? No, certainly this Zeal cannot be the product of Loyalty to the King,
or due honor to the Church or Religion, but rather of anger against these
presuming Rebels, that will not suffer our phanatical holy ones to have the
monopoly of these, and such like wickednesses.

And let no man's prejudice make him so illogical to infer, that what is or
shall be said, tends to extenuate the crimes of any whatsoever Traitor: for I
only mark out those that are or would be such, those (whom since the neck of
the late damnable Plot is broken) we have more cause to fear than Jesuits.

For it is not a sad observation to see, what multitudes of ignorant people are
seduced by that old and little artifice' of giving the name of Papist to all
that are against Phanatick Jnterest? so that let a man talk as charmingly as he
can; let him play the Logician as forcibly, it is all in vain. Tell these
trapan'd wretches that he is an ill, and impolitick contriver, who to quench the
flames at one end of his house, will set the other end on fire; tell them
there is a better way to preserve Churches from being the place of Image
Worship, than to call in the assistance of those, who will demolish Churches
for having Paint in their Windows. That there is a better way to preserve our
Service from Popish Superstition, than by introducing the Superstition of the
contrary kind. Nothing of all this can dissuade them from Deifying those men,
who make unreasonable Clamors against the Governors, as being remiss in
prosecuting and punishing Popish Offenders.

And no wonder if all that has been said prove ineffectual, when Demonstration
itself (the most commanding Proof) is rejected; For we cannot be believed that
His Majesty has done, as much as any King can possibly do against Offenders,
though we demonstrate it true by an induction of particulars, and show that no
King can do more, than lay his strict Commands on, and give Encouragements to
all his Subjects to find out, and apprehend all Offenders; when found out and
apprehended, to confine them till their Trials; when tried, and proved guilty,
to put the Laws in execution. But His Majesty has done all this.

Of the first Part, His almost daily Proclamations are a sufficient Evidence.

As to the second Parr, Justice has been so far from being remiss, that there
are some at this time under Confinement, who being accused but by one Witness
only, have lay'n in Prison this full Year, or more, and could not in all that
time by any means come to their Trials, and yet no Bail would be taken for them.

As to the third Part, We all know many of these Plotters have been legally
Convicted, not a man of which is living, but every one of them without Favor,
or Pardon, has received his just Reward.

There is no doubt had not His Majesty (who is indeed naturally inclined to
mercy) proved more merciful to the Scottish Rebels, who were not long since
actually in Arms, we had had as great a noise to stop, as now, we have to hurry
on Justice; for they, and most of our Petitioners are of the same sort. The
truth of which who can question, when he observes many of the Leaders of these
Petitioners to be old Colonels, Captains, etc. that have received benefit by
the Act of Oblivion, men that have tasted the sweetness of Church Lands, and
know, by their own experience, how to act Rebellion, which is evident even from
their very managements; first they infuse an ill Opinion into the unwary, and
inconsiderate Mobile of the present Government and Governors, and then get
their Subscriptions to seditious Petitions; these were the very steps of one,
and I wish they prove not of a second open Rebellion.

But amongst these Colonels, etc. there may be one of a higher rank, a Man
fuller of Craft than Honesty, or Religion, who, to gratify a proud, and
peevish humor, has offered his Royal Highness some great personal Affronts,
which makes him dread his single condition will not be so happy under the
Duke's Government; and therefore through a foresight of his own private
Grievance, thinks it the best policy to become Nationally afflicted, and so the
People must be terrified with the sad consequences of a Popish Successor,
because he fears the Duke's just resentments of his own impudence; and perhaps
this is no small reason why the point of Succession is so often resolved
against the right and lawful Successor.

Who is not now so well learned in the Statute Law, to tell you, He shall incur
the Penalty of Treason, that disallows a Power in the King and Parliament to
dispose of the Crown? And truly he may be condemned for a Fool, as well as
Traitor, that denies the Supreme Power in any Government whatsoever to be
uncontrolable; there must of necessity be one Supreme uncontrolable Power in
all places, to prevent the Confusion which else would inevitably follow; no
doubt therefore this, and all other Power is in the King and Parliament: But
whoever affirms the Power may be unjustly used, and that though for using it
unjustly they are unaccountable in this, yet they must give account in another
world, he need not be ashamed of his Assertions; The question therefore will
be, Not whether there is a Power can defeat the Duke of his Succession, but
whether his Circumstances considered they can justly so do?

In the discussion of this Point, many of his Royal Highnesses Friends have
appeared more Zealous, than Learned: For some of them have relied upon the bare
producting of a great many Examples, leaving still the main Point in question,
whether those Examples were just, or not, never minding if such sort of arguing
were of force, not only their Antagonists might use the same, but also the
greatest Villainies in the world might be easily justified.

Others have argued Monarchy to be Jure Divino, and gone about to prove by Laws
of Nature, and by Scripture, the Succession Sacred, and have argued the
Exclusion of the, Duke Perjury, because of the words Heirs and Successors, in
the Oath of Allegiance.

The Answerer of these Weighty Considerations has no cause to boast of a
Victory, and yet would he have us believe our Cause is lost: But this is not a
Case at Bar, wherein, though an impertinent Issue be joined, the Cause depends
upon the decision of the Issue; from all therefore that has hitherto been
said, it does not appear our Cause is either bad, or lost, or that the Duke's
Adversaries have acquitted themselves from being notorious Immoralists, and
with that I charge them. To prove them highly ungrateful, I need no more than
remind them,

First, How often they have complained of others, who never had Power adequate
to his Royal Highness for accumulating Riches at the Nations cost, and that
they could never so much as suspect him to give the Nation the least Grievance
by things of this nature.

Secondly, That this Great Man has as freely exposed his Life in his Countries
defense, as the most mean and common Soldier; and what hugely aggrandizes that
generous voluntary Act is this, That his aim could not possibly be at
Preferments, or Riches, the usual Inticements to such hazard: His motive
therefore could be nothing, save a great and mighty ardor for his Countries
safety. And shall such. Obligations as these be easily cancelled? Shall a
mistaken Opinion in matters of Religion not only root out the remembrance of
these obliging evidences of his kindness, but be a sufficient Argument also for
the prosecution of his ruin? A most unreasonable thing! Yet this is his case,
he is supposed to differ from us in matters of Religion, and therefore he may
be justly disinherited. This is that gross abusive Elench the Devils subtle
Agents has put upon many well-meaning ignorant men, and for their sakes it
shall now be exposed by as plain and familiar reasonings, as the nature of the
Subject will bear.

Give me leave to ask all vehement Sticklers for Liberty and Property, what
they mean by those terms? Is it not to be under the protection of reasonable,
known and determinate Laws, that we may have other measures of our Duties and
Punishments, other measures of what we may call ours, than the will of the
Imposers. If it be (which no doubt they must confess) let them show by what
known determinate Law, the Duke has forfeited the Inheritance, which a known
determinate Law has given him. If there be none, but that they would have a
Law made for that purpose, this according to what is before laid down, and the
true Notion of Liberty and Property destroys both; for at this rate no man can
be certain of any thing. Who can call that his, if the Legislators may justly
dispose of it when they please, by declaring first some Act, or some Opinion to
be erroneous, and then that Error to be a good cause of Forfeiture? Who can
promise himself one minutes liberty; for when the Legislators please to declare
something a defect either in my body or mind, and then that defect to be a just
cause of Banishment, or Imprisonment, there is no Injustice in the case, I
suffer as justly as the Murderer, it is true this the Supreme Power may do by
its unaccountable Prerogative in Government, nay, much more, it may hang all
that have gray, or black eyes, and for no other reason, but how equitable all,
or any of these things are, a mean capacity may judge from what has been said.

However I will yet more fully illustrate this matter by my Lord Strafford his
Case; in the management of which, I shall first show, there is no difference
between his, and his Royal Highnesses Case, in which his Royal Highness has not
the harsher dealing. In his Case, the Parliament were something countenanced in
their Proceeds, by an Act made 25 Ed. 3. wherein is a power left in them to
declare, what other Facts are Treason, besides those already so declared, but
in his Royal Highnesses Case they have no such plausible pretense; his Offenses
were Faults in Fact; this only Error in Opinion; his Faults were proved against
him, and himself heard in his own Vindication; here (as I shall presently more
fully observe) his Royal Highness must be Condemned unheard. Thus far the Cases
differ, and no farther; For it is in the Case of both, to have a Law made on
purpose to condemn them, and to suffer more for their Offense, than stands with
the allowance of known determinate Laws.

But notwithstanding the more plausible Pretenses for Strafford's Punishment,
yet His late Majesty showed himself the most sorrowful Penitent, by his
repeated Sighs, and passionate Exclamations, for shedding innocent blood. He
well knew, if there was no Law broken, there was no Transgression, and without
Transgression 'twas unjust to purish. He well knew, if there was a Law broken,
that 'twas Injustice to inflict a greater Punishment, than that Law had
provided. Nay, the Parliament themselves were ashamed of their own Act, which
appeared by their Declaration, That it should be no President. And yet now how
many are fiery hot for the acting of a thing of the same nature, that the same,
if not a stronger Reason prohibits: So that if their mutinous desires were
gratified, His present Majesty should be as guilty of unjustly removing His
Brothers Landmark, as His Predecessor thought himself in shedding innocent
Blood. Let our Phanaticks therefore if they can (who now look toppingly, and
like the Whore spoken of in Scripture, wipe their mouths, as if they had done,
or designed no harm) quit themselves from this dilemma, either it is just to
inflict greater punishments for offenses, than the known Laws have determined,
or not; if not, the Duke cannot be justly disinherited; if just, then first
Strafford did justly suffer, and His Majesty's tears of Repentance were but the
Sacrifice of Fools. The Parliament too are very much to blame, who upon second
thoughts presumed that Act unfit for a President.

2. Down goes Liberty and Property, there is at once a complete Surrender of
both them. And what prodigious Monsters are these that can in one and the same
breath, cry for and against one and the same thing. But what makes their noise
(if it be possible) more harsh, what makes them seem men that yet less consider
Justice and Equity, is this, They would have a Law to disinherit the Duke for
Popery: But ask whether they would have a Law, that all men should be thus
severely punished barely for dissent in opinion in matters of Religion? No,
that they deem a Law grossly unjust, else what mean their perpetual Clamors for
Liberty of Conscience? else what mean those continual Exprobrations of
Goyerors, for disturbing unlawful Conventicles? It Is plain therefore in their
own Opinion, such a general Law is not allowable. But however a Law of this
nature to reach some, particular individuals (provided always they be none of
their Fraternity) is, with them, agreeable to reason: For my part, I cannot
apprehend by what Logic it is maintainable. that that may be just to one, or
few, that will not be so to many, and all; for surely Justice is the constant,
regular, and equal distribution of Rewards and Punishments; so that in all well
regulated States, all Subjects must have equal Punishments for equal Faults.

Let one of them suppose himself so unhappy to have killed a man in his own
defense, the Law in that case has declared only a Forfeiture of Goods and
Chattels; but the Lawmakers say, though it is so declared, and though all other
men guilty of this Fault shall he under no greater Penalty, yet you shall hang,
and your whole Estate shall be forfeitured; say, let any one of them fancy
himself in this condition, and then tell me, Whether he should not believe this
hard measure in the superlative degree? Yet either this Case is just, or the
Duke's unjust; for what can be said here, that may not be urged for the Duke?
We can say, the Laws have not declared so great a Penalty for this Offense. We
can say, that no man ever did, or is ever likely suffer so much for such
Offense.

Truly if of such Principles as these will hold, we are like to be brought to a
sine confusion; one shall be imprisoned but for two days, a second stigmatized
a third only lose his Estate a fourth shall be deprived of both Estate and
Life, and all these several Punishments for one and the same Fault. This is not
to be allowed for the very confusion it brings much less when it undermines the
very Foundation, the very Being of Justice, which is rendering to every man
according to his works. And whether most unequal proportion for equal things be
a fulfilling of that Law, I leave to any undesigning men to judge.

To stop the force of this Argument, perhaps 'twill be objected, I ought to
have distinguished between Popish, and other Dissenters and then they would
have allowest that all Papists as well as the Duke may for no other reason than
being Papists, justly suffer Disinherison, by which Concession, the Arguments
drawn from the inequality of Punishments, etc. would fall I am sure, I know no
distinction will make for Planaticks; indeed Papists are for pulling down
Heretical Kings, the others are for pulling down all Kings Heretical; or else,
Papists are for contriving the ruin of Heretical Kingdoms, the others are
actuated by them, are their in ruments to put their contrivances in execution.
If therefore we may be supposed to fear them less than Papists, it can be for
no other reason, but because they have less management, not at all less wicked
intentions.

However let us see the consequences of this, That all Popish Dissenters,
barely for their Dissent, may justly suffer Disinherison; if so, it is time to
throw away our Book of Martyrs; for we can upbraid them no longer with that,
they can now recriminate, and argue ad hominem. It Is true, they thought it just
to take away our Being, but we think it just to take away their Well-being, and
perhaps to most men the first condition is more eligible. Besides all this,
what a Rod does this make for Protestants in Foreign Parts; for if the severest
usage of Papists, even to their utter ruin, be justifiable, barely for
dissenting in Opinion, then a persecuting return upon Protestants in Popish
Dominions is justifiable; for 'twill be no very passable Plea for us to urge,
we punish them for Error, they punish us for Truth; Who shall be Judge of that?
They will retort what we say, and which side soever pleads thus, begs the
main Point in question between us. They are as confident they are in the right,
and we in Error, as we can possibly be of the contrary. There is no rule
therefore for our Behavior one toward another, but to do as we would be done
by.

Thus much in answer to these violent Objectors, and we will now address our
selves to the more moderate, who will condemn such a general Law against:
Romanists, and yet argue the Duke may be justly disinherited because it is for
the good and safety of, the Kingdom, for the preservation of the Protestant
Religion. To this I answer,

First, That this is all but bare surmise; for suppose such a Law made, how can
we be assured the Duke will in his Conscience believe this a good and blinding
Law? And if he does not, can we believe a Man of his Courage will tamely
acquiesce, and lay down those which he thinks just Pretensions to a Crown? Such
a Law therefore in all probability would cause so much Bloodshed, as to leave
the Victors no reason to triumph. But if his Royal Highness (being as they
pretend a Papist) should be successful, how can the Protestants expect the
least favor from his hands, who have dealt with him so roughly? It Is therefore
altogether as likely, That that which is vainly fancied would be the Safety,
might prove the ruin of the Kingdom; that that which is vainly sancied would
be the Preservation, might prove the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion.

Secondly, That the safety of the Kingdom, and the Preservation of the
Protestant Religion, depends upon the making of such a Law is but bare surmise,
because the Duke is not yet convict of Popery; and if he were, it cannot
possibly appear but he may see the Errors thereof, and repent. He therefore
that positively objects this, must swallow those two uncharitable Suppositions;
first, that his Highness is a Romanist; and secondly, that will never repent.
But however unreasonable, and unchristian like this is, we will suppose it all,
and admit too the Law will have those effects they pretend; yet if it be
granted, that such a Law is not just for a bare dissent in matters of Religion,
abstracted from these consequences, then I do affirm, the addition of these
consequences can never make such a Law justifiable; for nothing can be more
perspicuously plain, than that this is doing evil, that good may come of it;
and is no more, than the preservation of a good Religion by a bad Law.

How blame worthy therefore were those, that marked out to the Rabble all
Dissenters from the late Bill against the Duke, as Conspirators, Betrayers of
their Country, and what not? perhaps considering too, they brought His Majesty
into this number, who in His Gracious Speech declared, He would not alter the
Succession.

And truly this Bill, their Darling, were it well examined, would be found to
be a condemning a man without legal, Conviction, without ever being heard,
whether he could clear himself in what is laid to his charge, a justice always
done, always allowed the worst of Criminals.

Perhaps many may think this a gross reflection upon the late House of Commons,
till they recollect many things have passed twice, that have been with scorn
thrown out the third time of reading; nor do I in the least scruple, but that
this Bill had underwent no other Fate.

And now upon the whole matter, how can we look superficially upon these
Comminations, what Loyal Subject, what Lover of his Country can be free from
amazing terrors? when every Coblet is deciding, who shall Reign; when the Press
is crowded with disloyal, treasonable Pamphlets, and the freedom of Peoples
tongues, equals that of their thoughts in treasonable matters; when designing
Fellows are venting multitudes of Contradictions ad faciendum populum, that by
any means they may work their ends, sometimes encouraging them to preserve
Liberty and Property, at, other times (which destroys both) telling them it is
just for a man to suffer more for an offense, than the known determinate Laws
allot, and suffer too unhead, sometimes representing what a grand Grievance
it is to want Liberty of Conscience, at other times maintaining it just for a
man to suffer Disinherison, for an Heterodox Opinion in matters of Religion;
when I, say, the serious considerations of these Premises present themselves,
what sad but natural Illations may we draw? How can we less expect (without the
most watchful prudence in the Magistrate, joined with a merciful Providence)
then a relapse into all imaginable confusion, than that we may a second time
use for England, King Agesilaus lamentation for Greece, O infelicem Graeciam
quae tantum hominum ipsa sibi interemit, quantum satis est ad universos
vincendum barbaros!

Here I should conclude, did I not fear his Highness might think me at least
rude, if not wholly without Apology, were not something offered to, excuse this
weak defense of his Right. When I saw our right and lawful Successor, our next
Father of our Country assaulted, my loyal affection forced my unexperienced
Pen, as it did the unused tongue of the, King of Lidya's Son, when his Father
was in danger, to cry out, O save my Father!

Now, Sir, I have nothing more, but to ask your Pardon for detaining you thus
long upon so sad and nice a Subject, and to assure you that I am

Dear Sir, Your faithful Servant, P.


