Orders concerning the Rates, and Demands of Carriers, and their Porters, for
Goods brought, and conveyed betwixt the University of OXFORD, and City of
LONDON.
WHereas the Carriers between the University of OXON: and the City of LONDON,
to the great prejudice of the Members of the said University, and others have
for these late years, contrary to the Charters, and ancient Practice of the
said University exacted what rates they pleased for the Carriage of Goods, and
Letters; For the prevention of the like Abuse for the future, It is therefore
now ordered by me JOHN FELL Dr of Divinity, and ViceChancellour of the said
University, That henceforth They, their Servants, and Porters shall demand, or
receive no other rates then

1 Imprimis, For the carriage of one hundred weight in the time between the two
Feasts of All Saints, and the Annuntiation of the Blessed Virgin Mary three
shillings four pence, and for the rest of the year three shillings.

2 Item, for the carriage of the greatest parcel (all being to be esteemed
parcels under a quarter of an hundred weight) ten-pence, and so ratably for
those that are less.

3 Item, For the carriage of any burden, not exceeding one hundred weight, nor
less then a quarter of an hundred weight, from the Shop or Warehouse, where
the Goods were unladed unto the owners Habitation or Shop, threepence, and for
a parcel one penny.

4 Item, That all Letters directed to Scholars shall be left at the Butteries
of their respective Colleges or Halls, and for the delivery of every such
Letter only one halfpenny loaf, as was accustomed, but if any carriage comes
with a letter, nothing shall be paid for the bringing of the said letter.

Given the 1. day of September An. Dom. 1666. JOHN FELL
ViceCan.

