ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS

(...) ET FELICITATIS

blazon of Oxford University
JOHN NICHOLAS, Doctor in Divinity, and Vice Chancellor of the University of
Oxford, to all Persons, whom it may concern, Greeting. Whereas all
Vndergraduates, and Minors, whatsoever, are strictly accomptable in all their
matters of Bargain, and expense, to their respective Tutors, and Governors,
and ought not by the Laws, and Ancient Usages of this Place to be Trusted, or
Dealt with, either in Buying or Selling for any Sum, or Thing, exceeding Five
Shillings in Value, without the approbation of the said Tutors and Governors:
And that notwithstanding several Persons have of late presumed to Trust, and
Deal with Young Scholars for very great Values, to the utter debauching of many
of them, and the unsufferable affront to public Discipline. These are
straightly to Charge and Require all manner of Persons, as Mercers,
Booksellers, and all other, Privileged, or not Privileged, of what Quality,
Trade, or Occupation soever, that from the day of the Date hereof, they do not
Buy, Sell, Trust, or Bargain with any Vndergraduate or Minor whatsoever, that
has his Residence, or Name in any College or Hall, within this University,
for any Sum, or Thing above the said Value of five Shillings, without the
knowledge, and express approbation of his Tutor, or Governor respectively,
under the pain of being proceeded against, according to the Quality of the
Person, and Nature of the Offense, as a Perturber of the Peace, and Good
Government of this Place.

We likewise further require and command all such as have Trusted, or Dealt
with Vndergraduates, without the knowledge of their respective Tutors, beyond
the Value of Five Shil^ings aforesaid, that they bring in true Bills of all
such Credits and Demands as are yet unpaid them, to the respective Tutors, or
Governons concerned, at, or before the First Day of December next after the
Date hereof, under the Pains and Penalties aforesaid, to be Inflicted upon all
such as shall neglect, or refuse.

Given under the Seal of the Office of the Chancellor ship of the University of
Oxford (...) in the Year of our Lord, 1678.

