The Observations of Mr. LILLY; and many Famous and Learned Divines, touching
the present Visitation of the PLAGUE of PESTILENCE; With a Prayer to be used in
all Families, for sheathing of the Sword of the Destroying Angel, and to divert
Gods heavy Judgments: As also several excellent Receipts and approved Medicines
as well for curing the Plague, as for preventing the further Infection: As has
f^r^erly been approved of in the Year, 1625. when thirty five thousand four
hundred and twenty eight died of the Pestilence; but by the blessing of God,
and the singular operation and virtue of these following Receipts the Venom of
this raging Distemper was expelled, and not one died; as appears by the
Wonderful Miracle of Mercy recited in the Margent. With the number that now
dies weekly of the present Visitation, both in City and Suburbs.
WHereas it has pleased Almighty God to Visit this Metropolis with His present
Judgments, and to streatch forth his hand of Indignation against us; let every
one therefore endeavor b^ Prayer and ^upplication to amend his life, to become
new Creatures, to reform themselves of their wicked practices, and to ^enounce
all sinful ways, to keep and obey Gods Commandments, and to prize the Holy
Sabbath, and his blessed Ordinances; and that ye may all do, apply your selves
to such Rules and precepts that may bring happiness to your immortal souls; and
as the learned Divines, Mr. Lilly and several others observe the only
Plague-Water for this present Infection, is, to cleanse and wash your hearts of
all filth and wickedness, to humble your selves under this p^esent Judgment,
and to forsake your sins; that so the Lord may be pleased to command the
slaying Angel to sheath his word and to put th^se A^^owes into the Quiver,
which are now dispersed into several parts of the City; and as God was
graciously pleased to make a miraculous (...) Pest^lence in the year 1625. when
35417 died of the Plague in London and the Liberties, and 54265 of other
Diseases; and (...) the mi^ of (...) desolation it pleased thee Lord most
wonderfully to command health and salvation, and to restore us suddenly to joy
and gladness* (...) let thy infinite mercies su^pass all our hopes; and be
graciously pleased now again to turn thy fury into Clemency and to (...)
people, whose daily supplications we earnestly implore may be amongst all
Families in manner and form as follows.

O Lord, God great Jehova^, thou merciful ^reat^^ of Heaven and Earth, we (most
miserable and dejected sinners) here present our selves before thy Heavenly
Throne, entreating thee to loo^ (...) distressed offenders; we confes^ we are
unworthy of the name of thy Children we have ^espised thy Love, and forsaken
thy ways, made slight of thy words and refused thy Chatisements, without
thinking what we deserve; we have not feared thy Judgments, nor dreaded thy
threatenings; we have not sought thy favors, nor listened after thy mercies; we
have winked at our small sins, and smothered our great sins; we have drawn down
thy Judgments upon us and thou have justly sent the Plague of Pestilence
amongst us: Our sins are manifold, our transgressions without number, they have
even sought for Vengeance, and now according to our deserts, thou have sent the
Destroying Angel to mark us out for Death. The graves seek to devour us, the
Bells toal for us, Death and Time are agreed to carry us away; but in thy
merciful help only there is hope, and on thee we depend for help: O help us
good God* O spare us sweet Savior and as thou did spare in the time of King
David, and Charged'st the destroying Angel to cease so we beseech thee now to
spare thy people, cease thy anger, take we entreat thee this Plague of
Pestilence from us, withold back thy wrath and as thou spared'st the repo^ing
Ninivites, so make us repent, and save this City and Nation. O Lord help us
unfeignedly to bewail our former life past, and seek effectual amendment for a
better life hereafter, to which better life pre^^^tly bring us, Lord we beseech
thee, and therein hold us for ever by the power of thy grace in Jesus Chaist,
to whom with thee O Father, and the Blessed Spirit, be glory by us, for all thy
mercies on us, now and ever, Amen.

Certain approved Medicines for the Plague, both to prevent that Contagion, and
to expel it after it be taken; as have been approved of in the year 1625. when
Thiry-five thousand four-hundred twenty-eight died of the Plague in one year;
as also in this present Visstation,1665.
1. A cheap Medicine to keep them from Infection is, Take a pint of new Milk,
and cut two Cloves of Garlic very small, put it in the Milk, and drink it
every Morning fasting, and it preventeth Infection. 2. A posset drink to remove
the plague from the heart, that is, an Ale posset drink with Pimpernel seethed
in it, till it tastes strong of it* drank often, removes the Infection, though
it has got to the very heart. 3. Another approved remedy against the Plague,
Take a sprig of Rue, otherwise called Herb-of-grace, and shred it, and put it
in a Fig or two, and eat it every Morning fasting, it keeps the body from
Infection, and purifieth the blood; withal, spare excess of drinking,
especially Ale and Bottle-drink, and be very temperate in the Liquors, Tobacco
is good every morning, and a great preservative against the Infection.


Amongst the many Prescriptions for the Cure of the Plague which we have
publisted, this is very effectual, and if carefully observed (by Gods
blessing). may cure many.
At the first taking of the Infection, or when they find themselves ill with
the accustomed Symptoms, as in other highly malignant Fevers, let them empty
their Stomach (if full or foul) with Carduus Posset in a large quantity, or
warm water; and if need be, take a Clyster of Milk and Sugar. Then betaking
themselves to bed, drink a good draught of warm Posset-Ale with a little
Vinegar, and as much as a good Walnut of London- Treacle dissolved in it; or
take the Treacle first, and drink the Posset-Ale after; and so without their
Shifts let them sweat twenty four hours or more, renewing the Treacle and
Posset-Ale every sixth or seventh hour, but in half the proportion; and in the
mean while, let them be refreshed with Posset-Ale, or Grewel, or Oatmeal
Caudle, or Broth in which Hartshorn, Mace, Marjoram and Marigold flowers are
boiled: Besides, they may take two or three spoonfuls of Plague-water. At first
also let large Blisters be raised under the Ears, near the Armholes and Groins,
and kept running till the Distemper be over. Mithridate and Venice-Treacle are
also very effectual ^n like manner taken, but in half the quantity.

For Prevention, this:
Take a pint of Whitewine-Vinegar, two ounces of London-Treacle, mix them well
in a Glass-bottle: take one good spoonful every morning and evening if you go
ab^oad; or take half a spoonful of Bole-Armen* with two spoonfuls of
Plague-water or Angelica water every morning. Take once a week three Pills of
Ruffus at bedtime. Hold often in your mouth Myrrh or Zedoaria. Take heed of
heating the Blood any way. Avoid Fruits, especially Plums, Melons, Cucumers,
etc. Keep to a spare and single Diet. This, under that great Preserver, Gods
Protection, may be a good security.

An approved Remedy against the Pestilence be it never so vehement.
Take an Onion and cut him overthwart, then make little hole in each p^ece, the
which you shall fill with fine Treacle, then set the pieces together again as
they we^^ b^fo^e, then wrap them in a white linen cloth. Putting it so to roast
in the Embers and Ashes, then when it is roasted enough, press out all the
juice of it and give the Patient a spoonful thereof to drink* and so by Gods
help he shall feel ease, and most undoubtedly be healed.

Bu^ied within the 97 P^rishes within the Walls, of all Diseases -- 93,
Whereof, of the PLAGUE -- 23



St. Andrews Holborn 35 St. Bartholomew Great 4 St. Bartholomew Less 0 St.
Brides Parish 7 Bridewel Precinct 2 St. Botolph Aldersgate 4 St. Botolph
Aldgate 1 St. Botolph Bishopsgate 17 St. Dunstans West 5 St. George Southwark 2
St. Giles Cripplegate 32 St. Olaves Southwark 2 St. Saviors Southwark 0 St.
Sepulchers Parish 48 St. Thomas Southwark 2 Trinity Minories 0 At the Pesthouse
5
Buried in the 16 Parishes without the Walls, and at the Pesthouse, of the
Plague -- 166

St. Giles in the Fields 149 Hackney Parish 0 St. James Clerkenwel 10 St.
Katharine Tower 0 Lambeth Parish 0 St. Leanard Shoreditch 7 St. Magdalen
Bermend 0 St. Mary Newington 0 St. Mary Islington 2 St. Mary whitechappel 6
Redriff Parish 0 Stepney Parish 2
Buried in the 12 out Parishes in Middlesex and Surrey of the Plague -- 176

St. Clement Danes 19 St. Paul Covent Garden 1 St. Martins in the Fields 55 St.
Mary Savoy 4 St. Margaret Westminster 26 Whereof at the Pesthouse 4
Buried in the 5 Parishes, in the City and Liberties of Westminster, of the
Plague -- 105

Buried of all Diseases -- 1006 Plague -- 470 Increased in the Burials this
Week -- 322. Parishes clear -- 79. Infected -- 33


* In and about London, from the 2. of December. 1624. to the 23 of December. 1625.
of all Diseases -- 63001. in London and the Liberties; Aug. 18. 1625. of all
Diseases, 5205. of the Plague -- 4463. the same year; March 9. of all Diseases
in London, and the Liberties in one week but -- 141. Of the plague none. A
Miracle of Mercy: Glory be to the most HIGH.

Printed for George Horton, living near the Crowns in Barbican, -- July 7. 1665.


