A SERMON Preached before the KING, AT St. JAMES's.

OCTOBER 13. 1695.

By EDWARD PELLING, D. D. Rector of Petworth in Sussex, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXCV.

A SERMON Preached before the KING, At St. JAMES's.
PSALM CIX. 27. That they may know that this is thy hand; that thou, Lord, have
done it.
THIS Psalm, it is thought, was composed by David, when he was wrapped up in
difficult, perplexing Circumstances, by the Faithlessness and Cruelty of Saul
and his Adherents. The greatest part of the Psalm is made up of Complaints, and
such Expressions of Resentment as are commonly thought to be direct and formal
Imprecations. And admitting they were such, a Question might arise, Whether
they were not innocent in those days, when the Jews lived under a Law which
some have thought permitted them to hate their Enemies, and consequently
allowed them to call upon God to appear against their Enemies; especially such
Enemies as David now was so grievously entangled by; men of that State, and of
those Fortunes, that they were out of the reach of ordinary Justice. What could
be done in such a case, but to flee immediately to God, when there was no help
from Man? But the candid Construction of many Divines is, That David here did
not Curse, but Prophesy: Nor is it unusual in the Scripture, especially in the
Book of Psalms, for Predictions to run in the Form and Style of a Prayer: And
if this be so, then David did not so much express his Desires what should befall
his Enemies, as his Belief and Foresight what he thought would befall them.

The next part of this Psalm consists of humble Prayer and Supplication; the
Sum whereof is, That God would save and deliver him out of his Troubles in such
a manner, as that all reasonable men might be convinced it was God's own
special Work; and that his Preservation depended not upon blind Chance, or upon
David's Conduct, Force, or Courage, how great soever his Fortitude was; but
upon the Particular Goodness, and Signal Power of God himself; That they may
know that this is thy hand; that thou Lord have done it.

In discoursing upon this Subject, the Nature of it will lead me to these Three
Things:

I. First, To show that there are some Acts of Providence so Signal and
Remarkable, that in the judgment of all discerning men who believe a
Providence, they ought after a peculiar manner to be ascribed unto God as his
own Handy-works, though done by the Cooperation of Subordinate Causes. II.
Secondly; To consider what Acts of Providence may be reasonably looked upon as
such; or by what Signs and Marks we may discern the special Hand of God in
them. III. And then in the Third place, To draw down this Consideration so as
to render it Practical.
I. That there are some Acts of Providence so Signal and Remarkable, that in
the judgment of all discerning men who believe a Providence, they ought after a
peculiar manner to be ascribed unto God, as the Works of his own Hands, though
done by the Cooperation of Subordinate Causes. I do not now speak of Miracles.
For many Effects may be wrought, and in former Ages have been wrought, which
either as to the nature of them, or as to the manner of their production,
surpass all the Power of Created Beings: And that such Effects are to be
ascribed to God's own immediate Hand, no question can be made by those who
believe that such Extraordinary Works have been done. But the ordinary way of
God in his Government of the World, especially in governing Human Actions and
the Issues of them, is to use the Concurrence of Inferior Agents: And when not
only men's Faculties of Acting are preserved, but moreover their Natural Powers
are so influenced and raised, their Designs are so ordered, their Actions are
so directed, and Events are so brought about, that Wise and Great Things are
done after a Stupendous and Amazing Manner; then are they to be accounted the
Works of God's own Hand, whatever Instruments he made use of: In those cases
the Glory of all must be given unto God; and we must say as the Devout Psalmist
did, This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Indeed we live in an Age when some are ready to scoff at Providence. But if
God were not wont signally to interpose, and remarkably to interest himself in
Human Affairs, what reason could David have had for his Prayer, that God would
adjust the whole Cause between him and Saul, so that his Deliverance from him
might be acknowledged by his very Enemies to come from God's own hand; and that
God did it, whatever it was that David had done himself, or his Forces for him?

Or what reason could he have had for that Request, Psalm. 86. 17. Show me a
token for good, that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed, because
thou, Lord, have helped me, and comforted me?

Or, lastly, What reason could there be for those Expressions, Psalm. 58, 10,
11. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, so that a man
shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous; doubtless there is a God
that judges in the earth?

Of these and the like Passages in Scripture, no tolerable Construction can be
given, if it be not granted, That in some special cases, however subordinate
Agents do move, the Hand of God in guiding and directing their motions, is so
plain and evident, that men of ordinary understandings may easily observe and
take notice of it, if they will not shut their eyes; and that God's Providence
in making Examples of some, and in protecting and delivering others, is
sometimes so particularly remarkable and wonderful, that every one who will use
his own Reason, cannot but discover the Hand of God, if he be persuaded of the
Being of a Deity, and that there are Operations of Providence in the World.

But the truth is, it is a very hard matter to convince some people of this;
because they do not in these days see with open eyes such sensible, such
miraculous Tokens of God's Hand, as he showed in the days of old, in his
Economy and Dispensations toward the Jews. The Strokes of Moses his Rod in
Egypt, the casting up of the Waters into solid Banks, so that the People passed
through the Sea dry-shod; these and many more Miracles did very deeply affect
the outward Senses of men: And by reason there are not now such sensible
Operations, such visible Miracles, some who are very fond of their Natural
Senses, renounce the belief of a Supernatural Power; others, that cannot be so
hardy as to deny God's Existence, are ready to question his Providence and
Superintendency, especially over Human Actions; and many of us are apt to set
too mean and low a Rate upon the Mercies of God; nor are the generality of men
so thankful for them as they ought to be; and all this because they do not so
sensibly perceive the Hand of God, as the Jews did.

Now these men do not rightly consider, that there is a great difference
between the Jewish State and ours, and consequently that it is fit for the
Divine Providence to be different as to its Quality and Manner of Acting. The
Jews were a dull, stupid, carnal People; and God being to form them into a
Commonwealth of his own, and intending to found his peculiar Government and
Dominion over them; to make them beforehand thoroughly sensible of his special
Care of them and Goodness toward them, did most wisely in doing such Miracles
before their eyes, as rendered the Belief of his Providence unquestionable; and
by those extraordinary Works, which were so evident and obvious to their
outward senses, they were irresistibly led on to believe all God's Gracious
Declarations; to hope and trust in him, and to depend upon his Providence
continually. But now the case between God and us does not stand after this
manner, because there has been already a sufficiency of Miracles to bear
witness to his Providence; so that there is no need of more for our Conviction;
and therefore it would be unreasonable for us to expect Miracles, properly and
strictly so called; that is, Works done, as they were of old, either without
the Use, or beyond the Power of Natural Causes. There is not the same reason
for God now to show his hand by such Acts of Omnipotence. There is not the same
reason now for God to exercise his Almighty Power by Signs and Wonders of that
high nature, to demonstrate his Providence, because Demonstrations enough have
been given of that already. Besides, the old, Carnal Polity of the Jews is now
changed into a Government of a Spiritual Nature, administered immediately, but
after an invisible manner, by Jesus Christ: Whose Exaltation unto the Right
Hand of his Father, and whose Power of judging the quick and dead is of it self
alone an abundant Proof of a Providence; because it would be impossible for him
to judge the world righteously in the next life, or to succor and protect his
Church in this, without a Providence; that is, unless he did observe the
Actions of men, and interest himself in the Affairs of the World. In short,
Miracles are not necessary in these days to attest the Divine Providence; and
therefore we must not expect to see the Hand of God in such Supernatural
Operations.

However, God has not shut himself out of the World: Though Miracles are
ceased, yet his watchful Care of us does never fail. Nor will it follow, that
there are no special Acts of Providence, because we see not those Tokens and
Signs from Heaven, which the Children of Israel saw. It is one thing to Govern
the World, and another thing to make the World sensible of it by Ocular
Evidence. The Christian Church is under a Spiritual Polity; and God does use
his Power now as efficaciously as ever, tho after a more secret and insensible
manner. And hence it follows, that the Hand of God may be, and is in many
Events, tho they be not in a strict sense Miraculous. Tho they be brought about
by the ministry of Second Causes, yet are they Effects of God's Special
Providence, because his own Hand does direct and govern their Causality after a
Special, Stupendous, and Amazing Manner.

II. Now that we may be always the more Thankful to God for such Signal
Instances of his Providence, it concerns us in the Second Place to consider,
What Acts of Providence may be reasonably counted his own Handy-works, tho done
by the Cooperation of Inferior Agents; or by what Signs and Marks we may
discern the Special Hand of God in them.

And here we must be very careful how we interpret Events at every turn, lest
we ascribe unto God some things which he has no special hand in; and which the
Passions, Prejudices, and Fancies of unwary people are wont to entitle that
Wise and Holy Being unto, without sufficient or just grounds. Some things he
only Permits; as the Sins and Wickednesses men do; wherein God has no more an
hand, than in upholding the Faculties of Human Nature, as he upholds the Powers
of all other Beings in the world. Some things he Appoints and Orders; as the
Evils men Suffer, and chiefly the Good they Enjoy. And that we may rightly
judge what Good that Transcendent Being has a Signal Hand in, this general
Rule, I conceive, is very necessary; namely, That we attentively observe in
every Event, what Evidences there are of Wisdom, Power, and Goodness. For these
are God's own Perfections; and the more of them we see in any Event, the more
of God we see in it; that is, when a Wise and Good Event is powerfully and
effectually brought to pass, we may then know, That it is God's hand, and that
God has done it.

Now if we apply this general Rule to particular Cases, methinks all reasonable
and discerning men may plainly see the Marks of God's Hand, or the Evidences of
his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, in these Four Cases; not to mention any more.
1. When a Great and Important Good is done; especially if it be done
surprizingly. 2. When a Great Good is done at a very Critical Juncture. 3. When
it is done by a Train and Series of Unexpected Accidents. 4. When Evil Designs
are so powerfully overruled, as to be made the Instruments and Means of Good.

1. First, We may reasonably look upon it as God's Hand, when a Great and
Important Good is done; especially when it is done after a surprising manner.
By a great and important Good, I mean that which is highly valuable in it self;
as the Preservation of the True Religion, and of men's Lives and Fortunes; and
that too which is of great Importance to a whole Community, a Church or State.
Such a Good is a most worthy Object of God's special Providence; most becoming
God to do: For if it becomes him to provide for the Private Good of Particular
Persons, much rather does it become him to provide for the Public Good of a
whole People professing his Religion. This is the most important Good; and
God's way is to adapt his Providence in proportion to the Worth and Value of
the Object which his Care is conversant about; so that as things differ in
their Rate or Estimation, so is God's Care lower or higher in its degrees, less
or more signal. This appears from our Savior's Words to his Disciples about
their relying upon God for their Food and Raiment: Is not life more than meat,
and the body than raiment? And, Are not ye much better than the fowls of the
air? And again, Are not ye of more value than many sparrows? Where the stress
of our Lord's own Argument lies in this, That the Measures of the Divine
Providence are suitable to the Nature and Value of Things. To the ordinary
Parts of the Creation it is extended in an ordinary measure; it is particular
over men, and more particular over those men who work the Works of God, because
they are better, more valuable, more useful than others. And hence it follows,
that if the special Providence of God be concerned for this and that Man in
particular, it must be concerned in a very high and eminent degree for a whole
Religious Community, because the reasons are still the greater and stronger; a
whole Nation being of far more value than a few Individuals. So that when a
Great Good is done to a Kingdom; when the True Faith is preserved in a Nation;
and when the Fortunes and Lives of a People are Providentially secured (all
which are things of the highest value) it is reasonable to conclude, That there
was the Hand of God; especially if that Great Good was wrought by unforeseen
and unexpected means.

This was the Case of all the Jews in the Reign of Ahasuerus, when that Haughty
and Bloody Minister of State, Haman, upon advising with his Friends, was
resolved to get Mordecai hanged the very next day, as he had before sent out
Orders under the King's Seal, for the utter Destruction of all the Jews
throughout One hundred twenty seven Provinces, upon the Thirteenth Day of the
Month Adar. Here was a Total Extirpation of God's People intended, and with
them the Extirpation of God's Faith and Worship that had been established among
them. And yet on a sudden the King's Mind was changed, and the Execution of the
whole matter was strangely prevented, by the wise Intercession of Queen Esther
at a Banquet. The Intercession was hers; but the Hand of God was over her, and
over the King's heart, and over the whole affair: And to show his hand, what an
unexpected, wonderful course did God take to preserve his People? Abasuerus
could not sleep the night before poor Mordecai was destined by Haman to be
sacrificed, tho Ahasuerus knew nothing then of Haman's Intentions. God held the
King's eyes waking: That occasioned him to call for the Public Records: In
them he discovered that Mordecai had done him very eminent Service; and finding
that he had not been rewarded, the King ordered him, instead of being hanged,
to be exalted with Honor; and so Haman, the great Contriver of Mischief, fell.
This was an Accident which flesh and blood could not have dreamed of; and that
which soon introduced a change of the whole Scene: For Queen Esther was heard;
her Request for her People was granted; the Letters for their Destruction were
reversed; Mordecai was advanced; Haman himself was hanged; the Jews every where
were allowed to slay their Enemies; and so their Deliverance was wrought; and
all this by unexpected means; by the Diversions of a Banquet, and by the loss
of a few hours Sleep. A Great and Important Good indeed, and that which was a
plain Manifestation of the great Wisdom, Goodness, and Power of God, working
with his Secret Hand after that wonderful manner.

2. Secondly, We may reasonably look upon it as a Mark of God's Hand, when a
Great Good is done at a very Critical Jnncture. Calamities are not always
foreseen; and when they are discovered it is not always in Human Power to avoid
them; and then it is a very Critical Season, when Dangers are not only
apparent, but imminent and extreme; when Destruction is just coming on; when
Preparations are at the height, and the Blow is ready to be given Such a
disconsolate, amazing condition Jews and Christians have been often in; so that
to human appearance no door of hope has been open, no way left for Innocence
to escape. Now when in such a case a surprising Deliverance happens, and such
extraordinary Events fall out, as work that Deliverance beyond men's
expectations, they carry with them Tokens of an Over ruling Hand, and are
arguments of Divine Wisdom and Goodness, armed with uncontrollable Power;
especially when the Evils that were ready to come to pass, were not apprehended
or thought of; as commonly it has happened. For so credulous are people of
simple minds, and so short-sighted are those whose business does not lie in
Intriguing, (and the world is for the most part made up of such) that it is
usual for people to be lulled asleep, and to rest confident of their Peace and
Safety, little dreaming of Snares and Death by their Bed sides. They who are
dextrous at mischief never care that the Dangers they are contriving should
appear with a grim and open face, to awaken men out of their security till it
be out of their power to keep the Enemy off, and to escape from him. In such
Extremities it is the work of God to lay to his hand; and when an happy Turn of
Affairs does ensue, it is to all thinking men who own a Providence a plain sign
of an All-seeing and Almighty Superintendent, who watches over people day and
night, and without whose Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, a Rescue would be
impossible for them, when evil designs are once ripe and the Pit perfectly
prepared to receive them. This is a glorious Evidence of God's own hand;
because none but that Omniscient Being can discern the whole Series of
Contrivances from the beginning to the end, and none but that Benign and
Powerful Being can dash them into nothing, and save his poor Creatures; as he
did the Jews, when the Sentence of their Destruction was now sealed; and as he
did Mordecai, when the Gallows was just going to be fixed; and as he did Isaac,
when the Fire and the Wood was ready, the Knife drawn, and Abraham's hand
stretched out; and (to come home) as he once saved King and Parliament here,
when the Match was just ready for the Powder. It is the peculiar Perfection and
Glory of God, that he is privy to all the intentions of the heart; that he
spieth out all the first formations of mischief; that he observes all the
motions of cruel and blood-thirsty men; that his Eye goes along with the whole
track of their designs; that he is able, when he pleases, to prevent the
Calamitous Consequents of them; and that he knows the time when it is fittest
for him to interpose, and to gain himself Honor, as he did upon Pharaoh when
he and his Host were in the midst of the Sea. And when a Deliverance comes at
such a Critical Juncture, in which Death and Ruin follow men close at heels, so
that of necessity there must be either Salvation to day, ot Destruction to
morrow, it is some what beyond the hardness even of an Egyptian, not to be
sensible that there the Hand of God fights.

3. It is a sign of God's Hand, when a Great Good is done by a Train and Series
of unfortunate Accidents. For this we need no other Instance but that of
Joseph. What a long Series of Providence did he go through, which no creatures
could any more foresee, than they could foresee the End, which God had an eye
upon throughout all. God had promised Abraham's Posterity the Land of Canaan,
and thought fit to transplant them first into the Land of Egypt, there to grow
and increase into a Numerous Nation, so that they might come to the Possession
of the Promised Land all at once, in a great Body, and after a plain,
remarkable manner. To make way for their Reception in Egypt, Joseph was to be
sent thither beforehand to get all the Power of the Kingdom under Pharaoh. In
order to this, first he dreamed two Dreams, importing that his Father and his
Brethren should bow down themselves to him. To remove him from home he was sent
away into the Field to see his Brethren. They consulted there how they might
use that opportunity to rid themselves of the Dreamer; and would have killed
him, had not Reuben prevented it. He advised to cast him into a Pit, and there
to leave him to the mercy of some wild Beast; but the Ishmaelites coming
accidentally that way, they sold him to those Merchants; and they again made
Money of him in Egypt. There one of Pharaoh's Officers bought him; his Mistress
fell in Love with him; and being disappointed in her Amors, became the means
of his being cast into Prison. Thence at last he was advanced by interpreting
some Dreams, first the Butler's, and then the King's. Joseph being now in
Power, a Famine is sent into the Land of Canaan. That forced his Kindred to
repair into Egypt, and so his Brethren fell into Joseph's hands, as he had
fallen into their hands before. By degrees they became known to one another;
and in the end their poor, aged Father, and all his Family were sent for, and
cherished; and so they multiplied exceedingly, till the time of the Promise
drew near. What a Train of strange Events was in all this matter? Joseph
observed how the Hand of God was in it all; and had he not told his Brethren
so, they must of themselves have acknowledged that such a long, continued
succession of odd Events, all of them terminating at last so wonderfully in so
great a Good, could never have been so ordered, governed, directed, and ended,
but by the special Providence of a Wise, Gracious, and Overruling Being.

But the Jews have not been the only People for whom the Hand of God has
appeared. Other Nations, and especially We of this Kingdom, have with
Admiration seen it act for us by a long Concatenation of Events, which no Human
Wisdom could forecast or think of. How many Virissitudes and Changes have we
seen? What Difficulties and Perplexities have we been surrounded with? What
Labyrinths and Pits have we been in? How dark and mysterious have many
proceedings seemed? How dismally have they looked and operated? How deeply have
we been affected with the sense of them? What Groans have we sent up to the God
of Comfort under our burdens; not able to guess where or how they would end;
and yet what surprising Joys and Triumphs have they ended in? Which is enough
to satisfy all considering men, that throughout a long course (a seemingly
incoherent course) of affairs, an Invisible and Wise Hand disposed and ordered
all; and brought every thing to such a Prosperous Issue, as cannot be justly
ascribed to any thing but a Divine Power, Wisdom, and Goodness.

4. Lastly, It may reasonably be thought to be the Hand of God, when Evil
Designs are so strangely overruled, as to be made the Instruments and Means of
Good. In this there is a double demonstration of God's Hand, and of his Divine
and Glorious Perfections; when wicked Contrivances are not only frustrated,
baffled, and defeated, but are moreover diverted and turned to ends quite
distant from, nay, contrary unto the purposes of evil men. This is plainly a
stroke from above; when their Designs recoil upon themselves, so that what was
formed and laid for the ruin of others, at last terminates in their own. It was
a glorious sign of God's Special Providence, which David observed in the Fall
of his and the Church's Enemies; That as they had made a pit, and dug it, so
they fell into the ditch they had made; that their mischief returned upon their
own heads, and their violent dealings came down upon their own pates; that in
the net which they had hid, their own feet were taken; and that they were
snared in the works of their own hands. An Observation which we our selves have
to our great satisfaction seen lately verified here in this Kingdom; our
bitterest Enemies have ruined themselves by their own Devices; and their
Counsels have been so wonderfully and providentially overruled, and even when
they thought themselves sure of Success, that what was Politickly laid for the
destruction of Truth, Peace, and good Government, in the Event proved an
effectual means to six all upon the firmer Foundation; the Contrivers
themselves going off with visible Marks of Divine Vengeance upon them.

III. And now to come to that which I proposed in the Third Place, What better
Improvement can we make of this whole Subject, than seriously to reflect upon
that Signal Hand which from time to time God has showed for this Church and
Kingdom; and impartially to consider what Expressions of Thankfulness are
called for at Our hands, who have been so long and so deeply indebted to the
Hand of God? Particularly, how thankful to him should we be, for saving us
hitherto from the Hand and Power of a Foreign Prince, of whose Cruelties many
of his own Natural Subjects are a dismal Cloud of Witnesses. Scepticks may be
unwilling to see and own it; but all indifferent persons who have a sense of
God, must look upon it as God's Hand, upon all those accounts I have now spoken
of. For,

1. Nothing but a Special Providence, directing and blessing the Means of our
Safety, could have preserved to us all that is so dear and precious in our
sight: Those Fortunes whereby we live; that Liberty which enhanceth the value
of Life it self; those Laws which are the peculiar Glory of this Nation, and
that Religion wherein is wrapped up the Eternal Interest and Happiness of our
Souls. How light soever some may make of this Consideration, (for no other
reason, but because we have not severely smarted under the Evils that were
coming upon us) yet our Dangers were apparent; Dangers to which all our dearest
and most valuable Concerns were exposed; and the Signal Preservation of them
ought on that account to be looked on as an argument of God's Hand, to which so
Great and Important a Good is to be ascribed.

2. To raise the sense of it yet, we should consider at what a Critical
Juncture this Good was done. At that nice season, when an unprovided,
defenseless People were to wrestle with a most Potent Enemy; when his Hopes
were at the height; when the Victory seemed to him unquestionable; and we
looked like men almost captivated at Home in our own Native Country. In this
our distress God that laughed all the Heathen to scorn, did with the Turn of
his Hand break and dissipate the Cloud, which hung lowering over our heads; and
that so suddenly and beyond expectation, that We, and our Enemies too, were
like those that dream, and could scarce believe our own senses.

3. Thirdly, if we observe how one thing followed another, we may well admire
the Special Providence of God through a continued Train and Course of
unforeseen Events; whereof, tho some seemed very threatening for the time, yet
the most uncomfortable accidents have now turned to our great advantage. How
long still God will please to vouchsafe his hand over us, is a Secret hid in
the Counsel of his own Will. Success for the future depends much upon the use
we make of his Providence to this day. If we will not be sensible of his Hand,
nor be thankful for it, nor be led by it to Repentance, we know not how soon
those Judgments may be executed against us, which were often denounced against
the Jews for their Hardness and Ingratitude in the like cases. However we may
be wanting to our selves, the hand of God has not been wanting. Since the time
that the Day of our Salvation began to drawn, tho there have been so many
Difficulties before us, yet by the good Hand of God the main Interest of the
Kingdom has so prosperously gone on, that every day we have the stronger
reasons to hope, That God will not only save us from the Power of that
Oppressor who has been such a Scourge to Christendom, but will moreover settle
us upon such solid Foundations, that neither the Policy of Rome nor the Gates
of Hell shall prevail against us. The present Complication of Affairs is such,
that the Hand of God is not hard to be seen by unprejudiced people, who believe
the Being of a Deity, and the Operations of a Providence.

4. And what can be a fairer evidence of it to strengthen our belief still,
than this Fourth Consideration, That the Devices of our Enemies are not only
rendered ineffectual, but are after a most wonderful manner turned upon
themselves? Those Arts which had been so long used against our Established
Religion, did so return upon the Authors of them, that perhaps the Church of
Rome never suffered greater Disgrace and Prejudice than she did in that little
time she stayed here: And when a Strong Wind carried her Politicians away to
their Homes abroad, they went off with such Infamy, as if God intended to
stigmatize and brand them, that they might be disdained and hooted at by all
the world.

That Good, Overruling Hand which God was pleased to stretch out for us in and
since that Remarkable Juncture, he has not yet drawn back into his Bosom.
Still it may be seen in the Happy Successes which God has granted unto, and in
the Signal Preservations wherewith he has blessed our most Heroic,
Publick-Spirited, and Indefatigably Zealous Prince, whom he thought fit to make
use of as the most proper Instrument in his Hand, to Rescue Three Kingdoms from
Vassalage and Idolatry. For all which, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy name let all Praise and Thanks be given, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory,
world without end.

Amen.
FINIS.
A Practical Discourse concerning Holiness. Wherein is showed the Nature, the
Possibility, the Degrees, and Necessity of Holiness; together with the Means of
Acquiring and Perfecting it. By Edward Pelling, D. D.

Printed for W. Rogers.


