Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus, A Treatise of Reginald Peacock, etc.

Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelm. Archiep. a Sac. Dom. etc.
Ian. 12, 1687.
A TREATISE PROVING SCRIPTURE To be the Rule of Faith. WRIT BY REGINALD
PEACOCK, Bishop of CHICHESTER, before the REFORMATION, About the Year MCDL.

LONDON, Printed for James Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1688.

PREFACE.
IF in any part of the Christian Religion an undoubted Certainty and most firm
Assurance may justly be required; if a scrupulous Examination and curious
Enquiry may ever be allowed in Matters of Religion; certainly an exact
Knowledge of the Rule of Faith will deserve as our first, so our chief,
Consideration. For since the Articles of Christianity are not in themselves
self-evident; nor can be found out by the sole principles of Reason; since all
revealed Religions are no farther credible, than as they can demonstrate their
Revelation to have been true and real, some Rule was necessary, which might
propose to Mankind those Articles of Faith which Reason could not suggest, and
propose them also with such evidence, as that the denial of assent should in
all become irrational.

What this determinate Rule is, has been the great Controversy of this and
all preceding Ages. However, all parties agree in affixing some certain
properties to it, whereby it may be distinguished; and indeed without which it
can never supply the Office, or serve the ends of a true Rule. These may be
reduced to four Heads, That it be able safely and inviolably to convey down all
revealed necessary Truths: That it be fitted to propose them clearly and
invariably to all Mankind: That it be independent on all other revealed
Articles: And lastly, that it be assigned as a Rule by God, the Author of all
revealed Religion. If either of the two first Conditions be deficient, the Rule
will be unuseful; if either of the latter, uncertain and without authority.

The Scripture enjoys all these properties in so eminent a manner, that no
reasonable Doubt can be made of the Truth of it. For if we consider, that
whatsoever is revealed, may be pronounced; whatsoever is pronounced, may be
written down; and whatsoever is committed to Writing may be preserved safe,
while those Writings are preserved unaltered; we must conclude, that any
revealed Religion may be entirely, and without danger of mistake, proposed from
written Books to the universal Belief of Mankind, since these will afford a
standing Rule both to Pastors of teaching of their People, and to the People of
examining the Doctrine of their Pastors, in case of Diffidence. The
independence of Scripture from all other revealed Articles is no less evident.
For that these Books were indeed written by those persons whose names they
bear, and these persons highly credible, is known by the same evidences whereby
the Authors, and Credibility of any other Books are known; I mean by the
concurrent testimony and consent of all succeeding Ages, considered not as a
Collection of Men professing the Christian Faith, but as persons devoid neither
of common sense, nor integrity, as they must have been, if they had mistaken
themselves, or deluded us in believing, and then testifying a matter of fact so
easy to be known, and more easy to be remembered. Being thus assured of the
Credibility of Scripture, that it was written by such Historians, who really,
either performed, or saw those Miracles which they do attest, we cannot but
believe these Miracles; and consequently, that the Authors and Founders of the
Christian Religion acted by a Divine Commission, and may reasonably command our
assent to their Revelations. Being thus assured of the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, we may probably conclude from the nature and end of them, but most
certainly from their own Testimony, that they contain all things necessary to
Salvation, and are the only Rule of Faith: and all this although we did not yet
believe any other Article of the Christian Religion.

On the other side, Tradition wants every one of those Conditions which are
necessarily required to a Rule of Faith. For first we can never be assured,
that any Articles were invariably and entirely without any addition or
diminution conveyed down to us by Tradition; since it has been in all Times
and Ages observed, that Matters of Fact, much more of Belief, not immediately
committed to Writing, presently degenerated into Fables, and were corrupted by
the capricious Malice or Ignorance of Men. Nothing can exempt the Tradition of
the Christian Religion from this Fate, at least from our reasonable suspicions
of it, but the Infallibility of that Society of Men which conveys down this
Tradition. But the latter can never be known till this certainty of Tradition
be first cleared and presupposed, since the Belief of this supposed
Infallibility, must at last be resolved into the sole truth and certainty of
Tradition.

In the next place, Tradition cannot certainly and invariably propose the
Belief of Christianity to all private persons. For from whence shall this
Tradition be received? from a Pope, or a Council, or both, or from none of
these, but only the Universal Church? In every one of these Cases infinite
difficulties will occur, which will singly appear insuperable: As, who is a
true Pope, what his intentions in defining were, whether he acted Canonically,
in what sense he has defined? What Councils, whether Ecumenical, Patriarchal
or Provincial may be securely trusted? What are the necessary Conditions and
Qualifications of a General Council? Whether all these Conditions were ever
observed in any Council? What these Councils are, what they have defined, what
is the true sense and intention of their Definitions? From whom must we learn
the Belief of the Universal Church, if Popes and Councils be rejected? From all
Christians, or only from the Clergy? If from the later, whether the assent of
every member of the Clergy be required? If not, how great a part may safely
dissent from the rest? From whom the opinion of the major part is to be
received? Whether from the Writings of Doctors, or the teaching of living
Pastors? If from the latter, whether it be sufficient to hear one or a few
Parish Priests, or all, or at least the major number are personally to be
consulted? All these Difficulties may be branched out into many more, and
others, no less insuperable, be found out; which will render the Proposal of
Religion by way of Tradition, if not utterly impracticable, at least,
infinitely unsafe.

Thirdly, Tradition is so far from being independent on other Articles of the
Christian Faith, that the Belief of all other Articles must be presupposed to
it. For since all Sects propose different Traditions, and the truth of none of
them is self-evident, it must first be known which is the true Church, before
it can be determined which is the true Tradition. Now the knowledge of the true
Church can be obtained only two ways, either from the Truth of her Doctrines,
or from the external Notes of a true Church. If the first way, then it must
first be known what are the true and genuine Doctrines of Christianity, the
steadfast belief of which causes this Society to become the true Church. But if
the true Church be known only from some external Notes, these Notes are either
taught by Scripture, or found out by the light of Reason. If taught by
Scripture, then the knowledge of the Divine Authority of Scripture is
antecedent to the knowledge of the true Church, and consequently independent on
it. For otherwise Scripture will be believed for the Authority of the Church,
and the Church for the Authority of Scripture: which is a manifest Circle.
Besides, in this case that grand Article of Belief in the Holy Catholic Church
will be received not from Tradition, but from the Scripture: and consequently
Scripture, not Tradition, will be the primary Rule of Faith. Lastly, if the
Notes of the Church may be found out by Natural Reason, then to pass by the
infinite Contradictions which would arise from such a Proposition, these Notes
can be no other than Antiquity, Universality, Perpetuity, and such like; every
one of which does some way or other presuppose the knowledge of the true
Doctrines of Christianity, as well as those of the present Church. For the end
of these Notes is to compare the former with the latter: and consequently both
of them must be first known.

Lastly, It can never be proved that Tradition was assigned by God as a Rule of
Faith. For this proof must be taken either from the Scriptures, or from
Tradition. Not from the first, for not to say, that Scripture is wholly silent
in this matter, such a supposition would destroy it self, and involves a
manifest Contradiction. For if it be a Point of Faith that Tradition is the
Rule of Faith, and this Article is deduced and received only from Scripture;
then Scripture is the immediate Rule of one Article of Faith, and the mediate
Rule of all other Articles; and consequently Tradition cannot be the Rule of
Faith. No less absurd is it to imagine any Proof of this Article can be drawn
from Tradition. For we can never be assured, the Tradition of this very Article
is of Divine Authority, and consequently infallible, until we be first
satisfied, that God, by assigning Tradition for a Rule of Faith, conferred
Divine Authority upon it, which is the matter now in question.

Thus have I briefly pointed out some Arguments, which prove that Tradition
neither is, nor can be the Rule of Faith. And indeed all Ages of Christianity
have been so far satisfied of the truth of this, that in all Controversies the
Catholics no less constantly appealed to Scripture, than the Heretics
recurred to Tradition. The pretense of Tradition is so easy, and impossible to
be refuted by the meaner Christians, that, no wonder if Heretics always took
this more compendious way, when to pretend the Authority of Scripture, would
have been too palpable and too gross an impudence. The Standard of written
Truths continued always the same, and could not be universally corrupted.
Whereas Tradition might securely be adapted to the most absurd and contrary
Opinions; since to effect that Design no more was required, than the confidence
or mistake of Heretics, pretending to have received their own Dreams and
Errors, as necessary Articles of Faith, from their Forefathers. Thus all the
Heretics of the three first Centuries, when the true and genuine Tradition of
the Church might much more easily be known, than it can be at this day,
proposed their Heresies under the venerable name of Apostolic Traditions;
which pretense they carried on so far, that they published the (...), or
Traditions of almost every Apostle and Apostolic Man, wherein they committed
to Writing those revealed Truths, which they believed the Apostles to have
preached, and have left unwritten. In vain should the Fathers and Writers of
the Church have recurred to the true and genuine Tradition of unwritten
Revelations, since they could never demonstrate, that this true Tradition was
rather to be found among them, than among those Heretics. For many of these
Heretical Sects were contemporary with, or began immediately after the
Apostles, were vastly numerous, and scattered through the whole Church; and
consequently could put in so fair a claim for Tradition, that no human wit
could ever have determined the Question, if the Scripture had not been called
in, and opposed to such unreasonable pretensions. Accordingly Scripture was
ever pleaded by the Catholics, and the pretense of unwritten Revelations
derived down by oral Tradition was then esteemed as a Characteristick Note of
Heretics. Thus S. Augustine Tract. in Joan. 96, 97.
, and before him Clemens Alexandrinus Lib. Strom. passim.
, complain of the Heretics of their times; Tertullian De Praescript. Haeres.
assures us, it was the usual evasion of Heretics, to decline the Scriptures,
and flee to Tradition, pretending, that the Apostles published not the Gospel
to all People, nor committed all revealed Truths to Writing, but delivered many
Articles of Faith secretly to approved Men; which Articles were no other than
their own Heresies. In the same manner the Heretics, opposed by S. Irenaeus
Lib. 3. cap. 2. lib. 2. cap. 3.
, were wont, when urged with the Authority of Scripture, and their perfect
silence as to those Articles which they obtruded upon the World, to plead the
Imperfection of the Holy Scriptures, that they were not intended by God as a
Rule of Faith, Quia non possit ex his (S. Scripturis) inveniri veritas ab his
qui nesciunt Traditionem. Non enim per literas traditam illam sed per vivam
vocem. Ibid.
Because the Truth could not be learned from them by those who were ignorant of
Tradition. For that the Christian Faith was not delivered by Writing, but by
Word of Mouth, or by Oral Tradition.

To produce but one Example more, Eunomius the Heretic in his Apology extant
in Manuscript in S. Martin's Library, every where pleads the Tradition of
precedent Ages, and professes to follow that as his only Rule of Faith. It is
necessary (says he (...). Apologetic. in fine Prologi. (...). Post medium.
) for those who treat of matters of Faith, setting before them the holy
Tradition, which has all along obtained from the times of the Fathers, as a
Rule and Canon, to make use of this accurate Rule to judge of those things
which shall be said. Afterward proposing his blasphemous Opinion about the
Holy Ghost, he introduces it with this Preface, Exactly following the Doctrine
of the Holy Fathers, and receiving it from them, we believe, etc.

This then was the Artifice and Practice of the ancient Heretics. What the
Practice of the Catholic Fathers was in opposing these Heretics, or
establishing any necessary Article of Faith; that they accounted Scripture to
be the only adequate Rule of Faith, and to contain in express and plain words
all things necessary to be believed; that they rejected all Articles, which
could not be thence deduced, as spurious and false, or at least uncertain and
unnecessary; and always asserted the Sufficiency of Scripture, I will not here
insist to prove; since that Point has been so often handled and cleared by the
Writers of our Church, more particularly by Bishop Tailor Dissuasive from
Popery. Par. 2. lib. 1. Sect. 2.
, to whom I remit the Reader.

My Design and the Age of that Treatise which I now publish, require me to
descend lower, and demonstrate, that even in latter Ages it was the commonly
received Opinion of the Church, that Scripture is the Rule of Faith. And this
alone will as evidently overthrow the Plea of Tradition, as if the Consent of
all Ages herein were demonstrated. For since Tradition is the perpetual
Succession of any Doctrine conveyed down in the Church by word of mouth from
the Apostles to this present time; if this Succession were in any Age
whatsoever interrupted, it can no more claim the Title of Tradition than if it
had never been believed. So that if it can be proved, the Doctrine of
Tradition, being the Rule of Faith, was in any Age of the Church disbelieved,
not only the proof of this Article from Tradition will fail; but even the
Article it self will appear to be evidently false. For it is not possible that
Tradition should be the Rule of Faith, if that very Article, that Tradition is
the Rule of Faith, were not delivered down by an uninterrupted succession of
Belief: for then it would not be the Rule of that very Article. Besides, it is
absurd, that the Church of any Age should have power of declaring what the
Tradition of Faith is, and consequently of fixing the Rule of Faith, and yet be
so far from being conscious of any such power inherent in her, that she
disbelieved it. Not to say, that if at any time Tradition was not believed by
the Church to be the Rule of Faith, and yet at the same time diverse Articles of
Faith were defined by the Church, Tradition must necessarily ever since have
ceased to be the Rule of Faith; since otherwise all Definitions of the Church
must indifferently be admitted, made by her both when she followed, and when
she deviated from the Rule of Faith; and consequently the Faith of all private
Christians must be subjected to infinite uncertainty.

Now to prove that the Tradition of this Article was in any Age of the Church
interrupted and discontinued, it is not necessary, that all members of the
Church should then agree in the disbelief of it, that no Doctors should believe
Tradition to be the Rule of Faith, or none maintain the Insufficiency of
Scripture. It is sufficient, that some Divines of great name, who lived and
died in the Communion of the Church, were ever held in great esteem both for
Piety and Learning, and never censured by the Church for any erroneous
Opinions, much less for Heretics, that some such, I say, disbelieved this
Article, and maintained Scripture to be the Rule of Faith. For if any such
were, then the contrary Opinion could not be the belief of the universal
Church, much less an Article of Faith. That there were such Doctors I shall
immediately prove, by producing their own Words* and thereby demonstrate my
intended purpose. And not only so, but farther shall therewith render it highly
probable, that it was the generally received Opinion of the Church at that
time, that Scripture, not Tradition, is the Rule of Faith, by all those
Arguments, which a question of this Nature will admit, I mean by the authority
of the most eminent Writers, and public practice of the Church in Councils.
For it cannot be imagined, that so many Learned Persons, esteemed, as it were,
the Oracles of their Times, and Pillars of the Church, should either be
ignorant of the Doctrine of the Church, touching the Fundamental Principle of
Faith, or if wilfully opposing it, should obtain, or conserve to themselves so
great a Reputation; or that the General Councils of that time should, in their
Sessions and Disputations, permit the Sufficiency of Scripture to be laid down
as an uncontroverted Principle, without giving some check to so grand an Error.

That the Church therefore in the fifteenth Age did generally believe the
Scripture to be the Rule of Faith, and contain all things necessary to
Salvation, may be evidently demonstrated from this Treatise which I now
publish. The Author of which was far the most Eminent and Learned Bishop of the
Church of England in his time; a person, who, as himself assures us, had spent
more than twenty years in writing Controversial Books against the Lollards,
when he composed this Treatise; and who every where gives manifest proof of
his great Learning. So eminent a person cannot be supposed to have been
ignorant of the general Belief of the Church in his time, concerning the Rule
of Faith; nor will his apparent zeal for the Interest of the Church, permit us
to believe, that he wilfully opposed the Doctrine of the Church, in whose
Service he employed the greatest part of his life; or that when he so zealously
pleaded the Cause of the Church against the Lollards, he should himself depart
from the Church in her principal Article, and therein become a Lollard. Since
therefore he plainly asserts and teaches, that Scripture is the Rule of Faith,
this undeniably proves, that the belief of this Proposition, was not, in the
time of our Author, accounted any part of Lollardism, or supposed Heresy; but
rather esteemed an Article of Catholic Belief, at least, an Article which
might be freely disputed, without violating the Definitions, or dissenting from
the universal Belief of the Church. And indeed our Author in the beginning of
this Discourse assures us, that the Doctors of his time disagreed in
determining, whether the Church or Scripture were chiefly to be respected in
the resolution of Faith.

One thing may be objected against the Authority of our Author; That he was
forced, by the ruling Clergy, to recant several Opinions and Doctrines taught
by him, as erroneous; and consequently, that he cannot be esteemed a Doctor of
the Church. But here not to say, that the sentence of two or three partial
Bishops (for no more condemned him) is not to be accounted the Judgment of the
Church of England, this very Recantation adds no small strength to our
Argument. For when the malice of his Enemies obliged him to recant all those
Doctrines which they esteemed to be erroneous, they took no notice of his
having asserted Scripture to be the only Rule of Faith, nor obliged him to
recant that Proposition; a manifest Argument that it was not then accounted
either heretical or erroneous, or contrary to the received Doctrine of the
Church; since otherwise they would not have failed to place it in the front of
his Recantation, as an Error of an higher degree, and greater contagion, than
any of those for which he stood condemned; which, in truth, were so far from
being Heresies, that they were all at that time maintained by many eminent
Divines, who never were censured by the Church, and some of them so far true,
that no Learned Man of the Church of Rome will at this day deny them. And this
also fully clears our Author from any suspicion of Lollardism, or secret
inclination to it.

That he was not singular herein, defended no Paradox, nor opposed any Doctrine
of the Church; I come next to prove: The School Divinity was at that time
universally received in the Church of Rome, taught in all Universities and
Schools, and by long use become in great measure the Doctrine of the Church.
The most famous and celebrated Author of this Divinity was S. Thomas Aquinas,
whose Writings were then in all Men's hands, universally applauded, and
religiously embraced. Some few Divines indeed dissented from him, and followed
the System of Scotus; but this Disagreement respected not the Rule of Faith,
nor indeed any material point of Divinity, but only some abstracted Notions and
Scholastic Niceties of Divinity. The Doctrine therefore of Aquinas is to be
esteemed the general opinion of the Divines and Writers of those times. It
cannot be here objected against the force of our Argument, that the same
Divinity is yet retained and taught in most Popish Countries, although the
Doctrine of the Scriptures Sufficiency be rejected. The Method of Reasoning and
Disputing is now infinitely altered among the Writers of the Roman Church from
what it was before the Reformation. Before that time they made no difficulty to
acknowledge and even urge the necessity of Reformation; whereas now the Honor
of their Church obliges them to declare it both unnecessary and unlawful.
While Scripture was yet looked up in an unknown Tongue, and removed from the
knowledge of the Laity, (who were then generally very ignorant) they were not
ashamed to make confident Appeals, for the Truth of their Doctrine to the Holy
Scriptures. When that Veil was removed, the Scriptures translated, and the
World become more intelligent and inquisitive, some other Artifice was to be
found out, which might preserve the Credit of ancient Errors, and defend them
from the silence and opposition of Scripture. To this end no stratagem could
conduce more than the constant Artifice of all Innovators in Religion, the Plea
of Tradition. Before that, lesser Artifices could hide the Deformity of their
Errors, and while ignorant Christians could be securely misled with false, and
sometimes foolish Interpretations of Scripture, while Ecce duos gladios was
thought sufficient to evince the coercive Power of the Pope over temporal
Princes; and Arabant boves, juxta comedebant asini, could effectually persuade
the Laity entirely to resign up their Judgments to the Direction of the Clergy,
there was no need of any desperate Remedy; but when persons became so far
inquisitive, as to inquire into Reasons of Things, and demand some better
Authority for the belief of Articles imposed on them; nothing less than the
arrogant pretense of an infallible Tradition could secure and palliate the
contradiction of impossible Propositions.

To prove therefore Aquinas his Doctrine concerning the Rule of Faith, to have
been entirely agreeable to that of our Author, I will go no farther than his
Sum of Divinity, the most famous and best known of all his Works. In the
beginning of it laying down the Principles upon which Divinity and the proofs
of Religion ought to proceed: he says Sed tum S. Doctrina hujusmodi
auctoritatibus (philosophorum) utitur quasi extrantis argumentis and
probabilibus, auctoritatibus autem Canonicae Scripturae utitur proprie ex
necessitate argument^ndo, auctoritatibus autem allorum doctorum eccl^siae,
quasi arguendo ex propri^s sed probabilibus. Inniiitur enim fides nostra
revelationi Apostolis and Prophetis factae, qui canonicos libros scripserunt ^
non autem revelationi, si qua fuit aliis Doctoribus facta. Unde dicit
Augustinus in epistola ad Hier. etc. par. 1. qu. 1. art. 8.
; That this Holy Doctrine uses the Authority of Philosophers as extraneous,
and only probable; but the Authorities of Holy Scripture as properly belonging
to her, and concluding necessarily (or infallibly) but the Authorities of other
Doctors of the Church as properly indeed belonging to her, but concluding only
probably. For our Faith is founded upon the Revelation made to the Apostles and
Prophets, who wrote the Canonical Books of Scripture, and not upon any
Revelation made to other Doctors, if any such there be. Whence S. Augustine
says in his Epistle to S. Hierom, To the Books of Scripture only, which are
called Canonical, have I learned to pay this honor, that I should most firmly
believe none of their Authors to have erred in any thing in composing them. In
the two next Articles it is inquired, whether Holy Scripture may use Metaphors,
and contain diverse senses under one and the same Letter. In both places the
Objections are thus formed. These Qualities would be incongruous to a Rule of
Faith; but the Scripture is the Rule of Faith. This last Proposition is no
where reinforced in the Objections, but laid down as an uncontroverted
Principle. Aquinas in answering them, no where denies Scripture to be the Rule
of Faith, but endeavors to take off the incongruity of a metaphorical and
ambiguous Style to the Rule of Faith; and in answer to both Objections has
these words. Non tamen ex hoc aliquid deperit S. Scripturae; quia nihil sub
spirituali sensu continetur fidei necessarium, quod Scriptur per literalem
sensum alicubi manifest non tradat. Art. 10.
Although Metaphors and Allegories be found in Scripture, yet does Holy
Scripture suffer no detriment or imperfection thereby. For nothing necessary to
Faith is contained under the hidden sense, which Scripture does not somewhere
manifestly deliver in the literal sense. Afterward being about to dispute of
God, and the Mysteries of the Trinity, and Incarnation, he proposes this as a
most certain and undoubted Principle, That De Deo dicere non debemus, quod in
S. Scriptura non invenitur, vel per verba, vel per sensum. qu. 36. Art. 2.
we ought to affirm nothing of God, which is not found in Holy Scripture,
either in words or in sense: conformably to what the Master of Sentences, and
Founder of the School Divinity had before taught; who inquiring what Method is
to be observed in treating of the Trinity, answers, That Primo, secundum
authoritates Sanctarum Scripturarum, utrum fides ita se habeat, demonstrandum.
Sentent. lib. 1. Did. 2. qu. 3.
it must in the first place be demonstrated according to the Authorities of
Holy Scripture, whether the Christian Faith teaches it or not, and in what
manner.

But to return to Aquinas, he asserteth Scripture to be the Rule of Faith in
many other places of his Sum. Thus disputing 1.2. qu. 106* Art. 2.
of the nature and properties of the New Law or Covenant, he inquires whether
it be a written Law. in resolving of this Question he opposes not the written
Law to Tradition, but to the Law written in the Hearts of Men, by the virtue
and operation of the Holy Ghost; and at last concludes thus: Lex nova
principaliter ipsa gratia est Spiritus S. in cord fidelium scripta; secundario
autem est lex scripta, prout in ^a traduntur illa, quae vel ad gratiam
disponunt, vel ad usum ipsius gratiae spectant. Ibid.
The New Law is principally that very Grace of the Holy Ghost which is written
in the Hearts of the Faithful; but secondarily it is the written Law, in as
much as those things are delivered in it which either dispose to Grace, or
respect the use of that Grace. Here the very nature of this Question, and
comparison of the Written with the New Law, supposes that the whole System of
revealed Truths is contained in the written Law: and lest we should doubt of
this supposition, the latter part of the Passage now cited plainly determines
it. But to proceed, Aquinas often renews this supposition; and at last
comparing the Old with the New Testament, he determines thus: Omnia quae
credenda traduntur in Novo Testamento explicit and aperte, traduntur credenda
in Veteri Testamento, sed implicit and sub figura, and secundum hoc etiam
quantum ad credenda lex nova continetur in veteri. Ibid. Art. 3.
All things which are plainly and explicitly delivered to be believed in the
New Testament, are delivered also to be believed in the Old Testament, but
implicitly and obscurely. And in this respect also as to matters of Belief,
the new Law is contained in the old. But if all matters of Belief in the new
Law be contained in the Old Testament; and whatsoever is contained in the Old
Testament, is plainly and explicitly taught in the New Testament: then the New
Testament does not only contain all matters of Belief in the New Law, but also,
which is more considerable, proposes them clearly and explicitly. He intimates
the same no less manifestly, when he teaches, That Tenetur homo explicit
credere omnes fidei articulos, implicit vero quaecunque in sacra traduntur
Scriptura. 2.2. Qu. 1. Art. 5. Concl.
Man is bound explicitly to believe all the Articles of Faith; but implicitly
whatsoever is delivered in Holy Scripture. Here he manifestly supposes
Scripture, not Tradition, to be the Rule of all Articles of Faith. Otherwise he
was obliged by all the Laws of Reason to conclude, that an implicit Belief, not
of all things delivered by Scripture, but of all delivered by Tradition is
required.

But the most considerable Testimony of Aquinas is yet behind. For inquiring
whether the Articles of Faith be conveniently disposed in the Creed, he forms
this Objection against it. Videtur quod inconvenient^r articuli fidei in
Symbolo ponantur. Sacra enim Scriptura est regula fidei cui nec addere nec
substrahere licet. Dicitur enim, etc. 2.2. Qu. 1. Art. 9.
It should seem that the Articles of Faith are inconveniently disposed in the
Creed. For Holy Scripture is the Rule of Faith; to which it is unlawful either
to add, or to take away. For it is said Deuteronomy. IV. Ye shall not add to the word
which I speak unto you, nor take away from it. Therefore it was unlawful to
compose another Creed, in manner of a Rule of Faith, after the Promulgation of
the Rule of Faith. Here certainly, if ever, was a fair occasion presented to
deny Scripture to be the Rule of Faith. But Aquinas is so far from doing it,
that he allows it, and endeavors to prove, that the Composure of a Creed does
not necessarily include either any Addition to, or diminution from Scripture.
For thus he answers, Ad primum ergo dicendum, quod veritas fidei in S.
Scripturis diffuse continetur, and variis modis, etc. Et ideo fuit necessarium
ut ex sententiis S. Scripturae aliquid manifestum summarie colligeretur, quod
propon^retur omnibus ad credendum: quod quidem non est additum S. Scripturae,
sed potius ex S. Scriptura disumptum. Ibid.
To this Objection it is to be answered, that the truth of Faith is diffusively
contained in Holy Scriptures, and diverse ways, and in some places obscurely: so
that to collect the true Faith out of Scripture, a long Study and Exercise is
required, to which all those cannot arrive who* are necessarily obliged to
believe the truth of Faith, since many of them, taken up with other business,
cannot attend to study. Therefore it was necessary that somewhat manifest
should summarily be collected out of the sentences of Holy Scripture, which
might be proposed to all to be believed: which indeed was not added to Holy
Scripture, but rather taken out of Holy Scripture.

I have used the greater diligence in representing the Doctrine of Aquinas,
because he bears not a single Testimony, but carries a numerous train of
School Divines along with him. I proceed now to the Writers of the fifteenth
Age, contemporary to our Author, premising only the Authority of a Learned and
Judicious Canonist of the precedent Age. This was Marsilius Patavinus,
Professor at Padua, and Privy Counselor to Lewis the Emperor: who asserteth,
Eos enim talem potestatem and authoritatem habuisse a Christo tenemur credere;
qualem per verba Scripturae sibi tradita convincere possumus, nonaliam.
Defensor pacis. l. 2. c. 4.
That we are bound to believe the Pope and Bishops to have received such a
Power and Authority from Christ, as we can evince from the Words of Scripture,
was conferred on them, and no other. But he more plainly afterward decides the
Question, when he lays down this Proposition. Nulli sermoni vel scripturae
fidem sive credulitatem certam aut confessionem veritatis praestare tenemur,
nisi iis quae Canonicae appellantur, i. e. quae in volumine Bibliae
continentur. Ibid. l. 2. c. 28.
To no Speech or Writing are we bound to give certain faith and credence, or
acknowledge them to be true, upon pain of damnation; except to those which are
called Canonical, that is, which are contained in the Volume of the Bible.

In the beginning of the fifteenth Age the Council of Constance was held:
which, as Aeneas Sylvius De gest. Council. Basil. l. 1. paulo ante med.
assures us, founded all their Decrees and Definitions upon the Authority of
Holy Scripture. The most eminent Divine in that Council, and indeed of all
Christendom, at that time, was John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris; who, by the
unanimous Delegation of all the Bishops, drew up the Decrees of the Council; a
person of that Eminence and Repute, that by reason of the known Conformity
between his Opinions and the received Doctrines of the Church, he was usually
styled, The most Christian Doctor; and when the Bohemians declined the
Authority of the Council, Cardinal Zabarella could oppose no Argument to them
more plausible than the Reputation and Fame of Gerson. To find out therefore
the received Opinion of the Church in his time, he ought in the first place to
be consulted. Thus then he delivers his Opinion: Scriptura sacra est regula
fidei, contra quam been intellectam non est admittenda authoritas seu ratio,
etc. Haec regula fundamentum est commune nobis and haereticis quos impugnare
conamur. Tract. contra Haeresi^ de commun. sub utraque speci^, Opp. Tom. 1. p.
521.
Holy Scripture is the Rule of Faith; against which, rightly understood, no
authority or reason of any Man whatsoever is to be admitted. Neither is any
Custom, Constitution or Observation valid, if it be proved to be contrary to
Holy Scripture. This Rule is a common Foundation both to us, and those
Heretics, against whom I now dispute. He was then disputing against the
Bohemians, the Followers of Husse and Wicliff, whom all know to have asserted
Scripture to be the Rule of Faith. In another place he has these words. In
examining Doctrines it must be first and principally inquired, whether the
Doctrine be conformable to Holy Scripture as well in it self, as in its
circumstances. This is manifest from the authority of S. Dionysius, who
pronounces thus: We must not dare to teach any thing of Divine Matters, except
what is delivered to us in Holy Scripture. Of which the Reason is this; Nihil
audendum dicere de divinis, nisi quae nobis a Scriptura sacra tradita sunt.
Cujus ratio est quoniam Scriptura nobis tradita est tanquam regula sufficiens
and infallibilis pro regimi^t totius Ecclesiastici corporis and membrorum usque
in finem saeculi. Est igitur talis ars, talis regula vel exemplar, cui se non
conformans alia doctrine vel abjicienda est, ut haereticalis, aut suspecta; aut
impertinens ad religionem prorsus est habenda. Suspecta est omnis revelatio,
quam non confirmat lex etc prophetae cum Evangelio. Alioquin, etc. De Examinat.
Doctrine. Par. 2. Tom. 1. p. 541.
because Scripture was delivered to us as a sufficient and infallible Rule for
the Government of the whole Body of the Church, and the members of it, even to
the end of the World. Scripture therefore is an Art, a Rule, and a Copy of that
Nature; that any other Doctrine not conformable to it, is either to be rejected
as heretical, or suspected; or at least to be esteemed no part of Religion, nor
belonging to it. Every Revelation is suspected, which the Law and the Prophets,
with the Gospel, do not confirm. Otherwise they are rather to be esteemed the
Delusions of Devils, or rather the Capricio's of Men's Brains, than Revelations.
To such Idiots that saying of Christ may justly be objected: Ye err, not
knowing the Scriptures. But some will say: From the beginning of the Gospel to
this day some wholesome Doctrines are found in the Mouths and Writings of Men,
which the Holy Scripture does not contain. I answer, that Scripture contains
them all according to some degrees of Catholic Truths. Lastly, disputing of
those Articles of Faith, which are necessary to be believed, he determines
thus: Constat autem quod Canon Bibliae lex est Dei per revelationem habita;
cujus Assertiones literales innituntur huic unico literali principio. Declarat.
verit. quae credenda sunt de necessit. salut. Tom. 1. p. 414.
It is mani^est, that the Canon of the Bible is the whole revealed Law of God;
whose Literal Assertions are founded upon this one only literal Principle.

At the same time Nicolas Clemangis, Doctor of the Sorbon, was held in great
repute for his extraordinary Learning and Piety: who, treating of the Rule of
Faith, and Authority of General Councils, places the first in Scripture, and
denies the latter to be infallible in these words: Licet autem Ecclesiae
militantis authoricas sit maxima, etc. non illi tamen nos oportet (ut videtur)
triumphantis Ecclesiae titulos ascribere, ut infallibilis sit and impeccabilis,
quae saepe, ut nosti and fallit and fallitur. -- Mirum sane prima specie satis
videtur, quod authoritatem peregrinantis in terra Ecclesiae authoritati videtur
Evangelii anteponere: cum in multis illa falli possit, illud omnino nequaquam
possit: and cum ipsius Ecclesiae authoritas quantum ad ipsius radicem and
fundamentum maxim ex Evangelio constet, etc. Disput. de materia Conc. Genesis p.
61, 62. Lugd. Bat. 1613.
But although the Authority of the Church Militant be very great, which founded
upon a firm Rock cannot be shaken, and against which the Gates of Hell shall
never be able to prevail: yet we ought not (as it should seem) to ascribe to it
the Titles of the Church Triumphant, as that it is infallible and impeccable;
which, as you know, often both does deceive, and is deceived. -- It seems
indeed very odd, that any one should prefer the Authority of the Church
Militant to the Authority of the Gospel; whenas the Church may err in many
things, the Gospel cannot in the least: and the Authority of the Church it
self, as to the Ground and Foundation of it is chiefly deduced from the Gospel.
Nay, the very Institution, Power and Edification of the Church can no way so
expressly and certainly be known, as from the Gospel. But, as I imagine, it can
by no method be so certainly determined, whether the Church or the Gospel be of
greater Authority, as by supposing this Case, when the Church defines any
thing contrary to the Gospel. I know indeed that this cannot be. (This is to be
understood of the Belief and received Doctrine of the Universal Church, not of
the Decrees of the Representative Church. Otherwise Clemangis will most
foolishly contradict himself.) However, that we may the better find out the
truth, let us put this Case; Do you imagine, that in that case S. Augustine would
have rejected the Doctrine of the Gospel, and adhered to the Definition of the
Church? No surely. Where he proceeds at large to urge this Argument, and
thereby to assert the Superiority of the Scriptures Authority to that of the
Church.

Before the middle of this Century flourished Thomas Waldensis, Provincial of
the Carmelites, and Confessor to two Kings of England, Henry V. and Henry VI.
successively, generally accounted the most Learned English Man of his Age, and
the great Champion of the Papal Cause against the Lollards and other supposed
Heretics of his time, against whom he writ a large and elaborate Work; which
was in a particular manner confirmed and approved by a special Bull of Pope
Martin V. Therein proposing an entire System of Divinity, he lays down the
Sufficiency of Scripture as a most certain Principle in three whole Chapters;
Doctrinale fidei antiquae. Tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 20, 21, 22.
out of which I will produce some few Passages. Disputing therefore of all
Articles necessary to be believed, and the complete System of Christian Faith,
he uses these words; They who Qui adhuc credunt Scripturarum Canon^m
imperfectum, and posse adhuc augeri per authoritatem Ecclesiae, cum Iudaeis
plenitudinem temporis expectant, Iudaico forsan sub Messia. cap. 2^.

Nec tamen hic laudo supericilium quod quidam attollunt, volentes occasion
hujus dicti decretum patrum in Ecclesia majoris esse auctoris and culminis and
ponderis, quam sit auctoritas Scripturarum. Quod quidem non tam ineptum videtur
quam satuum: nisi talis quis dicat, etc. cap. 21.


yet believe the Canon of Scripture to be imperfect, and that it may yet be
augmented by the Authority of the Church, do yet with the Jews expect the
fullness of time, perhaps under a Jewish Messiah. He then takes notice of that
famous Passage of S. Augustine, I would not believe the Gospel, unless the
Authority of the Catholic Church persuaded me. And gives this Answer to it: I
do not approve the arrogance of some Writers, who upon occasion of this place
maintain the Decrees of Bishops in the Church to be of greater Weight,
Authority and Dignity, than is the Authority of the Scriptures. Which indeed
seems not so foolish as mad: unless such an one would say Philip were greater
than Christ; when he induced Nathanael to believe that Christ was he of whom
Moses writ in the Law and the Prophets: although without his Authority (or
Admonition) he would not have at that time perceived it. -- All Ecclesiastical
Authority, since it serves only to bear testimony of Christ, and of his Laws,
is of less Dignity than the Laws of Christ, and must necessarily submit to the
Holy Scriptures. Well therefore did S. Thomas (Aquinas) allegorize, when he
introduced the Samaritan Woman to represent the universal Church: which Woman,
when the Citizens of Samaria heard preaching Christ, they were induced to
believe on him, etc. This Passage clearly represents to us the Opinion of
Waldensis to have been, that by the attestation of the Church, the Divine
Authority of the Scripture is known: which being once known, all matters of
Belief, and Articles of Faith are to be learned from the Scripture; just as
Philip induced Nathanael, and the Samaritan Woman her Neighbors to believe
Christ to be a Divine Person: of the truth of which, when once satisfied, they
learned not the Rules of Life, or Articles of Faith from Philip, or the Woman,
but received both from Christ himself. And therefore Waldensis subjoyns, That
the Authority of the Scripture is far superior to the Authority of all Doctors,
even of the whole Catholic Church; and that although the Catholic Church
should attest and confirm their Authority; that the Authority of all latter Men
(following the Apostles) and Churches ought to be submitted to the Authority of
the holy Canon, even to its Footstool: That Subjicitur tamen ipsi, sicut testis
judici, and testimonium veritati, sicut praeconizatio definitioni, and sicut
praeco regi. Ibid.
the former is subjected to the latter, as a Witness to a Judge, and a
testimony to the truth; as a promulgation to a Law, and as an Herald to a King.
As a testimony therefore is no farther to be regarded than as it is true, a
promulgation invalid, when it either increases or mutilates the Law; and an
Herald not to be obeyed when he exceeds the Commission of the King: so the
Decrees, Definitions and Doctrines of the Church are no longer to be respected,
than as they are exactly conformable to the Scripture, and deduced from it.
Upon this account Waldensis teaches in the next Chapter, Cap. 22.
That the Church cannot superadd any new Articles of Faith to the Scripture:
and that the Faith from the times of John the Evangelist (who writ the last
Book of Scripture) receives no increase. And therefore applies to the Books
of Canonical Scripture, the measure of the new City of God made by the Angel in
the XXI. Chapter of the Revelations; That as the circuit of that City consisted
of so many miles, neither more nor less; so the whole System of Christian Faith
and Divine Revelations is completed and contained in so many Books of
Scripture; and can receive no farther Addition. Lastly, showing how many ways
the Knowledge of the Catholic Truth may be attained, he says, Omnium optime
atque certissime Scripturis Canonicis. Ecce quatuor vias veniendi ad indubiam
veritatem, sed plus and minus certas, quarum prima and certissima est per
Scripturas Divinas. Ibid.
It may be obtained best of all, and most certainly from the Canonical
Scripture. He proceeds to prove this from the Authority of S. Augustine, and
then concludes; See four ways of coming to the undoubted Truth, but more or
less certain: of which the first and most certain is by the Holy Scriptures:
the rest begetting only an Historical and uncertain knowledge of the Articles
of Religion,

However these Doctors already mentioned were of great authority, and
sufficiently declare the common Doctrine of the Church in their time; yet the
practice and judgment of General Councils will give us greater assurance of it.
Two General Councils were held at the same time in this Age, the one at Basil,
the other at Florence. In both together the whole Western Church was present by
its Representatives; and in that of Florence the Eastern also. These two
Councils indeed thundered out Excommunications one against the other; yet both
agreed in using Scripture as the Rule of their Definitions, and in all
Disputations laid that down as a common uncontroverted Principle. I begin with
the Council of Basil; wherein Johannes de Ragusio, a Learned Dominican, by the
appointment of the Bishops, disputed publicly in the year 1433. against the
Bohemians about Communion under both kinds. Here magnifying the Authority of
the Church, he urges this Argument chiefly, that without the Attestation of
the Church, the Divine Authority of the Scripture cannot be known; and
consequently, that the Authority of the Church is antecedent to the knowledge
even of the Rule of Faith, and therefore the first Principle of the Christian
Religion. For thus he argues: Quod autem praedictus articulus sit inter alios
omnes primus, in quem omnes alii resolvuntur, manifestum est: quia si dubitatio
circa alios articulos contingit, statim ad sacram Scripturam veluti ad
certissimam and inobliquabilem regulam communiter recurritur; and secundum
testimonium veritatis ejusdem sublatis dubiis veritas elucescit. -- Nisi autem
Ecclesiae existentia sciatur; nulla est Scripturae authoritas. Council. Tom.
XII. p. 1025.
But that the aforesaid Article (the existence of one holy Catholic Church) is
the first of all others, into which all others are resolved, is manifest. For
if any doubt arise concerning any other Articles, recourse is immediately made
by common consent to the Holy Scripture, as to a most certain and invariable
Rule; and according to the Testimony of Scripture the Truth is cleared, and all
Doubts removed. -- For unless the Existence of the Church be known, Scripture
has no Authority. Whether this Argument be valid and conclusive, concerns not
my present purpose. It is sufficient, that he assumes this Proposition,
Scripture is the Rule of Faith; as an undoubted Principle common to both
Parties. However, if by a Church in this place he meant no more than a Society
of credible Persons, whose unanimous attestation of a matter of Fact ought to
be received, the Argument will be good and valid. And that he meant no more, I
am induced to believe; because, Praecipue and maxim ^sumenda est ex
authoritate S. Scripturae. p. 1026.
immediately after, disputing of the Authority of a Church properly so called,
he acknowledges the proof of this Article is to be taken from Holy Scripture,
However, these words cannot infer the Doctrine at this day received in the
Church of Rome; since they expressly assert the Scripture to be the Rule and
Judge of all Articles of Faith, saving this one of the Existence of the Church;
and attribute to the Church no more than the power of bringing us to the
knowledge of the Scripture, which thenceforward is to be used as our only Rule
and Guide. He proceeds to lay down several Suppositions, as Foundations and
Postulates of his subsequent Determinations. Of these the sixth is conceived in
these words: Sexta Suppositio. Fides and omnia necessaria ad salutem tam
credenda quam agenda fundantur in sensu literali (S. Scripturae) and ex ipso
solo argumentatio sumitur ad probandum ea quae fidei sunt vel necessitatis ad
salutem. p. 1028.
Faith and all things necessary to Salvation, as well Matters of Belief, as of
Practice, are founded in the literal sense (of Holy Scripture) and from thence
only may Arguments be drawn to prove those things which are of Faith, and of
necessity to Salvation. The seventh Supposition is this: Septima suppositio. S.
Scriptura in sensu literali sane and been intellecta est infallibilis fidei
regula and sufficientissima.
Holy Scripture in the literal sense well and soundly understood, is the
infallible and most sufficient Rule of Faith. This he does not only suppose,
but also proves with diverse Arguments; of which the second is this: Si S.
Scriptura non esset sufficiens fidei regula, sequeretur quod, etc. p. 1029.
If Holy Scripture were not a sufficient Rule of Faith, it would follow, that
the Holy Ghost, who is the Author of it, had insufficiently delivered it; which
is by no means to be thought of God, all whose works are perfect. Besides if
Holy Scripture were deficient in some things necessary to Salvation; then those
things, which are wanting, might lawfully and meritoriously be superadded from
some other Principle: or if any things were superfluous in it, they might
lawfully be diminished. But this is forbidden by S. John the Evangelist in the
last of the Revelations; where he says, If any one add to this Book, etc. From
which words of John the Evangelist it is clearly proved, that nothing is
deficient or superfluous in Holy Scripture: which is also consentaneous to the
Author of it, who is the Holy Ghost, as was before said, to whose Omnipotence
it agrees, that he give us a System of Wisdom neither deficient, nor
superfluous; and that he should deliver it in a method agreeable to our
necessity of Salvation.

In the Council of Florence however the Greeks and Latins differed in all other
things, till the former were forced into a compliance by the Commands and
Threats of their Emperor; yet in this they agreed, in laying down Scripture to
be the only Rule and Principle of Faith, although they dissented in determining
how far it might be explained by the Church. The Controversy was occasioned by
the addition of FILIOQVE to the Nicene Creed; this the Greeks maintained to be
unlawful, because the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son is not in
express Terms taught in Scripture; which they held to be the only Rule of
Faith. The Latins denied not this, but only asserted, that it was sufficient
this procession was taught in the Scripture in implicit Terms; the Church
having authority by explanation of those obscure Passages, to constitute
Articles necessary to be believed, and add them to the Creed, although but
implicitly contained in Holy Scripture, the Rule of Faith; and consequently,
that to insert FILIOQVE in the Creed, was no addition to the Faith, since that
Article is implicitly contained in Holy Scripture. The Opinion of the Greeks is
thus represented by Bessarion, Archbishop of Nice, who was chosen by the Greeks
to manage and defend their Cause. (...) Council. Flor. Sess. 8. Conc. Tom. XIII.
p. 14^.
We derive and receive all Articles of Faith from the Fountains of Holy
Scriptures, which are the Principles and Foundations of our Faith. Nothing was
ever added to them (accounted necessary to be believed, which is not contained
in them) nor may any thing ever be added to them, neither by us, while we are
our selves, nor by any other Christians. And when the Latins recurred to their
wonted refuge of Explanation or Declaration made by the Church, of what is
implicitly contained in Scripture, Bessarion replied, N^gari non potest,
etsiper modum declarationis veniret, qui^ sit additio, quae prohibita videtur,
and prohibitum hoc verbum apponi. Cum vero induxistis actae Patrum, quibus
aliqua videntur declarari, dubium nostrum non tangit. Nam quod aliquod
apponatur fidei, hoc nunquam licuit, neque licebit. Council. Flor. par. 2.
Collat. 7. Council. Tom. XIII. p. 935.
That it is undeniable, that although any thing were added by way of
Declaration, it was still an addition, which seems to be forbidden; and
consequently the addition of this word (FILIOQVE)* is forbidden. But whereas ye
allege the Actions of the Fathers (in Councils) wherein some things seem to be
thus explained, this reaches not our Question. For that any thing should be
added to the Faith, it never was, nor ever will be lawful.

The Bishop of Friuli was chosen by the Latins to answer the Arguments of
Bessarion, and defend the addition of the word FILIOQVE. This he does not by
denying Scripture to be the Rule of Faith, but endeavoring to prove, that the
procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son might be deduced from the Principles
of Faith, viz. from the Holy Scriptures. Ye grant, says he, Dicitis sic,
dogmata fidei sumuntur ex font Scripturarum, quae sunt principia fidei. Ex hoc
dicto inferimus nos, quod declaratio, expressio and explicatio, quae fit circa
articulum fidei vel symboli, per Scripturas Evangelii, epistolas Pauli, and
Vit. and Nov. Testamenti, nullo modo est extrinseca reputanda, aut alterius
gene^^^ doctrina; cum sit doctrina Dei and Ecclesiae. Quia tunc tantum dicitur
probatio extrinseca, quando fit non per principia illius doctrinae, sed, etc.
Ergo probatio and declaratio quae fit per hujusmodi Scripturas, fit notorie per
principia propria fidei, and intrinseca doctrinae nostrae. Ibid. Collat. 10. p.
959.

Immo nec proprie additio dici debet, illo dato, sc. quod ex propriis
principili fidei, so. ex S. Scripturis evidenter deducatur. Ibid. p. 960.


that Articles of Faith are taken from the fountain of Scriptures, which are
the Principles of Faith. From this Proposition we infer, that a Declaration,
Expression and Explication, which is made concerning an Article of Faith, or of
the Creed, by the Writings of the Gospel, the Epistles of Paul, and the Book
of the Old and New Testament, is by no means to be accounted extraneous, or a
Doctrine of another kind, since it is the Doctrine of God and of the Church.
For then only is a proof to be accounted extraneous, when it is made not by the
proper Principles of that Doctrine, but by the Principles of some other kind of
Science. As if a Physical Conclusion should be proved by a Mathematical
Principle. But according to you the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are
the Principles of Faith. Therefore a Proof and Declaration, which is made by
these Scriptures, is plainly made by the proper Principles of Faith, and
intrinsecal Principles of our Religion. -- Yea, this ought not properly to be
called an addition, this being once granted, viz. That it may be evidently
deduced from the proper Principles of Faith, that is, from the Holy Scriptures.
This manner of Disputation in defending the Article then in question,
sufficiently manifests, that the pretense of Oral Tradition, however
entertained by some private Men, had yet gained no general applause in the
Western Church.

From Councils I return to private Writers, but those of so great Repute and
Authority, that their Opinion can be esteemed no other than the general
Doctrine of the Church at that time. Of these I shall produce only two more,
Cardinal Panormitan, and Antoninus, Archbishop of Florence; the first,
accounted by all, the greatest Canonist of his Age, and by many the greatest of
all Ages: and which is more considerable, who had been to the Council of Basil,
what Gerson was to that of Constance, an Oracle and Dictator: the second a
person of so great Authority in the Church, that in the Judgment of Pope
Nicolas he deserved to be Sainted whilst alive, and was really Sainted, when
dead. Panormitan therefore proposes his Opinion in these words: In
concernentious fidem Concilium est supra Papam. -- Puto tamen quod si Papa
moveretur melioribus rationibus, etc. Nam and Concilium potest errare, sicut
alias erravit. Nam in concernentibus fidem etiam dictum unius privati esset
praeferendum dicto Papae, si ille moveretur melioribus rationibus N. and V.
Testamenti quam Papa. In cap. Significasti de electione.
In Matters pertaining to Faith, a Council is above the Pope. -- Yet I suppose,
that if the Pope were induced with better Reasons and Authorities than the
Council, that his Determination were rather to be embraced. For a Council also
can err, as it has sometimes erred. For in matters relating to Faith, even the
opinion of one private Man were to be preferred to the Determination of the
Pope, if he were induced with better Reasons of the Old and New Testament than
the Pope. Here Panormitan not only asserteth the Old and New Testament to be
the Rule of Faith, but also allows to every private Man a power of interpreting
that Rule, and even of rejecting the Definitions of Popes and Councils, if he
thinks them not consonant to it. Antoninus has transcribed those words into
his Sum of Divinity, Par. 3. tit. 23. cap. 2. Sect. 6.
and proposes them as his own Opinion. And not only so, but also in another
place declares his Judgment no less plainly in these words; Loquitur Deus in
Scripturis, and ita copiose (ut Gregorius exponit 22. Moral.) quod non oportet
Deum iterum loqui nobis aliquid necessarium, cum ibi omnia habeantur. Par. 3.
lib. 18. cap. 3.
God speaks in the Scriptures, and so fully ( as S. Gregory explaineth in the
twenty second Book of his Morals upon Job) that it is not necessary God should
any other way reveal any thing necessary to us, since all things necessary may
be had there.

After so many and so great Authorities, it cannot reasonably be doubted, what
was the general Belief of the Church in that Age touching the Rule of Faith: I
mean not, that then the Sufficiency of the Scripture was asserted by all, and
denied by none; but only that it was maintained by the greater, and more
considerable part of the Church; as the Practice of General Councils, and
Positions of the most famous Writers of that Age do manifestly evince. Many
indeed had for some Ages before asserted the existence of some necessary
Articles not contained in Scripture, but conveyed down to us by Tradition only;
but they equalled not the Followers of the former Opinion, either in number or
Reputation. And therefore Occam Dial. l. 2. c. 1.
in the preceding Age, representing the Arguments and Reasons of both Opinions,
proposes that of the Sufficiency of Scripture in the first place, as the most
common, and more generally received Opinion: and Ioannes de Neapoli, Vide
Quaest. 21. punct. 2. quaestiunc. 3. Edit. Neap. 1618.
a Dominican, and Doctor of the Sorbon, disputing of the Science of Faith, does
all along suppose, that whole Science to be contained in Scripture; and lest we
should doubt of his Opinion, does in more than one place positively assert it.
Not to say, that Nicolas de Lyra, in his Glosses upon the whole Bible, does
every where suppose it; and in his general Preface Vide Edit. Lugd. 1518.
most expressly maintain it. And of what Repute his Gloss was formerly in the
Church of Rome, may appear from that vast number of Manuscript Copies of them,
which may be found in our ancient Libraries. But I will not any longer insist
upon the Writers of this Age, having intended to confine my Discourse to the
fifteenth Age; the general Belief of which, concerning the Rule of Faith, I
have already manifested*

It remains, that I say somewhat more particular of the Treatise here
published, and of the Author of it. He was born in Wales, and bred in Oriel
College in Oxford; where he was created Doctor of Divinity, and obtained a
great esteem for his rare Eloquence, and extraordinary Learning. He was soon
taken notice of by that great Patron and Protector of Learning and Virtue,
Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, at that time Protector of the Kingdom; by whose
Favor he was promoted to the Bishopric of S. Asaph, in the year 1444;
translated to Chichester in the year 1450.

His singular Learning appears not only from this Discourse, which, if put into
modern English, would appear to the meanest Reader both rational and elegant:
but also from many other plain and manifest Indications. He had read the Works
of the Fathers with no small care and diligence; and as it should seem from
what he says upon the Article of Christ's Descent into Hell, had made Critical
Observations on them, far beyond the Genius and vulgar Learning of that Age. He
was not unacquainted with the Genuine Epistles of Ignatius; and in the first
Part of that Work, whereof this Treatise makes the second, cites the Acts of
his Martyrdom, writ by his contemporary Philo, and published in this Age by the
Learned Bishop Usher. As his Learning enabled him, so his Zeal prompted him to
write diverse Books of Controversy in defense of the Church against the
supposed Heretics of that time, the Lollards: whom he endeavored by all means
possible to reduce into the Communion of his Church: to which Work, as it
should seem from diverse Passages in the first part, he had dedicated his whole
Life. He mentions many of them in this Work, which are these: The just
apprising of holy Scripture. The just apprising of Doctors. Of faith in Latin.
Of Presthode. The Donet. The follower to the Donet. The Represser. The forcrier.
The book of Christian Religion. The provoker. The book of signis in the Church
clepid also the book of Worschiping. The book of Leernyng. The book of filling
the IV. Tablis. This present book of Feith. Of the Church in Latin. Beside
these already mentioned, Bale De Script. Angl. Cent. 8. p. 594.
reckons up, The Defender. The Follower of it. The Declaratory. Of the Creed.
To Godharde the Franciscan. Of Divine Offices. A Manual. Of the Providence of
God. Of the Liberty of the Gospel. Of the Power of Seculars. Against
Constantines Donation. Of the equality of Ministers. Of the Laws and Doctrines
of Men. Of Communion under both kinds. Against unlawful Begging. An Account of
his own Recantation. The greatest part of these Books are lost, being
studiously suppressed by his Enemies, and also burnt at his Recantation.
However I have seen his Represser in a fair Manuscript, in the public Library
of the University of Cambridge in Quarto. It is entitled, The Repressour of
over much blaming the Clergy: wherein he passes through all points in
Controversy between the Church of Rome and the Lollards; and largely
endeavors to confute the latter.

But as his zeal induced him to plead the Cause of the Church so copiously; so
his Learning enabled him to discover the Follies and gross Superstitions
practiced in that Age: which, when once discovered, his Piety enforced him to
detest. Religion had now passed through so many ignorant and barbarous Ages;
the means of greaterknowledge had been so studiously hidden from the People,
and the ignorance of the Laity was so advantageous to the interest of the
Clergy, that the true Spirit of Christianity seemed to be wholly lost, and had
degenerated into Shows and Ceremonies, many of which were unlawful, but almost
all unuseful. And not only this fatal stupidity and idle Superstition had
generally possessed the minds of Men; but all Remedies were detested, and all
Artifices made use of to continue the Disease. Many good and Learned Men
endeavored the Reformation of these Abuses, without departing from the
Communion of the Church; but were attended herein with the usual Fate of the
Opposers of inveterate Evils; who seldom escape the Persecution, but never the
hatred of those, who are engaged both by zeal and interest in the continuance
of those Evils. Our Learned Bishop was of the number of those brave and
generous persons; who while he earnestly invited the Lollards into the
Communion of his Church, no less vehemently opposed the Superstitions of his
own Party. Some Footsteps and Marks of this Disposition may be found in this
Treatise; which prove his Integrity to have been equal to his Zeal, and neither
inferior to his Learning.

The Authority of the Church, and Infallibility of her Definitions, had of late
been set up as the most successful Engine against the prevailing growth of
supposed Heretics. To refute the Arguments of Wicleff, and convince his
Followers with solid Reasons, neither the Ignorance of the Clergy, nor the
Badness of their Cause did then permit. It was accounted too great a
Condescension in the Governors of the Church to confute the Mistakes, and
inform the Judgments of their seduced People. Yet somewhat, at least, was
necessary to dazzle the eyes of the unthinking multitude, and at once convict
all their Adversaries of the Charge of Heresy. Nothing could be more effectual
to this end than the pretense of Infallibility; which alone might satisfy the
Scruples, and command the assent of credulous persons. For this reason ever
since Heresy began to be punished with death, it was thought sufficient to
oppose the Infallibility of the Church to the Arguments and Reasons of
condemned Heretics; and the maintenance of this pretense was esteemed the
great Bulwark of the Church. However, our Bishop easily discovered the vanity
of these pretenses; and in this followed the Opinion of the most Learned
Writers of his Age, that the Representative Church, or General Councils, were
not only fallible, but had sometimes actually erred; that the Decrees and
Definitions of the Church ought to be submitted to the Examination of every
private person; that no Article of Faith was to be received, which was
repugnant to the Principles of Reason; and that not the Belief and Acceptance
of the Church caused any Doctrine to be accounted true, and an Article of Faith,
but the presupposed Truth of the Doctrine rendered the Belief of it rational and
justifiable.

Indeed the Doctrine of the Churches Infallibility had by some Men in this Age
been advanced so far, that nothing less than a fatal credulity, or no less
fatal ignorance could excuse the admission of it. Our Author assures us in the
first part of this Book of Faith, that many Divines in his time argued from
those words of S. Paul: If we or an Angel from Heaven should teach any other
Doctrine than that which ye have received, let him be anathema, that if it
should happen that the Church militant and the Church triumphant disagreed in
an Article of Faith, the Determination of the Church militant were rather to be
followed. Such crude Positions might raise the admiration of fools, but
deserved the indignation of wiser Men. Our Author chose to do justice unto
Truth in owning and asserting the Fallibility of Church and Councils; and yet
not to quit the specious pretense of the Churches authority in pleading her
Cause, and confuting the Lollards. This therefore he proposed in a more
plausible way, confessed the Church might err, and that even in matters of the
greatest moment: however, that it would be most safe and rational for ignorant
Laymen entirely to submit their judgment to the Direction of the Clergy; that
by this submission indeed they might possibly be led into Error and mortal
Heresy; but that this would be no disadvantage to them, since in that case God
would reward their submission and docility, although to them the occasion of
most grievous Errors, no less than if they believed the Christian Faith entire
and incorrupted; and would even bestow upon them the Crown of Martyrdom, if
they laid down their lives in testimony of their Errors. And since in that Age
the Laity were generally very ignorant of the true Principles of Religion, and
devoid of all sort of Learning; he included them all in the number of those,
whose duty and interest it was to pay an implicit submission to the direction
of the Clergy.

But not only did he disown the Infallibility of the Church, but also
disallowed and condemned her practice of burning Heretics. He desired rather
to win them to her obedience by gentle methods, and thought it more noble to
convince them by Reasons and Arguments, than by Racks and Fires. This
moderation could not but displease his Fellow Bishops, who chose rather at that
time to satisfy their Malice by the punishment, than serve the Church by the
conviction of supposed Heretics. But our Author was acted with more noble and
generous Principles; he endeavored to remove their Errors, but refused to
practice upon their Lives; and which perhaps was no small part of his Crime,
neglected to thunder out his Curses against them, and scorned to treat them
with opprobrious Titles. Rather in the first part of this Work he gives to
them an honorable Character, and confesses them to have been generally
persons of good Lives and exemplary Conversations.

The incredible Fables of Legends, and incurable itch of Lying for the Honor of
their Saints and Patrons* which then reigned among all the Monastic Orders,
and was fondly received by the credulous multitude, were one of the greatest
scandals and most pernicious abuses in the Church at that time. The greater and
more necessary Articles of Faith, and all genuine and rational knowledge of
Religion had generally given place to fabulous Legends, and Romantic Stories;
Fables which in this respect only differed from those of the ancient Heathen
Poets, that they were more incredible, and less elegant. These, our Learned
Bishop feared not to oppose and disesteem; arraigns them of Error, Heresy and
Superstition; proclaims their falseness, and derides their folly.

This denial of Infallibility, moderation toward the Lollards, and disesteem
of Legends, drew upon him the envy and hatred of the Clergy, to which may be
added, his favor with, and faithful adherence to his Patron Duke Humphrey; who
had always manifested a moderation toward the dissenting Lollards, and
aversion from the superstitious practices of the Clergy. No sooner was the Duke
oppressed by a contrary State Faction, but his Client the Bishop was attempted,
and his ruin designed. Several Passages were taken out of his Writings, which
his Enemies accused of Heresy, at least, of Error. Hereupon in the year 1457.
he was cited to appear at a Synod held at Lambeth, by Thomas Bourchier,
Archbishop of Canterbury, attended with the Bishops of Winchester, Lincoln and
Rochester, and 24 Divines; by whom, after a short hearing, he was condemned of
Heresy, and enjoined to recant his heretical and erroneous Opinions publicly
at S. Paul's Cross. The Recantation he performed on the fourth day of December,
when his Books were also publicly burnt. His Fortunes after that time are very
uncertain. Some relate him to have been made away in prison; others, to have
been kept prisoner in his own Episcopal Palace until his natural death; and
lastly, some, that he had a small pension assigned to him out of the Revenues
of the Bishopric, and retired into a Monastery, where he ended his days in a
short time.

The Opinions which he was forced to recant, as they are represented by Bale
Cent. 8. p. 594.
, Bishop Godwin De praesul. Ang. p. 559.
, and Fox Martyrol. vol. 1. p. 928.
, are these, I. That it is the Office of a Christian Bishop, before all other
things to preach the Word of God. II. That human Reason is not to be preferred
to the Holy Scripture. III. That the modern use of the Sacraments (as attended
with so many superstitious Ceremonies and Customs) was l^ss advantageous than
the use of the Law of Nature. IV. That Bishops buying their Admissions of the
Bishop of Rome, do sin. V. That no man is bound to believe and obey the
Determination of the Church of Rome. VI. That the Revenues of Bishops are by
Inheritance the Goods of the Poor. VII. That the Apostles composed not the
vulgar Creed. VIII. That the Article of Christ's Descent into Hell was not
formerly in the Creed. IX. That no other sense is to be attributed to Holy
Scripture, but the first and genuine sense. X. That it is not necessary to
Salvation, to believe the Body of Christ is materially in the Sacrament. XI.
That the Universal Church (in a General Council) may err even in Matters of
Faith. XII. That it is not necessary to believe in the Holy Catholic Church.
XIII. That it is not necessary to believe the Communion of Saints. XIV. That
the voluntary begging of the Mendicant Friars was unprofitable, and no ways
meritorious.

It must not be imagined, that these Articles were generally at that time
accounted erroneous and heretical in the Church. For if we examine them, we
shall find that many of them were taught and believed by the greatest Divines
of the Church at that time: some at this day allowed to be literally true by
the Learned Writers of the Church of Rome: and in fine, that our Author knew
the Doctrine of the Church far better than his Judges; and although condemned
by them, was no less Orthodox than they. As for the twelfth and thirteenth
Articles, which seem to be most odious,, they are mere Calumnies, as appears
from this very Treatise, For toward the end of it he acknowledges it to be
necessary to believe the existence of the Holy Catholic Church, and of the
Communion of Saints; but yet unnecessary to believe on them, that is, as
himself explains it, to give a blind assent to all their Determinations. The
seventh and eighth Articles are known to be literally true by all Learned Men.
For no proof can be brought, that the Apostles composed this Form of Creed,
which we now use: and it is most certain, that the Article of Christ's Descent
into Hell was found in none of the Ancient Creeds, for the first 400. years,
except in that of the Church of Aquileia. The first, second, sixth and ninth
Articles, if heartily interpreted, cannot be denied to be true by any sober
Romanist; and whosoever considers the gross Ignorance and Superstition of those
times, will not deny the third. The fourth Article may be justified by the
Opinion of many great Canonists, who define all such payments to be Symony; and
the Church of France has all along decried and disapproved them. The
fourteenth was defended by Richard, Archbishop of Arniagh, Gulielmus de S.
Amore, and many other great Divines of the Church of Rome. The eleventh, and
consequently, the fifth Articles were believed and maintained by Occant Dial.
par. 1. l. 5. c. 25.
, Peter de Alliaco, Cardinal of Cambray Quaest. Vesper. Art. 3.
, Thomas Waldensis Tom 1. l. ^. c. 19.
, Panormitan Loc. supra cit.
, Antoninus Concord. Cath. l. 2. c. 3, 4.
, Cardinal Cusanus Disp. de Conc.
, Clemangis Sentent. l. 4. did. 11.
, and many others in this Age. Lastly, the tenth Article may be defended from
Peter Lombard Sentent. l. 4. did. 11.
, Peter de Alliaco In 4 Senten. qu. 6. Art. 4.
, Scotus In 4. Senten. Did. 11. qu. 3.
, Tonstal, Bishop of Durham De Eucharist. lib. 1.
, and others; who believed indeed the Truth of the Article, but denied it to be
necessary to be believed.

That Treatise which I here publish, and which gave occasion to the present
Discourse, was by me transcribed out of a Manuscript extant in Trinity College
in Cambridge; which seems to have been written with Bishop Peacock's own
hand, as may be conjectured from the frequent Emendations and Additions
inserted in the Margin, and bottom of the Pages by the same hand. The whole
Work was entitled by the Author, A Treatise of Faith; however, in the Front of
it this Title is affixed by a later hand, Reginald Peacock, Bishop of
Chichester 's Sermons, in English: whereas the whole Treatise is a Dialogue
between the Father and the Son, divided into two Books: whereof the first
proposes to treat of the most probable means of reducing the Lollards to the
Church, which he assigns to be an entire submission of Judgment to the Decrees
of the Church, although supposed fallible. The second treats of the Rule of
Faith. The first Part is chiefly taken up with a long Digression, proving that
Faith is only probable, not sciential, or that the Truth of the Christian
Religion cannot be proved by demonstrative, but only by probable Arguments.
This Dispute is managed in a Scholastic Way, full of Subtleties and Niceties
of Philosophy and School Divinity, and very obscure: which therefore I thought
not worthy either my transcribing, or the Readers perusal. However, I
transcribed some considerable Fragments or Excerpta, which seemed to me more
remarkable and worthy of notice; which I here present to the Reader. The second
Book or Treatise of the Rule of Faith, I have published entire, as far as the
Manuscript Copy permitted me. For, which is much to be lamented, some few
Leaves were wanting in the end.

Besides what I have already mentioned, many things may be here found worthy a
particular Observation; as with how great ardor he impugns the refusal of
submitting the Decrees and Doctrine of the Church to the examination of every
private man; how strongly he contends, that God can reveal nothing contrary to
our reason, or oblige us to the belief of it: that he rejects the authority
of Tobit and Susanna, as being Apocryphal Books; that a Divorce and Separation
of the Clergy from their Wives, after Marriage once contracted, in unlawful;
that the Council of Nice condemned that Separation, and consequently prohibited
not to the Clergy the use of Marriage in the third Canon; that the Church has
no more authority of interpreting Scripture, and proposing it to the faithful,
than has every private Householder of proposing it to his Family, every Divine
to his Hearers, every Learned Man to ignorant persons; or no more than a Judge
has of expounding the Laws,, or a Grammarian the Rules of Grammar.

I will not so far presume upon the Judgment of the Reader, as to make an
Apology for the old and obsolete style of our Author. If it wants the
Elegance and Beauties of our modern Language, that must be imputed to the fault
of the Age, not any deficience of the Author. I had once intended to represent
his Arguments in our modern Language, and publish both together in distinct
Columns, but the fear of enlarging these Papers too much, deterred me from
pursuing that design. However, I have drawn up an Alphabetical Catalogue of the
more obsolete and unusual words, and affixed their significations to them:
which the Reader will find at the end of the Book, and may consult upon
occasion.

A Treatise of REGINALD PEACOCK, Bishop of CHICHESTER, before the Reformation;
(In the Year 1450.) proving that Scripture is the only Rule of Faith.
CAP. I.
I. DEsiring for to win the Lay Children of the Church into Obedience,
which undir greet perel of there Soulis they owen pay and hold to the
Clergy, y entende and propose in this present Book for to mete agens such
unobediencers by an open wey and in a another manner, and by meene which the lay
persoonys wole admit and grant: which meene is this: That we owen to
bileeve and stand to sum Saier or Techer which may feile, while it is not
known that thilk Seier or Techer thereyne failis. And so for to move and
convicte them into obedience never the less and never the latter to the
Clergy in leernyng their feith; thoug it were so that the Clergy mygte
solempnely determyne agens true feith.

II. Twey thingis be the principal causis of Heresy in the lay yeple.
Overmyche leenyng to Scripture, and in such manner wise as it longith not to
holy Scripture for to receyve. And the second is this: Setting not by for to
follow the Determynatiouns and the Holdingis of the Church in matter of Feith.

III. The Feende has brought in so greet a sleigte in the Sect of the
Sarrasenes, that they ben full wondirful violenti settid for to geve audience to
any proof making for Christen Feith, or making agens Sarrasene Sect. For whi
thilk wickid Man Mahumet, which brought in their Sect, or sum Prelate after
him, made as for a po^nt of his Law, that no persoone of his Sect schulde
here any Declaracioun or evydence agens his Sect, and that under pain of
passing cruel deep. But O thou Lord Jesus God and Man, heed of thy Christen
Church, and Techer of Christen Bileeve, y besee^he thy mercy, thy pitee and
thy charity, fer be this seid perel fro the Christen Church, and fro each
persoon thereyne contained, and schilde thou that this Venom be never brougte
into thy Church, and if thou suffer it to by any while brougte in, y beseech
that it be soon again out spet: but suffer thou ordeyne and do that the Law and
the Feith which thy Church at any time kepith be receyved and admitted to
fall under this examinacioun, whether it be the same verri Feith, which thou
and thy Apostlis taugten or no: and that it be receyved into examinacioun
whether it has sufficient evydencis for it to be verry feith or no: and ellis
it mygte be hold aghe, and it were a full suspect thing to all them that
schulde be convertid thereto, and ellis also it were a full schameful thing to
the Christen Church for to hold such a feith for a substance of her
salvacioun, and yitt dursten not suffer it to be examined whether it is worthi
to be allowid for true feith or no. And it were a vilonye putting to Crist,
that he schulde geve such a feith to his people, and into which feith he would
his people turn all other people, and yitt he would not allow his feith to be
at the full tried, and that he durst not be aknowe his feith to be so pure and
so fine fro al falsehede, that it mygte not by strenghe of any evydence be
overcomen. And therefore Lord Almygti, thou forbid that any such prisonyng of
thy feith be maad in thy Church. And also this is worschip ynoug for Christian
Feith, that it may without feere be avowed, and be publischid and be profred
to be examyned by any wit under Heuene in such manner of examynacioun now before
seid, as vi which each pretense feith ougte to be examyned whether it be true
feith or no. And yitt ferthemore to this now seid, may evydence be this: that
ellis Crist would have gove such a Law to be had and to be continued in his
name, of which Law sum of our feith is a party, ne were that it mygte abide
the fire of triel and of examynacioun of each creaturis resoun, so the
examynacioun be such as ougte to be taken and usid for to examine and prove
whether a feith pretense be true feith or no, as ferforth as any Goldsmyth
wole avowe and warante his Gold, which he desyneth to be tried and examyned by
all manner of fire of this wordli brennyng.

IV. And ferthemore y wole Clerkis to have in consideracioun that not for a
thing is famed to be an Article of Feith, therefore it is an Article of Feith:
but agenward for that it is an Article of Feith. and proved sufficiently to be
such, therefore it is to be bileeved by feith. So that an Article to be
bileeved by feith is dependant on this, that it is before proved sufficiently
to be feith. And an Article to be an Article of Feith is not dependent of this,
for that it is bileeved as an Article of Feith.

V. The Clergy shall be condemned at the last day, if by clear wit they draw
not Men into consent of true feith, otherwise than by fire and sword or
hangement. Although I will not deny these second means to be lawful, provided
the former be first used.

VI. Thomas had thanne these same evydences (of Christis Resurrection) in as
good manner or in better than we hau now for us. For whi he herd the Apostlis
denounce Christis Resurreccioun to him by there own mouth, the that denouncen
the same to us by their Writing: and also he knew by experience the treuthe
and the sadness and the unbigilefulnesse of hise felowis, where that we known
it by liklihode, oonly thoug so likeli, that to the conttary we have noon
evydence so likeli.

VII. Sone y seid before that there ben two manners of feith: oon is opinial
feith; and this is the which we and all Christian hau by the common law of God,
whilis we lyven in this life. Another feith is sciencial feith; and thoug this
feith may be had by specialte in this life, yitt it is not commonli had in this
life, but it is had in the Bliss of Hevene.

VIII. Wherefore he (the Church) knowith not himself, neither ougte know
himself for to teache authentikli or by authorite of maistrie to any persoon, ni
las^e than he know himself to have receyved the same feith fro God in manner of
arguyng before seid by oon of these Meenes, of which oon is this: Holy
Scripture witnessith and denouncith this Conclusion. Another is this Holy
Church; for Feith has bileeved this in time of the Apostlis fro thens
contynueli hidirto. Another is this: Miracle is done unto witnessing of it.

IX. Resoun which is a sillogisme well reulid aftir the craf taugt in Logik,
and having two Premyssis openli true and to be grauntid, is so strong and so
mygti in all the kindis of matters, that thoug all the Angels in Hevene wolden
feie that this Conclusion were not true: yitt we schulde leeve the Angels
seeing, and we schulden trust more to the proof of thilk sillogisme than to the
contrari seiyng of all the Angels in Hevene. For that all Goddis creaturis
musten nedis obeie to doom of resoun, and such a sillogisme is not ellis than
doom of resoun. If the Church in earth determines agens it what such a
sillogisme concludith, we schulen rather trow and hold us to thilk sillogism
than to the determynacioun of the Church in earth.

X. Every Man is bound to obey the determination of the Church; but if he can
evidentli and openli without any dowte schewe teache and declare that the
Church bileeveth, or has determined thilk Article wrongli and untreuli, or
ellis that the Church has no sufficient ground for to so bileeve or
determyne, yhe thoug the Church schuld bileeve or deterymne amys, yet thereof
schulde not this persoon be blamed of God, but schuld be full excused.

XI. Sithen it is here before undoutabili proved that by thy obedience to the
Clergy in case of the Clergies erring, whilis thou it not knowist neither
desirist neither makist; noon hurt schal come, but the same good which schuld
to thee therebi come, if the Clergy in thee teaching not errid: is not this
ynoug to thee? what may thou look aftir any more?

XII. If a Parish Priest should teach his Parishioner some gross Heresy
instead of an Article of Feith, it were his Duty to receive, and would not only
be excusable before God, but would be as meritorious, and equally rewarded with
the belief of any true Article. Nay if that Man should lay down his life for
defense of this Heresy, imagining all this while that it is the Doctrine of the
Church, he would be a true and undoubted Martyr.

XIII. If you seie to me thus, I have leernyd that holy Writ is so worthi a
ground and fundement of our Feith, that noon othre ground or fundement passith
it, or is surer to be eleven to than is it. Wherefore, Sir, it would seem that
if y cleve to holy Scripture to take of it my Feith, y am not to be blamed, but
y am thereyne thank-worthi, forasmuch as I conform me to thilke reule, which
God has purveied for to be our reule in matter of feith, and whom no other
reule in earth passith. Sir, that this is true y grant weel, namel^^l, as
anentis all the feith which holy Writ techith. For that this be true shall be
showed well in the Book of Feith in Latin, or ellis in the Book of the Church
in Latin, as God wole grant.

PARS II.
Fadir ye hau seide in the X. Chapter of the first parti of this present Book
to all tho lay men which ben obstinat to the feith of the Church, that holy
Writ is the chief principal ground of all the feith which is contained in holy
Writ. And treuli fadir y can not undirstonde as yitt but that nedis ye must
have so seid to them, if it mygt be hold for true in any wise; nameliehe
sithen ye hau seid to them, as ye musten nedis seie to them, and it mygten not
be left unseid, that the dew and rigt literal undirstonding of holy Writ for
true feith to be had. laymen musten fetch at the Church: that is toseie,
that the al hool Clergy of Dyvynite or of the more and wittier party thereof.
And redily y know so much of her wittis and of her counseilis, that ellis if
ye had not so seid to them, ye schulden labor in vain; as for to bring them
into the obedience, into which ye ben about by writing of this present Book.
Also resoun thereto money thus. The Church or the Clergy in delyvering to
people feith which is in holy Writ alleggith for thilk delyverance holy Writ,
and expowneth holy Writ into thilk feith so delyvered. Wherefore the Church
in that biknows that he has thilk feith of holy Writ, and so not of him silf
principali. Forwhi not of him silf originali or groundeli, but of the seid holy
Writ eer and before; and therefore of holy Writ originali and groundeli. And so
as anentis al feyth conteynyd in holy Scripture the same Scripture schulde be
principal before the Church. Confirmacionn to the same may be this. If the
Church had of him silf principali, groundeli and foundamentali all the feith
which is conteynyd in holy Writ, the Church would not and ougte not for to
leene to holy Writ as for grounding and foundamental teching of thilke feith:
neither would send any askers into holy Writ, or would labor to expowne holy
Writ to them into thilk feith. But the Church would and ougte to seie to such
askers of rigt feith: Bileeve ye to me, for that I seie this to be rigt
bileeve. And the Church would not fetch to such askers auctorite of a thing
longer and of less auctorite to the purpos than the Church is. Wherefore the
Church, as it seems by his own pretencioun or interesse to expowne holy
Writ in to teching which is true feith, must nedis knowleche that he takith
holy Scripture for his better, worthier, higer and groundier foundament of the
Feith, which Feith the Church techith by holy Writ, and by the exposicioun of
the same holy Writ. And therefore opene it is that ye have not seid amys in
this your now spoken seiyng to laymen. Into the othre contrary side Fadir
many skilis now be maad, that the Church is principalier and cheefer than is
holy Writ, anentis any feith taugt by holy Writ, and that for VIII.
Argumentis, which y can make thereto. Wherefore y donte not but that trouble
and discencioun schulen be bitiwixe Lay Men and Clerkis, yhe and bitwixe sum
Clerkis and othre Clerkis upon this, whether holy Writ or the Church is
chefir and of more power havyng anentis feith is conteynyd in holy Writ: ni
less thanne ye Fadir answer to thilke VIII. Argumentis; and so y can not se
but that the matter of this discencioun must nedis be brougte forth in
utteraunce and conicacioun.

Sone y am redi to here thy VIII. Argumentis, and for to answer to them if I
can. Peraventure in the answering to them schal grow in sum thing, whereby
schal be clerid what comparisoun is to be had bitwixe holy Writ and the
Church anentis al feith conteynyd in holy Writ. And by so much y am the
leefir for to here thy Argumentis and for to answer to them, by hou much
thou have now seid and truth is, that the treuthe which is now occasioun of
the comparisoun making bitwixe holy Writ and the Church mygte not be left
unseid and untoold to the Lay People neither to Clerkis. And that cause before
by thee alleggid.

Fadir agens this which ye hau allowid before in the X. Chapter to be true,
that holy Writ is such a ground and foundement of our Christian general Feith,
that noon gretter or bettir or surer to us ground or foundament is for our
Christian general Feith written in holy Writ, y may argue by VIII principal
Argumentis, of which this is the first. Nothing is to be seid ground to us of
our feith without which thing our feith mygte have be sufficientli groundid
and witnissid. But without Holy Scripture now had Feith mygte habe be to us
sufficiently groundid. Wherefore holy Scripture is not to be seid ground of
another thing, without which the othre thing may be: and the second premysse
is to be proved thus. Thoug the Apostlis had not write any word, yet they
mygten have taugt to othre Clerkis and lay folk the al full hool feith
sufficientli to thbihove of the people as to there thereof the leerning, reporting
and remembering; whithe Clerkis and lay folk so taugt of the Apostlis and
outlyving to the Apostlis mygten have taugten othere Clerkis and lay folk the
same al hool feith sufficientli, which surviving and outlyvyng her Techers
mygte have taugte othere folk both of the Clergy and of the Layte the same
hool feith sufficientli; which folk so taugt also surviving and outlyvyng her
Techers mygten have taugt the same al hool feith sufficientli to othere; and so
forth into this present dai without any writing maad delivered to folk upon
the same feith so taugt. And if this had be done, thanne the feith of each
Leerners had be sufficientli ynoug groundid in her Techers, and in no
Scripture thereupon maad. Wherefore it folowith that Scripture is not, ne was not
the ground of feith to any persoonys bileeving. That this be true which is
before takun in the proof of the second premysse, that thoug the Apostlis
had not written any word, they mygten have taugt the al hool full feith to
people sufficiently, y may argue thus. In time of the oold Law it was so that
all the bileeve conteynyd in thill^ Law was taugt by mouth, and mas leerned by
mouth. For whi Exodus the XIII. Chap. when it is seid of the paske day, that
it schulde be kept yeerli by the Law thanne renning, it is seid ferthe anoon
aftir this: And thou schalt tell to thy sone in that day, and schalt seie:
This is it what the Lord did to me, when y gede out of Egypt, and it schal
be as a sign in thy hand; and as a memorial before thy igen, and that the
law of God be ever in thy mouth. For in a strong hand the Lord led thee
out of Egypt, etc. Also soon aftir there when it is bid that the people of
Iewis schulde halowe to God each first gendrid thing that opens the womb
among the sons of Israel as well of Men as of Bestis, thanne it is seid anoon
aftir thus: And when thy sone schal ask of thee to morewe, and seie what is
this? thou schalt answer to him: In a strong hand the Lord led us out of
Egypt of the house of servage. For when Pharao was maad hard, and would not
delyver us; the Lord killid all the first gendrid thing in the land of Egypt
fro the first gendrid of man til to the first gendrid of bestis: Therefore y
offer to the Lord al thing of mawle kind that opens the womb, and y agenbie
all the first gendrid thingis of my sons. Therefore it schal be as a sign in
this hand, and as a thing hanged for mind before thy igen. For in a strong
hand he led us out of Egypt. Also lyk sentence to this is written Deutro.
VI. Chap. of the paske day keeping: and Josue IV. Chap. of the XII. Stoones
taken out of the water and set on dry land into perpetual remembrance that
Jordan was dried. Also Deutr. IV. Chap. it was seid thus: Forgete thou not the
wordis which thin igen sigen, and fall thou not from thin heart in all the
days of thy life. Thou schalt teache tho to thy sons and to thy sons sons.
Tell thou the day in which thou stodist before thy Lord God in Oreb, when
the Lord spoke to me and seid, etc. Also Deutro. XI. Chap. it was seid thus:
Put these wordis in your hertis and soulis, and hang ye the wordis for
assign in hondis and set ye bitwixe your igen, teache your sons that they
thenke in tho wordis, when thou sittist in thy house, and goist in the wey,
and liggist down and risist. Thou schalt write tho wordis on the postis and
gatis of thy house, that the days of thee and of thy sons be multiplied in
the land, which, etc. Wherefore by like skile in time of the new Law the al
hool feith mygt have be taugt by word of mouth fro oon to an othre into this
present day sufficientli. Ferthemore into prof or into confirmacioun of the
same seid second premysse availith this, that we seen in sum Monasteries the
kunnyng and the fulfilling of certain usagis and customs be had forth in
persoones of the Monestarie, and be continued both in knowing and in
fulfilling sufficientli fro the first Fadirs of the Monestaries unto this
present day, and that without any writing maad upon the same usagis, but by
discente of word oonli fro persoone into persoone. Wherefore in lyk manner the
kunnyng and the using of al our hool feith mygte have be had and lad and
continued sufficientli by mind and by teching of mouth fro Fadris and
Prelatis into her Children and Parischens without any writing to be maad
thereupon. The second Argument is this: If it had be done in deed as is next
above argued, that it mygte so have be done, that is to seie, if it had be so
done that the Apostlis hadden taugt by word many Clerkis and many of the lay
folk the hool al full feith sufficientli; these Clerkis and laifolk surviving
and outlyvyng to the Apostlis hadden taugt by word the same al hool full feith
to othre Clerkis and laifolk succeding aftir the deeth of the Apostlis, and
that sufficienli, and so forth into this day: thanne the feith so taugt by word
and so descending by word fro persoonys into persoonys into this present day
sufficientli, had be sufficientli groundid in the Clergy so taugten to
othere. Thoug therewith a Scripture had be maad and delyvered forth by the
Apostlis upon the same feith ^o by word taugt to othere. But so it was indede
that the Apostlis taugten othre Clerkis the full al hool feith by word
sufficientli, and the Clerkis so taugt of the Apostlis sufficientli taugten
othere Clerkis succeding aftir them the same al hool feith, and that by word
sufficientli, and so forth continuali into this present day. Wherefore the al
hool full feith both in the time of the Apostlis and alwey ever sithen was
groundid sufficientli in the Clergy for the time being and lyvyng, and by the
manner now seid teching and delyveryng. And thanne ferth it folowith thus. If
the Clergy for the time being by there such now seid teching and delyvering was
and is sufficient ground for our feith for all time sithen the days of the
Apost^lis: it folowith at the leest that for to look aftir or set any othere
thing as is Scripture, every othere thing to be ground of the same feith after
Cristis teching by word, and sithen the teching of the Apostlis by word is no
need. The first premysse of this secunde principal argument is open ynoug to be
true, and the II. Premysse of the same argument schal be proved thus. Crist
bade to hise Apostlis Matthew. the last Chapter thus, Go ye therefore and teache ye
all folkis, baptizing them in the name of the Fadir and of the Sone and of the
Holy Ghost: teching them to keep all thingis whatever thingis y have comaundid
to you; and also Mark the last Chap. Crist bid to hise Apostlis thus, Go ye
into all the World, and preche ye the Gospel to every creature: and anoon aftir
it is seid there thus, They forsothe going forth prechiden every where. But so
it is, that the Apostlis hadden not fulfilled this now seid Commandment maad
to them by Crist, in less than they hadden prechid by word of mouth
sufficientli all the hool feith necessary to be had of the people. For whi all the hool feith necessary to be had is included in the Gospel of God, that is
to seie, in the message of God, which message God sent into the world. Wherefore
sothe it is that the Apostlis prechiden by word of mouth to othere Clerkis and
folkis all the hool full feith sufficientl^: and so the secunde before maad
principal premysse to be proved is true. The III. principal argument is this,
If the Apostlis hadden taugt many Clerkis and many of the laifolk the hool al
full feith by word of mouth principali; and these Clerkis and laifolk survyvyng
and outlyvyng to the Apostlis hadden taugt by word principali the same hool
feith to othere Clerkis, and to othere folk aftir the deeth of the Apostlis,
and so forth into this day: thanne the al hool feith so taugt by word of mouth
principali and descending by word principali fro persoonys into persoonys unto
this present day had be principali groundid in the Clergy whilis the Clergy
so taugt othere, thoug therewith had be a Scripture maad and delyvered forth by
the Apostlis to othere upon the same feith. But so it was in deed that the
Apostlis taugten othere Clerkis the hool full feith by word principali, and tho
clerkis so taugt of the Apostlis by word principali taugten othere clerkis
succeding to them the same al hool feith, and that by word principali, and so
forth contynueli into this present day. Wherefore the al hool feith both in
the time of the Apostlis and alwey sithen was groundid principali in the
Clergy for the time being and lyvyng; and by manner now seid teching and
delyveryng. And thanne ferth it folowith thus, If the Clergy for the time
veyng by there now seid such teching and delyveryng was and is the principal
ground for our feith for all time aftir the days of the Apostolis; it folowith
at the fulle that to look aftir or seche aftir or seie Scripture to be the
principal ground of our feith, or that Scripture schulde be a principal ground
thereof, or more necessary and better grounding of the same feith, thanne is
the Clergy of the Church aftir the days of the Apostlis, is waast ydel vanite
and untrewe. The first Premysse of this III. principal argument is pleyn ynoug
to be true. And for proof of the II. premysse of this III. principal argument
may be maad the same argument, which before is maad for proof of the II.
premysse of the II. principal argument, and that by the rehercid Textis of
Matt. the last chapter, and Mark the last chapter. The IV. principal argument
is this, The Church of Crist which be foundid on earth, and of which he is the
heed, is alwey and altymes oon and the same, as S. Paul witnessith, where he
seith that to man to have by the law oon Wife undeptabili signifies Crist to
have oon Church for his spouse. And the same witnessith the Clergy by the
profis or sequencis, which he singith in the Mass of Dedicacioun Feast day,
and in the VIII. day of the same Feast, and this same is comounli allegoriesed
upon thilk Text Cant. Oon is mi Dove. But so it was that in the time of the
Apostolis the Church of Crist in earth by his principal partly, which was the
Clergy, was of so greet worthiness and auctorite and dignite, that he thanne
more groundid the Feith of Crist, than Scripture groundid feith of Crist
thanne. For whi the Apostlis thanne being the Clergy of Cristis Church
groundid more Cristis Feith than there writing maad and written by them groundid
as thanne the same Feith: in as much as the effect of a cause does not so
much in to another effect as doith the cause of the same effect into the same
other effect aftir good Philosophy. Wherefore it seems follow that the Church
of Crist now being, and at al time a this side the Apostlis for the time being
is and was of great worthiness, auctorite and dignite, that he now more
groundith the Feith of Crist than Scripture groundith now the same Feith.
Sithen oon and the same Church is now and thanne, and therefore by like skile
the same Clergy of the Church is now which was thanne. The V. principal
argument is this, The Clergy of the Church dispensith with the thing which
holy Scripture forbedith. For whi the Pope geveth leeve to a Bigam, that is to
seie to a man that has be twies weddid, to be a Dekene and a Pressed,
notwithstonding that holy Scripture forbedith it. 1 Thy. 3. c. But so it is
that the less worthi refreyneth not the worthier, neither lowseth the
buidingis of the worthier. Wherefore the Clergy of holy Church is worthier
mygtier and of gretter auctorite than is holy Scripture, or at the leest the
Clergy is of evene worthiness, even power, and mygte and of auctorite with
holy Scripture of the new Testament. The VI. principal argument is this, The
Church of Crist by his cheef party the Clergy now and al times has power to
expowne, declare and interpret holy Scripture, thoug holy Scripture owes to
be undirstonde in the sense and undirstonding of God. But so it is that even
peer has power into his eeve peer aftir the comoun well allowid proverb;
neither the less worthi has power on his worthier, as may be takin of Paul,
Heb. 7. chap. where he seith, That the less worthi is blessid of the more
worthi. Wherefore it seems that the Clergy and the Church by his party,
which is the Clergy is more worthi than is holy Scripture. The VII. principal
Argument is this, What ever thing nedith to have upon him silf an interpreter
or a declarer, nedith to have the same thing as his overseer and worthier. But
so it is, that holy Scripture nedith to have of him silf an interpreter and a
declarer, which is the Clergy in earth, as for to schewe which is the dew
understonding of holy Scripture. Wherefore holy Scripture nedith to have the
Clergy is to be to holy Scripture an overseer and to him as a worthier. The
VIII. Argument is this, What ever thing the Apostlis settiden in the comoune
Creed is to be bileeved and to be holden and usid of all Christian. But the
Apostlis settiden in the comune Creed this Article, that is, for to bileeve to
the general holy Church in earth. Wherefore nedis it is to bileeve to the
universal or general holy Church in earth. And we mow in noon othere wise
bileeve to holy Church in earth than we bileeven to the Clergy of the general
Church in earth, for as myche as the Clergy is the principal parti of holy
Church in earth. Wherefore it folowith that nedis we must bileeve to the
Clergy of the general Church in earth. And if the Clergy ougten in any deed
be bileeved, he ougte be bileeved in his deed when he determyneth any Article
to be taken as feith. For as myche as this deed is oon of the grettist
aviseable dedis, which the Clergy does. Wherefore all Christian owen for to
bileeve to the determynacioun of the Clergy thoug he determyne agens holy
Scripture. Lo fadir these VIII. Argumentis y have gadered togidere for to be
assoilid by your hige wisdom.

CAP. II.
SOne thy seid VIII. Argumentis ben rigt welcome to me. For me thenkith the
answer and the assoiling of them with Goddis grace schal do good. The II.
premysse of the same first principal Argument, when it is seid thus, Without
holy Scripture our now had feith mygte have be to us sufficientli groundid is false, for to speak of kindeli mygte in our side and in our Soulis without greet
singular miracle of God above kind to have be done in our resouns and mind.
And it is most convenient in this purpos to speak. And when for prof of this
II. premysse it is argued thus, Thoug the Apostlis hadden not write any word,
yitt they mygten have taugt to othere Clerkis and layfolk the hool al full feith
sufficientli, so theli this is false. For whi a Feith is not taugt to a people
sufficientli, but if it be taugt so that by thilk reching they mow cleerli
undirstonde al it, and esili report al it, and remember al it perfitli and
currauntli, and kunne reherce it and talk it in a stable foorm of wordis
without variaunce maad in wordis and processis when it is at dyverse times
rehercid. And but if they mow have recours thereto and to each point thereof
redeli when any need schal ask. And sotheli for to speak of all the hool full
Feith written in the Gospels and Epistlis it may not in this seid wise be
taugt, without that it be write, and but if the writing thereof be delyvered to
the Clergy. Wherefore our al hool Feith which is now bitaken to us in
Scripture, mygte never by kind have be taugt sufficientli to any people without
thereof the Scripture: and thoug full many a process withynne the boondis of
the Gospels ben law of resoun and of kind, yitt this that Crist taugt it and
rehercid it is Feith: and so the al hool Feith written in the Gospels is oon
long a tale for to be sufficientli learned without thereof the writing. And
therefore sithen neither the Apostlis neither any othere Clerkis mygten have
taugt sufficientli the seid Feith without Scripture, and the people mygte not by
studiyng in the Scripture have leerned without techers; it folowith nedis that
holy Scripture is more worthi ground of our Feith than is any congregacioun of
the Clergy. O my Sone, if thou woldist take heed hou a tale or a tiding by the
time that it has run thoroug IV. or V. mennys mouthis, takith pacchis and
cloutis, and is changed in diverse parties, and turned into lesingis, and al
for defaute of thereof the writing: and hou that langagis whose reulis ben not
written, as ben englisch, freensch and many othere ben chaungid withynne yeeris
and cuntrees, that oon man of the oon cuntree and of the oon time mygte not and
schulde not kunne undirstonde a man of the othere kuntre and of the othere
time, and al for this, that he seid langagis ben not stabili and foundamentali
written: thou schuldist full soon and full sikirli deem, and so schulde each well
avisid man deem, that the long tale of the Gospels mygte never by any long
time be truli and aftir oon manner toolde and reportid and remembrid of dyvers
folk without thereof the writing: but many a cloute schulde thereto be set,
and maney a good piece thereof be takin awey, and much strys schulde there be
about the true rehercel thereof, as which were true rehercel thereof and which
were not so: but if the same long tale of the Gospels were write. And therefore
there may no teching of the Clergy ground weel and sufficientli to us our
seid Feith. And yitt the writing maad and purveied by God and by the Apostlis,
and by the Apostlis heerers of thilke same long tale may ground suffi^ientli
the same Feith in each Clerk or Layman notabili resoned for to understonde what
he redith in the new Testament, though he not leerne the same Feith by any
general Counseil, or any multitude of Clerkis tokider to be gaderid, thoug
peraventure he schal have need at some while and in some textis of the seid
Scripture seche to have expositioun had by the eldist party of the Church
joined to the Apostlis and lyvyng in time of the Apostlis, as soschal be taugt
in the book of Feith in Latin and in the book of the Church. Verily as y may
trow thoroug all the time of werre during these XL. year bitwixe Ynglond and
France, wiste y not scant III. or IV. men, which wolden accord thorug our in
telling hou a town or a castle was won in France, or hou a batel was done,
the though thilk men were holden rigt feithful men and true, and thoug each of
them would habe swore that it was true what he told, and that he was present
and saw it. Wherefore by all resoun in-lyk manner it would have be and was in
deed of the report of the dedis and wordis of Christ, eer they were written by
the Evangelistis. And that in deed it was so therynne witnessith Luk in the
prolog of his Gospel, and seith that therefore he was movid for to write the
Gospel which he wrote. And so by lyk skile for the same cause the othere
Evangelistes gave them to writing. Hou ever therefore mygte it have be well and
true of our Feith, if it schulde have come to us by report of heering, and
by mouth speking without thereof the writing. Also what that ever any counseil
of Clergy, or any Clergy without gadering into counseil techith as Feith,
even the Clergy referrith his so maad teching of Feith into holy Scripture.
And therefore needis the holy Scripture is more worthi ground for our Feith,
than is the Clergy of the hool church on earth. And if thou wolt wite of what
Scripture y meene, ^ertis it is the writing of the oold Testament and of the
new Testament. For it witnessith all the Feith or ellis at the lest well nigh all the Feith, which Crist sechith of us. Yhe and the writing of the new Testament
confeermeth all the oold Testament in that, that the writing of the new
Testament referrith us often into the writing of the oold Testament; as Matt.
XXVI. chapter Mark XII. and Mark XIV. Johne I. Luke XXIV. Johne V.XVII.XIX. and XX.
and in many placis of the Epistlis of the new Testament. Ferthemore sone not
oonli the writing of the al hool Feith in the Gospels is so necessary to the
people being a this side the Apostlis, but also the same writing maad and written
of the Apostlis were rigt necessary as by wey of kind and of resoun to the
same Apostlis, that by the writing of the Apostlis which they wroten, they
himsilf migten hold in mind the multitude of tho trouthis there written. And
that by recurse to be maad of them into the seid writing left that thereof the
perfigt mind schulde by kind fall away from them, whilis they were so much
in dyverse troublis occupied. And so therefore full opene it is, that the writing
of our Feith is more necessary ground to us for our Feith, than is any
congregacioun of Clerkis biganne sithen the deeth of the Apostlis. For answer
to the Textis before alleggid of the oold Testament in the first argument it is
to be seid that thoug by tho Textis it is had fadris schulden teache by mouth
there sons and there sons sons the lawis of God and the benefits of God. Yitt
by tho Textis it is not had that thilk to be done by mouth schulde have be
sufficient teching to tho sons and sons sons without writing: and therefore
tho textis maken not into the intent, into which the first argument them
alleggith. Namelich sithen in the processis of the same Textis it is had among
that it is bid with all this that the fadris schulden teache there sons by
mouth, it is had in the last of tho Textis that is to seie Deutron. XI. that
tho same fadris and all the people schulde have Goddis lawis and Goddis
benefeits in writing. For whi it is seid there that they schulden have tho
lawis and benefits before there igen. And this is ynoug for answer to tho
Textis. More thing according to this answer and confeermyng it thou may see
soon in the book of leernyng in thy vulgar tunge. But thanne fadir if it was
so necessary writing to be had upon Christen Feith, whi was writing of our
Feith so long time deferrid eer it was maad by the Apostlis, as that Matthew
wrote his Gospel in the VII. peer aftir Cristis ascencioun, and Mark wrote in
the X. year aftir Cristis ascencioun, as may be had by croniclis of Martyn; and
Luk wrote aftir othere writers of the Gospelis, as he seith him silf in the
prolog of his Gospel. And Jon wrote aftir all the othere, as many men trowen.
Also whi wrote not each Apostle as well as sum? Also whi wroten not they to each
Cuntre? Sone answer to thy first questioun may be this. Our Lord is wisist, and
he is for to lead us into our kunnyng to be had in profitabilist manner alwey
rediest. And for as myche as people to know by experience hou necessary it was
to them for to have their Feith written was to them more profitable than for to
know it without experience: therefore God so schope that the Feith schulde by a
notable time be prechid oonli by word to the people, that they mygten therbi
take experience, that preching of the al hool Feith by word oonli were not
sufficient without thereof the writing, and thanne that therefore the people
schulde desire to have the Feith written, and the Apostlis schulden se the same
treuthe by experience, and schulden consent for to write to the people the same
Feith, which before by parcellis they prechiden by word. An othere cause mygte
have be this. A preciouse thing when it is ligtli and soon gotten without
long before going desrie to have it, schal be the less set by, when it is
receyved. For as myche as the writing containing our al hool Feith is
preciose, and ougte not be set litil by, neither be feyntli and unworthili
receyved, therefore God so schope that it was long of the people desirid eer they
it receyveden: as for lyk skile God differreth full holy mennys boonys, for that
bither long desiring and priyng and abiding aftir it they schulden the more
joie have, and the more thank God, when they it receyveden. An othere cause
rennyng herwith mygte be that the Apostlis hadden not grettist leisers for
persecuciouns, that they mygten anoon in the bigynnyng have written, and
peraventure long time in the biginnyng the Apostlis prechiden not, neither
mynystriden to the people but a few articles of Feith: as were these of Crists
coming, and of his incarnacioun, and of the cause whi he came. And long time
minethis mygte suffice for to bring the people into consent and bileeve of
these few Feithis. Also scolers in each kind of scole schulden not be
oppressid in the bigynnyng of there scole with overmanye matters to be mynistrid
to them at oonys or suddenli or oversoone. And therefore a good while by yeeris
scolers in the scole of cristendoom herden pieces mele the Feith prechid eer the
hool sum and birden thereof was delyvered to them by writing. And thus myche
for answer to thy first questioun. If it be true that Joon the Evangelist
wrote his Gospel eer than it is seid that he wrote; and so that he wrote his
Gospel before his coming from exile, as thereto may be had greet motyve by the
writing is of Saint Denis Areopagite, by cause Joon had written his Gospels
eer Denis wrote hise bookis. Thanne answer to the secunde questioun may be
this. Right as what is necessary to a comonute is to be purveid fore: so what
is waast and comberose and chargeose to a comonute is to be left of, and to be
avoidid. And for as much as when Matthew, Mark, Luk, and Joon haden written,
the othere Apostlis sithen these writingis, and sithen these writingis were
sufficient to express the coming of Crist, the birth of Crist, the lyvyng of
Crist, the teching of Crist: and therefore the othere Apostlis wolden not as for
the same matters combre the peplis wittis with any more writingis thereupon. And
that what oon Apostle or a Disciple wrote, all the othere Apostlis and
Disciplis knewen. We mow take mark by this, that Petir in his Epistil the
last knowlechith that he wiste of Poulis writing; and by a greet liklihode he
knew what the othere writers wroten: and by as myche greet liklihood Poul wist
what Petir wrote, and what each othere writer wrote; and therefore he himsilf
wrote noon Gospel, but held him content with the Gospels written of othere.
Namelich siithen Luk was fellow to Poul in much of all Poulis labouris, and
therefore to Poul mygte not be strange and unwist the writing of Luke And also
that it was not to Poul unknown, it seems well herbi. For in the first Epistle
to Corinthies the XI. chapter Poul rehercith the process of Luk the XXII. chapter well
nyg word by word. And thus myche Sone for answer to thy II. questioun. To thy
III. questioun y answer thus, The Apostlis knew weel as they mygten well know
by resoun, that the writing of our general Feith wole serve like well to people
of each cuntre, as to people of oon cuntre: and they wisten that the oon same
writing mygte and schulde run from oon cuntre into anothere cuntre, like as
Poul in his Epistle to the Colociens biddith that thilk same Epistle schulde be
radde to the people which ben callid Laodocenses. And therefore it was no need to
make to dyverse cuntrees dyverse writingis in this wise dyvers; that they
schulden conceyve dyverse matters, thoug the writing of oon and the same matter
mygte be written or translatid into dyverse langagis. And thus is the III.
questioun assoili^. Fadir y perceyve well hou ye have declarid full well that what
was taken to prove the seid II. premysse in the first principal argument is
untrewe, and therefore it is to be denied. But ye have not answerid to the
argumentis for the prof of it what was so taken in to the prof of the same seid
II. premysse. Therefore Fadir answer ye to them. Sone the first argument before
maad for prof of it what was taken to prove the seid II. premysse, goith upon
processis and textis of the oold Testament, which prove no thing the intent
whitherto thou bringist them in thine argument. For whi tho textis wole no more
than this, that God would the oold Law and the oold Feith be leerned by
heering of word. But certis hereof folowith not that God would or meened it to
be leerned so and in lyk manner sufficientli. And therefore the textis hurten not
mine intent, neither they proven the intent wherefore thou brougtist them forth
into thin argument. Also the contrary, that is to seie, that God meened thilk
leernyng by word herd was not sufficient to the Clergy therynne and to the
people thanne; apperith well by this, that God bid the oold Law to be written,
and forto so bid had be yvel and in veyn, if the teching and the leernyng of
the same. Law by word oonli had be sufficient. To the II. argument maad into
the same intent y answer thus. Thoug a few usagis and customs in monestaries
mow be born in mind without writing; hou schulde thereof follow that so long a
tale as is the story of the IV. Gospels mygte be born in mind by leerning of
word without thereof any writing. That this schulde follow, has no color, and
therefore thilk argument is ligt to be in this now seid manner answered and
assioiled.

CAP. III.
FAdir agens you metith this: that the Feith which was in the beginning of the
world, and was continued forth into the days of Moses, was not written. For
whi Moses which was aftir the beginning of the world by XX. hundrid yeeris,
wrote the book of Genesis, and it is seid comounli, he wrote it by
inspiracioun, and by such propheci wherbi thingis passid ben known above power
to know them by kind, and yitt thilke Feith was a long tale and a long
story, as is opene be the book of Genesis with rehercels full hard to mind
upon generaciouns of persoonys and upon the names of persoonys. Wherefore it
seems that as well the stories of the Gospels mygte have be sufficientli taugt
of the Apostlis, and have be leerned of the othere Clergy and of the people
without writing. Sone if thou or any othere man ellis were sikir or had any
greet liklihood herto, and gretter than to the contrary, that there was no
writing of the Feith in the eldist time fro the bigynnyng of the world into the
flood of Noe, and fro thennes into the writing of Moses, thin argument were
strong. But certis noon such sikirnes neither any such liklihood to the
contrary is had. For whi soon aftir the flood of Noe there was leernyng of the
VII. Sciencis, and writing thereof maad in II. pilers, oon of brass and another
of earth: and also in the same time there was leernyng and writing of
Whicchecraft or of Nycromancie, as the Maistir of Stories Peter Comestor.
writith in the Chapter of the Toure of Babel. And if worldli men in that time
were so bisi in worldli leernyng and writing; it is not to be trowid but lyk
bisi were sum of many goostli men in leernyng and writing of goostli matters
perteyning to the Feith and the servyce of God and to the eend whereto man was
maad. Wherefore it is more likli that in tho dais soon aftir the flood of Noe
there was writing of Feith perteyning to God and to mannys governyng and
eending: than that there was no on such in tho days anoon aftir the flood of
Noe. Also long before the flood of Noe Ennok found lettris and wrote book is,
as the Maistir of stories seith. And this Ennok was a passing holy man, as the
Bible witnessith. And he lyved in the days of Adam. Wherefore sithen it is so
that such as a man is, such is his leernyng, studying and writing: it is more
likli that he wrote holy wondirful thingis of the Feith. And namelich sithen he
lyved in the days of Adam, which could full myche teache Ennok what he schulde
write in such matter, than that he wrote any othere worldli thing oonli. And
sithen Noe was a full holy man, it is likeli that he had and kept sum and
myche of this writing with him saaf in his schippe whilis the flood durid
namelich sithen he prechid an hundrid wintre to the people eer the flood came
that they schulde leeve there sin. And certis such preching could not have be
done without greet kunnyng of full goostli thingis. And also it must be by all
liklihood that Ennok delyvered to his own Sone Mathussale the same goostli
writing which Ennok wrote. And this Mathussale the Sone of Ennok lyvede with
Noe six hundrid wintre: and therefore it is to be seid that Noe had full myche
and hige kunnyng of Feith and of his writing. For so good a man as Noe was,
would not leeve unaspied so profitable a writing. And what he had so
profitabili in writing he kept saal in his schipp, and delyvered aftir to hise
Sons Sem, Came, and Japheth, which Sem clepid otherwise Melchisedeck lyved in
the days of Abraham. Wherefore Abraham by dilygence of his holiness schapide
him to receyve the same writing of Sem. And by liklihode Abraham bitooke it to
Ysaac, Ysaac to Jacob, and Jacob to hise Sons: and hou likli it is that Ennok
wrote what he leerned of Adam perteyning to God and to Men, so likli is it that
Noe or sum othere wrote what he leernyd of Matussale, that fell in the days
of Ennok and of Matussale: and Sem or sum othere in the days of Sem wrote what
he leernyd of Noe that fell in the days of Noe. And Abraham or othere in hise
days wrote what he herd of Sem that fell in the days of Sem, which was
clepid Melchisedeck. For whi even liklihode was of each of these casis, as was
in any oon of them. And so at the last Moises gaderid all this togider, and
maad a book thereof which is clepid Genesis. And certis this is more likli by
story before allegid and by resoun togidere, than forto sei that Moses had by
inspiracioun without any manys before govun to him informacioun. Namelich
sithen we owen for to not feyne forge allegge but the trow, nor hold any
miracle to be done, save when nebe compellith us thereto: that is to seie,
that we mow not save the caase otherwise by liklihode of resoun for to seie
that Moses had sufficient informacioun before of writings, thoug he schulde
make the book of Genesis, than is liklihode to this that he had noon such now
seid informacioun. Therefore in this case it is not to run into miracle, thoug
diverse doctouris in this case, and in special Gregory upon Ezechiel, without
myche avisement, and soon moved by devocioun so done. Also of sum thing done
before the flood of Noe, whereof no mensioun is maad in the writing of Moses,
we have knowing in stories, as of this, that Lameth was an hunter and dymme of
sigt, and that he was lad by a young man in hunting, and that he schotte Cayn by
dressing of the seid leder. Of this thing so untaugt in Moses writing we mygte
not have had knowing, if there had not be any writing before Noes flood of
thingis which bifelle before the same flood. Wherefore such writing of stories
was before Noes flood. And thanne ferthe if such storying of worldli chauncis
was written before Noes flood: much rather storying of worthi goostli thingis
was written before the same flood. And if this be true, thanne such written
stories weren kept saaf by Noe in his schippe for skile before maad: and so
they came aftirwarde into the knowing of Moses, as is before argued: and
Moses compiled the book Genesis out of them: and when the bokis of Moses
were had, the othere bokis fallen out of use, as it is likli to bifall; for
so it fallith in othere lyk casis. O Fadir me thenketh ye holden a full
reasonable wey in this matter, and such a wey, which has more likli evydencis
for it, than has the contrari party. Therefore your wey ougte by law of
kind, and undir perel of vice and of sin be holden, till gretter evydence be
founden to the contrary, thanne ben the evydencis making for this party. But
certis out of this folowith, as seems to me, that we schulde hold this party,
that Esdras renewid not the oold Testament in writing by gift of inspiracioun,
as is comounli hold: but that he renewid the oold Testament in this wise, that
he maad be written and multiplied many bookis of the oold Testament many mo
than there were before, and that for zele which that he had to this that
Goddis Law schulde be well know, thoug of each kind of tho Bookis sum Copy
was before. For whi like evydencis ben that Esdras had Copies of the oold
Law, as ben evydencis that Moses had Copies for to write or compile by them
the Book of Genesis. Yhe gretter evydencis to hold this now seid affirmative
party, thanne ben evydencis for to hold the contrary negative party. Sone y
hold well with thy conceyt in this matter, and the evidencis thereto ben these.
Hou ever yvel the People of Iewis at any time was, yitt they were never without
sum holy lovers and keepers of the same among them. Forwhi when grettist
ydolatrie was usid in Jewri in the days of King Achab so fer forth, that the
Prophet Hely weved and seid to God, That of all the Jewis there was noon but
he al oon left alyve which lovyd and kept the Law. The Lord answerid to Hely
and seid, (that it was not so, for he kept to him he seide) More than five
hundrid in Israel, which never bowid there knees to Baal. That is to seie, to
the false God, which in tho days was worschipid openli thorug al Israel. And if
this was true in tho days of grettist ydolatrie, that there was many privey
lovers and kepers of the Law; by like skile it schulde be trowid, that in each
othere time there weren such lovers and kepers of the Law. And in lyk it was
in each time when Jerusalem was in traldom by enemies withoutforth, and when
the Jewis weren translatid into Babilonye, and whilis they dwelliden there. But
so it is, that no man lettrid would cast him to be urri knower of the Law,
and therefore an urri keeper thereof, but that he would cast him to have the same
law in writing. Wherefore in all times of the Jewis, both whilis they were in
the land of Israel, and whilis they were in the land of Babilonye, there were
among sum of them bokis written of the law and usid of them: thoug the law
written in sum bokis was brent in the brennyng of the Temple. Also Jeremye
lyvede and abode in Jerusalem, whilis the last and grettist captivite of the
city was maad, and whilis the Jewis weren last translatid, and the temple was
distroied, and hereof he proficied, and wrote his Prophecy a litil before eer
this grettist and last captivite was done. And aftir that this captivite was
done, he abiding in Jerusalem with the releef and rescail of the Jewis, wrote
his book clepid the Trenys. But all this was not likeli to be, if Jeremye
schulde not have had with him the Book of the Law, into the keeping of which
law he so often preachid and stirid the people. Wherefore it is to be trowid
that Jeremye had with him alwey written a book of the law; thoug sum book
containing the same law was brent in the temple. And for lyk skile it is to be
trowid that Ezechiel had also the law written, which Ezechiel lyved in time
of this grettist and last thraldom, and was carried into Babylonye fro Jerusalem
with the greet route. And in Babilonie the fifth year of this thraldom he bigan
to prophecy there in Babilonie. Also sumwhat before the thraldoms of Jerusalem
the King of Joas maad the book of of the law be knowun, and be publischid full
myche, which long before was unknown as to the Prestis and to the more
multitude of the people. Wherefore it is lyk that in this Kingis days there were
written in greet noumbre many bokis of the law. Nameli sithen the people were
thanne brougt into a greet devocioun anentis the law, as it is open. Also in
each time of Jewis there weren sum Prophetis, as may be takun by the prologgis
of Jerome into the bokis of Prophetis, and also by the text: and to them it
longid to not be unknowers of the law, in as much as God comaundid his law
to be of his people knowun. And without writing such so long a law mygte not be
knowun. Wherefore at all days of the Jewis both in Israel and in Babilonie
there were bokis al redi of the same written. And herto would serve full openli
the story of Thobie, and the story of Susanne, Daniel 13. chapter ne were that
they ben Apocrisis. Also Daniel, Esdras, Neomyas, Zorobabel, Mardoche, Hester,
and othere were kepers of the law, whilis they weren freeli in Babylonie
inhabiting, as the story of the Bible makith mencioun. Wherefore it is like
that they hadden the law written, namelich sithen they mygten send and have
messages to and fro Jerusalem and Babylonie. And if all this be true, certis it
is likli ynoug, that when Esdras and Zorobabel came fro Babylonie into
Jerusalem for to bilde again the city and the temple: they hadden bokis al redi
written of the law: and thanne hereof folowingli this that Esdras renewid the
five bokis of Moses and all the stories into hise days, is to be undirstonde
thus: that he wrote or provokid or ordeynyde to be written and multiplied many
bokis of the same law in great noumbre, whereof was not but few before. And if
this be true, as it has more likeli evidencis to be trowid for true than
has his contrary party: it folewith that for to seie this which sum
Doctouris comounli holden with the Maistir of stories, that Esdras by
inspiracioun wrote without any copi all the five Bokis of Moses, and all the
o^here Bokis of Stories and of Prophecies in to hise days, is not but a feynyd
thing. For it is seid without sufficient thereto servyng evydencis. And therefore
this seid opinioun of Esdras his writing by privey miraclus inspiracioun, is
worthi to be leid a side. Namelich sithen to privey myraclis we schulde not
run for to defend our opinioun or our answer by them without that
sufficient evydence thereto serves. For ellis there mygte noon opinioun be
overcome by strength of argument, hou false so ever the opinioun were: so that
he included no repugnance, such as God mygte not do by miracle.

CAP. IV.
FAdir, aftir all this, what is seid for answer to the first principal
argument, and what is sunken in by occasioun of the same answer, it is now
time the ye biginne answer to the second principal argument. Sone, thou seist
sooth, and therefore as for answer to the second and third principal argumentis
togidere, the second premysse in ever each of them is to be denied. Forwhi
sithen by answer maad to the first principal argument it is declarid that the
Apostlis mygten not without writing teache sufficientli our al hool full feith,
whereof now is the new Testament written, it folewith that they taugten not
without writing sufficientli the same seid al hool full feith, which is agens
and contrary to the second premysse of the second principal argument. Neither
they taugten without writing principali the same al hool full feith which is
agens and contrary to the second premysse of the third principal argument. And
that for as myche as what the Aposilis mygten not do sufficientli or
principali, they diden not sufficientli neither principali. And so as now y
before seid, the both second premysses in the second and third principal
argumentis ben to be denied. Ferthemore thoug Christ bid as thou allegist
Matt. and Mark the last chapitris, hise Aposilis to preche all the hool Gospel,
and so all the hool feith to each creature by parcel mel in word speking of
dyvers times, and thoug they fulfillid this Commandment, yitt hereof folowith
not that Crist has herynne bade them preche the Gospel and the al hool feith as
sufficientli or principali to be done. For Crist would that a good preching not
sufficient neither principal schulde go before the teching full and sufficient
and principal: which principal and sufficient teching aftirward schulde be done
by writing oonli, or ellis by word and writing togidere. For as the Philosophy
seith, Kind in his worcking begins fro imperfit pr^ceding and growing into
perfect: and man does in the same wise in hise werkis of craft. And thoug God
the Auctor and maker of kind do in same wise in hise Werkis, as it is not to
be wondrid, but it is to be well prisid. Forwhi in that his worching accordith
well with our resoun. And so the two premysses in thin both argumentis maad
for proving of the two principal premyssis in the second and third principal
argumentis be not groundid upon the textis of Matthew and Mark in there last
Chapitris, and ben to be denied. And this wise sufficient answer is maad to
the second and to the third principal argumentis togidere. For answer to the
fourth principal argument thou schalt undirstonde that Paul seith ad Ephesians. chapter
IV. thus: Oon is the Lord, oon feith, and oon Baptim. And yitt the baptim of
this man here in Ynglond is not the same baptym in being and in kind, which is
the baptym of anothere man in France. For each man as he is dyvers in being fro
each othere man, so his baptim and his sacramental waisching is dyvers in being
fro each othere mannys baptim and waisching in water. Nevertheles this baptim of
this man in Ynglond is oon in significacioun and in representacioun with each
othere mannys baptim in France. Forwhi all the baptims and sacramenten are
oon thing, which is this as Poul seith, Romans c. That each man owith be deed and
biried to all synnys and rise into a new life in clennes of virtue. Also in lyk
manner the Church of Ynglond is oon Church with the Church of France, but
hou, certis not in being, in kind and in substance. Forwhi the people being
here is not the people being there. But they ben oon in reputacioun of auctorite
of feith, of power, and of jurisdictioun. That is to seie, for the oon of these
Chirchis has lyk power and juresdictioun to the othere goven to them fro God.
And in lyk manner it is to be undirstonde when it is seid that the Church
which now is, is the same Church which was this same time a thousind wintre,
or which was in the days of the Apostlis: or that the Church of God is alwei
oon not in being or in kind or substance. Forwhi the people is not now and
thanne oon, neither alwey oon, but oon in reputacioun. And not in all manner
reputacioun, but in reputacioun of lyk feith, and of lyk power, and of lyk
jurisdi^^ioun goven fro God. But certis open it is to each mannys resoun that
thoug the Church now lyvyng be in this seid manner of reputacioun the same
Church which the Apostlis weren, yitt it nedith not to follow that this
Church now lyvyng has like much kunnyng and power for to witness our feith
as had the Church, which the Apostlis weren. Neither it folowith that this
Church now lyvyng has more kunning and power forto witness than has the
writing of the new testament forto so witness: thoug it were so that the
Church of the Apostlis had kunnyng and power forto so more witness. And al
herfore. For this Church is not the same Church in kind, in being, and in
substance with the othere seid Chirch, rigt as these pesoonys be not tho
persoonys. And thilk Church had informacioun of the feith by heering the
Apostlis and the Evaungelistis, which the Church now being has not, but so
sechith aftir forto have by reding in the writing of the Apostlis and
Evangelistis. And so, Sone, if thou woldist this argument if it were maad to
thee: this Church now lyvyng, and the Church of the Apostlis weren oon in the
seid reputacioun. Therefore as the Apostlis weren in this degree of holy lyvyng
and mygten do myraclis, s^eke with dyvers tungis and write a new testament, and
witness that they saw Crist do and suffer, and herd him teache; so this
Church now being is lyk holy, and may do lyk greet myraclis, may speak with
dyverse tungis, and write a new testament, and witness that he sige Crist do
and suffer and herd him teache. Even so in lyk manner thou schalt be moved forto
deem thin own fourth principal argument that it make no following: which
argument is this. The present Church is alwey oon and the same with the
Church of the Apostlis. Wherefore as the Church of the Apostlis groundid the
feith more than Scripture it groundith; therefore the Church, which now is,
groundith more our feith than Scripture it groundith. Hou ever it be of the
conclusioun or of the consequent of the argument, which conclusioun or
consequent whether it be true or no schal be tretid in the book of the Church
in Latin. And ferthemore, Sone, thoug thou woldist put a successive aggregate
of all the Apostlis and of all Christian Men, which ever weren ben and schulen
be, to be the Church of Crist, and therefore that there is alwey thoroug al
times oon, and the same Church in aggregate being kind and substance: yitt
hereof folowith not that hou ever kunnyng holy mygti and worthi this aggregat
was in any time before in hise parties passid, so kunnyng holy mygti and worthi
this aggregat is now in hise parties now being: no more than folowith if the
successive aggregate mygte as he was thanne in hise parties passid do myraclis,
that the same aggregat may do now as he is in hise parties now being: no more
than it folowith, if Ynglond sumtyme mygte make such a conquest, therefore he
schal be ever a power forto make like greet conquest. And therefore, Sone, if
thy fourth argument be maad in this wise, the hool successive aggregat of
Clerkis is now which was in the time of the Apostlis; but in thilk this
aggregat was a worthier witnesser of our feith than was Scripture: therefore so
is this aggregat now. Certis this argument is not worth. For he concludith and
makith no following. Nevertheles, Sone, for to put and hold such a successive
aggregate in kind in propirte without figurative speech is agens good
Philosophy, and therefore* agens good resoun, and agens truth, as full well
mygte be provyd, if this place were according to trete such matter. But whilis
the putting and the holding thereof hurtith not my present intent, y wole here
let the treting thereof pass undir suffraunce. For answer to thy fifth
principal argument thou schalt undirstonde that scripture of the new testament
is not thorug each party of him lyk in auctorite in worthiness and in dignite.
For whi sum parties of Scripture techen to us feith, sum techen to us law
of kind and of natural resoun, as the text in it silf well schewith, and Austyn
witnessith the same. Nevertheles this that Crist taugt thilk law of kind and
of resoun, whereof it is written in holy writ that Crist them taugte, is feith.
For whi, this that he so taugt them cannot be leerned and found by mannys
resoun without thereof a teller and a denouncer. Sum parties of the seid
scripture techen to us positive ordinauncis of Crist, as ben the sacramentis,
and sum party thereof techen to us ordinauncis of sum Apostle, as the law of
bigamie, and that a woman vow not chas^ite before the sixtieth year of her
age. Now, Sone, thoug the Clergy that now is, and thoug the Pope that now is,
may dispense with it that the Scripture techith us the ordinaunre of an Apostle
and may revoke it, as he may dispense with this that Poul ordeynyd a bigam to
not be Deken or Pressed: 1 Thim. III. chapter and with this that Poul ordeynyd a
widow to not take perpetual videwite undir boond eer sche be of LX. Winter,
and but if sche had be wife of oon man, 1. Thim. IV. chapter yhe and revoke these
two pointis; because that the Pope is of lyk auctorite and of juresdictioun
with each or with the grettist of the Apostlis: yitt hereof folowith not, that
the Clergy now lyvyng or the Pope now lyvyng may dispense with this that
Scripture techith as the positive ordinance of Crist; and that he may revoke
any of tho ordinauncis. Forwhi so revoke and dispense mygte noon of the
Apostlis. And so thoug the Church now lyvyng be evene in auctorite and power
with sum parti of Scripture, as with full few parties of Scripture, as in this
forto make positive ordinances lyk as holy Scripture by power of the Apostle
maad, and for to revoke thilk positive ordinance of holy Scripture maad by the
Apostle: yitt he is not evene in auctorite and power with all the Scripture of
the New Testament, neither with many othere parties thereof. To thy sixth
argument y answer, granting the first premysse, that the Church now lyvyng
has power forto expowne and interpret and declare the true undirstonding of
holy Scripture. And y deny the second premysse that even peer has no power
into his even peer. Forwhi the sugget has some power upon his Sovereyn as for
to look upon him, forto speak to him, and forto warn him of hise harms, and
forto defend him, and such othere. And so the Church now being, yhe and each
thrifty well sped studient in Divinite has power forto declare and expowne holy
Scripture: yhe and each good Grammarien has power to construe Scripture, so
that as the urri dew literal undirstonding we schulden ask and leerne of a
greet leerned sad Divine, rather than of anothir youngir and less leernyd
Divine: so we schulde ask and leerne it of the universal or general hool
Clergy rather than of any particular persoone or persoonys save in the
execeptioun spokun of in the first parti of this book in the seventh chapter and in
othere chap. aftir there following. And therefore as it folowith not hereof that
each thrifti Divine and each Gramarien is more worthi for to ground Feith than
is holy Scripture, so it folewith not that the Church now lyvyng or the
Clergy now lyvyg are more worthi forto ground feith than is holy Scripture.
Sone, many kindis of Powers there ben. The even Peer has no power of
constreynyng upon his even Peer: that is to seie forto make his even peer to do
what he would not do in thilk kind of werk, in which they ben evene peers: and
yitt oon evene Peer may revoke and relese that the othere evene Peer ordeynyth
or biddith to be do or doith indede: as we seen that oon executour revokith and
relesith what the othere joined to him executour ordeyneth, biddith or doith,
namelich by the Law of Ynglond, and in this case is each Pope with each of the
Apostlis. As for answer to thy VII. principal Argument, y seie that power
forto interpret, expoune and declare which is the rigt sense of Scripture is
not but a full litil power upon Scripture: as power forto construe Scripture
aftir rulis of gramer is a full litil power upon Scripture; but yitt much less
than the othere power now spokun. Forwhi so by these powers no thing is takun
awey fro Scripture what he had before, neither any thing is set of the new
to Scripture, what Scripture had not before, neither any thing is commaundid
to be or not to be agens the comaunding the or nylling of Scripture. And that
because this seid power of interpreting, expownyng, declaring and construyng is
not but a power of kunnyng oonli for to schewe and make open the thing of
Scripture which is in Scripture al redi before thoug priveli and hid: rigt as
the Pressed in Lent time drawith the Lent veil, and therbi makith open to the
people what was before in the Auter alredi, thoug not seen of the people.
Wherefore the first Premysse in thy VII. principal Argument is untrewe and to be
denied, when it is seid thus: Whatever thing nedith to have upon him an
Interpreter or Expowner or a Declarer, nedith to have the same thing as his
overer and worthier. And whi this is untrewe it is now seid. Forwhi ellis a
Deltene yhe the Perisch Clerk were worthier than the Pressed stonding at the
auter, when the Clerk drawith aside the Lent veil. And also if the seid first
Premysse were true, thanne Scripture were worthier than sche her silf is, and
sche were overer to her silf, which is repugnaunce. For whi Scripture full often
expowneth her silf by as much as by the reding of Scripture in oon parti a man
schal leerne which is the true undirstonding of Scripture in all othere parti
wherynne he doutid or unknewe before. Also Sone the Iugis which the King makith
in his rewine for to juge all cause aftir the Law which he and his Parliament
malten, ben not so worthi forto ground rigt wisnes in causis as the seid Law
is. Forwhi all that they han to juge rigt wisnes in causis they han of thilk
Law: and yitt the same seid Iugis han power by there greet kunnyng for to
declare what is the true intent of the Law written or not written, when
othere not so kunnyng persoonys in the Law as they ben dougten therynne or not
so fer seen therynne. And therefore by lyk manner in this present purpos it is
that thoug the Clergy or sum of the Clergy by there greet leernyng have power
or kunnyng forto declare to simpler folk which is the urri sense and
undirstonding of Scripture: yitt hereof folowith not the Clergy or thilk
persoone of the Clergy so declaring is worthier in wei of grounding what
Scripture was ordained to ground by his dew undirstonding of treuthe, than is
the same Scripture in him silf for so to ground. For certis it may be that sum
oon simple persoon as in Fame or in State is wiser forto know juge and declare
what is the true sense of a certain portioun of Scripture, and what is the
treuthe of sum Article, and that for his long studying, laboring, and avising
thereupon, than is a greet general Conceil. For whi full of it is seen that oon
persoon in a general Conceil redressith all the Conceil fro that, that they
wolden ordeyne, as y have rad. If oon simple persoone had not agenstonde by
hise resounis a general Counceil would have ordained that Prestis schulde have
be weddid to Wyves if they wolden. And also y have rad in the tree departid
story that if Finucius Paphnutius.
had not recleimed in the greet Counceil of Nice there had be ordeynyde
that tho Prestis which have had Wyves schulden have left there Wyves and
schulden have be divorced fro hem. For answer to thy VIII. argument thou
schalt undirstonde that it is not oon and the same forto trow a thing to be,
and forto trow the same thing for whi y may trow the Sowdan of Babylonye to
be, yitt it nedith not therefore that y trow to him. And in lyk manner it is not
oon and the same forto bileeve a thing to be, and forto bileeve to thilk thing.
For whi y may and ougte bileeve the feend to be, and yitt y ougte not therbi
forto bileeve to the Feende. Wherefore it is not oon and the same forto bileeve
oon universal Church of God in earth to be, and forto bileeve to thilk oon
universal Church. And sithen it is so that by thilk Article put into the
comoun vulgar Creed y bileeve the holy universal Church, we ben not taught as
by strength of thilk wordis forto bileeve othere than this that oon holy
universal Church is, and what folowith thereof. Even as by lyk Articlis of the
same comoun Creed, by lyk tenor of wordis we ben taught oon Bap^im to be,
forgevenes of Synnys to be, everlastyng life to be; and not by tho Articlis
forto bileeve to oon Baptim, and forto bileeve to forgevenes of Synnys, and
forto bileeve to everlastyng Life, as schal be schewid bettir her aftir in this
same II. party the VIII. Chapter Wherefore folowith that by the tenor of thilk
Article in the comoun Creed in which and by which we ben taugt for to bileeve
oon holy universal Church, we ben not taught forto bileeve to the holy
universal Church, that is to seie to bileeve that the holy universal Church
seith and techith treuthe. So that if we be bound forto bileeve to the holy
universal Church in this now seid undirstonding, it must rise by sum othere
fundament than by thilk Argument in the comoun vulgar Creed, which in thy VIII.
Argument thou alleggist. Whi the Article to be bileeved that oon universal
Church of God is, was put into the comoun Creed, schal be sumwhat tretid
here aftir in this same II. Parti the VII. Chapter and more sumwhere ellis in
Latin. Nevertheles schortli to seie here. Soon aftir the Apostlis rosen
Heretikis, and sum of them helden that there were dyverse Chirchis of God on
earth, and that they were a Church of God by hem silf. And for as myche as the
great Fadris in the Church hadden abomynacioun hereof, they puttiden into the
comoun Creed forto bileeve oon hool universal Church to be with hise parties
not discording oon fro the othere in Feith of God. And this is fer fro this for
to bileeve nedis to thilk universal Church in all ^asis. This is ynow o my
Sone here for an answer to thin VIII. principal Argument. Also it is to be
undirstonde that Catholic is as myche to seie as General, and therefore the
Catholic Feith is as myche to seie as General and Universal Feith, and Catholic
Church is as myche to seie as General or Universal Church. This wole good and
true, grammar, and this wolen oold Doctouris of dunte as Ysidir and Bid in
there writingis. And all witti men known that tho significaciouns of wordis in
Latin ougten be take of grammar. Also Orthodoxe is as myche to seie as rigt
glory, or the thing which is worthi rigt glory: and therefore al true Feith,
thoug it be particular, ougte be clepid Orthodoxe Feith, thoug not each Feith
ougt be clepid Catholic Feith, and each true feithful particular Church ougte
be clepid Catholic Church, that is to seie General or Universal Church. And
yitt men now late not weel leerned in Latin and in Grammar, as good weren that
they weren, and as the oold Scole of Grammar brougte forth men leerned, have
brougte into a viciose use now late by ignonoraunce of true Grammar for to
call a thing Catholic, for that it is Orthodoxe, evene as for defaute of
sufficient leernyng in Grammar men bigynne forto bring into use forto seie in
Alioquin schort, where if they were well leernyd in Grammar they wolden sei
Alioquin long. Look all men whether the Ele^^urarie which Nicholas the
Phisisien in his Antidotari callith Catholicon is called so for that it is
Orthodoxe or for that it is universal. And look also all men whether the Book
of Januens^ in Grammar upon the IV. parties of Grammar is callid Catholicon for
that it is Orthodoxe, or for that it is universal; and thanne let all them be
schamed, or at the leest let them amend there ignorance, which cl^pen the
Church or Feith Catholic for that it is Orthodoxe or true, and not for that
it is universal or general.

CHAP. V.
FAdir may the Clergy or all the hool Church in earth make, of the new any
Article to be Feith, which was not before Feith in it silf. Sone, I would thou
forgatist not what is taugt in the first parti of the follower to the donet the
XI. chapter hou that Feith is takun in II. manners. In oon manner the knowing by
which we known the true Article, is clepid Feith; and this manner of taking
Feith is propre. In an othere manner the same true Article in it silf known ^i
Feith now seid in the first manner, is clepid also Feith. But the secunde manner
of cleeping, thoug it be often usid, it is an unpropir manner of cleeping.
Ensample hereof is this: the knowing with which y know that Marie conseived
C^ist in her maydenhode, is Feith in the first manner of speech; and the same
Treuthe or Article now rehercid and bileeved, which is this, Marie conceyved
Crist in her Maydenhode, is Feith in the II. manner of speech. And lyk manner each
othere Article bileeved is woned to be clepid Feith. Thanne ferthe thus, ever
each of these manners may be departid into tweyn othere manners. For whi as it
apperith Chap. in the first parti of the follower to the donet, the knowing
wherynne y consent in mine undirstonding to a treuthe being above our capacite
to know, save by thereof Goddis affermyng or reveling is Feith. And also the
knowing wherynne y consent in mine undirstonding to a treuthe not by my resoun^
fynding, but by this that a creature, which for good evydeneis y trow not
therynne to lie, it affeermede, is Feith. And so the comoun speech usith to
seie, y gave credence to him, he is a credible man, and so forth of othere
spechis lyk. Wherefore it folowith by strength of the first particioun now
before seid, that answeringli to these now last seid membris, the Article or
the Treuthe knowun by the first membre of this last particioun is Feith; and
the Article or Treuthe knowun by the II. membre of this particioun is also seid
Feith. Fadir, the particiouns or dep^r^ingis of Feith y conteyne well, and y
take and comprehend them sufficientli in mi wit and in my mind. Well Sone
thanne ferthe thus. Take thou thilk Feith which is a knowing whereynne we
consenten in our undirstonding to a treuthe being above our capacite to find
and know, and therefore we known it by this that God it affeermyd; and take
thou the Feith which is the Article or the Treuthe in this now seid manner
knowun, and certis never neither of these II. Feithis the Clergy or the hool
Church may make of the new at his own will. Forwhi it is not in the power of
the Clergy, neither in the power of the hool Church forto make such an
Article to be true or to be untrewe; as it is not in the Chirchis power forto
make this to be true or to be untrewe, that Marie conceyved a Child in her
maydenhode, or this, that Crist was de^d and roos again unto life, and so forth
of othere Articlis of Feith in this seid manner and kind. And therefore it that
all the Clergy or the hool Church may do heraboute, is denouncing and
declaring and defynyng to the sympler parti of the Church what is in ever
either of these now last seid manners, and that this is to be take for such seid
Feith, and that this othere is to be take for such Feith, and so forth of
othere lyk. But all wise men may soon se that fer is this fro power to make
any thing to be such seid Feith; and that the Church makith not a thing to be
such Feith in this that he decrees, decerneth, jugith, determyneth, and
witnessith, and publis^hith a thing to be such a Feith. ^esoun wole that the
wiser parti of all the hool multitude of Christian Men take upon them forto teache
and enfoorme auctoritativeli the simpler parti, which thing ougte be take for
Feith and which not, and that into greet aligting and esiyng and suring to the
simpler parti: and ^o doith the Clergy to the Lay parti. And of more strength
than this is, y se not that the determynacioun of the Church is. But agenward
take thou Feith which is the knowing wherynne we consenten in our
undirstonding to a treuthe which we fynden not in our resonyng other wise than
for a creature, which for sufficient evydencis we trowen not therynne to lie,
it affeermyde: and take thou the same Treuthe so of us trowid and bileeved,
which also is Feith: and ever either of these Feithis may be maad of new of the
Clergy. Forwhi the Clergy may make now first a Fasting day and an Holy day,
which never weren before. And of this making and ordinance risen up these II.
Treuthis which never were before: this day is to be fastid, and this day is to
be halowid. Now many of the simple people mow leerne these II. Trouthis of the
Clergy, that is to seie, they mow leerne and know that this day is to be
fastid, and this day is to be holowid: which they witen not whi save for this
that the Clergy seien so and affeermen so to them. And therefore it is in the
power of the Clergy to make into them such Feith as is now seid. Fadir, this
manner of Feith which the Church may make is of noon othere kind, but as is
the credence or Feith which each householder may make to hise young Children and
hise rude and simple Hyves and to his Hondmaydens, and Boond Men not myche
witti to resone: and therefore these Feithis which the Clergy may make ben fer
fro the hignes and worthiness of Feithis, which God to us makith. And therefore
Fadir let us speak her aftir, as we have spoken before of tho Feithis, which we
have by affermyng of God: for such ben algatis necessary to our help. Sone y
assente well that we schulen so speak, and therefore ask thereof what thou wolte.
Fadir y ask this: owith the Clergy or the Church bileeve as Feith any
Article which is not expressid in the litteral sense or undirstonding of holy
Scripture; and which is not following out of any Article in holy Scripture; but
if he have forto it bileeve and trow by this Argument: whatever God affeermed
or schewid or revelid is true. This Article God affeermyd or revelid. Wherefore
this Article is true. And but if he have sufficient evydence for Treuthe of
the II. Premysse, as by such a Premysse: whatever the Apostlis or othere
undoutabili true heerers of God, or sum undoutable miracle, or sum undoutable
inspiracioun, or sum undoutable appering without forth or withynne forth to any
persoone, or sum long uce of bileevyng in the Church without any bigynnyng
knewen thereof, witnessid God to have affeermyd or revelid or schewid; God it
affermed revelid or schewid. So it is that the Apostlis or sum other
undoutatable credible heerer of God or sum undoutable miracle or sum undoutable
inspiracioun, or sum undoutable appeering withynne forth or without forth, or
sum seid long uce of bileeving in the Church, witnessid that God affeermyd or
revelid this Article. Wherefore treuthe is that God affeermyd thilk same
Article. And yitt fer there upon the II. now seid Premysse he must have
notabili likli evydencis in Argument, and so likli that to the contrary is not
had, neither hopid to be had any evydence so likli. And sotheli Sone, as
may full openli be deducid, if al what is seid of Feith in this present Book be
weel takun undirstonden and comprehendid, whatever Article the Clergy or the
hool Church bileeveth as Feith, and has not upon the same Article this seid
process of evydence and of prof: he in so bileevyng is over hasti, and
usurpith and presumes ferther than he schulde: and upon whatever Article the
Clergy can have the said process of prof, it the Clergy may bileeve as Feith
without perel. And if the Clergy have such a preef as now is ensampled upon
sum Article not written openli in holy Scripture, neither folowingli out of any
Article so written, (the Church so has upon these trouthis that this holy
lyver aftir his deeth is acceptid into salvacioun and to be reverencid and
worschipid and folowid as for a savyd Soul and much lovyd and worschipid of
God, and so of many Martiris, Confessouris and Virgins othere and dyverse fro
the persoonys of the Apostlis: the Church has the now seid prof, and that by
help of Myraclis well tried and examyned by sufficient true witnessing, or by
open at fulle schewing. Thoug the Church nedith not seche help of Myraclis for
the Apostlis to be done, and that because Crist seid to them: Thus joie and be
ye glad, for your names ben written in Hevenes. And thanne thereof folowith this
to be take for an Article of Feith: Thomas of Cantirbiri is a Seint, Joon of
Bridlington is a Seint in the said dew undirstonding of this word Saint; and so
forth of othere whose lyvyng and for whom the myraclis done be weel examyned
and tried by witnessis sworn notwithstonding that pretense Myraclis and
pretense Inspiraciouns and pretense Appeeringis of God or of Angels withynne
forth and without forth and legendis or lyves of Seyntis and othere stories
which ben written and had in ^ame, ben full slider and unsure groundis forto
ground upon them Feith, that is to seie, a treuthe passing nature and revelid
by God, without passing greet trial of them. For certis among them a diligent
wise ensercher schal find sumtyme Supersticiouns, sumtymes Errouris agens sure
known Treuthe, sumtyme Heresies agens the Feith, and sumtyme contrariete
bitwix hem silf; as forto put out in special where and hou often, it were ^ver
long here. And therefore thoug the Church suffer many such to run forth
and be read, and be takin as wise men wole juge and feel of them; the Church
is not so hasty forto determyne autoritativeli them to be true. Nevertheles
all tho which the Church takith into greet and perfigt examinacioun, and
there aftir jugith and ^erreeth and determyneth autentikli to be true ben nedis
to be take for true, in less than sufficient prof be made into the contrary,
and unto time thilk prof be maad and know, as y seid before in the Chapter of the
first parti of this Book. But yitt that the Apostlis bitoken not, out and
bisidis holy Scripture any Articlis unwriten to be bileeved for necessary
Feithis, thoug sum men so comounli holden, y may argue by rigt notable
evydencis, of which the first is this. The Apostlis bitoken not to christian men
any Articlis to be bileeved as such seid Feith by any such wey, which the
Apostlis known to be no spedeful and sufficient wey forto in it bitake any
Articlis to be bileeved as so greet Feith. But so it is that the Apostlis
knewen well that to bitake to the heering and mind of the people oonli without
writing any such Articlis forto be of them bileeved was no spedeful and
sufficient wey. Wherefore the. Apostlis not so bitoken. The II. Premysse of this
Argument may in this wise be proved. Thilk wey was well known considered and
aspied to be insufficient and unspedful, which was by the Apostlis remedied and
left and leid aside. But so it was that this seid wey for to belyvere any
Articlis as such feith to the people by heering and mind oonli without writing
was left and leid aside and remedied by this that they wroten the Gospels and
Epistlis to the people. Forwhi ellis they hadden no sufficient cause for to so
write. And Luk in his prolog unto hise Gospel meneth the same. Wherefore it
folowith, that the seid wey was weel knowin and considered and aspied to be
insufficient for the seid intent to be sufficientli sped. Also the seid second
premysse mygte be proved thus: The Apostlis maad so wise by the holy Ghost
forto overse and know Scripturis of the oold testament, mygte soon know and
remember hou that many trouthis Adam seide and taugte to hise sons and hise
offspring over it that is written in the Bible. Whereof no man in the time of the
Apostlis could any thing seie: and thilk manner it was knowun of the Apostlis to
be true that Noe and Abraham seiden and taugten many treuthis to there here is
not written, which no man could reherce in time of the Apostlis, and al for
that they were not written. And in lyk manner it was true of David and of
Solomon auentis there heerers, so that noon of there wordis be knowun, than tho
ben written. And if we wolen come near hoom, Joon the Evangelist seithen the
last chapter of his Gospel, that mo myraclis Crist did, than be written in this
Book, which if they weren written, all the world, thoug it were turned into
bokis, schulde not take and comprehendo. And that of al tho myraclis not written
in the Gospels not ^on is of us now knowun. Wherefore it folowith that so wise
men as weren the Apostlis in goostli necessary matters, and so fulfilled with
the holy ghost, and also well put into good avi^is by full witti Clerkis
convertid into Christian Feith knewn well that this wey forto delyver necessary
feith to peplis by word and heering and mind oonli without that of the writing
was insufficient to the people. The second evydence is this. If the Apostlis
hadden let run any Articlis undir necessary feith to be bileeved without
prof of the Scripture; this intent and deed of the Apostlis schulde have be
better known and holden of the Church, which was in time of great Constantyn
the Emperor, than of any Church being aftir tho seid days. For so it was the
Church in the days of Constantyn hold not, trowid not, and considerid not,
that the Apostlis so left without writing any Articlis to be takun as
necessary feith. Wherefore no Church aftir the days of Constantyn owith so
hold. The second premysse y may prove thus. In the days of the greet and
first Constantyn Emperor there was maad an universal Counceil of all Christian
in Nice of Bityne, in which universal Counceil was gaderid the Latin Clerkis
and the Greek Clerkis togider for this intent principali to declare the true
feith in the article upon which Ari errid, and folowingli forto put out in an
express Creed the substauncial pointis and articlis of our feith, as is opene
in the stories clepid ecclisiastick story and tripartid story, or ellis thus.
The Churchis story and the third departid story: which stories ben the
worthiest and most credible of any othere save the Bible. And therefore so they
did and maad a Creed, which in the seid second book is written. But so it must
nedis have be that if the Church in tho days had known or trowid that the
Apostlis had delyvered to the people any articlis undir heering and mind oonli;
the Church in thilk seid general Counseil gaderid for to point and articlee
matters of our feith wolden rather have set forth in writing of the Creed than
maad tho seid articlis, which the Apostlis left out of writing, than tho of
whom express mencioun is maad in the writing of the Apostlis. And that fer as
myche as to the mo n^de remedy is rather to be goven than to the less need.
And the need to put tho Articlis undir writing was full greet as soon aftir
appear. Wherefore the Church then gaderid had no conceit that the Apostlis
leften any such Articlis of necessary feith, which the Apostlis not wroten.
And in lyk manner as it was in the first seid general Counseil of Nice that they
pointiden out Articlis of bileeve to all Christian people into a foorm of a
Creed, so did anothere greet general Counseil aftir at Constantynopil, and
many othere provincial Counseils, as apperith in the book clepid Decrees of
Counseils rehercen the II. now seid Credis; and in noon of them so making and
pointing Articlis of our feith in there credis is mensioun maad of any articlis
taugt by the Apostlis out of Scripture. The III. evydence is this. If any
Article schulde be left to people fro the Apostlis undir heering and mind to be
hold and bileeved of the people greet as feith, these pointis and articlis
schulde be tho rather than othere, or as soon as othere; that is to seie: we
schulen pry toward the Eest, we schulen bless us with a cross, Prestis schulen
make tree foold crossis upon the bread and wine offride in the after before the
consecracioun, the font of baptim schal be blessid with oil, and baptisid
persoonys schulen be anointed with oil. But so it is that each of the seid
governauncis takun there bigynnyng and ordinance of our Fadirs oonli not the
Apostlis by a chapter of holy Ba^ile in the sum of Gracian, Did. XI. c.
Ecclesiasticorum. And in the same wise it is to be demed of holy water, whom
Alisaundir the first and Pope ordeynyd. And of holy bread and of the most
parti of observaciouns in the Mass, and of the fasting Lent, and of many
othere such observaciouns, whom all holy Fadirs sithen the Apostlis ordeynyd,
and as it appears by opene witnessing of writings. Wherefore it is not to be
hold that any othere observaciouns or articlis dyvers fro these now rehercid
the Apostlis bitoke without writing to be kept and to be bileeved as such seid
greet feith. Also holy Basile the now before alleggid c. in the sum of
Gracian, c. XI. Ecclesiasticorum, departith tho thingis which all Christian
owen to hold and to bileeve into III. membris, that is to seie, into thingis
pointis or articlis, which to us levith and bitakith apostolik ordinance, that
is to seie, ordinance of a Pope, or of Popes, which to us bitaketh holy
Scripture, and which to us bitaketh devoute uce chosen of the mo part of the
people. Wherefore holy Basile conceyved no mo membris than these III. to be nedis
takun and kept of Christian people: and thanne folowith that he conceyvyd not such
a fourth membre to be takun and kept of the people, that is to seie, which the
Apostlis taugten and leften and bitoken for substauncial feith without writing.
And that by the first now rehercid membre Basile undirstood Popis ordinauncis
it is likli therefore: Forwhi the ordinauncis of Popis ben full famous and more
famous and more reverente attendaunce in the comoun people than is the custom
and usage of the comoun people, or at the leest of and even so myche. Wherefore
it is likli that Basile left not Popis ordinauncis unspokun of in his
particioun before seid. But othere it is that he speak not of Popis
ordinauncis, but if he speak, thereof in the first membre of the sei^
particioun. Wherefore it is true, that he so speak. And so finally forto seie
into the principal intent of this present chapter, y am not ware that the
Church techis or delyverith any thing to be such seid catholic feith as a
treuthe done or taught in tym of Crist or of the Apostlis, exceptid which is
conteynyd expressly in the writing of the new testament or following prof in
former argument. If any othere man kan remember him of othere or of (...), well
be it. But yitt thingis done or taugt long aftir time of the Apostlis the
Chirch may determyn for such seid feith, thoug not as a treuthe done or taugt
or revealid by God in the time of Crist or of the Apostlis, but l^tir aftir the
time of Crist and of the Apostlis: among which thingis declarid by the Chirch
for feith not conteynyd expresse^t or impressel^ in holy Scripture, if any such
be, y remember me now of noon, save of it what is before seid in this seid
chapter lo^gen to the c^nony^^ng of Seintis. And that if any such be, which
condicioun y seie for peraventure it may be hold and undirst^nd weel, that the
Chirch ^ntendith not forto decree and determyn and publisch this to be an
article of such seid feith, Thomas of Cantirbiri is a saint, John of
Bridlington is a saint, Ambrose is a saint, and so of othere lyk diverse fro
Marie, and fro the Apostlis in the new testament, but the Chirch admyttith and
allowith them to be hold and morschiped and fo^^wid for seintis in all, or in
myche thing taugt or done by them, and ellis people schulde not courtesi so do,
as the Chirch (...) not or determyneth neither publisc^^th the writings of
Ambros, of Jerome, of Austyn to be true, but admittis them to be take in (...)
of stydiyng, and of reading and heering with fredom to feel of them evydencys
now reasona^li and sufficientli more in time coming which writing is schulden
not ellis boldly and ^o^^seli be take into such studiyng, reading and heering
as they now ben take; ne were the seid admissioun done upon them by the Chirch,
even as the Chirch repellith and we^^neth the writingis of sin othere writers
to be take into uce of reeding and heering courseli, of which both dedis done
by Pope Gelasi mensioun is maad in the sum of Gracian Did. XV* c. Sancta
Romana, and therefore thoug y wole not exclude fro sum what helping into the
grounding myraclis and revelaciouns and long uce of bileeving in the Chirch,
namelich which may be in long uce of understaunding thus or thus holy
Scripture, as for his litteral sense yitt they ben each full feeble in him silf
for to found the seid feith, but he be sufficienth proved and tried. And
ferthemore it seimeth that the Apostlis entendiden not for to give any
catholic feith necessary to Christian Mennys savacioun by word oonli to be kept
without writing and remembrance, and so by all that is written fro the biginnen
of this present chapter hiderto, it seems that the Clergy ougte not induce
or constreyne the othere people into bilieve and feith of othere pointis and
articlis as upon the feith of whom is hangen our salvacioun than ben expressid
in the litteral sense of holy Scripture, or following them so expressed. O
Fadir, y am much delitid in your so wise and deep forth leeding of the seid now
before going pro^^s. Nevertheless y trust so much in your to me good
Fadirhood that ye wole suffer me make agens your doctrine this now to follow
objectioun. Oon of the best Clerkis and wisist Divins and clepid therefore the
Doctor Sutel Scotus, seith in his writing that this article Crist in his deith
of bodi discerdid into hellis is an article of necessary feith. And that for
as myche as it is put in the comoun creed, which e^ede is ascribid to have
be maad of the Apostlis, and yitt this ^ame article, as he seith, is not
groundid in holy Scripture. Wherefore your doctrine stondith not, if this
Doctor was not in this his new seide sentence bigilid. O Sone, he berith him
full well which is never bigilid, namelich if he write myche or teache myche. For
as holy Scripture seith in myche spechis defaut is not wanting. But that the
seid Doctor was in this conceit bigilid, so y may schewe thus. In the time of
Austyn and of othere holy Clerkis about Austyns time the comoune creed had
not withynne him this seid article: Crist in his deeth of bodi descendid to
hellis, as y prove in the book of feith in Latin. And no man may seie that the
Apost^is settiden thilk article in the comoun creed, a this side the days of
Apostlis. Wherefore nedis it is true that neither before neither aftir Austyns
days the Apostlis settiden thilk article into the comoun creed. And so the
ground Foundemente and cause whi the seid Doctor held the seid article to be
a feith is not true, that is to seie, that the Apostlis puttiden thilk article
into the comoun creed* and that the Kirk may make noon such article of feith,
is before schewid in of this present chapter the for-heed. That in the time of
Austyn and of othere holy Fadris about Austyns time the comoun creed had not
this seid article it is opene by diverse and many omelies and expo-siciouns,
which Austyn and the othere seid Fadris maden, expownyng the comoun creed in
there days rennyng. And that fro article to article by and by fro the first
unto the last, and they leeven unspokun of the now seid article. And also they
overleepen this article. Caetera desunt.

An Alphabetical TABLE of the more Obsolete English Words to be found in the
Treatise, with their Significations.
A.
AGens, against. Aghe, against. Agenbie, redeem. Agens metith, opposes.
Algatis, in all respects. Aligting, facilitating. Anentis, concerning. Anoon,
presently. Apocri^is, Apocryphal. Apower, able. Ari, Arlus. Assoilid, refuted.
A this side, since. Auter, Altar. Aviseable, deliberate. Avisement,
deliberation.
B.
Bid, commanded. Benefetis, benefits. Berith, behaveth. By, by. Bifelle,
be^el. Biknows, acknowledges. Bileeve, bel^ef. Birden, burden. Biried, buried.
Bisi, bulsie. Bisidis, besides. Bitaken, delivered. Bitooke, delivered.
Boondis, contents. Boonys, gifts, graces. Brennyng, burning. Brent, burnt.
Buidingis, commands.
C.
Cast him, set himself. Certis, certainly. Chargeose, expensive. Chauncis,
accidents. Che^^r, superior. Clepid, called. Comberose, cumbersom. Combre,
loud. Comonute, soc^ety. Conicacioun, examination. Could, could. Courseli,
hastily.
D.
Deed, dead. Deem, judge. Dekene, Deacon. Demed, considered. Departid,
divided. Departith, divides. Dew, due. Discencioun, dissension. Doom,
judgment. Dougten, doubtful. Dowte, doubt. Dressing, beating. Dunte, ^ame.
Durid, lasted. Dwelliden, dwelt. Dymme, dim.
E.
Ellis, else. Ennok, Enoch. Any, any. Earth, earth. Esili, easily. Evene,
equ^l. Expowne, expound.
F.
Fadir, father. Fadris, fathers. Feende, dev^l. Fell, happened. Fer, far.
Ferthe, forth. Fire, fire. Finucius, Paphnutius. Following, consequence.
Folowingli, consequently. Forheed, foregoing part. Foundement, foundation. Fro,
from.
G.
Gede, went. Gendrid, born. Goostli, spiritual* Govun, given. Great, great.
Groundeli, fundamentally. Groundier, firmer. Grow in, intervene.
H.
Had, had. Han, have. Hangement, hanging. Han, have. Heed, head. Here, hear.
Hemsilf, themselves. Her, their. Herden, heard. Here that, whereas. Here Is,
heirs. Hige, high. Hise, his. Hold, hold. Holy, holy. Hondis, hands. Hool,
whole. Hyve, company.
I.
Igen, eyes. Impresseli, impl^citly. Ion, John. Ioon, John. Iugis, Judges.
K.
Kind, nature. Kindeli, natural or ordinary. Kirk, Church. Kunne, can.
Kunnyng, knowledge. Kuntre, country.
L.
Leefir, more willing. Lesingis, lies. Lettris, letters. Liggist, lies. Likli,
likely. Litil, little. Longid to, belonged. Life, life. Lyk, like. Lyvyng,
living.
M.
Maad, made. Mannys, many. Mawle, male. Mede, Salvation. Mennys, men's.
Mensioun, mention. Mete agens, oppose. Mo, more. Much, much. Money, many.
More, greater. Morewe, morrow. Mow, may. Myche, much. Mygte, power. Mygten,
might. Mynystriden, administered. Myraclus, m^raculous.
N.
Namelich, namely. Ne, neither. Need, necessity. Nedis, necessarily. Ni^asse,
unless. Noon, none. Notabili, notably. Noumbre, number. Nylling, nulling.
O.
Omelies, Homilies. Oold, old. Oon, one. Oonli, only. Oonys, once. Openli,
mani^estly. Othre, other. Overer, super^ours. Owen, ought.
P.
Pacchis and cloutis, additions. Parischens, Parishioner. Paske, Passover.
Pieces mele, p^ecemeal. Per^it, perfect. Persoonys, persons. Physisien,
Physician. Poulis, Paul's. Prechiden, preached. Premyssis, propositions.
Pretense, pretended. Pry, pray. Privey, private. Process, passage. Proficied,
prophesied. Prologgis, prologues. Puplischid, published. Purveied, provided.
R.
Radde, read. Recleimed, opposed. Redi, ready. Releef and resca^l, poorer and
meaner sort. Run, run. Rennyng, running or curr^nt. Rennyng herewith,
concuring to it. Resoned, learned. Resoun, reason. Reule, rule. Rewine, room.
Rightwisnesse, justice. Roos, rose. Route, multitude.
S.
Saaf, safe. Sad, grave. Sadness, gravity. Save the caase, solve the question.
Scant, scarce. Schai, shall. Schapide, prepared. Sche, she. Schewe, show.
Schipp, ship. Schope, intended or ordered. Schortli, shortly. Schotte, slew.
Schulde, should. Scole, school. Se, see. Seche, seek. Seie, say. Servage,
bondage. Settid, resolved. Settiden, placed. Seyntis, Saints. Sigen, did see.
Sikir, secure. Sikirli, securely. Sithen, since. Slider, uncertain. Sone, Son.
Sooth, truth* Sothe, certain. Sotheli, certainly. Sowdan, Sultan. Stabili,
firmly. Stirid, stirred. Suffraunce, permission. Sugget, subject. Sum, some.
Sum, some. Sunken in, drawn in. Synnys, Sins.
T.
Take mark, be showed. Takun, assumed. Teache, teach. Thanne, then. They, they.
Thennes, thence. Theuke, meditate. Thy, thy. Thilk, that, or the said. Tho,
those. Thorug, through. Tho that, who. Ti^ to, unto. Togidere, together. Tree,
three. Trenys, lamentations. Tretid, treated. Treuli, treuly. True, true.
Trouthis, truths. Trow, believe. Tungis, tongues. Twey, two. Twies, twice.
V.
Uce, use. Uerri, very. Ueyn, vain. Uidewite, widowhood. Unbigilefulnesse,
veracity. Undeptabili, undoubtedly. Undoutabili, undoubtedly. Unto time, un^^l.
Unwist, unknown. Urri, true.
W.
Waast, vain. Waisching, washing. Weel, well. Weie, way. Well prisid, well
esteemed. Weren, were. Werkis, works. Werre, War. Weved, complained. When,
when. Whicchecraft, witchcraft. Whilis, whilst. 100 Wintre, 100 years. Wiste,
know. Without forth, external. Withynne forth, internal. Witti, learned.
Wittis, undirstanding. Wittyngis, testimonies. Wolden, would. Wole, will.
Worching, working. Worschipid, worshipped. Worschipid, esteemed. Wife, Wife.
Y.
Y, I. Ydel, idle. Ye, you. Year, year. Yhe, yea. Yitt, yet. Ynoug, enough.
Ysidir, Isidore. Yvel, evil.
FINIS.

