A SERMON PREACHED On the ANNIVERSARY OF THAT Most EXECRABLE MURDER OF K.
CHARLES The First Royal Martyr.

By EDWARD PELLING, Rector of St. Martins Ludgate, and Chaplain to his Grace
the Duke of Somerset.

1 Samuel 26. 9. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's Anointed, and
be guiltless? 2 Samuel 1. 14. How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine
hand to destroy the Lord's Anointed? Eccles. 1. 4. Where the Word of a King is,
there is Power; and who may say unto him, what do thou? LONDON, Printed for
J. Williams at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Joanna Brom at the Gun
at the West End of St. Paul's. 1682.

To His Grace, my ever Honored and Dear Lord, Charles Duke of Somerset,
Marquess and Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, and Baron of Trowbridge.
MY LORD,
SEveral Passages in this following Sermon, having been maliciously
misrepresented by Men who hate the Government, and love Lying, diverse Friends
have advised and importuned me to make the whole Discourse Public.

Not that any Hopes are conceived, that it will work much upon those whom
Interest or Malice engages to be Obstinate, and whom Obstinacy encourages to
be clamorous; especially if there be upon their Consciences any Guilt of that
Murder, which on so Solemn an Occasion, we cannot reflect upon, without the
greatest Horror, Astonishment and Indignation. Of such, little Good is to be
expected, who have sinned away a great Stock of Grace; which is so commonly the
miserable case of Inveterate Rebels, that to the Observation of the World they
very seldom repent.

But, God be blessed, the Generality of Men among us, mean well, and are so
honest in their Intentions, that they cannot easily be rifled of a good
Conscience, but by some Cheat, and for want of due Information; because the
shedding of the King's Blood was a Crime of that Horrid Nature, and the
Subversion of the Established Government, was a Mischief of such ill Effect,
that every Sober Man, whose Eyes are open, cannot but tremble, at the Memory of
the One, and for the future dread the very Thoughts of the Other (though some
few Spirits may be so far possessed with the Devil, as that they could again be
glad and rejoice at Both.)

Now the Design of this Discourse is, to serve the Sincere and Simple-minded
part of the World, by affording a short View of the Sin acted in 48, and of the
Methods and Degrees by which the King and the Government were destroyed
together; and of the Miseries in Church and State, which by the just Judgment
of God this Nation smarted under, that we might be made sensible of our foolish
Exchange, and be Disciplined into Wisdom for the future. But alas! since we
have been healed of our Stripes, some seem to have almost forgotten the Rod,
and are not only Willing, but Desirous to come under the Lash again. So unfixt
and mutable are many English Spirits, that the only Center they can rest in, is
the Grave: For as the Moon, after so many Periods, returns into the same
Phasis; so some Erratick Humors, after so many Years, revert into the same
Motion; and the only Way to save men the Charge of being cured again of their
Lunacy, is to prevent the Disease: And for this Reason I did Discourse upon
this Theme, because it is presumable, that though there be in the World some
Fickle, some Factious, and many Atheistical Spirits, that could be content to
try another Fall for the Government, yet all men that are truly Conscientious
and Wise, will beware of encouraging Attempts of that Nature; especially
considering what a sad Booty this Nation did get by its former Wrestlings.

And now, my Lord, I hope your Grace will not wonder, if I present this Sermon
to your Lordship as a Patron, though you was not an Auditor. My Great
Obligations to your self, and to your Honorable Relations for your sake, do
challenge Higher Testimonies of Gratitude than my Skill can Express, or your
Modesty will Bear. Yet were there nothing to be considered but that Natural
Love and Duty which I owe your Grace, I do most Thankfully Acknowledge, that
Your have a Just Right to all the Services which are Possible to be done either
by Me or Mine; because we are All your Lordships Servants by Birth. So far am I
from owning that Principle, That every man is born Free, that I confess my
Self, and all that bear my Name, to have Inherited such a State of Servitude to
your Lordship, as if (according to the Mosaical Custom) your Noble Ancestors
had bored the Ears not of our Progenitors alone, but of their whole Issue. For
your Grace knows (and I cannot without Ingratitude conceal it from the World)
that as we have been (of every Generation One of us at least) Clergymen, from
Father to Son, ever since the Reformation; so we have had the Honor to have
been all along Successively Chaplains to your Noble Family: Such a singular
respect to the Church, and (God be blessed) to an Honest race of Churchmen, as
hardly any Nobleman in the Kingdom, but your Self, can Own.

But, my Lord, I am a Debtor not to your Person only, but to your Spotless
Virtues, that which makes you Truly Honorable, and, I had almost said, the
Rarity of our Age. It is a Common Happiness, that what was Great and Good in
your Noble Ancestors, You are the Apparent Heir of; and those Surviving Virtues
in You, which were so Eminent in that Excellent Person your Noble Brother,
(against whose Memory I should Sin, should I rob him of that Just Character,
that for his Years he was one of the Flowers of the World) do something abate
the Sense of that (otherwise Irreparable) loss, which the whole Kingdom
sustained by his Unfortunate and Undeserved End. His Piety, Humility, Chastity,
Sobriety, Sweetness of Nature, and (which I could not but observe in Him) His
utter Hatred of all Profane and Irreverent use of God's Holy Name; they were
Virtues which do rarely meet in a Gentleman of Twenty years Old: But this is
all your Friends Comfort, that while I count up some of your Brothers Virtues,
I mention Yours too; and that Your Lordships Name may be ever Dear to all Good
Men, I must beg the wonted Freedom You give me, to beseech You with the most
Passionate Affection to be to your dying day Careful of your Virtue, being
confident of this, that as it is now your singular Honor, so it will certainly
be your Best Interest.

One thing I must put your Grace in mind of, that your Noble Predecessors have
been Eminent, among other Virtues, for their Fidelity to the Crown, and their
Zeal for the Prosperity of our Established Church. And this I know to be your
Lordships hearty Resolution, and a considerable part of your Lordships Honor.
Upon which account also I crave leave to offer these few Sheets to your Grace;
humbly begging your kind Acceptance, and beseeching God to Bless you with all
the Blessings of his Right hand, and of his Left; which is the constant Prayer
of,

My Lord, Your Grace's most Humble, Faithful and Affectionate Servant and
Chaplain, Edw. Pelling.

LAM. 5. 16. The Crown is fallen from our Head: woe unto us that we have sinned.
A Crown fallen? Had the Prophet gone on, and spoke of the fall of a Crowned
Head too, we might have guest that by his Prophetical Spirit he had pointed as
far as Forty Eight. But to shed Blood Royal, as if it differed not from the
Blood of a Vulgar Person; and to cut off the Neck even of a Neighbor Prince,
as if he had not been anointed with Oil, was looked upon as an act too Barbarous
to be done by those very Barbarians, who thought it just and safe to put out
the Eyes of a Conquered Monarch. For if we look into the History of those Times
to which my Text does relate, we shall find, that no less than Five Kings of
the Jews had been successively Captivated by the Assyrians; and though Most of
them, if not All, had been Unfaithful to the King of Babylon, and Rebelled
against him after they became his Servants, yet Sentence of of Death past not
on any One of them: but Deposing, Imprisonment, and Fetters, were the usual
Punishment of their Perfidiousness; only Zedekiah, who was the Last of the
Five, and had sworn Fealty to the King of Babylon, and had given greater
Provocations than the rest, was handled more severely than the rest: But,
though his incensed Enemies slew his Sons before his face, yet the Judgment
given against Him, was only the taking away of his Eyesight: the Destruction
and Killing of Kings being looked upon as a Crime of a most Horrid and
Detestable Nature, even by men who were in a state of Brutality, and even then
when they were armed with Power, transported with Rage, thirsty of Revenge, and
flesht with Victory.

However, to rid himself of a necessity of Forcing the Jews into Subjection at
every turn thus, Nebuchadnezzar resolves to make very short work with them: and
in order thereunto he Sacks Jerusalem, sets Fire on the Temple, makes Spoil of
all the costly Furniture and Utensils thereof, burns down the Houses within
the City, demolishes the Walls, destroys their whole State and Government, and
carries the King and People, and all away into a strange Land, leaving only
some of the poorer Sort to be Vine-dressers, and Husbandmen, as we read at
large, 2 Kings 25.

Now it was This Sad and most Dolesome time which the Prophet pointed unto in
this Book of his Lamentations, especially in this part of it, where he grieved
at This, as the Epitome and Sum total of all their Evils, that the Crown was
fallen from their Head. And in the whole Verse we may observe, First, The
Calamity so lamented here by the Prophet; It was the falling of the Crown.
Secondly, The Cause of this Evil; It was the Peoples Sins. Thirdly, That woeful
Condition, those Plagues and Punishments which were Consequent hereunto; Woe
unto us, for we have Sinned.

1. Let us look a little, first, into the Calamity it self, The Crown is fallen
from our Head: And for the opening of the Prophets Sense, we are to know, that
by the Crown some understand the Joy of God's People, Diadems and Coronets
being wont formerly to be used in some places at Solemn times of Festivity.
Others interpret it of the Glory of the Jewish Nation, which Glory consisted in
this, that hitherto they had been peculiarly favored and honored by God above
all other Nations in the World. Others will have it to be meant in a more
strict Sense of their Temple and Priesthood, in the possession whereof the Jews
had all along Boasted and Prided themselves to a most high degree. Others again
do (and as I conceive, with better Reason) understand by the falling of the
Crown from their Head, the loss of their Kingdom and established Government, and
the stripping of their Princes from that State, Power, Greatness and Royalty,
whereof the Crown was an Emblem and Argument. For this was the Complement of
their Misery, and the reason of all their other Evils was resolved into This,
that their King's Throne was now quite cast down to the Ground; and hereupon,
by necessary Consequence, their Religion was overthrown too, the Glory of
Israel was departed, the Liberties of the People were utterly lost, their Laws
cashiered, Church and State Both were now gone to wrack, all Joy was vanished,
their Harps were hung up upon the Willows in a strange Land, and they
themselves sat weeping by the Rivers of Babylon, while they thought of their
dear, and now ruinated Sion; Briefly, whatever did help and concur to make them
Desolate and Miserable, all was owing (next unto their Sins) to the Ruin of
that Monarchy and Government, wherewith hitherto they had been Blessed for so
many Ages: The Crown is fallen from our Head: woe unto us that we have Sinned.

The Calamity then was Judahs, but the Sin too was Englands on this day, when
Men not only with their eyes Saw, but with their own hands Caused the downfall
of the best of Kings, and the Funeral of the best of Monarchies, till God by a
Miraculous hand gave it a Resurrection out of that Grave, wherein it had been
buried by those Cursed and Domestic Babylonians, who said, Down with it, down
with it, even to the ground. We do not wonder at the ruin of Zedekiah, nor was
the ruining of him a Crime on Nebuchadnezzar's part: for even Absolute Princes
are Coordinate, and stand upon the same Level; and if upon sufficient
Provocations the one happens to gain his Neighbors Crown, the fact is Just by
right of Conquest. But if the one be Subordinate to the other, (which was
clearly the case of Zedekiah) the Recovery of the Crown is in the Supreme
Prince an act of Justice; and the Punishment of an inferior Prince, who
abjureth his Fealty, is by all Nations allowed to be a Righteous act of
Vengeance. Upon this account the Jews may be said to have been rather an
Unhappy People; for though they were wicked in This respect, that their Sins
Occasioned their Misfortune, yet they were not, they durst not be wicked in
that respect wherein the People of this Land Sinned; who rose up against their
own Sovereign, and Natural Lord, in whose Person the Supreme Power was vested
by God Himself; they themselves first pulled off their Princes Crown from his
Head, then proceeded to bow down the Prince himself upon the Scaffold, and at
last dared to strike off his Head from his Shoulders: So that though the
falling of the Crown was to the Jews a Calamity, yet being contrived here by
Men, who (whether Severally or Jointly considered) were but Subjects; being
attempted by Resistance against the Authority and Person of the King, who was
the Only Supreme; and being in the end brought about by most Unjustifiable
Methods, such as were contrary to all Laws, Divine and Human; contrary to so
many Voluntary Protestations, and Repeated Oaths; and contrary to that Natural
duty of Allegiance which every born Subject owes his Prince, whether he
enters into the Oath of God, or no; the falling of This Crown is justly
accounted to the People of this Land to have been Rebellion, Treason, Murder,
and the Highest act of Parricide, which (taking it with all its Circumstances)
perhaps was ever done upon a mere Man since the World was first Created.

And though there may be some, who will not take up the Confession in the Text,
that they have Sinned, either in laying the Crowned Head Low, or in abjuring
the interest of the Crown to the Worlds end, but Lament for this only, that the
Imperial Diadem is not a falling the Second time; yet the Sin of this day
calls aloud for Sincere Repentance from All, and even from Us, who were
neither Actors in it, nor Abetters of it; nor perhaps could have known it, but
by the hearing of the Ear. And to the end that our Repentance may express it
self by Amendment of Life, and may be attended with Watchfulness and Caution,
lest we fall under the same Guilt, and smart under the same Calamity again,
that we may not be Wicked and Miserable hereafter, it is necessary that with the
Prophet we reflect upon those Sins which formerly brought us under Both: Woe
unto us that we have Sinned.

2. Now many Sins there were which cried for Vengeance against this Nation; but
of these, some were more Vocal and Clamorous than others, and did more
immediately and directly tend to the casting down of the Crown. First, The
great Unthankfulness of Men for so many Mercies. It was that which so incensed
God against the Jews, that he delivered their Kings, and Them, into the hands
of the Babylonians; because he had carried them from the Womb, and they
delighted in Frowardness; because he had nourished and brought them up, and
they turned Rebels; because* Jeshurun had been high fed, and became wanton. And
this was our very case before the Civil Wars brake out. God had blessed us so in
every Respect, that nothing but our own Follies could have made us an Unhappy
People. In the Church we had a Faith that was free from all Corruption and
Error; Sacraments that were Duly and Entirely administered; a Liturgy that was
consonant to the Word of God; a Government that had been transmitted to us by
the whole Catholic Church from its first Ages; Ceremonies that were but few,
and those warranted by the general Practice of the Primitive Christians. In the
State we had a Prosperous and Long Peace; Laws that were a Terror to all
Wickedness, and a Security from all Oppression, as much of Liberty as was
consistent with Obedience, and more than any other parts of the World did
Enjoy; a Monarchy that was both our Defense and Honor; and (to Crown all our
Felicities) a Prince whose Example was more Operative than his Laws; whose
Endowments as he was a Man, whose Faith and Piety as he was a Christian, whose
Clemency, Wisdom, and other admirable Virtues as he was a King, were enough to
render him the Love of Mankind, as well as a Pattern to all Princes, and an
Honor to the whole World. In a word, whatever Blessings were necessary to
make us either a Religious, or a Wealthy, or a Potent, or a Free Nation, we
had our Portion of them in abundance; and were Miserable only in this respect,
that as Now, so Then, we had not the Sense to See, nor the Hearts to Value our
own Felicities. Hence it was, that men were Peevish without Reason, and
Troublesome without End: Hence it was, that the Same Pretenses which are so
Rife in this Age, were so Fatal in that: Our Regular Ministry was then
traduced, as if it were Popishly affected; our Bishops, as if they were an
Useless and Wicked Order; our Doctrines, as if they had been minted at Rome;
our Service Book, as if it were a Translation of the Mass; our Rites, as if
they were the Relics of Popery; and our whole Church, as if it were given
to Idolatry and Superstition. And from the same base Principle of Ingratitude
it was, that the World was filled with Insinuations and Complaints, as if the
Liberties of the People were in Danger; as if Religion was going out of the
Land, and Arbitrary Power coming in; as if his Majesty's Counselors were Evil;
as if the Introduction of Popery and Tyranny were the Design, and the King
himself were consenting to the Plot. All which Unjust and Malicious
Suggestions, though they were no other than the Arts of Unthankful Spirits; and
though the World has been since abundantly convinced of the Falsehood thereof,
yet they were taken for granted then; and so did naturally help forward the
downfall of the Crown, and the Sin of This day. Secondly, another way whereby
Men Sinned in those days, was by Publishing the Doctrines, and Entertaining the
wicked Principles of the Jesuits. For, seeing Religion and the Laws of the
Land had provided Securities for the King's Life, Person, Power and Greatness,
they found no way left them to Prosecute their Evil and Bloody Intentions, but
by poisoning the Kingdom with such Foreign Principles as these, that the King's
whole Power is derived from the People; that He is Such a Trustee and Servant
as may be called to Account, before the face of the World; that if they Judge
him to have been Unfaithful to his Trust, they may Lawfully Depose him; that
if he be a Tyrant (whereof they are the Judges) they may, and are bound to Kill
him; that it lies in them to Set up what form of Government they please, and
that the Crown is wholly at their disposal. Many other Doctrins there are which
bear affinity with These, and which of Late have served to fill up a Leviathan,
a Plato Redivivus, a Just and Modest Answer, so called, etc. besides whole
Loads of Intelligences, and other Scandalous Writings, wherewith the World is
even now pestered, as if it were not enough to have intoxicated the People, to
have undone a Nation, and to have pulled down the Crown Once. For these were
the Principles, upon which those Delicate Protestants, those Tender and
Thinskin'd Consciences, those goodly Loyal and Dutiful Subjects acted, when
they fought against their King; when they Hunted him upon the Mountains, when
they gave him a Crown of Thorns for a Diadem of Gold, when they translated his
Chair of State out of the Parliament House into Westminsterhall, and at his
Palace erected him a Scaffold for a Throne, and made him a Glorious Martyr,
whom they so often Swore they would make a Glorious King.

And yet these Principles were once the Proper Creed of the Jesuits; and it
was ever called Jesuitism, till by going abroad to seek its Fortunes it changed
its Name, and came to be called the Purity and Power of Religion, the Evangel
of Christ, the Faith of God's Kirk, and the Law of the Holy Commonwealth.
Originally these Doctrines were taught by Mariana, by Bellarmine, by Azorius,
and diverse Jesuits more; for many, even of the Romish Priests, have laid them
to the charge of the Jesuits; and Watson himself, in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, laid them particularly to the charge of the Jesuit Parsons, who had
written several Seditious Books full of those Principles, and in particular a
Book entitled, Doleman: And (that all Sober men among us may beware of those
Principles, and see how powerfully they did work throughout the whole Civil War
then, and how naturally they tend to embroil us in another, and will
necessarily do it, when there is a fair opportunity,) I must observe unto you,
that That very Book of Parsons, which had been written so many years before,
was in the Year Forty Eight printed again with another Title, as if it had been
newly Penned, not by a Jesuit, but a True Protestant. It is to be observed
too, that a late Pamphlet entitled, the History of Succession, is an Abridgment
of Doleman. which plainly shows, that those Traitors themselves were convinced
in their Consciences, that nothing could justify the raising of the War, and
the destruction of the King, but the Doctrines of a Through-pac'd Jesuit.
Thirdly, It is certain, that an Erroneous Devil in the Understanding, will soon
become a Furious Devil in men's Practice. For those wicked Doctrines being once
received, presently showed themselves by innumerable acts of Sedition; and that
was another Sinful way whereby the Crown fell. The Government was Libelled,
every Order of Men in the Church was traduced, the Loyal Magistrates and Gentry
were threatened and exposed, Nobles were voted Guilty upon public Fame, and
killed, as it were, by the strength of Peoples breath; his Majesty's Palace
assaulted by Land and Water, and himself forced to Fly in his own defense; and
all these mischiefs were mainly owing to those Hucksters of Sedition and
Treason, whose Fingers were daily employed to destroy the King with their Pens,
as Scotus's Scholars destroyed their Master with Pencils; insomuch that being
petitioned at Royston to return to his Parliament, His Majesty refused for this
Reason, because the Scandalous Pamphlets that Swarmed abroad, had now brought
his Person and Life into eminent danger. Fourthly, Nor did things stay here;
but to pull down the Crown from our head effectually, an actual War is Levied,
and Arms are taken up; which we cannot suppose to have been done without a
direct Design against the King's Life, it being altogether uncertain, what the
Fortune of War may be, and how a Single Bullet may be directed; as it happened
near a Town of Cornwall, where his Majesty narrowly escaped, the next Man to
him being shot by the Enemy. Which high provocation notwithstanding (that I may
not omit a Singular instance of his Tenderness and Clemency) though his
Ordnance were ready planted to batter the place down, he hindered the Attack
with this noble Expression. I understand (said He) that I have many Good
Subjects in the Town, and I had rather Spare the Lives of an hundred Rebels,
than venture the Hurting of one of Them. Indeed the Hand of God was all along
his Protection in the Field: but no thanks to those, whose very taking up of
Arms was Murder in the Intent; and if my Author Symmond's Vindication of the
King, page 90.
does not deceive me, it is a memorable Relation which he tells us, that at the
Battle of Edgehill, his Majesty's Soldiers took certain Letters, whereby it
was discovered; that they who then called themselves the Kings most Loving and
Obedient Subjects, had hired one Blake to signify by some Token the particular
place in the Field where the King was; that the shot might be directly levelled
thither, and that they might speak Home to his Heart out of the mouth of their
Cannon.

5. We have now seen Some of those wicked Means, whereby the Calamity in my
Text came upon us, Ingratitude, Jesuitism, Sedition, and actual Resistance: and
were not the Instruments thereof past all feeling, methinks they should not
stick to take up the Lamentation, The Crown is fallen from our Head: woe unto us
that we have Sinned. But yet all these Arts, though Sinful, would have been
Ineffectual, had it not been for Another wicked Course they took to Cheat the
World into their Assistance; I mean their palpable and villainous Hypocrisy.
Nothing is more Odious in the eyes of God, than Hypocrisy and Dissimulation;
and yet what was pretended all along, but the Glory of God, the Honor of the
King, the Interest of Religion, the Safety of the People, and the Welfare of
Three Kingdoms? A specious Pretense, and a very Raree-Shew in the Original. But
by too Sad and too Late Experience we found, that 'twas their Own Greatness,
and their Own Interest that was at the Bottom; that Plunder and Sequestration
were the things aimed at; that the Church was to be Purged, that is, from its
Possessions; and that the Estate, Dignity, and Power of the Crown was to be
Secured, but meaning to Themselves. In Forty One, they did Remonstrate, that
they did not purpose or desire to abolish the Church Government; and disclaimed
all intentions of absolving men from that Obedience, which they owed to his
Majesty, whom they professed they knew to be entrusted with the Ecclesiastical
Laws as well as with the Temporal. In Forty Two, they Declared, that they
intended a due and necessary Reformation of the Government and Liturgy of the
Church, and to take away Nothing in the one, or in the other, but what should
be Evil, and justly Ossensive; or at least Unnecessary and Burdensome. In Forty
Three, they Professed, that their Army was designed to defend the King's
Person, Honor and Dignity, and to hinder all change in Religion: they
Protested as in the Presence of God, that they had no Intentions to offer
violence to his Majesty's Person, or to hurt his just Power, or to destroy his
Monarchy. In the Third Article of the Solemn League and Covenant they Swore, to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion; and that they had no thoughts to
diminish his just Power and Greatness. And in Forty Six, they declared, that
their sincere Intentions were to uphold the Ancient and Fundamental Government
of this Realm, by King, Lords, and Commons. Now, whether these were not Rank
and Persidious Hypocrites, let the World judge; when instead of Reforming the
Church Government, they Abolish't it; when instead of Revising our
Service Book, they quite Removed it; when in their Negative Oath they
afterward Swore neither directly nor indirectly to Adhere unto, or Assist the
King; when they took away the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and Proclaimed
such Traitors as did stand for them; when they cashiered the Noble House of
Peers; when they sought against the Kings Person, attempted the shedding of his
Sacred Blood, and at last drove him to the Scaffold; all their Remonstrances,
Declarations, Protestations, Promises, Vows and Oaths to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

Beloved, I have not searched into the Villainies of former times with any
manner of Delight, but out of pure Necessity; that by seeing the Methods
whereby the World was Deluded, and the Throne Subverted in One Age, we may
learn to Beware; lest we be led by the Nose, and Trickt out of our Obedience
and Loyalty in Another. For it is a Pleasure and Pastime to some to play
Pranks, and to Show how Dexterous and Artificial they can be* at Cheating the
unwary Populace, and Hurling the World into Confusion. Therefore, if God in
Vengeance for our Sins shall at any time Suffer our Government to Shake; let us
Remember Epicharmus his Rule, and not be too Credulous, nor be deceived with
Popular Professions of Zeal and Conscience; a thing which many times is
Pretended, just as a fine Show is hung up upon a Sign-post, only to draw in
Custom. When the late Unhappy Troubles were breaking out, were there not
Thousands of well-meaning Persons that were Imposed upon, and abused with False
Notions and-Appearances? As Truth came more and more to light, did not many
Desert that Cause which they found to be wicked, and turn to the interest of
the Crown? Had not diverse an Hand in the War, who did not Foresee, nor Dream,
that it would End with such a sad Tragedy? and when the Fatal Blow was given,
did not the Generality of men Lament to see, what a dreadful Issue things were
brought to, by the Subtle Designs of some, and by the Rashness, Easiness, and
Folly of others? Why, they are the maddest people in the World, that will not
be Disciplined into Wit, nor taught to be Wary by their own Costly Experience;
especially when they have time to cast up their Accounts, and to compare their
Acquests with their Losses; and have the greatest Reason to consider, what Woes
and Miseries did Presently and Naturally follow upon the falling of the Crown:
which brings me

3. To the third and last thing in my Text, that woeful Condition which the
Prophet Lamented upon the Ruin of Their Government, and which we were
enthralled in, upon the Subversion of ours: The Crown is fallen from our Head:
woe unto us that we have Sinned.

I would entreat every Thinking man (who is not in Love with Misery, nor
desirous to Court and Invite his own Ruin) to consider Seriously, whether the
whole Christian World could show another Nation, which was so Miserable as this
Poor Kingdom was, before the Restoration of his present Majesty. We drank off
indeed the very Dregs of the Cup of Bitterness; and (which made it the
Bitterer) we mingled the Draught our selves. We were not Forced (as the Jews)
but Sold, and that by our selves, into the hands of the Babylonians. This
People were there own Captives; Submitting to Tyrants of their own Making;
Purchasing their Slavery with their Blood; Contracting to be undone by Leagues,
Covenants, Associations, and other Acts and Deeds of their Own. It is their
Usual Fate, who are given to Change, that they commonly change One Government
for a Worse; and the quartering out of a Kingdom into a Commonwealth, is but
the drawing on of that Curse upon a Nation, which King Solomon meant, when he
said, that for the Transgression of a Land, Many are the Princes thereof, Pro.
28. 2. For as all Republics have been originally Raised upon the Ruins of
Monarchy, so they who Erected them, have ever Groaned under the works of their
own hands; and there is not a Commonwealth in the World, but may attest the
Truth of that in Maximus Tyrius, that Happy is that State, which has a King
for its Governor. We may easily see by some instances abroad, that men are
great Losers, both as to their Spiritual and Temporal Interest, by being
Members of a State that is Popular: and my Author has rightly Observed of the
State of the Low Countries in particular, that (though they are happy in being
freed from the Yoke of Popery, yet) having fought with the King of Spain about
Two things, Religion and Taxes, they have so far prevailed, in respect of Both,
that They have gotten all the Religions in Christendom, and pay the greatest
Taxes in the World. But of all the People under Heaven This Nation most
deserved to be Plagued with the Worst of Governments, who would not be
contented with the Best. And the truth is, we had Woes with a witness, and were
so Surfeited with Evils, which Then we accounted Plagues, that Wise men could
not think, we should ever long to be Sick with them again. For whereas these
things were promised us; a Settlement of the Nation, together with a Security
for our Religion, Property, and Liberty; let every impartial man look into the
History of those Times, and judge whether in every of these respects, we did
not receive a Curse instead of a Blessing.

1. For a Settled we had a most Distracted Nation, so that Rome it self, that
had Shifted its Government so often, could not compare with this Little Island
wherein there was such a Variety of Scenes. We had Plague upon Plague, as if
our Land had been another Egypt, save only in This, that we could not find a
Goshen in any part of our Country. To day we had one form of Government, and
the next day another, and every one a Plague; nay, to go on upon the Parallel,
not only our Waters were turned into Blood, but even Flies, and Locusts, and
Lice, and Frogs (that croaked in the King's Chambers) were the Plague
Epidemical, and (which is worse) Men were forced to Worship and Adore these
Vermin, and as at first they set them up, so at last they bowed down before
them.

2. As for Religion, the great Lesson which was taught us was, to be Silly and
Dishonest; to have the Wisdom of the Dove, and the Innocence of the Serpent.
Hence came such numerous Sects and Divisions, in a short time, as by the
Confession of Some of That Party were never known before under that Government
which they decryed as Antichristian. Hence came Atheism, the Daughter of That
Age, and the Monster of This: for when Men found, that the Quarrel was about
Religion, and saw that many Pretenders to it were Religious Cheats, they were
apt to Mistrust, and for their Vices sake to Believe, that the whole business
of Religion was a Cheat too; and so Mr. Hobbs was followed as a greater Apostle
than St. Paul. Let me add one thing more; hence it came to pass, that Popery
has gotten such Elbow-room among us. For the Subtle Romanists easily
perceived, that there was no way for them to introduce their Religion into this
Kingdom, but by creating first such Factions and Schisms, as in time would
overthrow the established Government. Therefore did Campanella the Jesuit,
advice the King of Spain to use this Project, First to Divide De Monarch. Hisp.
the English, and then to persuade the Parliament to turn the Kingdom into a
Commonwealth. And in like manner Cardinal Richelieu counseled the French King,
To use all possible means to change the Monarchy of England into a
Commonwealth. And it appears by the Letters which were written See the Grand
Design, etc.
by Andreas ab Habernsield, a Bohemian, That Cardinal Richelieus Chaplain,
together with Cunaeus, and diverse other Romish Priests were employed here,
before the Civil War brake out, to bring the King, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury that then was, to Destruction. And the Truth is, the Jesuit could
never hope for a more fair Opportunity of doing his Own Work among us Safe and
Vndiscern'd, than when he had turned the Nation into Factions, and set every
one of them to grapple with the Government. So that things falling out just
according to the Jesuits Directions, the King being Murdered, the Archbishop
being Sacrificed, and the Monarchy being changed into a Republic, every Child
may easily understand, that it was not the Security, but the Ruin of our
Religion, that was intended all along from the beginning. Briefly, If Rebellion
be Religion, then were our Pretending Reformers the Undoubted Patrons of it. If
the Destruction of the Church be the Preservation of Protestancy, then were the
Papists and They the Only True Protestants in the World. If to cut off the
Defender of the Faith; if to Harass and Ruin the Ministers thereof; if to
banish all Order; if to throw away all Forms of Divine Worship; if to turn
Oratories into Stables; if to render the Service of God Ridiculous and
Contemptible; if to play the Hypocrites, and to violate Oaths; and by all
instances of wickedness to bring a Reproach and Odium upon Christianity; if
such Religious Villainies as these, did speak Men to be the True Friends and
Patrons of Religion, I am Sure no Age of the Church ever produced Such Friends
and Patrons before; though I cannot undertake but This Age possibly may produce
the like.

3. Next, let us consider a little in what a Miserable case we were, in respect
of the Subjects Property; to Defend which, they pretended a Particular, and
more than Ordinary Zeal; insomuch that thousands of Men were persuaded to
believe that their Designs were Honorable, to Secure every Man's Right, and to
make the whole Nation Great and Prosperous. But were we not Cheated of our
Hopes in that respect too? While the King Sat Easy in His Throne, every man
Sat Safe in his Possessions; and we were then (as God be blessed we are now)
under our own Vines, and under our own Fig Trees; Paradise was in in our Land,
Prosperity was our Portion, the King was our Guardian, the Laws were our
Security, and every Man's Riches were his Own. I pray what became of our Magna
Charta when our Monarch and Monarchy were cut off? Indeed we had Laws, but like
the Laws of Draco, that were written in Blood; we had Courts of Justice, such
as were almost as Just and Merciful as the Thirty Tyrants of Athens; and
Estates we had, in the hands of Sequestrators, who Kept them Safe for us; and
our Estates yielded their yearly Fruits of Increase, for Locusts and
Caterpillars; but Taxations we had none, only such as we could not Pay; nor any
Grievances in the Nation greater then were our very Rulers.

4. Nor, Lastly, did it Fare better with the Peoples Liberty, whereof they
professed to be the most Trusty and Faithful Keepers. See what became of it,
when the Crown was fallen. For to Preserve our Liberties, they made us Slaves;
and to keep all Arbitrary Power out, they brought it in: So that Vid. Delegat.
Scot. Chart. ult.
the Scots themselves in an Instrument directed to the Traiterous Juncto at
Westminster, in February Forty Eight, upbraided them tartly for exercising that
Tyranny Themselves, which they pretended forsooth, to remove all danger of, by
taking away the High Commission-Court, and the Star Chamber. The Civil Liberty
of a People is wrapped up in the Laws, and this great Blessing we have had
under our Kings, that we have been dealt with according to those Laws, to which
we our selves have by our Representatives given our own Consent. Happy are the
People which be in such a case: But what a miserable plight were we in, when
instead of One King, we had an Army of Usurpers? and instead of a Golden
Scepter to bow down to, we had an hundred Iron Rods to be beaten with? Yes, it
was a Glorious Liberty, when the Scum of the Nation could Imprison without
Reason, could Kill without Law, could Live without Religion, could Tyrannize
without Conscience, could do every thing that was good in their own Eyes. In
short, They had the Liberty to Plunder and Oppress, and We had the Liberty to
Beg or to Starve; They had the Liberty to be Cruel and Savage, and We had the
Liberty either to be Dishonest, or to be Hanged.

Let us learn therefore to be Wise in time, and in a Ticklish Age be careful
to distinguish between the Lamb-skin and the Wolf; and having had the
Experience of Former times to instruct us, give great heed, as to avoid our old
Miseries, so to forbear the old Methods which brought them about: Let us not
suffer our selves at any time to be Abused with a Show, nor to trust rashly to
Pretenses, because what Has happened may happen again; and to tread in the Same
track, is the ready way to drop in the Same Snare.

And this I would crave leave to recommend especially to your Consideration,
who are Members of this Great and Honorable City; because it is notorious,
that the Original and Growth of our Late Troubles, and the Sin of This Day,
were all in a great measure owing to the wicked Practices of a prevailing Party
here, whose Confederacies in Treason did help strongly to give the Fatal blow
to Three Kingdoms. 'Twas here, that Traitors were Harbored, and Carried in
Pomp. 'Twas here, that Firebrands were thrown, even from the Pulpit, to inflame
the whole Nation. 'Twas Hence that Petitions were presented against the Orders
of the Church; that Clamours were fomented against Churchmen; that Tumultuous
Routs were sent to cry for Justice, and to frighten the King from his own
Palace. 'Twas hence, that Associations against the Government were encouraged;
that a wicked Covenant was dispatched abroad into all parts of the Kingdom; that
whole Treasures were issued out to begin the Rebellion, and an Army raised too
to carry on the Blessed Work of the day. I do not care to instance in
particulars; do but Look into the Annals of the Times, and you will Blush to
see, that so much Guilt was contracted within the Walls of London. I cannot
therefore, without being wanting in that duty which I owe to God, to the King,
and to your Selves; but earnestly beseech you, that you take great heed of
those Means whereby the Crown fell once, and both Dread, and as much as Lies
in you, Labor to Prevent the Like Miseries, as presently came upon the fall of
it. I should be Unjust to this City, should I not own my confidence, that there
are now many as Loyal, as Great, as Brave Spirits in it, as any Age could boast
of; and let me add, it is both your Honor and the present Happiness of the
Kingdom, that there are so; and God increase their Number, Strength, and
Fortunes. Yet we see (what in such a great Body we cannot but Expect) what
different Interests and Parties there be, and how Blind Some are, I will not
say Wilfully, but yet so Unfortunately, that they do not discover the manifold
Blessings of God wherewith they are Surrounded, in the midst of some
Discouragements. However, since I perceive men on All hands do profess
themselves most Loyal and most Dutiful Subjects, I hope it will be acceptable
Counsel unto All, if we Exhort you, that ye Fear God, and the King, and never
meddle with them that are given to Change. In order thereunto, Study to be
Quiet, and to do your Own business; follow Holiness and Peace, endeavoring, by
all possible means, to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. Let
the Spirit of God rule in all your Hearts, the Spirit of Love and Obedience,
the Spirit of Humility, Unity, and Concord. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and
Envy, and Clamor, and Railing be put away from you, with all Malice. In fine,
Love the Brotherhood, Fear God, and Honor the King; that so God may Bless us,
and make us once more an Happy, Prosperous, and United Nation; and that neither
We, nor our Posterity, may ever have cause to take up the Churches Lamentation
in my Text, The Crown is fallen from our Head: woe unto us that we have Sinned.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Note, that these words, Page 15. [It is to be Observed too, that a late
Pamphlet entitled, The History of Succession is an Abridgment of Doleman.]
ought to have been put in the Margin.


