A SERMON Preached on The 30th. of January, 1684. The Day of MARTYRDOM OF King
Charles Of Blessed Memory.

BY EDWARD PELLING, Chaplain to His Grace the Duke of Somerset.

LONDON, Printed for T. M. and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall. 1685.

PSALM. 137. 1. By the Rivers of Babylon there we sat down, yea we wept, when we
remembered Zion.
THese Words do manifestly relate to the Captive-condition of the Jews, after
that Remarkable Overthrow of Jerusalem, when that Cruel and Barbarous Enemy the
Assyrian (called expressly, the Rod of God's Anger, Isa. 10.) had now taken the
City, burnt the Temple, consumed and dismantled the whole Metropolis, slain the
Nobles, and seized the Person of their King Zedekiah, and so carried Him and
his Subjects away Captives to Babylon, (that is, into a Land of Confusion, so
called from the Confusion of Languages in those Parts) there to smart a long
time for their Incorrigibleness and Wantonness at home; that they might Reflect
upon their Folly, and learn to value their Former Felicities by the Loss of
them: the only Discipline, that can effectually teach those Obstinate and
Ungrateful Wretches, that will not learn to be Wise at the Cost of their
Ancestors Experience.

By the Rivers of Babylon, there they sat down; remote from any Towns, or
Cities, (says S. Chrysostom) to spend part of their time (as some conceive) in
draining of the Marshes, and to keep away the Rest; and so between Labor and
Sorrow, to wear out that miserable Life, for which they had made such a woeful
Exchange.

There they wept (when 'twas too late) at the sad remembrance of Zion; that is,
at the thoughts of that Prosperous and Flourishing Condition, which once they
Enjoyed, but were now Deprived of, both in Church and State. For Mount Sion was
the Principal Place both for the Exercises of Religion, and for the
Administration of Justice. There stood the Temple of God, and thither the
Tribes went up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel, to give
thanks unto the Name of the Lord, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 122. 4. And (that
God and his Anointed might dwell together) there also were set the Thrones of
Judgment, the Thrones of the House of David, as it is ver. 5. Admirable was the
Constitution of the Jews State; and they the Happiest of all Nations, as well
in Sacred as in Civil respects, till they Surfeited themselves with Abundance
of Prosperity, and were so Intoxicated with it under their own Vines and
Figtrees, that they forgot both the Author, and Instruments of their Happiness.

The Story, is of Them: the Application of it, is for Us; and at the very first
view we may easily accommodate this sad Text to this sadder Day. For, do but
Date the Captivity, Stylo Novo: instead of, By the Rivers of Babylon, read, In
a Land of Confusion, (a Babel in our own Country:) Shift you Pious Thoughts
from the Monarch of Jerusalem, to the Memory of our Own Sovereign, a Greater, a
Better than Zedekiah, (the Mirror of Princes, the Noblest of Martyrs, the
Wonder of Ages, and the Honor of Men:) Lay before your Eyes (if yet ye can
Endure to behold) the Scaffold, the Ax, the Block, and all that Pageantry of
Oppression, which the Sun never before beheld provided in that Manner, and with
those Circumstances, for a Crowned Head? Consider with what Pomp of Inhumanity
that Mighty Prince fell, how Three Kingdoms fell with Him, how He was buried in
the Ruins both of Church and State, as in the Ruins of a Shattered World:
Remember those manifold Miseries that were throughout; some, the Praeface;
others, the Epilogue to the dismal Tragoedy of this Day; and then tell me,
wherein Our Captivity differed from that in the Text, unless it did in This,
that 'twas more Infamous and Reproachful, because at Home; and 'twas not (God
be Blessed) for Seventy years; 'twas not so Lasting as Our Sins; the
Deliverance out of it was too Quick and Hasty for the Repentance of those
Miscreants who made us Captives.

I shall not therefore take much notice of the Miserable Condition of the Jews,
it being a matter of Foreign consideration; but apply my self wholly to the
Business of the Day. And in the prosecution of it, 1. I shall first give you
some account of those Miseries which were the Attendants of Our Captivity; and
then, 2. Shall, in the second place, try if it be possible for me to persuade
Men, not to be so Improvident again, as to suffer themselves to be made
Captives the Second time; but to Beware in Time, and to bethink themselves
before it be too Late, before they groan again under such another State of
Bondage.

1. First then; That which was the principal Cause, or at least the greatest
Ingredient of all the Miseries of the Jews, was the Captive-condition of their
King. This they particularly lamented, that such as had been brought up in
Scarlet, did now embrace Dunghills; that their King and their Princes were in
the hands of the Gentiles; that the Crown was fallen from their Head; that the
Breath of their Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken in the Pits, as
you find in several places of the Lamentations of Jeremiah.

And what else was the Undermining and Subverting of Our King's Throne, but an
effectual Stratagem to overthrow the Prosperity of the whole Kingdom, and to
let in that huge Army of Miseries, which for many years made us not only the
most Calamitous, but also the most Contemptible and Infamous Nation under
Heaven? He that carefully reads the Shameful History of those Times, will find,
that all those Evils which were heaped up upon the Head of our Prince, fell
down upon our own Pates. Though He Felt the Burden, yet we Sunk and Perished
under the weight of it. Every Wound which Majesty received, did help to let out
the Blood and Spirits of the Subject too; nor was it possible to Preserve the
Welfare of the Body Politic, by Weakening and Impairing Him, who was the Common
Life of the Three Kingdoms. Those Artificial and Long-studied Methods which
were used to Lessen His Authority, to Profane His Honor, to Spoil Him of His
Peace, (of all but the Peace of His Conscience, and almost of That too) to
Strip Him of His Prerogatives, and at last to Destroy His Sacred Life; these
Methods, I say, were the Instruments not more of His, than of our own Ruin;
and as He fell and died by degrees, so did the whole Nation gradually Languish,
and fall into the Pangs of Death with Him. Happy had this Land been for many
Ages under the Successive Government of Kings, especially of such as were Good;
and none could be ever Better than This. Under the Shadow of His Wings we did
Rejoice, till His Feathers were clipped: Peace and Plenty was our Portion; and
every Man was Easy in his Cottage, as long as He sat Easy in the Throne: Our
Liberties were Secure; our Laws had Life; and Religion, which Exalts a
Nation, never flourished more in This, as long as he enjoyed the Prerogatives
which are justly due to the Head of the Church. No sooner was His Honor
touched, but our Faelicity was invaded too; especially when Wickedness was so
Impudent as to draw the Sword upon Him, and to thrust at Him with the Point.
Our Happiness Declined as His Peace did: it kept even pace with our Prince His
Fortune; the more still That tended to Ruin, the Faster He was Hunted to the
Scaffold; and then it Expired (though in hope of a Resurrection) when He laid
down His Sacred Neck, and died a Martyr for Religion, and a Victim for His
People. Great were the Miseries that attended that Unnatural and Devilish
Rebellion; but as long as the King was Safe, the Calamities were the less felt,
because there was a Prospect of Reparation; at least, of a speedy End of them.
Though that Rebellious Faction in Parliament pursued Him like a Partridge upon
the Mountains, yet we did not give all for lost, because they Declared,
Promised, Protested, and Swore by all that is Great and Sacred, that they
intended not to Hurt His Person, nor to Invade His Just Rights. Throughout that
Bloody War, there was something still to allay our Pains, because we hoped that
the Wounds in our Sides were not Mortal. Nay, though trusting to Men's
Compassions, He threw himself into the Hands of those Persidious Villains who
afterward set a Price upon His Blood, as Judas did upon our Savior's, yet the
King Himself did not yet Despair, because those Men had vowed in a Solemn
League and Covenant of their own, and with Hands lifted up to the most High
God, That they would Preserve His Person, Crown, and Dignity. Nay, when those
Iscariots at Westminster had bought Him for 200000 Pounds, and Cromwell, and
the rest of those True-Protestant Janissaries, had gotten Him in their Clutches,
though there was reason enough for our Hearts to Sink and Fail us, the King
Himself being now actually a Captive, and Loyalty and Religion in Captivity
with Him; yet such were the Solemn Professions and Protestations of those Men,
of Further Addresses to His Majesty, and of Personal Treaties with Him, that we
were still willing to hope, that yet we should not sit down by the Rivers of
Babel, to weep there. Once more; When the Conspirators carried Him away, first
to Holmeby, thence to Hampton Court, and thence conveyed Him to the Isle of
Wight, though we feared, that all their Treaties were nothing but Pretense and
Hypocrisy, to blind Men's Eyes; though they used Majesty with such Indignities
as none, but that Prince, could have born; though some of the Faction did now
say openly, That the King was no more than a Dead Dog; though every discerning
Man apprehended that the King's Life was now upon the very brink of
Destruction; yet even then were we willing to hope that all our Happiness was
not yet come to a full Period; because the Majority of the Parliament, enraged
at last to see how they had been cheated, and out of a just Abhorrence of the
intended Wickedness, voted, That the King's Concessions were Satisfactory, and
Sufficient Grounds for Peace. But when once we saw those Men barred out of the
House suddenly after; when once we saw that Cursed Vote of the Remaining
Faction, That the King had taken Arms against the Parliament, and was guilty of
all the Blood which had been shed in the War, and therefore ought to expiate
the Crime with His own Blood; when once we saw a Phanatick Army, that had been
used to Blood, so Thirsty for more, that nothing would satisfy them, but Blood
Royal; when once we saw a Tribunal Erected, and some of the Legion of Hell
Sitting on it, and a Judge appointed, whose most Honorable Character is, that
he was Pontius Pilate the Second; when once we saw Majesty treated there with
such Barbarousness and Contempt, and thence carried through Smoke, Spittle, and
Flouts, (some of them such as were used at the Condemnation of the Holy Jesus;)
when we saw Him led like a Lamb to be Slaughtered on a Scaffold at His Palace
Door; when we saw, that as the Presbyterian had clipped off His Locks, so the
Independent had now cut off His Head; when the one Faction had Destroyed the
King, and the other had now murdered the Man; Then, then our Hopes were gone,
and we could not but conclude our selves a Lost, a Captivated, an Undone
People: And while Some were so Barbarous, as even to wash their Hands in that
Blessed Martyr's Blood, the whole Nation was taught to make This Use of the
Shedding of it, That if ever it should please God, after the Death of the
Father, to Restore the Son, it would be our Best Policy to be most Tender not
of His Life only, but of His Honor and Peace too; it being Impossible so to
sever His Interest from our Own, but that of necessity we must Stand or Fall
with Him: Every Man's Welfare is so wrapped up in His, that we must take some
Share in His Fortune, whether it be a Crown of Gold, or of Thorns, that He
wears upon His Head.

2. The King being destroyed, the Miseries which ensued both in Church and
State are not to be written fully, but in another Book of Martyrs.

In the Church, our Calamities were such, that whosoever had a respect for
Conscience, for Religion, for a God, could not but be deeply afflicted, to see
what Contumelies were thrown upon every thing that was Sacred. Indeed the
Churches Sufferings began, when the Kings Troubles Commenced, and so Increased,
as They did; because Traitors saw, that the Doctrine, Discipline, and
Government of the Church were such Pillars of State too, that 'twas Impossible
for them to Pull down or Reach the Crown, but by stepping first upon the Ruins
of Prelacy, and all Order in Religion. And if we may have leave to make some
little Observations, it is somewhat Remarkable, That first the Primate, and four
years after, the King of England, were both Murdered in the same Month; the one
on the Tenth, the other on the Thirtieth of January; that Great Prelate showing
his Prince the way that even He was to go too, (somewhat like John the Baptist,
that was the Forerunner of Christ in his Sufferings, as well as Birth, and
prepared the way for the Prince of Peace, not only into the World, but to the
Cross also.) Monarchy followed Episcopacy to the Grave; and Religion, that was
the Mourner, dropped in at last. Good God! What Variety of Sects had we, that
Martyred the very Creed; so that some even of the Faction did confess, that
upon the dissolution of Episcopacy, more Sects and Haeresies presently started
up, than ever were heard of among us before, under that Government which was
Decried as Antichristian? And all these Sects were either Engendered, or
Encouraged by those Rebels, who by Dividing the Nation into a great many weak
Parties, strengthened their own Usurpations, and made each Party both Unable to
Rise, and Afraid to Mutter under the Common Oppressions. We had the
Independent, the Anabaptist, the Fifth-Monarchist, the Brownist, the Quaker,
the Seeker, the Ranter, the Adamite, nay the very Atheist himself for Company;
and all these the Natural Spawn of the Presbyterian, that Prolifick and Unruly
Leviathan, that not content to have taken his Pastime in the Lemain Lake, has
troubled the Waters in all Parts of the Christian World. So many Sects as there
were, so many Plagues there were in this little Island; and what could we
expect would be the Issue of this Complication of Unhappinesses, but that the
Interest of Religion would be weakened, and its Reputation rendered Contemptible;
so many Barefaced Enemies being Allowed and Encouraged to fall Foul upon the
Church, pursuant to that Base Example which was given them by a most
Unconscionable Parliament? Bishops were ready to be torn in pieces, as the
Limbs of Antichrist. Multitudes of the Inferior Clergy had no other Rewards
for all their Labors and Fidelity in the Service of Christ, but
Sequestrations, Imprisonment, and all manner of Cruelties, beyond the Tyranny
even of a True-Protestant Grand Seignior. The Universities were corrupted with
Haeresie and Hypocrisy, the Instruments of the Devil having taken his Work out
of his Hands, by sowing themselves such Tares and Cockle in the Seminaries of
Religion, as in a little time would have destroyed the very Life and Being of
Christianity, had not God himself been the Husbandman. The Liturgy, which they
solemnly Protested that they would only Reform, was soon thrown out of doors,
to make room for Blasphemies, and Enthusiasm, which made the Worship of God an
Abomination. Pulpits, that were erected for the Sons of the Prophets, were made
the Trading places of Mechanics and the Basest of the People, who were only
skilful in Cheating Men of their Money; and such another Famine was in the
Church, as was once in Samaria, when every Asses Head was sold for Fourscore
pieces of Silver. Sacraments were neglected, and almost given over, and the
People were so Frighted and Discouraged from their Duty, that in some Places of
the Kingdom the Holy Communion was not used for almost Twenty years together: A
Glorious and Blessed Reformation! Those Lands which the Piety of our Ancestors
had so solemnly set apart for the Encouragement of Learning, and for the
Edification of Souls, were made the Price of Rebellion and Blood, and a Booty
for the most Faithless and Perjured Villains upon the Earth. Truth, Honesty,
Justice, Obedience, Love, and other the Essential Parts of Religion, were all
Trampled under foot: and when God and his Worship were thus Scandalously
Dishonored, I do not wonder that some of God's Houses were Filthily Polluted
too: When the Creed was Contaminated, when the Lords Prayer was Despised, when
the Decalogue in all its Parts was Broken, when the Orthodox Ministry was
Cashiered, when Fonts and Altars were Defiled, and when the Church was
Plundered and Stripped within and without, it is no marvel that many Oratories
were so Profaned too, as to be Turned at last into Stables for Horses, by those
Beasts of the People, that before had made them Sanctuaries for Traitors,
Nurseries of Rebels and Regicides, and Dens of Thieves.

3. Well might we Weep, when we remembered Sion, whose ways did now mourn,
because her Children could not come to her Solemn Feast her Gates were
desolate, her Priests sighed, her Virgins were afflicted, her Beauty was
departed, her Princes were pursued like Hearts, her Persecutors overtook her,
her Enemies Prosper'd, and she her self was in Bitterness* as the Prophet
spoke, Lam. 1. But yet the Church did not suffer alone, nor was Religion the
Only bleeding Sacrifice, though the Wounding of That, was infinitely
Reproachful to those who sold their very Consciences, pretending a Design to
Redeem and Rescue it. The State went Partnership with the Church in its Losses;
and we soon saw what it was to want a King, whose Loins were not half so heavy
as the Little Finger of that Tyrant who Usurped His Throne, and was such an
Hardened Reprobate, as first to Kill, and then to take Possession. Liberty, the
Darling of the Nation, the Blessing of Kings, but the Engine of Traitors;
Liberty, that Fools never think Secure, till they sue for it in the Field,
though they have it in Possession, and no Man questions their Title: Liberty,
that was used to Destroy and Pursue Prerogative, was at last Confined within
the narrow Compass of a Goal and a Dungeon. Nor did it fare better with
Property neither; for no Man enjoyed so much of That, as the Beggar and the
Bankrupt, that had little to be robbed of, but the Latchet of his Shoe.
Sequestrations, Decimations, Plunders, Forfeitures, Contributions, Taxes,
Loans, and vast Offerings to the Public Faith, some or all of these devoured
all that was either Inheritance or Purchase; and we could call nothing our Own,
but those Sins and Follies that had made us Miserable; at least, no man could
promise himself any long Enjoyment of what he had; Violence and Rapine being
all over the Nation the great Trade of those Times, so that what a Mercenary
Soldier Left, a Rapacious Committee-man would be Sure to Take, unless a man
would Barter away his Honor, and a Blessed Eternity, by giving up his
Conscience as a Composition and Ransom for his Estate. And the Reason of all
this was, because the whole Kingdom was Plundered of its Birthright; I mean,
the Law, which while it was in the Hands of the King, was every ones Security,
from the Peer to the very Meanest Subject: and of this the King was so Tender
to the last, that just before His Martyrdom, when He was offered His Life if he
would Yield to some Conditions which were Inconsistent with His Conscience and
the Laws, He answered, That He would choose to die a Thousand Deaths, before He
would Prostitute His Honor, or Betray the Liberties and Rights of His People.
Every man was Sure of his Right, as long as that Religious Prince had His just
Authority. But when once Usurpation was the Regent, first in the
Parliament House, and then in the King's Palace, we had no Law but the Pleasure
and Lust of Tyrants, whose Oppressions were Unsupportable, because their Power
was Arbitrary, and their Tyranny Boundless. What was Magna Charta worth, when
it hung at the Hilt of the Sword? And what did you talk of Laws, when Votes
were too Hard for Statutes? when Trials were Removed from Westminster Hall to
the Camp? and Sentence was given at the Mouth of the Cannon?

Not that this was the Fate only of the Honest Royalist. Though His Miseries
were beyond measure intolerable, (and he knew not (Poor Wretch!) what to do
more, but to shed his Tears, when his Dread Sovereign, the Master of his
Dearest Affections, had now shed a whole Stream of Blood;) yet the Generality
of the whole Nation began now to be Sensible, what a Miserable Bargain was made
by the Unhappy Change of the Times, God showing at once his own Justice, and
Men's Follies, by letting them see, to their great Cost, that even Armed Rebels
rarely get any thing but Woe, by a Sad Victory over their Rightful Sovereign.
The Traitors pretended to fight for the Safety of the King's Person, for the
Protestant Religion, for the Liberty of the Subject, for the Privileges of
Parliament, and for the Laws and Rights of the whole Kingdom. In every of these
respects All were Losers but the King: He indeed got Two Crowns for One, a
Crown of Martyrdom, and a Crown of Glory, for a Diadem of Thorns: But what his
Enemies gained, besides Infamy, and a Curse, and a seared Conscience, with a
little Plunder, they themselves will find at the day of Final Retribution; and
what the Nation lost, we may reckon a little now. We lost a Prince, too Good
for Us to Keep, and (Good God!) too Sacred to be Destroyed. We lost a Church,
Beautiful in her Structure, Glorious in her Members, Militant for her Head; and
when that was struck off, 'twas her Necessary, but yet Honorable Fate, to take
her share in the Martyrdom. We lost our Laws too; (That indeed was the first
Loss, when Irreligion Levied that War against Majesty, which, in point of
Conscience, and Law both, was downright Rebellion.) And when our Monarchy, our
Religion, our Liberties and Properties were all gone, Vengeance went at last
out of the Field to the very Parliament- house, where all our Miseries had been
formed, to Invade Privileges too, and to let those Butchers of the World see,
how little even They should get by first Beheading the whole Parliament, that
others might be enabled to Behead the King too. The Fall of the two Hothams,
Father and Son, who were the first that bad Open Desiance to Majesty, and gave
Him the first Blow; but in a little time were Executed themselves* by the very
Masters that Employed them; their Fall, I say, was an early Praesage of what
would afterward befall the Rest, that were the Instruments of the King's Ruin.
These Two Men denied the King admittance in to Hull, though He went thither in
Person to Demand it. Soon after, upon Remorse of Conscience, they would have
opened the Gates to Him: but the Parliament now Hating their own Servants more
than they Feared their Sovereign, Rewarded them at last with a Scaffold and an
Ax; and by those their own Proceedings, they gave an Unpitied Example to Others
(a Faction that yet stood behind the Curtain) to make even Them and their
Accomplices the worst Returns, for their Best Services. And so indeed it fell
out, not in the Country and City only, but in Both Houses of Parliament also.
In the Beginning of the Troubles, Petitioning was encouraged (under Pretense of
being the Subjects Right) as a most probable Means to bring the King Low, and
to lay His Honor in the Dust. But though this Popular Method was for some time
fiercely cried up, as being of dangerous Consequence to Majesty; yet when the
Faction had served their own Turn by it, it was as violently Opposed, as being
of as dangerous Consequence to the Parliament: So that when the County of Surry
(in May, 1648.) carried a Petition to the House, that tended unto Peace, all of
them were Abused, multitudes of them Beaten, many of them Stripped of their
very Clothes, and several of them actually Killed upon the Spot. Thus, that
which one day was the Subjects Duty, another day was their Sin; and poor People
were taught to use Artifices, which in the end became their Snares; Toyls, to
catch the People themselves, after They had used them to catch their poor
Prince. This was one (but the very Least) part of the Countries Reward.

Did it fare better with the City, after all its Friendship, Services, Zeal,
Charge, Tumults, and unparalleled Wickednesses, for a Damned Cause? We know
indeed how it fared, when Vengeance from Heaven struck it down into the Dust,
to Expiate (if it were possible) its Sins by Fire. But how, I pray, did Matters
go here about the Period and Close of the War? Do not many now alive Remember,
how Miserably (I cannot say, Unjustly) this City was used in 1647; how it was
Overawed and Harassed even by those very Men, whose Hands the City had Armed
and Strengthened against its Prince? Upon the Apprentices Insurrection, did not
Cromwell Threaten (nay, Command his Forces) to Kill Man, Woman, and Child, and
to Fire the City? Were not Speeches made in the Commons House to Confiscate the
Estates of many the most Eminent and Wealthy Citizens, and to take off their
Heads? Were not the Aldermen and others committed to the Gaol, the Posts and
Chains pulled up, and the whole City left to visible Dangers of a Massacre? Was
not the Tower seized, the Fortifications about the Town demolished, the Militia
voted out of the Cityhands, and every House exposed to the Mercies of an
Outrageous Enemy, that was clothed with Plunder, and fed with Blood? Did not an
Insolent General ride with his Army through the Streets, for no other Reason,
but to Treat Fools at last with Scorn, Contumely, and Reproach, and to Triumph
over those who had Assisted so effectually to Beat and Conquer their King?
These, and I know not how many such like Usages more, were the Cities Reward;
not to speak of a Constant (and then in a manner the Only) Trade that was here
driven, of Impositions and Loans, and a Thousand Prefidious Tricks, to Cheat
men at last of those vast Sums wherewith Zeal and Impiety had liberally
entrusted the Public Faith: All which Disgraceful and Contumelious Treatments,
Men, though they might be then very sensible of their past Follies, were Forced
to yield and submit to Tamely, a Powerful and Veterane Army lying near the
Town, to keep People in awe, and to hold them by the Throats, while their
Friends at Westminster picked their Purses, and carried away their Money. These
were thy Gods, O Israel; These were London's Patriots, London's Tutelar Saints,
the Deities and Idols that London Worshipped and Bowed down to, when she
Forswore her Allegiance, and Raised such Formidable Mutinies, first against the
Earl of Strafford, and then against the King.

These were Strange Returns (one would think) for a Confiding City to Receive,
after all her Perjuries, after all those Forces of Men and Money which she had
Employed to bring her distressed Prince to the Scaffold, (for that was the
Event and Natural Consequence, whatever the Intentions of some were, who did
not look so far at the First.) But if we go on now, and enquire further into
the Story, we shall find, that the Parliament themselves that Blew the Trumpet,
and Sent out the Drum, gained nothing neither, but had reason to weep too, and
Infinitely more than others, considering that their utmost Acquest was Guilt
and Reproach, and a Perpetual Curse upon their Names For even They were paid in
their own Coin, and were served Themselves as they had served the Government,
having soon Lost that which they called the King's Politic Capacity, when they
had Ruined His Person. When Cornet Joyce had Surprised His Majesty at Holmeby,
bragging of his Exploit, he told Cromwell, That now he had the King in his
Power: Well, (said Cromwell) and then I doubt not but I shall have the
Parliament in my Pocket. And the truth is, He never had Money so much at his
Command, as now he had those who had hitherto been his Masters, and kept him in
Pay. Such was his Diabolical Craft, his Monstrous and Superlative Hypocrisy,
and his Inseparable Interest with a Potent Faction, that were linked with him
in the Communion of the Highest Crimes, that the Traitors which were of a
Meaner Size, were Managed at his Pleasure; and it is observable, that by the
same Methods and Artifices he Bafled and Outed Them, whereby They had Lessened
and Destroyed their Sovereign. The Parliament was now divided into Presbyterian
and Independent: and each House strove against the other; yet Both clashed
within Themselves, till the Army Officers, grown now too Hard for their
Masters, turned their own Arts upon them, and got a Victory over them All, as
they had over their Calamitous, but Anointed Lord. Those Lords that Consented
to the Exclusion of the Bishops, to the taking away of the King's Negative
Voice, and to the Vote against all further Addresses to His Majesty, were in a
short space deprived of their own Negative Votes, were Despised in all
Proceedings, (the Commons acting as they pleased without them) and in the End
were turned out of Doors, leaving nothing behind them in the House, but the
Memory of having Violated their Honor there, by being Unfortunate Instruments
of Undoing Him, who was the Nobility's Defense against the Rudenesses of the
Rabble. The Commons could not agree in Peace, though they had Confederated in
the Guilt of an Unjust War; but fell Foul upon one another, as they had done
upon their Prince; till they were by many Purgations Weakened, by many
Restraints Bafled, by many Menaces Overawed, and by many Armed Fellow- Traitors
first Vanquished, and then Expelled: So that their Reward too was only a
Miserable Life, to see Privileges destroyed after Prerogative, and the Power of
the Nation Shifted, out of the Hands of a Monarch, into the Claws of a Monster,
whose Early Vices had made him a Beggar, whose Contempt of God had made him an
Hypocrite, whose Ambition had encouraged him to be an Usurper, and whose
Sanguinary Spirit made him a Tyrant, a Parricide, and the Plague of Mankind,
till God in his Mercy to us put an Unexpected Period to his Life, and the
Devil, whom he had long served, carried him away to his Proper Place.

It is not to be wondered at, that an Host of Cockatrices should thus pick out
the Eyes of those our Repraesentatives, and render their House Desolate and
Inhospitable: for That was the Cockatrices Nest; and when They had warmed the
Eggs, and Hatched the Creatures, there was reason enough to Fear, that being
once grown up, they would infest not the Nation only, but Them too; because
Rebellion and Treason seldom last long; and, such is the Justice of God, that
Villainies, though Prosperous for a Time, turn at last to a Sad Account, both to
the Projectors and Instruments of them; and so we found the Course of things to
go, as well in the Management, as at the End of that Unhappy War. For, not the
Parliament only, but their Forces and Stipendiaries Suffered too; the Just God
decreeing to Plague the very Ministers and Executioners of Treason, though he
was pleased to Behold their Insolences a while, and then took away his
Anointed, to let Madmen see, how Happy they might have been, had they not been
their Own Enemies, as well as His. The Armed Independent soon tripp'd up the
Presbyterian's Heels: though the One marched out in the Front, and did cut out
the Way, yet the Other followed in the Rear, and first Cashiered him, and then
went away with the Spoil. The Reformation of Religion began the Quarrel, and
the Disciplinarian fought with Zeal for a Wretched Covenant, for which he had
pawned his Conscience and Soul, as well as Plighted his Troth. But the Other
Sectaries aimed at the total Subversion of the Government in Church and State
too; and to compass this End the better, they Disarmed the Hands of him, whom
they knew to be an Hairy, but Persidious Brother: and so, you know, the whole
Militia was Purged over and over, the Army was new-Officer'd, Confinding
Brethren were put in the room of those Puny Saints, that were afraid to go
above half way on the Errand, and Protested they would Preserve the King and
His Dignities, though they Destroyed the Establishments of the Church.
Therefore when the Covenanter had been sufficiently used as a Toel and Property
to do a considerable Part of the great Work of Darkness, then Others thought it
time for Them to slep in, to go through with it; and so the Silly Kirkmen were
for the most part Laughed at and Discarded, and cheated of their Ends, and
their Dear Convenant was Cried down, as Episcopacy had been before, the most
Powerful Faction having now Supplanted the Presbyterian, as the Presbyterian
had Supplanted the Honest Cavalier; by which means the Power of the Sword fell
into the Hands of a Juncto, that hitherto had not been Discovered, nor perhaps
Suspected; and then in stead of a Full Parliament by Westminster Hall, you had
a Committee of Grandees at Derby-house, that Voted, Managed, Destroyed, and
Ruined all; neither Sparing, nor Reverencing the very Crowned Head. Nay, to add
(...) and Disgrace to our Miseries, this Faction was molded and made up of
those who were Notorious for Debauched Principles, for Atheistical Spirits, for
Proffigate Lives, for Impure Conscienees, for Savage Minds, and mostly too for
such a Base and Abject Condition, that they were not only the Plague, but the
very Vermin of the Nation; a Pack of Fornicators, Bankrupts, Blasphemers of
the Holy Trinity, Beggars, and Mechanics of all sorts, Laborers at Furnaces
and Stalls, and the like; these were the Honorable, the Right Honorable, His
Excellence, His Highness, and such Filth of False Heraldry, that they were a
Reproach and Blemish to Christianity, to Honesty, to the Kingdom, shall I say?
nay, a Dishonor to the Hangman, a Stain and Disgrace to the very Gallows.

Yet had not these very Regicides neither more Reason to Insalt over the
Miseries of Others, than to Lament their Own. For want of that vigorous Life
and Soul, which is Infused into all Just Authority that has Law for its
Parent, their Power was in a manner Strangled in the Birth: and they themselves
that Survived it a little, were soon made Signal Instances of the Divine
Justice, which upon a Miraculous Revolution justly overtook them; so that an
Hateful and Unpitied Death was all the Advantage they gained at the Close of
their Unparalleled Villainies. And as for their Posterity and Families they
lest behind them, such as have made curious Enquiries into the thing, have
Observed, That they bear to this day the Characters and Marks of Divine
Vengeance, and have little but a Curse entailed upon them for their
Inheritance; as if the Hand of God had Stigmatized Them, as he did Cain; and
Cursed them with such a Portion as he left the Jews, for Crucisying our Savior.

Thus I have in some measure represented the Universal Miseries which attended
our Late Captivity both in Church and State, nay in the very Camp too: and I
have the Longer and the more Particularly insisted upon this Theme, for the
Information of those, who through their Ignorance of the Condition of those
Times, are in danger of being misled into Practices which naturally tend to
draw on a Second Captivity. For Treason did not die with those Regicides;
neither was the Art of King-killing the Sin of this Day only. The Drinking of
Blood once, leaves (it seems) an Appetite and Thirst after More, in stead of
Troubling Rebels Bowels, and working a True Repentance for that which has been
shed already. Though His Present Majesty has been ready to Forgive many wicked
Men their Treasons, yet we do not find that They have been as ready to Forgive
Him His Mercies: no; that they might be Revenged rather upon Him for His Act of
Oblivion to many that were Accessories to His Father's Blood, they have Studied
and Plotted how to embrue their Hands in His Blood too: the thing is so Plain,
by so many Unquestionable and Concurring Proofs, and even by the Joint
Confession of Criminals, that whosoever shall go about to Deny or Mince the
Late (I wish I could not say, the Present) Conspiracy, ought not (I think) to
be looked upon as a By-stander, but an Accomplice and Confederate in the
Treason. The Truth is, these Demonstrative Evidences have abundantly Satisfied
the Law: but there were Arguments enough before, to confirm the Opinion of
every Sagacious and Honest Man, that a total Destruction of Prince and
Government was intended, and carrying on again. For, what, I pray, was the late
Association, but a Transcript of the Solemn League and Covenant? only the Copy
exceeded, and was worse than the Original; and yet That did cost the whole
Kingdom its Peace, and the King his Head. Those numerous Riots and terrible
Confluences of Disaffected and Factious Men, which were seen a while ago, what
was it but a Numbering of the People, a Casting up of their Strength and Forces,
till the Demagogues should think it fit to Adjourn from the City into the
Field? The Forcing of that Petitioning-Trade, which of late was so General over
the whole Nation, what was it Designed for by Popular Hucksters of Mischief,
but to render the King and His Government a Grievance, and to Dispose Men for
another Rebellion? that is, to Sell the Nations Peace, and to Purchase a Crown.
Those Base Reflections which have been (nay, which are still) publicly made
upon His Majesty, and His Ministers of State, what is the meaning of them, but
to make Him Odious, and to Destroy Him Effectually, by Murdering Him first in
the Affections of His Subjects; it being Impossible for the most Active and
Malicious Villains to strike Him with an Ax, till they have slain His Credit,
and laid His Honor in the Dust? The Reprinting of Doleman, and the Dispersing
of a Thousand Other Libels, full of Seditious and Jesuitical Principles, is the
very same thing that was Practiced in the Former Times; and there could be no
other Reason for it, but to Justify Rebellion and Regicide again; it being
Unconceivable why the very same Methods should be used again, unless the same
Designs were at the End of all. Those Popular but Absurd Fears, that all our
Throats would be Cut in a Night, is a Stale and Known Instrument of Rebellion:
for a great Noise of such Dangers was thrown about in the beginning of the Late
Troubles, so that it was Reported, and Credited too, That the very Thames was
to be blown up with Gunpowder, to Stifle every one with Water in their Beds.
The Inordinate Apprehension of the Dangers of Arbitrary Power, every man knows
that 'twas an Old Device that served to bring it in. There are Twenty things
more I might take notice of, were it needful, to show how Industrious Some
pretending Patriots and Reformers have been to act over again those Seven years
Sins, which caused that Havoc, and Bloodshed, and Ruin both of Prince and
People, from 41, to 48. All the Kings Miseries, and our own Calamities, were
brought about by Confederacies, by Tumults, by Mutinous Complaints of
Grievances, by Seditious Pamphlets, by Defamations of the Government, by years
of Tyranny, by all manner of Jesuitical Practices, by Insolent and Impious
Votes, by bringing the King into Straits, by answering His Necessities with
Remonstrances in stead of Supplies, by crying out against Evil Counselors, by
pulling and tugging at Favorites, by declaiming against Bishops and
Ceremonies, by Schismatical Assemblies, and by a great many Stratagems more,
which have been lately set on work again so visibly and plainly, that we had
reason enough to suspect the Blackest Designs, before ever we heard of or
Mistrusted the Villainy intended at the Rye-house. For these Several years last
past, I think there has been nothing New, but Ignoramus Juries, and a gainful
Trade of Swearing and Ferswearing at the Bar: all the other Practices were a
Repetition of Old, Tried Artifices, which some Experienced Achitophels made use
of again, because they had once a Pr^^atum est, and became Successful.

O for the Love of God let us learn to be Wise, and to beware in Time, and not
venture the Sad Reckonings of a Late Repentance; especially since God has been
so Merciful unto us, that, in spite of all the Strivings of our Enemies, he
has Kept us Safe, even when we were in the Dark, and has now laid open the
Dangers we were in to every man's view. This was the Aggravation of the Folly
and Misery of Jerusalem, that she Considered not well of things till she was
quite a Captive. She remembered in the days of her Affliction, and of her
Miseries, all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old, says the
Prophet, Lam. 1. 7. By the Rivers of Babylon, there the Jews sat down, and
wept: but then it was too late; they should have bethought themselves Before,
while it was yet in their power to have Prevented their Captivity. I cannot
imagine what is likely to work upon People, if neither Other men's Experience,
nor their Own, will teach them to beware. Yet this is one thing that makes the
English Ridiculous Abroad, and Unfortunate at Home, that generally they are apt
to Try Conclusions, and to make Fresh Experiments still, though they have
smarted severely for their Silly Attempts, and have so often tried things to
Evil and Miserable Purposes. One would think, our Condition and Case the other
day was such, that we should not Forget it, much less desire to make it our
Option and Lot once more. Methinks it should be sufficient Warning to us, not
to flatter our selves with Fancies, and Probabilities, and Praesumptions of our
own, because we have found, to our great Cost, that in all Considerable,
especially Violent Alterations, there is nothing Certain, but Misery. For, as
it is Impossible for this Kingdom to be Happy, but upon those Foundations
whereon it Stands now both in Sacred and Civil Matters; so it is impossible for
men to Tear up those Foundations, but they must fall themselves under the
Ruins of the Building. Nor is it enough to say, Thus far only we intend to
go, we would take away this Rafter, and remove that Beam, that is such an
Eyesore unto us; but will not meddle with, or disturb the Groundwork: for
when men begin to Mend a whole Kingdom, by taking it into pieces, God alone
Knows how far Some may be Tempted, others may be Constrained to proceed at
last. Read but the History of the Late Times, and you will find how far the
Event ran out beyond the first Intentions, nay, beyond the Expectations and
Suspicions of Many, who were very Active and Zealous in Beginning the War
against His Majesty. But having once drawn the Sword, they thought it
Unadvisable to Sheath it again; because, being Conscious of their Guilt, they
were Afraid of Justice which they had Deserved, and Doubtful of Mercy which was
Precarious; and therefore never thought themselves Safe, but by Accumulating
Crimes to a great Bulk; and so one Mischief brought on another, till all
terminated in the Destruction of the King, which was the Capital Mischief. It Is
likely this was not the Primary Design; nay, perhaps it was not Designed at all
by many of them, (though it be hard to affirm, that they did not intend the
End, who used the Means.) But whatever Their meaning might be, Others that
stood Undiscerned in a Dark Corner of the House, made an Improvement of that
Treason which the rest had Begun, so that it was out of the Power of the
Honester sort to Save the Life of that Prince, whose Honor and Interest they
had Betrayed. For the Power shifted with the Sword, out of one Hand into
another, as every one could catch it. The Parliament Snatched it from the King,
and put it into the Hands of an Army: the Army was Divided, and though the
Presbyterians managed it First, yet the Independents soon wrested it out of
their Clutches, and held it till it fell to the Share of a Fanatic Committee,
that were Resolved to Embrue it in the King's Blood; which the First Actors
could no more hinder then, than they could command a Tempest, or govern an
Inundation with their Breath: And by these Means All of them were more or less
guilty of Murdering His Majesty; because One Faction Hunted Him till they drove
Him to the Scaffold, and the Other presently provided a Block and Ax for Him,
and so Both were Murderers; because it is the same thing in effect, whether a
Man be Killed by the Slow Methods of a War, or by a Hasty Blow, and a Speedy
Stab.

Now this should be enough to Warn and Terrify every well-meaning Person among
Us, from having any the least Fellowship with, nay from lending so much as an
Ear to those Malcontents of Our days, who are given to Change, and only wait
for an Opportunity. For it is Impossible to be Innocent long in the midst of
Such Temptations; because a little Communion in Evil, and the very Course of
things, will of Necessity drive all Unwary Men so far by degrees, as to bring
them under the Guilt of the Highest Crimes at last, though as yet they be not
Disaffected to the Government. One says, I am for our Monarchy; another, I am
for Episcopacy too; a Third, I am for the whole Frame of the Government as it
is now Established by Law; and All these say, God forbid that we should have
any hand in Killing or Deposing the King, or in setting up another
Commonwealth: No, we would only Keep out Popery, and secure our selves against
Arbitrary Power; and then we will give over. Now all this is Justifiable and
Good, as long as the Means are Honest, and Men are Sincere. But then, Consider,
I pray, what those Methods be which are Proposed by Popular Pretenders for the
Accomplishing of these Ends. Are they not the very Methods of the Old
Conspiracy, Revised, and Set out in a New Edition, and with Augmentations too?
Is not another Rebellion formed? Do not the Ringleaders (most of whom have no
Religion at all) go to work again by Spreading of Lies and Calumnies, by
raising many groundless Jealousies, by increasing Fears beyond a due measure,
by Consulting and Trucking with all sorts of Sects and Traitors, by Usurping a
Power over Crowns, and by such manifest Endeavors to spoil the King of His
Regalities, that had not the wonderful Providence of God interposed, they had
long ago made a Spoil of His very Life too? These Practices are Open and
Manifest, and as Visible as the Sun: and we ought with all manner of Diligence
and Shyness to Beware of Men that deal in Arts of this Horrid Nature, lest we
be led like Fools into Captivity again, and be forced to Lose not our Tears
only, but our Blood too, when 'twill be too Late to say, We did not think that
Matters would have come to this Miserable pass. When Men think to go so far,
but no farther, they should consider how much farther Others may go by their
Example and Encouragement; they should have a Care that they lend them not
neither an Helping Hand, nor so much as a Finger; for fear that the Least
Assistance may be Fatal. In the Former Times, though some did from the
Beginning design (as many of Late have done) the killing of their Prince; and
though endeavors were used by a Base Faction, first in the Northern Camp, then
at Hampton Court, and at last in the Isle of Wight, to make him away Privately,
either by Pistol, or Poison, or some other means of Assassination, yet the
generality of People did not dream of it, much less did they believe that any
could be so Diabolically Impudent and Wicked, as to Murder him Publicly under
Color of Justice: but yet Murdered he was after that manner; and our Nation
since has lain under such Guilt by it, as God alone knows when it will be
Expiated. I am sure, the shedding more Blood is not the way to Atone for the
shedding of that; but a ready way rather to provoke a Just God to cut us down
Root and Branch, that we be no more a People. Every the least drop of our
Princes Blood is Sacred, and more to be valued by us than the Blood of our
Parents; and that none of that Blood may hereafter be upon Us, or upon our
Children, for God's sake let us be very careful of these two things; and so we
will Conclude.

1. That we stifle all Conceptions of Disloyalty in our very Thoughts, that we
choke even the Beginnings of it, and that we abstain not only from all
Appearance of Wickedness of this kind, but from all Possibilities of Guilt. He
that hates his Brother is a Murderer; and so he that entertaineth any
Undutiful and Unworthy Apprehensions of his Prince, is in a ready way to be a
Regicide. Out of the Heart proceed evil Surmises, Jealousies, Fears, Hatreds;
thence Men go on to Blasphemies, and Reproaches of a Princes Actions, and
Government, and the basest Misconstructions that can be made of his Counsels
and Administrations, though they be for the most part Honorable, and in all
points Innocent and Just: And when the Heart, and the Tongue both are set on
Fire, the whole Kingdom will be presently set on Fire too; and it is twenty to
one but the King himself is made at last a Flaming Sacrifice. These were the
Original sins in the late times: From Idle Jealousies, which Undutiful Spirits
were very Receptive of, they went to Hard Words, from Words to Blows, and at
last the War ended in the Barbarous Parricide that was acted upon (...) Great
Father of our Country; though to still (if it were possible) the Madness of
the People, he was willing to part with any thing, but his whole Crown and his
Conscience. And yet, to see what a sad Fate commonly attends an Impatient and
Heady Generation, when his dangers of being destroyed were now Open and
Manifest, all considering Persons that had any regard for Humanity and
Religion, were presently in a Rage. And, not only many Honorable Persons, who
had ever been Faithful and True to Him, and particularly those truly Loyal and
Noble Lords, Hertford, Richmond, Southampton, Lindsey, and some more, freely
offered themselves to Die, and be Sacrificed for him; but also very many of
those who had been the Unfortunate Instruments of his Ruin, Relented when they
saw the Ax coming, and would have hindered the intended Barbarity, being brought
at last to a Sense, whether of their Sin, or of their Misery, I cannot tell.
The Scots Protested against it; but, alas! it was too Late; and their strength
was now gone, before their Prince, the Glory of their Nation fell. Considerable
Insurrections were in several parts of this Kingdom for the Liberty of their
Sovereign. The London Apprentices took Arms, to Atone (if they could) for their
Masters Crimes, and to Deliver their Captive Prince. The Parliament, that now
saw the sad issues of their Disobedience, voted an Agreement with His Majesty.
Only from the Army, and the Veteran Faction of the City, Petitions came for
Justice against Him. All other Faces gathered Blackness through Horror and
Amazement at the intended Villainy; nay, many of those very Ministers, who had
thrown Firebrands from the Pulpit, would now have Quenched them with their
Tears; they Repented, as Judas did; but were at last Despised and Hated by the
Faction that had hitherto Abetted them, but now could have been well pleased,
if, as they Repented, so they would have Hanged themselves too, as Judas (their
Elderbrother) did, after he had Betrayed the Innocent Blood.

This is enough to show, what a Dangerous Matter it is for People but to Affect
Innovation, and to be Disposed for it; and how Necessary it is for Us, that
would live Quietly in the Land, to Stifle all manner of Disloyalty in the very
Beginnings, lest by giving way to those things which already have Caused the
Subversion of our Government and Laws, and the Death of the King, we should
fall again into Distractions and Outrages, till by the Wiles and Artifices of
Evil Men, we be led like Fools to the Correction of the Stocks, and make our
selves Captives once more, beyond all Hopes or Possibilities of Redemption.

2. And in order thereunto, let us all be very careful, in the next place, to
keep our Brains from being Infected with those Vicious Principles, which the
Enemies of our Peace are wont to use as Tools and Instruments to bring all
their Bloody and Execrable Conspiracies to Effect: I mean, such Principles as
These; That the King's Power is not derived immediately from God, but from the
People; That by their own Voluntary Act the People do make Princes their
Commissioners and Trustees; That they may call Him to account, if they judge
him to have failed in the Execution of His Office; That if He will not come to
Trial with Tameness and Submission, the People may use any Force or Violence
against Him; That upon Proof and Conviction touching His Breach of Trust, they
may Condemn, Depose, and Kill Him if they please, and Dispose of the Crown
according as they shall think best for the Peoples Good. They that thus make
Court to the People, as if all Sovereignty were in Them, and would make them
believe that They have Really that Power which the Devil pretended to, of
Bestowing Kingdoms, can design nothing else but to Debauch Men out of their
Allegiance, and to fit them for the perpetrating of any the most Horrid
Villainies: and whosoever he be that is strongly persuaded of the Truth of those
Principles, wants nothing but Opportunity and an Ax to make him a Regicide. The
Faction of the Late Times, to Justify (if they could) their Proceedings
against the King, Reprinted a Treasonable Book, which had been written by a
most violent Jesuit, under the Counterfeit Name of Doleman, with some few
Alterations to Disguise it; which very Libel was Lately Printed again entire by
the Faction now, though it was Condemned by Act of Parliament in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth. Now H^st. of Indep. p. 113.
the Fundamental Principle in that Book is this, That every Commonwealth has
Power within it self to Dispose of the Governors, and either to Alter or
Abolish any Form of Government, according to the Pleasure of the People. A
little before the King's Trial, the Pestilent Remnant of the House of Commons,
that were now at the Armies Devotion, to Prepare the Kings way first to the
Court, and so to the Scaffold, agreed upon this Vote, (as if they had been a
Conclave of Jesuits) That the People under God are the Original of all Just
Power. And upon this Fundamental Principle they raised these other Positions,
which were the Natural Consequents of it; 1. That the Commons of England
Assembled in Parliament, have the Supreme Authority of the Nation. 2. That
whatsoever is declared for Law by the Commons, has the force of a Law. 3. That
all the People of the Nation are concluded thereby, although the Consent of the
King and the Peers be not had thereunto. 4. That to raise Arms against the
Peoples Representatives, is High Treason. Thus were these Popular Principles
Previous and Preparative for that Horrid Murder, which, to the Dishonor of
Nature, to the Reproach of Religion, to the Shame of this Kingdom, and to the
Scandal of all Nations, was so barbarously committed on this Day. The Charge
against that Incomparable Prince ran in the Name of the People; He had violated
that Trust which the People had reposed in Him. Which thing when an Honorable
Lady that was present Heard, she cried out openly before the whole Court, It
was a Lie, for not the Tenth part of the People would be guilty of such a
Crime. When the King demanded, by what Authority they brought Him to Trial,
that most Impudent and Unjust Judge, the Blasphemer of God and His Anointed,
answered, That 'twas by the Authority of the People. When the King had Solidly
and Eloquently refuted that Pretense, that Monster of Mankind persisted in it,
That the People of England were the Supreme Authority of the Nation, over King
and Laws too; that he was an Officer in Trust, and that having broken his
Compact with the People, they might justly proceed against Him, even unto
Death: And this he endeavored to prove by Arguments and Examples, all taken
one by one out of the Counterfeit Doleman, which I mentioned before.

Thus did these Treasonable Principles cost that excellent Monarch, first his
Peace, and at last his Life, to the Eternal warning as well of every Upright
Magistrate, that he presume not to Suffer, as of every Faithful Subject that he
presume not to Listen to those Cursed Principles and Doctrines, which were
never Formed and Designed but for Blood, were never Countenanced and Cherished
but for Blood, were never Obeyed and Followed but by Men, that Longed and
Thirst for Blood Royal.

I have no more to add, but my Humble and Hearty Prayers to the God of Order
and Power, That he would Pardon that Great Sin which this day was acted against
Himself and his Anointed, and Bless his Present Majesty, and the whole Royal
Family, with a long continuance of Life, Health, Peace, and Honor; and that
the course of this World may be so peaceably ordered by his Governance, that
his Church may joyfully serve him in all Godly Quietness, through Jesus Christ
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; To whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Glory World without end,

Amen.
FINIS.

