A DISCOURSE Concerning the EXISTENCE OF GOD.

BY EDWARD PELLING, D. D. Rector of Petworth in Sussex, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet street. MDCXCVI.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1 CHAP. 1. Concerning the Notion of God in general;
viz. A Being that is Eminently and Absolutely Perfect. What such Perfection
means. A more particular Notion of God drawn out by Necessary Consequences.
That he is a Being Independent, Eternal, Spiritual, Intelligent, Omnipotent,
perfectly Good and Righteous. This Idea of God is Intelligible and Rational. 7
CHAP. II. The Existence of this most Perfect Being proved by Four great
Arguments. First, The Necessity of a First, Independent Cause: The Origin of
all Motion and Life. The World not Eternal, but made by a Deity. 37 CHAP. III.
Secondly, The general Consent of Mankind, even the Ancient Heathens, and Modern
Idolaters, touching One Supreme Numon. The Singularity of a few Atheists of
old, not to be valued. This Consent proceeded not from mere Tradition, nor
Fear, nor State-Polity, nor Common Compact; but from a Principle in Humane
Nature, derived from the Great Author of it. No Argument of the truth of
Idolatry. 54 CHAP. IV. Thirdly, Extraordinary Occurrences. As, first, Miracles.
Three sorts of True Miracles. These, Arguments of a God. True Miracles have
been realy done. The Credibility of those done by Moses, and Jesus Christ. Of
Strange Works done by Idolaters. A distinction between Miracles in Appearance,
and Miracles Divine. 107 CHAP. V. Then, Predictions of future, contingent
Events. Such Predictions there have been; some relating to the Ancient Empires;
others to Jesus Christ; others to some memorable Events after Christ's
Ascension. 161 CHAP. VI. A Fourth Argument of the Existence of God, is taken
from the Admirable State of the Universe. And, First, Of the Excellent Order
into which the several parts of the world are digested. Their Commodious
Situation. Their mutual Relation. And the Permanency of them in their Natures
and Operations. All this could not come to pass by Chance; but is a Proof of
the Existence of a God. The Senseless Conceits of Scepticks; with a Confutation
of them. 191 CHAP. VII. A Second thing observable in the State of the Universe,
is the Beauty of its Parts; their Multitudes, Splendour, Variety; together with
the Comeliness of their Frame. The Pretenses of Scepticks answered, concerning
the Operations of Plastic Nature. 257 CHAP. VIII. The Third is, The Usefulness
of the several Parts of this Visible Word. First as to their Ends and
Tendencies: The Usefulness of the Heavenly Bodies in their Nature and Motions:
Of the Air; of the Seas, and their Saltness; of Springs, and Mountains; and of
all the Furniture of the Earth. The useful Structure of things in order to
their Ends; particularly of Trees, and Animals; of Natrition and Sensation in
Animals; and of the Fabrication of their Parts in order thereunto. The Evasion
of Scepticks concerning the Uses of things, answered. 285 CHAP. IX. The Fourth
is, The resemblance of Knowledge and Wisdom which appears even in Irrational
Creatures. The constant Regularity of them in the manner of their Operations;
and the seeming Sagacity of them, as to their Ends. This a clear Argument of a
Deity; because of themselves they design no End; nor do they understand the
Reason, or Tendency of Means; nor do they deliberate about the choice of Means.
This too is a demonstration of the Existence of God. The Shifts of Atheists, as
to this, considered also. 352 CHAP. X. The Fifth is, The Ample Provision which
is made for the good of all Needy Creatures: For their Formation and
Production, and for their Preservation afterward from outward Assaults, and
untimely Deaths: Proper Food provided in all Climates; and suitable to all
Conditions and Tempers. Proper Remedies for all Endemial Diseases. 385 CHAP.
XI. The Sixth is, The Admirable Frame of Human Nature. The Excellence of the
Rational Soul in its Nature and Faculties, which is proved at large to be a
manifestation of the Existence of a God. The Evasions of Scepticks considered.
The Conclusion. 419
A DISCOURSE Concerning the Existence of GOD.
THE Nature of Mankind, considered as Rational Beings, is made up of such
Faculties, that they are not only capable of Religion (that is, sitted and
qualified to believe that there is a Being vastly Superior to them, and to know
and worship that High Being in some agreeable sort and measure); but they are
moreover generally inclined to Religion, prone to it, and pleased with it, as a
thing which is suitable and correspondent to their Faculties; so that in all
Ages, and in all Nations, people have professed some kind of Religion or other:
Nay even Barbarous People, rather than they would be wanting in Religious
Performances, have abounded in great variety of Supersitions; and before they
would be Atheists, have been downright Idolaters; adoring a plurality of Gods,
rather than they would own no Deity at all; which shows that Religion is in
some sense natural to the Soul of man; and that the Corruption which is in men's
Practices, proceeds from a defect of Light in their Understandings, from those
many Ignorances and Errors wherewith they are possessed. Were it not for this,
True Religion would be the great Profession of the whole World.

There are especially Three Great Errors which have strangely misguided and
corrupted the minds of some men, and consequently have taken off that power and
influence, which otherwise Religion would have had over them, even from natural
Conscience: And these relate, either to the Being of God, or to his Nature, or
to his Government of the World, and Judiciary power over it.

1. First, Some reject all belief of God's Being, or at least question very
much the truth of such a Belief; and so of course conceive Religion to be, not
of Divine, but Humane Institution; a piece of State Policy, devised and set up
by cunning men, for the better keeping of Human Societies in order and peace.
To such men Religion must needs seem an indifferent matter, not worth their
time or pains to concern themselves much about, nor to care whether this or
that mode of Religion be professed, because they look upon all Religion as an
Artifice, an Invention that is alterable at pleasure, as the Reasons of State,
and Civil Policy require.

2. Secondly, Some acknowledge the Being of God, together with the inward
Necessity, Reasonableness, and Excellency of Religion in general; but yet are
much mistaken as to the particular manner of their Religion, and in their way
of worshipping God; because they are greatly mistaken in their notions of his
Nature. For they apprehend him to be not such as he really is, but such a one
as they would have him be; either a very tame and gentle Being, that is easily
pleased with formal Professions of Respect; or a very Partial Being, that is
kind only to one Sect of People; or an Arbitrary, Austere, and Rigid Being,
that seeks to hurt, and delights in the Miseries of Mankind. Accordingly,
as their Apprehensions of God's Nature are, so they form and suit the Scheme of
their Religion toward him; which must needs be still as uncouth and improper,
as those Principles are false, upon which the whole model of their Religious
Worship stands.

3. Thirdly, Some are willing enough to believe the Reality of God's Being, and
the glorious Excellence of his Nature; but yet conceive, that he is so happy in
himself, and in the enjoyment of his own Perfections, that he does not meddle
with the Tumultuous Affairs of the Sublunary World, nor takes any notice of the
Actions of men; and consequently, that he will not take men to an account for
their Actions another day. And as long as they go upon this Principle, what
venerable thoughts soever they may have of the Divine Majesty, it cannot be
expected that they should have any great regard for themselves; but that their
Lives will be very dissolute and irreligious.

Therefore, to retrench these Evils, and to settle True Religion upon its right
bottom, these Three things are highly necessary to be done.

1. First, To convince men of the Reality of God's Existence; which is the
Prime, the Fundamental Business of all Religion; For he that comes to God,
must believe that he is, says the Apostle, Heb. 11. 6. And the thing is
self-evident: For all Religion being supposed to be directed toward God, and
to terminate in him, before men can be satisfied of the Necessity or Usefulness
of Religion, they must be persuaded of the Reality of God's Existence.

As that Great Man of a Pagan, Cicero, De Not. Deor. lib. 1.
observes: If there be no God, or if God takes no care of Humane Affairs, what
Piety, Sanctity, or Religion can there be? for these things relate purely, and
properly, and only to the Majesty of God, upon this Supposition, That God takes
notice of them; and that God is a Rewarder of Mankind. But if God cannot do us
good, or will not do it; if he be not at all concerned for us, nor observes
what we do, nor gives us any thing that is of use to the Life of men; what
encouragement can there be for us to offer Worship, Honor, and Prayers unto
him?

2. Secondly, It is necessary also to give men a right account of those
Attributes and Perfections which are the Splendour of God's Nature: Because, as
his Nature is the Standard or Rule of all Religious Worship that is acceptable
to him (for what is not agreeable to his Nature, can never be grateful to his
Mind) so is the true knowledge of his Nature the greatest motive to those Acts
of Worship which are well-pleasing to him; (for what can more induce you to
adore him with Prayers and Praises, with Reverence, Cheerfulness, and Love,
than to be well assured, that the Object of your Adoration is a Being
infinitely Wise, Righteous, Powerful, and Good?)

3. Thirdly, It is necessary likewise to show the Acts and Ends of God's
Providence, as well as to prove his Existence, and to explain his Attributes:
That he is no Retired Being, no Careless Governor, no Unconcerned Spectator of
Affairs here below; but that he does dispose, order, and superintend all things
now, that at last he may judge the World in Righteousness, and may show himself
a Rewarder of them who diligently seek him. For, as this does excite men to
humility, patience, resignation, self-denial, and to all manner of obedience to
God's Will, so it naturally serves to make them work out their salvation with
fear and trembling.

These Three things being of such apparent Use, and of such vast Concernment
and Importance, I shall adventure, by God's assistance and blessing, to
discourse of them in some little measure suitable to my own poor Abilities; and
that in as clear, as succinct, and as practical a manner as I can; though I am
sensible beforehand what Difficulties must occur upon so Divine a Subject, and
what Time and Labor it must cost to go through so great an Undertaking.

At present I shall enter upon the Consideration of God's Existence; most
humbly beseeching that Father of Lights, of whose Essence and Perfections I
presume to speak, so to illuminate my Understanding, and to direct my Heart,
that I may not conceive any thing that shall in any wise detract from the
Honor of a Being so transcendently Great, so Glorious, so Adorable.

CHAP. I.
IN treating of this Fundamental Point, the Existence of God, I shall cast the
Sum of my following Meditations under these Principal Heads, as the Boundaries
of this whole Discourse.

I. First, It must be enquired, what the Notion of God implies and signifies;
or what is meant by that Appellation.

II. Secondly, It must be showed, that there really is a Supreme and Blessed
Being, whom we call GOD.

III. And then Thirdly, It must be considered, what Practical Inferences may be
deduced from this Truth.

I. First, As to the first Principal Head, concerning the Notion of God; it is
either general, or more particular: Both which being rightly considered, it
will evidently appear, what conception or notion we have in our minds, when we
think of that Nature, or Being, which is called by the name of God.

1. In general, The notion of God signifies a Being which is eminently and
absolutely Perfect. Though we cannot give a full definition of that Being,
because it is impossible for our finite and scanty Faculties to entertain a
conception that is exactly answerable and adequate to a Nature supposed to be
Infinite; yet this is an intelligible description of God, and the best
description we can make for a short one; That God is in the highest degree the
most perfect of all Beings, which either have an existence, or are possible to
exist. How different soever the Name of God be in the several Languages of the
World; and how various soever those ways have been, whereby people in all
Countries have expressed their thoughts of God; all men who have believed and
spoken of a Supreme Numen, or Deity, did mean a Nature distinct from all other
things, and the Best, the Noblest, the most Excellent and Admirable; that is, a
most Perfect Being.

That I may open this matter thoroughly, I must desire you to observe Two things.

1. First, That the Perfection of a thing is that wherein the worth and
excellence of it does chiefly consist. As, in Inanimate Bodies, the perfection
of them is Substance, for in that they excel a Shadow. In Vegetables, the
perfection of them is Life; for in that they excel Minerals and Stones. In
Animals, the perfection of them is Sense; for in that they excel all Plants,
and Trees. And in Men, the perfection of them is Reason; for in that they excel
all Brutes. So that for a thing to be perfect, is to possess that dignity and
valuableness which chiesly belongs to its Nature.

2. You must note, That Eminent and Absolute Perfection consists in
possessing after a singular manner, and in the highest degree, all kind of
Excellence, without the least mixture of Defect, or Imperfection. Such Defects
and Imperfections there are in all Creatures. In all Bodies there is Substance;
but such as is wrapped up in Matter, which is a great imperfection in comparison
of Spirituality. In all Vegetables there is Life; but such as is subject to
decay, which in them is imperfection. In all Animals there is Sense, or
Perception; but such as is attended with Fear, Grief, Anger, and other
disquieting Passions, which are so many Imperfections in their Nature. In Men,
there is Reason; but such as is blemished with Ignorance and Errors; and the
knowledge they have, is acquired by the great labors of the Mind, by
Contemplation and Study, by close arguing from one thing to another, and by a
long train of thoughts, which follow each other successively, and are gradually
spun out of the Soul by the painful operations of the Rational Faculties; all
which shows the Defects and Imperfections that are in Humane Nature also. And
as for those Blessed Spirits above, which we call Angels, though there be in
them a perfection of Understanding, without dullness, pain, or laborious
activity; and though there be too rectitude in their Wills, regularity in their
Affections, and all moral Perfections which make them happy, yet is their
Knowledge limited; and for their whole Being, they depend upon the Will and
Pleasure of a Superior Power, that at first created, and still preserves them;
which argues imperfection in them likewise, although they be the noblest part
of the Universe. Go through every Classis and sort of Individuals in the World,
and you will find in all of them some Deficiencies which are annexed to their
Principal and Best Part; so that though they be all perfect in their kind, and
sit for the Ends for which they were formed, yet they fall vastly short of
Eminent and Absolute Perfection: For such Perfection is to have all kinds of
Excellence, and all degrees of Excellence, clear and free from all manner of
Defect, indigence, or Incapacity.

Now the Notion of God includes this Absolute Perfection. For that word, GOD,
speaks a Being that is most Excellent: So that supposing a Deity to be, and to
be the Cause of all Inferior things (which the Notion of God implies too) you
must necessarily conceive of him, as the Being, in whom all those Perfections
are united, as in a Center, which are divided everywhere in the World; and
that they are all in Him in a most eminent and excellent Degree. For no Being
can give those Perfections which some way or other it has not, either formally
or actually, or virtually and eminently in it self; because then it would
communicate more than it has; that is, more than what is in its power to
impart; which to suppose, would be a contradiction. All Causes that work by a
necessity of Nature, though they operate to the utmost power and extent of
their Faculties, yet it is as impossible for them to yield what they have not,
as it is for Water to bring forth a Rational Soul, or for Fire to produce an
Angel out of a few Sticks. And though Voluntary Agents work as they please, and
may give their Effects much less than themselves have; yet it is as impossible
for the Freest and Powerful Agent to give more, as it is for an Artificer to
form a World out of nothing. The thing it self cannot admit of such
Omnipotence: And so we may be sure, that neither could God bestow Perfections
which he himself was not possessed of; and therefore, those Excellencies which we
find in Nature, and which are the Perfections of Nature, must be concluded to
come from the Author of Nature; and consequently to be in him, as in their true
Original; for otherwise there would be more Excellencies in the Effects, than
there are in the Cause; which is as absurd to suppose, as it is to imagine,
that there is more Water in a Rivulet, than in the Ocean.

Again; As all Perfection must be conceived to be in that Supreme, most
Excellent, and most Glorious Nature, which we call GOD; so it must be there too
Absolutely, or without the least mixture of Defect. All defect must be in the
Creature; and that, not so much by immediate Causality from God, as by the
necessary Condition of its own Nature; because it is a thing made, and of
Temporary production; and therefore of a Finite Nature, and of Limited
Faculties; that is, it must be essentially imperfect; especially in comparison
of its Creator; it being utterly impossible for a Narrow, Scanty, New-form'd
thing to be commensurate in all its Perfections to the Maker, who is supposed
to be Independent, Infinite, and All-sufficient in himself. The Nature of the
thing made, cannot allow this; and by consequence it is naturally and
necessarily defective. Upon which account, though we must conclude, that God is
a Perfect Being because all Perfections in other things are derived from Him;
yet we may not conceive, that he has any mixture of Desiciency, because the
things he has made are all of them defective in some respect or other: For
those Defects are so natural, that the things themselves could not possibly
have been made otherwise, or without them.

Therefore, as we must affirm, That the Perfections which are in the World, are
limited and partial, blended and alloy'd with something that is a blemish to
them; so we must conceive, that those Originals of them which are in God, are
Boundless and Full, Eminent and Absolute: For to think otherwise, is to degrade
the Author of all Perfections; and in truth, to make the Notion of a Deity
inconsistent with it self.

I have been the more desirous to clear this matter, That the general Notion of
God does and must signify a Being which is Eminently and Absolutely Perfect;
because it is a very Rational Principle, which may be fairly understood, and
must needs be assented to by all that will but hearken to Right Reason: And
because it is a very useful Principle also, that will soon enable us to draw
out of it, by direct consequence, a more

2. Particular Description of the Deity; which is the Second thing I am to come
to; that I may show what kind of Being we are to apprehend God to be, before I
go about to prove, that this supposed most Perfect Being does really and
actually Exist. For, from this great, and General Notion of God, this
Particular Account will follow.

1. First, We must conceive of God, that he is an Independent Being; not
beholding to any Antecedent, Distinct, and Foreign Cause, for the production of
his Nature. For could we (without a contradiction) suppose a Cause Antecedent
to that, which is thought to be the Chief and First Cause of all things? such a
Supposition would argue Imperfection in the Deity: Because it would make him a
Precarious Being, depending upon the Activity and Pleasure of Another, Superior
to him in greatness of Power, and before him in Time, and in Existence of
Nature.

2. God having all Perfection in himself, we must conceive of him to be of an
Endless Life. For all decay of Life proceeds from a defect, infirmity, or
limitation in the Essence of the Thing; so that without the help of a stronger
Hand, it cannot for ever hold up, and last. And since Life is one of those
Perfections which we poor sinful men enjoy, it necessarily follows, that, as it
must be in our Maker, so it must be in him in a most eminent and absolute
degree; that is, utterly void of all possibility of ever ending.

3. We must, from the Absolute Perfection of God, conceive him to be a Fountain
of Life, without any Beginning likewise. For, whatever had a beginning, must be
concluded in that respect defective; because it once wanted, not only those
Perfections which Beings enjoy, but even Being it self. And besides, that which
began, may end, as we see all the successive Productions of Nature do.
Therefore since the Notion of God signifies Perfection of all Kinds, and in all
degrees, Reason will tell you that God must have such Perfection of Essence, as
to be of a boundless Life, or be everlaststing from everlasting.

4. The Notion of God's absolute Perfection necessitates us to conclude, that
he is a most perfect Substance, or a Being that subsisteth of himself by the
absolute fullness of his own Nature. Indeed we cannot form an adequate and
positive Notion of the Divine Substance, as neither can we of the Substance of
our own Souls, though they are the noblest Beings of this lower World. For our
outward Senses, which are the great Instruments of Knowledge, are perpetually
used to corporeal and gross Ideas; and God being a spirit, John 4. 24. cannot
be the Object of any such sensation. But yet, we may rationally render him an
Object of our Minds; such an Object as our Minds are capable of viewing, by
abstracting Matter and Corporeity from our Apprehensions of him. This Reason
inforces us to do, because materiality is a defect in the thing that is made up
of it; for as it limits and consines the thing to one particular place at once
(which is most unsuitable to the conception of a Being that is said to fill
heaven and earth. Jer. 23. 24) so it makes the thing divisible, and
consequently subject to Dissolution, which is utterly incompatible with the
Perfection of God's Life. Therefore Reason compels us to do away these
Imperfections from our Notions of God, and to conceive of him as a Spiritual
Substance, which I shall show hereafter in its proper place, is far from being
an irrational Notion, however some are pleased to reject and deride it.

5. Since the Notion of God implies the excellence of Perfection, we must
conceive of him, that he is too a discerning and understanding Substance. For
Perception being the excellence of all Animals, whereby they are much more
perfect than senseless Matter, or inanimate Stocks and Stones; this excellence
must needs, after the most perfect and sublime manner, be in that most exalted
Nature, from which all Perfection is supposed to have been derived. The
Psalmist appeals to the common Reason of Mankind, where he argues, Psalm 94.
9, 10. He that planted the ear, shall not he bear? he that formed the eye,
shall not be see? And so, He that teaches men knowledge, shall not he know?
Though Perception is not wrought in God by Impressions that affect material
Organs, nor is attended with plain and disturbance, as in Creatures, who are
necessarily imperfect; yet the Reason of the thing shows, that he is a
Sentient, Percipient Being, an intelligent Nature or Mind, that acts in a way
which is suitable to the condition of a most glorious Being.

6. And hence it follows, That we must conceive of God, that he is a most
perfect Mind, or a Being that knows all things, and is conscious of all things
that are possible to be known, and that not by such discourse or succession of
Thoughts and Reasonings as imperfect Beings are sain to use; but by intuitive
Acts, and by a direct immediate view. Though knowledge be a great Perfection in
Men and Angels, yet to know things gradually, and by piece-meals, and with a
limited apprehension, is in the Creature a plain defect, and therefore it must
be abstracted or removed from our Conceptions of God.

7. Again, there is in us all a vigorous principle of Activity, whereby we are
able to do those things which our Desires and Wills incline us to perform in
our Sphere, and as far as this principle of Activity carries us. This also is a
Perfection; but yet such as is intermingled with defects, because the Execution
of our Power is laborious, nay finite; innumerable things being utterly
impossible for the most mighty Men upon the Earth to compass, though their Wits
and Industry should be never so great, and though all their force were united.
Upon this account Reason will tell you, that God being a Nature absolutely
Perfect, all manner of Impotence is to be shut out of our Notions of him,
because all Impotence is a defect, and therefore inconsistent with, and
repugnant unto the Excellencies of the Deity; and consequently we must conceive
him to be fully able to produce and do by the Act of his own free Will,
whatever does not imply a contradiction, or whatever is conceivable and
possible in it self, and can stand well with the other Perfections of his
Nature.

8. Further yet; The Notion of God signifying a Nature that is eminently and
absolutely Perfect, we must conceive him to be a good Being likewise; nay, the
best of all Beings. By Goodness here is meant, that excellent and most amiable
Disposition of Mind, which still prompts one to be Communicative, Kind,
Gracious, Compassionate, and Benificent. It Is the best Virtue, that which we
may call the Perfection of all Pefections; that which commands Honor and Love
from all; that which is the Beauty, the Excellency, the Glory of Humane Nature,
and therefore it necessarily and eminently belongs to the best Being, that
Divine and most Glorious Nature, which all People have ever adored for its
transcendent Goodness. Love is of God, says the Apostle, 1 John 4. 7. He is
the overflowing Spring and Fountain of all that Benignity which runs through
the World; therefore St. John spoke like a great Philosopher, as well as a
Divine, in saying, ver. 8. God is love, that is, a Blessed Nature made up of
Goodness, the Mirror and Perfection of it; for there must be in this case, much
more in the Cause than there can be in the Effects, which are of a finite,
narrow, and slender Capacity, as the faculties of all created Beings are;
whence it appears, that the glorious Deity cannot be a selfish, envious,
malevolent, spiteful, or cruel Being, because these and the like Dispositions
of Mind are wretched Defects, or Vices rather, which belong to the Devils in
Hell, and to Devils Incarnate; nor, though he be Omnipotent, and perfectly
Powerful, can he act like an Arbitrary, Tyrannical Being, void of Compassion
and Tenderness. All this is inconsistent with that great Benignity which is
necessarily included in the Notion of God, whose boundless Perfections argue
him to be a most desirable Good, a most adorable and charming Object of our
Affections; most bountiful, benign, merciful, gracious, longsuffering,
tenderhearted, ready to bestow upon all that are capable, the greatest
felicities that it is possible for us to enjoy or desire.

9. Once more: From the general Notion of God, that he is a Being absolutely
and eminently Perfect, we must conceive him to be a God of perfect Equity and
Justice, always acting according to the eternal Rules of right Reason, and the
quality of Things. There are some Principles of Righteousness so natural to the
Soul of Man, that they begin to appear as soon as humane common Reason begins
to work. And these are such Perfections in us, as set us above the rest of the
Sublunary World, and indeed make us excel one another, so that the Righteous is
more valuable than his Neighbor, what difference soever may be otherwise in
their outward Circumstances and Fortunes. These Principles could not come but
from the common Author of our Nature; and their Extraction shows him to be most
exact himself in the Government and Disposal of his Creatures, in whom all
Iniquity is a great desect, (to say no worse) because it proceeds either from
want of due Knowledge, or from want of honest Intention; both which are
Imperfections in our Nature, nay, Reproaches and Scandals to it. Therefore that
most perfect Nature which presideth over all, must be conceived to be most
righteous toward all that are under his Care and Power: So that as there is no
ground for unreasonable Fears from his Omnipotence, in regard of his great
Goodness and Benignity; so neither is there sufficient ground for Presumption
from his Benignity, in regard of his great Justice; because, as he has given us
equal Laws, so he will give upon us very equal Judgment, and render to every
man according to his works, Romans 2. 6.

The Sum is, if People would rightly understand and consider what the Notion of
God imports, they could not but look upon him as the most lovely and desirable
Being in the whole World; and instead of denying his Existence, would be glad
that there is a Being over them so transcendently Perfect, so proper and
suitable for them in this their imperfect State, that supposing he did not
exist, all Mankind (all good Men to be sure) would have reason to wish he did.

Therefore, before I entered upon treating of God's Existence, I thought it
needful for me by way of Preparation to show, what the word GOD means,
according to the common Sense of Mankind: in general, A Being or Nature that is
eminently and absolutely Perfect; and in particular, a Being that is Unmade,
Independent, Ever-living; a Spiritual Being, subsisting of Himself; discerning,
understanding, and knowing all things; able to do whatsoever is agreeable to
his Will and Nature; an inexhaustible Fountain of Love and Goodness; that to
communicate his Goodness, and to display his Nature, made the Universe; and
ever since the Creation has governed all things, inspecting the Works of his
Hands; providing for the good of the whole World, ordering every thing after
the wisest and best Manner, taking a more particular care of Mankind,
consulting for our present and future Happiness, giving us Laws, disposing of
our Fortunes, exercising Discipline over us in order to that great End; and
throughout the whole Series of his Providence showing himself to be an Infinite
Mind, that is perfectly Wise, Beneficent, Powerful, Merciful, Compassionate,
Kind, Righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm 145. 17.

This is a particular and true, though an imperfect Description of the Deity. I
have been the more critical in drawing it, because it is a very rational
Description; that which is rationally deduced out of this common Principle,
That by God is understood a most perfect Being, and that too which is fairly
intelligible by a rational Soul. For every Man understands what Knowledge
means, what Wisdom means, what Goodness means, what Power, Love, and
Righteousness do mean. All these intellectual and moral Perfections are very
intelligible. No sooner are they mentioned, but we form a Conception of them in
our minds; we apprehend presently what they signify. When they are spoken of a
Creature, we easily know what it is to be an understanding, wise, just, and
good Man. And when we discover considerable degrees and measures of these
Perfections in any Person, the apprehension of them does so affect our minds,
that we cannot but Admire, Reverence, Esteem, and Love such a Person for the
sake of these Perfections; and how then can it be thought impossible for us to
have in our minds a Conception of a Being that is eminently and absolutely
Perfect in all intellectual and moral Virtues? Why cannot we know what such a
Being means? Nay, rather, how is it possible for us not to adore, venerate, and
love such a Being above all things?

I urge this, because some that say in their hearts, There is no God, and are
willing to believe there is none, or wish at least there were no Deity, do
offer this in favor of their Insidelity, That there is no Idea of God;
meaning, that as we have not of that supposed transeendent Being, any material
Representation striking and pressing upon our outward Senses, so neither have
we any Conception in our Minds answerable to such a transcendent Being; and
hence they sancy that the Notion of a Deity being incomprehensible, there is no
such thing; or that those Perfections, which we call the Attributes of God, are
no Realities, but honorary Titles bestowed upon an imaginary Being, out of a
goundless Fear.

Now in this they are as weak Logicians and Philosophers, as they are bad
Divines; for they go upon two Principles here, both which are utterly false.

1. The first is, That we have no Evidence or Knowledge, no Conception or
Thought of any thing which does not fall under the cognizance of our bodily
Senses. For there are many Truths in Philosophy, which can have no corporeal
Representations to affect the Eye or the Ear, nor that inward sensitive Part
the Fancy, that is common to Men and to Brute-creatures. Though the Clink and
Sound of the Words makes an impression upon the Sense; yet the verity of the
Propositions which those Words contain, is quite a different thing, that is,
purely intelligible; and we know and assent to the Propositions with an act of
the Understanding, by means of the Congruity they bear to Principles of Reason;
and therefore none but rational Creatures can sind out, and apprehend the truth
of them. A Beast sees the Color of Snow, as well as a Man; but no Beast can
understand the truth of this Proposition, Snow is white; because that is a
thing out of its reach, for want of that operation of Reason, which makes all
Truth intelligible and evident to the Mind.

There are also innumerable Essences in Nature, which cannot be the Objects of
Sense, though the outward Forms and Ideas of them are. The inward Nature of
them is discoverable only by the Sagacity and Activity of the Mind, observing
their Effects and Operations; then arguing from one thing to another, and so
judging of the Reality and Nature of the Cause by its Consequents. Hereby the
Understanding penetrates into the inside of things, which Sense and Fancy can
never do; and it finds out, not what a thing seems to be, but what it is, which
is many times a quite different thing from the Fantastry and Appearance of it,
nor can ever be the direct and immediate Object of Sense.

To instance in one particular: We cannot but perceive in some measure, what an
admirable Being the Soul of Man is, if we will attentively consider its Powers
and Operations. And yet we cannot have any Perception of it by external
Sensation, because we cannot hear or see it, or handle it with our Hands, or
make any discoveries of it by any other Sense, no more than we can Smell or
Taste a shadow. Therefore there can be no sensible Images of it to make
impressions upon the Organs of Sensation; no external Essluvia's of it, no
foreign Idea's, no Representations from without to affect the imagination. No,
there must be the use of pure Cogitation and Reason, to find out what the Soul
is, and to make that intelligible to us which acts in us; and this will do
it, when all our Senses cannot. We perceive that there is something in us which
thinks, for every Man is conscious of his own Thoughts; therefore the Soul is
a Being. We perceive that it works continually in us, therefore it is a real
Thing; for it is a certain Principle of Reason, That what is not, cannot
possibly work. We perceive that there is in the Soul, Life and Vigor, Power
and Activity, Apprehension, Knowledge, and Memory, a saculty of comparing
things with things, and of reasoning and judging upon such comparison; a Power
too of determining what to do, of choosing and refusing, of desiring that which
it loves, and of reaching out after that which it desires; therefore it is a
real existing Being. Thus far we can easily go in our Notion of the Soul,
without any help of Sensation from abroad. And hence we proceed to perceive,
That this Soul of ours is an incorporeal Being. For its Operations are
incongruous to stupid Matter, too quick and noble for Matter, though you
suppose it to be in Motion. Clay cannot Cogitate, nor can any moving Wheel
reason, nor can the most spirituous Parts of the Blood philosophize, nor can
the finest Motes that dance in the Sun consult or deliberate; nor can that
glorious and enlivening Creature, the Sun it self, entertain those Meditations
which bubble and spring out of ones mind; nor can all the material parts of the
World put together, form those Contrivances, Desires, and Affections, which are
the Operations of every Humane Soul; and to suppose, as some Pretenders to
Sense and Wit do, that all these Actions proceed from little restless Atoms,
capering about in the Head, and falling accidentally into various Forms and
Contextures, does argue rather that the Brains of such Men are insested with
Flies and Nits, than that they understand any thing of right Reason and
Philosophy.

I have said this to show, That there are many things which are not Objects of
Sense, and yet are intelligible Objects of the Mind; and therefore that it is
false reasoning to conclude, That there is no intelligible Notion or Idea of
God, because the Divine Nature we call by that Name, is supposed to be an
Immaterial Being, and as such is not to be represented to our Senses. A
pretense, which though used to invalidate the belief of a Deity, might with
parity of reason be made use of to disprove the Existence of all the Beings in
the World, whose true Essences and Natures are not discovered by corporeal,
sensible Idea's; especially the Soul of Man, which is no object of external
Sensation; and yet by its Operations and Essects, appears to all understanding
Men to be a real, cogitative, intellectual, and active Being, distinct from
Matter, though it be immured in Matter; and then, why may we not conceive and
understand that supereminent Nature, which is supposed to create every Humane
Soul, to be a perfectly wise, righteous, and good Being, realy existing, though
we do not see him with the Eye? Especially, since we may see him in some
measure at second hand in his glorious Works. For he has not left himself
without witness, in that he does good, and gives us rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness, Acts 14. 17. So
that the invisible things of him from the creation are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead,
Romans 1. 20.

2. Another very false Principle those odd Men go upon, is this, That supposing
God to be, as we believe a transcendent, infinite Being; and supposing our own
intellectual Faculties to be, as we find them, of a finite, narrow Capacity; it
is impossible for us to comprehend God in our minds; and therefore we must be
uncertain, whether the Notions we have of him be true or false, right or wrong.
This is in effect to say, That because we have not all knowledge, therefore we
can have none; according to which rate of reasoning they may affirm also, that
we see nothing of the Sun, because we cannot view every single Ray, so as to
comprehend its full Luster; and that, because we understand not all the
Mysteries in Nature, therefore we are quite ignorant, or at least have reason
to doubt, whether those Ideas and Notions we have, do not utterly deceive us:
whereas in these cases the imperfection of our Knowledge proceeds not from any
Dubitableness or Delusion in the Nature of the Objects, but from the Weakness
and Incapacity of our own Faculties. Supposing the Existence of a Deity, that
is, a Being transcendently Perfect; how is it imaginable, that we poor
Creatures could possibly have full and adequate Conceptions of him, unless we
could reconcile Contradictions, by making Narrowness to answer Transcendency,
or a Finite Thing to be proportionable and commensurate to an Infinite Being?
And yet it would not by any means follow hence, that we have no knowledge of
God, or that God is an unintelligible Being, because we cannot comprehend all
the Glory of his Nature to the full.

We know in part, as we can, and according to our measure, because in this
weak, mortal state, the dullness and incapacity of our Minds will not allow us
to know perfectly; and to argue hence, that the Deity is an unconceivable, and
so (at least) a dubitable Being, when our own Conceptions of him, our
intellectual Powers are naturally and necessarily narrow, is as if we should
conclude that we have no knowledge at all of any thing in the World; nay, that
it is very questionable, whether there be any such thing as a World, because we
cannot measure all the dimensions of the Universe with our Span.

Besides, we may know as much as is necessary and sit for us to understand now.
For as we are not yet able to see God as he is, so neither would such a full
Vision be needful and proper for us, were it possible to be had here. A great
deal ought to be reserved for a more perfect and exalted State, under the
notion of a Reward: It is enough to see so much of this Life, as will raise our
longings after a better, and will help us to do those Duties of Religion, which
are now required in order to a perfect state; and so much we do know, though
our knowledge of God be comparatively very dim and short. We have such Notions
as serve to sound and encourage the practice of Godliness, and good Morality,
and that is all we are to mind in this World. We very well apprehend, That God
is an Omniscient, Just, Powerful, Good, and Gracious Being; and these Notions
are enough to encourage Men to all manner of Piety and Virtue. Therefore, since
the knowledge of these things is the way to Eternal Life, and sufficient to
answer the ends and purposes of Religion, it is most unreasonable to object
against the Idea of God, and to quarrel with it, as a thing unconceivable,
because the infinite Vastness of all his glorious Perfections is not to be
comprehended by us fully, especially in this our present imperfect state.

To conclude this Consideration: Whatever some pretend against the Idea of God,
I am apt to think, that they who strive and study to reject it, have a great
deal of it in their own Minds, stirring and terrifying them with fearful
Suggestions. For did they not conceive, that God is privy to their Vices, that
he is able to punish them, and in Justice may; it is hardly imaginable, why
they should offer such violence to their own Reason, as to force it to argue
against those Notions, that by degrees they may obliterate them, and argue them
utterly away, and so disbelieve the Existence of an Omniscient, Powerful, and
Just Being, that seems to them a most frightful Object. The Idea of God lies
very quiet in a good Conscience: nay, to a Man of an honest Heart, and of a
pious Life, it is the most comfortable Enjoyment, because it fills his mind
with such thoughts as these; That there is a glorious Being, who rules over
all, who observes all our Actions, who takes care of such as live Godly,
Righteously, and Soberly in this World; who orders the Affairs of this Life for
their good; who will guide them here by his Counsel, and afterward will
receive them into Glory: All which, and the like Notions, are such a
comfortable Idea of God, as no Good man would be without for all the World.
Therefore, when Men are tempted to deny God's Existence, the Temptation must
proceed either from a very wrong Opinion of God, as if he were a Cruel,
Mischievous, Spiteful, False, and Ill-natured Being; or (which is more likely)
from a very evil Conscience, which makes God appear to an ill Man a formidable
Being, by reason of his Omniscience, Righteousness, and Power. It Is probable,
that the truest Cause of Atheism, is Vice; there being on all hands such
variety of powerful Arguments to prove a Deity, as one would think impossible
for any, but Men of the most corrupt Minds, to resist the force of them.

CHAP. II.
2. HAVING thus prepared my way toward the proof of a Deity, by showing, That
by the Deity is meant, a Transcendent Being, that eminently enjoys all the
Essential, Intellectual, and Moral Perfections, which can possibly belong to a
Nature which is most excellent, and absolutely free from the least defect; And
by showing too, how intelligible, rational, and certain this Notion of God's
Nature is, I must come now in the next place to make it appear, That there
really is such a Divine Nature, or that this most perfect Being does actually
exist.

Now this naturally follows from the common standing Notion of a Deity, which
implies all possible Perfection. For Existence is the ground of all Perfection,
the very first thing in the order of our Conceptions; because that cannot be
said to be perfect, which is not, or which wants a Being; much less can we
suppose a Nature to be absolutely perfect, that is, to be perfectly Wise, Good,
and Righteous, unless we suppose the Existence of such a Nature.

But lest an Insidel should say, We make Suppositions of our own, by devising
what Notions we please of a God, and then use those Suppositions for Arguments,
to prove there is a God: Therefore in the prosecution of this Point, I shall
show, That there is in the World a most perfect Nature, which we call God,
actually existing, by considering these four things, which shall be the general
Heads of this Subject:

1. First, The Necessity of the thing it self. 2. Secondly, The universal
Consent of Mankind. 3. Thirdly, Those extraordinary Occurrences which must
argue the Being of a Deity. 4. And, Fourthly, The admirable State of the World.
1. First then, If we go through the whole Series and Order of Nature, from
Effects to Causes, and from one Cause onward to another, we must of necessity
come at last to one first Cause, to a Being that does necessarily exist of it
self, and consequently is a distinct, independent, and most perfect Being.

Here we must take notice of an universal Trth, which will very much help to
guide our Reason, viz. That whatever once had not any real Being, could not be
the cause of it self; for upon that impossible Supposition, it would have
existed, and yet not existed at the same time. It would not have existed,
because it is supposed to have wanted a Cause for its Production; and it would
have existed, because it is supposed to have exercised causality; which two
things being contradictory to each other, it must be granted, that whatever
once came out of a State of Nonexistence, was brought out of it by another
distinct Agent which existed antecedently, and had actual Power over it. Hence
it follows, That all the Effects which are now in Nature, and once were not, do
owe their Origination to Causes which were before them (for those things which
had no being, could not in a state of nothingness Act, much less could they act
upon themselves); and how many soever the Foreign Causes of them were, they all
lead us up to a Permanent, first Cause, which depended on no other, nor stood
in need of another for its being. Now we see, that there are innumerable things
in the World, which once were not; and the immediate Causes of these were
themselves the Effects of other Agents; and they again of others, and so on,
till we gradually ascend to one Chief Cause, which was the Original of them
all. To omit all other things at present, I instance in these two sorts of
Effects we see daily; the Motion of Bodies; and the Production of Living
Creatures, especially of Mankind. First, For the Motion of Bodies.

The principal Parts of the World are never idle. In the Earth there are active
Principles of Life and Vegetation, which prepare the vital Juice that is in all
Plants and Trees. In Animals there is Concoction, Digestion, and a Motion, or
Fluor of the Chyle, which serves for Nutrition. In the Sea there is a Flux and
Reflux, and a Current in Rivers and Springs. In the Air there are Vicissitudes
and Turnings, as Exhalations and Vapors steam out of the Earth, and return to
it again modified into various Forms. And the constant circular Courses of
those glorious Bodies in the Firmament, show likewise, that in this visisible
World there is no Rest. Now all these Motions of material Substances must
depend upon Causes; for Matter alone is a liveless, unactive, stupid Thing,
which can no more move it self, than Mountains and Rocks can walk; and whatever
those Causes be, whether proximate or remote, they must depend for their
Operations upon the Energy of one supreme Cause, that empowered Nature, and set
the whole Frame of it on work, and gave it, as we may say, the first Stroke;
for otherwise, Motion, which once was not in being, would have been the Cause
of it self, which is utterly impossible.

The like may be said of the Production of Living Creatures, and particularly
of Mankind. Once we were not, therefore you and I, and all of us had a
beginning, as we shall have an end; and though we should run up our Generations
so far, as to date our Breed from an hundred thousand Years ago, yet must we of
necessity derive it at last from some Ancestors, who were not begotten of
others, as we have been, but were made after a different manner by an
Omnipotent Cause, which could give them a beginning; for otherwise we must
either run up on to Eternity, or suppose our first Parents to have made
themselves, which is repugnant to the universal Truth I demonstrated before,
and would imply, that those our first Parents had a Being, and no Being at the
same instant.

This Argument so strongly proves the necessary Existence of a first Cause, or
a Deity, to form the whole Frame of Nature, and to set it in order, that some
unreasonable Men find themselves constrained to tell us, that the World ever
was, as it is now; the same from all Eternity, without any Rise, Novity, or
Beginning; and so without any dependence on a first Cause, or need of it.

They were as good say plainly, That they are resolved never to be convinced,
but will rid themselves of all belief of a Deity at any rate, though they
destroy the Principles of Common Reason, and run into the most fulsome
Absurdities and Contradictions. For how can it consist with reason to take a
boundless Progress from one Effect to another, still onward up to
Retroinfinity, without stopping at any beginning? This conceit being admitted,
these monstrous Absurdities must follow:

1. First, It implies the local Motion of Bodies to have produced it self,
without the efficiency of a first Mover, which is impossible, because Motion is
neither essential to Matter, (for then no body could ever rest) nor is it
incident to Matter as such, but by its being touched by some moving Principle
that is distinct from it. It is a Passion impressed upon Matter by an Agent, by
virtue whereof it changes place and distance; and therefore it presupposes
Action from something else; otherwise it must be its own Creature and Maker
too, the Effect and Cause of it self at the same time, and out of nothing,
which is a Contradicton. So that though you go through the vastest Series of
moving Bodies, from the things below to the Heavens above, you must come at
last to a first Mover of all things, or conclude against all Sense and Reason,
that there are innumerable Effects without any Original Essiciency. Suppose
when the World was made, it had presently had some great Jog given it; 'twere
hard to conceive, that the Motion of its several Parts should not have spent it
self in a little time, without a conserving Power pervading through all: But it
confounds Humane Understanding to think, how there could be Motion all along
from all past Eternity, and without any beginning, no superior Power moving or
acting upon Bodies; because it is impossible for Matter to be self-active,
though you should suppose it to have been Eternal. It could no more move than
it could make it self; for upon that principle Men must return to that great
Absurdity and Contradiction, touching a thing being its own Cause; that is,
touching its being and not being at the same time.

2. Secondly, To suppose the whole World to have been Eternal, would render the
Generation of Mankind altogether impossible. For every ones Formation and Birth
is absolved in the space of so many Months; and so it must of necessity
include, not only a Period, but a Beginning too; both which are inconsistent
with the Notion of Eternity; for if Humane Race was always begotten, carry it
as high as you please, you must come to a moment when Generation did begin.

3. If it be said, Thirdly, That Men were not from all Eternity generated, as
they are now, but that some were created or made from everlasting, and thence
others were produced in the ordinary common way; this contradicts it self,
for it necessarily infers a Creator or Maker; and by consequence it implies a
first Man, and a first Cause, and a time when our first Ancestors began;
whereas there is neither first nor last in Successions which are Eternal; so
that were our Ancestors Eternal, it must be said plainly, we had no first
Parents at all.

4. And then, Fourthly, What can be more absurd than to conceive, that every
particular Man should have (as we see every Man has) a Father and a Mother,
and yet that all Mankind should have none?

5. Fifthly, Or if every Man's Parents were infinite; then it must be said,
That there are as many Infinites as there are and have been particular Men in
the World, which is such another great Absurdity as the former.

6. Sixthly, To conclude this Argumentation; To affirm the World to have been
Eternal, is to destroy the Notion of Infinity, and to entangle ones self in the
greatest Nonsense. For, (to give you the Words of a most Learned and Judicious
Writer) If the World be Eternal, Bishop Stillingsleet' s Orig. Sac. p. 376.
there must have been past an infinite Succession of Ages; an insinite number
of Successions are already past; and if past, then at an end; and so we find an
Infinite which has an end, which is a consequence becoming one who avoids the
belief of a Deity, because Infinity is an unconceivable thing. Besides, if the
number of Generations has been Insinite, these two consequences will
unavoidably follow, which the Reason of any one but an Atheist would startle
at; That one Infinite may be greater than another; and that the part is equal
to the whole. For let him six where he please in the Course of Generations, I
demand, whether in the great Grand-father's time the Succession of Generations
was Finite or Infinite? If Finite, then it had a beginning, and so the World
not Eternal. If Infinite, then I ask, Whether there were not a longer
Succession of Generations in the time of his great Grandchildren; and so there
must be a number greater than that which was Infinite; for the former
Succession was Infinite, and this has more Generations in it than that had;
but if it be said, That they were equal because both Insinite; Then the
Succession of Generations to the Grandfather, being but a part of that which
extends to his Grandchildren and Posterity, the part is equal to the whole.

This surely is enough to show, That according to common Reason the World once
was not, but that it must have had a beginning; and consequently, that there
was a first Cause of it; nay, that the Existence of an higher Being was
necessary to make it, because whatever once was not, could not be
selforiginated; all that now Moves or Lives in the World could not produce or
make it self, but was brought into being by a most perfect Nature that was
before it, and superior to it, that is, by a Deity, and by nothing less than a
Deity, for these five Reasons.

1. First, It was impossible for all Beings to be made; for that would suppose
that once there was nothing at all; and then it is confessed on all hands, that
nothing could have been produced. Therefore as it was necessary for the first
Cause to be independent on any other, (for else it could not have been the
first) so it was necessary for that Cause to be unproduced, by reason of the
absolute Perfection, and intrinsic plenitude of its own Essence, so that it
needed no hand from without to give it any thing.

2. Secondly, The first Cause having its being by necessity of Nature, it was
impossible for it to have any beginning. For, had it had a beginning like other
things, it must have taken it from some other Principle, because whatever once
wanted Origination, could not give it to it self; and consequently the
Existence of the first Cause must have been contingent and precarious, which
would have destroyed the great Prerogative of its independence.

3. Thirdly, Considering that the several parts of the World were to take their
Original out of a State of Nonexistence, it was impossible for the first Cause
to have a Power limited and restrained by any thing without it. For as nothing
could hinder it from being, by reason of its own necessary Existence; so
nothing could hinder it from acting, by reason of its absolute Independence;
and consequently, the First Cause had necessarily a Power of creating things
out of nothing; because if any preexistent Matter had been requisite for it to
work on, it must have depended upon Matter, and been beholding to Matter for
permitting it to act.

4. Fourthly, The Power of creating things being so necessarily great, it was
impossible for the First Cause to be made up of Matter: For all Matter, as
such, is an unactive, stupid, dead thing, utterly incapable of producing either
it self, or any other Being, much less could it act with that wonderful
Faecundity, Counsel, Wisdom, and Benignity of Mind, which the whole frame of
Nature argues to be in the First Cause; as shall be showed in its due place.

5. Fifthly, It was impossible also for the First Cause of all things to be
locally extended, or to be circumscribed, limited, determined, and confined to
Place, as Matter or Body is. For being to raise up a vast Universe, it was
necessary for that most powerful Nature to be undividedly present to every part
of the world which it acted upon; and for the Management and Conservation of
the Universe, to contain it all within the Immensity of its own Essence: Which
Essence was necessarily boundless and unlimited, because it was not possible to
be produced by any other Being that could restrain, define, or bound its
Immensity. For (as an excellent Writer Dr. Scot' s Christian Life, part 2. vol.
1. p. 193.
well observes and argues) that which limits Beings, is only the Will or Power
of their Causes, which either would not, or could not bestow any further Being
or Perfection upon them; and therefore only such things as have a Cause, are
limited, because they being produced out of nothing, are only so far and no
farther brought into Being, as their Cause was willing or able to bring them.
That therefore which exists of its self without any Cause of its Being, must
also exist of it self without any Limits of its Being, by reason that it was
neither limited by it self, nor by any other Cause; and that which has nothing
to limit it, must necessarily be immense and boundless. God therefore being
this self-existent Being, must necessarily be of an unlimited Essence, an
Essence which no possible Space can either circumscribe or define, but must
necessarily be diffused all through, circumfused all about, and present with
all things.

The Existence then of such a perfect transcendent Being as has been
described, was absolutely necessary in order to the production and formation of
the world. And hence we rationally assirm, That before ever the Earth and the
Heavens were made, there was an Intellectual Nature that was to be the Cause of
the whole World; and that this Nature or First Being was and is
Self-originated, Eternal, Omnipotent, Incorporeal, and Infinite. In using which
expressions we speak like men, as we are able, according to our Capacities, and
as the narrowness of our Faculties, compared with the transcendency of the
Object will allow us. Our meaning more at large is this: Considering that all
the parts of the world were made by an Essicient Cause, and that nothing could
bring it self out of Nonexistence into Being, by reason that nothing could be
before it self, we must necessarily acknowledge, That there is a First Cause of
all things, and that this First Cause was not made or produced by any other:
Which First Cause being altogether Independent, existed by the absolute
Necessity of its Nature, by its own Perfection, Permanency, and Fullness; and
consequently, was Eternal, or of Infinite Duration; because being unproduced,
it could not but be without any beginning. And this Self-Existence includes
Self-Activity, suitable to the Perfections of an Eternal Nature; that is, a
Power of producing and effecting whatever is possible in the Nature of the
thing, and does not imply a Contradiction. For all Impotence or Inability to
operate, is utterly inconsistent with the Perfections of a First Cause, from
which is derived all the Power that is in Second Causes. Whence it follows,
That the First Cause could not be Matter (a thing which of it self cannot live
or move) but a Spirit, void of all Corporeal Substance; an Eternal Mind, able
perfectly to exert and display its Power, as it becomes an Intellectual, Wise,
and Voluntary Agent. And lastly, This Incorporeity renders the First Cause
incapable of beind divisible, or determinable to Place, after the manner of
Bodies, which consist of Magnitude and Dimensions: And therefore how
incomprehensible soever the Notion of Infinity may seem to us, whose outward
Senses are used only to things corporeal, Reason will oblige us to think, that
every Being must be extended or unextended, limited or unlimited, circumscribed
or diffused, according as its Essence and Nature is; and that the first Cause
being incorporeal, and having once an Immense World to make, and ever since an
Immense World to act upon and in, cannot be confined to place, but must be
every where, and undividedly, in a manner agreeable to the Plenitude of its
Nature.

Now this Account of the necessary Existence and Condition of a first Cause, is
so far a plain description of the Deity, or of God. And it is for the greatest
reasons that we maintain, that in order to the Production and Framing of this
huge Universe, the Existence of God was necessary, that is, the Existence of an
Independent, Self-existent, Eternal, All-powerful, Immaterial, and Infinite
Being. These are not bare Epithets of Honor, bestowed (as some strange Men
conceive) upon an imaginary something, which the fancies and fears of People
have without reason represented to their Minds; but real, solid, severe, and
demonstrable Truths; so that admiting the common and most rational Principle
touching the necessity of a First Cause, those glorious Perfections I have now
mentioned, must necessarily belong to it; and because those Perfections are
essential and peculiar to that Glorious Being we call God; therefore God, and
God alone must be acknowledged the First Cause of all things; and by natural
consequence, the Existence of God must necessarily be believed.

CHAP. III.
HAVING proved the Truth and Reality of God's being, from the necessary
Existence of a first Independent Cause. I proceed now to the second General
Head of this Discourse, touching the Consent of all Mankind; for if it can be
made appear, That the belief of a Deity has been universally received in the
World, it is reasonable to conclude, that that belief resulted from a common
Principle of Nature, which could not deceive the Minds of all Mankind.

Here then these two things are to be showed:

1. First, That Men have universally agreed in this, That there is a God. 2.
Secondly, That this universal Agreement is a very strong Argument of God's
Existence.
1. First, That Men have universally agreed in this, That there is a God. That
noble Orator and Philosopher, Cicero, does in several places acknowledge, That
all manner of People were naturally posfest with some Anticipations (or
Preconceptions) De Nit-Deor. lib. 1. Tuse: Qu. lib. 1. de Leg. lib. 1.
of a Deity, so that no Nation was ever so wild and undisciplined, but that
they had a fear of God, and owned his Being, however they were mistaken as to
the quality of his Nature. To the same purpose Seneca tells, That the belief
Ep. 117.
of a God is planted in every ones mind. And Maximus Tyrius is positive, Diss.
1.
That how great soever the Contentions of Men were about other Points, they all
agreed in this, that there is one Supreme God over all. Nay, Epicurus Cic. de
Not. deor. lib. 1.
himself (of whom this Character is given, that in words he owned the Existence
of God, but in fact denied it) was contented the belief of it should pass
abroad, because it was a kind of innate Principle, not only among Philosophers,
but among the Unlearned too, who all had some Pri-notion of a Deity.

So true is this, That not only the real Existence, but even the Singularity
and Unity of a Supreme God, has been generally believed by Heathens
themselves; especially by the wiser fort of them; which I think very material
for me to take notice of here, for the further Illustration and Confirmation of
the Matter in hand.

Indeed the Heathens have been wont to worship a Plurality of Deities. But
withal it is very observable, that they looked upon those many Deities, as a
fort of middle Beings between Mon and the Supreme Deity; and accordingly in
their Devotions they addressed themselves to them, as Agents and Officers under
the Great God, as his Ministers of State, and as Mediators between them and the
most high Sovereign Numen, because they thought it irreligious Confidence to
apply themselves to him immediately, and directly; such a venerable and august
Opinion they had of the God over all.

Though in the Poetical, Fabulous Ages of the World, ignorant People were
taught to worship a multitude of gods; as the Souls of dead Men, whom they
believed to be Deified; the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which were supposed to be
animated with Deities; besides, a great number of Demons, or incorporeal
Substances, or Spirits, which they thought were generated, and had the
Administration and Government of the World committed to them; yet they owned
One Sovereign Numen, One Incomprehensible, Self-existent Being, the Prince and
Father of all. Nay, the more intelligent sort of Pagans anciently thought, that
the Plurality of Deities which the Vulgar worshipped, were only so many several
Names of one and the same Supreme God, according to the several Manifestations
of his Power. In the Heavens (says St. Austin) they called De Civit. 1. 4. c.
11.
him Jupiter; in the Air, Juno; in the Sea, Neptune; in the Earth, Pluto; and
very many more Appellations there were; which though the sottish Rabble
believed to have been proper Names for distinct Deities, yet the Philosophers
thought they did all belong to one Supreme Numen variously acting and
displaying his Virtue. And with this agrees that of De Benef. l. 4. c. 7.
Seneca; What else is Nature (says he) but God; or Divine Wisdom and Power
displaying it self in the whole world, and in all the parts of it? You may,
when you please, give several Titles to the Author of all things: And you may
call him Jupiter Optimus Maximus, and Tonans, and Stator, not from stopping the
Roman Army in their flight, but because all things do stand (or consist) by
him. You may well apply to him what Names you will, that signify his Heavenly
Power and Efficacy: There may be as many Appellations, as there are Gifts, or
Effects of God. Besides Jupiter, Tonans, and Stator, we call him Liber Pater,
Hercules, and Mercurius. Liber Pater, because he has produced all things:
Hercules, because his Power is invincible; and Mercury, by reason of his
Wisdom. Turn you which way you please, God meets you; for nothing is without
him: He fills all his Works (so that his various Names were according to the
various Manifestations of him). Should you receive a kindness from Seneca, and
say you owed it to Annaeus, or Lucius, you would not change the Person, but his
Name; for what Name soever you call him by, you mean still the same man. And so
you may call the Deity too, Nature, Fate, and Fortune; but all these are the
Names of one and the same God, diversely using and showing his Power.

Hence it appears, That in times of the greatest Ignorance, Heathens themselves
did not only profess the belief of a Deity, but did own also the Existence of
One Sovereign Being over all. Though they talked of Gods many, and of Goddesses
many, and a multitude of Deities was believed and worshipped by the Common
People; yet the Wise men among them looked upon this great appearance and show
of distinct Deities, to have been different Names of One Supreme God; various
Representations, Characters and Titles of One Eternal and Incomprehensible
Nature pervading through the whole world, and variously acting, exhibiting, and
manifesting its Divine Power in it every where.

In the Primitive Ages of Christianity, the Controversy between the Christians
and Pagans was not about the Being of One Supreme God (for all on each hand
were agreed as to that) but about the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and about many
Inferior Powers which the Heathens worshipped besides the great Creator
himself, God blessed for evermore. It Is plain from Acts 17. 23, 24. that in St.
Paul's time the Athenians not only owned the Existence, but adored the Majesty
of the True God; For, says the Apostle, whom ye ignorantly worship, him
declare I unto you; and that was no other, but the God who made the world, and
all things in it; called by the Athenians, the unknown God, because his Nature
cannot be comprehended or seen by men. In the following times of Christiany,
the great Doctors of the Church, who defended our Religion against Heathenism,
do tell us over and over, That the Pagans acknowledged a Supreme God, as well
as Christians. The Dispute between them was concerning Fictitious Deities
supposed to be subordinate to the Supreme. For the Pagans Faith was, that many
Gods were derived from One; that to those Inferior Spirits the care and
government of the Universe was committed; and that Divine Honors ought to be
given them, as the Officers of God, and as Mediators between God and Men.
Nevertheless, among their many Deities, and over all their many Deities, they
acknowledged One Supreme. They called him the First, the Greatest, the Unmade,
the Supercoelestial God, the Chief, the King of all. They believed that all
things were from him; that he was the Maker especially of Immortal Beings; that
he is Incomprehensible, Good, the common Father of all, wanting nothing, and
without all manner of Envy; that he is a Self-existent Principle, the Fountain
of all Good, the Conserver of all things living, the Lord of the Universe, the
Universal Reason and Mind, the Uniform Cause of all things, the Original of all
Pulchritude and Perfection, of all Unity and Power; the Great and Magnificent
Father of Nature, whose Virtues are diffused throughout the whole World.
Julian, that great Zealot for Cyril. l. 2.
Heathenism, confessed, that there is a natural knowledge of God in men's minds,
from whence that common Inclination toward a Deity springs, and that
Persuasion among all men, that He who is the King over all, has his Throne in
Heaven. Accordingly, Julian, and the rest of the Learned Heathens, honored the
God of Heaven with the greatest veneration that was possible for men of their
Principles. Though they gave their other Deities divine honors, yet it was an
inferior sort of worship; and that they paid too for the Supreme God's sake,
and in honor to him, believing that the Great God was pleased with it, because
it was given upon his account to other things, as the Ministers, Images, and
Representatives of the Invisible Orig. cont. Celsus, p. 421, and 419.
Deity. If (says Celsus, that Bigoted Defender of Paganism) a man be required
to praise the Sun, or Minerva, he may sing Hymns cheerfully; for by singing
Hymns to these, he will the better worship the Great God; because that Divine
Worship is the most perfect, which passes through all. However, says he, God
is by no means at any time to be forsaken, or left out; neither by day, nor by
night; neither in private, nor in public; neither in any of our Thoughts, nor
in any of our Actions, but in every thing our minds should be still directed
toward God, and intent upon him. And again; all Torments are rather to be
endured, and any Deaths are rather to be undergone, than we should either speak
an irreligious thing of God, or admit into our minds an irreligious Thought of
him.

Before I pass from this Consideration, touching the Pagans Belief of the
Existence of God, in the Primitive Times of Christianity, as in the Ages
before; I cannot but observe, by way of digression, that notwithstanding this
their hearty Belief, and Religious Worship of One Supreme Deity, the True God,
that made all things, these Pagans were Idolaters, and were still counted by
the Christian Church guilty of Idolatry: Not because they worshipped Creatures,
laying the Creator aside (for it is plain, that they owned and adored the same
Great God that we Christians worship); but because they served the creature,
(...), as St. Paul speaks, Romans 1. 25. that is, besides the Creator. They gave
Divine Honors to him, and to other Beings too; they worshipped them as well as
the Great God; they made them Partners and Sharers with the Great God in their
Religious Services; and though this worshipping of other Beings was for the
Great God's sake, though it was a lower kind of Worship, and though all the
Services of the Heathens (especially the wiser sort of them) were directed to
the Great God, did refer to the Great God, and did terminate in him; yet were
they downright Idolaters. And as this shows the true Notion and Nature of
Idolatry, that it is the Religious Worshipping of any thing besides God: So it
shows how impossible it is for those Christians, who adore Saints and Angels,
as well as the True God, and the True Messiah, to clear themselves of the
Charge of Idolatry, notwithstanding all their nice distinctions of Dulia,
Latria, Relative Worship, and the like. All this the Heathens might have said
for their Excuse. They gave the Supreme God the highest Honors; and in Honor
to him they worshipped inferior Deities, as the Romanists do Saints and Angels:
in which respect their practice is a plain, but shameful Counter-part of old
Heathenism; so that were there no such thing in the Church of Rome as
Image Worship, I cannot see but this Creature-worship would be enough to make
them guilty of Idolatry. Either this practice is Idolatrous, or that of the
Heathens was not such, which yet they of the Church of Rome dare not affirm.

But to return to the Matter in hand. If from those elder times of Heathenism
we come down now to modern Ages, though we search into the darkest and remotest
Corners of the World, we cannot find any one Nation or People so barbarous, so
sunk into a State of Ignorance and Stupidity, as not to have believed the
Existence of God, even in their Idolatrous Gentile Condition. The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work, There is no
speech nor language, where their voice is not heard. Their sound is gone out
into all lands, and their words unto the ends of the world, Psalm 19. 1, 3, 4.
Where David represents those glorious Creatures as proclaiming, and all Nations
as hearing them proclaim the Transcendent Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and Majesty
of their Maker and Conserver. All People, how ignorant soever they have been of
other Languages, have understood this. However they have differed from one
another in their Polity, Laws, Customs, or Manner of Life, have unanimously
consented in this, That there is a God. And though many have lived, as if they
were without God in the World, yet none have been without him in their
Consciences.

Here falls in an Account which has been given us, by a most Inquisitive and
Learned Writer of our Church; and which, both for the Usefulness and Curiosity
of it, well deserves to be taken notice of in this place. That Great Man Bishop
Stillingfleet's Defense of his Discourse concerning Idolatry.
undertaking to prove, That men may be guilty of Idolatry, though they believe
and worship the True God, shows particularly, That the grossest Idolaters of
later times, both in the East and West Parts of the World, have acknowledged
one Sovereign Being over all those inferior Deities they worshipped; that they
gave him the highest Honors; and that that they called him in their respective
Languages by some peculiar Name, which signified the greatest Excellency.

First, he shows of the Idolaters of the East Indies, That they all believed
there was but One God who made the World, and reigns in Heaven; and that they
worshipped this One God, as well as Christians, and referred all the Honor to
him, which they gave to other things; that some called the Supreme God
Parabrama, which in their Language signifies, absolutely Perfect, being the
Fountain of all things, existing from himself, and free from all Composition;
that others called that Sovereign Being Achar, that is, Immutable; others,
Tento, believing him to be the Governor of the World; others Sciaxeti, or
Scianti, which signifies the Supreme Monarch; and Tienciu, which is as much as
to say, The Lord of Heaven.

Then the Learned Author gives this Account of the Idolatrous Tartars, That
they believed and worshipped One God, owning him to be the Maker of all things
visible and invisible, and to be the Author of all worldly Good and Punishment.

Of the Inhavitants of Madagascar, he shows, That they believed One God, who
made Heaven and Earth, and will one day punish the bad, and reward the good
Actions of men.

Of the People of Monomotapa, That they acknowledge One God, whom they call
Mozimo, and are said to worship nothing else besides him.

Of the Idolatrous Muscovites, That they worshipped only the Creator of the
Universe, to whom they offered the first Fruits of all things, even their Meat
and Drink.

Of the Idolaters of Cranganor, That they worshipped the God of Heaven, calling
him Tambram, and believing him to have made the World.

Of the Northern Idolaters, especially the Goths, he shows, That the most
ancient of their gods was called by them Alfader, that is, the Father of all;
they believed that this God lives for ever; that he governs all things; that he
made the Heavens, and Earth, and Air, and all Things in them; and which is the
greatest of all, that he made Man, and gave him a Soul that should live for
ever, although the Body be destroyed; and that those who are good shall be with
him.

Touching the Idolaters in Asrick, that Excellent Writer shows, That they
worshipped God under the Name of Guighimo, that is, The Lord of Heaven; and
that though the Negroes adored many gods, yet they acknowledged One Supreme,
whom they called Ferisso, and believed him to be the Author of the Good and
Evil they received.

As for the account he gives out of Josephus Acosta, and Garcilasso de la Vega,
touching the Idolaters in America before their Conversion to Christianity, I
have reserved it to the last, because it seems so clear and full, that it is
the fittest Observation to conclude this Point. The surn of it is, That those
Idolatrous Indians acknowledged a Supreme Lord and Author of all things, whom
they of Peru called Pachacamac, that is, the Soul of the World, the true
Sovereign Creator of the Sovereign Creator of the World; and Usapu, which is
Admirable; and such like; and though they had a great Veneration for the Sun
and Moon, and other things, yet they held and adored Pachamac as the chiefest
of all, and whenever they mentioned his Name, did it with all the Reverence and
Devotion imaginable, in Honor to the unexpressible Majesty of God. And hence
was that Observation of the Spanish Jesuit, Acosta, That those who at that time
did Preach the Gospel to the Indians, found no great difficulty to persuade
them that there is a High God and Lord over all, and that this was the
Christians God, and the True God. This (says he) is a truth conformable to
Reason, That there is a Sovereign Lord and King of Heaven, and him the
Gentiles, with all their Infidelities and Idolatries have not denied; so that
the Preachers of the Gospel had no great difficulty to plant and persuade this
Truth of the Supreme God, though the Nations to whom they preached were never
so Barbarous and Brutish. The hard thing was to root out of their minds this
Persuasion, That there is no other God, nor any other Deity than one; and that
all other things of themselves have no Power, Being, nor working proper to
themselves, but what the Great and only Lord does give and impart to them.
However People have been mistaken in their belief of a multiplicity of Deitics,
this has been a common Notion in all barbarous Countries, that there is One
Supreme God infinitely Good.

I think no more need be said, to show the universal Persuasion of Mankind
concerning God's Existence. However, before I proceed to Argue and Reason from
it, and to prove the Truth of God's Existence from this universal Persuasion,
it will be necessary to take notice of two Pretenses, which are commonly used
to evade the force of this Argument.

1. The first is, That some whole Nations have been found, which have been
without all Sense of God; as was reported particularly of some People in
America, after the discovery of them by Christians. To this there are three
things in answer.

First, That the matter alleged is not evident or certain, because the Men who
first related it, were Strangers to the Language and Customs of those People,
and therefore could not be competent Judges of their Principles. Nay, they were
abhorred as Enemies, and consequently were incapable of understanding the
Mysteries of those Peoples Religion; a thing, which Men are generally very shy
of discovering, especially to those who use them hardly.

Secondly, It is so far from being certain, that in probability it is not true:
For though upon the first discovery of those Nations, some of them were
suspected of Atheism, yet a different Account was given afterward upon further
enquiries; nay, the most Ignorant and Savage People among them did worship some
things after a Religious sort; however they were mistaken in their Notions of
God's Nature, and as to the manner of his Worship; a plain Sign that they
thought that there was a Superior Being to be worshipped, and that it was
better to Worship almost any thing for a Deity, than not to own any Deity at
all.

Thirdly, Were the Report true and unquestionable, all that can be gathered
hence, is, that it is possible for some Men to be so besotted, and governed by
outward Sense, as to lose in a manner that which is proper to Humane Nature,
Reason and Religion, and to fall into a Belluine kind of Life. But this is no
Argument against the common Principles of all the rest of Mankind, who have
hearkened to the Voice of Nature, and to their own Consciences; nor is it
reasonable, that one particular Exception should prevail against a general
Rule. If in the Universe there be now and then a little Irregularity, it cannot
argue that Nature is not steady and uniform. And so, if among Mankind there
chance to be here or there some brutish People, it cannot argue, that the
generality of Men have no Reason, or that what is agreeable to common Reason,
is false. That there is a God, is a Principle agreed upon by the generality of
Mankind; and if some odd Folks of lost understanding have no such Notion, Of
what weight is this, that it should bear down the common Sentiment of Mankind?
After this rate it may be said, That there is no right Reason in the World, nor
any Credit or Authority to be given to Reason, because there are in the World
Beasts and Naturals.

2. But to take off this Answer, it is pretended, Secondly, That Philosophers
and Men of Reason have been against the belief of God's Existence, as
Theodorus, Bion, Leucippus, Democritus, Protagorus, Diagoras, Epicurus, and the
like. Now as to this, these four things are to be said.

First, That we scarcely find the Names of twelve Atheists expressly mentioned
in History since the Creation; setting aside some in these later Ages, who
would have been thought wiser than all the World besides. In all the Scripture
we read not of one by Name; and though the Psalmist speaks indefinitely of a
Fool in his time, That said in his heart, There is no God, Psalm 14. 1. yet by
his Character you see what he was counted; and as great a Fool as he was he
would not speak out, nor affirm it positively, but said it in his heart; so
that it was rather his Wish than Opinion.

Secondly, Of those we read of in Humane Writers, some were called Atheists
merely because they despised the Rabble of Deities, and the unreasonable
Superstitions, which the generality of Gentiles had in great admiration. Such
was the humor of people in those times, that they stigmatized all who opposed
their follies with that infamous Character: An humor which held on to the
times of the Gospel, when the most Religious Disciples of Christ were charged
with Atheism for the same reason; because they were Enemies too (though upon
far better grounds) to the Faith and Worship of the Pagan Deities: So that upon
a strict computation, I think, the notorious Atheists in those dark Ages were
not in all above Seven.

And of those it is observable, Thirdly, That not so much as one could be a
tolerable Judge of matters relating to Religion. For some of them were infamous
for Vice and Immoralities; and therefore in favor to their Lusts did think
themselves concerned to destroy the belief of God's Existence. Others were men
of so little Sense, that every Modern Insidel has just reason to be alham'd of
them: For Protagoras was a Porter, and Diagoras a Slave; both of them were
angry at Providence for not having disposed of them better in the World; and so
were easily bribed and hired by Democritus to make up a small paltry Litter.
And of all of them it is remarked, that they were bloated up with Pride,
Arrogance, and Ambition, whereby they affected to be singular, and to signalize
themselves as the most knowing Sages in the World, by rejecting Notions which
were the common received Principles among all Mankind.

And yet, Fourthly, What those few Upstarts did, they did by straining and
forcing their own Consciences. There is a Power in Conscience which cannot be
utterly fubdued, especially when not only the Honor, but the very Being of God
is concerned, whose Deputy it is. Then Conscience will throb and possess the
most Irreligious men with such Fears as argue the Existence of God, whatever
Arguments they endeavor to raise against him. They lie (says Seneca) who
profess an unbelief of God: For though they maintain it before you in the
Daytime, yet at Night they themselves call their Infidelity in question.
Company, Business, or Diversion, may banish their Fears for a while; but those
Fears return in the dark from under the Pillow, when Conscience comes to have
private Audience. And to this purpose Colla in Cicero tells us of Epicurus
himself (whose Doctrines De Not. Dcor. lib 1.
were designed to destroy the apprehensions of a Deity), That he never saw any
man more afraid than that Philosopher was of those things which he said were
not to be dreaded; that is, Death, and God: A clear Argument, That whatever he
pretended and taught to the contrary, his Conscience told him there was a
Righteous Judge of all the Earth.

The sum is; The belief of God's Existence has been the general belief of all
Ages and Countries; and for that very reason Epicurus himself was willing Ibid.
it should pass on still. 'Twas observed before of that Conceited Man, That
though in fact, and in the natural consequence of his Principles he denied God,
yet for fear of the severe Laws and People of Athens, in words he owned a
Deity; and that for this consideration, because Nature it self had imprinted on
all men's minds a notion of God; as his Disciple Villeius in Cicero said of him.
For, said he, what Nation, or sort of men is there, which have not, without
Learning, some anticipation of a Deity, which Epicurus called a Prolepsis, or
Pre-notion? And since that Opinion is not grounded upon any Institution,
Custom, or Law, and yet continues the firm, unshaken belief of all men,
therefore people ought to profess the belief of a Deity.

And now what is the singular Imagination of a few vain, wanton Wretches, to
the settled Persuasion of all the World besides? Must all men be deceived in
their notions of God, because Democritus and Epicurus would not seem to own
them? There are sometimes Monstrosities in Nature; and so there are too often
in Opinion; nor is any thing so absurd and monstrous, but it has been disputed
for; at least, may be disputed for by men of parts; and does it hence follow
that the contrary Principles are not true? One Philosoper maintained, that
there is no such thing as Motion; another would have persuaded people that Snow
is black; and some stood in it, that the same thing may be, and may not be at
the same time, and in the same respect; that is, that both parts of a
Contradiction can be true; and shall such odd Whimseys prevail against the
common Sense and Reason of Mankind? Some never saw the light in all their
lives; and does this argue that there is no real Sun? or, that That is no Sun
which the whole World beholds? Why, a man of unprejudiced and impartial Reason
may with his mind as easily see God in his Works, as I can see the day with my
eyes. But should I so affect singularity as to shut my eyes, and then pretend
that all the World is a dismal, dark, confused Chaos; could it be concluded
hence, that there is not one Star in the Firmament? why, it is as senseless to
conclude that there is no God, and that Mankind have been all along mistaken in
their belief of God, because two or three Impious Philosophers have shut the
eyes of their Understanding against him. This indeed is an argument against
themselves; a proof of their own folly, stupidity, and wickedness: But it is no
argument against all other men, who have no mind to be so stupid and
irreligious as they were: It Is far from being a proof, that there is no
Existing Deity, as the generality of men have been in all times and places
unanimously and thoroughly persuaded.

2. Nay, that I may proceed to the Second thing I proposed under this Head,
from Matter of Fact to Evidence of Reason; this Universal Consent is a strong
Argument of God's Existence. For whence could this common belief proceed, but
from a common, natural Principle, wherewith the Souls of all men were endued by
the Common Creator, to bear witness of his Being, as a Signature made by his
own Finger?

I do not mean, that the Notions we have of God are connatural to the Sou; that
is, inbred, innate, and engraven, as it were, in our minds, upon our Conception
in the Womb, so that every man in his Senses does of himself, by common
instinct, understand that there is a God. Methinks we need not go so far. It is
enough that there is in us an inclination toward God, a disposition and
propension to Religion, and an aptness to receive the knowledge of God upon
Instruction, Education, and the use of common Reason. This we may well call a
Natural Principle; and so the Notions we have of God are Natural Notions,
because they do naturally result from the free exercise of our Natural
Faculties.

Now this plainly infers the Existence of God; because none but God could put
the Souls of all Mankind into this frame: None but the Author of Nature could
be the Author of those Principles in our Nature, whereby every man is able to
discover and find out God; as all men have done, and do, who use their Reason.
All have consented in this, that there is a Deity: Of this One, Universal,
Uniform Principle there must be One, Universal, Uniform Cause; nor can any
other Cause be reasonably assigned, but that Sovereign Being, who is the Cause
of all things, and who ordered our common Nature thus. Had not God made our
Faculties so, that the belief of his Existence springs forth in every one's
mind with his Reason, and grows up with his Reason, we might argue with
Lucilius in Cicero, De Not. Deor. lib. 2.
That it would have been impossible for that Belief to have continued every
where constant, or to have been confirmed by a long tract of time, and to have
become inveterate together with men's Ages. For vain, fictitious Opinions wear
out by Diuturnity. Time discovers and destroys the falsehood of Imagination, but
confirms the solid dictates and determinations of Nature. Which shows, that
this common, lasting Notion of the Existence of God, is natural, and owes its
original to a Power above, whose workmanship we all are.

To defond themselves against the strength of this Argument, those that say in
their hearts there is no God, pretend that this so universal a belief of the
Existence of a Deity, may be impured to one or other of these four Causes, if
not to all of them: Tradition, Fear, State Policy, and common Compact; the
vanity of which Pretense I am now to show, that I may not pass by any thing
material which lies in my way, upon this necessary, useful, and seasonable
Subject.

^. As to the pretense of Tradition, though we suppose it to have been one
Cause of that Universal Consent I have spoken of, yet these two things must be
said: First, That Tradition argues the Truth of the Belief; and therefore is
alleged to no purpose. Secondly, That Tradition of it self alone, and without
the dictates of Nature, could not have been a sufficient cause of this
Universal Consent.

First, Tradition argues the Truth of that Belief which has prevailed amongst
all Mankind. By Tradition is meant (if men will speak Sense and Reason) an
Opinion handed down from some First Authors: Nor can any other Authors of this
Tradition be assigned, but those from whose Loins all Mankind descended; for
how was it possible for a common Principle to spring but from a common Root,.
our First Parents? Now this leads us back to the Times which Moses speaks of,
when the First Parents of Mankind were formed. And the Faith of God's Existence
being derived originally from them, cannot but be unquestionably true; because
they could not but know their own beginning: They could not but know, that God
had made them after a preternatural manner; that God had formed them by his
immediate Power; and that they came out of the hands of God: Nor is it
conceivable, that they should have taught their Children the knowledge of God,
had not they themselves been sure there was One: That they should wilfully and
designedly impose a Fiction upon all their Posterity, and such a Fiction too as
would keep their minds in continual bondage under the most frightful
apprehensions; this is an Imagination which confounds the Understanding of any
reasonable man, and is altogether unaccountable.

Besides, Had not the Tradition been certain, how could it have held so every
where in the World, and all along for several Thousand years to this day?
Fables are apt to be soon lost, what Hand soever sends them abroad to pass
about in the World. The falsehood of them is somewhere or other discovered in
time; especially when Inquisitive and Wise men begin to search into them, and
to examine what substance there is in them, and what credit they are of: And
how was it possible for this Tradition, had it been fabulous, to have gone
through the world without interruption, or stop, notwithstanding all the most
Curious Enquiries in so many Philosophical and Learned Ages? This shows, that
the Tradition is grounded upon Principles of Nature; that therefore it is
common with our Nature; and must be as constant and common as Humane Nature
continues.

2. To which I add, Secondly, That though Truth went along with the Tradition,
yet of it self alone, and without the Dictates of Nature, it could not have
been universally received in all Places and Ages. For every one is not ready to
embrace Truth it self, though it be never so probable; and when it is received,
in process of time it does often drop; nor is it easy to conceive how this
Truth could have gone so current, as it has gone, in all parts, and from hand
to hand, without any considerable opposition, unless it had had the help of
strong Reason to support it, and to carry it on still. No doubt but Adam taught
his Children, in that long tract of time, the Nine hundred and thirty years of
his life, many Truths, both Philosophical and Divine, which yet are now quite
lost; especially to those people who have not the use of those Books which are
open before us. Nay, though we are able by the help of Discourse to gather
diverse things out of Moses's Writings, which the old Pagans had no knowledge at
all of; yet are there several matters which we our selves are to seek for,
because they are not evident from clear, cogent Principles of Nature. But this
great Truth concerning the Existence of God has been propagated all along
together with Mankind, and as people have every where multiplied successively
from Generation to Generation. Nay, the higher we go to those Elder times after
the Creation, the less of Infidelity we find. Though there were then very few
Books in the World, yet God was believed on, and even by those who in their
lives dishonored him: For in those days Nature spoke with simplicity, and much
plainer and better than in aftertimes, when men of wanton Wits, and of base
Minds, used Arts, and so corrupted and debauched their Natural Reason. This
shows, that the Belief of God's Existence is grounded upon something in Humane
Nature, which has still preserved it in the world, notwithstanding the
miscarriage of many other Traditions which our old Ancestors transmitted to
their Posterity, and left with them. This has escaped undestroy'd,
uncontradicted but by a very few Partial, Conceited, and Designing Men; of
which no other cause can be rationally assigned, but that it is most consonant
to the frame of our Nature, a Natural Principle, an Idea of God which he
himself has, as it were, imprinted and stamped upon every ones minds, so that
it cannot be worn out by Time it self, which wears out other Notions that are
not fixed and rivetted, as this is, into the common Reason of Mankind; and
therefore it is not to be imputed to mere Tradition.

2. Nor, Secondly, Can it be imputed to Fear; which is the next Pretense. For
those who would destroy the Belief of a God, would fain persuade the world,
that it is only a thing of Fancy, a fictitious, frightful Idea, put into
peoples heads by Designing Men, or formed in their Brains by the power of their
own Imagination; and that their minds being once scared, were easily bent to
conceive that there is a Terrible Being over them, which those bold, hardy
Wretches imagine to be nothing but a Bugbear, without any real Existence; and
accordingly they bottom Religion upon groundless Fears; believing Hell, and
Damnation, and a Deity, to be Figments, things invented and talked of to
terrify the World; and so the Atheistical Author of the Leviathan represents
them, comparing them, as he has the confidence to express it, to an empty Hat
upon a crooked Stick to fright Birds from the Corn. I should beg every good
Christian's pardon for but mentioning such Impiety, did not the Looseness of
the Age we live in constrain us to take notice of the strange Notions that are
got abroad: The meaning whereof in short is, That if people were not frighted
out of their Wits, they would hardly believe the Existence of a Deity; for they
ground that Belief upon Fear, and make Popular Fear to be the cause of it. And
hence it is, they think, that this Belief has generally prevailed in the
World; not from any Natural Principle in the Understanding, but from a slavish,
foolish Passion of heart; and because men have been every where taught to be
fearful and timorous, or have made themselves so.

Now to every Considerate, Rational Man, it is plain, that Fear cannot be the
cause of that Belief, but is the consequence and effect of it: That is, Men do
not believe a God, because they are afraid; but are therefore afraid, because
they believe there is one, a Just and Powerful Being over all: And therefore
their Fears proceed from an Universal, Common, and Natural Principle in every
ones mind, touching God's Existence; for otherwise it were impossible for men's
Fears to be so great, so universal, so fixed in Humane Nature, as never to be
eradicated.

First, It can never stand with common Reason to conceive, how Fear should
create Tormenting Apprehensions of a Being, whom all Mankind have ever adored
for his great Goodness, and whom Heathen Philosophers themselves have
discovered by the Light of Nature, to be for his Divine Perfections the most
Lovely and Desirable Being in the whole world. What Reverence soever the sense
of his Greatness may call for, disquieting. Terrors of a Being so infinitely
Perfect, cannot spring but from an Evil Conscience: And then I appeal to all
Men of Sense, whether that Conscience ought to be heard against God, whose
Interest it is to have none. This is certain, That there can be no fear, where
there is not supposed an Object to be afraid of. That Object must be
acknowledged, not only to be, but to be Angry and Threatening; otherwise our
Faculties would be both vain and delusory, constrained to fear where no grounds
of fear are; which is to reproach Nature it self, that is so adored by some
Insidels, and to impeach it for a Common Cheat.

Secondly, Though we should think some particular Persons imposed upon by their
Fears; yet how could all Men in the World fall under the same Imposture at
once? How could they be seized with one Agony universally, but from an
Epidemical Principle in Humane Nature? Or, how could they all jump together in
one Principle without the Hand of a God who made them all, and intended by this
means to hold them all fast to himself?

Thirdly, If we should be so unreasonable as to suppose Mankind to have been
frighted all at the same instant, no body knows by whom, or when, or how; and
by that fright to have been possessed with the thoughts of a Deity, can we
suppose too that they had no time in so many Ages, to recover themselves out of
that panick Distemper? Fear is a cruciating and tormenting Passion, which every
Man is desirous to rid himself of as soon as he can; and would all Mankind be
plagued with it perpetually, and without grounds? If it be said, That some
Philosophers have found out the unreasonableness of it, and for that reason
have discarded the Notion of a Deity, which was the effect of it; how came it
to pass, that those Philosophers themselves could not void their own minds of
that Fear notwithstanding? It was observed before out of Cicero, That Epicurus,
as great an Atheist as he was, could not rid himself of the fear of God and
Death; and if the hearts of his Followers were thoroughly searched, it will be
found, that none are more fearful than they; which is a plain sign, that there
are Briars and Thorns in their Consciences that can never be plucked up by the
Roots; that there is a Testimony of God within them, and that how slightly and
contumeliously soever they may talk of a God in their sits, there is an abiding
Conviction upon their minds, that there is a God that judges the Earth, and
will one day render to every Man according to his works.

There is an end of fear, when once it is discovered to be groundless; and if
Democritus, and the rest of them, did verily believe, there was no God, what
made them still afraid? This fear could not raise the Notion of a Deity in
them, because they disputed against the Notion. No; it was the Notion of God,
which their Consciences could not part with, whatever they said; it was this
that kept them in fear. For Nature will not lie, however Men's Tongues may; and
the terrible Apprehensions which those very Men labored under, are a plain
argument, that the belief of God's Existence is inseparable from all men's
Reason; a Principle never to be pulled or torn out of Humane Nature, because
radicated in it by the Maker of Mankind.

3. It is suggested also, That the universal belief of a Deity was introduced
by the contrivance of Politic Princes, who took advantage by the panick fears
of People to confirm their apprehensions, and to fill their minds with Notions
of a God, that thereby they might the better keep their Subjects in Peace and
Obedience to their Commands, and in continual Awe of an Invisible, Omnipotent
Being, that would punish both in this World, and in another, all Sedition,
Contumacy, and Disorders, though never so secretly acted; and so they resolve
all Religion into State Policy, as if it were nothing but an Imposture, and
Artificial Engine of Civil Government, formed by the Wit and Cunning of
designing Legislators. One of the thirty Tyrants at Athens, Critias by Name, is
thought to have been one of the first that suggested this, and fancied the
belief of a Deity to be an Invention and Trick of State; and from him that
fancy is come down to us, and has possessed the Brains of some in this Age, who
are much of the Principles and Temper of Critias. I call it a fancy, because it
is an unreasonable imagination upon these four Accounts.

1. First, It is not conceivable, how any Pagan, though never so great a
Statesman or Philosopher, could at first without any Preconception or
Disposition toward a Deity, devise and create in his mind a bright Idea of so
glorious a Being, and of those Divine Properties which essentially belong to a
Nature that is acknowledged to be eminently and absolutely Perfect. If it be
said, This Idea was first formed by the strength of Humane Reason, the Point is
gained, that the Notion of a Deity is grounded in the intellectual part of
Humane Nature, a rational, natural Principle; and for that cause, the belief of
a God has been universally professed all over the World. If it was not the work
of Reason, but a kind of Phantasm that fell by mere chance into the man's
Imagination, a casual and contingent Idea, that one would think might as well
have dropped into the fancy of a Common Animal without the use of Reason: How is
it conceivable, that such a glorious Idea, as the Idea of God is, could be
first framed in any man's Imagination by chance? The Idea of a Being of all the
most glittering Perfections? The Idea of a most Wife, Righteous, and Gracious
Being? The Idea of an Omnipotent, Benign Cause of all things? In short, The
Idea of a Being that is the most glorious, beautiful, and charming Object for
the Rational Faculty to be fixed on, and to contemplate, and for one's heart to
desire? How could such an Idea fall into any one's fancy by mere chance, and
without the Operation of Reason?

2. Or Secondly, How can such an imaginary Figment of the Brain be reasonably
thought to have possessed the minds of all the Politicans in the World at once,
and that by chance too? How could they all entertain the same Notions of God at
the same time, if they were fictitious things; or if there were not great
Reasons for them in Nature? How could Men of so many different Languages, and
in so many distant Places and Countries, conspire all at once to devise a
Notion, for which there was no Reason, Ground, or Truth?

3. Or, Thirdly, If all Princes could have joined together to cousen the World,
how is it conceiveable that they would, or could have put a cheat upon
themselves, and have deceived their own minds? For Princes and Statesmen lie
under the apprehensions of God as well as other Men; and the most hardy, crafty
Politician is some time or other afraid of him, as Caligula was when he heard
it thunder. God has been the Hope of good Princes, and the Terror of bad Ones;
and what ground could they themselves have for their expectation of Rewards or
Punishments, if the belief of a Deity had been an Invention of their own; and
if their secret design hereby was to keep, not themselves, but their People in
Awe?

4. But though all this were supposed possible, yet how can it be imagined that
the most subtle Statesman could deceive the minds of all other Men in the World
for such a long Tract and Succession of Ages, with a groundless and
unreasonable Opinion? There are but two ways of propagating a Fiction, viz.
Violence and Fraud, and neither of these can with any color of sense be
pretended in this Case. First, For Violence, no History can show, that ever it
was used to make People believe the Being of a Deity. Whatever force has been
used, was intended to establish some particular Form of Religion, and Manner of
Worship, which Men in Power thought most agreeable; and in their severe
proceedings they intended not to create in People's minds the Faith of God's
Existence, but did suppose that, and took it for granted, and took advantage by
it to carry on their great End, which was, to bring People to a particular Mode
of Religion, that they themselves were best pleased with. Besides, Violence, if
it had been used in this Case, could not have done their work, because the
Minds of Men are never to be forced, especially into an universal Belief, and
without the help of Reason. Whatever External Professions and Compliances it
may bring a few timorous Persons to, it cannot alone work upon the
Understanding and Conscience, to receive an Opinion which is not in it self
evident or probable; rather, Men are apt to hate an Opinion that is brought
with the terrible Pomp of Sword and Fire; witness all the unsuccessful Attempts
of Princes, who instead of propagating their Religion, have still done it hurt
by Sanguinary Methods. The difficulties here would have been far greater, nay,
insuperable, to force all the People in the World into the belief of a thing so
contrary to the Inclinations and Ease of their own Minds; to make them believe
that there is an Almighty Being over them, that observes all their evil
Actions, and will most certainly punish them; and so to bring them under a
necessity of possessing themselves Day and Night with tormenting Anxieties;
this is so inconsistent with those desires which every one naturally has of
enjoying all possible Satisfaction and Comfort in his own breast, that it would
have been impossible for all the World to have been forced into an universal
Belief of it, had there not been an universal Principle in Nature to oblige
them to it. Fear is a disquieting Passion, which every Man would clear his mind
of as soon as he can. Some who have been bred up in the fear of God, have
endeavored to force themselves out of it, even against their Consciences and
Reason; and how all Mankind could be forced into it without their Consciences
and Reason, is altogether unconceiveable.

It is therefore pretended in the next place, That this was done by the subtle
and fraudulent Arts of Politicians; and that People believed, because they were
told by their Governors, that there was a Deity. But to tell, is one thing; and
to persuade, another. People are not wont, much less are all People in the
World disposed to have so very kind an Opinion of their Superiors, as to
believe them upon their bare words; especially in a case which touches them so
nearly; and wherein all the Pleasure of their Lives, and the Peace of their
Minds are so deeply concerned. For Men have ever found, that Sense, Wisdom, and
Honesty, do not always go along with Power. Great Men may be as weak and
shallow in their Intellectuals as others, as soon mistaken in their Measures,
as easily disappointed of their Ends; nay, more apt to be put upon, than to
impose. And though some may be very skilful in their Conduct, yet may they be
designing; and the more politic any Governors are thought, the more ready are
People to be very jealous of their Intentions; and how it could happen all at
once, that all Statesmen should be so politic as to contrive, and all Mankind
should be so credulous as to consent to a Fiction of so great a Nature and
Consequence, is a question which may well ask any Man of Reason, how this can
agree with it? But besides, suppose such a lucky hit did once, (no Man knows
when) fall out; how is it imaginable, That a politic Artisice could have past
every where all along from Age to Age, without being discovered by the greatest
part of Mankind? There are very few probable Truths, but some time or other
have met with Contradiction; and when an Imposture comes to be notorious, it is
for ever basfled; and if the belief of a Deity had been such, how can we think,
that a Design formed to terrify and rack the World, should not have been found
out and spoiled many Ages ago; especially when inquisitive Philosophers
traveled up and down into so many parts to discover what was true, and what
was false, and to communicate their thoughts where ever they went? Still they
returned home confirmed in their belief of a God, as the Rational Sense of all
Men; and though in aftertimes some few Opiniators pretended to be singular,
yet were they hooted at, scorned, and hated; and the ancient, universal Belief
went on still, which makes it evident, that it was of strength enough to
support it self; and the more narrowly it was looked into, the greater Substance
was found within it, and the greater Solidity at the bottom of it; being highly
consonant to every Man's Reason, and founded in our Common Nature.

4. It is pretended, lastly, That tho universal Belief of a God might have been
introduced by common Compact, or mutual Agreemeent among Mankind, which is as
senseless and filly an Imagination as any other; for how was it possible for
such an Agreement to have been begun, managed, carried on, and ratified, with
the express consent of all People in the World? Surely they that think so, must
imagine, that the World lies within a very narrow compass; and that
intelligence in those Days was very quick, and that the minds of all Men were
wonderfully credulous. It Is a great rarity to find in any one little Country or
Town, an entire agreement in matters of Opinion, though they carry with them
sufficient reasons of credibility; and was it ever possible for so many Nations
in the World, of such different Languages, so vastly distant from one another,
of such several Inclinations, Customs, and Interests, so divided by Seas, and
without any Mutual Commerce or Correspondence; is it likely, I say, That they
could all deliberately agree in one and the same Notion of their own making by
Pact, Covenant, and Stipulation? And that too, to abridge themselves of the
Pleasures of Life, to bring themselves into Slavery under fears of their own
creating, to crucify their Hearts with mortifying Expectations, to render
themselves came and managable by their Governors, to propagate a Fiction, and
thereby to make their Posterity for ever melancholy and miserable, if there
were no God?

But this pretense is so very Absurd and Fantastical, that to confute it any
further would be time lost; and therefore the premises being rightly
considered, must necessarily infer, that the Belief of a Deity is a Principle
rooted in Humane Nature; Notwithstanding all the various Modes of Religion
which are in the World, all Nations Consent in this Principle, perhaps it is
the only Principle wherein all are agreed: Which shows, That it is the
necessary and immediate Result of Common Reason. It springs out of our Natural
Faculties, as soon as we use them. We bring the Seminals of Religion into the
World with us; and the universal Belief of a Deity is a strong argument of
God's Existence, because it could come from no other hand but his that gave us
our Faculties, and framed our Nature so, that by the exercise of our Faculties
we may presently discover the Hand that made us, and gave us our Being, and
has set a mark of himself upon the minds of all Men, whereby his Being may be
discerned and known, though all the Glories of his Nature cannot be fully
comprehended.

If at last it be said, That this Argument touching universal Consent is not
strong enough to prove the Truth of God's Existence, because then it would
prove too the truth of Idolatry, forasmuch as all Nations were once Idolaters,
and consented in the worship of a great many Deities: To this, two things may
be easily returned,

First, That there was no such universal Consent as to that; no, not among the
Pagans themselves. For though they worshipped a plurality of Objects, and the
vulgar People paid their Devotions to them, as to so many real and distinct
Deities; yet (as I showed before) they owned One Supreme God, and looked upon
the rest as Inferior Beings; Deities that had been generated or made by the
great Cause of all things, and them they adored for his sake, and upon his
account, as Deputies and Administrators under him, and as Mediators for Men to
him; so that they referred their Worship to him by them, and did terminate all
of it in him. And yet the wiser sort of Men among them, did not esteem that
multitude of Deities, as so many real Persons, Substances, and Beings distinct
from the Supreme, but rather as so many several Virtues and Powers of One
Sovereign Numen, personated fictitiously, according to the Sea Dr. Cudworth's
Intel. System. l. 1. c. 4. p. 502.
various Works and Manifestations of that One God, that did Pervade all things,
did Exist in all things, did Act in all things, and was conceived by them to be
in a manner all things, and consequently was, as they thought, most honored,
and best served by the Religious Honors which were given him by and through
his Works every where, as he manifested every where his Virtue, and displayed
his Power. So that the great Error among the old Heathens, seems not to have
been about the Existence of One God, (as to which they were well agreed) but
about the way and manner of Worshipping him; as to that, they were divided in
their Opinions; some believing the Supreme God to be worshipped jointly with
other Deities; and the rest conceiving him to be worshipped alone under several
Names, Titles, and Appellations. Now, though the Being of God was a thing so
evident, obvious, and bright, that it flashed in all their faces, yet in their
Notions of God's Worship (a thing which required greater use of Reason and
Philosophy) they were puzzled and distracted; and therefore universal Consent
cannot be pleaded to prove the truth of their Religion, and the real Existence
of all their Deities; because they were not generally agreed as to that, as
they were in this Common Principle, That there is One God over all things.

2. Secondly, How gross soever the Conceits of the Heathens were, the whole
account of the matter shows, That they were inclined and willing to Worship the
True God, if they could but have certainly known where or how to have found
him. In places of the thickest Darkness, and in times of the greatest
Ignorance, there was in all Men a Propensity to some Religion or other; so that
rather than People would have no God at all, they would adore many, which still
serves to confirm the Point in hand, That the belief of a Deity is radicated in
Humane Nature, how hard soever some few odd Men have labored and strained to
tear it out. Seeing a belief so universal cannot be founded on mere Tradition,
or Fear, or Policy, or any advised Agreement, and Institution amongst Mankind;
if we will enquire soberly into the Reasons of it, no other rational Account
can be given, but that the Faculties of our Nature are so framed by the
Excellent Wisdom and Power of God, that upon the due exercise of our
Understanding and Reason, an Idea of God arises in every one's mind; which is,
therefore rightly called a Natural Idea, because it may be formed by the use of
our Natural Faculties, without the assistance of special Revelation; and
because our Nature is so ordered by the Father of Spirits: Divines rightly say,
That the Idea of God is imprinted on all Men's minds by the Finger of God, and
is a mark of himself, and of his own setting, to let us know that we are all
his, and to draw from us all possible returns of Praises and Reverence, of
Admiration and Love, of Imitation and Obedience, and Universal Submission to
his Divine Will and Pleasure.

CHAP. IV.
HAVING fully considered this Argument of God's Existence, taken from the
Universal Consent of Mankind, and the Common Principle which is in Humane
Nature; I proceed now to that which was proposed as the Third Head; viz. The
Consideration of some Extraordinary Occurrences in the World, which further
argue the Being of a God.

And here many things might be taken notice of, were I minded to let this
Discourse swell into a great bulk; as, The Strange Discoveries which have been
made of many the most Secret Villainies; the Wonderful Events, whereby the
Designs of Wicked Men have been prevented and overruled; the Various
Providence whereby Oppressed Innocence has been vindicated and delivered, the
Several Revelations of the Divine Will which have been given since the
beginning of the Creation, the constant supporting of Government and Order in
the World, the remarkable Translation of Empires for Peoples Provocations; the
Astonishing Examples which have been made of many Bold, Incorrigible Wretches;
and the like: All which do in their kind show, that there is a Divine Disposer
and Governor of the Universe; an Observing and Righteous God, that judges all
the Earth. But because these may chance to be looked upon rather as Popular
Suggestions, than Convincing, Solid Arguments, I shall for brevity sake wave
them, and insist only upon Two things, which the most Judicious Men are
commonly wont to urge, and which indeed are past all contradiction, if matter
of Fact can be made appear: And they are

1. First, Such Miraculous Works, as could never have been done but by an
Almighty Power: And, 2. Secondly, Such Predictions and Prophesies, as could
never have been delivered without the foreknowledge of an Omniscient Being.
1. First, For those Miraculous Works which could never have been done without
an Almighty Power. By Miracles I mean such as are True Miracles; or such
Effects, as no Second, Subordinate Cause can possibly work of it self; no
Finite, Natural Agent can do by any Causality, or Virtue of its own. And of
such Miracles there seem to be these Three sorts, which most of all relate to
the matter in hand:

1. First, Such as have been done without any Concurrence or Instrumentality of
Second Causes; nay, such as could never have been done by any Limited Power: As
the giving sight to those who were born without Eyes; the making the Sun to go
back, or to stand still; the Raising of the Dead to life again; and the
multiplying a few Loaves and Fishes to satisfy Five thousand People.

2. Such Effects, as perhaps might have been done in time by the help of
Natural means, but yet never were, nor could be wrought on a sudden by their
use and application; as, the healing of the Leprosy in a moment; the
instantaneous removing of the Palsy, and the like Difficult and Inveterate
Distempers.

3. Such Effects as have been done by the use of Means; but yet such a sort of
Means, as were indisposed for those Operations; nay, were utterly incapable of
themselves to produce those strange Effects: As, the Dividing of the Sea with a
Rod; the Separating of Waters by smiting them with a Mantle; the Curing of a
Leprosy by washing in a Common River; the Sweetning of a Bitter Fountain with a
Piece of Wood; the giving Sight to the Blind by the application of Clay and
Spittle; the Restoring of the Deaf and Dumb by putting a Finger into the Ear;
the Healing of many Infirmities with a Touch, with the Hem of a Garment, with
an Handkerchief, with a Word, with a Shadow of a Man passing by, and the like.

All these Extraordinary Occurrences are above the Powers of all Art and
Nature: The first sort, in respect of the Quality of them; the rest in respect
of the Manner of their Production. No Creature can stop the Course of the Sun,
any more than he can pull all the Stars out of the Firmament. No Creature can
form an Eye, or any Integral part of it, any more than he can extinguish the
Light of the Day: No Creature can recover the Dead, any more than he can mould
an Humane Soul and Body out of the dust. Nor can any Creature do one Wonder
(though it be only a Wonder in Nature, or to outward appearance) either without
means, or by means indisposed, incompetent, and insufficient, any more than he
can frame a World, or govern the Universe by his Beck. The Nature of these
things, and the Power that is requisite to bring them to pass, sets them above
all the reach of Natural, Finite, Limited Agents; and therefore when they are
done, they are plain Demonstrations of a Superior Power, Arguments of an
Uncontrollable Hand, Proofs of an Almighty Agent; that is, of the Existence of
a God.

1. For first; None but an All powerful Being can alter the Established Course
and Order of things. Every part of the World is under some peculiar Law, which
it regularly and constantly observes. Though here and there Nature may commit
some slight Error in its Specific Operations; yet the great Laws of the
Universe stand, and hold against all Natural Agents; and every Creature
yields Obedience to them. Therefore when the settled Course of the Creature is
altered (as it always is when a True Miracle is wrought) it is an undeniable
Argument of a Superior Hand, which gave every thing its Law, Never to be
changed but by the same Power which fixed it; and against which no Law can
possibly hold, when that Sovereign Being has a mind to dispose of a Creature
into a different Course. As for instance; It Is a Law which the Waters are
under, That they shall perpetually consist of fluid parts, by means whereof
they naturally run into, and maintain an inviolable state of mixture and
co-adunation. It Is a Law the Heavens are under, That the Lamps thereof shall be
Day and Night in motion. It Is a Law every Man is under, That the Dust shall
return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return unto him that gave
it. According to these Laws does the Course and Order of all these things hold,
never to be broken or changed by the natural force of any of their
Fellow Creatures. Now when it so happens, that either an Heavenly Body is
arrested in its progress; or that the Sea is thrown up and consolidated into
standing heaps; or that a man's Soul, which had escaped out of its Prison, is
sent back again out of the other world, and remanded into its Cold, Earthly,
and Ruinated Lodgings; it is impossible with Reason to ascribe this to any
other Cause, but the Omnipotence of a Transcendent Being, who governs and
disposes all things in Heaven and Earth of his own good pleasure. And it
shows, that the first sort of Miracles, viz. such as have been done without the
operation of any Second Causes, nor could have been done by them, are clear
Attestations of the Existence of a Deity, under whose Hand and Power all other
Beings are.

2. And then, Secondly, Touching the other sorts of Miracles, such as have been
wrought instantly, and without means sufficient of themselves, as the Curing of
Diseases in a moment by a Word, or a Touch; they are the productions of things
out of nothing; which cannot be attributed to any thing less than a Deity. For
in these Cases there is an utter indisposition, both in the Means, and in the
Object about which those Means are used; and consequently, such a Miracle is a
kind of Creation, which nothing but Omnipotence can produce. There is little,
if any, difference, as to the Power, between raising things out of no
preexistent Matter, and forming things out of Matter that in it self is quite
incapable of that formation; in each Case an Almighty Power is necessary; and
where that Power is, it is the same thing to it, in effect, to bring
Perfections out of utter Incapacities, as to bring Habits out of Privations, or
Substance out of Nonentity. Which is an evident Proof, That granting those
Miracles were really done, which we find recorded of the Prophets in the Old
Testament, and especially of our Savior, and his Apostles in the New, they
must be acknowledged to have been wrought by a Divine Power, or by the hand of
an Omnipotent Being; and consequently that such an Omnipotent Being does Exist.

Hence it is, that True Miracles are always destructive of Insidellty; so that
wherever they have been showed, all Teachable Men have been convinced of the
particular Providence of an Almighty God over that People. When Naaman the
Syrian found himself healed of his Leprosy, by washing in Jordan at the
instance of Elisha, it extorted that Confession from him, Behold, now I know,
that there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel, 2 Kings 5. 15. When that
Nobleman, John 4. saw what a Miracle was wrought on his dying Son, the Text
says, That himself believed, and his whole house, V. 53. When Sergius Paulus
saw what a Miracle was done for the punishment of Elymas the Sorceror, he
believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord, Acts 13. 12. In which
three Instances means were used, such as they were. In the first, the
application of Water; in the two latter, the speaking of a few words only; and
yet each Miracle was as convincing, as if God had displayed his immediate hand;
because the means being of themselves insufficient for the production of such
astonishing Events, argued plainly, that an Omnipotent Virtue went along with
them, which supplied their natural insufficiency, and showed, that the
Excellence of the Power was of God.

What I have said upon this Point does suppose, that these, and the like
Miraculous Works have been actually done; and if so, then the Inference will be
necessary and unavoidable, That there is a God. But to evade the force of this
Argument, the Infidels of our Age have these Two things to say.

1. First, That no True Miracles, or Supernatural Works, have been ever wrought.

2. And Secondly, That the Wonders we read of, are no more an Argument of the
truth of God's Existence, than they are of the truth of Idolatry, because
Idolaters themselves have pretended to Miracles. These two Subterfuges and
Shifts must be now considered in their order.

1. First, They will allow of no higher Miracles than what have been found here
in Nature, when some unusual things have happened, the natural cause whereof
could not be well assigned. As for Supernatural Effects, they are Fables in the
account of these men; because they cannot admit of such Effects without
admitting of a Supernatural Power to produce them; that is, the Existence of a
Deity; which of all things in the world they are most afraid to own.

Now for the clearing of this weighty matter, I would first ask these great
Pretenders to Reason, this General Question; Whether it be rational to deny
matter of Fact, which has as good Evidence as can possibly be given of any
matter of Fact which we have not seen with our own eyes? If this be rational,
then there is an end of Faith amongst Mankind, and we must believe nothing but
what our own Senses bear witness to; and so no Credit is to be given to any
History, or Relation in the world. If it be not rational, then have we as good
grounds to believe the truth of Supernatural Effects, or Miracles, as can in
reason be expected for the truth of any thing that is gone and past.

And this shall be my next business, to show, That the Account we have of such
and such Miracles done, carries with it as strong Evidence, at least, as any
matters of Fact we find in any History of former Ages; so that with as much
reason men may reject the belief of any, nay of all Accounts, as the belief of
this.

I do not here in the least pretend to support the Credit of all those
Appearances which have gone under the name of Miracles, especially in latter
Ages. We read of multitudes, which have been either downwright Forgeries and
Fictions, purposely invented to carry on Lucrative and Superstitious Designs;
or else have been no better than Illusions of men's Senses, whereby the
Credulity of weak people has been imposed upon, and abused. Nay, many of them
are of such a ridiculous Nature, that some have been ashamed of the Stories,
though they have made Money by the Invention. To talk of such Miracles is a
great disadvantage and prejudice to Christ's Religion, however it may serve
men's private Interest.

The Miracles I urge as clear Demonstrations of the Existence of a God, are
those recorded in the Scriptures; in the Old Testament, by Moses, chiefly; and
in the New, by the Evangelists. And, how slight soever Scepticks make of them,
there is as great evidence of the truth of them, as there can be of any matter
of fact, if we will be so just to those Writers, as to allow them the Common
Reputation of having been fair Historians; though at present we set aside the
consideration of their having been divinely Inspired.

Now the greatest evidence that can possibly be given of any thing that was
formerly done, depends upon these four Grounds.

1. That the Person said to have done it, did really exist; or that there was
indeed such a Person. 2. That the Relators of the Action were sufficiently
Credible. 3. That others who had Reason to know, and were able to know the
truth of the matter, were sufficiently satisfied of the certainty of it. 4.
That things of great and public Concernment were the consequents of it. Where
there are all these grounds of evidence, no reasonable Men can question any
matter of fact, though it was done at a great distance of time from them; and
from all these it appears, that such true Miracles have been done, as argue the
Existence of an Omnipotent Agent.
1. For first; That there was in the World, such a Man as Moses, and such a
Person as Jesus Christ, is as evident, even from Humane Testimony, as that
there were such Men as Alexander, Caesar, and Cato. Josephus shows out of those
Ancient Writers, Manetho and Cont. Appion. l. 1.
Chaeremon, what a great esteem the old Egyptians had of Moses; and what an
Admirable Divine Person he was in the Account of that Nation. Clemens
Alexandrinus tells us out of the Greek Writers, what an Honor the old
Philosophers Stromat. l. 1.
among them had for Moses's Memory; and that they looked upon him as the only
wise Man in his time, and gave him the Character of a Prince, a Lawgiver, a
General, a Just and Holy Person, beloved of God. The same Author tells us, That
the Egyptian Mystae believed that Moses was taken up into Heaven; and that
Eupolenius gave him the Character of the first wise Man; and that the Mystae
relating the Story of his killing the Egyptian, said, That he did it by the
word of his Mouth; and that Artapanus owned the Story of his Imprisonment,
adding some fabulous Stuff concerning his Deliverance. Numenius, the
Pythagorean, said, ^irom. 5.
that Moses was a Divine, and a Prophet; and that his Writings are worthy of
belief, Id. 28.
and that he was a most powerful Man with God by his Prayers. Trogus Pompeius
mentions Abraham, Eusebius. de prepar. l. 9. c. 8.
Moses, and Israel, as Kings of the Jews. He takes notice of the many Sons of
Israel (though he mistakes the number). He speaks particularly, and by Name, of
those two Sons of Israel, Juda, and Joseph; and then he goes on relating the
story of Moses, and of his leading the Jews out of Egypt; though he
sophisticates the Story with a great deal of falsehood, as also Cornelius
Tacitus Justin. l. 36. Tac. l. 5. Hist.
does in his Account of Moses and his Conduct: Both which Ancient Historians
follow the Narration which was given of this matter by the Egyptians
themselves, who mortally hated the Jewish Nation, and told a great many Lies,
touching the Reasons and Manner of their Departure from them; as Josephus shows
in his first Book against Appion. Justin Martyr upbraiding the Greeks in his
time for being Enemies to the Christian Religion, proved to them out of their
own Authors, that Moses, who laid the Foundations Exhortat. ad Graec.
of Christianity, was acknowledged much more Ancient than any of their Poets'
Historians, Philosophers, or Legislators' And out of that noble Historian,
Diodorus, he told them, That Moses was reckoned a God, by reason of his Divine
and Excellent Wisdom, and for teaching People to use good Laws, and to live
according to them; which Account Diodorus, who had spent thirty Years in
Travels, said he had from the Priests in Egypt. To these Observations diverse
more might be added out of Grotius, and other Modern Writers, were it needful.
But the Learned know, That as the Greeks first borrowed their Letters of the
Jews; so the best Laws at Athens, and afterward at Rome, took their Original
from the Laws of Moses.

And that Jesus Christ formerly lived in the Land of Judea, is acknowledged
even by those who were no Friends to his Religion. Josephus the Jew, who seems
to have been our Savior's Cotemporary, says, That in the Regency of Pontius
Pilate, there lived one Jesus, a wise Man, (says he) if yet it Antiq. l. 18.
c. 4.
be sit to call him a Man; because he did many Miracles, and appeared alive
again the third Day after his Crucifixion. That Roman Historian, Tacitus,
Cornel. Tac. l. 15.
speaking of the Christians, tells us, That the Author of that Name, was one
Christ, who in the Reign of Tiberius the Emperor was put to Death by Pontius
Pilate. About fifty Years after our Savior's Time, Pliny the Proconsul of
Bithynia, sent the Emperor Trajan Plin. l. 10. Ep. 97.
this Account of the Christians, That their Custom was to sing Hymus to Christ,
as to a God. Suetonius In Vit. Claud.
makes mention of him too, meaning not so much his Person as his Doctrine. The
Acts of Pilate, to which the Primitive Christians were wont to appeal, show
that there was such a Man once in being. Those Learned Heathens who wrote
against his Faith, Celsus, Porphyry, and Julian, never questioned the Truth of
the History touching his Life and Death. The most hardened Jews themselves, that
hate and reproach his Memory, cannot deny, but that there was such a Man, and
that their Ancestors killed him. Nay, they are sensible to this day, that for
that very reason they are despised and abhorred by the Christian World. So that
no account whatsoever of matter of fact can possibly be more attested, more
clear and certain than this is, That Jesus Christ once lived in the World.

2. The next thing is, That the History of those Miracles, which are said to
have been done by Moses and our Blessed Savior, is also as sufficiently
credible, as any Historical Account can be.

Two Qualifications are necessary in an Historian to make his Relations
sufficiently Credible, Knowledge and Integrity; and where both these
Qualifications meet, that is, where a Man cannot be ignorant of the Truth of
what he writes, nor can be justly suspected of an intention to deceive; in that
case there can be no fair or tolerable reason for our disbelief.

1. Now as to Moses's Knowledge, it is impossible to conceive, That he knew not
what he did himself, or that he was not conscious of his own Actions. And it is
as impossible to think that the Evangelists knew not what Jesus Christ did. For
Matthew and John were contiually about him, attending personally upon him,
Eyewitnesses of all his Actions; especially the latter, who was admitted into
his Privacies, so that no Miracle is said to have been done at any time out of
the common View, but what John was a constant Eyewitness of. And if Luke and
Mark were not such Attendants upon Christ himself, as the others were, yet the
least that is said of them, is, that the one was conversant with Paul, who had
as certain Information of all things as the rest of the Apostles had; and that
the other was conversant with Peter, who was allowed the same Privilege which
John enjoyed, and was continually one of those three special Favorites, who
were privy to the Lord Jesus his more secret Actions.

2. This short account being given of all these Writers Knowledge, the next
thing to be showed to make their Testimony sufficiently credible, is, their
great Intergity, which will soon appear to any reasonable Man that will but
consider, 1. First, The Impartiality. 2. And then the Simplicity that is
observable in their Writings.

1. The Evangelists have given us an Impartial Account of the Obscurity of
Christ's outward Condition; of the Meanness of his Disciples Quality and
Fortunes, of their Natural Inabilities, of the Dullness of their Understandings,
of the slowness of their Hearts to believe; of their Insirmities and Faults,
and particularly, of the Treachery of one Apostle, and of the shameful Lapse of
another. There are none of those things concealed, which Men of Art and
Partiality would hardly have made known. Nay, it is observable of Mark, that
though he was Peter's great Attondant in the Execution of his Ministry; yet in
relating the Story of Peter's denying his Master, he tells it as plainly as
Matthew does, with this little difference, that he does not take such affecting
notice of his Repentance, as the other does. For, whereas St. Matthew says,
That he wept bitterly; St. Mark says, only He wept; as if he lessened his
Sorrow after an humble, modest manner, in respect to Peter, whose Amanuensis he
then was. An instance that shows, That if there was any Partiality in these
Writers, it was in this, That they did not say enough of one another Virtues.

Such Impartiality is seen throughout the History written by Moses. For therein
he sets down, not only the Poverty of his beginnings, but even the Faults and
Miscarriages he had been guilty of, and how angry God was for them. He relates
as well the Crimes, as the Infirmities of his Ancestors, all along from Noah,
down to the Twelve Patriarchs; and among them, he particularly notes the
Persidiousness and Cruelty of his great Grandfather Levi, when he and Simeon
tricked the Sechemites out of their Lives and Fortunes; for which Inhumanity
their Father Jacob set a Curse upon them, which Moses has very faithfully
recorded in Genesis 43. In short, Whereas Partial Historians are wont to seek
themselves a Name, by favoring, and many times by slattering the Parties they
belong to, Moses spared not his own Nation; But has left the World a long and
lasting Account of the Follies, the Insidelity, the Murmurings, the
Ingratitude, the Apostacies, together with the perverse and incorrigible Temper
of that People, the Jews; neither concealing, nor excusing, nor extenuating
their Provocations; his great Design being to set forth the Glory of God's
Truth and Goodness; who set his love upon them, and chose them, not because
they were better, or more in number than any People, (for they were the fewest
of all People, and a Rebellious People) but because the Lord loved them, and
because he would keep the Oath which he had sworn unto their Fathers.

2. To demonstrate yet further the Integrity of Moses and the Evangelists, who
speak of such Miracles done, let us consider, Secondly, their great Simplicity
of Mind, without any mixture of Sinister or Self-designs. Men are not wont to
tell Tales for nothing. It Is either Vanity, or some private Interest, which is
the end and drift of Impostors. And what could Moses propose to himself by
telling stories, which the Egyptians and Jews were so easily able to
contradict, if those Miracles had not been done among them? Or, what advantage
can Men think he aimed at, when at the same time he spoke so hardly of those
People, from whom alone those advantages were to be expected, if any advantage
at all had been sought for? Nay, when he let those advantages go, which he had
already in his hands? Whereas Men in Power endeavor to keep their Authority
up, and to transmit it to their Posterity, Moses was content to let all that
Power dye with him, wherewith he was vested when he governed the whole Jewish
Nation. He appointed Joshua to succeed him in his Civil Authority. The great
Dignity and Advantages of the Priesthood, he disposed of to his Brother Aaron
and his Sons. As for his own Children, he left them in Subjection to the
Priests, to officiate under them in the ordinary and mean Ministrations of the
Tabernacle, not alloting them one foot of Land amongst all their Kindred: All
which shows, that from the beginning to the end, Moses designed nothing but the
Honor of God, and the Common good of his People: And that no Honor or
Interest of his own could possibly sway, or tempt him to violate his Integrity.

And what could the four Evangelists propose to themselves, that should move
them to deceive the world, and make their Relations incredible, or suspected?
Honors they could not aim at, unless men think it an Honor to be Dishonest:
Nor could Interest tempt them to impose fictions on men's Belief, when they were
sure beforehand to receive nothing in this world but Hardship, Persecutions,
and Death, for their Reward. Very poor encouragements for men to invent and
spread abroad idle Stories: Or, if it be said, that 'twas for the Credit and
Propagation of their Religion; they must be thought the oddest men in Nature,
that would coin Fictions for the sake of a Religion they believed to be false;
and yet they could not have believed otherwise of it, if they had not known it
to have been confirmed by Miracles; for they were the only things that could
give Evidence of its Truth beyond all Contradiction.

3. This I have said to show, that however some Irreligious Men have the
confidence to despise the Scriptureaccount of Divine Miracles; to common human
Reason it appears sufficiently credible, from the certain Knowledge, and
manifest Probity of the Writers; and consequently, that we have as fair
Evidence of the Reality of Miracles (in that respect) as can be had of any
other matter of Fact that has been done in former Ages. To which let us add, in
the next place, this third ground of Credibility; viz. that others, who had
reason to know, and were able to know the truth of the matter, were
sufficiently satisfied of the certainty of it.

Here again we must return to Moses; and First, it is observable, that the
account he gives of Miracles done by him, has continually past through a long
succession of Ages, uncontradicted; which is an Argument, that the Inquisitive
and Knowing men in most Nations were well satisfied of the Reality of the
matter: For, as the Mosaic Writings contain the most Ancient Records that are
extant in the world, so they seem to have been perused by the most Ancient
Philosophers and Historians; because the things related in them were spoken of,
and owned generally by the whole Heathen world; though sometimes not without a
mixture of Poetical Fables; as, the Creation of the Universe; the Sanctity of
the Sabbaths; the Story of the Deluge, and of the Ark; the Right of
circumcision, and the like; as the Learned Grotius has particularly showed in
his First Book of the Truth of Christianity. It is very probable, that the
general belief of these things sprang from the general persuasion which
prevailed in the world, of those Signs and Wonders that Moses had showed, that
made him so great a Person in the Esteem of Mankind. There were thousands ready
to have disproved the Relation, if the Works had not been done; nor is it in
the least likely, that of so many Neighboring Nations round about the Jews,
which mortally hated the Jews and their Religion, none would have discovered
the Imposture, had they not been satisfied, that what Moses had written, was
true. The Honor of having such great things done for them in the eyes of the
world would have been thought too much for a despised, hated People to have
gone away with.

2. But, Secondly, instead of Contradicting Moses's History, the most Ancient
Writers among the Egyptians and Greeks, did own his Greatness: Insomuch, that
the old Egyptians would have appropriated him to themselves, pretending that he
was of Egyptian Parentage, and a Priest of Heliopolis, by name Ozarsiph,
changing his name afterward to Moses. Some indeed of the other Heathens, as
Apuleius, and Numenius the Pythagorean, reckon him among the old Magicians, and
in particular, among Jannes and Jambres, the famous Magicians of Pharaoh; but
all looked upon him as a very wonderful Person, by reason of the Plagues he
brought upon Egypt.

3. And then, Thirdly, as for the Jews, nothing can be more clear, than that
their whole Nation have all along acknowledged the truth of the Miracles done
by Moses. For their whole Constitution was founded upon the Credit of his
Divine Authority; and that depended upon the Credit of his Miracles: And had
any of them been unsatisfied in that point, those Rebels who rose up against
Moses and Aaron, alleging that they took too much upon them, would have
alleged that they pretended too much also; a great deal more than what was
true: Nor could those People, who time after time Revolted from Moses's Law,
have had such another Plea for their Apostacies, as this would have been, that
the Authority of the Law giver was not confirmed by Miracles, as 'twas believed.

I have said thus much of Moses, to confront some in our days, who have taken
the confidence to deride the Writings which go under Moses's Name, and the
Miracles said to have been wrought by him, that thereby they may with the
greater boldness deny the Existence of God; though, if Men will take the
evidence given of any matters of Fact done at a great distance of time from
them, it is impossible to find better evidence of any matters, than there is of
these; of the certainty whereof, those who had Reason to know, and were able to
know, were fully satisfied.

I go on now, in the next place, from the same Consideration to prove the
Reality of those Miracles which the Evangelists ascribe to Jesus Christ. And
who could think themselves more concerned to enquire into the truth of them,
than those great Men, who made it their business to oppose his Religion? And
yet, that many notable Miracles had been done by him, and by his Apostles after
him, was manifest to all that dwelt at Jerusalem; and they could not deny it.
All that they had to say for their Infidelity, was, that Christ did those
wonderful Works by the help of the Devil; but matter of Fact they owned. Hence
it was, that soon after the Lord went out of the World, diverse pretended to a
power of Miracles, such as Simon Magus, the Gnostics, and especially
Appollonius Tyanaeus; that they might draw People off from the Profession of
Christianity upon the same Motives which had induced them to embrace it. Those
times abounded with Magicians and Sorceres; who, though they could not deny the
Works which Jesus Christ had done, yet used all their Arts to lessen and
disparage them, by pretending to do the like. Our Savior had foretold his
Disciples, That false Christ's, and false Prophets would arise, and would show
great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they would deceive
the very elect, Matthew. 24. 24. Accordingly St. Paul speaking of that set of
Seducers, in the Singular Number, as the Man of Sin, says, That his coming was
after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders; that
is, with wonders that served to confirm and give testimony to false Doctrines,
2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. All these Appearances were so many Imitations of the Works of
Jesus, intended by those men to deceive, who tried to counterfeit things which
they durst not contradict, for fear of being contradicted themselves by all the
World. Nor did those bitter Adversaries to Christianity in aftertimes, Celsus
and Julian, presume to disown the Miracles of Christ; for they acknowledged, as
other Heathens did, that he cured the Blind and the Lame; but to keep the force
of this Argument from working upon men's minds, they reviled his Actions, as
though they were done, not by any Divine Power, but by Arts of Magic, after
his return out of Egypt, where they pretended he had learned his Skill.
Briefly; Orig. cont. Cells. lib. 1. p. 30.
In the Ages which were nearest to our Savior's, all sorts of knowing Men
acknowledged the Miraculous things that had been wrought by Him and his
Followers: And had some Scepticks of our days lived then, even Jews and Pagans
would in that point have accused their Infidelity from notoriety of fact which
was unquestionable.

4. And yet there is one Consideration more, that gives further Evidence of the
truth of those Miracles which Moses and Jesus Christ did; viz. That things of
great and public concernment were the consequents of them; than which no
stronger evidence can be given, or desired, of any matter of fact that ever was
done in the world. There cannot possibly be a better proof that there were
formerly Wise and Good Men in England, than the Government they established,
and the Laws they have left us. Our whole Constitution is founded upon their
Actions; and the Polity we are under, shows what Kings and Parliaments they
were, and what they have done, though the Men are long ago dead. So does the
state of Judaism and the frame of Christianity show what Moses, and what Christ
did. All on each hand is built upon the Miracles which were done by the one and
the other; and to say at last, there were no such things, is to accuse all
their Disciples of the highest madness, for following their Institutions
without Grounds or Reason; a censure that is too hard to be given of so great a
part of Mankind, who think they have the greatest Reason in the world for their
Profession. Moses his business was, to form the whole Nation of the Jews into a
Commonwealth, distinct from all other Societies of Men; to give them peculiar
Laws; to prescribe them a peculiar Form of Religion; to bring their Necks under
an heavy yoke; under a sort of discipline, that was the most strict, the most
cumbersome, and laborious: And how can we think that a froward People, just
delivered out of one Bondage, would presently have submitted to another (nay, a
Bondage which they thought was to last for ever), had they not seen such signs
and wonders done before their eyes, as plainly argued that their Lawgiver came
to them by immediate Commission from God? Or how can we conceive, that their
Posterity, who groaned so often under the Curses which Moses had left them,
would have endured the severities of such a Taskmaster, had they not well known
that his Authority over them was attested from Heaven? Nay, How is it
imaginable, that the Jews at this day should not yet depart from Moses, but
stick to him to death, and will undergo any sufferings, rather than leave him,
though their Religion (as distinct from Christianity) has no inward natural
Goodness to commend it, no human Power without to support it; and though they
themselves be the most ignominious hated People in the world? The Reasons of
all this must be drawn from those strong assurances the Jews have always had,
That to erect their Polity, and to establish their Religion, Moses did such
Works as wore out of the Power of all Art and Nature, and plain tokens that he
acted in the Name of God, and by the Authority of God.

And then as for the Christian Institution, it has been long ago Received and
Professed up and down in the world, though it met with, and indeed carried in
its nature such vast and manifest discouragements, as could never have been
conquered, had not Christ showed the Necessity and Divinity thereof by
Miracles. A Religion, whose Author died a most reproachful Death: A Religion,
that lays hard Restraints upon men's natural Desires, and binds them to acts
of Self-denial and Mortification: A Religion, that makes People prefer future
Expectations before all present Enjoyments, and wait till the day of Judgment
for their full Reward. A Religion, that is attended with Sorrows and
Sufferings, and exposes its Professors to Death it self, for the sake of a
good Conscience: In short, a Religion, that brings with it all the seeming
disadvantages and discouragements that can be offered to Flesh and Blood. And
yet notwithstanding all inconveniences, this Religion, wherever it has been
Preached, has continually prevailed over the hearts of all Teachable Men in
the world; of which no other rational account can be given, but this, That the
Author and Finisher of our Faith proved his Authority, and confirmed all his
Laws and Doctrines by working Miracles by the finger of God. The works that he
did in his Father's name, they bore witness of him, Joh. 10. 25. For all people
knew that he was a Teacher come from God, because no man could have done those
Miracles that he did, except God had been with him, Joh. 2. 3. So that Miracles
were the foundation of every man's Faith and Obedience; the great Reasons which
Congregated all people into that Body which we call the Church; and which still
holds them firm together against all the Hardships and Storms that can be
brought upon them. The Christian Church is a standing, visible Monument of our
Savior's Miracles, as the Jewish State was of the Miracles wrought by Moses;
and both of them are Monuments of such vast and public consequence, as could
never have been erected without them; much less could they have stood against
all Winds and Weather. And after all, to imagine (as some do) that no such
Divine Supernatural Effects were ever done, is to say, That the greatest part
of the World have been all along so many stark Fools; a Character which we
think more peculiarly belongs to those who say in their hearts, There is no God.

Considering what a difficult and hazardous Office the first Preachers of
Christianity had to discharge, How, think ye, was it possible for them to
undertake it with such readiness, to perform it with such vigor, and to go
through it with such constancy and cheerfulness, notwithstanding so much
opposition, had they not been abundantly convinced of the truth of their
Religion by Miracles, which they saw with their own eyes? And considering what
vast importance the Christian Religion is declared to be of; and how directly
opposite it is to the natural Inclinations of corrupt Mankind, and how it was
discountenanced and hated by Jews and Heathens in the beginning; How can we
think it possible for it to have been received so generally and unexpectedly in
the World, had not inquisitive Men, who had the fairest advantages of knowing
matters of Fact, been fully satisfied, That the mighty Miracles reported to
have been done by Jesus, were true? Men cannot think these things possible, but
either they must believe, that people in those days had lost all their Senses;
or make us now believe, that they themselves have utterly lost their own.

The design of all this is to show, That there is as convincing and strong
Evidence, that True, Divine Miracles have been wrought, as can rationally be
expected of any thing which has been done in former times; because no matter
of Fact whatsoever can possibly be capable of stronger proof. In cases of this
nature, the utmost that can be expected, is Moral Certainty; when the Evidence
is so fair, that no reasonable man can have just cause to doubt of the truth of
the matter; and that Evidence must be from Testimony, because it is impossible
for us to know any thing which is gone and past, but by information from
others; and when that Information is so full, that to unprejudiced
Understandings the thing seems unquestionable, it is as much as any reasonable
man can desire. Since therefore it appears by indubitable Testimony, that those
persons, who are said to have done Miracles, were once actually living in the
World; since it appears that the History of those Miracles is sufficiently
credible, and is confirmed by the collateral Testimony of those, who were both
capable of knowing, and deeply concerned to know the Truth of that Account:
And, lastly, since such public Settlements and Constitutions followed upon the
Credit of those Miracles, as plainly argued a firm and general Belief, or
rather Knowledge of them, and could never have been brought about without them:
Since, I say, all these grounds of Credibility do appear, to give evidence to
the truth of Miracles formerly done; it seems unconceivable, how stronger or
clearer evidence can be given of any matter of Fact, or of any History that is
now in the World.

2. Let us consider next the second Evasion; That supposing some wonderful
things to have been done in former Ages, yet this is no more an Argument of the
truth of a God's Existence, than it is of the truth of Idolatry; because
Idolaters themselves have pretended to Miracles, to vouch for their Religion.
And considering how inconsistent, and impossible it would be for a Deity to act
for, and against it self too, therefore Men of Atheistical minds conclude, That
those wonderful Works which have gone under the name of Divine Miracles, have
been really nothing but Art and Imposture.

Now for the solving of this seeming difficulty, I shall consider two Things:

1. First, Matter of Fact. 2. Secondly, The Weakness of these Men's reasoning
from it.
1. First then, that I may carry a fair and impartial Hand, it is granted, that
many strange and extraordinary things are said to have been done by Men of a
false Religion. For Moses himself tells us what the Magicians did in Egypt
before his own face. Jesus Christ told his Disciples, that many false Teachers
would come in a little time with Signs and Wonders to deceive (if it had been
possible) the very Elect. To verify that Prediction, diverse Ecclesiastical
Writers tell us of the Wonders done by Simon Magus, and his Followers, soon
after the Lord' s Ascension into Heaven. Others tell us of the Blind and the
Lame being cured by the Heathen Emperor Vespasian; and of a Whetstone being
divided into two by a Razor, at the Command of Accius Navius; and of several
Prodigious things done by Apollmius Tyanaeus, whom the Pagans matched with
Jesus Christ for doing Miracles. And every body knows what Accounts of Miracles
have been given by the Church of Rome, in de^ence of that part of their
Religion, wherein they have most scandalously departed from True, Primitive
Christianity. Considering therefore what an heap of Stories there is, whereof
some are related by Sacred Writers, and some others by Men of Probity and
Temper (though abundance of Fictions has been vended among them) it must be
allowed, that many Wonderful Works have been done by Idolaters.

But then, Secondly, This can be no Plea for the truth of Idolatry; because how
wonderful soever those Works have seemed, they were not in themselves Divine
Miracles. We must distinguish between Miracles in Appearance, and Miracles in
Reality. By Miracles in Appearance (which should rather be called Wonders and
Signs) I understand, not mere Impostures, or Delusions of men's outward Senses,
but such Real Effects as may seem to be done by the extraordinary and immediate
Power of God, when indeed they are not. That such things are possible to be
done, is clear from Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. where God himself gave the Jews
this Caution, If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and
gives thee a sign, or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass,
whereeof he spoke to thee, saving, Let us go after other gods (which thou have
not known) and let us serve them; thou shall not hearken unto the words of that
prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God proves you, to know
whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul.
Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments,
and obey his voice; and you shall serve him, and cleave unto him; and that
prophet or dreamer of dreams shall be put to death. We cannot conceive, that
when God has any where established his true Worship, he will lift up his own
hand to draw People away from it to Idolatry; and therefore when Signs or
Wonders are showed to that end, we may be sure they are not Divine Miracles, or
Effects that are altogether Supernatural: And yet it is manifest, that such
things may be done as are counterfeitings of God's hand, and seem to carry the
signatures of his Power; for otherwise there would have been no reason for that
charge given to the Jews, that they should not hearken to such a false Prophet,
but put him to Death, though his Sign or Wonder came to pass. Hence it is easy
to conclude, That there are Miracles in appearance, which are not true ones:
For God cannot act contrary to himself, by working one Miracle to Establish his
True Worship, and another to Destroy it; and therefore those Men are insinitely
mistaken, who pretend, That if Miracles argue the Existence of a Deity, they
argue the truth of Idolatry also; for it cannot be proved that any one Divine
Miracle was ever yet done to confirm and give credit to Idolatry; and therefore
I deny that any Idolaters can with Truth or Reason pretend it.

Now here Two things may be demanded, which I shall consider a little, because
they are pertinent to the point in hand, and may be very useful if rightly
understood.

1. First, What Natural Power Miracles in Appearance may be imputed unto,
supposing they have been actually done.

2. And, Secondly, How we may be able to know and distinguish such Appearances
from works which were strictly and properly Miraculous.

1. First, What Natural Power Miracles in Appearance may be imputed unto,
supposing they have been actually done? This is no very difficult Proposal,
either to those Pagans who own the Existence of Demons; or to us Christians who
read of Angels Good and Bad; all under the Government of a Supreme Glorious
Being, the Father of Spirits. But to the Scepticks of our Age, it will seem odd
to speak of these things, because they acknowledge not the Existence of any
thing that is not Material and obvious to Sense; and therefore explode the
Belief of all Spiritual Beings, both God and Angels. These Men I must at
present leave to be contradicted in this Point by all Mankind, considering that
it is a Subject too far out of my way, and of so copious a nature, as to admit
of a large Discourse by it self for the clearing of it. I take it for granted,
that there is another world besides this; and that that other world is
Inhabited by Invisible Beings, which by God's Permission Interess themselves in
the Affairs of this. Which being supposed, How can it seem to any Reasonable
Men impossible for such Spirits, what by the subtlety and active Faculties of
their Nature, and what by their great Knowledge of things in Nature and Art,
and what by their own long Experience in the world, to do (when God is not
pleased to interpose or check them) many things which may seem Miraculous to
us, though they be wrought by their own Natural, Ordinary, and Limited Power?
It is not hard for those Beings to show Signs and Wonders, by God's Permission,
though without the help of his immediate Hand. They can by their Natural
Agility and Power carry a Body from place to place, as the Devil did our
Savior's own Body, with God's leave. They can modulate the Air so as to form a
Voice in an Image, as the Angel made Balaam's Ass to speak. They can by the
Natural Vigor of their Faculties, as easily divide a stone, as a man can cut
off the Branch of a Tree. By impressing a new Vigor upon the Animal Spirits,
they can help the defect of Sight (when God pleases) in one that is casualy
blind; though they cannot by any Natural Means help him to Eyes, who was born
without them. By the use of many Natural Causes they may do Prodigies, as the
Magicians did by their help in Egypt. In which instance, two things are
observable: 1. That the Power of those Spirits was restrained. For though they
did some things extraordinary, very like unto the Miracles which Moses had done
with his Rod; yet when the Miracle of Lice came, the Magicians could not do it;
and therefore they confess, That that was the finger of God, Exodus 8. 18, 19.
2. That though they brought some Plagues upon Egypt, they could not remove any,
for which reason the King sought unto Moses all along; a plain Sign, that they
were evil Angels with whom the Magicians were then in Confederacy. Hence it
appears, That* very wonderful Signs have been showed, which looked like true
Miracles, and were in imitation of true Miracles, when they were not Works of
an Almighty Hand, but the ordinary Effects of that natural, sinite Power that
is in Demons and Devils. To which also we may rationally impute those
Operations, for which those Magicians presently after Christ, and others after
them were so famous among the Heathens; and more especially those, by which
Apollonius Tyanaeus got himself such a Name in the World, if the stories told
of him be true, which yet is very questionable; nor does Philostratus himself
who relates them, report them all as things certain, though he wrote with a
great deal of Partiality. The like is to be said of those pretended Miracles we
have been told so much of for several Ages past by Men of the Romish Communion.
Supposing some of those things were true, I mean, really done (for he must have
a most miraculous Faith, that can believe all, or but one half of them) it will
by no means follow that they were Miracles in a proper sense, or Effects purely
Supernatural, above the power of all Second Causes. For though no Natural Cause
in this visible World could do them, yet may they be very well imputed to the
ordinary Power of created Beings that are invisible; and so they are to be
ranked among the workings of. Satan, whose coming is wont to be with Power, and
Signs, and Lying Wonders, which God has many times permitted, partly to prove
and exercise the Faith of sincere Professors of Religion, and partly to punish
those who receive not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved; for
which cause God does send them strong delusions, so that they believe a Lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2

All this makes it evident, that such pretended Miacles cannot possibly argue
the Truth of Idolatry, though actually done by Idolaters, because they are
suffered to be done in way of Judgment upon perverse and obstinate people.
However, this advantage is hereby gained, That those Miracles in appearance
(such as they are) do argue the Existence of a God. For if there are any
invisible Beings permitted to show Signs and Wonders, vigorous in their
Actings, and limited in their Power, it will follow that there is a Sovereign
Being presiding over them, that does govern and command them, suffer or
control, chain or let them loose, of his own pleasure, and as the Reasons of
Providence require it.

But it will be said, That this distinction between Miracles in Reality, and
Miracles in Appearance, is vain, and to no purpose; for who can see the
difference of the one from the other by the nature of the things themselves,
because on each hand the works may be the same? And it is not enough to say,
This was done by the Great Power of God, and that by the Natural Power of
Infernal Spirits, when this does not appear from the quality of the thing
produced. As for instance; Moses is said to have turned his Rod into a Serpent,
and then the Waters into Blood, and then to have brought up Frogs out of the
River; and are not the Magicians said to have done so too? Where then is the
difference in the works? And if there be no visible difference in them, how
does it appear that there was a difference in the Powers which produced them?
And so why may not all be concluded an Imposture; and consequently, no
substantial Evidence of the Existence of a God?

This now brings me to the second Enquiry, How we may know and discern a true
Miracle from a pretended one?

1. For the clearing whereof, it is, First, granted, That they are not
distinguishable by the visible quality of the works themselves, unless it be in
some particular Instances, as the raising of the dead, the giving Eyes to one
that was born blind, the multiplication of a few Loaves, and the like. In those
cases, the very Nature of the Works show the singer of God; for none but an
Almighty Power could produce them; nor could any created sinite Power pretend
ever to have done the like. But where one Wonder resembles another, and seems
to answer another, there

2. Secondly, The difference is discoverable chiesly from the Necessity and
Tendency of the Operations. Indeed their Circumstances and Manner of Production
may go a great way to show the singer of God, or the working of Satan; but I
conceive a true Miracle may be most easily and best distinguished from a false
one, 1. By the Importance of the Reasons which make a Miracle necessary. 2. By
the End and Scope to which it tends.

1. First, When there is a true Necessity for Miracles. As 1. When a man
pretends to come from God with special Authority and Commission for some
extraordinary Service; in that case a Miracle is necessary, to give evidence of
his Commission, and that he may be believed. Such extraordinary Power must be
backed with extraordinary Works to attest it; for otherwise people could not
have sufficient Arguments to own it; and it is inconsistent with the Divine
Nature to require men's Submission, and not justify, or set his Seal to that
Authority which he binds them to submit unto, but to leave them in a state of
Guilt, for rejecting that which he gave them not sufficient reasons to receive.
2. Miracles are necessary, when extraordinary Alterations are to be made in the
world: As, when a solemn, peculiar Form of Divine Worship is to be first set
up; or when a peculiar Form, that was established by Miracles, is to be removed
and taken down, to make room for a different Form. For these things are of such
vast importance, that in cases of this nature Men cannot be deceived, without
running the greatest hazards; and nothing under a Miracle can keep them from
being imposed on. Now, when in these necessary cases Signs and Wonders are
showed, we may conclude them to be Divine Miracles; but if there be no need at
all of extraordinary Operations upon these accounts, such as are pretended
ought to pass for works Diabolical; because God is not wont (as they say) to
set his Seal to a Blank, nor is it consistent with his Majesty and Wisdom to
use his Omnipotence in vain.

2. True Miracles may be distinguished from false ones by their scope and
tendency. The Works of God are Glorious, not only for those signatures of Power
they carry with them, but also for that admirable Goodness and Wisdom which is
discernable in them all; because they always drive at the best and most
important ends. And so we must reckon such Miracles Divine, as tend to confirm
Truths which come by Divine Revelation. For as such Truths cannot be consirmed
but by the God of Truth that Reveals them; so neither would they be attested by
the Father of Lies, the Devil, did it lie in his Power to work a Miracle for
the confirmation of them; because nothing is more cross then Truth is, to his
interest in the world. 2. Such Miracles are to be accounted Divine, as tend to
draw People off from the practice and love of Sin. For as such Miracles are
glorious manifestations of the Holiness of the Divine Nature, so they serve to
transform the Spirits of Men into the Divine Image; and consequently, can be
wrought only by the Finger of God. 3. Such Miracles as tend to preserve the
true Worship of One God by acts of singular Love and Reverence, and with an
entire Resignation of Heart and Soul; because this is the great end of God's
whole Economy; and that which all Impostures hitherto have been intended to
Defeat and Bass^le. 4. In short; Those are to be looked upon to be true Divine
Miracles, which tend to the utter destruction of the Devil's Power and Works.
These cannot possibly be thought Diabolical operations; for if Satan rise up
against himself and be divided, he cannot stand, but has an end, Mark 3. 26.
All these things carry their own light with them, and by that light we may very
easily discern and distinguish true Miracles from those Impostures which have
gone under that name in all times, both Ancient and Modern.

Next after Moses, Jesus Christ was the only Person publicly owned to have
come from God upon an extraordinary Message to the world. And in regard he
intended to repeal the Mosaical Ordinances, and instead thereof to enact more
Spiritual Laws, it was necessary for him to work Miracles, to show his
Authority for the founding of his Church, as Moses had showed his for building
of the Tabernacle. And these were the noble ends of all Christ's Miracles, to
seal the Truth of his Doctrines; that how Mysterious soever some of them might
seem, they might be believed; for which reason he did no one Miracle before he
began to Preach; to reclaim Mankind from all manner of Vice and Immorality, or
whatever is contrary to God's Nature, or reproachfel to their own; to establish
Piety and Honesty in the world; to teach men to lead Sober, Righteous, and
Godly Lives in this world; to direct them how to Worship the only True God in
Spirit and Truth; and to deliver not only the Bodies, but the Souls of all
People from the Tyranny and Power of the Devil, whose business was to Captivate
all Mankind, that they might walk on still in darkness and blindness of Heart;
which being the reasons and ends of the Lord Jesus his Miracles, we may be
sure, that those reasons having been once answered, and the ends sufficiently
served, by himself, and his first Disciples, there was no further need of
Miracles. And therefore whatever Signs and Wonders have been showed (supposing
they were really effected) either by some Pagans immediately following the time
of Christ, or by some Romanists in latter Ages, they are not to be reckoned
Divine Operations, but so many Workings of Satan and his Instruments; which are
so far from justifying, or giving credit to their Ways and Professions, that in
fact they are a reproach to them; especially since they have been done in
prejudice to that Grave and Holy Religion which the Lord Jesus confirmed; and
were so manifestly intended for the promoting and encouragement of
Superstition, Vice, and downright Idolatry.

I have now ended this Point concerning Miracles, having discoursed the more
largely upon it, that at the same time I might demonstrate the Existence of
God, and likewise serve the interest of Christianity; the truth whereof
undeniably appears from this single argument, That Jesus Christ confirmed all
his Laws and Doctrines by True Miracles. For this being once granted, it must
necessarily follow, not only that there is a God, but moreover, that Jesus
Christ came from God, and that the Testimony which his Works gave of him, was
Divine and Infallible; and consequently, That we are bound at our utmost peril
to Believe and Obey him: Which Consideration being of such vast moment, I
thought my self obliged to bestow the more time and pains in clearing matter of
Fact.

CHAP. V.
THE next extraordinary Occurrence I mentioned, as a demonstration of God's
Existence, is Prophecy; that is, the Foretelling of some Future Events, which
depended on such secret and remote Causes, as none but an Omniscient Being
could possibly discern afar off.

That you may understand this matter distinctly and clearly:

1. I do not here by Events mean such things as have come to pass by the
necessary and natural Operation of second Causes. For where a thing depends
upon necessary Causalities, any man that can discover the order, and series,
and application of the Causes, may easily foresee and predict the consequent;
as a skilful Astronomer can foretell Eclipses of the Moon and Sun. For those
glorious Creatures are under a constant Law, and their motions are Regular; so
that a man who knows their Courses, and by the Uniformity of them, perceives
when an Opake Body will fall between one of those Luminaries and our Eyes, can
discover long beforehand when the Light will be intercepted, and fail in our
Hemisphere. But by future Events are understood contingencies, or those issues,
the Causes whereof are not yet in being; or at least are so occult, remote, and
uncertain, that they are not discernible by any limited Understanding, in
regard that they depend upon the casual concurrence of Second Causes, or upon
the Arbitrarious Power of Men's Wills; or upon the uaccountable hits of Fortune;
or upon such strange results, as look like so many secret over ruling
determinations of Destiny: As, What Great Men will arise Two or Three Ages
hence, (if the world shall continue so long)? What Revolutions there will be
then in States and Empires? What the Conditions of the Church will be? What
Wars will happen? What will become of our Posterity and of the Fortunes we
transmit to them? In short, How the world will go? These things, and the like,
are altogether Accidental, and therefore must needs be Uncertain; nor can they
come within the reach of finite Beings, any more than the close of the world,
or the Day of Judgment can be known, or predicted by us.

2. Secondly, By Foretelling future Events; is meant true and infallible
Prediction, in contradistinction to Conjecture, or probable Foreknowledge.
There is in all Intellectual Beings a Presaging Power, and the Perception
beforehand must be according to the condition and quality of the Cause, from
which that Perception springs and is gathered. If the Cause be Necessary and
Natural, the Foreknowledge is Certain; but if it be only Casual and Fortuitous,
it can amount to no more but a probable Opinion. No Creature, how Intelligent
soever it be, can of it self infallibly foresee what Chances and Accidents will
fall out hereafter; by reason that the immediate Causes are supposed as yet not
to be Existent, or at least to be a great way off in the dark. Therefore when a
contingent Event is clearly Foreseen, and infallibly Predicted at a distance,
so that after a long tract of time, the thing, how Casual soever it was,
exactly answers the Prediction, we must conclude, That the Being which Foresaw
and Foretold it, is of a more Perfect Understanding than any Creature can
pretend to.

If then it be made appear, That many contingent things have long before they
happened, been certainly Foreknown, truly Predicted, and at last in Fact have
come to pass accordingly, this must be a Demonstration of the Existence of a
most Perfect Being, that is, a Deity. For all Human Presaging of accidental
Events at a great distance from us, is at best but Guessing, which commonly
ends in vast mistakes; so short-sighted are our Understandings, and our
capacities so very narrow! And as for those Intellectual Creatures which
Inhabit the other world, and traverse up and down in this, though by reason of
the innate Quickness and Sagacity of their Faculties, the long Experience they
have had of Human Affairs, the great Insight they have thereby into all things
here below; the Agility of their Nature which enables them to be privy every
where to Men's Counsels and Actions, and the continual Observations they cannot
but make from the Disappointments or Successes of Men's Designs; though, I say,
by means of these singular advantages, they are qualified to give, beyond
expression, far better Judgment of future Events, especially near at hand, than
the Wisest and most Reaching Men on Earth; yet is their Knowledge limited
notwithstanding: So that without the Assistance of Divine Revelation, their
Foresight of Contingencies, especially of such as are remote and do depend upon
a series of distant Causes, can be but only Conjectural. Hence it was, that
those ancient Southsayers and Augurs among the Heathens, who used the help of
Demons in their manifold Superstitious ways of Prognosticating, were often
mistaken, even in very probable cases, and when Events were hard by. And it is
commonly observed of those old Oracles, who were so much consulted by the
Idolatrous Pagans upon any emergencies which seemed difficult, that though
those officious deluding Spirits were wont (till Christ's time) to give People
Answers out of Holes and Caves, yet, to save Apollo's Credit, they were wont to
wrap up those Responses, in equivocating and doubtful Terms, that were capable
of various Constructions, as the thing consulted about succeeded or failed.
Indeed Good Angels have not deceived Men; and therefore their foresight must be
acknowledged to have been better grounded, and of a further and clearer reach.
But yet by reason of those finite and (comparatively) scanty measures of
Knowledge, which are connatural to all Created Beings, though Exalted and
Glorious, to make all their Predictions certain and infallible, they have
always, by the necessity of their Nature, stood in need of special Revelation
and Commission from a Superior Being, whose Prescience touches all intermediate
and proximate Causes, and all contingent, probable, possible Events, though
never so far removed from created Understandings. Therefore if in this case
matter of fact be true, that any Creatures, Men or Angels, have acted after
such a Prophetical manner, as to have Foretold things Future, things which
Natural Causes did not necessarily produce, things which could not have been
foreseen, but through a continued train and succession of Accidents, and
through many Circumstances in themselves dubitable and uncertain; nay, some
things which depended, not so much upon Natural or Moral Causes here below, as
upon an overruling Power, which some have called by the Name of Fate; whereby
others understand the Absolute Decrees and Pleasure of Heaven: I say, if things
of these kinds have been certainly and infallibly Predicted, it is a plain
Argument of the Existence of an Omniscient Being, because none but an
Omniscient Being, or a Deity could Foreknow them; none but an Almighty Being
could Direct and Govern them. And therefore this is claimed as a peculiar
Prerogative of the Deity, to declare the things that are coming, and shall
come, Isa. 44. 7. an Argument which the Prophet there used to show, that the
Idols which the Apostate Jews Worshipped, were not Real Deities.

This then being so evident and undeniable, the whole matter will turn upon
this main point, Whether there have been at any time such Predictions as these.
For the clearing whereof we must refer our selves to those Books which have
been all along of so great Authority with Jews and Christians, since they were
first compiled; especially to those Books, which we commonly call the Old
Testament: Books of such Venerable Antiquity, that the very last of them was
written Four hundred years before the Birth of Christ; that is, above Two
thousand years ago; and the first of them contains the most Ancient History
that is in the World; and is at least Three thousand two hundred years old.
Though in several other Writings, which are but of vulgar note, we meet with
diverse Accounts of Prophecies; yet because there are the most Ancient, the most
Authentic, and are believed to have been penned by Prophets themselves, I
shall take notice only of such as we find in them; considering those Writers
now, not as Men divinely inspired, but as fair Historians only; the Credit
whereof, there is no sober, modest man, but will be ashamed to deny them.

Now here I might sill a large Volume, were I minded to write a particular
Account of the most Intelligible Predictions we find throughout the Scriptures,
and of the Accomplishment of them. But 'twill be enough for me to take notice
only of Three sorts.

1. Such as relate to the Great, Ancient Empires. 2. Such as relate to Jesus
Christ. 3. Such as relate to some Memorable and Remarkable Events after his
departure out of the world.
1. First, Such Predictions as relate to the Great, Ancient Empires. Of which,
the Assyrian Monarchy was the First; and long before the Translation of it to
the Medes and Persians, Cyrus, who was designed to translate it, was mentioned
by name, as God's Shepherd and Anointed, by Isaiah; a Prophet of the Jews, who
told them before hand what great things God would do for Cyrus, and that Cyrus
would perform all God's pleasure, Isa. 44, 45. Yet this was many years before
ever Cyrus was born; Two hundred and ten years, says Josephus; who adds, That
Cyrus having Jos. Antiq. lib. 1. c. 1.
read that Ancient Prophecy concerning him, to express his Thankfulness to God,
gave the Jews leave to return home out of their Captivity, and to rebuild God's
Temple at jerusalem; toward which he promised his own assistance.

The Jews had then been Captives at Babylon about Seventy years; which sore
Judgment had been literally foretold them, together with the determinate Time
of it, by the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 25. 11. This whole land shall be a
desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king of
Babylon seventy years.

By the way let me observe, That Jeremy began his Prophesying in the Thirteenth
year of that good Prince Josiah, King of Judah: And that Josiah by name had
been foretold in the Reign of Jeroboam, as we find, 1 Kings 13. 2. And that
Prophecy was by certain computation given about Three hundred and fifty years
before the days of Josiah.

But to go on: Toward the end of the Captivity at Babylon, Daniel interpreted
Nebuchadnezzar's Dream concerning the Great Image, the Head whereof was of fine
Gold, the Breast and Arms of Silver, the Belly and Thighs of Brass, the Legs of
Iron, and the Feet part of Iron, and part of Clay. This Vision was a
Representation of the Four Famous Empires, as we see by Daniel's own
Exposition, Dan. 2. The First Empire was that then in being, the Babylonish;
represented by an Head of Gold, because it was the most Considerable and
Glorious of all the Four. As to the Three next, the Vision was Prophetical;
intended to show the several Successions of them; and that the Latter would
still be inferior to the Former in Splendour and Dignity. Whereas therefore the
Babylonish Empire was of Gold; the Second was to be of Silver; and that was the
Persian Empire; represented by Two Arms, because it consisted of Two great
People, the Persians and Medes, that were to be united together into one State;
and that under Cyrus, who would be related to both Nations; to the Medes by the
Mother's side, and to the Persians by his Father's. By the Third Kingdom is
meant the Macedonian, or Grecian Empire, that was to be erected by Alexander
the Great, upon his Signal Victories over the Persians. This was represented by
a Brazen Belly and Thighs, because (as St. Jerome thinks) Brass, of all Metals
giving the greatest sound, was sit to set forth the Extraordinary Fame which
would be spread over the world, not only of the Greeks Power and Fortune, but
of their Eloquence also. The Roman Empire was to be the Fourth; and that was
represented by Legs of Iron; because, as Iron breaks in pieces, and subdueth
all things; so was the Roman Power to break and subdue all the Principalities
which Alexander left to his Commanders, and their Successors; and so would
possess it self of all the Riches and Glory of the Three former Empires.
Nevertheless, how strong soever the Roman Power was to be at the first founding
of that Empire, in process of time it would be impaired, weakened, and debased,
like Iron mingled with Mire and Clay. Which St. Jerome observes was, when the
strength of Rome was so wasted by their long Wars, Foraneous and Civil, that
they were forced upon many Occasions to call in the Aid of Barbarous, Exotic
People, which mixing themselves with the Old Roman Blood, gave it an alloy, so
that they lost great degrees of their Ancient Strength and Honor.

This Succession of the Empires thus predicted in the Second Chapter of
Daniel's Prophecy, we sind foretold again in some other places, under other
Representations; but I instance in this only, because it is most obvious to
every ordinary Understanding. And now, whoever will take the pleasure to
examine some Humane Writers from Herodotus down to Justin, the Historian, may
with infinite Satifaction find, how exactly these Predictions were fulfilled:
1. By Cyrus's getting the Power out of the hands of the Babylonians; then by
Alexander's getting it out of the hands of the Persians; and then by the Romans
wresting it out of the hands of Alexander's Successors; and yet between the
delivering, and the fulfilling of Daniel's Prophecy, there passed a Flux of
about Five hundred years; which does manifestly argue the Existence of God, who
alone could at such a distance of time so infallibly and particularly foresee
and predict Events, that were in themselves so contingent and uncertan. That it
looks like an History, rather than a Prediction. To which purpose St. Jerome
tells us of that great Blasphemer of Christ, and his Religion, Porphyry, that
reading the Proem. in Dan.
Book of Daniel, and finding how exactly consonant the Events were to the
Prophecy, he could not but acknowledge the truth of the account; but to evade
the force of those Arguments which the Christians drew thence, he betook
himself to this senseless and absurd Pretense, that the Book was not a
Prediction written by Daniel, but rather a Narrative of things that were done
long after Daniel's time, and written by some body else in the days of
Antiochus Epiphanes.

2. There is another sort of Predictions which relate peculiarly to Jesus
Christ; whom Daniel called beforehand, Messiah the Prince, Dan. 9. 25.
Whereupon a very Mr. Mead, B. 3. p. 861.
Learned Writer observes, That there is no other place of Scripture, whence the
Church of Israel did or could ascribe the Name of Christ and Messiah unto him
they looked for, but only this of Daniel. For there is no other Prophecy in all
the Old Testament besides this, where that Name is directly given him, but only
by way of Type; which makes it unquestionable, that the Jews understood this
Prophecy of that Great and Eminent Person, whose coming into the World,
together with all the remarkable Circumstances which attended his Life and
Death, were long before so particularly foretold by several Prophets, that
those Predictions are not capable of being fairly applied to any other Person;
what arts soever some Jews, and other misguided Men have used to wrest them
another way. That he was to be of the Seed of a Woman; or that he was to appear
in the Nature, not of Angels, but Men. That of all Mankind he was to spring
from the Loins of Abraham. That of Abraham's Posterity, he was to descend only
from Isaac. That of all Isaac's Generation, he was to be of the Tribe of Judah.
That of all that Tribe, he was to be of the House and Lineage of David. That a
Virgin of David's Lineage was to conceive and bear him. That Bethlehem was to
be the place of his Nativity. That he was to be a Prophet like unto Moses, yet
much above him. That he was to do Miracles. That he was to Preach good Tidings
to the meek, and to bind up the brokenhearted. That he was to be a Man of
Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief. That he was to be despised and rejected of
Men. That one of his own Familiars, who should eat of his Bread, would lift up
his Heel against him. That he should be sold for thirty pieces of Silver. That
he should be led to the Slaughter like a Lamb. That he should be numbered with
the Transgressors. That his Garments should be divided, and Lots cast upon his
Vesture. That Vinegar should be given him to drink. That in the midst of his
Sufferings he should be scoffed at, and reviled. That he should make
Intercession for Trangressors. That for the Sins of People he should be
smitten. That he should make his Grave with the Rich. That not one of his Bones
should be broken: And that his Soul should not be left in Hell, nor his Body
suffered to see Corruption. These things were foretold of Jesus Christ; and
taking them altogether in a sum, it is impossible for an Insidel, with any
color of Reason to apply them to any other but Jesus Christ only.

But one of the most remarkable things, is, That the time of Christ's appearing
in the World was so plainly foretold by some of the Prophets, that the Learned
Jews found by their Calculations, that about the time when Jesus Christ was
born, the promised Messiah was to come. And hence it was, that at that Juncture
they were all full of Expectations of him. Nor is it at all questionable, but
the time so agreeing with the Predictions, they would joyfully and unanimously
have received Jesus Christ as the Messiah, had not his coming been in that mean
and obscure Condition, which was so great a surprise to those People who
expected the Messiah would have been like a David, or Solomon, to have gone in
and out before them with all possible Pomp, Splendour, and Magnificence.

The Prophet Haggai mentioned the time of his Appearance more largely, Hag. 2.
7, 9. The Substance of which Prediction was, That the desire of all Nations
(that is, the Messiah or Shiloh) should come while the Temple which was then a
building, continued and was standing; and that the Glory of that latter House
should be greater than the Glory of the former, which had been at so vast an
Expense, erected and finished by King Solomon. Now this was fulfilled merely by
Christ's constant presence at that Temple, some years before the Destruction of
it by the Romans. For in respect of the Structure, and external Glory of it, it
fell so very short of the first, that when the ancient Men who had seen the
first House, saw the Foundations of the second, They wept with a loud voice, as
Ezra tells us, Ezra 3. 12. And besides, the Jewish Rabbis confess, that five
things were wanting to this Temple, which the former was honored with as so
many Signs of the peculiar Presence of God's Majesty at it. 1. The Urim and
Thummim, or those Stones upon the Breast Plate of the High Priest, whereby God
was wont to reveal his mind. 2. The Ark of the Covenant; from which the King
and the High Priest did sometimes receive answers from God by a clear and
audible Voice. 3. The Fire that was wont to fall from Heaven, to devour the
Sacrifice upon the Altar. 4. The Shekinah, or Divine Power, that was signified
sometimes by the Pillar of a Cloud, and by the Holy Oil, wherewith the King and
High Priest were wont to be anointed. And 5. the Spirit of Prophecy. These
glorious things being wanting at the second Temple, whence could that great
Glory predicted by Haggai proceed, but from the Presence of Jesus Christ? One
that was the Brightness of his Father's Glory, and the Glory of his People
Israel. One that was the true Urim and Thummim, that revealed his Father's Will
plainly to the World. One that was the typified Ark of the Covenant, the
Propitiatory by his own Blood. One that Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with
Fire; the true Fire from Heaven, where of the other was but a typical
Representation. And one who received not the Spirit by measure, but was
anointed with the Oil of gladness above his Fellows?

But the Prophet Daniel pointed out the time of his coming after a more close
and precise manner, Dan. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27. Seventy weeks are determined upon
thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an
end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up vision and prophecy, and to anoint
the most holy. Know therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of the
commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the prince,
shall be seven weeks; and threescore and two weeks, (after that) the street
shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times. And after
threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself; and the
people of the prince that shall come, shall destroy the city, and the
sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the
war desolations are determined. And he shall confirm the covenant with many for
one week; and in the midst of the week he shall cause the oblation and
sacrifice to cease; and for the overspreading of abominations, he shall make it
desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured out
upon the desolate. As to the exposition of this Prophecy, all Writers are
agreed, that according to the language and custom of the Jews, by a week is
understood not seven days, but seven years; that is, seventy times seven years,
or four hundred and ninety years in all. And the plain sense of the Prediction
may be comprised within these Observations, as far as it concerns my present
purpose.

1. First, That from the second building of the Temple and City of Jerusalem,
to the last destruction of both, there was allotted the space of four hundred
and ninety years, to be computed from the time of the publication of an Edict
by some Persian King for this second Building.

2. That within the compass of those four hundred and ninety years, Sin should
be expiated; true, substantial Righteousness, grounded upon eternal Reasons,
should be preached; the old Prophecies should be fulfilled; Messiah the Prince
should be cut off, and afterward instated in his everlasting Kingdom. The rest
of the Prediction relates to the destruction of Jerusalem, of which I shall
take notice by and by. Thus much of it is concerning the Advent, Life, Death,
and Unction of the Messiah.

Now to lay aside the various, perplexing Accounts given by inquisitive men,
touching the exact Impletion of every part of this Prophecy, these two things
are very evident:

1. First, That the rebuilding, and final devastation of the Holy Temple and
City, was according to the time allotted, the seventy weeks of years. For though
the Jews were permitted by Cyrus to return into their Land out of their
Captivity, and to begin the restoration of the Temple, yet the great Edict, the
successful Commandment for the restoring and building Jerusalem, was given by
that Persian King, called Darius Nothus, Ezra 6. And from the third year of his
Reign, when the work of the Temple (by the incitement of Haggai and Zachary
renewed the year before) was now confirmed by a new Edict from the King to be
finished, unto the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, are exactly four hundred
and ninety years; that is, seventy weeks of years fully complete, as a Learned
Mede. B. 3. page 858, 859.
Writer has computed the time to my hands.

2. Secondly, It is most evident, that before the expiration of these four
hundred and ninety years, while the Temple and City of Jerusalem were yet
standing, Jesus Christ was manifested in the flesh; that he fulfilled all
Righteousness in his own Person, and taught all others to live godly,
righteously, and soberly in this present world; that he offered up himself upon
the Cross, a Sacrifice and Propitiation for the Sins of all men; that to him
all the Prophets did bear witness, and in him their Prophecies did terminate;
and that upon his Resurrection and Ascension, he was exalted unto the right
hand of God, and all Power was given him in Heaven and in Earth, according to
Daniel's Prediction.

And now to return to our Argument, How was it possible for Daniel, or for any
other man, to have foretold these Events so exactly, and so long before,
without immediate Revelation from a Divine, Omniscient Being, who foresaw, nay,
fore-appointed the whole series and course of these things from the beginning
to the end? And consequently, How is it possible for any man of common reason
or sense, to question the Existence of such a Being, for these things could not
depend upon any natural Causes. No, the Advent, Sufferings, and Glorifying of
the Messiah, were purely the result of a Divine Decree; and therefore could not
have been predicted or foreseen, but by that Divine Being who had decreed all;
and by whose determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge Jesus Christ was delivered
to the Jews, as St. Peter told them, Acts 2. 23.

3. The like is to be said of those other Predictions, which relate to some
remarkable and memorable Events after Christ's departure out of the world, and
they were chiefly these three. 1. The Destruction of Jerusalem. 2. The
Propagation of the Christian Faith. And 3dly, the dispersed and reproachful
Condition of the Jews.

1. As Daniel foretold the Desolations that would come upon Jerusalem, so did
the Messiah himself foretell, that there should not be left one stone of the
temple upon another, which should not be thrown down, Matthew. 24. 2. And a
little further he said, When ye shall see the abomination of desolation spoken
of by Daniel the prophet, stand in (or about) the holy place, let them which be
in Judea, fly to the mountains, ver. 15, 16. This, by the way, shows that the
computation of Daniel's seventy weeks, is to be carried on to the time of
Jerusalem's destruction; for there the four hundred and ninety years end, and
not before; as we see by our Savior's referring to that Prediction, when he
spoke of that Desolation. These Predictions were accomplished about forty years
after the Messiah's Crucifixion, and in that Juncture the several parts of
those Predictions were answered to the full. Then the Jews saw the abomination
of Desolation which Daniel had spoken of, meaning the Roman, Heathen Armies,
with the Heathen Figures, in their Military Banners, expanded about the Holy
City. Then were the people of the Prince (that is, their Commander Titus) come
to destroy the City and the Sanctuary. Then did Titus his Forces overrun the
Land of Judoea like a Flood, and make it desolate. Then was the Temple laid
waste, and the Oblations and Sacrifices which were wont to be in it, were made
to cease. And then was the Consummation which Daniel foretold, or the End which
was determined upon the Desolate; namely, the utter overthrow of their whole
Government both in Church and State; and then too was the Desolation foretold
by Jesus Christ, not one stone left upon another, neither in the City of
Jerusalem; for, as Josephus acknowledges, it was razed to the Foundations, and
laid even with the Ground: Nor yet in the Temple; for, as our Learned
Paraphrast observes out of Scaliger, as a full Completion of our Savior's
Prophecy, the very Foundations of the Temple were torn up by Turnus Rufus with
a Plow-share, so that no part of it Underground was left undissolved; not one
stone left upon another. How could a clearer Argument be expected than that
was, of the Existence of an All-seeing, an All-powerful and Righteous God, who
weighed the Sins of an hardened People, and by his determinate Counsel and
Foreknowledge, made their Punishment then as plain as their Guilt had been,
when with wicked hands they crucified the Lord of Life, and wished that his
Blood might be upon them, and upon their Children.

2. But, Secondly, Besides these Predictions which concerned them, and were
fulfilled in their Sufferings, there were others which had references to the
Propagation of Christ's Religion. Christ himself had foretold, That when he
should be lifted up from the earth, he would draw all men unto him, Joh. 12.
32. And near Two thousand years before that time, the Patriarch Jacob
presignified on his Deathbed, That when Shilo should come, to him the
gathering of the people should be, Genesis 49. 10. which was not possible for
Jacob, at such a vast distance of time to say, or foresee of himself; no more
than 'twas possible for the Prophets in aftertimes, without Revelation from an
Allknowing Being, to predict, as they did, That all kings should fall down
before him; That all nations should do him service; That he should stand for
the people; That to him the Gentiles should seek; That from the rising up of
the sun to the going down of the same, his name should be great among the
Gentiles; That the Heathen should be for his inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for his possession. All which Predictions proved in the
Event most evidently true; notoriety of fact shows it; and yet the exact
impletion of these Prophecies could never have been foreknown, as it was, but
by a Supreme Numen, who knows all things; considering how unlikely it was, as
things stood, for Christianity to find universal success and entertainment in
the world; because it was so opposite to men's Lusts and Pleasures; the Jews
were so hardened against it; the Pagan Religion, which Christianity was intended
to destroy, was so spread over the Gentile Nations, and so fixed by Laws:
Princes were so set against it; the Devil used such various methods to stop its
progress; and the Preachers of it were of themselves so weak, and unable to
carry it over the world; that without the Assistance of a Divine Power, it
could not have prevailed over the hearts of people so universally, and in such
a conquering manner, notwithstanding all Obstacles which were in the way. But
herein appeared the wonderful Conduct of Divine Providence, That the Government
of the Jews being quite dissolved upon the destruction of Jerusalem, the
Scepter then being utterly departed from Judah, and the Lawgiver from between
his feet, Shiloh reigned with triumph and glory. As the Jews lost ground, so
Christ, whom they had crucified, got it; and a great deal more: So that in a
very little time, not only multitudes of the Jewish Nation were Converts to
Christianity, but great Armies of People in the Gentile world, and in the most
Barbarous Countries, were brought in obedience to Christ's Faith. And hereby
the Ends of God's Providence were served by the Romans themselves; first by
being his Instruments to captivate and subdue the wicked Jews; and then by
being themselves subdued to Jesus Christ; so that wherever the Roman Eagles
flew, there Christ was a Conqueror by his Holy Spirit.

3. To which let me add, Thirdly, this one Observation more, concerning those
Predictions which relate to the Dispersed and Reproachful Condition of the Jews
since the Overthrow of their City and Government. As the Old Prophets had told
those People long before, what a sad, miserable Condition they would bring
themselves to at last; so Christ had foretold them in express terms, That upon
the treading down of Jerusalem, they should be led away captive into all
nations, Luke 21. 24. A Prediction which was literaly fulfilled as soon as they
were conquered by Titus his Army. Many thousands of them were carried away,
divided, and scattered up and down in the world; where their wretched Posterity
inherit their Ancestors Curse to this day; leading still a forlorn sort of
life; Vagabonds into all parts, and hated wherever they go. An Avenging Hand
from above does still pursue them; and every day the world sees the Predictions
concerning them more and more fulfilled: Which is, as it were, an Ocular
Evidence, as well of the Truth of Christianity, as of the Existence of a Just
God.

I use this Argument the rather, because it is a kind of sensible proof of a
Deity; and not of so remote a Nature as the rest are. Though it be apparent to
Reason, that there must be a First Cause of all things; though the common
notions and impressions we have in our Nature show, who and what that First
Cause is; though Miracles are undeniably convincing; and Predictions, when
accurately fulfilled, demonstratively infer the Existence of a Being that
foresees all Events, though at the greatest distance; yet because those
Observations are most operative, which most nearly affect men, I urge this
Observation, touching the Jews Punishment, as being a thing verified by our own
Experience. Miracles we have not seen; but this Remarkable Judgment against the
Jews we see daily; and therein we see the plain accomplishment of some
Predictions which we know were written some considerable time before the Events
happned; so that we may well wonder, how there can be an Atheist, as long as
there is a Jew living in the world. To this purpose, a Learned and Judicious
Prelate of our Church, who has solidly written upon the great Subject now
under my hand, expresses his thoughts in these words, with which I shall
conclude this present Point. There Bishop Wilkins' s Not. Rel. p. 89.
is (says he) one particular, which to me seems very considerable for the
proof of a Deity, though but little notice of it be taken by others; and that
is, The State of the Jewish Nation, who for these 1600 years have been driven
out of their own Country, having now no particular place of abode belonging to
them as a Nation; but are scattered and dispersed over all the habitable world,
hated and despised wherever they are permitted to dwell; very frequently
persecuted, impoverished, banished, murdered in vast multitudes: And
notwithstanding all this, they are not yet so mixed and blended with other
Nations, as to be lost among them; but are still kept up a distinct People;
there being no Instance like this in any Story; as if they were intended for a
standing Memorial and Example to the world, of the Divine Power and Vengeance.
To me it seems, among Rational Arguments, one of the plainest, not only for
the Proof of a Deity, and a Just Providence, in pursuing that Nation with such
Exemplary Vengeance; but likewise for the Authority of Scripture, and the Truth
of the Christian Religion.

CHAP. VI.
HItherto I have showed the Existence of a Supreme Being, that is Eternal,
Independent, Self-existing, the Author of our common Nature, Omnipotent,
Omniscient; all which Characters are included in the general Notion of a Deity;
or a Being that is Eminently and Absolutely Perfect. I proceed next to some
other Considerations, which argue a Being that is infinite in Wisdom, Goodness,
Benignity, as well as Power.

In order thereunto, let us now begin to take a view of that which was proposed
as the Fourth great Head of this Discourse; I mean, the Admirable Frame and
State of the Universe. For whoever will seriously reflect upon those various
appearances which are in this visible world, must be the most senseless and
stupid thing in it, if after all the bright manifestations of a Deity that are
every where discoverable, he can at last permit himself to say in his heart,
There is no God. God has not left himself without witness, says St. Paul,
Acts 14. 17. No, that which may be known of God is manifest to us; for God has
showed it unto us. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the
world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead, Romans 1. 19. 20.

Here then we meet with Eight Observable, which are very fit in their turns to
fall under our contemplation.

1. The excellent Order into which the several parts of the Universe are
digested.

2. The great Beauty that appears throughout the world.

3. The wonderful Usefulness that is in all the branches of the Creation.

4. The curious and exquisite Structure of them for the Uses and Ends to which
they serve.

5. The constant Regularity of them in their respective Operations.

6. The ample Provision that is made for the good of Creatures, especially
Mankind.

7. The Resemblances of Knowledge and Wisdom in the Operations of things
Irrational.

8. The Divine Frame of our own Rational Nature. O Lord, how glorious are thy
works! in wisdom have thou made them all; the earth and heavens are full of thy
riches; the various testimonies of thy greatness, and inexhaustible benignity.

1. First, We may observe the excellent Order into which the several parts of
the Universe are digested. This Order is seen:

1. In the commodious Situation and Position to which they are determined. 2.
In the near Relation of them to each other, and Dependence on each other. 3. In
the Permanency of them in that State and condition wherein they have been
placed.
1. As there are several Ranks and Classes of Creatures, so is every Rank
determined to its due and proper place. That part of the world we stand in
immediate need of, is the Earth; and that is placed in the middle of the world,
that it may receive influence from all the ambient parts of the Universe, to
help its Fertility; and the distance of it from the Celestial Bodies is so
commodious, that its Productions are not apt to be destroyed by excesses of
Heat or Cold, which otherwise would unavoidably follow were the distance nearer
or more remote. It is the proper place for man in this life. For it is the
Theater we are to Act on, and the Magazine that yields us the Stores we live
by; and therefore it is near at hand, hard by all our Necessities, and richly
furnished with Plants, Fruits, Meats, Entertainments of all sorts; so that it is
but going out of doors, and industrious People may gather their Provision, and
whatever they can modestly desire, either to supply their Wants, or to afford
them Pleasures. And lest we should drop down suddenly, for want of Breath, with
our Meats between our Teeth, the Air, which serves for Digestion and
Respiration, is, I cannot so well say in our Neighborhood, as in our Nostrils.
An Atmosphere so appositely placed, and so adapted to the gross contexture of
our outward Senses, that it is infinitely more proper for sensitive Creatures,
than the Fine, Unmixt Ether that is at such a distance from us. Those fluid
Bodies the Waters, are in their proper place too, treasured up in concave
Receptacles and Channels, and there ready at hand to quench the Thirst of every
Animal; and if Men will be wanton, to serve their Sensualities also, without
endangering their safety by inordinate, sweeping Inundations. The Heavens are
to give light and warmth to all Sublunary Creatures, and therefore the
provident Hand which formed them, has set them very remote; that those great
and glorious Luminaries may cast their Influences over all the World; and
withal secure all things living from those Scorchings and Deaths, to which
their Vicinity would otherwise have unavoidably exposed them. In short, all
things are situate where they should be; nor could the wisest Counsel have
placed them better, supposing the wisest Being to have had the disposal and
ordering of them.

2. The excellent Order of Creatures is seen in the near Relation of them to
each other, and Dependence on each other. Where I shall speak only of that
general and common Reference, which the several kinds of Creatures, thus
situated and disposed, do bear to one another. As for the usefulness of
particular Branches of the Creation, it will fall under our eye in its due
place. At present I am to take notice of that Relation and Connection, that
Respect and Cognation which is between the Species and Sorts of things which
make up this great Frame and System of Nature. For in the great Volume of the
Creation there is a noble Design carried on, this Creature having a respect to
that, and that hanging upon the other, like Premises and Consequents in a
well-compos'd Book; so that if one part be taken away, not only the Beauty, but
the Purpose of the whole is lost. Were all Sensitive Creatures destroyed, what
would the Light of the Sun be to a blind World? Were the Earth annihilated,
what would the sweet Influences of the Pleiades signify? Or, were but the
Fowls, the Cattle, the Fruits of the Earth removed, what would become of Man,
that pretends to be the little Lord of all, and yet is fain to be a Dependant
upon these poor Creatures, to afford him Provision daily, and to furnish out
his Table? Some conceive, that the only great Design of Nature is, to support
Man; which though I think is too great a Vanity to imagine, yet supposing it
were so, how many Creatures are there to be served, before it can come to his
turn? I will hear the heavens (says the Divine Being) and the heavens shall
hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil,
and they shall hear Jezreel, Hos. 2. 21, 22. Where we have a Summary
Description of the great Order of Nature as things are cast into a State of
Relation and Correspondence, set forth as if they cried to each other, and
heard each other, to denote their mutual Subserviency and Dependence. Thus the
Stars by their attractive Beams prepare and enrich the Clouds; the Clouds drop
down fatness, that fatness moistens the Surface, and supplies the Bowels of the
Earth; that Moisture increases and invigorates those active Particles within,
which are the Principles of Vegetation; those Principles carry the spiritous,
vital Juice to every Tree and Plant; that Juice passing through many Nervous
Ducts and Conveyances produce Germination; those Germations cover Mountain and
Valley with a fresh Verdure; and by these various means the Earth receives
yearly a kind of new Life; every Species upon it is propagated, every living
Individual is sed and cherished, and Man and Beast are abundantly provided for
anew, after all the vast Consumptions and Expenses of Nature the year before.
There is a Series and Connection of Causes, which act upon each other, the
superior Cause still having a respect to the Powers of that which is the next
in Subordination; and all show the wonderful Wisdom and Goodness of the Supreme
Cause, in thus suiting and adapting the Operations of his Creatures, according
to the necessities of the several Branches of his Creation.

And as there is this extrinsecal Reference born by one Creature to another; so
is there in every one of them an intrinsic Faculty and Disposition, which
bears respect to the Operations and Productions of those external Causes. In
all Animals there are eager Appetites, as Hunger and Thirst, which stimulate
and excite them every day to Eat and Drink of Natures Bounty. In all Vegetables
there are spreading Roots, fibrous Receptacles, with open, greedy, capacious
Orifices, to entertain, digest, and send up that animating Sap, which is
ministered by the restless Principles of Vegetation. In the Bowels of the Earth
are hid the multifarious Seeds of Life, prepared for a new assistance of Salts,
Nitre, and the like Supplies, to quicken, actuate, and render them Prolisick.
Those quickening Recruits wait for Distillations from above, to convey them down
into their Apartments; and those Distillations are various, according to the
Quality and Temper of the Seasons; and as the Sun and Stars act by their
Influences in the Air, where the great Treasures are annually made ready by
various Motions and Secretions, and then shed plenteously abroad in variety of
Forms and Modifications; as, Hail, Snow, Rains, or Dews. Thus each Cause bears
a Correspondence and Relation to the Faculties and Dispositions of that which
is Subordinate; and those Faculties bear a Reciprocal Correspondence to the
Power and Agency of the next Superior One. There is such an orderly Connection,
such a close harmonious Confederacy between the several Parts of the World, as
they are placed and situate; that as they all severally depend upon each other
for their respective Operations, so all jointly conspire to the Preservation
and Maintenance of the whole; which evidently shows, That it could not be blind
Fate or Fortune that linked together the Parts of the Universe into such an
admirable League, such an amicable State of Subserviency and Assistance; but a
most Wise and Beneficent Agent, that from the beginning consulted and provided
for the Good of all his Creatures, and accordingly sitted their Powers to that
great end. For those Irrational Beings, the glittering Lamps of Heaven, the Air
and Earth, Vegetables and Creatures, that are merely sensitive, cannot be
supposed to understand the Ends and Scope, the Reasons and Purposes of their
Operations. They are not the effects of any Deliberaration, or choice of their
own, but the consequents of Necessity; and therefore must be brought about by
the directing Hand and Will of a God of Incomprehensive Power, of Wisdom, that
they might bear witness of his Being and Providence, and excite all Mankind to
praise and glorigy the adorable Perfections of his Nature.

3. The excellent Order of Creatures is seen in the Permanency of them in that
State and Condition in which they have been placed. This Permanency consists
in two things: 1. First, In the entire continuance of their Natures. The
constituent, principal Substances of the Universe are still the same they ever
were since their first Formation, in Number, Measure, and Weight. Nothing of
their Beauty is saded by Age, nothing of Matter worn away by Motion, no Parts
lost quite by Accident, nor any one Species annihilated by outward Violence, or
inward Insirmity and Decay. Though Individuals upon the Terraqueous Globe dye
daily, or are cut off, lest the Earth we inhabit and live upon, and have our
Food by, should be over-stock'd, yet all sorts and kinds of Beings remain, from
the glorious Furniture of the Firmament, to the meanest Species of Flies and
Worms. All Vegetables propagate, as in the beginning, the diversity of Sexes,
Male, and Female, in all Animals continues on; Men and Beasts increase and
multiply, and perform all their Natural Offices, ever since the primordial
Benediction. But lest these things should be looked upon as Productions of
Course, springing merely from the Principles and Energy of Plastic Nature,
what think we of the Permanent Concinnity and State of the Air, whose
Salubrious Blasts, Transparency, proper Motions, and all other uses it was
intended for, do still hold on, notwithstanding all Nusances and Infections,
all Vicislitudes and Alterations, and all those Disturbances, Conflicts, and
Wars, from contrary jarring Qualities which have been in it, since its first
Expansion? What can we think of the Caelestial Host, that for these Six
thousand Years have been every minute casting and dispersing their enlivening
Beams over the whole World? What can we think of the Sun in particular, that
during such a long Tract and Succession of Ages, has been every moment at so
vast an Expense of Light and Heat, its Body still continuing unimpaired, and
its Powers neither wasted nor disabled? How could all this Conservation be
without the help of an Almighty provident Hand, that does by a sort of new
Creation, sustain and supply daily the several Branches of the Universe; and
did at first from them all so perfect in their Kinds, and in order to their
particular Ends, and for the general Good of the whole; that there is no
mending the Creation; no altering the Figure, Posture, Number, or Frame of the
Integral Parts of it; no adding any new Species, or destroying any old ones,
without disorder and detriment to the great Compages?

Secondly, The permanent state of things is discernable, as by the continuance
of their Natures, so by the constant tenor of their Operations and Motions;
witness (for all) those bright, radiant Bodies over our heads, whose circular
Travels are so exactly periodical, and their Influences so constant, that they
plainly show there is a God above, who has given them a Law which cannot be
broken. By the various Aspects and Motions of the Moon, the melancholy
Solitudes of the Night are abated; the growth of Vegetables is assisted; the
increase of Anirnals is promoted; Dews fall to help and cherish the seminal
Powers of the Earth; and (besides many other advantages) the stowings and
ebbings of the Sea are regulated, and thereby the Waters are kept from
putrefaction, and the innumerable multitude of Fishes are preserved. And how
comes it to pass, but by the Decree of a Wise and Beneficent Being over all,
that these Influences are so constant, and these Motions are so stated and
certain, that the Monthly Aspects, and Annual Revolutions and Courses of the
Moon are still the very same; and all this, through a thin fluid Vehicle in
which it swims? The other Planets, how differently soever they move, yet amidst
that Variety, their Rowlings about have all along to this day so punctually
answered their determinate Periods, that they carry with them manifest Marks of
an Unerring Hand that does direct and govern them; and keeps the parts of them
from those Dissipations, which otherwise the Rapidity of their Motion would
expose them to, in their sine unresisting Ether. All other Stars (the Sun
excepted) are said to be fixed; not that they do not move at all, but because
their daily Motion is still directly forward in the same Circle, without any
particular Retrograde creepings, and without those Aberrations and Deflexions,
sometimes Northward, and sometimes Southward, which the seven wandering Stars
observe. Now if, according to the old Opinion, these great Bodies be supposed
to be fastened, like so many Nails, in Pellucid, but Solid Spheres, it is a
stupendous thing to consider, how such vast, cumbersom Machines should be able
to turn about so exactly, and in such a constant, even course, Night and Day,
without an Almighty Power that did first set them on Motion, and does still
superintend and steer them. But if they be supposed to roll in a free, open
Ether, it is impossible to conceive how so many Pendulous Bodies, of such
unmeasurable magnitude, so briskly moving in their respective Spaces without
the least rub to stop or hinder them, should not clash, or cross, or interfere
with one another, but still keep at the same distances, for ought we know, to
an hair's breadth, and perform all their Courses with equability and constancy
to an exact point; all this is beyond the reach of Human Reason to conceive,
unless it be granted, that there is a Supreme, Overruling Being, who did at
first set them into a determinate order, and has ever since preserved them in
that order, maintaining, governing, regulating, and directing their motions by
his own Infinite Power, and most Watchful Providence.

But to speak more particularly of that Glorious Luminary, which every day
rejoiceth as a Giant to run its course, to visit the whole world, and to
invigorate and cherish all things here below with lively Emanations: What can
we think of his Diurnal Motion, whereby that Immense Creature daily takes his
Round, and absolves his Course within the space of 24 hours; and this, not only
with far greater celerity, than that of the swiftest Arrow from the strongest
Bow; and moreover with such exact order, and constancy, that for these Six
thousand years his daily Revolution has been neither quicker, nor slower by one
minute; twice only excepted, when at the Special Command of his Maker he was
arrested in his Race, and was made one day to stand still, and another day to
go backward Ten Degrees? Besides this Diurnal Race from East to West, which
causes the vicissitude of Day and Night, what think we of the Sun's Annual
Progress toward the Northern, and then off again toward the Southern Tropic,
in an Oblique Circle they call the Zodiac, under Twelve Signs, or
Constellations, each whereof consisting of Thirty Degrees, he passes through
in Thirty Days, finishing his yearly Course in 360 Days, or thereabouts;
rising, as he goes, every new day in a new Line parallel to the Equinoxial; and
so increasing or lessening the Hours of the Day, and bringing on the several
Seasons of the Year, which are ordained for wise and good Ends: And hence come
the Vicissitudes of Summer and Winter, of Spring and Fall, of the Laborious
Seed-time, and the Joyful Weeks of Harvest: All which, that great Divider of
Days, and Months, and Years, has all along performed, by such an uniform,
steady, and constant tenor in its motions, that this present Day, nay this
present Minute, exactly answers to that which was full a Thousand Years ago,
when the Sun moved in the same Sign, in the same Degree, nay in the same Point,
wherein it moves now. All this while I have spoken according to Old Ptolemy's
Hypothesis, That the Heavens move; because the Scripture speaks after that
manner, as being most suitable to our ordinary Apprehensions. But, whether in
fact the stars move, or the Earth only, or the Earth and Stars too, is the same
thing to my present purpose; and I leave it to our Modern Inquisitive
Philosophers to dispute that matter out, and to end it when they can. For,
where ever those Motions be, our Observations will return to this point, and
must rest here, That these Motions are exact, punctual, and precise; which yet
were impossible, without the Decrees and Contrivance of a Supreme, Intelligent
Being, or a God, that superintends, orders, and takes care of this great Frame,
and Wonderful Machine of the Universe.

Now to all this the Scepticks of our Age are ready to tell us from two or
three old Blundering Pagan Philosophers, That this Excellent Order of things
came to pass, not by the Counsel, Skill, and Power of a Deity, but by mere
chance. For (that I may in a few words open to you the Mystery of Insidelity)
their grand Creed is this; That from all Eternity there was nothing but Matter
and Motion in an Immense Space; wherein numberless multitudes of small
Particles of Matter, called Atoms, were for a vast, long time, dancing and
sporting, playing and toying, justling and tumbling, freaking and clashing
together; and using all endeavors and tricks, how to clutch and combine into
Aggregate Bodies, and into different Modifications, Shapes, and Forms: And that
after many Rencounters and Trials, though without any Design, Forecast, or
Understanding of their own, they happened to fall into all the things which make
up the world: Some fell into a Sun, others made up the Moon, others formed
themselves into great numbers of Twinkling Stars; a frolicksome sort of Atoms
danced together into that which we call the Free, Open Air; the more Dull and
Lumpish kinds made up an Earth; and thence sprung up in time many other
Contextures which made up Plants and Trees; and abundance ran into Animals,
Beasts and Men: the very Souls of men being (as they say) nothing but delicate
Modifications of the sinest, and most active Atoms that Matter could afford;
where when they are by any untoward Accident or Insirmity, dashed and dissolved,
then they bring Death; which in their Opinion is only the unclutching of
Matter, void of a spiritual, intellectual, distinct Substance, that is said to
return to a God to give an Account of its Actions at a Judgment-day; Notions
which these great Wits of the world (as they take themselves to be) believe to
be nothing but the Inventions of Priests and Politicians, to keep Mankind in
slavery, and to fright people out of their Senses. Thus instead of believing in
a God, they believe in Matter and Motion, in Space and Atoms, in Chance and
Fortune: For, according to them, as things fall apieces by chance, so it was by
mere chance that they fell at first together; not by the Hand and Directions of
a Wise, Omnipotent Agent, that gave them their being; by Lucky Hits, by Casual
Concurrences, but by the succesful motions of Blind, Senseless Atoms,
accidentally and fortuitously jumping together into great variety of
Combinations and Figures; and so continuing, till Fortune that joined them,
makes them fly asunder again; and till by some new Comical Motions they sorm
themselves into new Shapes.

Now, though the exposing of these Conceits be Consutation enough, yet I would
gravely ask these Wise Sages, How it can consist with common Reason to imagine,
that the Fortuitous Motion of Stupid, Unthinking Matter could compose all
things into such excellent order; as the most Intelligent, Prudent Mind could
not have made more apt and proper? How could Blind, and consequently Erroneous
Chance, without any deliberation, pitch upon such Places to dispose every thing
into, as our common Senses show to be most sit, and commodious? We see the
Earth is Situate in the Center of the Universe, to receive kindly and
seasonable Influences, Heat and Cold, Drought and Moisture, from all the
Ambient Parts of this visible World. The Firmament is expanded at such a
convenient distance, as that it can communicate its sweet Influences, without
exposing us, and the things round about us, to those Extremities of Heat, or
Cold, whereby a greater Propinquity, or Longinquity would cause Living
Creatures to languish and dye. Those Lucid Globes which enamel the Firmament,
are so appositely fixed up and down everywhere from Pole to Pole, that the
remotest Regions participate of their Virtues and Powers. The Sun is determined
to such a Fitting Course, and to such Convenient Limits, that by its Alternate
Accesses and Recesses those Comforting Rays are dispersed over all the Earth,
which at proper Seasons produce Grass for the Cattle, Bread to strengthen man's
heart, and Oil to make him a cheerful Countenance, and generous Wines to
refresh and exhilerate his Spirits. Under the Opposite Poles there are the
great Treasures of Snow, which yield to the Hotter Climates plenty of Rain, and
Refreshing Gales of Wind. Not to speak of the Commodious Position of the
several Parts in Men, Beasts, and Plants, which could not be altered, I do not
say, without apparent Deformity, but without insupportable Inconvenience and
Prejudice to the whole Frame. This is enough to show, that the several Branches
of the Universe are so agreeably disposed and placed, that without betraying
our Reason, and the use of our Faculties, we cannot impute those Positions to
the casual motion of blind, senseless, undeliberating Atoms; but must look upon
them as the Results of Design and Choice, and as Arguments of an Intellectual,
Provident Being over all, who works all things according to the counsel of
his will; (or, according to the Best and Wisest Reasons) Ephesians. 1. 11.

Again, Let me ask our pretending Philosophers, How can it consist with common
Reason to conceive, That those Congruities and Relations which these several
parts of the world bare to each other; those Aptitudes and Concinnities which
are between the Disposition of some things, and the Faculties of others; so
that this thing is for the use of that, and that thing reciprocally fitted for
this; how, I say, can these mutual Correspondences be rationally ascribed to
nothing but mere Fortune and Chance? Is not the Eye fitted for the seeing of
Light, and Light fitted for the use of the Eye? Are not all the Senses adapted
to their proper Objects, and those Objects adapted to gratify the Senses? Is
not the Air a proper vehicle for Volatile Creatures, and the Frame of those
Creatures suited to the Contexture of the Air? Are not the Waters agreeable to
Fish, and the Nature of Fish so adapted to the Waters, that they cannot subsist
in a thinner Element? In short, Are not the parts of Nature's great Fabric so
congruously fitted to each other, like so many Springs and Wheels in the most
curious piece of Art, that there is no taking away a part, without disordering
and disjoynting the whole? And how can all this be thought to proceed from
Chance, any more than the Frame of a Watch or a Clock? These things show, that
they were intended for Ends, and where Ends are to be served, there must be
Knowledge, Counsel, and Forecast, how to make choice of proper Means, and how
to fit those Means together for due application: And when we see the Parts of
the whole World so admirably fitted, suited, and adapted to each other in such
exquisite Order, What extreme sottishness is it not, to attribute those
Congruities to stupid, blundering Fortune, which are so many Sculptures of a
Divine Hand, so many plain Evidences of the Wisest Mind, and the Highest
Reason? Once more let me ask, How it can consist with Reason to believe, that
this vast Compages could hold and continue in the same excellent Order for so
many Thousand years together, if it fell into it at the first by mere Accident?
Or how it could come to pass, that the Parts of it have not been as yet
Disunited and Scattered by Motion, if nothing but Fortuitous Motion joined
them? All Motion serves, especially if it be violent and swift, either to Wear
away Matter by degrees, or to Dissolve and Dissipate the Particles on a sudden,
and to make all about it fly; as we see clearly by the rapid Revolutions of
every Wheel about its Axis. Supposing then one or other of these Three things,
which are the principal accounts; either that the Earth alone whirls about upon
an Axis of its own; or, that the Heavens turn round upon the great Axis of the
Universe, the Earth lying quiet, and the Sun moving both forward and retrograde
perpetually; or, thirdly, That the motion is divided, the Earth doing the
Diurnal part, and the Sun absolving that part which is Annual; which of these
Opinions soever men are pleased to follow, they must grant on all hands, that
the motions are performed with the greatest velocity and quickness. And how
then can so many Combinations of Atoms be rationally supposed able to have
still held it out against the utmost Rapidity; and that all along, during the
Succession of so many Years and Ages; so that in all this time, neither the
Parts of any one moving Body have been impaired, nor the motion of any one has
been disturbed out of its orderly Tenor? especially, since all is supposed by
our Refined Wits to depend upon Chance; which is far more likely to dissolve,
or disorder a Rapid Body, than ever it was to form it; for they themselves
cannot tell the manner how this was done; but it is very easy for any man to
conceive how that may be; and if there be nothing but Luck in the case, it must
be a great wonder to any considering man, that by some odd Luck or other the
whole World has not been dissolved long ago.

To draw this Consideration to a period. Suppose these Scepticks should see
(what I have somewhere read of) a Great Machine of Brass, like that Sphere,
which Tully says his Friend Posidonius made, contrived according to Ptolemy's
Hypothesis, wherein there is a visible Description of the Heavens and Earth; of
the supposed Orbs and Spheres above; of the Cycles and Epicycles; with an
ingenious, but imperperfect Representation of the Centrical and Eccentrical
Motions of the Heavenly Bodies; and all this in a round Scheme of Materials,
orderly disposed in their proper places; fitted together in apt Connexions; and
holding all together in a firm, lasting, and permanent Frame: Would they
themselves fancy this Machine to have been formed, not by the Design, Art, or
Hand of any Skilful Workman; but only by Chance, and by the Fortuitous Motion
of Atoms? But because such a Machine I speak of, is not every where to be seen,
let them with an accurate Eye observe some Pieces of Art, which have been the
Curious (though now Ordinary) Improvement of this Age; I mean, the Pendulum
Clocks; wherein the Movements are so fine, so adapted to each other, so
regular, nay so steady and constant in their course, that some (without any
help) will go, and keep their Order a full Month; some a Year, and some more;
and can it be rational to impute all this to Luck, and Fortune; and to the
casual falling together of unguided Particles of Matter; when Chance never
produces any thing that is orderly and uniform, exact and steady, stable,
fixed, and constant? Or, thirdly, Let them view a Common Globe, and distinctly
observe the Poles, the Axis, the Horizon, the Meridian, the Equator, the
Ecliptic, the Zodiac, the Tropicks, and all the Degrees whereby they may
follow, and trace with their Finger the determinate course of the Sun, and then
let them say, whether that poor, ordinary Frame can be thought the effect of
Blind Fortune too. Nay, Lastly, Let them survey their own Houses, and examine
the Solidity of the Foundations, the Cementing of the Walls, the Contignation
of the Beams and Rafters, and all the parts of the Buildings, so duly and
properly laid, so regularly erected, so strongly fastened, so depending upon
each other for support, so fitted and compacted for use; and all making up such
Firm, Durable, and Permanent Structures, as can bid desiance to Winds and
Tempests; and after all, would it not be ridiculous Folly to conceive, that
those Edifices were not intended for use by any Architect's Forecast, nor
raised by any Architect's Contrivance, nor finished by any Architect's Skill
and Workmanship, but that all happened to be erected by the Fortuitous
Concurrence of Unguided Instruments, and by the accidental motion of Irrational
Materials; the Stones leaping by chance out of the Qarries, the Timbers dancing
away from their Roots, the Mortar taking a frolic to be in too; and Saws, and
Axes, and Trowels, and Hammers, and Nails, and Pins, helping and moving too by
Chance, they know not how, nor when? Now if these be such Senseless
Imaginations, what gross Stupidity is it to think, that this Goodly,
Magnificent Fabric the Universe, was made without the Counsel and Wisdom of a
Divine Architect, and merely by the chancemotions and friskings of small
Particles of Matter, that without the Power and Directions of an Infinite Mind,
were no more able to make a Star, or a Man, than the Motes of the Sun were to
Re-build the Great City of London, when it lay in Ashes?

I have instanced in these things of Art, to show the monstrous
unreasonableness of those, who will not allow so much of Skill and Contrivance
to have been used in setting the World into this Commodious, Apt, and Permanent
Order, as is necessary for the perfecting of Humane Inventions: tho indeed
there was infinitely more of Wisdom necessary, besides the Power requisite to
raise the Materials of the World out of nothing. For, as a Learned Writer
speaks, may not the most Excellent Pieces of Humane Artifice, the Fairest
Structures, the Finest Portraictures, the most Ingenious and Useful Enquiries,
such as we are wont most to admire and commend, with infinitely more ease
happen to exist, without any Industry or Contrivance spent upon them? If we
cannot allow those rude Imitations of Nature to spring up of themselves, but as
soon as we espy them, are ready to acknowledge them Products of Excellent Art,
though we know not the Artist, nor saw him work; how much more reason is there
that we should believe those Works of Nature, so incomparably more Accurate, to
proceed also from Art, although invisible to us (that is, Divine) and
performing its Workmanship by a Secret Hand?

This Argument for the Existence of a Deity, was urged by that Wise
Philosopher, Cicero; who observed, That in the Nulla in Coelo nec fortuna, nec
temeritas, necerratio, nec vanitas inest; contraque omnis ordo, veritas, ratio,
constantia. Cic* de Not. Deor. lib. 2.
Heavens there is nothing of Fortune, Temerity, or Error, nothing which is
vain, or useless; but that on the contrary, there is all Order, Truth, Reason,
and Constancy. And hence he shows, That since things perfected by Nature are
much better than Works performed by Art, and yet Art it self does nothing
without Reason; therefore we must believe, that Nature is not void of Reason
and Wisdom. If then Si ergo meliora sunt ea, quae natura, quam illa quae art
perfecta sunt, nee ars efficit quidquam sine ratione; ne natura quidem rationis
expers est habenda. Qui igitur convenit, Signum aut tabulam pictam cum aspexe.
ris, scire adhibitam esse artem; cumque procul cursum navigii videris, non
dubitare quin id ratione, atque art moveatur; aut cum Solarium vel descriptum,
aut ex aqua contemplere, intelligere declarari horas art, non casu; mundum
autem qui and has ipsas arts, and earum artifices, and cuncta complectatur,
consilii and rationis expertem putare? Quod si in Scythiam, aut in Britanniam
Shpaeram aliquis tulerit, hanc, quam nuper familiaris noster effecit,
Posidonius, cujus singulae conversiones idem efficient in Sole, and in Luna;
and in quinque stellis errantibus, quod efficitur in Coelo singulis diebus and
noctibus, quis in illa Barbary dubitet, quin ea Sphaera sit perfecta ratione?
H^ autem dubitant de mundo, ex quo oriuntur and siunt omnia, casune ipse sit
effectus, aut necessitate aliqua, an ratione, ac mente Divina? Ibid.
(says he) when you see a Sign, or a Picture drawn, you know that there Art was
used; or, when at a distance you see a Ship taking its course, you doubt not
but it is steered by Reason and Art: Or, when you look upon a Sun-Dial, you
conclude, that the Hours of the Day are showed by Art, and not by Chance; how
can it consist with Reason to think, that the World which contains all those
Arts, and all Artificers, and indeed all manner of things, can be without
Counsel and Wisdom to order it? If (says he again) a Man should carry into
Scythia, or Britain, that Sphere which our Friend Posidonius lately made,
wherein are represented the Motions of the Sun, and Moon, and the five other
wandering Stars, just as they move every Day and Night in the Heavens, Who of
those Barbarous People would doubt whether that Sphere were made by perfect
Art? And then how can it stand with Reason to doubt concerning the World, out
of which all things do spring, and are made; whether That was formed by Chance,
or Nature, or by a Wise and Divine Mind? And hence, a little Quis enim hunc
hominem dixerit, qui cum tam certos Coeli motus, tam ratos astrorum ordines,
tamque omnia inter se connexa and apta viderit, neget in his ullam inesse
rationem, eaque casu sieri dicat, quae quanto consilio gerantur, nullo consilio
assequi possumus? Ibid.
after, that Excellent Author questions, Whether he ought to have the name of a
Man given him, who when he sees the motions of the Heavens to be so certain,
the ranks of the Stars to be settled, and all things to be so connected and
fitted together, shall after all, deny that there is Reason for all these
things; and say, that they were done by Chance, when our Understanding cannot
reach, or comprehend the Great Counsel and Wisdom, whereby they are done or
performed.

CHAP. VII.
THE next thing that shows the Existence of a God, is the great Beauty which
appears in the Universe; whereby I mean, that entertaining and delightful View,
which the admirable Frame of the World does afford us. For which way soever we
cast our Eyes, whether upward or downward, whether on this side or on that,
What charming Objects are there every where for us to contemplate, with
unspeakable Pleasure and Satisfaction? 1. For their Multitudes. 2. For their
Splendour. 3. For. their Variety. 4. For the Comeliness and Delicacy of their
Frame; which Four things make up the Beauty of the Creation.

1. And, First, If we look upward, What a Magnificient and August Expansion is
there above to entertain our Eyes? A sit Curtain to be stretched out before the
glorious Habitation of the Divine Majesty, and to be a Partition-Veil between
that most Holy One, the Glorious God, and his poor Creatures. And who can tell
the Number of the Stars, or call them by their Names? What Essays soever
observing Astronomers have made, it is no more in the Power of Man, than it is
to bind the sweet Influences of the Pleiades, or to loose the Bands of Orion,
or to bring forth Mazzaroth in his Season, or to guide Arcturus with his Sons;
as the Expressions are, Job 38. For which way soever we move, we still make new
Discoveries; still we find a new entertaining Prospect of Lights without
Number. That Multitude which is obvious to every Man's Eye, is uninvestigable
by us; besides that immense Tract, usually called the Milky-way, which is made
up of a Congeries of innumerable lesser Stars, that by reason of their vast
distance from us are not singly discernable, but altogether do cast the
appearance of a White spacious Cloud, or Zone, by the mixture and union of
their languid Beams. But by the use of that artificial Instrument, the
Telescope, great numbers of Stars have been lately discovered, which, probably,
were Hever observed by Man before: And Mr. Ra^, of the Wisd. of God in the
Creat.
(as a learned Author tells us) its likely, that had we more perfect
Telescopes, many Thousands more might be discovered; and yet, after all, an
incredible Multitude remain, by reason of their immense distance beyond all ken
by the best Telescopes that could possibly be invented, or polished by the Wit
and Hand of an Angel. For if the World be as Des Carts would have it,
indefintely extended; that is, so far as no humane Intellect can fancy any
Bounds of it; then what we see, or can come to see, must be the least part of
what is undiscoverable by us; the whole Universe extending a Thousand times
farther beyond the utmost Stars we can possibly descry, than those be distant
from the Earth we live upon. But we need not go so far in our Conjectures; for
if that new Hypothesis, which seems most Rational, be granted, That the fixed
Stars are not all placed in one and the same concave Spherical Superficies,
equidistant from us as they seem to be; but that they are variously and
dispersedly situate, some nearer, some further off, just like Trees in a great
Wood or Forest; this alone, were there nothing else to be considered, is enough
to show the exceeding Greatness and Fecundity of that Divine Power, which
Adorned and Beautified those Regions above with such Multitudes of glorious
Luminaries, as by the Scripture Comparison, Genesis 22. 17. seem equally as
impossible to be counted up, as the Sands that are upon the Seashore.

But besides the Numbers, we must reflect upon the Magnitude of those glorions
Bodies, which plain Reason will force us to conclude in general to be very
great and immense. For though they appear to us to be small in their
proportions, the Sun and Moon excepted, yet that is because of their vast
distance from the Eye. There are certain Rules in Mathematics, and those
grounded upon very probable Observations, whereby the most learned and modest
Astronomers, comparing the Diameters of some Stars with the Diameter of the
Earth, have given us such accounts as to ordinary Capacities sound at the first
hearing, not only amazing but utterly incredible. And though I cannot undertake
to vouch for the exactness of the computations; yet on the other hand, I must
confess my inabilities to show why they may not be thought right and true in a
great measure. Who would think that the Sun is 139 times bigger than the Earth?
And yet this, I think, is the very least account; for some skilful Astronomers
reckon above 160. Who that takes measures by his Eye sight would imagine, that
the Three Planets above the Sun do bear such disproportions to the Terrestrial
Globe, as to be the lowermost above once, the next Two above Eighty times
bigger? And yet there are curious and inquisitive Philosophers that pretend to
make these Calculations good by Mathematical Demonstration. As to the sixth
Stars, their Dimensions are said to be proportionable, and the now received
Opinion is, that how numberless soever they be, they are (the principal ones
especially) so many lesser Suns, or Sun-like Bodies. But waving all pretenses
to exactness, it must be granted on all hands, that they are of vast
Magnitudes, how small soever they seem to us, by reason of their great height
and distance from us: Which thing being duly considered, What but an
Omnipotent, and most Intelligent Being can be thought to have formed such
Worlds (as it were) of immense, glorious Creatures, wherewith the Firmament is
adorned? Can it be reasonble to conceive, that such a vast orderly Host was
raised by the Chance-Motion of senseless Atoms? Or, that Chance, which never
yet built a Cottage, or drew a Picture, or paved an House, could first make,
and then furnish the Heavens after that magnificent and wonderful Cic de Not.
Dcor. lib. 2.
Manner? Cicero considering those glittering Bodies in the Sky, their
Multitudes, Greatness, Motion, Order and Commodious Situations, so that instead
of annoying the Earth, they are serviceable and beneficial to all things in it,
could not but admire how it should enter into any Man's Heart to think, that
such a goodly, beautiful Structure was framed by the fortuitous Concourse of
blind and undesigning Particles of Matter, that could never build a City, or a
Temple, or a Portico. After that rate (says he) they may as well believe, that
by throwing multitudes of Letters upon the ground, Ennius his Annals may be
made by chance, so as to become a fair, legible and intelligible Book; whereas
no one Verse was ever so composed. (And is not such a little thing more easy to
be formed by chance, than the large Volume of the World?) And hence that
excellent Author proceeds to a Discourse of Aristotle's to this purpose:
Suppose some persons should have dwelt all their days under ground, in stately
Domicils, adorned with Imagery and Pictures, and furnished with all necessaries
to make their lives happy, and there should have heard some rumor of a Numen,
and Power Divine: And suppose that after a while, by the sudden opening of some
Caverns of the Earth, those Persons should step out into these Parts of the
World, and behold the Earth, Sun, and Heavens, and observe the greatness of the
Clouds, the violence of the Winds, the bigness, beauty, and influence of the
Sun; and that the Day depends upon his Presence: And suppose when Night comes
they should behold the Face of the Heavens so adorned, the various aspects of
the Moon, the order and motion of the Stars, their rising and setting, and
their stated and perpetual Courses; when they saw all these things, they could
not but believe that there is a God, and that these are the Works of God. By
these wise Meditations of intelligent Pagans we see, that there are in the
World, and especially in the Heavens, such Evidences of a Deity as shine bright
upon the Mind; so that plain honest Nature bears Witness to the Truth of that,
Psalm. 19. 1. The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament shows
his handy work.

2. If now, in the next place, we lower our Contemplations, by taking our Eyes
off from the Magnificence by God's Throne, to behold a little what may be seen
about his Footstool; with what Pleasure and Ravishings may we find astonishing
Objects for Number and Varieties? In both respects they are next to Infinite:
Which shows that nothing but an Understanding infinitely perfect, a Will
infinitely essicacions, and a Power infinitely extensive, could give them a
Being, or preserve them in it; because more must be supposed to be in the
Agent, especially in a voluntary and Divine Agent, than is in its Effects.
First then, as to the Number of them. The most assuming Seepticks will not have
the Considence to deny, but that it is impossible for all Mankind to give a
distinct Account of Individuals; for who can be answerable for the Catalogue of
Men only? Indeed great pains have been taken by some critical Naturalists, and
particularly by that learned Author of our own beforementioned, to discover
the Tale of Species, or the several sorts and kinds of things with Life. And
because Books are not ready at every one's Hand, let me give you the Sum in
short, which seems to be this; The Species of Beasts, certainly known and
discovered, about 150. The Species of Birds, about 500. The Species of Fishes
above 3000. The Species of Insects, 20000. And the Species of Plants above that
Number. But how well soever these worthy Observers and Secretaries of Nature
have deserved of the World for their Curious and elaborate Enquiries, still
they speak but like Men, whose Knowledge is, and unavoidably must be of a short
reach in comparison; for what Men can be accountable for all the known Parts of
the World? and especially for those Parts which are as yet undiscovered?
However, the Estimate is the more laudable, because it is modest; there being,
Secondly, great Variety, as well as Numbers, of things on Earth, that are
included and comprehended under one and the same Species; which still shows the
Beauty of the Creation the more: As, the Lilies (for Example) which though they
are not allowed a Specisick difference, to make them every one a distinct sort
or kind of Flower; yet a Numerical difference must be allowed them, by reason
of their plain difference as to Growth, Color, Shape, and Smell. I use this
Instance the rather, because the Lord Jesus himself was pleased to send us to
the Lilies of the field for our Instruction, Math. 5. But the Observation
extends to many other Productions, wherein we find great diversity in one
respect or other, though they be of the same Kind. And this variety of things,
which still operates conformably to their own Powers and Faculties, carries
with it a plain Stamp of an Hand acting with secundity of Power, directed and
governed by abundant Wisdom. For though an Infinite Power may form things
without Number or End, yet the Beauty of that Power is best seen by the
diversity of its Strokes, which make up one comely and fair Composure, as
variety of agreeable Features and Lineaments make up a beautiful Face. Such is
the admirable Decorum that is in this spacious Universe, in that it is not
stocked with numerous Generations of one Kind only (which yet a boundless and
uncontrollable Power could have made) but is checkered (as was more agreeable
to Wisdom) with a Multiplicity of Species, that the fecundity of the Power
might be more wonderfully displayed, the Glory of the Divine Goodness might be
more visibly extended round about the World, and that all Rational Creatures
might be more easily and thoroughly taught to admire and adore that Munificent
Being, which from time to time maintains so many abundant sorts of Creatures
at the constant charge of his Providence. We see how one Creature is
ministerial and serviceable to another; as Grass is for the Cattle; Fruits for
Beasts, Fowls, and Insects; and Animals themselves for the use of Men, (and
every Man should be for the service of God.) Now by this admirable State of
things, that provident care seems to have been taken from the beginning, which
the Son of God took at the Miracle of the Loaves and Fishes, that nothing
should be lost, John 6. 17. Nothing is quite lost upon the Earth; but what one
Creature leaves, another takes; what this kind refuses, another sort gathers;
so that at the end of the Year, Men and Animals constantly make even with the
World, and spend the Liberality of Nature; all waiting on the Providence of a
Superior Being, to give them their Meat again in due Season. Things endued
with Life being thus various, and that variety being thus useful as well as
entertaining, what can a Man's next Thought be, but that there is a Glorious
God, who made his Creatures in Number, Measure, and Weight; not only to display
the Exuberance and Transcendency of his Power, but also to exemplify the
insinity of his Skill, Wisdom, and Munisicence? And yet I have taken no notice
of the variety of things inanimate here below, or of their various
Dispositions, Qualities, and Modifications, which yet are astonishing Arguments
of a Divine Mind, that so appositely formed such a vast multiplicity of Beings,
according to such innumerable and such beauteous Idea's. The diversity of
Elements, with their various Mixtures and Temperaments in this lower World: The
attracting, penetrating, refrigerating Motions of the Air, and the various
Appearances in it of Rain, Hail, Snow, Thunder, Lightnings, Clouds, Winds,
Rainbows, Comets, and other liquid Meteors; the variety of Waters, as Springs,
Rivers, Lakes, Seas, Baths; their various Colors, Smells, and Tastes, together
with their various Courses and Reciprocations; the uninvestigable variety
within the Earth, Quarries, Minerals, Metals, Loadstones, Subterraneous Fire,
Caverns, Treasures of Salts, Nitres, Bitumens, Sulphurs, precious Stones and
Gemms of great variety. In short, whatever is for the Advantage, or Comfort, or
Pleasure, or Ornament of our Lives, we fetch out of the Earth in great
abundance: All these multifarious Creatures speak the Forecast and Providence
of a most wise and liberal Being, that of his Goodness, was pleased thus to
sill the whole Universe with his Riches. This Pulchritude of the World arising
from the variety of its Furniture, was to Cicero a convincing Argument of the
Existence of a God; the Perennity of so many Fountains, the Delicacy of
Streams, the Garniture of Banks by the sides of Rivers, the vastness of Caves,
the asperity of Rocks, the height of many hanging Mountains, the immensity of
Champion Countries, the hidden Veins of Silver and Gold, the infinite store of
Marbles, the goodliness of Seas, the multitude and varieties of Islands, the
Amenity of Shores, and the innumerable diversity of Things by, and on the
Sea-shores: And to say after all, that this admirable and delightful Variety
happened by the casual Motion of blind, irrational, and unguided Atoms, is far
more absurd than to say, that Cicero's Orations were composed by the casual
droppings of Ink, without the help of any Hands or Brains, though they contain
such variety of Matter, such copiousness of Style, such elegancy of Phrase,
such abundance of Sense, Argument, and Wit, that the whole Air of them shows
them to have been contrived and penned by a Man of excellent Art, and the
acutest Understanding.

3. If we cast our Eyes on further yet, we may see the beauty of the Creation,
as by the variety, so by the Symmetry and comeliness of those things which every
where fall under our Contemplation. With what admirable Contrivance are the
innumerable Tribes of Fishes made, to live in a little World by themselves? to
feed and propagate, to swim and play, to poize and steer their Bodies in their
fluid Element? How exquisite is the formation of all the Sensitive Creatures
upon the Earth, from the Lion and Leopard, from the Elephant and Camel, to the
Ox and Ass? What affecting variety of Art is there in the formation of Man? O
Lord (says David) I am fearfully and wonderfully made; mavelous are thy
works in me, and that my soul knows right well. My substance was not hid from
thee when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of
the earth. Thine eyes did see my substance being yet unperfect, and in thy Book
were all my members written, which day by day were fashioned, when as yet there
were none of them. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot
altain unto it, Psalm 139. But though the Mystery of God's Workmanship within
us be not discoverable by every Eye, yet the external Beauty of this House of
Clay affects all Men, especially when Innocence and Goodness are the
Inhabitants; a goodly Structure of Nerves, Veins, Arteries, Tendons, Muscles,
Vitals, Bones, Ligaments, all covered over with a beauteous Skin, adorned with
Features and Lineaments, with Shapes and Colors, to which the most sullen
Stoics, nay the greatest and proudest Heroes, have humbly offered up
themselves, not Votaries only, but sometimes Sacrifices also. What do I speak
of the graceful Form of Humane Bodies? View the most contemptible Creatures
upon Earth, and you will find the excellent Curiosity of their Contrivance for
the Ends and uses they are designed unto, from the Velvet Mole even to those
creeping Animals which strike us with Horror at the sight of them* the Snake,
the Adder, the Evet, the Lizzard, and the very Toad, who have such a Symmetry
of Parts, such speckled Contextures, such beauteous Colors, as show that they
stole not into the World without the Will of that provident Being, who thought
fit to adorn the Universe with great variety. But of those ordinary Creatures
we familiarly behold, there are especially three sorts, which for the
exquisiteness of their Frame, or for the delicacy of their Complexion, or for
both, are no little Ornament to the Creation. First Insects, which though they
are looked upon as the Refuse parts of the World, yet do bear the Signatures of
a most accurate Hand, and bring to my Mind St. Paul's Observation of the
Fabric and Garniture of our Bodies, 1 Cor. 12. The eye cannot say to the hand,
I have no need of you; nor again the head to the foot, I have no need of you.
Nay much more those members of the body which seem to be more feeble, are
necessary. And those members of the body which we think to be less honorable,
upon these we bestow the more abundant honor; and our uncomly parts have more
abundant comeliness. The meaning is, that where Natural Beauty is wanting,
Artisicial Beauty by handsome Clothes does make amends. In like manner those
ignoble Creatures I now speak of, how low soever the Divine Hand has placed
them in Rank and Order, their want of Honor in respect of their Station, is
supplied and made up by the Beauties bestowed upon them in respect of their
Contexture: Witness the Gildings of the Wasp, the Hornet, the Be, and many
suchlike Insects; the Gayeties of the Butterfly; the Garniture of the
Caterpillar; the Luster of the Glowworm; the Glosses of the Beetle; the
Elegancies of the Grasshopper; the five Embellishments of many Garden and
Meadow-Insects, which I cannot name; the delicate forms of Flies of all sorts,
especially the various Beauties of those which in Summer you may with great
Admiration behold about Ponds and Rivers; their incomparable Shapes; their
gaudy Trains; their Or's and Azures; their curious Lineaments and rich
Embroideries; all these are so many legible Characters in the Volume of the
Creation, to instruct us, that the Maker of the Universe is a Divine Being,
infinite in Knowledge, Wisdom, and Fecundity. I shall close this with the
Observation of a learned Writer, concerning the Bp. Wilkim*s Not. P. cl. p. 80.
difference between Natural and Artificial things, which appears by the help of
the Microscope, since we have had the use and improvement of it. Whateever is
Natural, does by the Microscope appear adorned with all imaginable Elegance and
Beauty. There are such inimitable Gildings and Embroideries in the smallest
Seeds of Plants, but especially in the Parts of Animals, in the Head or Eye of
a small Fly; such accurate Order and Symmetry in the frame of the most minute
Creatures, as no Man will be able to conceive without seeing of them.

4. Another sort of Creatures which serve as well for the Ornament of the
Creation, as for the Service and Delight of Men, is that winged Quire of Birds
which entertain us with melodious Consorts, and should teach us to offer up
daily Hymns of Praise to the Honor of that God, who seedeth Man and Beast,
even to the young ravens which call upon him, Psalm 147. and begrudgeth not his
Altars to be an house for the sparrow, and a nest for the swallow to lay her
young, Psalm 84. And how artfully are those Creatures formed for their
respective ends? How appositely are all their Organs sitted, that they may be
able to discover all Meats that are proper for them; to gather their various
sorts of Food, from the Worms in the Earth to the Flies and Insects in the Air;
to flee and shelter themselves from Deaths and Dangers; to sail about in their
thin Element; and to fill Mountains and Valleys, Woods and Fields, with their
sweet Harmonies? Of all Animals the Fowls of the Air (if you take the whole Set
of them) appear to the open Eye the most beautiful; excepting some birds of
prey, such as the Raven, the Daw, which want that Splendour which others have;
as if the tender Being, whose Mercies are over all his Works, designed to
disgrace, even in irrational Creatures, all bloodiness and cruelty of Temper.
With what delicate variety are the more innocent sorts adorned, especially such
as live upon Seeds and Worms? Their party-colored Clothing, their beauteous
Heads and Breasts, their Plumes of Silver and Gold; all socketted within such
Nerves and Ligaments, and sized in such due Proportions for flight, and deelt
with such splendid Curiosity, that a Man can hardly see a Feather which shows
not the Art of a Divine Hand.

But, as our Savior himself said, Consider the lilies of the field, how they
grow; they toil not, neither do they spin, and yet your heavenly Father clothes
them. And how various and beautiful is that Raiment? I must not pretend to
describe it, since no Art can reach the wonderful sineries of Nature. And what
we call Nature is nothing but yet the forming Power or Faculty of seminal
Principles, directed by the Will of a wise supreme Being, in order to the
respective Ends and Uses of the things which are to be formed. Now, to instance
in our common Lily; do but observe the congruous Complication of its fibrous
Roots, the procerity and decence of the Stalk, the Ornaments upon its Head, the
conformity of the Flower to all others of the same kind, the Odor it yields,
its tender Seeds provided against the next Year; and those surrounded with a
graceful Defense, consisting of such curious Divisions, tinctured with such
Blushings, criticiz'd with such Edgings; and all these supported and maintained
by a curious Contexture of Filaments, conveying the Powers of Life all over
through a Network of the most exquisite Fibers, all wrapped up in a lovely Skin,
and thereby defended from the annoyances and rudenesses of Weather. And what I
have said of the Lily, is observable in every other Flower where with the
Surface of the Earth is beautified; nay in every Blossom wherewith the Heads of
Trees are adorned; the meanest whereof consists of such a delicate Shape,
Form, and Structure, as plainly shows that they are not the casual Works of
stupid bungling Atoms, but the fair Productions of an orderly Power,
superintended and guided by an intelligent Being, that at first made all things
by the fertile energy of his Will. Can any Man of sound Reason believe that all
these Elegances did ever jump together by chance? Was an House, or a Room, ever
beautified with Carvings, Paintings, and Tapestry, by mere Chance; that is,
without Hand, or Instrument, or Design? Did blind Chance ever draw one
Landscape, with Trees, Flowers, birds and Cattle represented in it? Did it ever
draw the Picture of an Ass? a thing so dull and stupid, that one would think it
most easily done by the casual aggregation of senseless Atoms, if Chance ever
did any thing of that kind at all. And is it rational to believe, that Chance
made a whole beautiful World of Originals, when it could never yet give us one
Copy? No; these beauteous Productions show the print of an Hand that formed all
things according to the highest Reason, and with the most stupendous Skill and
Art; otherwise it were impossible to conceive how there could be such great
diversity of comely Species; such Concinnities and Symmetries in them; such
regularity of handsome Strokes; such congruous Features and Lineaments; such
curiosity of various Forms, as we see adorn the Creation, and entertain our
Eyes with Delight and Astonishment.

If it be said, that all his proceeds from Seminal Principles, acting in every
thing by the Virtue and Faculty of that Plastic Nature, of which a very
excellent Author of our own has spoken Dr. Cudworth Intel, Syst.
so much, and written so well; in answer hereunto,

1. First, It seems very reasonable to grant, that as there is in Animals a
Plastic Nature, or an internal moving, formative Principle, which does dispose
and fashion all the parts of the Foetus; so there is in the Earth too a
Plastic Nature, or Life by which all Plants and Vegetables are differently
formed, according to their different Seeds; and all this regularly, orderly,
methodically, and artificially, according to the dispositions of every
Vegetable, and in order to certain Ends and purposes which it serves for.

2. But then, Secondly, it must be granted also, that this Plastic Nature
cannot know or understand its Workings, or be conscious of what it does; much
less can it comprehend the reasons of its Operations; or intend and design the
Ends, or consult and deliberate concerning the manner of bringing those Ends
about: For these are Mental Acts, proper to Creatures Rational, endn'd with
Rational Faculties and Powers.

3. And therefore, Thirdly, instead of destroying the Notion of a Deity, the
Plastic Nature in Animals and Plants, does infer the existence of an
intelligent directing Agent, under which, and in subserviency to which, it
acts so methodically; like a Labourer that does the drudgery, to act under
the Conduct of a wise Master-Workman. And this is the Notion of that excellent
Author spoken of; that though Plastic Nature does act artificially for the
sake of Ends, yet it self does neither intend those Ends, nor understand the
reason of that it does. Nature is not Master of that consummate Art and Wisdom
according to which it acts, but only a Servant, and a drudging Executioner of
the Dictates of it. It acts not by Choice or Knowledge: Though it be a thing
which works regularly and uniformly for Ends, and which may be also called
the Divine Art and Fate of the Corporeal World; yet for all that, it is a low
and imperfect Creature, for as much as it is not Master of that Reason and
Wisdom according to which it acts; nor does it properly intend those Ends which
it acts for, nor indeed is it expressly conscious of what it does, it not
knowing, but only doing according to Commands and Laws impressed upon it. Neither
of which things ought to seem strange or incredible, since Nature may as well
act regularly and artificially without any Knowledge and Consciousness of its
own, as Forms of Letters compounded together, may print coherent Philosophic
Sense, though they understand nothing at all; and it may also act for the sake
of those Ends that are not intended by it self, but an higher Being, as well as
the Saw or Hatchet in the Hand of the Architect does.

This shows that whatever the Powers of Nature be, they are all in Obedience
and Subserviency to a supreme, wise Being, that was the Author of Nature, and
has all along since preserved its Faculties, and is still the principal,
superintending Cause of all that Decence and Beauty, which gives such a
dazzling Luster to the whole Creation, and is from Year to Year, from Age to Age
maintained in a constant, uniform, and undistrubed State. To say that all the
comely Parts of the World were such from Eternity, is very absurd. To suppose
they made themselves such out of nothing, is nonsense: To conceive they were
fortuitously formed such by the accidental Jumblings, and Sportings, and
Coalition of undesigning Matter, is equally as unreasonable: And to fancy they
constitute such by the like accidental cohesion of those blind Particles of
Matter, is a conceit as wild and extravagant as the rest. Can Chance form a
Flower, especially such variety of Flowers, the contexture whereof no Art can
express? Can Chance propagate so many beautiful Species of them in such a
steady, constant, regular Manner? Can Chance do this that never did any thing
that was orderly, uniform, and uninterruptedly Graceful since the World stood?
Could Chance make so many Minute Seeds so Mysteriously, with such Germens,
Fibers, and Ramifications, that by the help of a Microscope you would believe
you saw the Plant in an Epitome? Can Chance then teach the Seed to sprout so
Methodically? First to cast out a complication of Roots downward, to establish
its hopeful Offspring in the Ground, and to receive for it a constant
supplement of Vitality; and then to shoot upwards into a proportionable Body,
with variety of Vessels to entertain its Nutriment? Can Chance then direct the
Plant to cloth it self with proper Integuments? To extend it self into diverse
Branches and Divarications? To cover its Head with Leaves? To adorn those
Leaves with Flowers, To which Solomon's Glory was not comparable? And to digest
and disperse the vital Juice into great variety of odoriferous Shapes, Streaks
and Colors, such as are inimitable by human Art? And when these curious Works
are done, Does Chance instruct the florid Creature to reflect upon its mean and
poor Beginnings, and as a grateful return to form more Seeds of the same
Species for another new Generation? Do all these orderly and artificial
Operations look, as if they proceeded from the fortuitous Motions of
irrational, rude and stupid Atoms? Are they not rather clear Arguments of the
wonderful Skill and Wisdom of an intelligent Being, that sustains the
Faculties, and guides the Operations of plastic Nature by a perpetual Law?
That is, by an energetick, effective Principle given it by its Maker, whereby
Nature works uniformly and steadily in subserviency to the Will and Intention
of the great Creator, and Preserver of all things? This is the only
intelligible and rational Account that can be given of the Beauty of the
Creation.

CHAP. VIII.
THE next thing to be considered, as a plain Argument of the Existence of a
God, is the usefulness of the particular Branches of the Universe, and the
aptitude of them to answer their respective Uses; which I once intended to have
made two distinct Heads; but upon second Thoughts conceive it better to cast
them together into one. And if it is made appear that the World is so artfully
framed, that the parts of it tend, and are adapted to such beneficial Purposes,
as they would and should have been made for, supposing Divine Wisdom and
Goodness to have had the framing of them; What can any reasonable Man conclude,
but that they were intended and sitted for those excellent Purposes, by the
contrivance of a directing, beneficent Being over all; and not jumbled together
by the mere lucky compositions of unthinking, undeliberating Atoms?

This then must be our present business to look into distinctions; and because
the Subject is Copious and Important, as well as entertaining, it will be
necessary for us to cast our Eyes again over this goodly Fabric, and observe
the admirable usefulness, as we have hitherto discovered the Order and Beauty
of its Structure.

1. To begin then with the heavenly Bodies; whose principal End (as I conceive)
is, by their Luster and Magnificence to set forth in some measure the infinite
Greatness and Splendour of the Divine Majesty; being themselves so many faint
Rays, or rather (as in this case, if I may without absurdity speak) so many
Shadows of his Glory. As they relate to this inferior World, they are the great
means of Vitality, without which it were impossible for any living Creatures to
be maintained in their Being; nor would the whole Terraqueous Globe be any
thing but dead Rock and Ice. For the prevention of which Havoc, they are in
their Natures so many inexhaustible Fountains of Fire, that give Light to all
sensible Creatures, warmth and vegetation to all Animal substances. This is to
be said more especially of that great Luminary the Sun, which Heathens have
been wont to worship, for the universal Good it does by its enlivening Beams.
For as it is in its Nature of a comforting, cherishing, and quickening Faculty;
so are its Courses such as render its Powers every where effectually useful.
Had it been fixed over any one determinate Part of the Earth in a State
unmovable, it would have been not only useless, but pernicious unto all
things; for as the Parts of the World out of the reach of its Beams, would have
been in an eternal State of Darkness and Death; so the very Regions under the
Sun must have been parched up, and consequently desolate, and uninhabitable by
means of those continual Fires, which would have turned all into a kind of
Conflagration. Therefore it is as necessary for the good of the Creation that
the Sun should move, as that it should give light and warmth; and that Motion
being twofold; Diurnal finished in 24 Hours; and Annual performed in 12
Months; all things living receive such vast Utilities by both, as argue the
Existence of a most wise and provident Being, whose Goodness is over all his
Works. By the Diurnal Motion of the Sun there are constant, stated returns of
Light and Darkness; and by those Vicissitudes, as all Animals have their Time
divided between Labor and Rest (which is as necessary for them as Labor, and
as their Food which is acquired by Labor, and repairs those Expenses of Nature
which Labor brings) so are those Productions which serve for Food, prepared
and ascertained by these daily Revolutions. In the Day time the Beams of the
Sun serve to heat the Ground, to actuate the principles of vegetation, to
promote the ascent of vital Juices, to concoct and ripen Fruits, and to
impregnate the Atmosphere with Fumes and Vapors: And in the Night those
Vapors descend upon the Ground again in Dews, Showers, or Rains, according to
the Necessities of the Climate; by which means there is a due Temperament of
Warmth and Moisture that makes all Vegetables Fruitful, and preserves Animals
in a state of Health and Vigor; witness those Regions under the Line, where
the Sun shines the hotest; though the Ancients believed they were all roasted
into utter Barreness; yet by Discoveries which have been made since, it appears
that the heats and droughts of the Day are so allayed by the constant Breezes
and Rains of the Night, that they are the most fertile parts of the World. By
the Annual Course of the Sun, which carries it about from North to South, and
so round again, it disperseth its vivisick Rays over all, restores yearly all
the Powers of Nature, makes all People amends for its late distance from them,
and takes its Circuit so, that one Sun serves all Climates, and answers the
Necessities of all the World. It Is true, some places are much more remote from
the Sun than others are, as those extreme parts of the Earth called, The
Northern and Southern Poles. But then it is to be considered, that the Fruits
and Animals of those Countries are such as do not require so great degrees of
external Heat. And besides, there are other Stars which cast in those parts a
more proper, kindly, and (if I may so speak) connatural Influence; especially
the Moon, of which Luminary it is observable, that it is the Sun's Deputy, to
supply its Room in its absence; and as the Moon moves further toward the North
and South than the Sun ever does, so is it fullest of Light, and consequently
of enliveing Influences, when the Sun is at the greatest distance from it
toward the one part or the other; so that there is the most benefit by the
Moon in those Regions, and at those Seasons of the Year, when and where the Sun
is most wanting. All which shows, that there is a most wise and beneficent
Being over all, who formed the Substances of those glorious Luminaries, and
directed all their Course as he foresaw would be best for the World; because it
is impossible to conceive rationally how Creatures utterly void of Reason and
Sense, (as the Sun and Moon are) could, without the directions of Divine
Reason, and without the appointment of a Divine Will, pitch upon such regular
and proper Motions, that if they had had the highest Reason of their own, they
could not have determined upon better Courses for the service and good of the
Universe.

To descend now a little lower; every one perceives how useful that thin Medium
is between Heaven and Earth, which we call the Air; how it transmits the Light
of Heaven to us; how it delights our Ears with many Natural and Artificial
Undulations; how it helps us with Breath; how it supplies us with the
seasonable Advantages of Heat and Cold, of Drought and Moisture; what a Vehicle
it is for vast variety of useful Creatures; and how it opens its Treasures to
make the whole Earth communicate of its Plenty: And what but a Divine Mind, and
an Omnipotent Hand, could have made this Medium of such a necessary and fit
Contexture, as to answer all these Purposes? Could Fortune and Atoms contrive
to breathe into the Nostrils of every Animal such a common breath of Life?
Could they make it fluid, to assist the flight of every Fowl, and to suit with
every Vibration of its Wings? Could they store it with Insects for every Bat
and Swallow to live on? Could they give it an agreeable thickness to refract
the Light, and by those Refractions to bring all Forms, Shapes, and Colors to
the Eye in their proper Idea's? Could they provide Winds to keep it from
Stagnation, and Frosts and Snows, Lightnings and Thunders, to carry off those
Impurities which would prove very prejudicial to our Lives? Could they
impregnate it with Nitrous Particles, to make the Blood in an Animals Lungs the
more Spirituous? Could they direct it to warm and irrigate the whole Earth,
like the Mist which Moses says went up from the earth in the beginning, and
watered the whole face of the ground? Genesis 6. 2. Is it reasonable to imagine,
that stupid Matter, and the undirected Motion of diminutive Particles, could
contrive or do all these wise and good things, without the guidance of a
super-intending Power, that gave every thing a Law? This were to make senseless
Matter and Motion capable and conscious of such Philosophy as the wisest
Philosophers have stood astonished at in all Ages.

To go on: They that go down to the sea in ships, and occupy their business in
great waters, these men (says the Psalmist) see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep, Psalm 107. 23, 24. How wantonly soever some conceited Men
talk of Atoms falling by Chance into Pebbles and Sands, it seems prodigiously
strange they should believe the whole Ocean also to have been made by an
accidental Composition of them. An Element of such vast extent and depths, and
so aptly contrived for great ends and uses, that one would think whoever has
but heard of a God, would presently conclude it to have been formed by Divine
Art and Counsel: For what could it be but Wisdom that made it a sluid, liquid
Heap, to serve for Navigation and Traffic into all parts of the World, and for
those innumerable Creeping things to move in, which the Psalmist speaks of,
both small and great Beasts, Psalm 104. 25? What could it be but Wisdom that
proportioned out such determinate quantities of Water, so great as to supply
all the Necessities of Creatures; not greater to drown them? What could it be
but Wisdom that gathered that lighter Element into Cavities, which by the Laws
of its own Nature overflows every dense and heavy Substance? What could it be
but Wisdom that barricado'd up the Sea every where with rising Shores, Rocks,
and Hills, which seem to tell the proudest Waves in God's own Language,
Hitherto shall ye come, and no further? What could it be but Wisdom that
appointed those reciprocal Motions, the Ebbings and Flowings of the Sea, to
preserve the Waters from those Corruptions and Stenches to which the great heat
of the Sun would otherwise make them subject; as we see in standing Ditches,
Pools, and Lakes? What could it be but Wisdom that seasoned the whole Ocean
with Salt, to keep even those Profundities from putrefying which are not so
violently tossed to and fro, as the Surface is by the influence of the Moon,
especially at the Change and Full? What could it be but Wisdom that ordered the
proportions of Saltness so, that it is every where distributed according to the
Necessities of the Place and Climate, in more degrees toward the Sea's Bottom,
where there is less of Motion, and in more scanty Measures toward the Poles,
where there is less of Heat? What could it be but Wisdom that took care that
notwithstanding these saliue Mixtures which are so necessary and useful there,
the Ocean should be both the Original and Receptacle of those fresh Waters,
which are as necessary and useful at Land? What could it be but Wisdom that
provided that some of the Salt Element should be freshened in the Air, thence
to fall down upon the Ground in gentle cherishing Showers; and abundance more
to be sweetened in the Veins of Hills, which serve to percolate and strein the
Waters in their way through variety of Sands and Earths, toward innumera^le
Fountains, and this with such accuracy, that no Art of Man can so effectually
take away all that Bracki^hness by any Filtres or Distillations?

And (now we are come upon firm Land) let us consider, what could it be but
Wisdom that prepared those secret Veins in the Earth, through which the Waters
of the Seas ascend to the Tops of Mountains; thence fall down in crystal
Streams, to fertilize Valleys, and to afford salutary Drinks for Men and
Beasts; and at last, after all their uses and ends answered, return to the Sea
again, in a regular course of Circulation, like the Circulation of Blood in
sensitive Creatures, which supports Life, and recruits all Vital and Animal
Spirits? Certainly that Man must have a Mind and Forehead as hard as a Rock of
Adamant, that can have the confidence to ascribe all this wise and wonderful
Economy which has been all along, to nothing but Fortune and Chance, or to
the accidental Motion of unthinking, irrational, and ungoverned Matter. And yet
this one thing more is very Disput. de Deo, 2. Sect. 21.
observable, that throughout the whole Earth, the mountainous parts of it are
so situate and exalted, that they seem to have been made on purpose, and with
an intention, the more commodiously to relieve all the Regions round about
them; and the hotter and dryer those Regions are naturally, the lostier are the
Mountains, and the greater plenty of Springs and Streams they have to cast
forth, though the Waters they yield creep up to the Tops of them, against the
tendency of their own Nature. Thus (says my Author) is that ho^ Quarter of the
World America, divided by a continued Ledge of Mountains, which run out from
South to North, and yield on each side toward the East and West, abundance of
great Fountains and Rivers. In like manner is Africa divided by Atlas and the
Mountains of the Moon, out of which on each side great Rivers spring: And
whereas at certain times of the Years, the Winds in those parts throw great
store of Moisiure from the Seas upon those Mountains, hence in all lieklyhood
it is, that the Rivers overflow Africa at certain Seasons, as Nilus does the
Land of Egypt. After the same rate is Asia divided from the Pamphylian Coasts
to the extreme parts of India, by Taurus, Imaus, Caucasus, and other Mountains,
which run out by diverse Branches about into all parts, whence innumerable
famous Rivers run for a long Tract of Miles, into Countries that need them. In
Europe there are the Pyrenean by Spain, the Apennine in Italy, and the Alps by
France, which extend their Arms through several Nations, and cast out vast
Streams of Water, that run far and wide where they are most useful and
necessary. And, to conclude the Observation, if any Man (says he) will examine
Islands, and the lesser parts of the Earth, he will find, that the Land in
every part is highest about the middle of the Country, so that the neighboring
Plains and Valleys are liberally supplied by beneficial Currents. And what more
pregnant Instances can any considerate Man desire to convince him of the
Existence of a most wise and provident God? Whereas Chance does evermore come
short of Art, as Art it self comes short of Nature; these things in Nature are
so far beyond all, that it is impossible with any Color of Reason, to think
they proceed from a Cause that never understood or intended to do good; or to
impute them to any thing but Divine Art, Counsel, and Contrivance.

I have taken notice of these things the rather, because the Barrenness of
Hills has been objected against the Doctrine of a Providence, which (if the
thing supposed were in Fact true) would be a very poor Argument, because the
Utilities already mentioned, abundantly compensate for the supposed Sterility.
But after all, the Supposition it self cannot hold: For the mountainous parts
of the Earth are in diverse accounts as necessary as the richest Soils; and
perhaps would be found as advantageous, if Art and Industry were employed to
make Experiments. I do not speak only in reference to Culture, but moreover in
respect of those latent Treasures, Quarries, Minerals, Metals, Gemms, and the
like; which have occasioned that Notion among some Naturalists, That the more
ungrateful any Country is on the Surface, the richer are its Bowels; which is
still an Argument of the Existence of a most wise Being, that made Mankind not
to stand still a staring about the World, but some way or other to take Pains
in it.

As for the other parts of the Earth, the Utilities of them are so various and
manifest, that notwithstanding the most comfortable Notions we have of a better
World, few People are very willing to leave this. We see how the Creatures
about us serve to good ends, and how serviceable they are in their Tendencies
and Effects. Herbs, Fruits, Animals, all are useful, as for the Beauty and
Preservation of this inferior World, so for the Good of Man, the noblest part
of it. Some things serve for our Food, and some for our Clothing; some for
Nutriment, and some for Medicinal Operations; some for our Employments and
Labors, and some for our Ease; some for our Necessities, and some for our more
comfortable Subsistence; some to gratify our Senses, and some to exercise our
Reason; some which minister to our Convenience, and some which even humor us
in our Pleasures and Diversions. Now all this shows, that there is a most wise
and benign Agent which presideth over all, and directs every thing for Good;
because Creatures which are void of Rational Faculties cannot be supposed to
operate of their own choice, according to the Laws of Reason and Goodness, nor
to intend, or design, or understand Ends; which yet they seem to prosecute so
effectually, as if they had Reason and Goodness of their own to guide them. And
therefore it is most reasonable to grant, that there is a superior intelligent
Being, who formed and intended them for their several Uses, and preserves their
Power so that they may answer the Uses they were made for. It Is true, there may
be many things in the World whose uses we are as yet very ignorant of: But it
will not thence follow that they are superfluous, and to no good purpose at
all: For this Ignorance proceeds either from want of Capacity in our
Understandings, which cannot open all the Mysteries, nor comprehend all the
Intrigues of Nature at once; or else from want of due Care and Diligence in
making enquiries into them. And this is an Argument not of any Defect in the
Contrivance it self, nor of want of Forecast and Skill in the Contriver, but of
the greatness of that Art and Wisdom, which thus escapes our dull and narrow
Faculties, till Time and Experience helps us. There are diverse Plants, which in
former Ages have been esteemed noxious, and of ill effect, and yet have been
found to be very wholesome and kind to our Natures. And though there be diverse
Animals which are abhorred as Venomous, and which Vulgar People think might be
well spared out of the World, yet we must not think but that they were designed
and fitted for good Purposes; partly to take off those Qualities in the Air and
Earth, which would be prejudicial to the Lives of Man and Beast; and then to
digest those Qualities by the Chemistry of Nature, to alter them so, that in
the end they prove not only safe but vital; witness the Viper, out of which the
skilful Apothecary can prepare as well a pleasant as a salutary Cordial.
Therefore, as when we go into an Artificers Shop, and observe variety of
Instruments, the uses whereof we do not understand, it would be folly to
imagine, that those Instruments were not contrived by a good Artist, nor were
intended for good Ends, though we see them used, and have in truth nothing to
say, but that we our selves are unacquainted with the Art; so when we view this
great Shop of Nature, and find there some Creatures, whose proper and
particular uses we do not presently perceive, it would be great Weakness to
conclude thence, that they were not formed by a wise Hand, nor serve to wise
Ends. For the only reason why their special Utilities do not appear, is because
our own Faculties are so limited, and our Experience so short, that we do not
understand all the Methods and Arts of Nature, nor every Purpose which that
superintending Being aims at, in whose Hand Nature is, and in subserviency to
whose Wisdom Nature operates. Rather we should believe that nothing is in vain;
and that the Divine Purposes are fulfilled, though we do not discern the effect
in every Instance: For the great Ends to which many parts Dr. Barrow, Vol. 2.
Sermon. 2.
of the World serve, are so palpable and plain, that (as an excellent Writer
speaks) Reason obliges us to suppose the like of the rest, though perhaps we
discern not the use of each part, or the tendency of each particular effect.
Even as a Person whom we observe frequently to act with great Consideration and
Prudence, when at other times we cannot penetrate the drift of his Proceedings,
we must yet imagine that he has some latent Reason, some reach of Policy, that
we are not aware of. Or, as in an Engine consisting of many parts curiously
combined, whereof we do perceive the general use, and apprehend how diverse
parts thereof conduce thereto, Reason prompts us (although we neither see them
all, nor can comprehend the immediate serviceableness of some) to think they
are all some way or other subservient to the Artist's Design. Such an Agent is
God, the Wisdom of whose Proceedings being in so many Instances notorious, we
ought to suppose it answerable in the rest: And such an Engine is the World; of
which we may easily enough discover the general End, and how many of its Parts
do conduce thereto; and cannot therefore in reason but suppose the rest of
their kind alike congruous, and conducible to the same purpose. Our Incapacity
to discover all, does not argue any defect, but an excess of Wisdom in the
Design thereof: Not too little Perfection in the Work, but too great an one
rather in respect to our Capacity.

Having thus considered the usefulness of those ends, which the things here
about us are subservient for, let us in the next place observe the usefulness
of their Structure in order to those ends; which will further demonstrate the
wonderful Wisdom of God above all the Powers of senseless Matter and blind
Fortune.

And here to describe the Fabrication of all the things which are obvious to
the Eye, would be a Task in vain for me to attempt, and impossible to go
through; so manifold are the Works of God, and so hidden is the Exquisiteness
and Elegance of their Contexture. It may therefore suffice to instance only in
two sorts of Creatures; Trees and Animals; some Account whereof will serve as a
short Specimen whereby we may judge a little of the admirable Wisdom of the
Divine Mind, that has so fitly and curiously contrived his Creatures for their
respective ends.

1. Now the immediate Tendencies of Nature in every Tree are two fold, partly
for the sustenance of the individual Plant, and partly for the increase of its
Species or Kind. And accordingly the Powers and Faculties of Nature are of two
sorts; some for Nourishment, and some for Semination. For the accomplishment of
which ends, it cannot but affect us to consider how artificially the Vegetative
Soul works, as if it were endued with Reason and Policy; which (because it is
utterly void of) shows, that there is an Understanding Being over it, which
does direct and govern its Operations. There is, first, the Original Vehicle of
Life, the Root, protended round about into the Bowels of the Earth, that
through a Circle of innumerable Strings, as it were through Meseraick Vessels,
it may suck up a spirituous Sap into an umbelical Receptacle, whence Nature
does methodically direct a Series of long porous Fibers all along the Trunk to
each Arm and Twig, to each Joint and Bud. Now the Use and Office of these
Formations is discernible by their Effects, though they be hidden and fine in
their Contexture, and mysterious as to the manner of their Operations. For, as
in the radical Parts, Nature draws and receives its proper Nourishment, so by
these it conveys and distributes it into all places, digesting it still in the
way, the grossest Matter into Wood, the siner Particles into Leaves, and the
more spirituous into Blossoms: And (as if Nature studiously and designedly
provided not only for Necessaries, but against Accidents also) for the more
effectual distribution of its Bounty, the Tree is clothed with a firm outward
Bark, to defend its Life from extremities of Weather, and with a soft Rind
within, to facilitate the ascent of the tender Juice. These Provisions being
made for the preservation and growth of the Tree, the Seeds, which serve for
the increase of its Species, follow. And these, for their greater safety, are
accurately enclosed, some in a Vinous Liquor, others in a tough Membrane,
others in a spungy Husk, others in a hard Shell, others in a pulpy Substance,
according to the quality of the Vegetable, whether it be better or worse, as
the condition of the Seed is, whether hardy or tender, and as the Weather may
prove, either severe or temperate; and as the Season is to be for the Maturity
of the Fruit, whether Summer or Autumn, Nature seems in all its Operations to
foresee to and forecast, and to consult, and to provide very carefully for the
best; and yet it is a thing without any Understanding of its own; it moves with
no more Deliberation or Thought than the Tide does. This is a plain Argument
that there is an intelligent Agent over it, that first created it with its
enlivening and forming Powers, and does continually use it as an Instrument in
his Hand, to act according to the directions of his incomprehensible Wisdom;
because otherwise 'twere unconceivable how an irrational Principle could of it
self design beneficial ends; how it could project an artificial Method to bring
those Ends about; how it could make choice of suitable and proper means; how it
could sit and connect all those means together so, that one thing serves in
order to another, to assist and promote its Operations; and all of them to be
so critically and accurately serviceable in order to the main end. These
wonderful Contrivances speak Council and Art in the highest degree, and
therefore impossible to belong to senseless and undeliberating Matter, which is
utterly incapable of knowing both how to aim at useful purposes, and how to
frame or order any thing of it self, after an useful manner; but goes on
necessarily in a dark Road, as it is conducted, managed, and directed by a most
wise Being, that is over it, and commands it by a perpetual Law.

2. To Creatures endued with Life only, as Trees and other Plants are, the next
in Dignity of Nature are Animals, or Creatures endued with Life and Sense too.
Now in them, the only tendency of Nature which is proper for me to take notice
of here, is their own preservation. In order whereunto these Three things are
necessary. 1. A constant supply of Nourishment within. 2. A distinct perception
of all outward Objects, that are either agreeable, or injurious to Nature. 3. A
due perfection and fitness in the Structure of the whole Body. And if we would
consider with uncaptivated Minds, the stupendous contrivances which are in the
Fabric of every sensitive Creature, and especially in the frame of our own
Bodies, in order to the preservation of Nature, we should not need any plainer
Evidences of a Deity, than those we carry continually about us. It is commonly
noted of Galen, that renowned Physician among the Old Pagans, That though he
was no great Friend to the Religion of those times, yet he was thoroughly
convinced that there is a God, and that God is a Being of absolute Goodness, of
unsearchable Wisdom, and of insuperable Power. Which hearty acknowledgment he
was led unto by observing the useful Frame and Disposition of the World; and
particularly the great usefulness of the parts of Animals: On which Subject he
wrote those excellent Books of his, which are so deservedly celebrated.
Therefore since Contemplations of this kind tend to such Divine Purposes, I
hope I shall not be thought to go out of my Profession, if I take the cursory
view of the Structure of humane Bodies, in reference to those Three things,
Nutrition, Perception and Organization, which so necessarily and appositely
tend to the preservation of each Individual.

Scepticks have been ever puzzled, how from their own odd Principles to give the
least tolerable account of the formation of an Animal; so various are its
Parts, and all so admirable for their Contexture, Position, Figure, Shape and
peculiar Offices, that indeed it would be ridiculous to attempt a Solution of
the whole Structure from the improvident strokes of rude, stupid, and
undirected Matter. To instance, 1. First in those Parts which serve for
Nutrition, every one has a Mouth ready prepared to receive his Food; a Palate
to distinguish what is most agreeable; Teeth to cut and chew that which is
solid; Salival Vessels to assist the maceration of that which is dry; Muscles
at the Roots of the Tongue, to precipate the Food when thoroughly broken and
commixt; a soft Tube, or Gullet made up of diverse Coats, and variety of Fibers
to convey it down; and a capacious Stomach to ferment, concoct and digest it
into sluent Chyle. To keep the Aliment from running out of its Elaboratory
before due Concoction, the lower Orisice of the Stomach is provided with a
Circle of Fibers, which they call a Sphincter to knit it up a little, till
sufficient Fermentation transmits the Chyle by a gentle ascent into the Bowels.
To help Nature in its chemical Operations, the Heart is placed above the
Stomach, the Pancreas below, the Liver on the Right-Side, the Spleen on the
Left; all to promote Digestion and Expulsion, by joint Ministrations of Heat
from all Parts round about, and by a particular Ministration of an acid Humor
(as some conceive) from the Spleen. Then for the Diffusion of the Walaeus de
Motu Chyli, Epist. 1.
elaborated Matter, the same Divine Art which contrived the Parts preparatory,
has provided further Conveyances; that is, a Series and Duct of Entrails;
which, though they be of great lengths, lie round in the Belly, with turnings
and windings, in Complications and Circumvolutions, that by the long and
gradual Progress of the Juice intended for Vitality, and by new Fermentations
of it in its way, it may be the better separated from the feculent and grosser
Substance. And here we meet with a new, wonderful Idea; the Mesentery, as it is
called by Anatomists; meaning a most curious Network of innumerable, porous
Strings, which fasten the Entrails together in a Circle, and with their gaping
Orifices devour and drink up the spirituous Chyle throughout its Passage.
Thence being conveyed through those somenting Parts, and spungy Kernels, the
Clandules, the Supplement of Life, is by the constant Motions of the Diaphragm
forced and drawn upwards again, but in a new way, some into the Liver, some
into other Vessels, but mostly into a common Receptacle, like a little Lake;
whence it is carried on still further upwards W^^eus, Ibid.
toward the Neck, there to be discharged into a great Vein, or Canal of Blood.
This constant course of the Chyle, prepared in the Stomach, and conducted
through so many Vessels, was not discovered so exactly, and particularly till
some late Critics in Anatomy made the strictest search. And though it may seem
to lie out of a Divines way, yet because the Speculation is so useful and
important in the Consequence, as well as diverting in it self; I shall for once
venture upon it a little further. That milky Substance, the Chyle, being now
commixt, and swimming with the Blood, is instantly transmitted into the
Right-Ventricle of the Heart, there (as some have thought) to be turned into
perfect Blood of the form of its Vehicle. Thence it runs through a Chanel into
the Lungs, there to be enriched by impregnating Particles from the Air; whence
it takes a circuit back again into the Left-Ventricle of the Heart; where being
instantly Sublimated, and made highly Spirituous, it is ejected thence up into
a great Artery, which by innumerable Branches conveys it speedily over the
whole Body; there by the assistance and supply of more Spirits from the Nerves,
to warm and comfort, to enliven and invigorate, to feed and nourish the several
Parts; and so the remainder returns to be supplied with fresh Chyle to the
Heart again, through Veins, which though they be numberless, yet is the
Circulation so quick that the Blood goes through the Heart (as a very learned
Physician has Dr. Lower, de Cordc.
computed it) no less than thirty times within the compass of and Hour. This I
take to be the short account of Nutrition, especially in Man; wherein if there
be any slight mistake, I submit to the Judgment of those of the noble Faculty
and Profession, whose business it is to understand it much better.

And now considering the admirable usefulness of all those Parts which serve to
these vital Purposes, I would ask any reasonable Person, Whether mere Chance,
or blind Matter, or any thing else without the Skill and Providence of a most
wise Being, could contrive such artificial and wonderful Methods, Conveyances,
Instruments, and Vessels of such various Sorts; and all so curiously Formed, so
orderly Disposed, and so exquisitely Connected and Fitted, to bring about such
necessary and excellent Ends? If it be said, That all these things are done by
Common, Animal Nature; it is easily answered, That Nature, of its self, is
without all Understanding, utterly incapable of Forecast, or Cogitation; and
therefore shows that there is an intelligent Being over it, that erected and
ordered the business of Nutrition, which common Nature never knew either how to
perfect and finish, or how to begin; nor indeed does humane Reason it self help
to carry it on. As for instance; A Man deliberates indeed what he shall eat,
and what he shall drink; for these are Objects which fall under Consultation,
or, at least, Fancy. But when once his Nutriment is cast down into the Stomach,
there is an end of all deliberation, as to the manner of Digestion, and of
turning the digested Matter into Blood and Spirits. In the whole Economy of
this Affair, Reason, has not the least Hand; nor did any Man ever yet consider
how he should convert his Food into Chyle, or convey it from the Stomach to the
Mesentery; or how he should there separate it, and so carry it to the Heart.
The greatest Politician in the World never yet thought of managing this
Intrigue. Nature indeed does the thing to his Hand: But because that Principle
of Life, which we call Nature, is utterly void of all Policy and Thought, we
must rationally conclude that there is a Being of excellent Knowledge and
Wisdom (that is, a Deity) which has contrived these Operations for Nature, and
has directed and fixed the Methods of them. If it be said again that Nature
operates thus in a Mechanical way, by forcing and thrusting on the Chyle and
Blood, like the Art and Method used in Waterworks; it may be very reasonably
demanded, Who invented this Art for Nature? Who at first put that unintelligent
and blind thing upon it? And what Hand prepared that stupendous Course and
Instruments it was to use, in order to the Animal's Nutrition? Nay, who
contrived the Animal it self, and designed the Nourishment of it? Or, if these
Questions be not enough, we may very well ask the great Pretenders to Reason
one more; viz. How the Circulation of the Blood, which is so Demonstrable is so
constantly performed, and so quickly finished in its periodical Course? For
here the greatest Artists are divided Disp. de Deo. p. 462.
in their Opinions, whether the reduction of the Blood to the Heart through the
Veins be by the inosculation of the Veins and Arteries (an Opinion which seems
to be out of Doors) or, by the porosities of the fleshy Parts; or by the
systaltick Motion (as some call it) in the Veins themselves? As to this, Men of
the best Skill are yet to seek how to give a clear and satisfactory Account of
the manner of the Circulation of the Blood, though the Circulation it self be
apparent; which to me is an Argument, that the whole Method of Nutrition in us
was instituted, and is still carried on by a Divine Being, which has made some
things undiscoverable by humane Art; that by the Mysteries we find in Nature,
we may be the more easily prevailed on to believe the sublimest Truths in
Religion.

2. Having thus observed the First thing which tends to the preservation of
that Nature which is common to Man and Beast, the work of Nutrition that is
performed in the Bowels: Let us in the next place consider briefly the Second
thing, or the Business of Sensation that is performed in the Head; both
inwardly in the Fancy, and outwardly by the Instruments of Sensation, as the
Eye, the Ear, and the like, which convey to the Fancy all sensible Objects from
abroad. And here I must not be so vain as to pretend to give a distinct,
accurate, and full account of all the operations of Nature, and of its hidden
means, and manner of Working. No, it is enough for one of my Profession to take
such a summary notice of those things which serve for Sensation, as may
satisfy any reasonable Person, that the whole Work of Sensation argues
wonderful Wisdom and Contrivance; and consequently the Existence of a God. The
Fancy then is the highest and most perfect Faculty of the Animal Soul (as the
Understanding is of the Rational.) An imagining, directing Power in every
sensitive Creature, carrying in its Acts some faint resemblances of humane
Reason, though it be quite destitute of it, and much inferior to it. Its Seat
is in the Brain; and its Uses are so great and necessary, that without it no
Animal can answer the Inclinations and Purposes of its Nature. By this Faculty
the Creature receives within it the Idea's, and Representations of exterior
Objects; perceives so much of their Qualities as exerts its Appetites, and in
(some sort, after an obscure, imperfect manner, and in an unreflecting way)
judges of things, whether they be Pleasant or Painful, Convenient or
Disagreeable, Beneficial or Destructive; in short, whether they be for its
Enjoyment, or for its Hurt. And according as those Impressions are, which are
thus made upon the Fancy, so does the Creature act; either craving for the
Object, or declining it; either embracing, or abhorring; either pursuing, or
avoiding it; and either gratified with the Fruition, or grieving under the Pain
which the Object affords. So that as the Heart is the Spring of all vital
Motion; so is the Fancy the Spring of all animal Motions, both inward and
external. Now, Can any reasonable Man believe, that this so useful a Faculty
came accidentally into the Soul, merely by nonsensical Combination of
undesigning Atoms? Does it not rather show, that the Animal was endued with it
by a wise Agent, that constituted and aimed at its Preservation? Especially if
it be considered, that as it is a distinguishing Faculty in every Individual,
whereby it perceives the difference between what is Good for it, or Injurious
to it; so in every Species of Animals it is various; and yet. notwithstanding,
that variety works in every one of the same kind after an uniform Manner. For
that Object which is delightful to one sort of Animals, another is averse to;
and whether it be desired or refused by one Individual, it is alike desired or
refused by all of the same Species; which is a plain Argument that it was not
Chance, but Divine Reason which formed that Internal Sense, the Fancy.

In the next place, let us take some (though it be but a transient) view of the
Instruments, which are assistant and ministerial to transmit Impressions from
without, to that Organ of the Soul, where this distinguishing Power, the Fancy
is placed. Those Instruments are of two sorts, Nerves and Spirits. The Nerves
or Sinews resemble so many hollow, winding Pipes, through which all Idea's and
Notions of things abroad are conveyed to the Sense within. The original
Complication and Bed of the Nerves is in the interior Fabric of the Brain,
dividing there that soft, artificial Structure of Nature into diverse Cells or
Apartments, whence the great Branches of those Instruments of Sensation are
extended outwardly through the Head by Pairs. That in each Ear serves to open a
Passage to the Fancy for all sorts of Sounds, according to the various Motions
and Modifications of the Air. That Nerve in each Eye serves to let in the
Idea's and Shapes of all visible Objects. Those which extend toward the lower
parts of the Face, are to admit all kinds of Smells, and by variety of
Ramifications, to govern the Taste, to move the Tongue in all its Vibrations,
to assist the Lips, the Jaw, and all the Organs there, which help toward
Nutrition. Others Divarications are into the Lungs and Windpipe, to preserve
Respiration, to modulate the Voice, and to serve for the Ejection of whatsoever
is offensive to that sensible Fabricature. Others strike down into the Stomach
and Heart, to promote all Motions and Operations there. Others run lower, to be
serviceable to the Bowels and Mesentery, that they may discharge their
Functions. Others to the Liver, to the Reins, and to all the parts in their
Neighborhood. And others down the Neck to the exterior parts of the Body, so
that by innumerable straight, circular, and oblique Branches, all over the
Body, to the very Soul of the Foot; they are insinuated into all the Muscular
Formations, which serve to move every Limb, Member, Joint, and Particle.

And yet all this wonderful Plexure of Nerves would be of no real use, without
the help of active, lively Spirits to invigorate all. And for the Extraction of
these out of the Blood, provident Nature has prepared (though not by any
Providence of its own) peculiar Elaboratories in the Brain. As those Spirits
which serve directly for the Ends and Uses of Life (and are therefore called
Vital) are produced in the Region below; so are those Spirits which serve for
Sense and Motion, (and are therefore called Animal Spirits) chymically prepared
in that Supreme Region, which is the Seat of Sensation, the great Organ and
Original of all those Motions which are in the several parts of the Body. There
those Ministers of Nature are continually employed in their various Ranks and
Functions; nay in their several Cells too, that they may not disturb or
interfere with one another in their respective Operations: And there, like
Sentinels about a Garrison, they are upon the Watch, to give the Fancy notice
from their several Divisions and Districts, of whatever may prove either
grateful or offensive to Nature. Those in the Optic Tubes in the Eyes, convey
all lucid Idea's to the Fancy: Those in the Hollow, and about the Drum of the
Ear, all sorts of Sounds: Those in the Palate and Nostrils, every Taste and
Odor; and those dispersed about in Nerves and Fibers over all the Body serve
to convey the Sense of all Pain, or Pleasure; besides the manifold,
stupendendious, and unaccountable Office* they do, both for the exterior parts,
in order to all Muscular, and local Motion; and for all the inward Vessels, in
order to vitality.

And here I cannot well omit what an inquisitive Author has observed, Disput.
de Deo, P. 479.
touching that mutual Relation, and necessary Commerce, which is between the
Brain, and those inferior parts which are for the Ends and Operations of Life:
For though every Part by it self be formed with most exquisite Art for the
Offices and Functions it is to perform, yet no part can answer its Ends,
without the subservient Ministry and Assistance of others. Thus, unless the
Heart supply the Head with Blood, it is impossible for the Brain either to
produce Animal Spirits, or to sustain it self. Again; If the Brain did not pay
a Tribute of Spirits to the Heart, 'twere impossible for the Heart to prepare
that Blood. Again; Neither can the one prepare Blood, nor the other Spirits,
unless the Stomach provides Chyle, and the Lungs Nitre. Nor again, can either
Lungs or Stomach perform their Offices, unless both parts receive from Heart
and Brain, Blood and Spirits. Since, therefore, in the whole Labyrinth of this
Contexture there is such admirable Excellence, and Curiosity of Contrivance,
each part so exquisitely formed in it self, and all so intimately depending
upon one another, Good Lord! what could have been more wisely, more
advantageously, more artificially, more divinely designed and ordered?

And to confirm this yet further, it will not be amiss to consider transiently
the wonderful Art of Nature in contriving the first principal Instruments of
Nutrition and Sensation both. All we see depends upon Nourishment; and that is
sought for by those Cravings in the Stomach which we call Hunger and Thirst.
Now here lies a Mystery, how we come to be sensible of these great Wants
below? The immediate Causes of Appetite are allowed to be in the Stomach it
self; and suppose it to proceed from an Acid Humor there, which agitates and
frets the Fibers upon Emptiness, yet the Enquiry is, How the Head comes to be
sensible of these Cravings? Or, How and by what means it is that the Fancy in
the Brain is affected with these Cravings in the Stomach, so that we feel and
know the Necessities of Nature, which must be answered, or else the whole
Fabric will fall to the Ground? Why, the true Account is this; That there are
immediate Instruments between the Stomach and the Brain, which convey to the
Fancy the Sense of those Necessities which are below; I mean little Nerves, or
porous Strings, which, (by the help of Animal Spirits within them) move the
Fancy above, as they themselves are moved by the Vellications or Twitchings of
the Fibers beneath. On these poor Instruments the whole Being and Welfare of
every Sensitive Creature does originally depend; and so I would ask any
Rational Creature, Whether the Formation of those Instruments in every Animal,
could be the effect of blind Chance, or is not rather an Argument of the most
wonderful Reason and Wisdom, (that is, a Deity) directing and governing the
Works of Nature after such a stupendous manner, and to such providential Ends
and Purposes, for the preservation of every Animal's Nature?

3. And this leads me to consider now the Third thing which tends thereunto,
and exposes to our View the great Wisdom and Contrivances of a God; namely the
due perfection and Fitness which is in the Structure of a Sensitive Creature's
Body, I mean still in order to its own Preservation, or to the Support of the
Individual. And here it passes my little Skill, and perhaps the greatest Skill
of all the most inquisitive Men upon Earth, to give you a distinct particular
View of every wise Work. Therefore it will be enough for me to give you a rough
Draught, an imperfect Specimen and Idea.

And, to speak first of the useful, perfect, and fit Fabrication of the Head,
that great Fort of Nature, which is provided like a Citadel on high, for the
defense and safety of all the other Works: There we find such Excellence in the
Frame, such Art in the Contrivance, and such variety of Uses throughout the
whole Building, as plainly shows the Hand and Wisdom of a Divine Architect; as
an hairy Scalp, to keep all the interior Parts in due warmth; a Skull, to
guard them from violence; a tough Membrane over it, to help the making of
Reparation for acts of Battery; another Membrane they call the Pia Matter,
within, to Coat the Nerves, to divide the Brain into Partitions, and to keep
the volatile Spirits at home, to do their proper Offices for Sense, Life, and
Motion: There we find too, innumerable Branches of Arteries, to carry Blood all
over for the Sustenance of every Part, and for the extracting of Spirits; as
many Branches of Veins also, to carry off the phlegmatic Matter left, that it
may be invigorated anew; Glandules, like so many Spunges, to drink up
superfluous Moistures, and to cast them into their respective Sinks; besides an
intricate Series of Nerves, which I spoke of before, divaricated round about,
and laid, like Pipes, in their proper Cavities, to help Sensation from abroad.
Of these, if we take some notice of one only, it will enable us to conceive
something the better of the artificial Contrivance of the rest, I mean the
Nerve Optic, that serves to convey the Species of all visible Objects, into
the Brain. It is inserted into the Bulb of the Eye a little sideways, or in an
oblique Posture, as most convenient for clear Vision. Thence it spreads it self
into Ramifications infinite, partly into those various Branches which assist
the six Muscles of the Eye, that it may move six several ways, to receive
Impressions from all Objects, and partly into a vast variety of Fibers, which
make various Coats; all of them transparent, and without any Tincture
(outwardly) of their own, to let in Light and Colors in their proper Idea's,
that Vision may be the more distinct and clear, and that the Fancy may not be
deceived. The exterior or horny Coat is made of a Unequal Figure, to admit Rays
from all parts round about. In the second or Uveous Coat, is the Pupil,
commonly called the Sight of the Eye; a round and narrow part, provided for the
gathering of the Rays into a Concourse; and about this Pupil is the Iris, made
up of Ciliary Processes, like a Circle of the finest Hairs; by the Motion of
which Fibers, the Sight of the Eye is sometimes contracted, and at other times
dilated, according as the splendid Object is near or remote, or as the Splendour
it self is greater or lesser. Besides these, is that they style the Retiform
Coat (because it resembles the most curious Network) next to the Visionary
Nerve, somewhat capacious, to give room for the necessary Proportions of the
Idea; and of a dark Color round about within, to prevent the Reflection of the
Light: And within these various Coats are various Humors, which serve so
artificially to refract all the incident Rays, and to transmit the Species of
every visible Object to the Fancy in a regular Form, that in all Ages the
Structure of this little Member, the Eye, has been to the Admiration and
Astonishment of the best Anatomists.

Now by this we may guess at the wonderful Structure of those other
Instruments, which serve for Sensation in the Head. And if we descend lower,
What a World of Wonders do we meet with there? Were I to instance only in the
Contexture of the Hand, 'twere enough to show the Existence of a God. How
useful is this outward Member to defend the Senses, and to preserve the very
Life of Man; it being employed about all Works, and exercising all Arts that
serve for our Necessities and Convenience, and even for our Humor and
Curiosity? Galen and others have particularly observed the artificial
Fabrication of the Hand, and the wonderful fitness of all Things in it for
their several Uses; the fit Proportion and Disposition of it to lay hold on any
Objects whether great or small; the sit Division and Number of the Fingers; the
sit Magnitude, Quantity, Variety and the Figure of the Bones; the fit Numbers
and Filletings of the Joints; the fitness of the Muscles, Tendons and Nerves,
for the moving and turning of the Hand every way as occasion requires; the
fitness of the Flesh, Skin, and the very Nails, for their respective Offices;
and upon the whole they conclude, that no Art could possibly have contrived
this Member better, or more appositely for its Uses; and that great
Inconveniences must have followed, had any thing in it been otherwise than
just as every thing is.

If now with this Hand you dissect the Lungs of an Animal, you may see the
stupendous Wisdom and Skill that is shown in the contrivance of that whole
pendulous Fabric; for the drawing in, and digesting the nitrous Particles of
the Air; for the dispersing of it into every Lobe and lesser Receptacle; for
respiration by the alternate shrinking and stretching of the Fibers there; for
conveying Blood out of the Heart, and back again into it; for governing and
modulating the Voice; for keeping the Windpipe continually open by circular
Cartilages, or Grisles; and for defending it by a muscular Membrane at the
Roots of the Tongue, which upon occasion shuts down like a Clap-door to keep
every thing but Air from descending into the Lungs.

To your Fingers ends you feel the pulsations of the Heart, on which depends
the Circulation of the Blood, that is the immediate Spring and Prop of Life.
And did you distinstly perceive the manner of its quick course from the Heart
round to the Heart again: Did you see the texture of the Arteries, which serve
to carry it off; the intricate passages of it, even through the little Cavities
of the Bones; the Force whereby it is propelled and driven on forward upon
every new pulsation; the watery Particles which drop into it by the way to thin
it, and thereby to assist its Motion: Those Vessels they call the Glandules and
Lymphaeducts, out of which those watery Particles are derived; the conveyances
by which it runs out of the Arteries into innumerable Veins, and little
branches of Veins; the Valves in them which keep it from flowing back; the
frame and windings of those Canals, which lead it on to the Heart; the opening
of the Heart to receive it, when it is come to the Door of the Right-Ventricle;
and those muscular Membranes, the Valves, which are so artificially provided to
open forward into that Ventricle to let the Blood in, and then shut to like
Trap-doors, to hinder the Blood from Recoyling the same way; Did you, I say,
distinctly perceive all this mysterious Process and Structure, no more would be
needful to make you sensible of the great Reasons which the holy Psalmist had
for those Expressions, Psalm. 139. 14. O Lord, I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made; mavelous are thy works, and that my soul
knows right well.

Besides these Miracles of Divine Wisdom Bish. Wilkin's Not. Rel. p. 81.
within us, I might lead you on to a further view of the various Fortifications
of Nature, which are more outward: A Structure of Six hundred several Muscles;
in each whereof are at least Ten several Intentions, or due Qualifications to
be observed; proper Figures, just Magnitude, right Disposition of its several
Ends, upper and lower position of the Whole, the insertion of its proper
Nerves, Veins, and Arteries, which are each of them to be duly placed; so that
about the Muscles alone, no less then Six thousand several Ends or Aims are to
be attended to. The Bones are reckoned to be Two hundred eighty four: The
distinct Scopes or Intentions in each of these, are above Forty; in all about
an Hundred thousand. And thus is it in some proportion with all the other
Parts, the Skin, Ligaments, Vessels, Glandules, Humors; but more especially
with the several Members of the Body, which do in regard of the great Variety
and Multitude of those several Intentions required to them, very much exceed
the homogeneous Parts. And the failing of any one in these, would cause an
irregularity in the Body, and in many of them such as would be very notorious.

But because I have just mentioned the pulsations of the Heart, I shall close
up this Speculation, by observing a little the amazing Works of Nature there.
As the Sun is Cor principium vitae and Sol microcosmi (ut proportionabiliter
Sol cor Mundi appellari meretur) cujus virtute and pulsu Sanguis movetur,
perficitur, vegetatur, and a corruptione and grumefactione vindicatur* suumque
Officium nutriendo, fovendo, vegetando toti corpori praestat Lar ille
famaliaris, fundamentum vi^ae, auctor omnium. Harv. de Mortu Cordis, Exerc. 1.
Cap. 8.
to this lower World, so is the Heart to every sensitive Creature a Fountain of
Life; by the Virtue and Motion whereof the Blood is moved, perfected,
invigorated, preserved from Corruption, and performs its Office by nourishing,
cherishing and invigogorating the whole Body. After the opening of the Heart,
to let the Blood in on the Right-side, there follows a strong Constriction, or
Shutting up of the Heart to throw it out on the Left: And that vibration or
beating which we feel then, is usually called the Pulse; whereby the Blood is
cast and forced into all Parts, for Nutrition every where, and to cause its
return round about to the Heart again, when all Parts have been fed with some
Portions of it. Now let any reasonable Man view distinctly the contexture and
frame of an Animal's Heart; and then let him lay his Hand upon his own, and ask
his Conscience seriously whether any thing but the highest Reason and Wisdom
could contrive that little, but most necessary Member, for its respective Uses.
For the clearing of this, let us consider a little the artificial Works of
Nature, both at the first formation and motions and of the Heart, and in its
subsequent Operations.

1. And First, As to the primordial Rudiments of this great Prop of Life.
Suppose the Original Principle of Life to be enclosed within a round muscular
Substance, (like a little Bladder) which in time becomes a full, perfect Heart.
Suppose (what a most Learned Harv. de Motu Cordis, Exer. 1. cap. 4. and cap. 17.
Anatomist tells us) this small muscular Substance (like a drop of Blood, or a
Red Point) to palpitate, stir and beat, and by that Motion to form directly
those Side Vessels above upon the Basis of the Heart, which they call the
Auricles, or Ears, and which are the next Parts that move. Suppose all this as
plain Matter of Fact, we must conclude hence, That this Motion thus exerted,
communicated, and carried on, is performed by those contrivances of Nature,
which are the necessary Instruments of Motion; and consequently that those
Instruments are already in being. And what, think you, are those Contrivances?
Why, they go under the name of Fibers; and are in every Heart that is fully
formed, like the finest Threads; and therefore may be well supposed to be at
the first formation hardly so big as the finest Hairs. On these small,
exquisite Instruments of Motion, the Lives of Men, and other Animals originally
and constantly depend: And as they either stretch or shrink, so does the whole
Heart open or shut; and so does that Vehicle of Life, the Blood, run. Without
these Fibers, or Heart Strings, 'twere impossible for the Punctum Sanguineum,
or that first Rudiment of an Animal, like to a drop of Blood, to vibrate, or
move, or exert its Faculty; much less to fashion an Auricle, which is a Fibrous
Part also, that opens and shuts, to let in, and force out the Blood, as the
Heart it self does, which immediately receives the Blood from it. And now to
argue hence a little, What do these artificial beginnings of Nature show, but
the wonderful Wisdom, Skill and Power of a Divine Mind, and consequently the
Existence of a God, that does order all the least Tendencies to Life after such
an exact, exquisite, and stupendous manner? For though in all this, Nature be
the immediate Agent; yet that is of it self a blind, unthinking, inartificial
Thing. Though it be an active, vivisick, formative Principle (whatever the
Substance of it be, whether material, or not) yet it is without all
Consciousness, all Sagacity, all Forecast and Knowledge; and therefore cannot
be supposed to contrive, or project, or to act by any Wisdom of its own. And
yet so wise are those Contrivances, which are the Origin of every Animal's
Life; so admirably Designed, so sitly, and appositely Formed in order to their
Ends; that the whole Fabrication shows it to come from the Counsel, Will and
Direction of a most intelligent Being, in whose Hand Nature is, and under whom
it Operates. It requires no little Art to dissect an Heart after a proper
manner; to expose these Rudiments of Life to your view; to show you their
Dependencies upon Tendons, their Figures, Positions, and Intertextures; and
after all this Curiosity to delineate them upon Paper, and to give you with a
Pen a little Resemblance and Idea of them; this is enough to exercise and show
the Skill of the wisest Artist upon Earth: And then, How great must the Wisdom
and Skill of that intelligent Agent be, who so admirably contrived the Original
Formation and Structure of them?

2. As to subsequent Operations of Nature for the perfecting of the Heart, with
all its Parts and mere Appendages, we are told that by the first Pulsations of
the springing Heart, the Parts of an Animal being now laid out and formed
gradually, that prime Vessel of Life increases, and comes to discharge its
Office to the full, being now well furnished with all Necessaries for it; so
that as one Ear receives the Blood out of a great Vein, and then by its
Constriction sends it out into the Right-Bosom of the Heart; so that Heart by
its own Constriction forces it thence into the Lungs; whence it is agitated
round into the Left, and so transmitted into the other Bosom, thence to cast by
a new constriction into an Artery they call the Aorta, which like a great Pipe,
laid into a Fountain, conveys it into many others; by which means every
Particle over the whole Body is fed, irrigated and refreshed. All which
wonderful Works of Nature are perfomed immediately by the Fibers, those
Instruments of Motion I spoke of before; which, the Heart being now grown
corpulent, act with violence, and are strong and visible; some lying in direct
Lines from the tip of the Heart to the Crown; others cross wise in the form of
a Circle; others in Oblique, or winding Lines: All meeting within the tip, as
in a knot or center, and fastened above to round Tendons, like Strings tied to
an Hoop: So that the Heart being full of Blood, as the tip makes its efforts
upwards; so all the Fibers conspire from every Part by a joint Compressure to
throw the Blood out, and then dilate themselves again for the Reception of a
new Supplement; and by this alternate Motion of these Fibers, every Minute is
the Life of Man preserved.

I cannot well omit one very material Observation more, concerning these
artificial Contrivances which argue the Existence of a most wise Being, the
Author and Director of Nature; and it is this, That in all the innumerable
Canals of Blood, which transmit it to and from the Heart, there are (as indeed
in the several Conveyances of the Chyle) muscular Membranes, or Valves,
provided (I cannot compare them better than to Sluce-doors) which open always
before the Current, to let it pass forward; but upon occasion shut, to hinder
it from returning the same way. And this is especially observable in those
Vessels which are in and about the Heart, where the Constrictions and
Pulsations being so violent, would cause the vital Stream to slow back, did not
the shutting of these Valves prevent it, before every Pulsation: Hence it is
that the Blood is forced onwards, and is circulating every Moment; these
Sluce-doors stopping all Reflux, and a Flood behind them still pressing on,
till the Heart by its Constrictions evacuates it self, and drives the Current
forward still, somewhat like an Engine in Water works, which (together with the
other remarkable effects of Nature) shows, that every the least Part within us
is most wisely sitted for its proper Use, and that the whole Structure is so
congruously ordered, that nothing is vain, impertinent, or superfluous; nothing
that can be spared without disturbance, damage, and danger to the Fabric; and
consequently that there is nothing, but what is an Evidence of Counsel,
Foresight and astonishing Skill in a superior Agent, framing and directing
Nature after a most excellent manner; that is, a Deity.

I have taken the Liberty to venture upon these Anatomical Speculations (though
some may think them a little too much out of my way) partly to raise in Peoples
Minds the greater Sense of God, by the stupendous Operations of his Hands,
which they carry about with them, and which they find at home in their own
Bodies; partly to excite them to all Acts of Praise and Thankfulness for such
Miracles of God's Providence; and partly to move them to all Sobricty and
Regularity of Life. Intemperance and Debaucheries are quite distant from the
Ends of our Formation, and utterly inconsistent with the Reasons of it, nay
destructive of them. And therefore People should be very careful not to abuse
so excellent a piece of Workmanship, on which such Elegance of Art and Care has
been bestowed; especially considering how weak the Stamina Vitoe, all the
Threads are on which our Lives depend; how frail, as well as curious, the whole
Web of Nature is; and how soon we may be forced away to the Divine Tribunal,
should but a few Fibers break.

But to evade the force of this whole Argument for the Existence of a God, lewd
Scepticks are ready to tell us, from that old Epicurean and Atheist, Lucretius,
That though many good Uses of things have been sound out, and the things are
sitly applied to those uses, yet these uses were never designed, but fell out
casually; and consequently are no proof of an understanding, intending Cause,
or a Deity. And to this purpose a learned Writer gives an Dr Cudworth, Intel
Syst. p. 690, 691.
Account of these Men's Principles or Shifts, viz. That nothing in Man's Body
was made out of design for any use; but that all the several parts thereof
happening to be so made as they are, their uses were consequent thereupon. The
former Teeth (say they) were made by material and mechanical Necessity thin and
sharp, by means whereof they became sit for cutting; and the Jaw-Teeth thick
and broad, whereby they became useful for the grinding of Food: But neither of
them were intended to be such for the sake of their uses, but happened by Chance
only. And the like they affirm concerning all the other Parts of the Body,
which seem to be made for Ends.

To which that learned Person replies, That though a thing that happens
accidentally to be so or so made, may afterward, notwithstanding, prove often
serviceable for some use or other, yet when any thing consists of many Parts
that are all artificially proportionated together, and with much Curiosity
accommodated one to another; any one of which Parts having been wanting, or
otherwise in the least placed or disposed of, would have rendered the whole
altogether inept for such a use; then may we well conclude it not to have been
made by Chance, but by Counsel and Design, and intentionally for such uses: As
for Example; the Eye, whose Structure and Fabric consisting of many Parts,
(Humors and Membranes) is so artificially composed, that no reasonable Person
who considers the whole Anatomy thereof, and the Curiosity of its Structure,
can think otherwise of it, but that it was made out of Design, for the Use of
Seeing; and did not happen accidentally to be so made, and then the use of
Seeing follow. And for a Man to think, that not only Eyes happened to be so
made, and the use of Seeing unintended followed, but also that in all the same
Animals, Ears happened to be made so too, and the use of Hearing followed them;
and a Mouth and Tongue happened to be made so likewise, and the use of Eating,
and (in Men) of Speaking, was also accidentally consequent thereupon; and that
Feet were in the same Animals made by Chance too, and the use of walking
followed; and Hands made in them by Chance also, upon which so many necessary
Uses depend: Besides innumerable other Parts of the Body, both Similar and
Organical; none of which could have been wanting, without rendering the whole
inept or useless; I say, to think all these things should happen by Chance to
be thus made in every one and the same Animal, and not designed by Mind or
Counsel, that they might jointly concur, and contribute to the good of the
whole; this argues the greatest insensibility of Mind imaginable. But this
absurd and ridiculous Conceit has been long since so industriously confuted by
that larned Pagan Philosopher and Physician, Galen, in his Book of the Use of
Parts, that it would be altogether superfluous to insist any more upon it.

I shall only add, for the Confirmation of all this, that in the several
Species of Animals (both Men and Beasts) many Parts are totally wanting in some
Individuals, where they would have been neither necessary nor useful, which are
not wanting in others where they are so; which shows that those Parts were
intended for uses, and for their proper uses only they were therefore formed,
not by Chance, but by the greatest Counsel and Wisdom; that is, by the wise
Contrivance of a Divine Mind. Nay, in some whole Species there is a manifest
difference, where there is good reason for that difference; a plain Argument,
that it was Divine Reason which ordered all things so very exactly for the sake
of Ends, and with an intention to have those Ends and purposes answered. As for
instance; many Sensitive Creatures, (nay, a very strict Enquirer into Nature
Harvey de motu Cord. c. 6.
tells us, the greater number of Animals) have no Lungs at all, as various
sorts of Fishes. The reason is, because Lungs would be of no use to them; for
their manner of Respiration is performed by the opening and shutting of their
Gills. Again; some sorts of Animals (as several kinds of Worms) have no Heart
neither: The reason is, because a Heart also would be of no use to those
Creatures; for, as they gather, so they dispose of their Nourishment by
Contracting and Relaxing their little Bodies; and consequently there is in them
no Circulation of the Blood, nor indeed any need of it; and so they have no
need of a Heart to throw it about into their extreme Parts. Again; though many
sensitive Creatures, (as Fish and others) which have no Lungs, have an Heart
notwithstanding, yet the same learned Author observes, that in all such
Creatures the Heart has but one Ventricle or Bosom; whereas in Men, and in
some other Animals, it has two: The reason is, because where there are two,
the Right Ventricle serves to transmit the Blood into the Lungs, (as they send
it about again to the Left Ventricle) But where Lungs are wanting, there a
Right Ventricle would lie idle and unserviceable to any good End or Purpose;
and therefore Nature forms it not in those Animals, one Cavity being enough for
the Reception and Distribution of the Blood. Again; as the Heart of Man is
connected to the Lungs, so does it lie covered over in a soft Membrane, like a
Case or Purse; it is called the Pericardium, wherein is a Watery Substance, (as
it is generally thought) to moisten and temper the Heart, that it may not be
parched or rendered unfit for its Office, by inordinate Heats. But it is
observed, that the Heart of a Brute is without Disp. de Deo, p. 458
such a Case; and the reason perhaps is twofold, partly because the Nourishment
of a common Animal is not so strong, nor the Blood so inflaming as to need
Refrigeration there, partly because the Heart of such a Creature lying not in
an exact Posture, as in Man, but lengthwise, (according to the Figure of the
Body) and pressing somewhat upon the Diaphragm; were a Pericardium added, it
might hinder the Diaphragm from moving freely, especially in its Constrictions.
To all which I shall subjoin but two Observations more, and the one is this;
that in Animals which chew the Cud, there is wanting an upper Range of Teeth.
The reason is, because it would be useless; for those Animals fetching up again
(by the Peristaltick reciprocal Motion of the Stomach) their unconcocted,
unmacerated Food, do, by a continued and gentle Rumination, as well prepare
their Nourishment for Digestion, as other Creatures do theirs by a double Row
of Grinders. The other I borrow of a Pious and Critical Naturalist, who
speaking of the Artificial Mr. Ray's Wisdom, etc. p. 46.
and Wonderful Conformation of the Windpipe, observes, that lest the asperity
or hardness of its Cartilages should hurt the Oesophagus or Gullet, which is
tender, and of a skinny Substance, or hinder the swallowing down of Meat,
therefore its annulary Gristles are not made every where round and entire
Circles; but where the Gullet touches the Windpipe, there to fill up the
Circles, is only a soft Membrane, which may easily give way to the dilatation
of the Gullet. And to demonstrate that this was designedly done for this End
and Use, so soon as the Windpipe enters the Lungs, its Cartilages are no
longer deficient, but perfect Circles or Rings, because there is no necessity
for them to be otherwise there (at a distance from the Meat) but more
convenient they should be (in their Divarications) entire.

The Scope and Meaning of these things is, in short, to show, that though that
energetick and forming Power or Principle, which we call Nature, does act
without any Counsel, Design, Advice, or Deliberation of its own, yet in its
Operations it works so Methodically and Artificially, in order to good Ends
and Purposes, that in its ordinary Proceedings, nothing can be found which is
useless and superfluous; nothing which is not necessary, proper, or convenient;
nothing but what there is some reason for; nothing but what great Wisdom would
direct; and by consequence, that there is a most Wise, Directing Being over it,
who does preserve, assist, and govern it in its orderly, but blind Operations:
For what Man in his Senses can conceive, that an intelligent and directing
Cause has no Hand at all in Works wherein we see such excellent Ends so
exactly answered, and such suitable Means so cleverly used, and every thing so
wisely and admirably well done? How is it possible for any considering Man to
imagine, That the Instruments of Breathing should be so curiously formed by
mere Accident? That the casual impulse of the Air should break upon the
Nostrils, and bore the Passages and Meanders of Sensation? That Chance, and
nothing but foolish Chance, should prepare a Mouth, and furnish a Mouth with
all things necessary and apt? That nothing but unadvised Fortune, or unadvised
Nature, (which alone is as uncertain of its Hits, as Fortune is) should so
orderly and exquisitely provide a Stomach for the Reception of Food; Materials
to concoct it; a Labyrinth of Conveyances, to carry it off; a politic Duct of
many Vessels to refine it; a Machine of Curiosities, to distribute and disperse
it into all Parts? But -- here I stop: For I have spoken of these things
already; and though the Chyle takes a Round, and the Blood a Circulation, yet
this Discourse must admit of none; and therefore thus much shall suffice to be
spoken concerning the great usefulness of all things, and especially of those
things which tend to the preservation of Man and Beast.

CHAP. IX.
THE great Utilities of the things in Nature having been thus largely and
particularlarly considered, together with their apt and excellent Frame, in
order to their uses, one would now think, that no more should be necessary to
show the Existence of a most Wise and Good God. However, it will not, I hope,
be unprofitable for the Confirmation of your Faith in that absolutely perfect
Being, if I proceed (though but in a summary way) to the utmost extent of this
Subject; at least, as far as to those Bounds which were proposed at my first
Entrance upon it. The more we look into the Works of God, the more apt we shall
be to admire, adore, and love him; whence it was that the devout Psalmist made
it his business to think of all his Works; to meditate and muse upon them; to
declare and set them forth; to talk (familiarly) of them; and to invite all
People to behold and consider them: And he looked upon it as a great Cause of
the Wickedness of those ungodly and deceitful Men he spoke of, Psalm 28. That
they regard not in their minds the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his
hands. Let us therefore go on to the next thing which falls under our
Meditations, and that is, touching those Resemblances of Knowledge and Wisdom
which appear in the Operations even of irrational Creatures, that they may
answer their uses, and bring their ends about. For if it be considered, that
such Beings are utterly void of all Understanding which is properly called
Rational, and yet act so Methodically and Artificially, as if they had Reason,
Judgment, and Discretion of their own, it must follow, that they are guided and
governed by a Superior Being, which is intellectual, and whose Reason is the
Law they act by. Here then we are to observe these two following things, which
show the Resemblances of Knowledge and Wisdom in Creatures Irrational. 1. Their
constant Regularity as to the manner of their Operations. And, 2. Their seeming
Sagacity as to the ends of them.

1. First, Their constant Regularity, as to the manner of their Operations.
There are no Creatures (Devils and Men excepted) but what act uniformly and
steadily by a certain Rule, according to their Natures, whether they be
Inanimate or Vegetative, or Beings endued with Sense, we see they observe their
Laws; as well those general Laws which are for the Order and Preservation of
the whole Universe, as those special Laws which are peculiar and proper to
their several Kinds. To this purpose I have already taken notice of the
constant regular Motion of the Celestial Bodies, and therefore shall not need
to have any farther Recourse to them; though it be an astonishing thing to
consider, that such vast multitudes of immense Bodies, all void both of
Intellectual and Sensitive Faculties, and several of them moving in a manner
different from the rest, should for so long a Tract of Time, observe their
Lines so uniformly and exactly, that for these Six Thousand Years there has
not been the least variation of their Courses. Of this no other rational
Account can be given, but that there is a superintending Being above, under
whose commanding Power they always have been, and to whose Will they yield
entire and absolute Obedience. Since they know not their Law themselves, it
must follow, that there is a God who knows it for them, and keeps them to it.

Of those Inanimate, or Live-less things which are in the Earth, I shall
instance only in the regular inclination, or tendency of the Loadstone; the
greatest Wonder which the Earth affords. And (not to enumerate all those
strange Faculties and Powers, which some curious Naturalists have discovered in
it, especially in these last Ages) that which is most pertinent to my present
purpose is, that is constantly affects the same Position toward the Poles of
the Earth, which was Natural to it before it was taken out of the Bowels of its
Mother Rock: So that where ever it be carried it will (if it has its liberty
to move) still direct its Points toward the North and South, as it lay
Originally, and as the Earth it self lies. If you hang it in the Air by a
String, or set it in some floating enclosure on the surface of Water, it will
never be at rest, but stir and quaver on till its Points answer to the North
and South; as if it were Conscious of a Right which Nature gave it, to one
particular, determinate Situation. Nor is this all; for (as if it communicated
its seeming Consciousness) every Needle of a Sea-Compass, or of a moveable
Sun-Dial, that is touched by the Loadstone, will affect the same Direction, and
restlesly incline to the same Points. A wonderful Secret in Nature, and
unaccountable hitherto by mere Principles of Philosophy; and yet that which has
been vastly Beneficial to the Trading and Traveling part of Mankind, since the
Discovery of it in Fact. And what can all the Scepticks in the World do here
with their senseless Atoms? When all is done, This strange Mystery in Nature
must be ascribed to the Power and Pleasure of a Divine Agent that has given
every thing a Law; that is, has impressed upon all Matter a fatal Necessity of
moving according to that energetick Principle, wherewith he himself endued it.

The constant regularity of all things upon the surface of the Earth, is
obvious to every Man's eye. We see that Plants germinate, grow, and seminate
exactly according to their several Kinds; and though the manner of their
Operations, and the quality of their Productions be as different, as their
Species; yet in each Species every particular individual works such as the
rest of the same sort do; as if every distinct Species had set it self a
distinct Rule; and as if every individual had consented to one and the same
common Polity. In like manner every Species of Animals acts still after the
same rate; though their particular, and proper Rules be different; yet one and
the same Rule belongs to every Animal of the same Species, which they
constantly observe without any difference, difformity, or variation. For as
each sustains it self after the same manner, and with the same sort of Food,
which belongs properly to the whole, and is peculiar to the whole Species and
Set; so each propagates its Kind the same way; preparing for Propagation by the
same Methods; breeding their Young at the same Seasons; nourishing them with
the same Matter; training them up, and providing for them by the same pretty
Artisices which are used by all others of the same Rank and Order. Go, for
instance, but to the Fowls of the Air, and you may observe how regularly and
accurately each individual Bird operates, according to those Laws, which are
common to that particular Species whereunto it belongs. From the Raven to the
Sparrow every peculiar Species has its peculiar Rules for its increase; and
every one particular Bird yields the most exact Obedience to those Rules: Not
the least difference is to be found in the Bigness, or Color, or Form of any
one Egg; nor any difference in the Building wherein it is laid: But the same
Proportions are in it all, the same Situation, the same Materials, the same
Shape, the same Structure within, the same Defensatives without, the same
Curiosity of Art over and in it all; hardly a Stick, or an Hair difference; no
discernible variation to be found, as to Plaistering, or Garniture, or Moss, or
whatever else the Integument be. As a great City, or Society of Men, is divided
into several distinct Fraternities, and each Fraternity is Governed, as by
general Laws for the Interest and Welfare of the whole Community, so by
particular Orders for the Prosperity and Good of the distinct Company, in
conformity whereunto every single Member acts; so is this lower World divided
into many distinct Ranges of Creatures; and each Range in Nature has its Laws
given it; some which relate to the general Good of the whole Universe; and
others that relate to the particular Good of every distinct Classis: And these
Laws are exactly obeyed by every individual Creature; so that were Man out of
the way, there would be no Being in this visible World, but what would be
Regular, Orderly, and Conformable to its Rules; though Man be the only Creature
that understands his Rules.

And can all this Regularity be with any pretense of Reason ascribed to an
unintending Cause, or to blind Chance, that never did any one thing by Rule
since the World stood; and therefore can never be thought to act Uniformly in
every Creature constantly, and in all Instances? No; these Operations so
exactly Congruous and Regular, are a plain Argument of the Existence of a
directing Deity, and a real Explication of that Divine Benediction and Command,
which Moses says was given at the Creation: That the earth should bring forth
grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit after its
kind; that every winged fowl should multiply after its kind; and that every
living creature should be brought forth after his kind; cattle and creeping
things, and beasts of the earth, all after their kind; and it was so. Those
Productions were regular then, and so they are still, and will continue so to
the end of the World; being no other but so many constant, and visible
Executions of an Original Law.

2. Besides this great Regularity of things in the manner of their Operations,
we must consider next the seeming Sagacity of them, as to the ends of their
Operations; which is another Expression of the resemblances of Knowledge and
Wisdom in Creatures that are Irrational. All Creatures work, as if they
understood the Reason of their methodical Proceedings; nay, as if they proposed
Ends to themselves, and intended by such and such Means to bring all their
Projects and Purposes to pass; chiefly to preserve their own Being, and then to
continue their Kind, and to provide a Posterity to succeed them, when either
natural Death, or Casualties shall take them off, that no part of the Creation
may be lost. It is observable of all Vegetables in general, that from the
opening of the Spring they begin and carry on their methodical Works, as if
they knew beforehand all the business they are to do the next Summer; and as if
they intended to answer the Ends now mentioned: First by taking care for their
own Growth; and then for Semination. And it is observable in particular of
diverse Pulses, and other Plants, whose Natures are so weak and feeble, that
they cannot stand upright of themselves, that, as if they were sensible of
their Infirmity, they shoot forth into various Fibers, Strings, and twining
Branches, which bear no Fruit, but are designed to take hold and clutch on some
Poll, or Wall, or on some neighboring Shrub, for the support of the Vegetable,
and for its better Sustenance and Semination: In all which Nature works with so
much seeming Caution, Prudence and Forecast, that if it had Reason of its own,
it could not operate with greater Art. And then for sensitive Creatures, we see
with Admiration what resemblances of Wisdom and Providence there are in their
Actions. Go to the ant, thou sluggard, (says Solomon) consider her ways, and
be wise: Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, provideth her meat in the
summer, and gathers her food in the harvest, Prove. 6. 6, 7, 8. In the Common
Edition of the Septuagint, it is there added, Go to the be, thou sluggard, and
learn what an opificer that is, and how stupendous its works are. Those
curious Observers who have narrowly looked into the Nature and Polity of that
Animal, have given such accounts of it, that one would think it to be next to
Man himself, the most admirable Creature in the World; though our chief Good be
reserved for us in another World; and therefore are to be excused, if they
speak of it in that manner, as if it were a Rational Agent With what Sagacity
does it perceive, when its Labors are to begin, and where its Employment is to
lie chiefly? And how artificially does it order all its oeconomical Affairs?
Its first Care is for a Repository to lay up its Stores, and to breed its Young
in. And with what Curiosity does it search after the viscous Matter? How
skilfully does it gather and prepare the Wax? And then with what mathematical
Exactness does it dispose it in various Apartments of Combs and Cells, all so
accurately contrived for Strength, Figure, Situation, and perfect Uniformity,
that they are above the Imitation of all humane Art? The next care is for a
treasure of Nourishment; and with what a quick Sense does it discover a Mildew,
though at a great distance from its Habitation? With what Niceness of
Application does it pass from Flower to Flower to extract its Aliment? And
having at last by its chemical Methods furnished it self with quantities
sufficient; With what a discriminating Faculty does it order it at home,
discharging its Legs of the phlegmatic or grosser Part, which it lays by in
spare places for its present Food; and casting up the most spirituous drops out
of its Stomach into Cells, and there covering them up with a viscous Membrane,
for a necessary reserve against the searcities and severities of Winter?
Besides these resemblances of Providence for the support of its Nature, and for
the increase of its Kind: Some See Butler and Allen of Bees.
have made such Observations of its seeming Wisdom in reference to the whole
Community, as assord even us Men diverse moral and useful Directions. For their
mutual Interest all are industriously at their respective Employment; as if
they had a transeript of that LAw, which the Psalmist speaks of Psalm. 104. 23,
when The sun arises, man goes forth to his work, and to his labor until the
evening. As there should be in all Societies, so is there in this, a perfect
Unity among themselves. If Foreigners threaten an Invasion, they easily
distinguish them, though of the same Color, Shape, and Bigness with
themselves, and the next moment they prepare for Battle. If any of their
Members suffer, all sympathize, and are engaged with undaunted Resolution, with
a joint Force, and with the utmost hazard of their Lives; which gave David
occasion to say of his Enemies, They came about me like Bees. Within their own
Body there is all Order, Harmony, and Peace (the wisest things for the good of
all Communities) and to preserve those things the more effectually, their
Government is Monarchical; under which they provide for the Common good of all,
and serve their Sovereign with their Labors, with entire Obedience, with
Fidelity, with Cheerfulness; nay, with devoted Affection: So that if their
Queen dies without a Successor ready, either they too die there upon the spot,
or else quit all their Treasures, to force themselves through any Dangers and
Wounds into another well constituted Community. From all which very strange,
but (as far as ever yet I could perceive) very true Observations, a Question
may arise, Whether among all those Forms of Government, which are, or have been
among Mankind, there ever was any one sort of Polity more wisely Framed and
better Served, than that is among these little neglected Animals?

And from these I might proceed at a large rate, to observe those resemblances
of Understanding and Prudence, which appear in other sensitive Creatures. With
what seeming Forecast do they generally provide Conveniences for the breeding
of their Young? How artificial are their Works in order to it? What Patience do
they seem to express in their Labors and Griefs? What Fondness do they show to
their new Osf-spring? What Cares do some take for Nourishment suitable to their
Natures; and with what Pleasure do others yield it? How Sollicitous are they
for their Safety? What pretty Methods do they use in training them up? And how
do they teach them by degrees to shift for themselves in the World? If you
observe every rank and species of Animals, you will find in all those poor
Things a similitude of Sagacity; some Faint, and Imperfect, and Umbratile shows
of Reason; and surprising imitations of Prudence and Policy in all their
Operations. And yet all this is nothing, but what we call Natural Instinct;
that is, there is a fatal Necessity impressed upon them; or an inward, operative
Principle seminated and fixed in their Natures, which is a subordinate
Instrument of the Deity, and which does, like a Bias, powerfully incline and
move them to act after such a manner, when they themselves understand not the
Reasons of their Actions. In Three respects the Operations of all sensitive
Creatures are different from the Actions done by Beings Rational.

First, They do not intentionally design the accomplishment of such a certain
End, which is the scope of their Operations. Nor, Secondly, Do they understand
the Reasons of those means, which are in order to that End. Nor, Thirdly, Do
they consult or deliberate about the Choice of those means. And therefore it
will unavoidably follow, that their Operations being always Uniform and
Artificial, not withstanding their own natural Defects, and want of Reason,
there is a Divine Being over them of perfect Knowledge and Wisdom, that
intends, and understands, and chooses for them, and directs them by a
perpetual, secret, and irresistible Law. To consider this matter distinctly:

1. First, They do not intentionally design the accomplishment of such a
certain End, which is the scope of their Operations. For the End, though it be
the first thing purposed, is the last thing done. At the time of acting it is
at such a distance, as assords only a Prospect of it: Nor can Man himself be
said to design an End, unless he does both apprehend and foresee it, unless he
be affected and wrought upon by Motives from it; nay, unless he thinks it
possible, and goes about the thing with desires, and hopes to bring it to pass.
Now these are Impressions, of which no irrational Creature is capable; because
they include, not so much ocular Perception, as mutual Knowledge and Discourse,
touching the Necessity, Goodness, Feasableness, and Fitness of the Matter
proposed and foreseen; which require much Reasoning, and a due Logical
Inferring of one thing out of another; and that can never be done by any Animal
that is merely sensitive: To instance only in the industrious Be; though of
all such Animals it seems to be endued with the greatest Sagacity, yet we
cannot conceive, that in Spring time it foresee; the return of Winter; that it
keeps an Eye still upon hard Weather afar off; that it has a prospect of Frost
and Snow, of naked Woods and Fields; and that upon these Considerations and
Motives it makes a diligent use of the present Season, going forth early, and
coming home late, and eating (if I may so speak) the Bread of Carefulness. We
cannot imagine that the poor Creature concludes this to be the proper and best
way for it to subsist, and that it uses this Method in hopes of living on to
another Year. Nor can we think that Gathering time being quite over, when it
destroys the (then useless) Drones, it makes that Massacre out of a design of
Frugality, retrenching thereby the Expenses of the Household, and curtailing
the Family, lest those voracious Creatures should cause a Famine among them.
These things in Fact it does, and they manifestly tend to the preservation of
its Life; and throughout all, the Be seems to be very Wise and Provident
(though its Providence be mixed with so much Cruelty and Ingratitude) and if it
had Reason of its own, it could not take a more effectual and ready way for its
Safety. But yet notwithstanding all this show of Policy and Forecast, it does
not so much as understand that its Life is concerned; nor does it think at all,
why, or to what purpose it operates after that manner; much less does it act
upon a long train of Thoughts, but it does thus of course, and by the fatal
energy of a natural Principle within it, no more aiming at Ends, than an Arrow
aims at the Mark toward which it slyes. And the like may be said of all other
sensitive Creatures, how Sagacious soever they appear to be; they go still on
in a road, which mere natural Instinct directs them to, and sometime Custom
makes familiar; but know not the End of all their Travels under the Sun any
more than the Ox, or the Sheep knows when it is going to the Slaughter.

2. As they design not any End for the scope of their Operations, so neither do
they apprehend the reason of those Means which are in order to an undiscerned
End. The reason of any Means lies in the Necessity, Fitness and
Conduceableness thereof, for the obtaining of an End: For, therefore do all
rational Creatures act thus and thus, because such sorts of Actions are
necessary and proper, to compass the Designs they drive at. Now as to this, all
wiser sensitive Creatures are utterly at a loss: Though they do things which
are necessary, and convenient, and proper, yet they know nothing of their
tendency and fitness; that is, they are wholly ignorant upon what account such
and such Operations are requisite, or convenient. For this calls for Discretion
and Judgment to carry a Design on; though the End be known and visible, yet
it is a Work of Reason to consider what is to be done for it; how to find out
good, sitting, and effectual Methods, and then how to apply and use those
Methods after a right manner. This requires good, intellectual Parts to
discover the necessity and fitness of one thing in order to another, and to act
according as the Reason and Nature of the thing is; and therefore it is
impossible for any Brute Creatures to act after a discreet, judicious rate. To
instance again in that little Animal I spoke of before: Though it works most
artificially for the sake of Ends, yet it works not with any Discretion or
Judgment of its own. For as it has no distinct apprehension, or foresight of
the Ends themselves; so neither does it understand the reason of those Means it
uses. It knows not what necessity there is for the gathering of Wax first; nor
upon what account Wax is the sit and most convenient thing to make a Larder
for the treasuring up a Provision of Honey. It knows not the reason for which
every Comb must be made up of a Partition Wall of Wax in the middle, and a
large Structure of little Cells on each side. It knows not why it must work and
frame every thing with such Geometrical accuracy; nor why the Cells must hang
together by close Junctures; nor upon what account each of them must consist of
just six Angles; nor for what reason the Angles on the one Side must not answer
the opposite corners on the other Side exactly to a Point. It knows not that
the meaning of all this delicate Art, is, for the greater Stability, Strength,
and Security of the whole. All this done, it knows not upon what account two
sorts of Honey must be gathered; a siner and more limpid Part, as the best and
most congruous to be preserved against Winter; and for its present Nourishment
a grosser Substance, which will not keep sweet very long. It knows not why its
Mouth and Tongue are the sit Instruments to extract that; and its Legs more
proper to tread out, and bear away this. And after the industrious Thing has
been trading abroad for its Prizes, though it returns home thoroughly Fraighted,
and discharges it self of its Lading, yet it is as Ignorant then why the Mouth
of the Cell, where the richest Part lies, must be presently Plastered over.
It considers not, poor Creature! that its choice and far-fetched Pearls are of
a fluid Substance, that otherwise would soon run out; and though it knows not
the reason why, yet it lays them up as securely as the veriest Hunks and Miser
does his Money, till Necessity knocks at the Cell-door, or some Thieves and
Robbers come to plunder it. Such Observations are to be made of all other Parts
of the Animal World: Though their Methods be not equally Curious, but admit of
great Variety and Difference; yet in their Kinds and Tendencies they are all
proper for the Preservation of themselves, and for the Propagation and Welfare
of their several Species. But neither do they intend, or design any Purposes by
elicite Acts of Choice and Providence of their own; nor do they examine or
comprehend the aptitude and congruity of their Methods in order to Purposes;
and therefore they must be concluded to act by the Reasons of a Divine Mind, to
which they are in Subordination. Indeed some sort of Perception may be allowed
them, such as is agreeable to their irrational Natures; that is, a Perception
in the Fancy; whereby they are, in some measure, sensible of what they do,
while they are yet a doing it. But that they look before them, and at a
distance, with an Eye upon some End, the goodness whereof invites them to use
Means; or that they look about them to compare the fitness of those Means, for
the compassing of that End; this we cannot allow them without the forfeiture of
our own Reason, though their Actions carry an Umbrage of Reason with them. As
the Bird perceives when she makes her Nest, she is sensible then of her own
Actions; for the matter of her Actions, or the Works she does, makes an
Impression on her outward Sense, and that conveys an Idea of it to the Fancy
in her Brain. But all this while the Bird does not choose to act upon a
premised Principle, that she providentially designs this Nest for her Young;
nor does she thence infer that therefore she must build it in such a place,
with such Materials, after such a manner, in such a form, and to such a degree
of warmth, as is most suitable to the temper of her Young; for this would be
Reasoning and Arguing, or Deducing of one thing out of another, which is a
Thing or Art too high for any Brute Creature. And yet all these things are
done, in every respect so suitably, and with such artisice and exactness, that
the most contriving Man in the World with all his Reason and Skill cannot
possibly do them so well: Which shows that there is a Power and Reason
superior even to humane Wisdom, that has invigorated the Natures of Animals
with an energetick Principle, which we call Instinct, whereby they form their
Works with the greatest Contrivance, though they know not the meaning of them.

3. This is an Imperfection in their Nature, notwithstanding all their curious
Formations. And yet, Thirdly, There is another respect wherein their Operations
differ from the Actions of Rational Creatures; namely, that as they know not
Ends, nor the reason of any Means, so they do not consult, or dliberate about
the use of Means. All Artists among Men consider which is the sit and best
way to be taken; and in their Undertakings they do still leave room for second
Thoughts. And hence it is, that humane Arts admit of great Improvements;
because second Thoughts produce new Experiments; and new Experiments produce
fresh Variety; and so by comparing one effect with another, a Man sees where he
altered the former Method for the better, and how necessary and useful that
Alteration was. But in the Operations of Nature it is not thus; for Nature has
never but one way, and that way is not only ready at hand, but so very sit and
proper too, that it is not capable of Amendments. Hence it is that sensitive
Creatures are never to seek what to do, nor ever change their wonted course;
but proceed in a constant, uniform Tenor, using the very same means for the
preservation of their own Beings, and for the propagation of their several
Kinds, which were used by those that were before them Six thousand Years ago.
They do not consider whether things may not be done better now, than they were
in those days; nor do they so much as look back upon the last preceding
Generation, but go on still in the same way by roat, without forecast,
reflection, or advice; and yet we see their Works are so artificially done,
that if they had bad the longest Experience, and the greatest Reason of their
own, they could not after all their Studies and Practice have pitched upon more
succesful and exquisite Methods.

Let us now from these Premises consider with due freedom of Thoughts, whether
this be not a manifest Proof of the Existence of a Being, which is infinitely
Operative and Omniscient: For from what other Cause could all this Art in
Nature come? Whence else could it receive its admirable Skill? What but a Deity
could direct and govern it? What other Being could teach that rude and
undiscerning Thing to exercise its Faculties after such a methodical and
unreproveable manner? Or what else could guide it in making such regular,
uniform, and constant Strokes, as if it were all perfect Wisdom, when it has
not in it self the least Grain of clear and true Knowledge? It is all Dr.
Scott. Christ. Life, Part 2. p. 214.
mere natural Instinct; and (as an excellent Writer, now with God, speaks)
natural Instinct is nothing but the Impression of the Art and Reason of the
Author of Nature; which Impression knows not what it does, nor upon what
Reasons it proceeds, but only answers to the Reason of God, as the Signature
does to the Seal that impressed it, and like an Echo articulates and resounds
his Voice, without understanding what it means. And as the senseless Echo
when it reverberates Words that carry Sense and Reason in them, supposes the
original Voice to proceed from some intelligent Mind; so these irrational
Instincts of Nature, which express so much Art and Reason in their Operations,
do necessarily imply that there is some wise Mind or Providence to which they
owe their Original.

If our modern Scepticks tell us, That these natural Instincts come ex traduce,
and by descent from one Animal to another; let us consider how they came there,
in every Species of Animals, at the first (for an infinity of Causes is
impossible) If they are so hardy as to tell us, That they came Originally by
the casual Motion of unthinking Matter; let us consider again how it comes to
pass that these natural Instincts hold on, and continue in every Species, and
in every Individual throughout the World; since Chance, (blind, sporting, and
wild Chance) is far more likely to spoil a fine Work than to make it: Or, if
after all they affirm, That the continuance of Instincts from Generation to
Generation is perfectly casual; that is, without the Pleasure or Power of an
understanding Being over all; let us consider, lastly, that Chance and Wisdom
are things as utterly distant from each other, as Extremes and Contraries are.
Chance never did any thing Wisely, nor by Rule, nor after a uniform Rate, nor
in a constant, uninterrupted Tenor. And yet all Animals operate Wisely, as if
they perfectly understood the Reasons and Necessities of their own Actions. But
that they have no Wisdom or Reason of their own, is evident because Id. ibid.
p. 218.
whatsoever they do, they necessarily do, and cannot possibly do otherwise; for
they never vary in their Operations, never try any new Experiments, but always
proceed in the same Road, and repeat the same things in the same Method; which
is a plain sign that they cannot do otherwise, and consequently that they act
not from their own Choice or Reason, but Necessity: And therefore since they
are made and impelled to act as they do, and yet do act Rationally and Wisely,
that which compels them must be a rational Mind, either acting upon them
immediately, or by a fixed and permanent Impression of its Art and Reason upon
their Nature and Motions.

The truth is, those Images and Imitations of Wisdom which are in Creatures
purely sensitive, together with the regularity and constancy of their
Operations, are as plain an evidence as need be given of the Existence of a
God; because it is unconceiveable how the Animal Parts of the World should so
orderly conform to the Rules of Reason, as if they were endued with intelectual
Faculties, without any directions and influence from a Divine Mind presiding
over all. It is no rarity to see some of those Creatures (especially such as
have the quickest Sense) gratisie the curiosity of People, by an entertaining
show of such artificial Gestures and Actions, as if they understood the meaning
of Commands, and knew how to obey: And can any one believe that they never had
any Artist to discipline and teach them? Yet these Instances are comparatively
very few; nor is this half so much as natural Instinct; and, at last, all their
little Tricks vanish with their Breath: And is it imaginable, that every Animal
under Heaven could constantly, and in all things act after such a regular and
wise Manner, without a commanding Power over them? Or, that any other Power
could be able to command them all, but that which was the Original of their
Natures?

Indeed the Learned Dr. Cudworth observes, Intel. Syst. p. 675.
that some odd Philosophers have given it out, That senseless Atoms, playing
and toiling up and down, without any Care or Thought, and from Eternity trying
all manner of Conclusions and Experiments, were at length (they know not how)
taught, and by the necessity of things themselves, as it were driven to a
certain kind of Trade of Artificialness and Methodicalness; so that though
their Motions were at first all Casual and Fortuitous, yet in length of time
they became Orderly and Artificial, and governed by a certain Law; they
contracting, as it were, upon themselves by long Practice and Experience, a
kind of Habit of moving regularly; or else by the mere necessity of things, at
length forced so to move, as they should have done, had Art and Wisdom directed
them.

But (as that great Man strongly Argues) it is no more possible, That the
fortuitous Motion of dead and senseless Matter should ever form it self, be
taught, or necessitated, to produce such an orderly and regular System, as the
Frame of this whole World is, together with the Bodies of Animals, and
constantly to continue the same; than that a Man perfectly Illiterate, and
neither able to write nor read, taking, up a Pen into his Hand, and making all
manner of Scrawls with Ink upon Paper, should at length be taught and
necessitated by the thing it self, to write a whole Quire of Paper together
with such Characters, as being decyphered by a certain Key, would all prove
Coherent, Philosophic Sense. Or, than that a Man Writing down the mere Letters
of the Alphabet transposedly, any how, as it happens, without the least Thought
either of Words or Sense, after his Scribbling a long time together, what is
altogether insignificant, should at length be taught and necessitated by the
thing it self, without the least study or consideration of his own, to write a
large excellent Volume. Or to use another Instance; This is no more possible
than that ten or a dozen Persons, altogether unskilled in Music, having
several Instruments given them, and striking the Strings or Keys thereof, any
how, as it happened, should after some time of Discord and Jarring, at length
be taught and necessitated to fall into most exquisite Harmony, and continue
the same uninterruptedly for several Hours together.

Wherefore if it be ridiculous for one that has read over the Works of Plato,
or Aristotle, or those Six Books of Lucretius Carus, De Natura rerum; to
contend that possibly the Letters of those Books might be all put together by
Chance, or scribled at Random, without the least thought or study of the
Writer, he also having no manner of philosophic Skill in him: Or for one that
hears ten or a dozen Persons playing in Consort upon Instruments of Music, and
making ravishing Harmony, to persuade himself that none of those Players had,
for all that, the least of musical Art or Skill in them, but struck the Strings
as it happened: If all this be ridiculous to imagine, it must needs be much
more ridiculous and absurd, to suppose this artificial System of the whole
World, to have resulted from the fortuitous Motion of senseless Atoms, without
the direction of any Art or Wisdom; there being much more of Sense, Art, and
Philosophy therein, than in any philosophic Volume or Poem ever written by
Men; and more of Harmony and Proportion, than in any Composition of Music. And
therefore the Conclusion must be this, That it is absolutely impossible things
should have come to pass, or continued in their orderly and regular Operations,
by mere Fortune and Chance; and without the direction of any Mind, or God. The
Divine Mind and Wisdom has so printed its Seal, or Signature upon the Matter
of the whole corporeal World, as that Fortune and Chance could never possibly
have Counterfeited the same.

CHAP. X.
AND yet I have more to say. For though what has been already observed, is a
clear Demonstration of immense Power, divine Knowledge, and unsearchable
Wisdom; yet there is something very remarkable behind still, which Proclaims to
all the World that Glorious Attribute of God, his infinite Goodness, and
Benignity also: And that we cannot but take notice of, if we consider that
which was proposed in the next place; namely, the ample Provision that is made
for the Welfare of all needy Creatures, and even for the temporal good of
Mankind.

I have already observed the near Relation and Connection that is between all
the Parts of the Universe; the necessary dependence that one has upon another,
together with the great Helps and Ministrations whereby each part of the World
is serviceable and useful to its Fellow Creatures, and does good Offices for
them. And therefore I shall not need to go over the Creation again, to show you
the various Footsteps of Goodness which appear every where, and which are
evident Marks of a most liberal and munificent Being, that has provided for
the Welfare of the whole. It may be sufficient for me to confine my Meditations
to the Sensitive Parts of the Universe, and to take a transient View there, of
the wise and excellent Provision which is made for the good of them; for this
must undeniably prove, That things did not come together by Chance, (that is,
without the contrivance of an intending Cause) but by the Counsel and Art of a
most benign Creator, that has taken care for the good of all things which
stand in Need.

The Good of an Animal consists in the Existence of its Nature, and in the
Enjoyment of its own Being, with Pleasure and Safety: I mean as far as the
Enjoyment suits with the Welfare of the rest: And it is well worth the while to
observe what due Provision is made accordingly for it in both these respects;
First, For its Production; and then, Secondly, for the Preservation of it
afterward.

1. First, For its Production: How solicitous does blind Nature seem to be, in
preparing all things necessary for a Sensitive Creature's Formation? in drawing
and laying out all the Parts of* it after the best and most proper manner? in
cherishing the rude Foetus till it is come to its due Perfection and
Proportions? and in supplying it with Nourishment by mysterious Means, before
its coming into a wide World? Every the least Bird in the Shell, is fed with a
red Substance which Nature conveys into its Bowels through a Vein provided on
purpose to Minister that Aliment for its growth, till the time of Exclusion. In
Creatures which give Suck, there are Navel-Vessels prepared in the Womb, to
transmit the Nourishing Juice from the Parent to its Young; which Vessels upon
its Production, close up of themselves; and then the Nourishment leaving its
former Course, is directed from the Womb to the Paps; where Natural Instinct
teaches the tender thing to seek its Sustenance for the future. These secret
Dispositions, Powers, and Faculties, and formed with a Design for some peculiar
uses, and for a certain time; and therefore are impossible to be ascribed to
unskilful and erroneous Chance. No; they are all Arguments of great and tender
Care; and consequently of wonderful Wisdom and Goodness in an intelligent Agent
over all, who governs and guides Illiterate Nature, that works under him, for
the subsistence and well-being of his meanest Creatures.

2. And then for the Preservation of them being once brought forth, so
admirably kind and indulgent is Nature in its various Contrivances, that to an
observing Mind, they are ravishing Attestations of a God of the most abundant
and extensive Benignity.

And here let us give some Scope and Liberty to our Meditations, and
attentively consider the ample Provision that is made. 1. First, for the
support of Sensitive Creatures in the state of their Minority, or in their
first helpless, necessitous Condition: And then, 2. Secondly, for their safety
and welfare when they are grown up, and come to live of themselves in the World.

1. First, For their support in the state of their Minority, when they stand
most in need of Help. Our blessed Savior compared his own great Care for the
Preservation of the Jews, to the tender Affections of an Hen toward her
Chickens; or rather of every Bird toward its young ones; (...). as a Bird
gathers her Brood under her Wings, Mat. 23. 37.) Which shall give me warrant
to take notice, in the first place, of the Provision those poor things are
directed to make for the Welfare of their Issue. The Provident Creature having
found out some Retirement fit for a Nursery, then pitched upon the most
convenient part of it, out of the reach of Enemies; then built it with Art
inimitable, according to the Temper and Constitution of her future Off spring;
and after long Incubation, and great patience under hunger and thirst, having
at last produced her new Family, her following Cares are to search for Food
that is most agreeable to their Natures; to carry it constantly to her Brood,
that, under God, now call upon her; to minister to them one by one, though she
want her self; to shelter them from the Annoyances of the Weather; to defend
them what she can from Hostilities; and at last to invite them abroad, and by
her own Example to teach them to take Wing, to use their Liberty, and by
degrees to become their own Feeders and Guardians.

This natural Affection we may observe in all other Animals universally, though
never so fierce and savage; what Fondness they express toward their young;
what Securities they seek out for them; what Moans they make in their Absence;
with what diligence and eagerness they search after them; with what Pleasure
they hold out the Dug to them; and how suspicious they are of the least Danger
that may approach. Which universal Instinct is an invincible Argument of the
Existence of a Supreme, Beneficent Being, that has fixed in the whole common
Animal Nature this inseparable Disposition, to be an Instrument in his Hand, or
like a Provid^^^ under him, to take care (...) the Welfare of every poor
Crea^^^^ (...) can take care or provide (...).

And to demonstrate yet that these things are not the Effects of undesigning
Chance, but the Operations of a provident and good God, it is further
observable, that according to the standing Law, and ordinary Course of Nature,
no Sensitive Creature comes into the World till the things necessary for its
Support are ready. There is a Breast prepared and replenished with Milk, for
every Child of Man: There is an Udder for the Lamb, and Paps for all other
suchlike Animals: And Tully observed long ago, that the more prolisick any
Animal is, and the more young ones it is to suckle, the more in number are
those little Bottles of Mr. Boyle's high Veneration, etc.
Life: Others have observed, that Birds breed in Seed-time, when the Worm is
turned up, and the Corn cast into the Ground; That many living Creatures fall
in the Spring, when the tender Grass, and other Nutritive Plants, are provided
for their Food: That the Mr. Ray.
Eggs of Silkworms are hatched when Mulberry-Trees begin to Bud, and put forth
their Leaves, whereon those precious Insects are to feed: That the Wasp is not
wont to appear till after the Summer Solstice, when those Fruits which are for
their Food, begin to ripen: That the Caterpiller is bred on Leaves, which are
their proper Aliment; That other Insects (as the Be for one) that at
Breeding-time can find no Aliment abroad, have it at home prepared and laid up
beforehand by their industrious Parents. To which many Observations more might
be added, to show that for every Mouth that is brought into the World, there is
agreeable Meat ready, and in its Season; and that as there are varieties of
Animals for varieties of Fruits, that nothing of the Creation may be lost; so
both Animals and Fruits are produced at their proper times, that when the one
wants, the other is at Hand to answer its Necessities. Now mothinks no Man
should be so false to his own Faculties, as to think it reasonable to believe,
that these apposite and suitable Preparations were made by Chance, which are
such pregnant Arguments of great Wisdom and Benignity. And yet hereunto I must
subjoin this one Remark more, That, as convenient and sit Nourishment is
seasonably provided and made ready for all, so that the Appetites of all
Creatures are corresponding, and adapted to that Provision which is proper for
their Sustenance. Though during the whole time of their Formation they were fed
secretly, without any Art, or Appetite of their own, and without any use of
their Mouths; yet upon their Production they begin to crave, and seek for their
Nutriment another way. We see daily in every Species of Animals that live by
Milk, how soon they long for the Pap; how they reach after the Pap, and make
toward the Pap, and open their Mouths for it, as if they understood that the
former way of Nutrition is now out of Doors, and at an End. Now here our
Scepticks, who derive all things from Chance, should consider, how young
Animals come to observe this constant, uniform, and stated Method; as if they
were sensible that the first Course of Nature now fails; that their Aliment
now runs to another place, and therefore they must have recourse thither, where
their Food now lies. There is something in them, (whatever it be) that does
regularly direct, and as it were teach them, to act after this proper manner:
And to say it is mere Nature, is nothing to the purpose, or at least that which
does not come home to the point: For this Nature is in Creatures which are
irrational, nay, at their lowest state of Irrationality, and before they have
any the least Experience to guide them; and in such a state, Nature alone, and
of it self, must needs be as rude and ignorant, and as liable to
Irregularities, as Chance it self is. Therefore if we will hearken to Reason,
and speak according to Reason, we must conclude, That the first Appetites and
Motions in these poor young Creatures, proceed from a certain invisible
Principle, which at the first moment of their formation was fixed in them by a
wise and beneficent Agent, under whom it Operates necessarily, and without any
consciousness of its own, in conformity to his Will, for the Welfare and
Support of his Creatures in their most needy Condition.

2. And here let us pass on to observe, Secondly, the Provision that is made
for their Safety when they are grown up, and come to live of their selves. And
here, to cast things into a clear Method, we should consider, what Provision is
made 1. First, For their protection from outward Assaults; 2. For their defense
against untimely Deaths.

1. For the Protection of Creatures from outward Assaults, Nature has
furnished many sorts of them with means proper for Resistance; some with
Armature on their Heads, to push and Gore; some with Teeth, to rend an Enemy;
some with Hoofs, to strike off Dangers; diverse with variety of other Weapons,
which are sit for their preservation: Nor are any Animals that are to secure
their Lives by Resistance, left defenseless. Nay, it is observable of such,
that as their Strength is suitable chiefly in those parts which serve for their
preservation, so is their Boldness and Courage proportionable, especially when
they are brought into Streights, and into imminent Danger. Nature indeed has
been accused by some as a kind of Stepmother to Man, for bringing him into the
World in a naked, defenseless Condition. But it should be considered, that as
Man has Hands and Arms to use for his Safety, so is he endu'd with
intellectual Faculties, to form a thousand Weapons and Stratagems for his
preservation. Besides, Man is naturally a social Creature, fitted to live under
Polity and Laws, and to act according to the Eternal Rules of Goodness and
Righteousness; which are far more agreeable to a Rational Nature, than brutish
Violence is, and would be the most effectual Means for the Welfare of all
Mankind, if they were but carefully observed. To accommodate the Words of the
Prophet to this purpose, Isa. 11. Were righteousness the girdle of our loins,
and faithfulness the girdle of our reins, the wolf might dwell with the lamb,
and the leopard lie down with the kid; and the calf, and the young lion, and
the fatling together; and a little child might lead them. The sucking child
might play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child might put his hand on
the cockatrice-den; Nor would there be any hurt or destruction in the World. In
short, as Self-preservation is the first Principle in Nature, so is every
Creature endu'd with Faculties and Defensatives for their Preservation as long
as the Powers of Nature are to hold: which shows that a most wise and
beneficent Being has formed every thing for its Good.

2. Many other Creatures are directed by Nature to preserve themselves by
flight: Not only the Fowls of the Air, but diverse sorts of four-footed Animals
on Earth, especially such as are of a more timorous temper. And accordingly as
their Organs of sensation are artificially fitted to discover dangers at a
distance, so are those muscular Parts which serve for swiftness much larger in
proportion, than in other Creatures, to quicken and maintain their Motions: A
plain Argument that those Instruments of Celerity were framed, not by rude,
unintelligent Fortune, but by the contrivance of an intending Cause, whose
Goodness is over all his Works.

3. Others are taught to abscond in holes and cavities of the Earth; and lest
their cold Sanctuaries should prove as Fatal to them as external violence,
Nature makes them Coats of Fur, and such suitable Integuments to keep them warm.

4. Lastly, Whereas there is utter Enmity between diverse sensitive Creatures,
those Animals which are most exposed to danger from others, are endued with a
natural Instinct which inables them, both to be sensible of their Enemy at the
first sight, and to provide, what they can, against the danger. The innocent
Lamb runs presently from the Wolf, though it never saw a Wolf before. Many
sorts of Birds are frighted at the first sight of Fowls of Prey, and endeavor
with all possible speed to escape from them. The Elephant when he goes to
sleep, hides the end of his long Trunk in the Ground, so that nothing but Air
can get in, lest his natural Enemy, the Mouse, should enter in, and creep into
his Bowels. The Crocodile that is in continual Danger from that Egyptian
Animal, the Iehnenmon, is guarded Jo. Johnston, admirand. qu tdrup. c. 1 4.
by the watchful attendance of another Animal, the Trochilus, that awakens the
sleeping Crocodile, when the Ichneumon is preparing to run into his Mouth. Many
such remarkable Observations might be collected out of Natural Histories, which
show what various Methods Nature uses for the preservation of living Creatures
from Assaults and Hurt. And because Nature of it self is a thing (if we speak
strictly) without all Providence, Care, or Thought, Reason will oblige us to
conclude, that there is a God over Nature; or a most wise and benign Being,
that directs it in operating for the good of all.

2. Which will yet further appear, if we consider, in the second Place, the
Provision that is made for the Defense of Creatures against untimely Deaths.
And here many things might fall under our Meditations, should we look over the
Works of Nature particularly: As 1. First, touching that sufficiency of proper
Food, which is provided every where for the support of their Beings, and for
the pleasure of their Lives, as far as the enjoyment of their Lives, is
consistent with the Welfare of the whole Universe. 2. Secondly, Touching the
aptitude and fitness of those Parts wherewith every Species is provided, for
the gathering, and digesting of their proper Sustenance: So that by the
Structure of an Animal's Body, especially in and about the Mouth, it is no hard
matter to conjecture what sort of Food is most suitable to its Nature, and how,
and in what places it is commonly gathered; as for instance, by the form and
length of a Bird's Beak, you may guess what it lives on, and where its proper
Aliment does for the most part lie. These are plain Arguments of a provident
and good God, that in every respect has taken effectual Care, that none of his
Creatures should perish for want of Sustenance, or for want of Faculties and
Powers to receive that Portion which his most liberal Hand gives unto all.

But these Observations would carry us back to some Subjects which we have past
through already; and therefore I must wave them here; and shall employ my
Thoughts upon the Consideration of that Provision which is made for Man
chiefly, for his present good and safety, and for the preservation of his Life,
as long as it is fit for him to live in this present World.

Is there not an appointed time to man upon the earth? Are not his days also
like the days of an hireling? says Job, Chap. 7. 1. Yes; His days are
determined; the number of his months are with God, who has appointed his
bounds that he cannot pass, Job 14 5. By which appointed time is meant the
natural Period of Humane Life, or, that limited Course, beyond which all the
Power and Strength of Nature cannot hold now, since the Sentence of Death has
past upon Mankind. Indeed, before the Fall, our Parents were in an immortal
State, and had they never sinned, they should have continued immortal in this
World (especially by eating of the Tree of Life) till God had thought it sit to
translate them alive out of this World into a better. When once the Decree came
out, Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall return; it was appointed unto all
Men once to die; and ever since the Faculties of Humane Nature have been so
stinted and weakened, that with all our Care and Endeavors, we cannot stay very
long here. Now, by an untimely Death I mean that which comes before the Term
which is appointed and prefixed to ones Nature; and as sinful Creatures as we
are, such ample Provision is made in all parts of the World for the health and
support of its Inhabitants during the Course of Nature, that if People were but
wise and provident themselves in the use of that Provision, their End would not
be so precipitated as it commonly is by Men's own Faults: Which necessarily
argues the Existence of a most beneficent and gracious God, that cares for us
all: For whereas these two things are necessary to defend a Man from an
untimely Death; 1. Convenient Nourishment, to keep up the Faculties of Nature
in a due Vigor; and 2. Proper Medicinal Applications, to recover Nature, when
by some ugly Accident it begins to droop: In both these respects such ample
Provision is made for our Preservation, as is impossible with reason to be
ascribed to any Cause, but the Providence and Bounty of a good God.

1. First, There is provided convenient Nourishment for all; that is, such as
is suitable to People of all Conditions. 2. Such as is suitable to the Quality
of all Climates. And 3. Such as is suitable to all Tempers and Constitutions:
All which could never have been without the Counsel and Skill of an intelligent
Being, that orders and disposes every thing in the World after the best way.

1. Convenient Food is provided for People of all Ranks, States, and
Conditions. Because the ordinary sorts of People were to be provided for, as
well as the great and noble; (and indeed much rather, considering that the
greatest part of Mankind does consist of People of an ordinary Condition)
therefore Wisdom and Goodness has made that the sit and most agreeable,
the most natural Food, which is ordinarily and commonly had; that which is the
next at Hand; that which is most easy and ready to be gotten. Things which lie
more out of the way, serve rather for Men's Luxury, as Luxury serves to breed
Diseases: Those common Meats which answer the ordinary Necessities of Mankind,
are most Salutary and Natural. Of the Truth hereof this is a clear Argument,
because such Provisions, if moderately used at a time, Nature is not offended
with, but rather craveth for, though daily taken: Whereas Daimies, which are
more scarce, and harder to be provided, and which gratify the Fancy rather
than supply our Wants, the Appetite is soon cloyed with, and becomes averse to.
How sensual soever we are, neither the most Craving, nor the most wanton People
would be tied, or endure to live long upon those By-Entertainments, and
far-setch'd Rarities, which Woods and Forests, Rocks and Mountains afford. But
no temperate Person is surfeited with Bread from the Field, which is the common
Food of the World. It Is every Day repeated with Hunger, as well as swallowed
with Delight. And so it is with other ordinary sorts of Nutriment; they find a
kind Welcome to Nature, and leave behind 'em a grateful Appetice. Upon which
account the mean Man shareth with the Mighty in the Comforts of this Life; and
has equal reason to rejoice in the good things before him, and to bless a
provident Hand which scatters these necessary Comforts without
discrimination, as the Manna was scattered in the Wilderness; He that gathered
much had nothing over; and he that gathered little had no lack, Exodus 16. 18.
Every Man gathers according to his eating, and that which is agreeable to his
Appetite and Taste: Which would be Nonsense to ascribe to undiscerning Chance,
because it is apparently the effect of Prescience, Wisdom, and unlimited
Goodness; and therefore shows, that there is a Being of the most extensive
Kindness and Benignity, who shuts not up his Bowels of Compassion from any;
but, as he makes Poor, and makes Rich, so he holds out his Hands like a
common Providore, to support all indifferently, and gives to every Man a
convenient Portion.

2. Ample Provision is made, as for all People of all Conditions, so for the
Necessities of all Climates and Nations in the World. Though in every
particular Country there is not the same plenty, nor the same sorts of
Provision, for a weighty reason which I shall presently take notice of; yet no
Nation is so barren and destitute, as not to yield its Inhabitants (especially
its Natives) a competency and sufficiency of things needful for them,
especially where a Nation is well Peopled and well cultivated. Some abound with
grosser kinds of Food; others with variety of Pulses; others with peculiar
Plants and Roots, and generous Wines; others with choice of excellent Fruits;
and others with singular sorts of Trees, which answer variety of uses, and
serve not only for the Necessities, but also for the Conveniences and Delights
of People; as (what a learned Author observes) Mr Ray. ubi supra.
the Cinnamon -- Trees of Ceylon, which yield those People manifold Advantages:
The Dropping-Trees in some parts of Africa, which serve instead of Rain, and
fresh Springs: The Aloes- Muricatae in some places of America, which assord the
Natives every thing their Necessities require: The Coco-Trees of the Indians,
which supply them with Bread, Water, Wine, Milk, Oil, Honey, Clothes, together
with various sorts of Utensils; in short, with every thing almost they stand in
need of. Besides many other Trees, which another Author mentions; that
celebrated Dr. H^^lins (...).
Tree in Peru, the Leaves whereof satisfy both Hunger and Thirst, and preserve
Men in Health, and their Spiri^s in Vigor: The Hovo-Trees in Castella-Aurea,
whose Blossoms, Bark, Leaves, and Roots, are for so many great Uses: The
Magney-Trees in New-Spain, whose Tops, Rind, Boughs, and forty sorts of Leaves,
serve for variety of excellent Purposes: The Mignolo-Trees in Guinea, the Bark
whereof yields a Liquor more pleasant, strong, and nourishing than the choicest
Wines: The Palm Trees in Egypt, which are said to yield whatsoever is
necessary to the Life of Man. To which few Observations a vast number of the
like kind might be added, if a Man would make it his business to take, though
but a summary Account of the great Provision that is made for the Subsistence
of Mankind in all the known Parts of the World. Briefly; as it is in the
Fabrication of a Man, if Nature be defective in one part, it commonly makes
amends in another; so is it in the Model and Frame of every Country, the Wants
of it, in some respects, are compensated by an Abundance, or at least by a
Sufficiency in others: Nor is any Country so destitute, and at a loss, but that
it is able to help it self very well, either by Industry employed about the
Stores of Nature at home, or by some sorts or other of Riches which it is
liberally supplied with, to maintain Commerce and Traffic abroad.

3. The reason why there is not an equal plenty of the same things in every
Nation, I take to be this; Because the same things are not sit and proper for
all People. And this, Thirdly, I cannot but look upon as a pregnant Argument of
a Providence and a God, that in all parts of the World such Provision is made
for the Sustenance of People, as is most suitable to their Tempers and
Constitutions. In Cold or more Temperate Climates, where the Air is more
Nitrous, and where, consequently, the Appetites of People are the stronger, and
their Constitutions require the stronger Food, there grosser Nourishment is
more agreeable; and accordingly we find, that in such Parts, and among such
People, there is the greater plenty of the Flesh of Beasts, for their constant
Support. Abundance of this kind of Diet would not be so suitable to Sanguine
Tempers in Hot Climates, but rather would create inordinate Fermentations of
Blood, Fevers, Calentures and Frenzies: And therefore such Nations are better
stored with Roots, Pulses, and Plants, and with various Fruits of the Vine, to
correct the more Phlegmatic part of them, and to carry off the Crudities and
Flatulency thereof. Other places abound with Fruits that are fragrant,
refreshing, and cooling, as being most proper to preserve the Inhabitants in a
State of Health, and a due Temper. The great plenty of Rices in the East; and
of Maize, which is the great Food of the Americans; and such other peculiar
sorts of Nutriment in other Countries, are provided for the peculiar
Constitutions of People every where, and adapted to them. And so are their
Drinks, if taken in a due measure. For which reason, though the Vine be a Plant
which generally grows in all Nations of the World, because of general Use, yet
some Oriental Parts are quite destitute of it: But (says my Author) the want of
it is Dr. Heylin, page 924.
supplied with a pleasant Drink, made of the Juice of other Fruits, more
natural to those People than the other, and so preservative of Life, that the
People there are reported to be longer lived than in any other Parts. In China
it is supplied by an Herb, out of Id. page 865.
which they press a delicate Juice, which does not only serve them instead of
Wine, but preserves their Health, and freeth them from many of those
Inconveniences which the immoderate use of Wine does breed in others: Which
short Remarks (not to make any more of this Nature now) show that there is a
superintending, wise, and good Being over all Men, that does dispose and order
the things of Nature in all parts of the World after the best manner, and for
the present Benefit and Advantage of every Man: For to adapt and sit things
thus, according to the Necessities of all People, and to make them so exactly
congrnous and answerable, cannot be the fortuitous Essect of improvident
Chance, but the admirable Works of an intelligent, contriving, and most
beneficent Deity.

2. Yet it will not be amiss to observe a little, what Provision there is made
too of proper, Medicinal Remedies, to recover the insirm Nature of Man, when it
begins to droop; to convince Men yet further of the Existence of a God, that
begrudgeth not any Man that Good which consists in the Enjoyment of himself,
till his appointed time comes.

What variety of Drugs Nature is furnished with to this purpose, is neither
necessary nor proper for me to note here. The thing I would briesly observe is
this; That such Medicinal Remedies are provided for all Men, and those so sitly
suited to all incident Griefs, as are enough to satisfy any reasonable Man,
that there is a Divine, Benign Nature in the World, that of his Insinite
Goodness takes care of us all. And this will appear if we consider the
Provision which is made, 1. Against such common Diseases as Mankind in general
are subject unto: 2. Against such as are incident more peculiarly to some
Nations.

1. First, There are very many Diseases which are incident to all People in
general. For as all Mankind consist of the same common Nature, so is this
common Nature subject in all places to decay and dissolution; nor are there any
parts in ones Body but what are liable to the same Infirmities and Griefs,
which affect the rest of Adam's Generations. Now that People may not
unavoidably come to an untimely End, only for want of present, necessary help,
there is all over the World a sufficiency of proper Means, if Men will but take
the pains to discover the Faculties of those things which Nature affords, and
be careful to apply and use them after a due manner. And as our necessary Food
is, so are our necessary Medicaments ordinarily and commonly to be had: For no
Man is forced to languish on, and die, under a Dropsy or Fever, a Consumption
or Flux, or such like usual Distemper, merely for want of this one particular
Root, or that Flower, or that Drug, which cannot be procured at Home, but must
be fetched from beyond the Seas by a long Voyage and great Expense. The things
we most need are within our reach, and hard by, almost in every Wood, Field,
and Garden: And though some humorous and vain Persons are seldom pleased but
with what is scarce and costly, yet Nature is gratified with what is common, as
most suitable to its Necessities, most proper and effectual for its relief. The
Ancient Egyptians had their Garden-Deities; not that they looked upon them as
Gods, but as great preservatives of Life, blessed with a Divine Power derived, as
they thought, from the Objects of their Worship. And hence, perhaps, it might
be that the Jews who had lived so long among them, lusted in the Wilderness for
their Old Egyptian Fare, the Melons, the Cucumbers, the Leeks, the Onions, and
the Garlic; because they had by their long Experience found those things so
Beneficial in a Country, where the Air was wont to be corrupted by the
Inundations of that vast River Nilus. Generally speaking, Domestic Remedies
are the kindest Friends to every ones Nature, and the best Restoratives of it;
and it seems a sensible Argument of Divine Wisdom and Unlimited Bounty; that
is, of the Existence of a Provident and Good God, that such Provision is made
so aptly and liberally for high and low, for Men of all Ranks, Conditions and
Ages, and for People of the meanest Fortunes; that the precious Life given to
us all may not be snatched from us (if we be but Provident our selves) till
Nature has done her whole Work; till it be time for us to go hence; till that
proper Season comes which Job's Friend spoke of; the Season when a Man shall be
ripe and sit to drop into another World; Thou shall come to thy grave in a full
age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in its season, Job 5. 26.

2. Secondly, There are some Endemii (morbl) sunt, rum qui ex putridis aquarum,
terrarum, vel cadaverum expirationibus orti sunt; turn etiam quibusdam
regionibus familiares, ut Ph^hifis, Lusitanis, Struma Hispanis and Alpinis,
Hydroca^e Nerbonensi Galliae, omnes quidem ex acri^ gravirate nati. Jo. Fernel.
de abdit. rerum causis, lib. 2.
Diseases which Physicians call Endemial; meaning such as are more peculiar and
familiar to some Nations. And if Travelers would accurately observe what
proper Provision is made against such Distempers, throughout the several Parts
of the known World, they might oblige us with such a fair acconnt of the Divine
Goodness, as that the curiosity of Men could not desire a fairer for its kind.
In diverse Nations their proper Food is their proper Physic too. In many places
the natural Baths, and other medicinal Waters of the Country, serve to carry
off Diseases that are most incident. In some parts of A. srick every one is
said to be his own Physician; because all of them are so much Mandelslo's Trav.
13.
acquainted with the Specificks of their Country, as they think is necessary
and enough for the Preservation and Recovery of their Health. In Persia they
Tavernier, 1. 5. cap. 15.
have no exact Methods of Physic: Their China Drinks, and the common Id. Part
2. 1. 1.
Pulses and Roots of their own Growth, together with a regular Diet, are their
greatest Preservatives of Life. In the East Indies its said that there are no
Physicians, but such as attend Kings and Princes. As for the ordinary sort,
after the Rains are fallen, and that it is time to gather Herbs, the People go
out into the Fields and gather such Simples which they know to be proper for
such Diseases as reign among them. Others tell us of their choice Drugs,
Mandelslo's Trav. in Ind.
their Plant called Bettele, and the Fruit of their Tree Areca, are their most
sovereign Preservatives. In some places where Fevers are wont to reign, those
Trees are common, whence that celebrated Medicament is setch'd, usually called,
the Jesuits Bark. In those Heylen of Amer. Fernel. de lue c. ^^.
parts of America where a silthy Discase is Hereditary and Epidemical among
Young and Old of both Sexes, those Regions abound with Gunjacan and Sarsa,
which are said to be proper for it. In this, and some other Northern Climates,
where the Scurvey prevails, and some other Maladies which depend upon it, a
peculiar Herb abounds, which thence takes its Name; besides other proper
Plants which grow in every Garden; and perhaps above all, the Elder which is to
be found almost in every Hedge: Which brings to my Mind the Observation of a
curious Author, Mr. Ray, p. 104.
I have mentioned more than once, that there are such Species of Plants
produced in every Country, as are most proper and convenient for the Meat and
Medicine of Men and Animals that are bred and inhabit there. Insomuch that
Solenander writes, That from the frequency of the Plants which spring up
naturally in any Region, he could easily gather what Endemial Diseases the
Inhabitants thereof were subject to.

And what can this argue, but great and wonderful Goodness in a provident Being
above, who takes ample Care of the Lives of his Creatures? With what Face can
any Man ascribe all this commodious and apt Disposition of things to Chance,
which is such a palpable Evidence of Wisdom and Benignity? Should you look into
a great Family, or an Hospital, and there observe what Provision is made for
the whole Household; sufficient and agreeable Sustenance prepared for every
the meanest Retainer to it; skilful Artists daily attending with proper
Remedies for Griefs and Sicknesses of all sorts; and every thing disposed so
orderly, and after such a Congruous, Liberal, and Charitable manner, as speaks
Compassion and Goodness toward all: Would you not think it reasonable to
conclude that certainly there is a wise and beneficent Governor presiding, by
whose Directions and under whose Care all Ministrations are performed in such a
way as is suitable to every ones Necessities? Why, much rather may we think it
reasonable to conclude that there is a God presiding over the whole World,
under whose unlimited Providence Nature does regularly and conveniently
minister to the Wants of all People. The Families of the Earth are innumerable;
their Habitations vastly distant; their Necessities pressing, constant,
various, and infinite; And what but infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness could
provide so amply, and appositely for them all? Nature, its true, does it
immediately; but, as has been shown, Nature of it self is an uncontriving,
unthinking Thing that acts in the Dark, and therefore it infers the Existence
of an Agent above and over it, that understands for it; that has put it into a
stated Method, and still directs and employs it under him to minister thus to
the Necessities of Men every where, who do, or should at least understand far
better than Nature does, whence all that Bounty and Liberality comes, which
replenisheth the World.

CHAP. XI.
HAving proceeded thus far upon this large Speculation, concerning the
excellent State of the World, as a clear Proof that there is a most wise and
good Being who framed it. I find but one thing remaining for us to look into;
and that is the admirable Frame of our own rational Nature, which I have
reserved for the last Consideration, because it is the brightest and most
glorious manifestation of a Deity. For if it be made appear that our rational
Part is so excellent, as that it could not be formed by any thing less than an
Agent that is essentially Divine, and transcendently Perfect, humane Reason
must extort this Confession from all Men, That there is a Being
incomprehensibly Excellent, which formed so excellent a Creature as our humane
Nature is.

In Discoursing then upon this Subject, I shall endeavor to show these Two
things. 1. First, Wherein the Excellence of humane Nature does consist. 2.
Secondly, That this Excellence was derived, not from the casual Modification of
stupid Matter, but from the Agency of an intelligent Cause that is eminently
and absolutely Perfect.

1. First, Touching the Excellence of our humane Nature. By our humane Nature,
is understood strictly the intellectual, thinking, and rational Thing within us
which we call the Soul: And when I spoke of its Excellence, I mean its
essential Perfection, before Vice comes to deprave and hurt it: And I spoke too
of a comparative Perfection; not meaning that it is Excellent in such a sublime
Degree, as a Deity is supposed to be; but Excellent in its Kind, and in
comparison of the other Parts of this visible World. Now that every rational
Soul is thus Excellent, will appear both from its Nature and Faculties.

In its Nature it is, 1. First, Immaterial. For it is a distinct thing from
Matter; and the Properties of it are quite different from the Properties of
Matter. It is of the Nature of Matter, to be locally extended, as a Wall is,
part by part, and one part by another in a palpable Series of Contiguity; to
move as a Stone does, as it is moved forcibly by some other Agent, and to
communicate its Motion to a corporeal Substance by strokes impressed upon it; to
be wholly passive to external Violence; to be in an utter state of Rest, when
Force is not offered; to be as Senseless as a Stone, and as void of Cogitation;
and when it is stirred and agitated, to be destitute of all Apprehension which
way, or in what manner, or to what end it moves: These and the like dull
Properties essentially and necessarily belong to Matter. There is as much
difference between them and the Attributes of the rational Soul, as between
Death and Life. Because this is a busy Thing, prone and ready to enquire into
the qualities of Objects; to discover their Natures; to apprehend Ideas; to
commit Notions to Memory for a long time; to discern and distinstuish between
Truth and Falsehood, and between Right and Wrong; to infer Conclusions from
Premises; to spin Opinions out of a train of Thoughts; to judge what is to be
Received, and what is to be Rejected; to exert an Appetite toward that which
is Good, and to rest with Complacency and Delight in the Enjoyment of it. Nay,
besides all this, to be also in its operations Self-active and
Self-determining, is Essential to it. For the Soul of Man is not pulled, or
forced, dragged, or drawn, or thrust on like a Machine. No; the Principle of
its Actions is within its self; nor can any thing move it, but by its own
consent and voluntary compliance. Indeed outward Objects make Impressions upon
it; and such as do affect it and incline it to act according as things appear
to be either desirable or hurtful. But this is not done by any violent,
necessitating Impulse, like the Force impressed upon a common Engine; but in a
Moral way, by persuasion and allurement, and by the intervening use of Reason,
which judges of the Object whether it may be chosen or refused, and
accordingly dictates and directs: So that when the Soul resolves upon Actions,
and comes to exert its Power, it determines it self, being solicited thereunto
by Temptations and Arguments from the inviting Appearance of an Object, but not
driven to it by irresistible Violence. For in many Cases we do resist Offers,
though they be very Tempting; because the Motives for our compliance are not so
strong, as the Reasons which are against it: And when the Reasons on each hand
seem equally fair, the Soul is unresolved, and in suspense, hanging in doubt,
in aequilibrio, like Scales that are exactly even till some Grains be added,
some more Arguments offered on the one side which outweigh all on the contrary,
and so turn and cast the Scale, and bring the Soul to a Determination. Of these
things every Man has daily Experience in his own Breast: We all feel in our
selves this our native Liberty and determining Power. And hence it follows,
That after all the Disputes about the Substance of the rational Soul what it
is, we may certainly conclude what it is not. It cannot be any material,
corporeal Substance, though you suppose it to be never so fine and thin;
because its Operations are quite different from the Motions of the most subtle
Body. They proceed not from any necessitating Cause; nor are they carried on
after a necessitating Manner; nor are they brought to any necessary Result, as
the Motions of Matter are (these are still impressed upon it by some
necessitating thing which is without, and foreign to it.) But the Soul of Man
has a Principle of Freedom and voluntary Activity within it self, and in its
Nature, whereby it is apt to begin, and order, and govern, and perfect its own
Actions, as its own Reason directs, and as it self judges to be most
convenient and best.

2. And because it is immaterial, it must follow, that its own Nature it is
immortal also; which is the Second Argument of its Excellence, if compared with
all the other parts of this visible World.

That this thing may be rightly understood, we must consider, that there is a
two fold Life in Man. 1. The Life of the Compositum (as they call it) or the
Life of the whole Man; that Life which results from the Vital Union between
Soul and Body. This cannot be thought immortal, because we see it every Day
destroyed by the separation of those two Substances, Soul and Body, from each
other. 2. There is the Original Life of the Soul it self, considered singly and
separately, as a distinct thing from the Body. This Life is, I conceive, a
state of Vigor and Activity, and a state which is peculiar and proper to the
Soul. Now this is immortal; that is, though the Body turns to Dust and Ashes,
yet the Soul continues a living Being still; or subsisteth on in a state of
Vigor; so that the Nature of it is not subject to Mortality. For by Mortality
is meant a proneness or tendency in a Being to a Dissolution of it, upon the
failing of that Principle of Activity within it, which we call Life. And three
things are requisite to render a thing Mortal; as we see by every Day's
Experience, in all Creatures which naturally consume away and die. 1. There
must be a Mixture of contrary Qualities, as Heat and Cold, and the like. 2.
There is a corruptibility of Humors upon the Prevalence and Predominancy of
one Quality over the others. 3. And Thirdly, a Divisibility of the Parts upon
and after the over-powering the Faculties and Temperament of Nature. So that
it is Matter that is liable to Death; nor can Death be incident to any thing but
Matter, nay to corruptible Matter; nor can any corporeal Substance be Immortal,
till this Corruptible has put on Incorruption. If then a Being be immaterial,
or destitute of Bodily Parts, it must be in its own Nature immortal too. A
Spirit has not Flesh, and Bones (and Blood) as every Humane Body has; and
consequently it cannot be liable to those jarring Elements whereof our Bodies
do consist; nor can it of it self be capable of Corruption or Dissolution of
Parts, as our Mortal Bodies are, seeing it is supposed to have no Parts at all
to be divided. Therefore since the Rational Soul is a Spirit, or such a Being
as is incorporeal and immaterial (as I have now showed it is) it must follow,
that it is not naturally subject to Mortality, as the Body is; because it is
utterly void of all Natural Principles of Mortality, and is incorruptible in
its Essence; and therefore it must by the ordinary Necessity of its own Nature,
as well as by the Will and Pleasure of a Superior Being, survive the Body, to
receive Rewards or Punishments in another World, according to the Quality of
its Actions in this.

2. Having thus briefly considered the Nature of every Humane Soul, let us,
Secondly, take some Account of its Excellence in respect of its Faculties and
Powers, in order to prove the Existence of a God, as the only Cause that could
give this Soul a Being.

There are some Faculties in a Man which are common to Brute Creatures also: As
1. Sense, or the power of perceiving Idea's impressed from outward Objects upon
the Organs of Sensation; the Eye, Ear, etc. 2. Fancy, or a power of
apprehending the seeming Suitableness or Unsuitableness of an Object to its
Nature. 3. Memory, or the power of retaining for some time the Idea's and
Shapes of things sensible. 4. Appetite, or a power of moving according as an
Object appears, either agreeable or hurtful; being allured by the one, or
frighted and dampt by the other.

But these several Powers are nothing in comparison of those noble faculties
peculiarly belonging to the Rational Soul; as any Man may perceive that will
but search into himself, and observe what he finds and feels there. For 1.
First, We find that we have a Power to Think and Consider; I mean to examine
those Objects which are presented to our outward Sense; to employ our Minds
conversantly about them; to take notice of their Proportions, Forms, and
Qualities; to compare one thing with another; to discover the Causes and
Effects of them, so that we may penetrate into the inside of them, and dive
into their Natures. Now this no Brute Creature does, or can do. The ox, indeed,
knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib; that is, they come to both,
being invited and moved thereunto by the appearance of things, which are wont
to gratify the Eye and Palate. But in this there is no such thing as
Consideration, nothing that can properly be called Thought; because such
Creatures are not capable of enquiring in themselves, Who, or what their
Feeders are? or, What the Substance of their Fodder is? or, What produced it?
or, How it was provided? or, To what End it serves? and, For what Reason it is
proper and good to be used? Acts of this kind are too high for Animals which
are merely Sensitive; Their Phancies go no further than the Crib: They are well
satisfied with the bare enjoyment of that which is before them. The Considering
part belongs to Man: To observe the natural difference between Things and
Things; to examine their distinct Causes, Properties, Dispositions, and Uses;
and so to look into their intrinsic Essences and Natures; this is the peculiar
work and business of a Soul that is Rational.

2. We find in our selves, that we have a power to understand also; that is, a
Faculty and Ability to comprehend the Reason, and Condition, and Philosophy of
Matters; nay, to know many things which are not directly obvious to our outward
Senses. That Perception which is in Animals Irrational, is an Idea in the
Fancy, derived from those Efsluvium's, Rays, and Images of external Objects,
which are impressed upon the Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Tasting, or
Feeling-Faculty, and so conveyed through the Nerves into the Brain. These are
sensible Phantasms; and the possessing of an Animal with them is properly
called Sensation, because the Creature is affected with a sensible Object,
merely by the use of its Senses. But Sensation is one thing, and Intellection
or Understanding is another. This properly is, when a Man's Mind is so possessed
and enlightened with Intelligible Notions, or with such Idea's as are not
subject to corporeal Sense, and therefore such as cannot be stamped upon the
Mind by Motion or Pressure from Bodies without us; but such Idea's as spring
out of the Mind it self, by an active, exerting Power that is native to it.
There are many kinds of such intelligible Notions, as do not fall under
external Sense, and yet are very clear and evident to us: As several
Certainties in Mathematics, which appear from Demonstration; diverse Truths in
Natural Philosophy, which we are convinced of by pure Reason; several Moral
Verities, which we are assured of, from the immutable Natures of Vice and
Virture; several Doctrines in Theology which our Minds yield us, from the
Contemplation of the Divine Attributes and Perfections: Besides diverse such
common Notions as these, wherein all Mankind are agreed of themselves, That
what has not any Being, cannot act; That things which agree in one Third,
agree among themselves; That the Cause is in order of Nature before the Effect;
That Equals added unto Equals, do make Equals; That Nothing can produce it self
out of Nothing; and the like: These are eternal Truths, which depend not upon
Sense, but upon natural, certain Reason; for they would be Truths though there
were not any Sensitive Creatures in the World. Now this is a noble Power in the
Soul, which sets it infinitely above the Souls of Irrational Creatures, in that
it can act within it self abstractedly from Matter; and without using the
Bodily Senses, can speculate and understand those leading Truths, and necessary
Notions, which are in order to the greatest Undertakings, and enable the Mind
of Man to search into all the Secrets of Nature; to open the Mysteries of the
Creation; to invent Arts; to improve Sciences; to prescribe the most
commendable Rules of Life; and, in short, to govern the World: All which I
shall show is an Argument of the Existence of an absolutely perfect Mind, or a
God, that formed the Rational Soul with Divine Faculties and Powers to act
under him.

3. Thirdly, We find in our selves a Power to deduce one thing out of another
by way of Inference; and by comparing Notions with Notions, and by sifting them
narrowly, to gather and conclude in the End, that this is True, and that False;
this is Right, and that Wrong; and so to go on, still drawing of Consequents
out of Antecedents; which is usually called Ratiocination, or Mental Discourse.
As for Example; Though we discern not our own Souls, nor can behold them with
our Eyes, yet in regard that we think, and meditate, and reason in our selves,
we strongly conclude, that they are Beings actually existing, because it is
most certain, that what is not, cannot operate. In like manner, though the
Being of God be quite out of the Ken of our corporeal Senses, yet considering
what bright manifestations there are in the World, of wonderful Goodness,
Power, and Wisdom, we rightly infer, That it was framed by a Supreme Being, of
the most adorable and excellent Perfections. And so it is in innumerable other
Instances; though there are ten thousand things in Nature, whose Contextures
are not subject to the Cognizance of our Senses, yet by arguing either a
priori, from the manifest Cause to the Effect; or a posteriori, from the
manifest Effect to the Cause, we proceed to satisfactory Inferences; because if
this thing be granted, then, according to the common Principles of Reason, that
thing will follow. This is to Reason, and Argue, and to Discourse in our Minds;
and it is a Faculty whereof the Souls of Irrational Creatures are not capable;
because sine and close reasoning is vastly above bare and naked Sensation: It
requires strong Meditation, great rolling of Thoughts, and a firm linking of
Notions to Notions in a Chain; so that Rational Premises may fairly and
regularly draw on Rational Conclusions: All which Brute Creatures can no more
do, than they can study Philosophy, or understand Books of Metaphysics and
Logic.

4. Fourthly, We feel in our selves a power of directing us in all our Moral
Actions, and of reflecting upon our Actions after they are done; and this we
call Conscience, meaning the Judgment of a Man as it relates to the practice of
Virtue and Honesty. There are some Actions which are unchangeably good; and
others which are immutably Evil: Their Natures are so utterly opposite, that it
is as impossible to make Vice Virtue, or Virtue Vice, as it is to reconcile
Light and Darkness. The Notions of such things every one does carry in himself;
nor is any Soul of Man so void and destitute of them, but that the most
unpolisht and barbarous People understand in some measure what is Right and
Just. Accordingly we find something within us, which before an Action is done,
tells us secretly what is necessary, sit, and proper for us to do: And when our
unreasonable Inclinations and Passions carry us on to do that which is contrary
to those good Dictates, we find something within us, that does reprehend and
blame, and fly upon us, and many times does wound us so, that we, are very
sore, and our Minds are full of great Anguish and Torment. To which purpose are
those Words of St. Paul, Romans 2. 14, 15. where speaking of the Gentiles, he
faith, That though they had not the Law (written in two Tables, as the Jews
had) yet they did by nature the things contained in the law, and having not the
law, were a law unto themselves. Which showed the work of the law written in
their hearts; their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts among
themselves either accusing or else exausing one another. Now this Faculty of
governing and regulating all our Moral Actions, and of passing Sentence upon
them, is an excellence of the Rational Soul, which cannot be pretended to be in
any Animals which are purely Sensitive, how sagacious soever they appear;
because Actions natural are the highest they can go to. As for the Rules of
Sobriety, Righteousness, and Godliness, they are wholly destitute of them, as
destitute as a Stone is of Sense, or as a Plant is of Reason. And hence it is
that their Souls are mortal. Whether they be altogether material, or so
necestarily depending upon Matter that they cannot subsist without a Body, I
will not now dispute. No question but they perish with their Bodies: For having
no Law of Morality to act by, they cannot be accountable either for Obedience
or Transgression, and so cannot be supposed to survive, because they are
incapable either of Reward or Punishment in another World; as being without all
Power of Reflecting, and consequently of having any Joys or Remorse of Mind in
this.

To conclude this Consideration; Besides a Principle of Life, a Power of
Sensation, and a Faculty of retaining Idea's which spring from things without
us, we find in our selves such high and exquisite Powers, that supposing a
Being Angelical, and next to a Deity, was to have been formed on purpose that
it should be invested with Humane Flesh, there to display the great Glories of
its Nature, we cannot conceive how a Being could have been made more like to an
Angel, than the Rational Soul is: A Being that is able to search into the
Secrets of Nature, and into the invisible things of God; to entertain it self
with lofty Contemplations; to discover recondite mysterious Truths; to open the
Treasures of Philosophy; to fill the World with Histories of things past, and
to foresee things to come, things which naturally must, or probably may happen;
to know all that a Finite Creature is well capable of knowing; to set out the
just Boundaries between Good and Evil; to inform the World how far they may
honorably and safely go, and what they are at their Peril to avoid; to employ
Mankind in the most curious Arts; to furnish them with the most delightful and
useful Sciences; to give measures to all States and Princes; to prescribe to
all Societies the truest Methods for their Preservation and Welfare; to show
them what noble Ends they are to pursue, and what are the wisest and best means
of bringing those Ends to pass; to fit Men for the greatest and most generous
Undertakings, and to make them Men of Renown; to inspire them with laudable
Ambition, and upon animating Hopes to found glorious Achievements, and to
erect the Fortunes of Kingdoms; to make us aspire toward the highest and most
excellent Enjoyments: In short, to help us to do all the great things that can
be done by mortal Creatures here; and in the midst of our Labors under the
Sun, to show us a Glimpse of another World, and to sit us for a Blessed and
Eternal State in it.

2. These are the noble Powers of the Rational Soul; and hence I argue, in the
Second place, that this Excellence of it is a manifestation of the Existence of
a God; because these high Endowments and Faculties could not be derived from
the casual Modifications of Dead and Senseless Matter, but from the Agency of
an intelligent Cause, that is eminently and absolutely Perfect.

For it is a certain Principle of Reason, That there cannot be more in the
Effect than there is in the Cause. If there could be more, it would follow that
Something can come of it self out of Nothing, which is impossible. Defect of
Power in an Agent, is a Nonentity, a want of Being, a Privation, an
incapacity, an utter Nothing: Nor is it conceivable how any thing can be drawn
into Existence out of it, but by a superior, uncontrollable Power over it: For
should we suppose it to produce any thing of it self, we should suppose it to
produce that which it has not power to bring forth, and to give it a Being
which it has not at all it self; that is, to bring it out of an Incapacity, or
out of Nothing: Which no Humane Reason can think how a thing can do by any
Casuality of its own, because there is a defect of such Casuality. If then
there be something more and higher in a Rational Soul than what is in Matter,
it must be inconsistent with Reason to imagine, that Matter caused it; for then
it would necessarily follow, that it caused it without a Power, or by its
Incapacity, Inability, and Defect; that is, out of Nothing. When we observe
this admirable frame of Nature, the Universe, can we think that its Order was
effectively caused by Confusion? Its Harmony by Discord? Its Beauty by
Disproportions? the Usefulness of its parts by Error? Its wise and regular
Fabrication by Nonsense? This were to make one Contrary, the cause of another;
and with parity of Reason it might be said, that Water produces Fire; and
Darkness made the Sun; and that Death is the efficient Cause of Life, Sense and
Motion. In like manner, when we consider the Nature and Faculties of the
Rational Soul, and compare the whole frame of it with the Substance and
Properties of dull, lifeless, and incogitative Matter, can we think that
Corporiety was the cause of a thing that is immaterial? that Divisibility was
the cause of a Being immortal? that Reason was the work of Stupidity? that
Atoms taught us to Philosophize? that Wisdom sprang from the motion of little
Bodies, void of all Art, Skill, and Knowledge? and that the Powers we find
within us to act with Freedom and Choice; to direct our Actions by the Logic
of Truth, and by the Laws of Virtue; to desire and intend our Good in all
things; to pursue it with Eagerness, Understanding, and Delight; and to rejoice
in the Fruition of it; can we think, I say, that all these things came from the
Chance-Operations of Matter, which has nothing of Sense or Thought in it? It
may as well be said, that the tumbling of Stones and Timber together will
produce Sensation, Intellection, Reasoning, Memory, Prudence, Conscience,
together with those Passions and Affections which we feel within us: In short,
It may be as well said, that a Rational Soul can be educed and drawn out of an
Heap of Rubbish. As an Effect cannot naturally proceed from a contrary Cause;
so neither can an Effect transcend the Perfection and Virtue of its natural
Cause. It may fall short of it; or it may come up to a degree of equality with
it; but it can no more go beyond or above it, than Waters can naturally run
higher than the Fountainhead stands. So that were there nothing in the World
besides dead and senseless Matter, modified into various Forms at a venture, by
undesigning and unintending Motion, it were impossible for a Rational Soul to
spring out of it; for the Effect would be much nobler than the Cause, and
consequently would emerge out of nothing. For I ask; Were the Perfections of a
Rational Soul in Matter before the Soul was made, or were they not? If you
suppose they were, then this ridiculous Conceit will follow, that Atoms have in
them Knowledge, Wisdom, Morality, Liberty of Will, and such other Perfections
which belong unto the Soul. If they were not antecedently there, then this
ridiculous Conceit will follow, That Perfections were caused by Incapacity; or
that Matter gave a perfect Being an Existence, which it self had not to give:
Which would be a plain Contradiction; and would moreover ascribe a creative
Power to Matter (though it be a thing altogether Passive) when the Men I now
dispute against will not allow a Deity it self that Power, because they think
it an impossibility. Dr. Cudworth Int. Syst. p. 862
Hence a Learned Author concludes positively, that neither can Matter, (which
is a mee^ Passive thing) efficiently produce a Soul, nor a Soul Matter; no
finite imperfect Substance being able to produce another Substance out of
nothing; much less can such a Substance as has a lower degree of Entity and
Perfection in it, create that which has an higher. There is a Scale or Ladder
of Perfections in the Universe, one above another; and the Production of things
cannot possibly be in way of Ascent from lower to higher, but must of necessity
be in way of Descent, from higher to lower. Now to produce any one higher Rank
of Being from the lower, as Cogitation from Magnitude and Body, is plainly to
invert this Order in the Scale of the Universe, from downwards to upwards; and
by the same reason that one higher Rank or Degree in this Scale is thus
unnaturally produced from a lower, may all the rest be produced also.

The Consequence of all this is, That Matter being so utterly incapable of
making an immaterial, immortal, intelligent Soul; there must be a most perfect
Mind that gave it its Faculties and its Nature. Either it must be supposed to
have no Cause at all, (which would be most absurd to imagine) or it must have a
competent Cause; or a higher and most perfect Being to derive its Existence
from. A spiritual Substance cannot come but from a Spirit; nor can any thing be
the cause of Mind but Mind; or of Understanding but Understanding; or of Reason
but Reason; nor of Self-activity and Liberty, but that which is a self-active,
voluntary and free Agent. Since the rational Soul is so excellent a Creature,
there must be a most excellent Being that created it; a Being that contains all
manner of Perfection; a Being of unlimited Power that could make it of Nothing,
by the force and fecundity of his own Divine Will; and a Being of the most
exalted and glorious Nature that could give Existence to such an admirable
Being, as every humane Soul is; void of Matter and Corruption; incapable
Naturally of dying; in every respect like unto a Deity; Spiritual, Intelligent,
Active, Wise, Powerful, Benign, Kind and Good.

But those unreasonable Men who deny the Existence of God, finding themselves
pressed with the invincible force of this Argument, would shift it off by
pretending that what we suppose touching the spiritual Nature and Faculties of
Men's Souls, is not to be granted. They say that there is nothing real in the
World but Matter and Motion: That our very Souls themselves are Matter,
consisting of a smoother and siner sort of Atoms, or indiscernible Motes; by
the various Motions and Modifications whereof the Soul Thinks, Understands,
Exerts the Will, and Acts. They will have mind to be nothing but the local
Motion of some more active Particles of Matter. They will have Knowledge to be
nothing but a Passion caused by the intromitting of Images into the Brain, from
sensible Objects without. They will have Memory to be nothing but the decaying
remainder of Motion; like the sound about a Bell when it has done ringing. And
every act and determination of the Will, they would have to be Clinamen
Principiorum, or a declination of Atoms from a kind of perpendicular Line, in
which they suppose them to have hung before: So that according to these Men,
every Operation of the Soul lies in Atoms, and is derived from Atoms; which
Whimsies deserve Laughter rather than any grave or sober Confutation. For is it
possible for Men of true, solid Reason to believe that Atoms can be a bubling
Fountain of Thoughts? That they can study, contemplate, perceive, argue, form
Opinions, resolve Doubts, discover Truth, find out the different Natures of
Good and Evil, direct our Actions, tell us what we must Do, and what we must
Avoid, promise Rewards, or threaten us with Punishment? Nay inflict Punishment
presently, and plague wicked People with the intolerable Smart that attends an
evil Conscience? They may as well say that Atoms can write Books; that the
whole material World is an Academy of all manner of Learning; and that the
Motes which we see dancing in the Sunbeams, are so many Historians, Orators,
Philosophers and Divines. The truth is, It Is not Reason that is the Groundwork
of those wild Conceits, but a sad Necessity they bring upon themselves of
running to the most monstrous Absurdities, to avoid all Thoughts of a God,
whose Existence they have disowned. For it there be such a thing as a rational
Soul distinct from Matter and Body, it must inevitably follow that there is
also a Deity who gave it its Being, because nothing but a Deity could give it.
Therefore they who have the Front to deny the Being of a Deity, are forced to
deny the immateriality of the Soul of course. And yet that the Soul is
immaterial, its excellent Powers, Faculties and Operations will convince any
one, that will but lay his Hand upon his Heart, and give himself leave to think
soberly. For if the Soul be Matter, How came Men to dispute about its
Immateriality? How had the Mind any Notion of it? How did the Mind get it at
first, since it is infinitely too high for Matter? Nay, since the Notion of
Incorporiety is so contrary and repugnant to the Nature and Notion of Matter:
If the Soul be Matter, How comes it to judge of material Representations, and
to discover those Impostures and Cheats, which Matter many times puts upon the
Imagination? As for instance, The Sun is found to be vastly bigger than the
whole Earth, though it appears to the Eye and Fancy to be but a Foot wide.
There are a thousand other Errors wherewith our Senses and Imaginations are apt
to be deluded: And how could the Mind look through all those Errors into the
Truth and Reality of things, if it were not a nobler Being than Matter that
measures sensible Objects by intelligible Ideas of its own, which are the
proper Criterions of Truth? If the Soul were Matter, How could it be capable of
Reflecting within it self? Or how could it Recollect so many things done long
ago, in the Days of ones Minority, and Recover so many fugitive Ideas, as we
find it does Command; and this by a native Power of its own, purely by the
strength of thinking? Matter cannot act upon Matter, but by some impulse from
without it; much less can it act upon it self, as the Soul does, by a peculiar
Faculty it has of casting about, and of rouling Thoughts within the Minds; and
therefore it must be a noble Being distinct from Matter that has a Principle
of Activity, and an Empire within it self. If it were Matter, How could it
command the Body in every Instance, and make it obey at Pleasure? Nay, how
could it command it self to think on this Subject, or that, as it lists? To
go on a Meditating, or give it over? To resolve upon that Action, or another,
without control? How could it forsee, deliberate, or advise? How could it
entertain any inward Pleasures and Joys; impressions which Matter can no more
receive than Rocks can dance? How could it contemplate so excellent a Being as
a Deity? Or discourse of Eternity and another World? Or possess wicked Wretches
with such Fears as they can never quite rid their Mind of? Or fill good Men
with comfortable Hopes of a Reward? The natures of Good and Evil, and the Ideas
of Divine Justice and Benignity, are too Sublime to fall under Sense, nor can
they be incident to Matter; and he must have the most ridiculous Conceptions in
the World of his own Frame, who thinks that the Operations and Perfections of
his Soul are no higher or better than what Clay, or Pebbles, or Chips would be
capable of, were their Particles but otherwise modified.

Hence we infer, That the rational Soul is of far higher Extraction than what
Stone or Timber can pretend to: That it is infinitely of a more noble Nature
than Atoms of Dust: And that its Operations and Perfections are vastly
different from the Properties of Matter, how fine soever you suppose it to be.
And therefore it will follow, either that these Operatiosn and Perfections
sprang from Nothing; or that there is a Being of the most eminent and absolute
Perfections, from whom they are derived; which indeed is the only true and
satisfactory Account that can be given of the Nature and Faculties of a
rational Soul.

I have hitherto argued from Reason only; because they who deny the Existence
of a Deity, are constrained by necessary Consequence to deny Divine Revelation
too, and the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. However we may ex abundanti
observe, what Moses tells us, Genesis 1. 27. God created man in his own image, in
the image of God created be him: And what St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 11. 7. That
a man is the image and glory of God. Which places of Scripture, though they are
to be understood partly of that Dominion, Authority and Power, which God has
given Man as his Vicegerent and Representative over all things here below; yet
do they, I conceive, speak also, and perhaps chiefly of that Similitude and
Resemblance, which the Soul of every one of us, does, in its Frame, bear of the
Divine Nature and Perfections; which will a little further show its Excellence,
and consequently the Existence of a super-eminent Being, whose Stamp and
Impress it carries as far as the Capacities of a Creature can admit it.

We find how volatile and nimble our Thoughts are, how soon they reach the very
ends of the Earth; how quickly they compass Sea and Land; with what Facility
they mount to Heaven; how speedily they take a view of the whole Frame of
Nature, as it were at once; and with what Celerity the Mind does gather and
comprehend within it self so many different Ideas. And what is this but an
imperfect Representation of the Omnipresence of that God, Who is said to fill
heaven and earth? Jer. 23. 24. Nay, Whom the heaven, and heaven of heavens
cannot contain? 1 King. 8. 27.

We find also, That notwithstanding this Divine Activity of the Mind, and its
Ubiquitary Rangings abroad, we can command it home, and make it retire into a
delightful Solitude, to view those entertaining Ideas within it self; and we do
often fix it so, that outward Objects cannot draw it off from the inward
Operations it is intent upon, nor deprive it of the great Pleasures of
Contemplation, and of Enjoying its own private Thoughts. And what is this but a
faint Similitude of the Allsufficiency and Plenitude of a God, who stands not
in need of any things without himself, but is infinitely Blessed in the
Contemplation of the Glories of his own Nature, and in the eternal Fruition of
his own unspeakable Perfections.

We find too, That though we know but in part, yet we can not only observe
things present and before us, but can moreover call back things past and gone,
and foresee Events that are Future or Possible; and can represent them all to
our Minds, as if they were all now under our Eye. And what is this, but an
umbratile show of the Omniscience of a God, whose Understanding is infinite,
Psalm. 47. 5. And before whom Hell and Destruction, and all the Hearts of the
Children of Men are? Prove. 15.

We find again, That there is in the Mind of Man a wonderful Fecundity of
Power, to do almost any thing which is Necessary, Good, Honorable and
Excellent: To form Notions, as it were, out of Nothing, and out of those
Notions, which comparatively seem next to Nothing, to draw by the gradual
Methods of Study and Consideration, Systems of Philosophy, Platforms of
Politics, Schemes and Models of Arts, Volumes of Divinity; and whatever is
useful or tends to improve the Knowledge, and to answer the Wants of Mankind.
And what is this, but a weak Resemblance of the Omnipotence of that God, who by
the infinite Fecundity of his Divine Power created all Things out of Nothing;
Who spoke and they were done, who commanded and they stood fast? Ps. 33. 9.

We find moreover in the Mind of Man a constant Disposition to do every thing
for the sake of some Good, either real, or at least apparent; and accordingly
to deliberate about the Choice of necessary and proper Means. And what is this
but a little Signature of God's Wisdom, Who works all things according to the
counsel of his own will, Ephesians 1. 11. And makes every thing to work together
for the good of them that love him, Romans 8. 28.

We find furthermore in the Mind of Man innate Principles of Righteousness and
Benignity; which no tract of Time, no Humors or Arts of People can totally
obliterate, though the base Inclinations, and selfish Practices of some have
strangely defaced them; for even Publicans and Sinners will do good to them, at
whose Hands they have received good. And what is this but some Similitude of a
God, who is Righteous in all his Ways; and whose Mercy is over all his Works;
though it comes vastly short of that Pattern which the Son of God gave the
World from his Father, Who causes his sun to shine upon the evil as well as
upon the good, and sends his rain upon the just and unjust also, Matthew. 5. 45.

Some more Instances and Respects there are, wherein the Soul of Man does in
some (though very scanty) measure resemble a Being that is eminently and
absolutely Perfect. But these being added to the other Considerations, touching
the immateriality and immortality of its Nature, and the excellence of its
Faculties and Powers, are enough to make it appear to all reasonable Men, that
there is verily a God above, after whose Image and Likeness the rational Soul
is created. And this I have used as the last Argument to prove the Existence of
a Deity, because it comes so home and close that no Man can renounce a God,
but by renouncing his own humane Nature, and by making himself like unto the
very Beasts that perish, and are without understanding.

I have now, I thank God, gone through with what brevity I could all those
things which I proposed at my first entrance upon this Subject, to confirm you
in the rational belief of the true and ever blessed God, in an Age which so
abounds with Infidelity. Considering how Men on that side are wont to say,
that we can have no Idea of God, because a Deity is supposed to be incorporeal,
not subject to Sense; and so that a Deity is an unconceivable Nothing;
therefore I did think it necessary in the first place to show what the Notion
of God means; namely a Being of eminent and absolute Perfections. Out of
which general Description there follows, by necessary Consequence, a more
particular account of those Perfections which relate, either to the Nature of
God, as Independency, Incorporeity, Eternity, etc. or as to God's Actions, as
perfect Knowledge, Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and the like. Then having showed
how Intelligible and Rational this Notion of God is, though it be not any
sensible Idea, as those are which come from corporeal Objects without us, I
proceeded, in the next place, to prove there actually is such a perfect Being.
1. From the order of Causes, which obliges us to acknowledge that there must
be one first Cause, Self-existent and Eternal; or a Being not made by any
other, and the like. 2. From the general consent of Mankind, which cannot
rationally be ascribed to any but that first Cause, who is the common Author of
humane Nature. 3. From some extraordinary Occurrences, which plainly show that
there is a supreme Being of the most perfect Knowledge and Power. 4. From the
Frame and State of the World, which is so admirable for its Order, for its
Beauty, for the usefulness of its Parts, for the resemblances of Wisdom in
Creatures which are Irrational, and for the ample Provision that is made for
the good of all Things, that it would be the most senseless imagination to
attribute this goodly Frame of Nature to Matter and Motion, to blind Fortune
and Chance, or to any other Cause, but that Allmighty, All-wise, and most
benign Being whose Perfections are infinite. And, 5. To evince this further
yet, I have taken particular notice of the admirable Frame of the rational
Soul, which in its Nature, Faculties and manner of Operating, bears an evident
Resemblance and Representation of a Deity.

This whole Speculation being thus ended, I should now, in the last place, draw
it down to our Practice, and show what we are to render unto God for all these
bright Manifestations of his Divine Glory; what just Acknowledgments they call
for at our hands; what Acts of Faith and Admiration, of Humility and Holiness;
of Adoration and Praise, of Love and Obedience, and Imitation, and the like
Expressions of Religion, are due from us. But this Subject is so copious, as
well as of such great importance, that it ought to be handled distinctly, and
with Care, and therefore requires a Discourse by it self. At present I shall
conclude with a devout Hymn out of the Writings of the Holy Psalmist, who
considering the transcendent Greatness of God's Majesty, the Glory of his
Nature, the Variety of his Works, and his stupendous Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness throughout all, summoned the whole World to join with him in the
Adoration of their great and only Creator.

O praise the Lord of heaven: praise him in the height.
...Praise him all ye angels of his: praise him all his host.
Praise him sun and moon: praise him all ye stars and light.
Praise him all ye heavens: and ye water that are above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of the Lord, for he spoke the word and they were
made, he commanded and they were created.
He has made them fast for ever and ever: he has given them a law which shall
not be broken.
Praise the Lord upon earth, ye dragons and all deeps.
Fire and hail, snow and vapors, wind and storm, fulfilling his word.
Mountains and all hills: fruitful trees and all cedars.
Beasts and all cattle: worms and feathered fowls.
Kings of the earth and all people: princes and all judges of the world.
Young men and maidens, old men and children; praise the name of the Lord: for
his name only is excellent, and his praise above heaven and earth, Psalm, 148.
O speak good of the Lord all ye works of his, in all places of his dominion.
Praise thou the Lord, O my soul, Psalm 103. 22.
FINIS.
BOOKS Published by the Reverend Dr. Pelling, and are to be Sold by William
Rogers.
A Practical Discourse concerning Holiness. Wherein is showed the Nature, the
Possibility, the Degrees, and Necessity of Holiness; together with the means of
Acquiring and Perfecting it, 8vo. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A Discourse of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Wherein the Benefits
thereof are set forth, and the Distinction between Christ's Natural and
Spiritual Body Discussed, with Practical Conclusions drawn from the whole
Discourse, 8vo. Part 1. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A Practical Discourse upon the Blessed Sacrament: Showing the Duties of the
Communicant before, at, and after the Eucharist, 8vo. Part 2. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A Practical Discourse upon Charity in its several Branches; and of the
Reasonableness and useful Nature of this great Christian Virtue, 8o. Price 2 s.

A Practical Discourse upon Humility. Wherein is shown the Nature,
Reasonableness, and Usefulness thereof; together with the ways of Expressing
and Increasing it, 8vo. Price 2 s.

A Practical Discourse concerning God's Love to Mankind. Written for the
Satisfaction of some scrupulous, Persons, 8vo. Price 2 s.

A Practical Discourse concerning the Redeeming of Time, 8^o. Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Practical Discourse upon Prayer, 8o. Price 1 s. in 12^. Price 6 d.

A Sermon preached before the King at St. James's, October. 13th 1695.

BOOKS Printed for and are to be Sold by W. Rogers.
A Rchbishop Tillotson's Works, being all that were Published by his Grace
himself; and now Collected into one Volume, Fol. Price 20 s.

Bishop Wilkins Fifteen Sermons, 8vo.

Bishop of Worcester's Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly
Represented, etc. 4to.

-- Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared, in Two Parts, 4 to.

Bishop of Norwich's Two Sermons of the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence,
before the Queen at Whitehall, 4 to.

-- Sermon preached at St. Andrews-Holborn, on Gal. 6. 7.

-- Of Religious Melancholy. A Sermon preached before the Queen at Whitehall, 4
to.

-- Of the Immortality of the Soul, preached before the King and Queen at
Whitehall, on Palm Sunday, 4 to.

-- Thansgiving-Sermon before the King at St. James's, Apr. 16. 96.

Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists
protesting against Protestant Popery, 2 d. Edit. 4 to.

-- Answer to the amicable Accommodation of the Differences between the
Representer and the Answerer. 4 to.

-- Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and Catholic
Communion, etc. 4 to.

-- Preservative against Popery, in 2 Parts, with the Vindication, 4 to.

-- Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion of the Catholic
Church. First part. 4 to.

-- Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, 3 d. Edit. 4 to.

-- Apology for writing against the Socinians, 4 to.

-- Case of Allegiance to Sovereign Powers, stated, etc. 4 to.

-- Vindication of the Case of Allegiance, etc. 4 to.

-- Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Dr. Calamy, 4 to.

-- Sermon before the Lord Mayer, November 4. 1^^^. 4 to.

-- Fast-Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, June 17. 4 to.

-- Sermon before the House of Commons, Jan. 30. 1692. 4 to.

-- Sermon preached before the Queen, Feb. 1^ 1692. 4 to.

-- The Charity of lending without Usury, in a Scrmon before the Lord Mayor on
Easter-Tuesday, 1692. 4 to.

-- Sermon at the Temple-Church, May ^9. 16^^^. 4 to.

-- Sermon preached before the Queen, June 26. 1648. 4 to.

-- Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Dr. Meggor, late Dean of
Winchester, December. 10. 1692. 4 to.

-- A Sermon at the Temple-Church, December 30. 1694. upon the sad Occasion of
the Death of our gracious Queen, 4 to.

-- Practical Discourse concerning Death. In Octavo. Ninth Edition, Price 3 s.
In Twelves, Price 2 s.

-- Practical Discourse concerning Judgment, Third Edit. 8 vo.

-- A Discourse concerning the Divine Providence. 2 d. Edit. 4 to.

Dr. Claget's View of the whole Controversy between the Representer and the
Answerer, 4 to.

-- Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith, etc. 4 to.

-- Answer to the Eighth Chapter of the Representer's 2 d Part in the first
Dialogue between him and his Lay-Friend, 4 to.

-- State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began, 4 to.

-- School of the Eucharist, Translated and Published (with an excellent
Preface by Dr. Claget) in Quarto, Price 1 s. In Octavo Price 6 d.

-- Sermons in Two Volumes, 8 vo.

Dr. Wake's Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry, 4 to.

-- Sermons and Discourses on several Occasions, 8 vo.

-- Sermon preached before the Queen, April 2, 1690. 4 to.

-- Sermon before the Lord Mayor in Easter-Week, 1690. 4 to.

-- Sermon before the King and Queen, May 4, 1690. 4 to.

Mr. Brograve's Sermon before the King and Queen at Hampton Court, May 12 1689.
4 to.

Mr. Jessery's Sermon, preached in the Cathedral Church of Norwich, on Numb.
23. 10.

The Peaceable Christian, A Sermon, 4 to

Mr. Clack's Sermon at Bow-Church, July 5. 1691, at the Consec ration of his
Grace John Lord Archbishop of York, etc. 4 to

Mr. Hutchinson's Sermon at the Visitation at Beccles, May 27, 1692.

Mr. Griffith's Sermon at St. Laurence Church in Reading, October 3, 1692.

Mr. Blackhall's Sermon at Brentwood in Essex, October 7, 1693, at the
Visitation of Henry Lord Bishop of London, 4 to.

Mr. Prowae's Confirmation Sermon, preached at Bridgewater, July 16. 1693. 4 to.

Mr. Gee's Letter to the Superiors (whether Bishops or Priests) which approve
or license Popish Books in England, 4 to.

-- The History of the Persecutions of the Protestants in the Principality of
Orange, by the French King 4 to.

Mr. Tayl^^ Letter to the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, 4 to.

Dr. Linsord's Dialogues between Mr. G. and others, etc. 8 vo.

Mr. Johnson's Impossibility of Transubstantiation demonstrated.

Dr. Wallis's Defense of the Royal Society, 4 to.

J. Broccard's Alarm to all Protestant Princes, with a Discovery of Popish
Plots and Conspiracies, 4 to.

Mr. Hodge's Sermon of the Necessity, etc. of Gospel Ministers.

-- Treatise of the Lawfulness of the Marriage of the Clergy.

The Lord North's Light in the Way to Paradise, 8 vo.

Molins of the Muscles, etc. 8 vo.

Mr. Perk's new and easy Method to sing by Book, 8 vo.

-- The Art of Spelling, 8 vo.

Erasmus's Weapon for a Christian Soldier, 12 s.

Marlow's Book of Ciphers, or Letters reverst, etc.

Leonard's Reports in Four Parts, the second Edition, Fol.

Bulstrode's Reports, in Three Parts, the second Edition, Fol.

Bendloe and Dalison's Reports, Published by Mr. Row, 1689. Fol.

Ventris's Reports in two Parts. Fol.

Callis's Readings upon the Statute of Hen. VIII, 4 to.

The complete Clerk, containing the best Forms of Precedents, 4 to.

Wingate's Abridgment of all the Statutes in Force to 1689. 8 vo.

Washington's Abridgment of all the Statutes of King William, etc,

Fitz. Herbert's Natura Brevium, corrected and revised, 8 vo.

Brown's Entring-Clerk's Vade Mecum, 8 vo.

Doctor and Student, 8 vo.

Goodman of the Law against Bankrupts, 8 vo.

Wentworth's Office and Duty of Executors, with the Appendix.

Sir William Petty's Political Anatomy of Ireland, etc. 8 vo.

A Discourse of the Growth of England in Trade since the Reformation, Fol.

Col. Parson's Chronological Tables.

Mr. Lortie's Practical Discourse concerning Repentance, 12 s.

Mr. Elis's Letter to a Friend, etc. 8 vo

-- Reflecter's Defense of his Letter to a Friend, etc. 4 to

-- Protestant Resolved: Or a Discourse showing the Unreasonableness of his
turning Roman Catholic for Salvation, 4 to

-- Religion and Loyalty inseprarable, a Sermon preached at the Assizes at
Nottingham, Sept. 5. 1692, 8 vo

-- Necessity of serious Consideration, and speedy Repentance, 8 vo.

-- Folly of Atheism demonstrated to the Capacity of the most unlearned Reader,
8 vo

-- A short Scripture-Catechism, 12 s

The Christian Hearers First Lesson. A Sermon at Nottingham, Oct. 4. 94.

A Defense of Dr. Sherleck's Notion of a Trinity in Unity, 4 to.

Mr. Wilson's Discourse of Religion; showing its Truth and Reality; or the
Suitableness of Religion to Humane Nature, 8 vo

-- Discourse of the Resurrection, showing the import and certainty of it, 8 vo

Reason and Religion; In some useful Reflections on the most eminent Hypotheses
concerning the first Principles and Nature of Things.

Bishop of Bath and Wells's Commentary on the Five Books of Moses: With a
Dissertation concerning the Author or Writer of the said Books; and a General
Argument to each of them. In two Volumes, 8 vo

-- Sermon upon the Resurrection, preached before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen, at St. Bridget's-Church, on Monday in Easter-Week,
April 9, 1694, 4 to

Mausoleum: A Funeral Poem on our late gracious Sovereign Queen Mary of Blessed
memory.

An Elegy on his Grace John late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury: Both by N. Tate.

Mr. Dryden's Translation of C. A. du Fresnoy's Art of Painting; with Remarks:
Together with an Original Preface; containing a Parallel betwixt Painting and
Poetry: As also an Account of the most Eminent Painters, 4 to

The Liberty of Prayer Asserted, and Guarded from Licentiousness. By a Minister
of the Church of England, 8 vo.

A Letter to the three Absolvers, Mr. Cook, Mr. Collier, and Mr. Snett; being
Reflections on the Papers delivered by Sir John Friend, and Sir William
Parkyns, to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, at Tyburn, the place of
Execution, April 3, 1696: which said Papers are printed at length, Paragraph by
Paragraph. Fol. Price 6 d.

A true Copy of the Papers delivered by Mr. R. Charnock, Mr. Ed. King, Mr. Tho.
Keys, at Tyburn, March 18th. 1696. and of the Papers delivered by Sir John
Friend, and Sir William Parkyns, at Tyburn, April 3d 1696. and of the Papers
delivered by Brigadier Rookwood and Major Lowick, at Tyburn, the place of
Execution, April 26th, 1696, to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, just
before their several Executions; with an account of the Behavior of Brigadier
Rookwood, Major Lowick, and Mr. Cranburne; but more particularly the two last.
Fol. price 4 d.

A Reflection on our Modern Poesy: an Essay. Fol. price 6 d.

The exact Effigies of his Grace John late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, on a
large Sheet of Paper, curiously Engraven by Mr. White, from Mrs. Beale's
Painting. Price 12. d.


