A Plain and Short TREATISE OF AN Apoplexy, Convulsions, Colic, twisting of
the Guts, Mother Fits, Bleeding at Nose, Vomitting of Blood, Stone in the
Kidneys, Quinsey, Miscarriage, Hard Labor, Cholora Morbus: AND Several other
violent and dangerous Diseases that come of a sudden, and require present Help.

SHOWING The Sick or Bystanders what ought presently to be done.

Together with proper Remedies for each Disease, and plain Directions for the
use of them.

By J. PECHEY, of the College of Physicians in London.

London, Printed for the Author, and Sold at his House in Basing-lane, near
Bread-street, School.

THE PREFACE.
HAving often considered, that there are several Diseases so surprising, and
withal so very vioent, that the Patient is often dead, or past all hopes of
recovery, before a skilful Physician in many places can be called, or advised
with* I thought a plain English Treatise of such kind of Diseases might be of
general use, and that it may suit all conditions of Men, all by the frailty of
Nature lying open to one or other of these sudden Incursions, I have reduced
it to a small compass, that it may be the easier read over, and that each
Disease may be the soon, er turned to upon any sudden occasion. Ordinary
Readers being as often at a loss in a large Book as Travelers in a Wood; and
it is composed in a small Character, that as every one may need it, so every
one may be able to buy it, and I have Written it in a plain Style that every
one also may be able to understand it.

This little Book may be an assistant to Charitable Ladies and Gentlewomen in
the Country, who like the good Samaritan, have never an Hand but what is ready
to help their distressed Neighbors, here they may find plain directions, and
the most celebrated Medicines, such as the LondonPhysitians most frequently
make use of in these Diseases. The Traveller and Seafaring Man when they are
far distant from Physicians, and destitute of all other help, may here also
find releif.

The Medicines prepared by my self that are often mentioned in this Treatise,
are of great Virtue, and Efficacy, and have bin found Successful to admiration
in cureing several of these Diseases. And they keep good many Years, and will
endure the excess of Heat and Cold in various Climates. Therefore very proper
for those that live in the country, and in the Plantations abroad, or go to
Sea. And indeed every one that has been once seized with any one of these
Diseases, will undoubtedly wheresoever he dwells, think it no small comfort and
Security to have an approved Remedy ready at hand, in time of need.

Chap. I. of Sleepy Diseases, Coma, Lethargy, Carus, and Apoplexy.
THese Four sorts of Preternatural Sleep proceed from the same Causes, and
require the same Methods of Cure; and therefore shall be treated of together in
this Chapter.

When any Person is seized with a Sleepy Disease, the Bystanders must endeavor
by all means to rouse him, by offering violence to all his Senses; and
therefore you must expose his Eyes to the Sunbeams, or to a clear Light, his
Ears must be filled with violent Noises and Clamours, and you must be sure to
call him aloud by his own Name: sharp things are to be blown up his Nostrils;
the sense of Touching must be revived by Rubbings, Vellications, plucking of
the Hair, binding of the Members, squeezing of the Fingers together, and the
like: he must be presently Blooded if he has Strength but his strength is not
to be judged of, by the present Circumstances, but by such as he was in before
the Disease seized him. You must first Bleed in the Arm, and then in the
jugular Vein, presently after give the following Vomit.

Take of the Blessed Wine, one Ounce and an half; of Carduus water one Ounce;
of spirit of Juniper Berries, two Drams. Make a Vomit.

Inject two or three sharp Glisters in a Day.

Take of the Carminative decoction with Bay Berries and Juniper Berries, ten
Ounces; of the Electuary of Bay Berries ^ne Ounce; of Blessed Wine and
Brown-Sugar, each three Ounces; of C^ymical Oil of Juniper, ten Drops: Mix them
and make a Glister.

If a Glister be not rendered in an Hour's time, provoke the Belly by a
Suppository.

Take of Hiera ^i^ra, half an Ounce, of Sal Gemma one Dram; of Honey, a
sufficient quantity: Make Suppositories.

The Spirit of Sal Armoniack must be held often to the Nostrils, or my
Cephalic Tincture, which is one of the best Midicines in the World for Sleepy
Diseases, and indeed for all diseases of the Head and Spirits.

Things of all kinds that cause Revulsion must be used, not only Frictions and
Ligatures, but also Cupping-Glasses set on the Back, Shoulders, Arms and
Thighs: but in an Apoplexy you must not apply Cupping-Classes to the Back or
Hypochondres, left the Muscles of the Breast and Belly, should be contracted,
and so Respiration more hindered. Cupping-Glasses applied to the Head are
counted very proper, apply a Blistering Plaster with Euphorbium to the Neck;
Some, according to the custom of the Ancients, hold a red-hot Drying Pan to the
Head at such a distance, as it may burn the Hair, but not the Skin.

Take of the Waters of Rue, Balm, and Black-Cherries, each three Ounces; of
Compound Peony-water, and Compound Syrup of Peony, each one Ounce and an half;
of Tincture of Caster, one dram; of Spirit of Sal Armoniack, half a dram;
mingle them, make a Julop. Give four or five Spoonfuls often, or ten drops of
my Cephalic Tincture in two Ounces of Compound Peony-Water, or in a small
Glass of Canary.

In the general Cure of these Diseases, you must take notice, that in those
which poceed from Blood, Medicines that heat the least, are to be used: But
Bleeding is to be used freely, and afterward a vein in the Forehead is to be
opened, and things that purge Choler are to be mixed with those that purge
Phlegm.

If the Brain be very much cooled, the Sick after universal Evacuations may use
Tablets made in the following manner.

Take of Ambergrease, half a Scruple; distilled Oil of the Seeds of Anise,
Cinnemon, and Nutmegs, each three drops * of Oils of Cloves, one drop; of Sugar
dissolved in Orange Flower-Water, four Ounces; make Tablets. Let him take a
Dram or two every Morning, and let him be sure to take twenty drops of my
Cephaclic Tincture in two Ounces of Compound Peony-water at Bedtime, three
Nights before the New Moon. It is also proper to hold a Nutmeg often in the
Mouth, and to chew it; and perfumes are often to be held to the Nostrils,
especially Apoplectick Balsam, or my Cephalic Tincture. Spices are to be used
with Meats, and the following digestive Powder after Meals,

Take of the Seeds of Coriander, Sweet-Fennel, Caraways, each fifteen grains;
of White Amber, one dr^m; of the yellow Peel of Citrons; and Flowers of
Rosemary, each one dram and an half; of Nutmegs, half a dram; of White Sugar,
three ounces: Powder them grossly, and give half a Spoonful after Meals.

If from too great a quantity of Blood, a sleepy Disease is feared, the Patient
must be sufficiently Blooded, and the utmost endeavors must be used to make
the Hemorrhoids flow, than which nothing can be more advan^agious.

Purging must be also ordered to prevent a Relapse.

Take of the Pill of Amber, and of the lesser Coeh, each two scruples; of the
best Castor, six grains; of Oil of Amber a sufficient quanty: mix them, make 12
Pills, take six for a Dose, and the other six three days after. Or, take my
Pills, which are excellent in these diseases.

After Purging let the Sick use the following Medicine.

Take of the Conserves of the Flowers of Male-Peony, and of Rosemary, each one
Ounce; of the Bark of Citron Candied, ^^x drams; of the Species called Diambra
and Dian^bos, each one dram; of Castor Powdered, two scruples; of compound
Spirit of Lavender, half a dram, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrups of
Gilly-flowers, and of compound peony make an Electuary. Give the quantity of a
Nutmeg, Morning and Evening daily, and let the Sick take two spoonfuls of Black
Cherry-water, and ten drops of my Cephalic Tincture Morning and Evening,
presently after the use of the Electuary.

Take of Amber Powdered, one ounce; sprinkle the fourth part of it upon the
Head every night at Bed time.

Chap. II. Of Bleeding at Nose.
Bleeding at the Nose comes at any time of the Year, and afflicts those chiefly
that are weakly, and of a very hot Constitution; and more frequently when they
are Old than when they are Young.

In this Case you must do all you can to restrain the violent heat and
ebullition of the Blood, from whence arises the said unusual Extravasation, and
to turn the fore: of it another way. To which end Bleed often in the Arm, and
take away Blood freely: order also a Cooling and Thickening Di^, as three parts
of Fountain Water and one of Milk boiled together, and drank Cold; roasted
Apples, Barley Broaths, and such like things as are made without Flesh: order
the Sick to keep from Bed for some time daily, and give a gentle cooling
Glister every day, and let it not be once omitted. Give also a draught made of
half an ounce of Diacodium and Cowslip-water at Bed time to quell the fury of
the Blood: but because a sharp humor often accompanies Bleeding at Nose, and
the like which being mingled with the Blood, furthers it is motion, and opens
the Orifices of the Veins, besides revulsion and cooling, I usually give the
following Purging potion when the Disease is even at it is height.

Take of Tamarinds, half an ounce, of sena two drams, of Rhubarb, one dram and
an half; Boil them in a suff^cient quantity of water, to three ounces of the
strained Liquor add of Manna, and Syrup of Roses solutive. each one ounce, make
a Potion, and after it has done working, I give at Bed time a draught made of
two ounces of water of Red Popies, and one ounce of Diacodium, and when the
Bleeding* is gone quite off I give the Patient some purging potion again.

As to outward Applications, a Linen Bolster dipped in cold Water, wherein Sal
prunella has bin disolved, may he applied to the Nape of the Neck, and to both
the sides of it often in a day; and after Bleeding and Purging the following
Liquor may be used.

Take of Hungarian Vitriol, and Allom, each one ounce; of Phlegm of Vitriol,
half a Pint; Boil them till all is dissolved; filter the Liquor when it is
cold, and separate it from the Cristals that sometimes rise: To the remaining
Liquor add a twelfth part of Oil of Vitriol; And put a tent dipped in this Liquor
into the Nostril from whence the Blood flows, and keep it in two days.

Rags moistened in this Liquor and applied stop Blood, from what parts soever
it flows

Spitting of Blood, which betwixt Spring and Summer befalls weakly People of a
hot Constitution, whose Lungs are infirm, and rather Young People than Old, is
almost of the same nature with the Bleeding at the Nose, and requires almost
the same Method of Cure, only it will not bear Purging, by which, especialy if
repeated, the sick is apt to fall into a Consumption; but Bleeding used often,
a Glifter injected every day, a draught made of D^a odium taken at Bedtime,
and a Diet thickening and cooling will do the Business eff^ctually.

Chap. III. Of Vomiting of Blood.
VOmiting of Blood, from what cause soever it arises, is very dangerous; for if
too great a quantity of Blood be evacuated, their is danger of Death; if it
coagulate in the Stomach, and corrupt there, it occasions ^ainting. It must be
cured by Medicines that cause a Re^ulsion of the Blood from the Stomach, and by
such as attemperate it, and stop the opening of the Veins. And first, because
an orderly Diet is of great use in this case, the common Diet ought to be
astringent and cooling, as Barley-broths, Almond and Rice diet, Water Gruel,
and especially Starch boiled in Milk, whereunto may be added, a little
Rose Water, hard Eggs may be also used, dipped in Vinegar, also Bread dipped in
Water and Chicken Broth with Wood Sorrel, Purslain, and Plantian boiled in it:
But at the beginning of eating some astringent things should be taken, as a
Quince baked under the ashes, Medlars or the like.

Let the Sick abstrain from all Salt, Peppered, and Fried Meats, and also from
such things as yield a great deal of nourishment, unless the Weakness of the
Sick requires that they should be taken sparingly.

He must drink but little, and when he does, it must be Water, wherein iron has
bin quenched with a little juice of Lemon in it.

The Sick must not expose himself to the Winds, nor to the rays of the Sun, he
must Sleep moderately, and his Body must be kept open.

Bleeding must be used sparingly, and it must be repeated. The Members must be
rubbed and bound, and cleansing Glisters must be injected, Cupping-glases must
be applied to the Buttocks, Legs, and Loins.

Let two spoonfuls of Vinegar and Water mixed be given, if there be a suspicion
of clotted Blood; for by the use of it, it may be easily disolved, and driven
from the Veins of the Stomach, and they will be stopped thereby; foment the
Region of the Stomach also with it cold.

Let the Sick take Morning and Evening four ounces of the juice of Plantain
cold.

Take of old Conserve of Roses, and of Comfry Roots, each one ounce, of
Marmalade of Auinces half an ounce, one Myrobalane candied, troches of Amber
and Lemnian earth, each two drams, of coral prepared, and of Saffron of Mars
each one dram; with Syrup of dried Roses, make an Electuary, and let the Sick
take the quantity of a Nutmeg Morning and Evening.

Troches of Amber do not only bind, but also disolve clotted Blood; and
therefore are frequently to be used.

Tincture of Coral made with the juice of Lemons is also very good.

But when the Blood is evacuated violently, and cannot be stoped by the
forementioned Medicines, Narcoticks must be taken inwardly and injected by
Glisters, and the region of the Stomach must be anointed with the oil of Roses
and Myrtles washed in Vinegar; and after you have anointed it, sprinkle on
Powder of Coral, Bolearmenick, and sealed Earth.

Bleeding being sufficiently used, gentle and frequent Purging must be ordered,
whereby the Blood may be cleared from serous and Choleric Humors, occasioning
this Disease: but they ought to be made of Rhubarb, Myro^alans, Tamarinds, and
the like which bind as well as Purge, and do not stir the Humors. They may be
given in the form of a Bolus with Syrup of Myrtles or dried Roses, or in a
Potion made of a Decoction of Sorrel, Succory, Purslain, or the like.

When purging is used, the fore mentioned Electuary, Syrup of Coral, or some
other Astringent and Corroborating Medicine must be used at Bedtime.

Lastly, to prevent a relapse, a dram of Rhubarb must be given once a Week for
a long time.

Chap. IIII. Of Childrens Convulsions.
CHildrens Convulsions are so frequent, that they are almost the only Species
of Convulsions.

They are chiefly subject to them in the first Month, and at the time they
breed Teeth; but they also happen at other times and proceed from other causes
in such as are disposed to them. Sometimes they do not come presently after the
Birth, but lie hid until the breeding of Teeth, or not till a great while
after, and take their rise from an unhealthy or Big-bellied Nurse, from Milk
clotted or corrupted in the Stomach, from a Feverish disposit on, from Ulcers
or Scabs of the Head or of other parts suddenly disappearing, from changes of
the Air or the like.

We must endeavor to prevent these Convulsions in Children and Infants, or to
cure them when they are come; for if the former Children of the same Parents
have been subject to Convulsive Fitts, this Disease ought to be prevented by
the early use of Remedies in such as are Born after. To this end it is
customary to give to new Born Babes as soon as they begin to breath, some
medicine proper for Convulsions: Some upon this occasion give some drops of
Pure Honey, others a spoonful of Canary Wine sweetened with Sugar, or Oil of
Almonds fresh drawn; others give a drop of Oil of Ambar: But besides these
things used at first, which certainly do good, some other Remedies ought to be
given; for instance give a spoonful twice a Day of the following Liquor.

Take of the waters of Black-Cherries and Rue, each one ounce and a half; of
Langiuses Antiepileptick Water, one ounce; of Syrup of Coral, six drams; of
prepared Pearl, fifteen grains; mingle them in a Viol.

The third or fourth day after the Birth, make an Issue in the Neck, and if the
countenance be florid, Bleed, and take away an ounce and an half or two ounces
from the jugular Vein: but take care that too much Blood does not flow out in
Sleep: Rub gently the Temples with the following Ointment

Take of Oil of Nutmegs by expression., two drams of Balsam of Copaiba, three
drams, of Ambar, one Scruple: mix them.

Hang round the Neck the Roots and Seeds of Male ptony sewed up in a Rag.

Moreover medicines proper for Convulsions must be given daily to the Nurse:
let her take Morning and Evening a draught of Whey wherein the Roots of
Male-Peony, or the Seeds of sweet Fennel have bin boiled, and let her be very
orderly in her Diet.

But if an Infant be actually seized with Convulsions, because the Issue does
not run well, you must apply a Blister to the Neck, or behind the Ears; and if
the Infant be not of a cold Constitution, Blood must be drawn from the jugular
Veins by Leeches, and Linnements must be used to the Temples, Nostrils and
Neck, and to the Soles of the Feet, and Glisters of Milk and Sugar must be
injected.

Take of the Oils of Copaiba, and of Castor, each two drams, of Ambar, half a
dram, make a Linnement; and every fixth or eight Hour give a Paper of my Powder
for Convulsions in a spoonful or two of Black Cherry-water, sweeted with Syrup
of Peony,

When by reason of breeding of Teeth, difficultly Convulsions happen, a thin
and cooling Diet must be ordered, and Bleeding and Glifters must be often used.

When Children are seized with Convulsions, not presently after the Birth, or
upon Breeding of Teeth, but from other occasions and accidents; the cause for
the most part of such is either in the Head or in the Bowels: When the former
is uspected, as is wont to be known by the signs which show watery Humors
heaped up in the Brain, my Powder for Convulsions, and the medicines
abovementioned must be used. Moreover for those who bear Purging well, a Vomit
or gentle Purge must be prescribed.

When tho cause of Convulsions seems to be lodged in the Bowels, or when Worms
or sharp Humors in the Belly are the cause, my Worm-Powder is of excellent use.

Chap. V. Of the Colic.
It takes it is Name from the Gat Colon, which is the part affected: The causes
of the Colic are excrementious matter, Wind, the excrements hardened,
costivness, thick, cold, and phlegmatic Humors, also Choleric and Melancholy
humors. There are other causes of the Coli^k, but less frequent, as Stones
growing in the Guts, Worms, hard Bodies obstructing the Guts, as Cherry-stones,
hard Cheese and the like.

The external Causes are a cold Constitution of the Air gross meats of hard
disgestion, immoderate Sleep immoderate Venery, and other external Causes,
which may injure the Concoction of the Stomacht but from what cause soever this
Tormenting Disease is occasioned, there is no Med cines yet known that do so
certainly Cure it, as my Elixir and Cordial Drops.

But to prevent a relapse, and to strengthen the Bowels, and to open
Obstructions I advise the Sick to Ride often.

Chap. VI. Of Mother Fits, and Vapors.
THese Diseases are the most frequent of all Chronical Diseases, and they are
not only frequent, but so wonderfully various that they resemble almost all the
Diseases poor Mortals are subject to: Sometimes they possess the Head, and
occasion an Apoplexy, and this seizes Women very often after Delivery, or is
occasioned by hard Labor, or some violent commotion of the mind.

Sometimes they produce violent Convulsions, very like the Falling Sickness,
the Belly and Bowels swelling toward the Throat, the Woman struggling so
violently that though at other times her strength is but ordinary, she now can
scarce be held by all the strength of the by standers uttering some odd and
inarticulate Sounds, and striking her Breast: these Convulsions are commonly
called Mother Fits.

Sometimes they possess the outward part of the Head causing violent pain
continually fixed in one part, which may be covered by the top of your Thumb;
and violen^ Vomiting accompanies this pain: this pain chiefly afflict^ Maids
that have the Green Sickness.

Sometimes falling upon the Heart, they occasion a violent beating of the
Heart, so that the women who are afflicted with it, verily believe that the
Bystanders may hear the found of the Heart thumping upon the Ribs.

This chiefly afflicts those that are of a thin Habit of Body and of a Weak
constitution, and also Young Maids that have the Green Sickness.

Sometimes the Patient Choughs without intermission but brings up nothing: this
chiefly invades Women tha^ abound in Phlegm.

Sometimes rushing violently upon the Belly the Vapors occasion violent pain
much like the twisting of the Guts, and the Woman Vomits exceedingly: this
chiefl^ seizes those that are of a lax and crude Habit of Body, and those that
have suffered much in bringing forth great Children.

When the Vapors fall upon one of the Kidneys, they plainly represent, by the
pain they cause there, a Fit like that of the Stone; nor is the Bladder free
from them, ^or sometimes they do not only cause pain there, but also ^^op the
Urine just as if there were a Stone: but this kind ^^izing the Bladder very
seldom happens; that which re^embles the Stone in the Kidneys is not so rare.

Sometimes falling upon the Stomach they cause a^ontinual Vomiting and
sometimes a Looseness, when they are settled upon the Guts

And as the Vapors afflict almost all the Inner parts, so sometimes they seize
also the outward parts, and occasion pain and sometimes Swellings in the Jaws,
Shoulders, Hands, Thighs, Legs; nor can the Teeth free themselves from the
assaults of Vapors, though they are not hollow; at these pains and swellings
which afflict the outward parts chiefly seize those Women that are in a manner
quite (...) out by a long series of Vapors, and by the force of them.

But among all the Torments the Vapors occasion, there (...) none so common on
as a Pain in the Back: and this is worth observing, that often a notable Cold
of the outward parts makes way for these Fits of the Vapors, which for the
most part does not go off till the Fit ends: and moreover all Women troubled
with Vapors complain of a dejection and sinking of the Spirits.

Lastly, every one knows that Women troubled with Vapors sometimes Laugh
excessively, and sometimes Cry as much without any real cause for either: But
among all the Symptoms that accompany Vapors, this is the most proper and
almost inseparable; namely an Urine as clear as Rock Water, and this Women in
Vapors evacuate plentifully: and it sometimes happens that they belsh up ill
fumes as often as they eat, though they eat only Moderately, and according as
they have an Appetite; and sometime the Wind that comes from the Stomach is as
sower as Vinegar.

Nor are they unhappy only for that their Bodies are so ill affected, and as it
were tottering like ruined Houses just about to fall; for their Minds are more
diseased that their Bodies, and an incurable Desperation is mixed with the very
nature of their Disease; and what the Roman orato^ said of the Superstitious
exactly agrees with these Melancholy People. Sleep, says he, seems to be a
refuge for the Laborious and Careful, but from thence cares and fears arise
whilst only Funerals and Apparitions of their Deceased Friends are represented
in Dreams, and they are so tormented in Body and Mind, that one would think
their Lives were a Purgatory, wherein they were to purify themselves, and to
expiat Crimes committed in some other State. Nor does this happen only to mad
people, but also to those who, if you except these Impetuosities of Mind are
very prudent and judicious, and who much excel for deep thought, and wisdom of
Speech, others whose minds were never excited by these provokments to thinking.
But this dreadful condition of Mind which I have above described, seizes only
those that have much and a long while conflicted with this Disease, and have
been at length wholly vanquished by it* especially if adversity, Care o^
Trouble of mind, or the like joined with an ill Habit o^ Body, have added Oil
to the Flame.

In order to the cure, let eight ounces of Blood be taken from the Right Arm,
and the following Plaster applied to the Navel.

Take of Gal^anum dissolved in Tincture of Castor, and st^ained, three drams;
of Tacamahaca, two drams, mix them make a Plaster.

The next Morning let her make use of the following Pills: Take of the Pill
coch: Major, two Scruples, of Castor powdered, two Grains, of peruvian Balsam,
four drops, make four Pills. Let her take them at five in the Morning, and
sleep after them. Repeat them twice or thrice, every Morning, or every other
Morning according to their operation, and the strength of the Patient*

After the purging Pills are taken, she must take two of my Pills for Vapors
early in the Morning, and at five in the Afternoon for thirty days drinking
after them Morning and Evening, three spoonfuls of compound Br^ony-water* and
so the Vapors are most commonly Cured, and most obstructions in Women,
especially the Green Sickness, and also all suppressions of the Courses

Tu^bridge-waters are also very proper for the Cure of these Diseases; and
Riding abroad in the Air, if the Woman has Strength to bear it.

When a Fit of the Vapors seizes any Woman, suddenly you must hold to her
Nostrils Assafaetida, Galbanum, Castor, Spirit of Salarmoniae or the like, and
give inward^y ten drops, of Spirit of Hartshorn in three spoonfuls of Compound
Briony-water.

Chap. VII. Of Twisting of the Guts.
THis dreadful Disease, which has hitherto been accounted Mortal by almost all,
arises from the in^erted and preposterous Motion of the Guts.

When it appears by Glisters Vomited up and other ^^gns, that there is a
twisting of the Guts, you must endeavor three things, First, that the contrary
motion of the Stomach, which occasions the same motion of the Guts, may be
Hindered; Secondly, that the Intestines being Weakened by sharp Humors may be
strengthened, Thirdly, that the Stomach and Guts may be freed from the Humors;
and that you may Answer these Indications, you must order the Cure in the
following manner. First prescribe one Scruple of Salt of Wormwood, in a
spoon^ul of juice of Lemons to be taken Morning and Evening, but at other times
of the Day order some spoonfuls of Mint-water without Sugar, or any thing else,
to be taken twice in an Hour, and order a Live Ki^ling to lie always on the
naked Belly: but after the Pain and Vomiting has whollyceased, for the space of
two or three Days, give one dram of the Pill Coch Major dissolved in
Mint-water, which must be also used very often all the time of the working of
the Pills, to hinder the return of the Vomiting; nor is the Kitling to be
removed before the Patient has taken the Pills,

The Sick must observe a very thin Diet, namely some spoonfuls of Chicken
Broth must be taken twice or thrice a Day, and he must keep his Bed till signs
of perfect Health appear, and when he is well, he must persist in the use of
Mint-water for a long time, and keep his Belly warm with Flannels doubled, that
there may not be a relapse; to which this Disease is more obnoxious than an
other.

Chap. VIII. Of the Stone in the Kidneys.
WHen any one is seized with a Fit of the Stone, setting aside all other
remedies, let him presently drink a Gallon of Posset drink wherein two ounces
of the Roots of marsh Mallows have been boiled, and let the following Glister
be injected.

Take of the Roots of marsh Mallows and Lillies, each one ounce, of the Leaves
of Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, and of the Flowers of Camomile, each one
Handful, of Flax and Fenugreek seeds each half an Ounce, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water, to a Pint and a half; dissolve in in the strained
Liquor, brown Sugar, and syrup of Marshmallows, each two ounces, mingle them
make a Glister.

As soon as he has rendered all the Posset drink by Vomiting, and rejected the
Glister, let him take thirty of my Cordial drops in a Glass of White wine, and
compose himself to rest on his Bed.

But to prevent this Disease, let him drink Acton or Richmond Waters, or other
Purging waters often, especially when he finds a pain in his Back or heat of
Urine* And every Summer if his Condition will allow of it, Tunbridge Waters or
the like, for the space of a Month or Whey for the same time, when he has not
an opportunity to drink these Waters.

Riding ou Horse Back is also very good for prevention* But it is to be noted;
that if the Stone is too large to pass, neither the Waters nor Riding are
proper, for some old Men have hastened their end; by attempting in vain to Cure
this Disease by such Remedies, the Stone by this means being thurst forward,
when it was too big to pass.

If a Bloody Urine be occasioned by the Stone in the Kidneys, take two ounces
and a half of Manna, dissolved in a quart of Whey once a Week for some Months,
and when you are to Walk or Ride, be sure, to drink a large draught of small
Beer before you go out, and in the way if you stay long a broad.

Chap. IX. Of Vomiting and Looseness, called Cholera Morbus.
THis disease is easily known, for there are violent Vomitings, and an
Evacuation of ill Humors with great difficulty and trouble by Stool, there is
a violent Pain of the Belly, an Heart Burning, Thirst, a quick Pulse and often
Convulsions, Fainting, and a Coldness of the extreme Parts, and such lik
Symptoms, which Frighten the Bystanders, and kill the Patient in Twenty four
Hours.

For the Cure of this dreadful Disease, proceed in the following manner, boil a
Chicken in about 3 Gallons of Spring water, and let the Sick drink several
large Draughts of it a little warm, or for want of it Posset Drink: At the same
time a good quantity of the Liquor will serve for several Glisters, to be given
successively, until all the Liquor is consumed and evacuated upwards and
downwards. The Filth being ejected by these means, which require three or four
Hours, give twenty of my Cordial drops in a spoonful of Cinnamon Water, or the
^ike.

But it must be carefully noted that if the Vomitting and Looseness continue
many Hours, suppose ten or twelve, and the Sick is worn out, so that the
extreme Parts ^ax cold, and the use of the Liquor above mentioned has been
neglected, you must immediately give my Cor^i^^ drops as above directed, and
Sixteen of them must be also given Morning and Evening daily, till the Sick has
recovered his Strength and Health.

Chap. X. Of hard Labor.
THat is said to be hard Labor, which does not observe the due and ordinary
course of Nature, and longer time is spent in it, and the pains are more
violent than usual, and the Symptoms that accompany it are more grievous.

Many causes may be assigned for it, both external, and internal, the internal
depend on the Mother, the Womb* or the Child.

As to the Mother, the natural Weakness of the whole Body may make the Labor
difficult, or her Age, she being too Young or too Old, or it may be occasioned
by Diseases, which she had with her Big-belly, Leanness on two much dryness of
the Body, or Fat compressing the passages of the Womb, or the ill-conformation
of the Bones encompassing the Womb, as in those that are Lame, may also
occasion it, Wind swelling the Bowels, a stone on preternatural tumor in the
Bladder that presses the Womb, may be the cause. So may the ill Constitution of
the Lungs, or the parts serving respiration, for the holding of the Breath is
very necessary to help the exclusion of the Child.

As to the Womb, various Diseases of it, may render the Delivery difficult, as
Tumors, Ulcers, Obstructions, and the like. As to the Child, hard Labor is
occasioned, when by reason it is Dead, or Putrified, or any way Diseased, it
cannot confer any thing to it is own exclusion. Also when the Body or Head of it
is large, or when there are many, so Twins most commonly cause hard Labor; or
when it is ill situated, as when the Hands or the Feet offer first, or when one
Hand or Foot comes out, or when it is doubled, or when the Membranes break too
soon, so that the Water flows out, and leaves the Orifice of the Womb dry at
the time of exclusion. Or when the Membranes are too thick, so that they cannot
be easily broken by the Child.

The external causes depend on things necessary and contingent; things
necessary are those which are commonly called non-natural, so Cold and Dry air,
and a North wind are very injurious to Women in Labor, because they bind the
Body, and drive the Blood and Spirits to the inner parts, and they are very
injurious to the Child coming from so warm a place. Hot weather also dissipates
the Spirits and weakens the Child. Crude meats and such as are difficulty
Concocted, and those that bind, taken in a great quantity before Labor, render
it difficult, the Stomach being weakened, and the common passages contracted,
which ought to be very open in this Case.

Drowsiness hinders the Action of the Mother and Child, and shows that nature
is Weak. The unseasonable motion of the Woman much retards the Delivery; as
when she refuses upon occasion to Stand, Walk, Lie, or Sit, or flings her self
about unadvisedly, so that the Child cannot be Born the right way, being turned
preposterously by the Restlesness of the Mother.

The retention of such things as should be evacuated at the time of Labor, as
of Urine, that swells the Bladder, or excrements in the right Gut, the P^^es
also much swelled, narrow the Neck of the Womb, and so hinder natures
endeavors. Lastly violent Passions of the mind, as ^ear, Sorrow and Anger,
make the Labor difficult.

To things Contingent ought to be referred, a Blow, a Fall, or a Wound, which
may much obstruct Labor, also the want of Bystanders, which ought to assist
the Woman, namely strong Women or Maids which may lift her up just at the time
of her Delivery. An unskilful Midwife, that orders the Women to endeavor an
expulsion, and to stop her Breath, when the Ligaments stick fast to the Womb,
so that the Woman is tired before the time of her Delivery.

Difficult Labor is known by the Woman, the Bystanders, and the Midwife. And
first if the Woman continue a long time in Labor, namely two, three; four or
more Days, whereas a natural Birth is finished in twenty four Hours. Languid
pains returning at long distances are a sign of difficult Labor; also the
Pains tending backward, rather than forward. But the causes of difficult Labor
may be known by the Woman's Relation, and most commonly upon sight, So the
Weakness of the Woman, or Leanness, or over Fatness may be seen by the Habit of
the Body. The diseases of the Womb may be known by their proper signs. The
weakness of the Child by the weak and slow motion of it. The bigness of the
Child may be Judged of by the Stature of the Parents, especially if a Gigantick
man be Married to a Dwarfish Woman, but when there are none of these Causes,
and the Woman's and Child's endeavors are strong, and yet the Labor is
difficult, they signify that the Secundine is so strong that it cannot be
easily broken, and this will be confirmed, if no Water, or Moisture flows out
in Labor. The proposterous Figure of the Child may be perceived by the Midwife.

As to the Cure of hard Labor. First all those things that retard it must be
removed, as much as may be. Afterward Medicines that further Labor must be
given: And first it is common with Women to give a spoonful or two of Cinnamon
water, or Cinnamon powdered with a little Saffron, or half a dram of Confection
of Alkermes in Broth, or half a scruple of Saffron alone in some Br^ath, or
every Hour a little Wine.

If these things are not sufficient, the following may be used, which have been
frequently very effectual Give five grains of extract of Saffron, or five drops
of Oil of Cinnamon, or thirty drops of my Cephalic Tincture, in a Glass of
Wine; for it powerfully hastens Delivery. Sneezing is also very Beneficial: It
may be provoked by the following Powder.

Take of white Hellebore, half a dram, of long Pepper, one Scruple, of Castor
five grains. Make a Powder: Let the quantity of a Pease be blown up the
Nostrils.

But difficult Labor must be helped also by outward Remedies. Let the Midwife
frequently anoint the Womb with Oil of Sweet almonds, and let the Belly be
somented with an emollient Decoction made of the Roots of marsh Mallows, the
Leaves of Mallows, and Mugwort, Linseeds, Fenugreek Seeds, and the Flowers of
Camomile and Melilot. And sharp Glisters must be injected: Anoint the Navel
with the Oil of Amber.

If the Child begins to come forth preposterously, as with one Arm, or first
with a Foot, or the like; the Midwife ^ust thrust them back, and turn the Child
right, which may be done by placing the Woman in a Bed upon her Back, with her
Head low and her Feet high, and then she must thrust the Child gently into the
Womb, and endeavovr to turn it right, namely the Face toward the Mothers back,
and the Buttocks and Legs must be Elevated toward the Mothers navel to hasten
a natural Birth.

Chap. XI. Of Miscarriage.
MIscarriage is the exclusion of an imperfect, or unripe Child. The causes of
Miscarriage are some inward, some outward. The inward may be reduced to four
Heads, Namely to the humors, to the Child, to the Womb, and to the Disease of
the Mother. The humors may occasion Miscarriage when they offend in quantity
or quality. They offend in quantity either by way of excess or defect. The
quantity is excessive when there is more Blood than is requisite to nourish the
Child; for then it flows into the Veins of the Womb, and is excluded like the
Monthly Courses, and so the Child comes away with it. There is too small a
quantity of the nutritious humor when the Child's nourishment is by any means
lessened, as by fasting, and when the Woman with Child nauseats all sorts of of
Food, or Vomits it up again, or the like.

In respect of the Child Miscarriage may happen, if it be too big, so that by
reason of it is ^ulk it cannot be contained in the Womb. And for this reason
little Women often Miscarry, especially if they are Married to men bigger than
ordinary. Plurality of Children may also occasion Miscarriage, as when one, or
two, or three are contained in the Womb at one time.

The womb it self occasions Miscarriage, if it be not large enough, or if it be
inflamed, or impostumated, or moist and slack, so that it cannot contain the
Child so well as it ought to do.

Miscarriage comes two ways from the Disease of the Mother. First when her
Disea^es are communicated to the Child, whereby it is killed or so weakened
that it cannot receive due Nourishment or Growth, such are continual Fevers and
Agues, the Fr^nch Pox, and many such like. Secondly when the said Diseases of
the Mother cause great evacuations or great commotions of the Body, as large
Bleeding from what part of the Body soever, Fluxes of the Belly, grievous
Swooning, Falling Sickness, Vomiting, and a continual endeavor to go to s^ool
called Tenesms, which above all other is wont to occasion Miscarriage: Outward
causes which further Miscarriage do some of them Kill the Child, others draw
away the nourishment, and others dissolve the bands wherewith it is fastened to
the Womb.

The Child is Killed by great commotions of the mind, by Anger, Sadness,
Frights and the like; by meats earnestly Longed for and not obtained, by strong
Purging medicines, by things that provoke the Courses, and by ill smells,
especially the stink of a Candle ill put out: violent exercise, as Dancing,
Running, Riding, Jolting in a Coach or Cart, Carrying or Lifting from the
Ground an heavy Weight, a violent Fall, a blow on the Belly, vehement motion of
the Belly, Coughing, Vomiting, Looseness, Sneezing, Convulsions, Crying out,
immoderrate or over wanton embraces, Vehement motion of the Arms, and the like
occasion Miscarriage

The signs of present Miscarriage are manifest of themselves: but such as go
before and show the same are these, an unusual heaviness of the Loins and Hips,
an unwillingness to stir, appetite gone, Shivering and Shaking coming by Fits,
Pain of the Head, especially about the Roots of the Eyes, a straightening of
the Sides and Belly above the Navel; the Flaging or Falling, and Extenuation of
the Dugs. But if frequent and almost continual Pains torment the Reins and
Loins, with endeavors to Evacuate the Womb, the Woman will certainly Miscarry
in a short time.

If from violent external Causes, as a Blow, Fall, and the like, vehememt Pain
and Disturbance arise in a Woman with Child, she ought to Bleed presently, and
to keep her Bed three or four Days, or longer.

The Cure of Miscarriage consists in Preservation; for that which is past
cannot be helped: But all the Symptoms which follow Miscarriage are the same
which accompany Women duly brought to Bed.

The Preservation from Miscarriage consists principally in these two things;
the one concerns the Woman before she is with Child, and the other when she is
with Child: Before the Woman is with with Child, all Indispositions of the
Body, which are wont to cause Miscarriage, must be removed, as fullness of
Blood, ill Humors, and peculiar Diseases of the Womb.

If the Woman be too full of Blood, when she is with Child, she must be Blooded
in the first Months twice or thrice if need be; but much Blood must not be
taken away at a time; and if she be troubled with abundance of ill Humors,
gentle Purging must be repeated, especially in the middle Months; in the mean
while astringent and strengthening Medicines must be used all the time the
Woman is with Child.

Take of Conserve of Roses, two Ounces, of Citron Peel Candied, six Drams, of
Myrobalans Candied, and of the Pulp of Dates, each half an Ounce, of Coral
prepa^ed, Pearl prepared, and Shavings of Hartshorn, each one Dram, with Syrup
of Quinces make an Electuaery, of which let the Woman take the quantity of a
Nutmeg every other Night at Bed time.

But that the success of this Medicine may be good, the Woman must keep her
self as quiet, both in Body and Mind, as possibly she can, and abstain from
Coition. But if by reason of the vehemence of the Cause, whither Internal or
External, the Woman is ready to Miscarry, you must do the best you can with the
following Remedies. And in the first place, so soon as the Pain shall be
perceived in the lower parts of the Belly, we must endeavor to allay them both
by Medicines taken inwardly, and outwardly applied; for if Miscarriage be
caused by Crudities and Wind, which is most usual, when it begins from an
inward Cause, a Powder must be given made of Aromaticum Rosatum and Coriander
Seeds, give of each half a Dram, or three or four Spoonfuls of Dr. Stephen's
Water, if Phlegm and Wind abound; at the same time let carminative Medicine be
applied below the Woman's Navel, such are Bags o^ Anniseeds, Fennel Seeds,
Fenugreek Seeds, Flowers of Camomile, Elder, Rosemary, and Stechas mixed
together, o^ a Rose Cake fried in a Pan with Rich Canary, and sprinkled with
Powder of Nutmegs and Coriander Seeds; if by these means the Pains cease not,
inject a Glyster made of Win^ and Oil, wherein half an Ounce of Venice Treacle
must be dissolved, and after the Glyster is come away, you mus^ give sixteen of
my Cordial Drops, in a Spoonful of Stephen's Water. But if Blood begins to come
away, you must Bleed immediately, and rub the upper Parts, and tie the Members;
and if the Flux of Blood continues, give tw^ Ounces of the Juice of Plantain,
sweetened with an Ounce (...) Syrup of Poppies, to which add one Scruple of
Bolearmeni^^ and apply hot a little bag full of Red Roses and Balaustine^
Boiled in Smiths Water and Red Wine, to the Woman's Belly.

Chap. XII. Of an immoderate Flux of the Courses.
AN immoderate Flux of the Courses invades, either i^ Childbed, or at other
times; as to the first, that afflicts Women most on the first Days after a
difficult Labor, and is accompanined with a long train of Hysteri^^ Symptoms;
and as it happens only on the first Days, so us^ally it does not last long; for
if a thickning Diet be o^dered* it soon abates. The following Drink may be all
used

Take of Plantane Water, and Red Wine, each one Pint, boil them till a third
part is consumed, sweeten it with a sufficient quantity of White Sugar; let the
Woman take half a Pint of it twice or thrice a Day.

But as to the Flux which happens out of Childbed, though it befalls Women at
any time, yet most commonly it invades a little before the time they leave
them, namely when they are about Forty five Years of Age, if they have them
Young, and about Fifty if it were late before they begun to have them; and by
reason of the great quantity of Blood, which is continually evacuated, they are
almost continually afflicted with Vapors.

In order to the Cure, you must bleed in the Arm, and eight Ounces of Blood
must be taken away; the next Morning the following Purge must be given.

Take of Tamarinds, half an Ounce, of Sena two Drams, of Rhubarb, one Dram and
an half; infuse them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water, and in three
Ounces of the strained Liquor Dissolve of Manna, and Syrup of Roses Solutive,
each one Ounce, make a Purging Potion; which must be taken thrice, three Days
betwixt each Purge; and every Night at Bed time, through the whole course of
the Disease, twelve of my Cordial Drops must be taken in two Spoonfuls of small
Cinnamon Water, or the like. Take of the Conserve of dried Roses, two Ounces,
of the Troches of Lemnian Earth, one Dram and an half, of Pomgranate Pill, and
red Coral prepared, each two Scruples, of Boodstone, Dragons Blood, and
Bolearmenick, each two Scruples; with a sufficient quantity of simple Syrup of
Coral, make an Electuary; whereof let her take the quantity of a large Nutmeg
in the Morning and at Five in the Afternoon, drinking upon it six Spoonfuls of
the following Julep.

Take of the Waters of Oak Bud, and of Plantain, each three Ounces, of Cinnamon
Water hordeated, and of Syrup of dried Roses, each one Ounce; of Spirit of
Vitriol, a sufficient quantity to make it pleasantly acid. Take of the Leaves
of Plantain, and of Nettles, each a sufficient quantity, beat them together in
a Stone Mortar, and press out the Juice, Clarify it, and give six Spoonfuls of
it cold three or four times in a Day.

After the first Purge, apply the following Plaster to the Loins. Take of
Diapalma, and of the Plaster for tuptures, each equal parts, mix them and
spread them upon Leather.

A cooling and thickening Diet must be ordered, and a Glass of Claret may be
allowed once or twice a Day to recover the strength.

This Method may be also used to prevent Miscarriages, but the Juices and
Purges must be omitted.

Chap. XIII. Of a suppression of the Childbed Purgations.
THere is so great a Flux of Humors from all parts to the Womb, when a Woman
is with Child, and during the Commotion in her Labor, that in case there be
not afterward sufficient evacuation of them, the Woman is in great danger of
very ill Accidents, and sometimes of Death it self; because these Humors
corrupted by their stay, there will certainly cause a great Inflammation, and
this is the reason why the suppression of these Childbed Purgations is one of
the worst and most dangerous Symptoms which can befall a Woman after Delivery,
especially if they be wholly and suddenly stopped the first three or four Days,
which is the time they should come down plentifully, for then follow an accute
Fever, great pains in the Head, Pains in the Breast, Reins and Loins,
Suffocation of the Mother, and an Inflammation which is suddenly communicated to
the Belly, which thereupon becomes much swelled and blown up; there happens
also a great difficulty in Breathing, Choakings, Beating of the Heart,
Fainting, Convulsions, and often Death it self, if the Suppression continues.
And if the Woman outlives it, she is in danger of an Abscess in the Womb, and
afterward of a Cancer, or there may happen great Imposthums in the Belly; also
the Gout, Sciatica, and Lameness; or an Inflammation and Abscess in the Breast.
The Causes of the Stoppage of the Childbed Purgations, proceed either from a
great Looseness, or strong Passions of the Mind, also from great Colds and cold
Drink. To bring the Childbed Purgations well down, let the Woman avoid all
Perturbations of Spirit, which may stop them; let her ly in Bed with her Head
and Breast a little raised, keeping her self very quiet, that so the Humors
may be carried downwards by their natural tendency; let her observe a good
Diet, some what hot and moist, and apply the Plaster mentioned in the Chapter
of Vapors to her Navel.

Take of the Conserves of Roman Wormwood, and of Ru^ each one Ounce, of the
Troches of Mirth, two Drams, of Castor, English Saffron, Volatile Salt of
Salarmoniak, and of Assafoetida, each half a Dram; with a sufficient quantity
of the Syrup of the five opening Roots make an Electuary. Let her take the
quantity of a large Nutmeg every third Hour, drinking upon it three or four
Spoonfuls of the following Mixture,

Take the Waters of Pennyroyal and Balm, each three Ounces, of Compound Briony
Water, two Ounces; of Sypup of Mugwort, three Ounces and an half; of Saffron,
two Drams; of Castor tied up in a Rag and hanged in the Glass, one Scruple;
mingle them. If these things are used presently upon the Suppression, they
generally take it off,

Chap. XIV. Of Quinsey.
A Quinsey comes at any time of the Year, especially between Spring and Summer,
and chiefly seizes Young Men, and such as are of a Sanguine Complexion, and
Red Haired People more than any other. The Sick shiver and shake, presently a
Fever follows, and a little after a Pain and Inflammation of the Jaws; and if
the Sick be not presently relieved, he can neither-Swallow nor draw his Breath,
so that he is under the Apprehension of being Strangled, by reason the Jaws are
stoped by the Inflammation and Swelling. There is great danger in this Disease,
for it sometimes destroys a Man in a few Hours.

In order to the Cure, Bleed presently in the Arm, and take away a large
quantity of Blood, and presently afterward open the Veins under the Tongue,
and then touch the inflamed parts with Honey of Roses made very sharp, with
Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur; and the following Gargarism must be used often,
not in the common way; for it must be kept in the Mouth without motion till it
wax hot, and then it must be spit out.

Take of the Waters of Plantain, Roses, and Frogs spawn, each four ounces; the
Whites of three Eggs turned to a Water by beating, of White-Sugar-candy, three
drams; make a Gargarism.

The Patient must also take daily of the Emulsion to be mentioned in the cure
of a Pleurisy; the next Morning bleed again, unless the Fever and difficulty
of swallowing abate, and defer purging till the next day: but if both these are
lessened, give presently the Lenitive Purge, mentioned in the Chapter of the
immoderate Flux of the Courses. If the Fever and other Symptoms are like to be
troublesome after Purging, they will be quelled by Bleeding, repeated as
before, and by applying a large and strong Blister to the Neck, and by a
Glister of Milk and Sugar injected every Morning, except when the Sick purges
through the whole course of the Disease; the use of all kinds of Flesh, and
their Broths are to be forbid, and the Patient must be dieted with Oatmeal and
Barley broths, roasted Apples, or the like, and he must drink Small-beer, and
he must keep from Bed some Hours every day.

Chap. XV. Of a Pleurisy.
THis Disease is very frequent, and comes at any time, but especially betwixt
Spring and Summer; it chiefly seizes those that are of a Sanguine Constitution,
and often Country People, and those that are accustomed to hard labor; it most
commonly begins with a shaking and shivering, and then heat, drough,
restlesness, and other symptoms of a Fever follow: After a few Hours (but
sometimes it is much longer before this symptom comes) the Patient is seized
with a violent pricking pain in one of his sides about the Ribs, which
sometimes reaches toward the Shoulder-blades, sometimes toward the Backbone,
and sometimes toward the Breast; he Coughs frequently, which occasions great
pain; so that sometimes he holds his Breath to prevent Coughing; the matter
which is spit up at the beginning is little and thin, and often sprinkled with
particles of Blood: but in the process of the Disease, it is more and more
concocted and mixed with Blood.

Though this Disease has an ill Name, and is of it self more dangerous than any
other, yet if it be well managed, it is easily cured, and indeed as certainly
as other diseases. As to the cure, ten ounces of Blood must be taken presently
away from the Arm of the side affected; then presently after Bleeding give the
following draught.

Take of Red Poppy-Water four ounces, of Salprunella, one dram; of Syrup of
Violets, one ounce; mingle them ^ake a draught.

Take of Sweet Almonds, number seven; of the Seeds of Melons and Pompions, each
half an ounce; of the Seeds of White-Poppies two drams; beat them together in a
Marble Mortar, pouring gently upon them a pint and a half of Barley-water, of
Rose Water, two drams; of Sugarcandy, half an ounce; mingle them, make an
Emulsion; give four ounces every fourth hour. Pectorals must also be taken
frequently.

Take of the Pectoral decoction a quart, of the Syrups of Violets and
Maidenhair, each one ounce and an half, mingle them, make an Apozem: Let him
take half a pint thrice a day.

Take of the Oil of Sweet-Almonds two ounces, of the Syrups of Violets and
Maidenhair, each one ounce; of Sugar Candy half a dram; mingle them, make a
Linctus, of which let the Patient lick often in a day.

Oil of Almonds by it self, or Linseed-Oyl is often used with good success.

As to diet, you must forbid all Flesh, and the Broaths of it, though never so
thin: but the Patient may be dyeted with Oaten and Barley Broaths, and Panada,
and let him drink of a Ptisan made of Barley-water, and the Roots of Sorrel,
and Liquorish, and sometimes Small-beer. Anoint the pained side Morning and
Evening with the following Ointment, applying upon it a Cabbage-leaf.

Take of the Oil of Sweet-Almonds two ounces, of Ointment of Marshmallows and
Pomatum, each one ounce; mingle them, make an Ointment.

The Sick must persist in the use of the said Remedies through the whole course
of the Disease.

If the pain be very violent, you must take away ten ounces of Blood again on
the first day, or else the day following, and so the third day; and after this
manner four times one day after another, when the pain rages violently. But if
the disease be more moderate and less dangerous, and if the Patient being weak,
cannot well bear Bleeding so often, it must not be repeated again after it has
been twice used, till a day or two be past betwixt each Bleeding.

You Will seldom find that a confirmed Pleurisy can be cured in grown People,
with less than the loss of forty ounces of Blood, or thereabouts; though in
Children once or twice Bleeding is most commonly sufficient.

All the time of the Disease, care must be taken that the Patient be not
overheated; and therefore he must be taken every day out of his Bed, and kept
up some hours according to his strength; for if he be kept continually in Bed,
neither so large and an evacuation of Blood, nor other Remedies how cooling
soever will sometimes do any good.

Presently after the last Bleeding, it will be convenient to give a gentle
Purge.

Chap. XVI. Of Swooning.
THe next and immediate cause of this Disease, is a defect of the Vital Spirits.

When any one is seized with a fainting Fit, you must lay him on his Back, and
sprinkle Water on his Face, and provoke Sneezing: put some good Wine, or
Cinnamon Water into his Mouth; call him aloud, shake him, pull him by the Nose:
double his Fingers, pull his Hair, and rub him. If he faints for want of
Nourishment, you must refresh him with a piece of Bread dipped in Wine. If he
faint by reason of a malignant quality, give a scruple of Venice-Treacle
dissolved in some Cordial Water. If he faints by reason of immoderate
Evacuations, he must be refreshed by good Meat and Drink, Sleep and Rest. If it
proceed from too great loss of Blood, lay him in a Bed with his Head downward,
sprinkle his Face with cold Water, and give a little Wine mixed with Water. If
it proceed from Purging, give twelve of my Cordial Drops in a spoonful of
Cinnamon water, and let him lie on a Bed. If Fainting proceed from a fright or
fear, Blood must be let.

FINIS.
The INDEX.
Apoplexy, page 1.

Bleeding at Nose, 4.

Blood Spitting, 5.

Blood Vomitting, 5.

Bloody Urine, 15.

Carus page 1.

Childbed Purgations suppressed, 24.

Cholora Morbus, 15.

Colic, 9.

Coma 1.

Convulsions, 7.

Courses immoderate, 22.

Labor hard, 16.

Lethargy, 1.

Looseness, 12.

Miscarriage, 19.

Mother-Fits, 10.

Pleurisy, 26.

Quinsey, 25.

Sleepy Diseases, 1.

Stone in the Kidneys, 14.

Swooning, 28.

Twisting of the Guts, 13.

Vapors, 10.

Vomitting, 15.

Advertisement.
The following Medicines are prepared by the Author, and are to be Sold at his
House at the Angel and Crown in Basing-lane, being the Second Turning in
Bread-street from Cheapside.

1. MY Cephacick Tincture is excellent for all cold and moist Diseases of the
Head, Brain, Nerves, and Womb: It cures the Headache, Giddiness, takes off
dullness and drowfiness, and is very proper for a Palsy, and Old Aches, and
takes off Women's after-pains, the Belly being well bathed with it, and a
Flanne^ applied over, and it hastens delivery, and is good for Mother-Fits.

For outward uses, bath the part affected with it Morning and Evening, and rub
it well in with a warm Hand.

For inward uses, give twenty drops Morning and Evening in a Glass of Canary.
Price One Shilling the Viol.

2. You must give one Paper of my Powder for Childrens Convulsions every sixth
hour, in a Spoonful of Black-cherry-Water, or the like* Price 6 d. the Paper.

3. My Powder for Worms must be taken for three Mornings following, one Paper
at a time, in a Spoonful of White-Bread and Milk. Price 4 d. the Paper.

4. My Cordial Elixir, for the Colic and Gravel* be taken by spoonfuls, 4 or 5
spoonfuls, according to your strength, or so many as you find will give three
or four Stools; and presently after it has done working, take twenty four of my
Cordial Drops, in two Spoonfuls of Cinnamon Water* Price 2 s. 6 d. the Bottle
of my Elixir for the Colic and Gravel.

5. My Cordial Drops must be taken according to the directions in the foregoing
Treatise, and you will find them in all the cases where they are mentioned in
this Book, to be of wonderful virtue and efficacy. Price 1 s. the Viol.

6. My Stomach Drops cleanse and strengthen the Stomach, for which they are
highly to be valued, for from a foul and weak Stomach proceed a numerous train
of Diseases, as Crudities, Nauseousness, Vomittings, loss of Appetite, and the
like; and if the Stomach which prepares Nourishment for the whole Body be
vitiated, the Nourishment, and the Blood with which it is mixed, must
unavoidably be vitiated also, and by consequence all the Animal and Natural
Functions must be perverted. They also expel Wind, and are good for the
Jaundice and Dropsy, and restore to pale Virgins a fresh and pleasant
Countenance. Twenty Drops must be taken every Morning for the space of a Week
in a Glass of Wine, Mum, or Beer. Price 1 s. the Viol.

7. My Pills for the Vapors must be taken according to the directions in the
Chapter of Vapors. Price 3 s. 6 d. the Box.

8. My Electuary for Agues, certainly cures (...) taken presently (...) take
the quantity (...) Nutmeg every fou^^^ hour, and eight days, after the taking
the last (...) of the Electuary, take another Pot of it in the same manner,
though the Agne be gone, to prevent its return. Price of a Pot 2 s. 6 s.

9. My Electuary for Coughs and Consumptions* is an excellent Remedy for the
Diseases of the Lungs; it must be taken often in a day, the quantity of an
Hazel Nut at a time. Price of a Pot 1 s. 6 d.

10. My Purging Pill cures the Scurvy, and purges the Head, Breast, Stomach,
and Reins, and is peculiarly proper for a Dropsy, Women's Obstructions, and to
purify the Blood after the Smallpox, They are also of excellent use for those
whose Bodies are surfeited by Heats and Colds; and for Seafaring men, and such
as live in unwholsom airs, and moist places, two of them may be taken at
Bedtime, and two, three, or four, the next Morning early, according to the
strength of the Body they may be swallowed down alone, or taken in the Pap of a
Roasted Apple, or Honey, or Stewed Prunes, or in a little Syrup, and when they
work, drink Posset Drink, Water Gruel, warm (...) or Tea. I have found this
Pill by many years Experience, excellent for cleansing the Body of ill humors,
of what kind soever they be* Each Box contains eighteen Pills; Price ^ ^. 6 d.


