A PRACTICAL DISCOURSE UPON THE Blessed Sacrament: SHOWING THE DUTIES OF THE
COMMUNICANT Before, at, and after the Eucharist,

By EDW. PELLING, D. D. Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Somerset, and Rector
of Petworth in Sussex.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple-Barr, near
Devereux-Court, 1692.

Imprimatur,

Ex Aedibus Lambhithanis, Ap. 25. 1692. Ra. Barker R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D.
Johanni Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.

To her Grace, the most Noble, most Virtuous, and Religious Lady, Elizabeth,
Lady Duchess of Somerset.
May it please your Grace,
THE kind Acceptance which my former Discourse upon this Subject found at your
Graces hands, has given me Encouragement and Confidence to prefix your great
Name to this; which indeed should have been presented to your Noble Patronage
long ago, but that the late Controversies with the Romanists (wherein I thought
my self bound to take my share) and a great many unexpected Accidents since,
have hitherto hindered me from bringing it even to that little Perfection
wherein it now appears. Besides, Madam, the Subject being altogether Practical
and directive of the Conscience, a little time was not enough for that
Consideration and Care, which a matter of such a tender and weighty Nature must
require, especially since my design from the beginning, was, not only to inform
Communicants, but moreover to lend such Assistance to all others, in order to a
right understanding of their Duty, as I hoped might serve to promote the great
Ends of Christianity in general. To this purpose, I have somewhat largely and
particularly discoursed of these things which concern all sorts and ranks of
Christians, as Faith, Repentance, Charity, and Perseverance; to which I thought
fit to add in the last place, a short Platform of a Christian Life, collected
out of the Holy Scriptures, and digested into little, that every one may see,
as it were at one view, the Nature, Excellence, and Easiness of that Universal
Obedience which the New Covenant exacteth at all our Hands: and all this I
resolved and endeavored to do in such a plain and clear manner, that I might
be serviceable to those of the most ordinary and vulgar Capacities, because
they need Instructions most of all.

I confess, Madam, that in saying this, I seem to have made an Objection
against my self, as to this Dedication; and fear that all those who have the
Honor to know your Grace, will be startled to see a little Book, intended for
ordinary Capacities, presented to a Person of such eminent Parts and Judgment,
as well as Quality. But I hope the wonder will cease, when once it is
considered, that the whole design of this Piece being to excite and quicken Men
to a serious Practice of Religion, I could not but look upon it as your Graces
due, were there no other reason but this, that your Grace is a great Example of
Virtue and a truly Christian Life in all particulars; which, God be thanked, I
can very safely affirm and tell the whole World, without the least guilt of
Flattery. But besides, Madam, my Personal Obligations to both your Graces, for
your great and continual Favors to me and mine, and the tenderness you are
pleased to show us daily, do challenge from me all possible Expressions of
Honor, and dutiful Affection; and all too little, I am sure; not any thing
indeed in comparison of that Service which I should, and with all my Heart
would do, were it in my Power. Among some Discouragements I have met with in
the World, I bless God, the great comfort of my life is, that I enjoy so
plentiful a share of your Graces goodness, with all Freedom and Gratitude I
acknowledge my self to be in that respect, as happy a Man as lives. The Station
I am now in, I was unexpectly put into by the desire of both your Graces, and
by your Zealous Applications to some great Friends, who could have no other
reason to consider me but for the sake of your Graces, whom they were ready to
gratify for your being such true Friends and Ornaments to our Church, and the
whole Protestant Religion. Your thus transplanting me into your Graces own
Neighborhood, as it was an argument of the most kind Intentions, that I should
spring and thrive afresh under the influence of your Favor; so is it a mighty
Advantage to my Ministry, which is now assisted with such Noble Comments upon
Christianity, and Examples of it, as may prove more operative than any
Discourses of mine. Upon these Accounts, Madam, all the labors I can bestow,
can be but so many Expressions of Thankfulness; which I humbly entreat both
your Graces to accept of, being all that I can tender, besides my earnest
Supplications to Almighty God, evermore to continue and increase his Goodness
to your Graces and your Noble Issue; and to enrich you with all the Blessings
of Heaven and Earth; which is, Madam, the daily Affectionate Prayer of

Petworth, Feb 20. 1691/2 Your Graces most Humble, Faithful, and Obedient
Servant and Chaplain, Edw. Pelling.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Necessity we are under to receive this Sacrament. page 1.
CHAP. II. Several Excuses considered at large. p. 25. CHAP. III. Of the
Necessity of Preparation. p. 42. CHAP. IV. Of the Nature of Preparation in
General and in Particular. Of Faith. p. 60. CHAP. V. Of Repentance. p. 84.
CHAP. VI. Of the Degrees and Measures of Repentance, according as Men's Sins
are. Of unwilful Sins. p. 100. CHAP. VII. Of Wilful Sins. p. 123. CHAP. VIII.
Of Charity. p. 142. CHAP. IX. Of Brotherly Forgiveness. p. 160. CHAP. X. Of our
Behavior at the time of Receiving. p. 183. CHAP. XI. Of the Lawfulness of
Kneeling when we Receive. p. 192. CHAP. XII. Of our Behavior after Receiving.
p. 215. CHAP. XIII. Of Perseverance. A short Platform of a Christian Life,
taken out of the Scriptures. p. 237.
CHAP. I. Of the Necessity of Receiving the Holy Sacrament.
THOUGH Notions are for the most part more Difficult, and of far less
Concernment for men to Understand, than their Duty; yet such is the general
Curiosity of People, that they are more intent upon Speculations, than upon
Practice, and study more to be Masters of an Opinion, than to inform and keep a
good Conscience.

HOWEVER, in regard that Knowledge is the Principle of Action, and Men are so
governed by their Persuasions, that their Practice is ever suitable to their
Sentiments, the most natural way of prevailing upon them to comply with their
Duty, is to instruct their Understandings in the first place, and to furnish
them with such Notions as may have a due influence upon them, and do naturally
tend to prompt them on to that business which lies before them.

THIS is the Reason, that when I entered upon the Subject of the Holy Sacrament,
I thought it advisable for me to Divide my Meditations; so that I might first
dispatch the Notional part, which is of the greatest Difficulty; and then
proceed to the Practical, which is of the greatest Use.

PURSUANT to this Design, I have formerly discoursed at large of the Nature, of
the Ends, of the Dignity, and Usefulness of this weighty Ordinance; which
things if Men would but seriously consider and carry in their Thoughts, they
could not easily neglect a matter of such importance, without offering violence
to their Judgments, and acting against their own Reason.

BUT there is a great deal of matter yet behind, which immediately and directly
serves to engage all of us to discharge our Duty in this particular, and also
to govern us in the discharging of it. And the first thing that offers it self
to our Consideration, is touching that Necessity which lies upon us, to eat of
this Bread, and to drink of this Cup.

NOW in order to our better proceeding upon this Subject, we must note, that
there is a Twofold Necessity which relates to the matter in hand. 1. First,
Some things are Absolutely and Indispensably Necessary, because they are the
fixed and immovable Conditions of the New Covenant, without the performance
whereof, Salvation cannot be expected by us. So, to Believe in Christ, to
Mortify our Lusts, to have a Sanctified Spirit, to be Humble, Charitable, and
the like; these things are Absolutely Necessary; for without Faith, and
Repentance, and entire Holiness of heart, none of us can see the Lord. 2.
Secondly, Some things are Necessary Respectively and upon Supposition; that is,
supposing that there is some Command for them, though they be not necessary in
their own Nature, but are required chiefly to try and Exercise Men's Obedience:
Or supposing that they are appointed as certain and effectual Means, in order
to some great and Necessary End; and as Instruments to bring us those Mercies,
which our Souls stand in need of. Now, when we say, it is Necessary to receive
the Sacraments of Christ's Body and Blood; the meaning is not, that it is
absolutely, simply, indispensably, and universally necessary, so that no Man
can possibly be saved without it. For no Rites whatsoever are to be accounted
of equal moment with substantial Morality; and things of Positive Institution,
though they be necessary in their Kind and Quality, yet they are not necessary
in that degree, as those things are which are good in themselves, and which
carry an eternal Reason and Obligation along with them. In some cases a Ritual
Ordinance may be omitted; and it is not the bare Omission, but the wilful
Neglect and Contempt of it, that is Criminal in God's account. This is evident
from the case of Circumcision, which was of old a Seal of the Covenant between
God and the Jews. We find in the fourth of Exodus, that when Moses wilfully
forbore to Circumcise his Son, the anger of the Lord was so kindled against
him, that he met him in his Journey, and sought to kill him; and as some Hebrew
Doctors tell us, did actually smite him with a sudden Disease; and yet we find
in the 5th of Joshua, that afterward the Jews omitted Circumcision for many
years together in the Wilderness: whether it was, because they were then upon
their Travel (as some think) or because they were not yet mingled with the
Heathens, and so needed not as yet to be Circumcised (as others are of opinion)
this is certain, that we do not read that God was displeased with them for not
having been Circumcised, though he was often displeased with them for their
Infidelity.

THE same thing is observed of the Passover Vid. Seldom de Synedr. Lib. 2. Cap.
2.
it self; that it was omitted in the Wilderness for about forty years together;
because the Celebration of it depended upon the use of Circumcision, For in
order to the due Celebration of the Passover, it was necessary not only for the
Fathers of Families to be Circumcised themselves, but moreover for all the
Males in their Households to be Circumcised too, Exodus 12. 48, 49. So that
Circumcision being pretermitted for so many years, the Celebration of the
Passover did also of course cease for that time.

HENCE we may easily collect, that things of Positive Institution are not
equally necessary with those Duties which are naturally and eternally good. In
like manner, when the Jews were in Captivity, and could not Solemnly present
themselves before God in his Sanctuary, the Law was not executed upon them: As
long as they were in those sad Circumstances, it was their Unhappiness and
Punishment that they could not go with their Lambs to the Temple, but 'twas not
their sin that they did it not.

THUS it was with the Jews under the Law, as to things of this Nature; and thus
it is too with People under the Gospel, as to matters of the like Condition.
Baptism now is necessary; yet not so necessary as Faith and Regeneration; nor
must we presume to say, that all Persons who die Unbaptized are everlastingly
miserable: For though it be said St. Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved; yet in the next words, Damnation is the Punishment of
Unbelief only; it is not said, He that is not Baptized shall be Damned. Baptism
is indeed the standing and ordinary Means, which we are tied to use; but it
does not follow that God so tieth up his own hands, that he cannot, by Virtue
of his unlimited Prerogative, dispense with a Rite, and show his Mercy at his
Pleasure. It Is even thus in the case concerning the receiving of this blessed
Sacrament. It is an Ordinance of Divine Institution, and so it is communiter
and ordinary, in its Kind; and in a general construction necessary to Eternal
Happiness. But yet some Persons are not capable, nor in a condition to prepare
themselves for it, as Children, and Lunaticks, and the like: Now, in such a
case, the Rule is, that no man is obliged to act nisi positis omnibus ad
agendum requisitis, unless there be a sufficient presence of all Qualifications
that are necessary for the Action: Or some inevitable cross Accident may
unexpectedly happen, so that a Man cannot eat that Bread with his Mouth which
his Soul longs after: And in this case the Rule is, that no man is bound to
Impossibilities; nor shall any one be condemned for not performing that which
is out of his reach and power: Ones case may be such, that it may not be in his
Power to receive; and therefore to communicate of the outward Symbols is not so
absolutely necessary, as it is to Believe and Repent.

HOWEVER, out of these two Cases, it is very highly necessary to receive the
Sacramental Bread and Wine; that is, supposing a Man be capable of Receiving,
so that he cannot plead want of Understanding, or want of due Information; at
least, cannot pretend that he wants Means of being instructed: And supposing
that he has Occasions and Opportunities of Receiving, so that he cannot plead
want of Time or Power (and I am sure this cannot be our Plea, who have been
bred up under the Instructions of a most indulgent and provident Church) in
this case (I say) the Receiving of the Sacrament is so necessary, that the
neglect of it makes Men very guilty of Sin, especially if that Neglect be
customary and habitual, as indeed it is in very many Professors of Christ's
Religion.

THE Sinfulness and Danger of this Negligence is fairly proveable from the bare
Analogy that is between this, and those Sacrifical Banquets of old, especially
the Paschal Feast. Such as might celebrate it, and refused to do it, were under
God's Wrath and Curse; so that if a Man was clean, and not in a Journey, and yet
forbore to keep the Passover, that Soul was to be cut off from his People,
Numb. 9. 13. Now if the Sin was so great in that case, where they saw nothing
but a Figure and a Shadow, it cannot but be far greater in this case, where Men
have the Body and Substance. To be sure, the Guilt cannot be less, in an
instance that is of a more Noble and Excellent Nature: Nor can we suppose, that
when Christ instituted a better Ordinance, he should abate of our Duty; or that
Men's despising of such an important, fixed, and permanent Solemnity is not
Criminal, when it was such a Sin to disregard a temporary and vanishing Rite,
which our Redeemer did put an end to. But if this Argument be not enough, the
wickedness of Men in this case is further demonstrable, from a threefold
Consideration. 1. It is a direct Act of Disobedience against Christ's plain and
peremptory Command. 2. It proceeds mainly from an evil Conscience. 3. It is a
most injurious Sin against a Man's own Soul.

1. IT is a direct Act of Disobedience against Christ's plain and peremptory
Command. Concerning the Institution of this Mystery, these four things are very
observable. 1. That the Command about the Celebration of it, is as strict and
Imperial, as any other Law whatsoever, that is about things which are of a
moral nature, and of Eternal Obligation. Take and Eat, says our Lord, Matthew.
26. and Do this in remembrance of me: So St. Luke delivers it, Luke 22. Now
this runs in as commanding a Style, as that Precept does, Matthew. 4. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: And as the other
Precepts run, Matthew. 19. Thou shall do no Murder, Thou shall not commit
Adultery, Thou shall not Steal, Thou shall not bear false Witness, Honor thy
Father and Mother, and, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. I do not
here compare Thing with Thing, a Ceremony with Morality, but one Command with
another: And seeing all of them are equally as plain and peremptory on the one
hand, as they are on the other, it necessarily follows, that though the
nature of the thing it self does not, yet the Command does bind us to Obedience
in one point, as well as in the rest; the Divine Law being Authoritative, and
the Will of God being Obliging in smaller, as well as in the more weighty
matters. 2. This Command touching our receiving the Blessed Sacrament, is one
of those new Laws which are strictly and properly called Christian Precepts.
Those Everlasting Duties of Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety, though Christ
did Adopt them, and make them a part of his Law, yet we cannot call them the
peculiar Laws of Jesus Christ, because they were enacted and written in Men's
hearts from the Beginning, and they are common to Christians, and Jews, and
Heathens also. But the Law touching this Sacrament is perfectly an Evangelical
Command; and the Observation thereof is a direct and immediate Profession of
our Discipleship, and of our Faith in him, and Love to him, who came to take
away the Mosaical Rites, whereby Jews were distinguished from other People; and
instituted this Solemnity as a foederal Rite of his own, to be the outward Mark
and Cognizance of a Christian. 3. It is observable, that Christ gave no plain
and positive Command about this matter, till his Last Supper, and just before
the time of his Departure; to show unto us (as St. Austin has somewhere noted)
that the Observation of this Solemnity, ought to be had in very Venerable and
Lasting Esteem. Because nothing is more Natural to Men, than to remember and
value the Injunctions of a Dying Friend, whose Last Commands are apt to leave a
deep impression upon our Minds, and a continual warmth upon our Affections.
Therefore, though our Blessed Savior, intended all along to Institute this
Ordinance, yet he was pleased to post-pone the Institution of it, and to
reserve it until his Death, to put his Church in mind of the vast Importance of
this Mystery, that she might set and Devote her self to the Religious
Observation of That, which she had Received at the Hands of her Dying Lord, as
the last Request and Pledge of his sincerest Love. To which we may add in the
4th place, That this Mystery bears an immediate and near Relation to Christ
himself, because it is the great and standing Memorial of his Philanthropy.
This Character he himself has set upon it, that it is the Annunciation of the
most Mavelous Love that he could show unto the World; This do in remembrance
of me. Lord! were there not a thousand other Arguments of his Love to us, from
his Nativity to his Cross? What were all his Sermons, Miracles, Sufferings, but
so many Declarations and Monuments of his Goodness, to perpetuate the Memory
thereof to all Ages? And yet, we see, he appointed this Ordinance, to be in
remembrance of him Chiefly and Principally. Here we do most Solemnly
Commemorate the Incomparable Greatness of his Love; we do Publicly own and
Declare it; we Proclaim and Publish it before God and Man. So that now by all
this put together, the Necessity of Receiving this Sacrament does plainly
appear. For to deny this Necessity, is no other than tacitly to deny, that we
are to observe Christ's Laws; to refuse Obedience, is in effect to deny him to
be our Lord; it is to cast off our Livery, and to renounce our Profession; to
despise this Memorial of his Philanthropy, is to render our selves the most
Insensate and Unthankful Wretches, that are as willing to have the Memory of
his Love Dye, as the Jews were to have Him Expire upon the Cross.

I am sure, in the Primitive and Purest times of Christianity, Men accounted it
a great Act of Religion, and a main Expression of their Affections to the Holy
Jesus, to Celebrate this Mystery very often; nay, they looked upon this
Solemnity, as a necessary part of their constant Worship; without which, the
rest of their Services were imperfect and lame. Religion began to be Decrepit
and Cold, when the Custom of Receiving a few times in the year, stole into the
Church of Christ. For not only in the Apostles time, but for a long time after,
Christians were wont to Address themselves to the Lord's Table, every Lord's
day, as evidently appears out of Justin Martyr, St. Cyprian, Jerome, Austin,
and some more of the Ancients; nay, in the Synod at Antioch, it was Decreed;
That all such, as at any time met together in the House of God to hear the
Scriptures, should be Excommunicated if they stayed not to Receive the Holy
Communion. Devotion, which now is, as it were, vanished into Smoke, in those
times shined in a mighty Flame; The Hearts of Men were on fire, and their Zeal
was Active and Sprightly in this particular, because they reckoned it a
necessary piece of Religion. I confess, the Practice of the Church, is not that
which makes a thing Necessary: Yet it is a fair and strong Argument of its
Necessity, as being a good Comment upon our Lord's Command. The continued
Practice of the Church from the Apostles downward, does show, that the Wisest
and most Learned among them, did look upon themselves greatly obliged by the
Law of Christ, to a frequent Participation of this Mystery: Because he said, Do
this, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me, they concluded themselves
bound to do it often; and lest they should not do it often enough, they did it
daily.

BUT I will not urge the Necessity of a daily Communion: Yet this we must
affirm indefinitely, and in general, that it is necessary to Communicate often;
so that if nothing be wanting, but a willing and ready Mind, to omit it, is a
Sin, a Violation of Christ's Law: And if we think the Primitive Christians did
it too often, they are infinitely more to be followed yet, than many now a
days, who either do it not at all, or at most but once or twice a year; and
even then it may be questioned, whether it be not something else besides the
Love of Christ, that does constrain them.

2. THUS much may suffice to be spoken of that Necessity, which is grounded
upon our Lord's Command. But besides this, we are to consider, that the neglect
of this Sacrament is Evil, not in it self only, but in respect of a very Evil
Cause, whence this shameful Neglect comes; for that cannot well be supposed to
be any other, than some lurking Sin and Wickedness in Men's Hearts, which makes
this Sacrament so formidable in their Eyes. Since at this Ordinance, God
offers to Men all the Mercies of the Gospel, and nothing can hinder the
conveyance, but an Impenitent and Wicked Heart on the Recipient's part: Hardly
would any Man refuse so great Salvation, did not his Conscience tell him, that
by Reason of his Love of Sin, he may take Poison into his Mouth, instead of the
Bread of Life. It must needs be, that the great Contempt of this Sacrament is
caused, mostly by some root of Bitterness that is in Men's Breasts, which
renders the Cup of Blessing very unsavory and loathsome unto them. The World
generally is Evil, and many Love to be so, and for that Reason they dare not
come to the Lord's Table. How else comes it to pass, that they crowd many times
into the Church in Throngs and Multitudes to Prayer, and especially with
itching Ears after a Sermon; when yet we see a very slender appearance
(especially in some places) at the Sacrament? Certainly we must conclude (or
mistrust at least) that People are Conscious to themselves, of many Vices which
they are fond of, and willingly allow and indulge themselves in; and rather
than they will forsake those Vices, they forbear this Ordinance, because they
cannot live Wickedly, and Participate too, without Eating and Drinking their
own Damnation. And is not this a most horrible Crime, to value a few paltry
Lusts, above the Body and Blood of Christ? And to prefer some Sensual and
Brutish Enjoyments, before those Admirable and Astonishing Blessings which are
tendered at the Lord's Table? It was the Sin of the Jews, and that which greatly
kindled the Anger of the Lord against them, that they slighted the Manna (which
David called the Food of Angels) and lusted after the Fleshpots of Egypt, the
Cucumbers, the Melons, the Leeks, the Onions, and the Garlic, Number. 11. Much
more will it be looked upon as an intolerable Crime in us, if we make light of
the greatest Blessings that Heaven can bestow (as, the Comforts of the Holy
Spirit, the Fellowship of Christ, the Pardon of our Sins, the Peace of our
Consciences, an Assurance of a Glorious Immortality, and whatsoever is the
Felicity of Blessed Souls; I say if we slight and reject all these) out of
favor to our Sensitive Appetites, that we may still pursue the Unprofitable
Works of Darkness, and Enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, which are both Beastly in
their Nature, and very short for their continuance. As Maximus Max. Tyr. Ser.
20.
Tyrius (an Heathen Philosopher) argued, Who is so Mad, so Bewitched, so
Biased by his Affections, that for the love of small and Transitory Pleasures,
of uncertain Enjoyments, of doubtful Hopes, and questionable Prosperities,
would not change his Life for a Better, and betake himself to that which is
Solid and Unquestionable Happiness? Yet of such corrupt and object Spirits are
they, who neither Love nor dare to partake of this Covenant Feast; Men of such
Debaucht Minds and Impure Consciences, that they prize the most fordid
Considerations, above the Love of God, and a Blessed Eternity; like unclean
Swine, that contemn the sweetest Repose in comparison of a Dunghill, and a Bed
of Mire. Were not Men Earthly, and Sensual, every one would strive to be a
Companion at the Altar. It Is a Polluted Heart that hinders Men's approaches;
because they that are Wicked, will be Wicked still; and that is a great Reason,
why the Neglect of this Sacrament is Sinful, forasmuch as it proceeds from a
sinful Cause, an Evil and a Rotten Heart.

3. I Heartily wish, that all Persons who are concerned, would seriously
consider these things; and be so Provident too, as to look upon the sad
Consequence of this Neglect, and see what an immediate and irreparable Injury
they are like to do to their own Souls by it; which is the Third and last
Consideration. For the words of Christ are plain, Joh. 6. Except ye Eat the
Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you. This
place of Scripture all the Ancients do with one Illud in primis animadvertendum
occurrit, quoties apud veteres agitur de hoc Sacramento, verba Domini nostri
quae Joan. cap. 6. referuntur, caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere
est potus: Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est: Et nisi ederitis carnem silii
hominis, etc. ad hoc Sacramentum omnes applicant -- Nec audiendi sunt, qui
tanta nube testium refragante, negant illud caput Joannis huc referendum.
Diallacticon, Edit. Londin. 1688. p. 15. 9. v.
consent and mouth apply to this Blessed Sacrament; and St. Austin himself
urged it to prove the necessity even of Infant Communion, which was then a
Custom in the Church. That indeed was an Error, that proceeded from the
abundant Piety of those times; and the Reason upon which that Custom was
grounded, was not strong enough; because we cannot suppose (whatever St. Austin
did imagine) that when Christ spoke those words, he intended that even those
should Communicate who were not capable of Preparation, and consequently could
not eat his Flesh, nor drink his Blood after a due manner. However, it seems
most manifest, that the words do refer to this Sacrament; in a secondary sense
and construction. Primarily they mean the eating of Christ's Spiritual Flesh,
and the drinking of his Spiritual Blood, and that after a Spiritual manner; and
this a man may do, though he cannot come to the Sacrament. All Divines do
affirm, that Christ may be received Spiritually, when he is not received
Sacramentally; meaning, that we may receive vital influences from him (which
are his Spiritual Body) though we do not communicate of the Sacred Elements;
and I doubt not but that Children, and young Members of the Church do so. But
this is no Encouragement for any Adult Persons, who are not under any
Incapacity, this is no encouragement to such, to despise or neglect this
Ordinance; for to such as these, the Receiving of the Sacramental Bread and
Wine is the ordinary Means of Receiving Christ; without using these Means, they
cannot have any Reasonable Assurance of so great a Blessing, nor such solid
grounds as others have for their Hopes of Salvation.

PEOPLE may build their Hopes of Salvation upon Faith and Repentance, and the
like: and the truth is, these are the Conditions of our Everlasting Peace. But
yet there are several things which well deserve to be considered. 1. That the
Promise of Salvation upon Faith and Repentance does suppose, that Men are in
the Communion of the Church, and that they express and show that Communion, by
a Regular Use of this and all other Religious Ordinances; for every one is
obliged to do This, as well as to Believe and Reform his life. 2. That Man's
Faith and Repentance is very much to be suspected, who Refuses to eat of this
Bread, and to drink of this Cup. For how can the Truth of his Faith appear to
himself, that does not own and confess Christ's Authority over him, by his
Subjection to it in this particular? Or, if he believes this Ordinance to be
Necessary, and himself to be obliged to the Observance of it, then how can the
sincerity of his Repentance appear, when he continues in That which he must
acknowledge to be a sin? Obedience to the Evangelical Commands is the only
thing that Tryes a man, and shows him to be what he really is; and he hardly
deserves the Name of a Christian, that declines a Duty which is so easy, so
comfortable, so advantageous, to every one that is a Penitent indeed. Suppose
such a man lay upon his sick Bed, with a troubled Conscience, and the terrors
of Death about him, I would fain know, how he could satisfy himself, that he
is a Convert in Truth and Reality, seeing he has lived in a continual Breach
and Defiance of Christ's Law? 3. But suppose his Faith and Repentance be such
as is required, yet still it is Necessary for him to Receive the Holy Communion,
because it is needful for him to have the Seal of that Righteousness which he
has by Faith. We know that Abraham Believed, and found favor with God before
he was Circumcised; and yet by Circumcision he was Assured of God's favor. In
like manner, suppose a Believer to be forgiven before he comes to the Lord's
Table, yet he is Assured of his forgiveness by coming to it; and it is necessary
for People ever to take that course which is most for their Safety and
Satisfaction. Every man is apt to think so in Civil Contracts, so that though a
Deed be drawn, and agreed to, yet they think themselves not sure enough, 'till
the Wax and the Seal be added. And truly, if the Children of Light were as wise
in their Generation, as the Children of this World are in their kind of Wisdom,
they would think every thing Necessary, that helps to give them the more and
more Assurance. Now this blessed Ordinance has such an Effect and Tendency; so
that let a Penitent's condition be never so good, an honest-hearted
Communicant's is much better; his Confidence is better grounded; his Hopes are
built upon a surer basis; and the Comforts of his heart must be stronger, and
the Peace of his Conscience must be greater, and his Condition must needs be
every way much safer, than His can be, who from time to time Neglects so
great Salvation. For, in the Fourth place, It is upon the due Use of God's
Ordinances, that he entitleth us to Eternal Life. Though he be loving unto
every man, and is ready to pardon every true Penitent, yet has he set us our
way, to obtain our pardon; he has directed a method and course, in order to
our Salvation; and men must observe that method, and take that course, if they
will be happy. It Is not Peoples Fancies that can save them; nor must they think
to Capitulate with Almighty God; or to prescribe Him Conditions; but with all
heartiness and readiness observe those Conditions which he has prescribed Us.
Now this is God's Method, to bring men to Happiness upon a due Use of
Sacraments, as well as by other Performances; and we must conclude, that he who
requires those Duties we owe our Selves and our Neighbors, will also (and
much rather) exact that Duty we owe his Son. In short, men must go in God's
Way, and follow God's Directions, and then depend upon his Goodness and Mercy
in so doing. If the Jews in the Wilderness intend to be healed of their Wounds,
they must look upon the Brazen Serpent. Indeed God might have made them whole
and sound only by a word from his Mouth; but this was not his way, and
therefore there was a necessity for them to make use of the other way that he
had ordered them, Numb. 21. And so if Naaman will be healed of his Leprosy, he
must go down into Jordan, and wash seven times. Indeed he muttered at the
Prophet, because he did not strike his hand over the place (as he might have
done) and he bragged of Abana and Pharphar, that they were as good Waters as
any Rivers in Judea (as perhaps they were) and yet for all this, the Prophet's
hand must not heal him, nor will all the Rivers of Damascus do him good, but to
Jordan he must go, or else return a Leper, as he went, 2 Kings 5. Why thus it
is in the present case: God has promised to pardon all penitent people, and to
heal them of their Wounds and Leprosies; but withal, he has showed them
whither they must go, and what Means they must make use of; he has ordered us
to Do This, to Eat of this Bread, and to Drink of this Cup for the remission of
sins; and we are not to begrudge our Duty, but to follow God's Method and
Command, and so to expect his Blessing. Men must not hold off and forbear,
because God can pardon them without these Means; or because such great things
are spoken of Faith and Repentance; they must not let go Certainties, and trust
to Possibilities; nor slight any Ordinance, as if it were unnecessary, upon a
Presumption that God's Mercy and Power is All-sufficient. No, they must show
their Obedience; and have recourse to those Means which God has Appointed: And
this is one, and a principal one; viz. the Receiving of this Blessed Sacrament.

CHAP. II. Several Excuses Considered.
WHAT has been thus delivered, will I hope prevail with those, who will be
Wise for themselves; who study to be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God
without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation.

BUT it is a most difficult Matter to Persuade, especially to Actions that are
of a Divine and Spiritual Nature. Though Interest be commonly the most powerful
Rhetoric in the World, and Men's greatest Interest is concerned in this Case,
yet because they do not discern with their Eyes, either the Advantages that are
Received by a Worthy Use, or the Losses that are sustained by an unworthy
Contempt of this Ordinance; such is the Folly and Stupidity of many People,
that any pretense almost serves as an Excuse and Plea (sufficient, as they
think) to keep them from the Lord's Table. That Great Person, Luke 14. that
made a costly Supper, and Invited many Guests, received very rude Returns; when
they presently pretended, one, that he had bought a Farm; another, that he went
to make Trial of his Oxen; a third, that he had Married a Wife, and therefore
could not by any means come. It Is called a Parable, but if you apply it to the
Case in hand, it is a plain History of the Improvidence and Unthankfulness of
those, who refuse to come to the Lord's Supper, and would fain come off
handsomely, if they could, with several Excuses, that something or other does
still hinder them from closing with the Invitation. Therefore my next Business
must be to show, how incompetent and trifling Men's Excuses are; and I must do
this the rather, because the shameful neglect which some are Guilty of, is very
Mischievous and Scandalous to others; so that they both Judge themselves
Unworthy of Eternal Life, and (as much as in them lies) by their bad Example,
do help to draw many more into the same Condemnation; and further the hurt of
diverse precious Souls, for whom the Savior of the whole World was content and
desirous to Dye.

IN the Prosecution of this Matter, there are several sorts of People, I am to
speak to. 1. Such as Indulge themselves in a course of Life, that is unbecoming
and inconsistent with Christianity; and therefore are very backward and
unwilling to come to the Holy Communion. 2. Such as live Honestly and Fairly
before Men, but yet are such Drudges to the World, and so intent upon making
Provision for their Families, that their whole time is laid out upon Secular
Affairs, and they have none left them (as they say) for the business of
Preparation; and therefore pretend, they have no Leisure to come. 3. Such as
are willing (and perhaps desirous) to Communicate, and confess they have time
enough to fit themselves by Prayer, Fasting, and Repentance, but yet what out
of a Sense of their manifold Failings, and what out of an apprehension of the
greatness of the Mystery, and what out of a mistrust of themselves for the
future, conceive themselves to be Unworthy and Unfit, and therefore are afraid
to come.

1. NOW, as for those in the first place, who make no Conscience of their ways,
but live without having a due regard to the Laws of Religion, I must premise,
that though it be a wonder, that any who have Learned Christ (who have heard of
his Sufferings, of his Laws, and of his Threats) should presume in spite of
all to live after this rate, yet it is no wonder that they who do live so,
should be backward and unwilling to Receive this Sacrament. It would be very
dangerous for them indeed to receive it, because S. Paul has declared, that he
who eats and drinks Unworthily, eats and drinks Judgment to himself;
and such Men as I now speak of, are no more Worthy to eat and drink at the
Lord's Table, than Swine are fit to live of the Altar. To such, the Holy
Sacrament is a dreadful thing indeed, as long as they continue in an Evil
Course: They do in a manner drink down Death with the Wine, and swallow the
Bread and the Devil together. Therefore as long as they are in Love with Sin,
and Obey it in the Lusts thereof, and yield their Members as Instruments of
Unrighteousness, they must by all means forbear coming to this Ordinance.

BUT then they must observe, that this forbearing or refraining upon the
consideration of an Evil Conscience, will be in no wise excusable in the Great
and Terrible day of God; and if any Man be so Vain and Foolish as to think so,
I would offer these following things to his most serious Consideration. 1. That
by parity of Reason, he may neglect every other Divine Ordinance, as well as
this; for there is none, but what will rise up in Judgment against him, unless
he Repent, and Answer the great Ends of its Institution. Unto the Wicked, God
says, why do thou Preach my Law, and take my Covenant into thy mouth,
seeing thou hate to be Reformed? Ps. 50. 16, 17. In like manner, why do such
Men call upon God's Name, or please themselves, that they hear his word? Nay,
why indeed do they profess themselves Christians, as long as they hate to be
Reformed? For the Displeasure of God is provoked throughout, and God is their
Enemy, and they are His, as long as they thus continue in Sin. For all that
such Men do, is Leavened with Hypocrisy; and no Monster is so hateful to God
and Man, as an Hypocrite. He that Prays with his Mouth, and has Villainy in
his Heart, does in a manner spit in God's Face. He that Hears the Divine
Oracles with an Uncircumcised Ear, does but make a Mockery of Religion: And he
that owneth himself a Disciple of Christ, and at the same time is a Son of
Belial, infinitely affronteth the Son of God, by making him a Friend to
Immorality and Wickedness. It Is an Honest and Upright Heart that renders all
our Services acceptable; and where that is wanting, the Sinner may as well
forbear every Exterior Profession of Religion; as go from the Sacrament; there
is the same Reason for both, because he injureth himself, and draws a Curse
and Judgment upon his Head in other Instances, as well as by eating and
drinking Unworthily. 2. To refuse the Communion, is so far from Extenuating,
that it aggravates the Crimes of an Evil Wretch; because he thereby adds one
Sin to another; and this is the plain Language of his Heart; I have broken the
rest of God's Commandments, and therefore I will go on and break this too. Now
I would beseech such to consider, whether this does not tend to their greater
Condemnation, instead of amounting to a just Excuse. For a Man to shed his
Neighbor's Blood, and then to plead that he had Malice in his Heart, is the
ready way not to lessen, but to heighten his Offense; and so, for a Man to
trample under foot the Blood of Christ (as they in some Sense do, that slight
and vilify this Ordinance) and then to pretend in his excuse, that he was an
Impenitent Sinner, is to be Guilty in some measure, of the Sin of the Jews,
when they Crucified the Savior of the World, because he upbraided them with
their Incorrigibleness. Were Men allowed to come to the Sacrament with their
Impieties about them, we should have Communicants enough; but because this Holy
Rite is an Adversary to their Lusts, and is intended to bring Men under the
Discipline of the New Law; Therefore such as are Wicked, and resolve to be so,
draw back, and keep themselves off at a great distance from it, lest they
should be put to the trouble of Repenting; and then they make that their
Apology, which in Truth is their Crime, viz; that they are in a very ill State.
A thing, which, instead of being any tolerable Plea, is a most inexcusable
Pretense; Because, 3dly, it is a Brutish and Unreasonable Contempt of that,
which is a certain Remedy (if duly used) against the greatest Evil; and for
that very Reason, do Licentious Men reject it, because it is a Remedy. Now who
would pity a Man, that will not go to the Fire because he is ready to starve
with Cold, or that refuses to eat for that very Reason, because he is ready to
starve with Hunger? Why, such is the contumacious Folly of those, who contemn
God's Pardon at the Sacrament, because they need it; and refuse to be cleansed
by the Fountain of Life, because they are Filthy; and reject the means of
Recovery, because they are in a State of Death. In this case, every Refractory
Person pleads his Disease, to excuse his Unwillingness to accept of Help:
Such an upardonable Act of Stubborness; as if a Man should say, he is in
extremity of Sickness, and therefore he will not make use of a Physician. It Is
true, most do pretend, that it is not out of Contempt, but out of Reverence,
that they dare not approach to the Holy Table; they have a dread upon them, and
are afraid (as they say) of incurring God's Displeasure, and of Damning their
own Souls, by receiving Unworthily. But then I would entreat them to ask their
Consciences, why and how it comes about, that they are not afraid to Sin? And
why they are not afraid to Transgress other Divine Laws, as well as to Violate
this? Are Men so Foolish, as to think, that there is only one Path which
leads to Hell? and that nothing will bring them to Perdition, but Unworthy
Receiving? Or that they may Sin safely, as long as they Sin, and do not Eat?
There is every whit as much danger by an Evil Course of Life, as by undue
Participation; and a Man may drink his own Damnation at a Tavern, or in his own
House, as well as at the Lord's Table; so that when he dreadeth to do that,
which he is commanded to do often, he should examine the Reason, why he dreads
not that which he is required never to do. 4. It is not the staying from the
Sacrament that will serve an Ill Man's turn; it is an addition to his Guilt,
but no diminution of his Wickedness; and whether he Communicate or forbear, his
Case is very bad, till he makes his Peace with God, by a sincere Repentance,
and Reformation of his Life. Into such a wretched strait and Snare, do Ungodly
and Irreligious Courses draw Men, that whether they Receive the Sacrament or
no, they are Miserable; they Perish without the Holy Food, and they Perish by
Eating it too; so that they have only this one way left them to secure them
from final Ruin, viz. to Repent them seriously of all their Wickedness, and so
to Eat of this Bread, and to Drink of this Cup. What (say they) would you have
us be Damned, by Receiving the Sacrament, when we are not in a fit Condition
for it? No; but we would have you fit your selves, and then Receive: We would
have you neglect neither, but do both; because your Unfitness is no Excuse or
Bar against your Duty, by Reason that your Unfitness is wilful; and your
failure in one instance, cannot excuse, but must needs aggravate your failure
in another. He that Eats Unworthily, is Guilty in Eating, because he
Profaneth Christ's Body: And he that Eats not at all, is Guilty in not
Eating, because he Despises Christ's Body. And thus much of those that neglect
the Communion through an Evil Conscience.

2. THERE is another sort of Men that are Guilty of the same Crime, but upon
different Reasons (at least they pretend so) such as pass for Fair and Just
Men, but yet are so entangled with the Cares of the World, that they excuse
their absence from the Sacrament, by pleading that they want time: As if they
Lived in some strange and unknown Country, where there are not any hours in the
day.

NOW as to Matter of Fact, there is no question, but that Secular Concernments
do hinder many from this and other Offices of Religion; upon which account, it
is the prime Duty of a Christian to Dye unto the World; and so much Christ
intimated, when dividing his Benedictions, he Blessed those in the first place,
who are Poor in Spirit, as you find by those Evangelists who have recorded his
Sermon on the Mount; and the Reason of it is told us, Matthew. 6. 24. because we
cannot serve God and Mammon too: And we see it by every days Experience, that
the Love of Greatness and Riches, and the Inordinate Cares of this Life, are
apt to outweigh all other Considerations. But then if we speak de Jure, of the
Reasonableness and Sufficiency of their Excuses, who time after time refuse the
Holy Sacrament, under a pretense, that they have not leisure to Prepare
themselves for it; there are many Considerations to be offered, which show,
that this Plea will rather Condemn than Acquit them; for Brevity sake, I shall
pitch upon these. 1. That this Plea is very much to be suspected and
questioned, whether it be real, or only a Pretext and a Cloak to cover their
Disobedience. 2. But suppose, that they are Men of some Ingenuity, who pretend
variety or multiplicity of Business, Men that are Honest and Conscientious in
their Callings, but yet are carried away with an hurry of Affairs, and are
troubled about many things, as was said of Martha, Luke 10. 41. yet they should
often call to mind the next words of our Savior, that one thing is needful. It
is not necessary to be Rich, but it is necessary to be Religious; and Worldly
Matters must ever give place to things that are of an Heavenly and Spiritual
Nature, when they stand together in Competition. Men were better do, as Crates
the Theban did, part with all their Gold, than be void of that which is true
Wisdom: And it is infinitely more desirable for them to be rid of those Riches
which are a clog unto them, and hinder them from going to Heaven, than upon
their Deathbeds to be troubled with a sad remembrance, that they have been
more faithful Drudges to their Familes, than Friends and Servants to God. 3.
But I hope there are many good People who use the World, yet neither Abuse the
World, nor themselves for the World's sake. I am sure, it is possible to have
our Conversation in Heaven, even while we live upon the Earth; and it is no
difficult Matter for a Wise Man, to serve God and himself too. Let him follow
his Vocation diligently, let him deal Justly, and show Mercy, and walk Humbly,
and Pray Daily, and with a good Conscience; and then in doing the works of his
Calling, he does in some measure work out his Salvation too. For he Obeys God
in laboring with his hands, and in working that which is good; and so
throughout the week, he does in some sort and degree fit and prepare himself
against the Sacrament on the Lord's day. I deny not, but Men should pare off
some portion of the six days, and Consecrate it to a more solemn and strict
Preparation. Yet this I say, that the following of our Secular Business with
Sobriety and Honesty, is far from being a just hinderance, to keep him from
attending on this Ordinance. For let a Man but lead an Holy Life (and that he
may do in any Calling that is but lawful) and the less time will be required
for self Examination. Let him but carry always the true Fear of God in his
Heart, and the less fearful will he be of drawing near unto God in the Church,
because he never departs from him, though he be at home. An upright
Conversation is a continual Prayer, and a constant kind of Preparation; and so
Men may in some measure fit themselves to be Communicants, even in their Shops
and Warehouses. And yet certainly the Business of the day is not so great nor
urgent, but that any the most painful Tradesman may find some convenient time,
to offer up to God the Morning and Evening Sacrifice, both of Praise for the
Enjoyment of his Mercies, and of Prayer for the Pardon of his own Sins. Now let
him but enter upon his Affairs with Devotion, and manage them with Integrity,
and end them and the day with Piety and Repentance for his Failings, and he may
be fit to Communicate weekly if he will. And if any Man be such an Enemy to
himself, as that he is careless in observing this Method, let him lay the blame
not upon the Urgency of his Business, or want of time, but (where it should be
laid) upon his want of true Zeal, and a right Christian Spirit. Yet it is not
to be denied, but Men may have some more extraordinary Troubles come in upon
them at some times, than at others. Such is the course of this world, that
there are floods as well as ebbings of Business in every Employment. However,
4thly, This is to be Considered, that the most important Matters are rarely so
instant and pressing, but Men can pick out some lucid intervals, and steal away
from their Cares, either to some by-Concernments that are not so cumbersome, or
to Recreations that are for their Refreshment. And how can Men pretend, that
they have not time to fit themselves for the Sacrament, when they may dispatch
the work in a less space, than that amounts to, which many times is vainly, and
sometimes sinfully employed? If such Men were sure to purchase an Estate, by
the Prayers and Penances of a week, I am apt to think, none of them would
pretend that they wanted time. Or if an Office or Place were in danger to be
lost, or a considerable sum of Money like to be forfeited, unless the Sacrament
be Received by such a day, it is likely that whatever Men's Business or
Concerments are, they would be sure to keep their sides free from the lash of
the Law. And what is the Reason, that Penal Statutes are so carefully observed,
while at other times the Commands of Christ are so easily past over, but that
Men generally have not that tender regard of their Souls, as they have of their
Purses, and of their Secular Interest?

3. BUT besides these, there is a third sort of Persons, whose Excuses are a
little to be Considered too; many Serious, Religious, and Devout Christians, I
doubt not, who have both Hearts to come to the Communion, and time enough for
Preparation, but yet are troubled with Scruples and Fears, lest they should not
come prepared sufficiently, notwithstanding their Pious Endeavors; and so
rather choose to refrain, though it be with much reluctance and regret. These
Fears and Scruples, I now speak of, do mostly, if not altogether, proceed from
wrong Notions and Apprehensions concerning this Mystery. Because they are told,
that before they Receive, they must Examine themselves, whether they be in a
State of Grace; and that after they have Received, they must be careful
continually to persevere in that State; hence it comes to pass, that they are
very mistrustful of themselves, and very fearful of the worst. Perhaps the
remembrance of some Sin that is past, does yet run in their minds, though they
be truly Penitent for it; and withal the Sense of their Natural Weakness makes
them doubtful for the future, lest they should Transgress again notwithstanding
their watchfulness; and the apprehensions of what is past, and of what may
follow, disquiets their Consciences; and thinking to Err on the Right Hand,
they resolve to keep their feet from the Table of the Lord, lest they should
take a step toward the brink of Destruction.

NOW, to rectify the mistakes of these, it is to be observed, That no more is
required of any (in point of Practice) for the due Receiving of this Sacrament,
than what is required of us all by the Tenor of the New Covenant; for here we
do renew our Covenant with God, and engage our selves afresh, but upon the
former Terms that were undertaken at our Baptism: So that what that Covenant
does contain, that we are bound now to make good. Now the Conditions of the New
Covenant are these in short, viz. Faith in Christ, accompanied with Repentance
from all dead Works. And if Men bewail their Sins heartily, and resolve to be
circumspect for the time to come, not allowing themselves in any thing that is
Evil, but forsaking all sinful Habits, and watching against all sinful Acts;
and if they persevere in this course, studying to serve God according to the
best of their Power and Knowledge; there is no doubt, but they shall find
acceptance with God. And these are the things which we profess at the
Sacrament, that we do and will do: 1. We profess our selves Penitents for all
that is past and gone. 2. We undertake to live Godly Lives for the future;
meaning as near as we can, by the help of God's Grace, considering the
Imperfections of our Depraved Nature. And if we do not Profess and undertake
these things at other times, we are not so much indeed as Christians; and if we
do them sincerely now, we are fit to be Communicants. So that, I confess, I do
not see, what Reason any Conscientious and Good Hearted Man has to be afraid
of this Ordinance; rather it should be his Comfort and Joy, that he has
liberty to use it; because it is the Seal of those Promises of Pardon and
Mercy, which God has made to every broken Heart. No scruples therefore are
sufficient to beat off any Pious and Penitent Souls; for if Men do not Repent
and Reform, they are not the Disciples of Christ; and if they do, they are in a
good Condition to be Guests at Christ's Table. I have more to say concerning
this matter, when I come to treat of the Nature of that Preparation which is
necessary; but this I hope is sufficient for the present.

CHAP. III. Of the Necessity of Preparation.
THE Necessity of Receiving the Holy Sacrament being thus proved, it is time
now to consider those Disposititions and Preparations wherewith all People are
bound to come to the Lord's Table, that they may Eat and Drink aftr a worthy
manner.

AND here, two things are to be enquired into, for the full satisfaction of
Men's Consciences. 1. First, concerning the Necessity of Preparing our selves
before hand; how that does appear. 2. Secondly, concerning the Nature of this
Preparation; wherein that does consist.

1. FIRST, touching the Necessity of Preparing our selves, before we presume to
eat of this Bread and to drink of this Cup. It is observable, That our Blessed
Savior himself gave his Disciples no particular Instructions about this
matter, when he Instituted this Solemnity. He commanded them indeed to do this,
and to Celebrate this Mystery in Remembrance of him; but we do not Read of any
express Directions he gave, touching Preparation thereunto. However, that no
Man may be emboldened to use this Ordinance, after an Irreligious or rash
manner, the Necessity of Preparing our selves, will evidently appear from these
following Considerations. 1. From the consideration of that Analogy which this
Mystery bears to those Ancient Sacrfical Feasts, that were Celebrated by all
Mankind. These I have treated of at large, because the full Knowledge thereof,
is very serviceable in helping us, to understand both the Nature of this Feast,
and our own Duty too in the use of it; which probably might be the Reason of
our Lord's Silence in this point: Because it was not so very necessary for him
to give particular Instructions in a matter, which was so obvious to all, that
Men could easily be led to a Sense of their Duty by those common Notions and
Apprehensions, which both Heathens and Jews had of Banquets of this Nature.

AS for the Heathen part of the world, they saw by the Light of Nature, that
Holy things ought to be used with a great deal of Reverence, and by Men of
Holiness and Purity. And for this Reason their constant Custom was, before they
went to their Sacrifical Banquets, to Prepare themselves with many previous
Rites and Ceremonies, supposing, that thereby they did Sanctify and fit
themselves for the Service of their Deities. Thus the Pagan Priests were wont
to forbear the very touching of Farinam fermento imbutam attingere, ei fas non
est. Aul. Gell. de Flam. Dial. Noct. Attic. lib. 10. c. 15. Of these
Preparatory Rites, See Stuckius in Sacror. and Sacrificior. descrip. page 79.
etc. Gyrald. Hist. Diorum Syntag. 17. p. 497. Natal. Mythol. lib. 1. c. 9. and
14. Alex. ab Alex. Genesis dier. l. 4. c. 17.
any Bread that was Leavened, lest they should be polluted. They used many
sorts of Lustrations and Washings, cleansing as well their Clothes, as their
Bodies (especially their Hands) with the Purest Water, that was appropriated to
that purpose. They abstained for many days before hand from Eating of Flesh,
and from Drinking of Wine. They refrained from the Nuptial Bed, and from all
Carnal Pleasures, using many Artificial Methods, to subdue and Mortify their
Sensual Appetites. And when the time for Sacrificing was come, they arrayed
themselves with clean and spotless Garments, which they called their Holy and
Religious Dress. Nor was this the Practice of the Priests only. For all the
People that were to Eat and Drink before their Deities, were required also to
Prepare and Purify themselves thoroughly after their way; believing that the
outward Sanctifications of their Bodies, did serve to Sanctify and Cleanse
their very Souls and Spirits. Thus they were wont to wash themselves often; to
give themselves to Fastings and much Abstinence; to deny themselves those
Fleshly Satisfactions, which at other times were lawful. Their Custom too, was
to make solemn acknowledgments of the Sins of their Lives, Praying to their
Gods not to take Vengeance upon them. If any Man had his Hands Defiled with
Blood, or was polluted and stained with any gross Wickedness, he was not to
come to the Altar: And when their Services were See the Authors above mentioned.
beginning, Proclamation was made, (...), who are here? Whereunto they
Answered, (...), that is, Many and Good Men: And if any was found there, that
was known to be otherwise, or to be in a State of Guilt, he was turned out of
the Company of the Rest; the very Heathens believing, that none were fit to
meddle with things In Sacrificiis rite celebrandis majorem nullam ceremoniam
fuisse videmus, quam nihil sibi conscire, bonos ac pios esse. Gyrald. Syntag.
17. page 492.
Sacrificed, but such as were Upright in Mind, and void of an Evil Conscience.

AND as touching the Jews, every one knows how strictly they were commanded to
Cleanse and Purify themselves, according to the Sanctifications of the Law,
before they presumed to Eat and Drink before the Holy One of Israel; especially
at the Paschal Supper, in lieu whereof this Christian Solemnity is substituted
and appointed: No Man was permitted to partake of the Passover, that was not
duly Prepared for it by the Rite of Circumcision. No Proselyte was suffered to
come, that was not first Sanctified and fitted for it, according as the Law
directed in that case. None that were in their Uncleanness, or in any respect
legally Impure, whether Men or Women, were to be admitted, till they were
cleansed from their Pollutions. Nay, not the People themselves only, but their
very Houses also were to be free from all defilements. And hence it was, that
some days before the Feast, they purged all manner of Leaven out of their
Rooms; and for fear any ferment should remain in any part of their dwellings,
they were wont, the Night before the Passover, to search with a Candle into
every hole in their walls, and into every chink and crevise in their Floors.
And whatsoever Leaven was found, their Custom was to burn it, using this Form
of words, Let all the Leaven, and every Leavened thing that is with me,
Buxtorf. Synag. cap. 12.
whether I have seen or not seen it, whether I have carried it forth or no, be
dissipated and destroyed, and accounted as the dust of the Earth: By which
Solemn way of Imprecation, the Jews did clear themselves of Guilt, and
protested their Innocence to the utmost of their Knowledge. And when the Hour
was come for the Eating of the Passover, before they sat down, the Feet of the
Commmunicants were washed, as at other Feasts; only it is to be Noted, that at
this Banquet they washed twice, to show the Preeminence, and great Dignity of
this Religious Solemnity above the rest.

SEEING then this was the general Practice of the Jews and Gentiles both, it
abundantly argues it to have been the common Sense of all Mankind, that great
and strict Preparations were necessary, before they durst present any Sacrifice
unto God, or Feast together upon any parts thereof. And the Correspondence that
is between this, and other Ancient Sacrifical Banquets, is enough to show how
Religious and strict the care of Christians ought to be, in preparing and
fitting themselves for so Solemn an Ordinance, before they presume to address
themselves to the Holy Table, to Feast together upon a Sacrificed Savior, the
Spotless Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the world. For this is a
Feast of the Highest and Noblest Nature, that ever was. We have an Altar,
whereof, neither Heathen nor Jew, has any right to Eat: And we have a
Sacrifice to partake of, which is infinitely better than thousand of Rams, and
ten thousands of Rivers of Oil. For here we feed on the Son of God himself,
Christ our Passover, that was Sacrificed for us, whose Flesh is Meat indeed,
and whose Blood is Drink indeed. Here we enter into a close Alliance with the
Holy One of Israel; we are One with Christ by his Spiritual Body that is given
us; we Receive the Seals of our Adoption, and are possessed of a Title to the
Kingdom of Heaven. And this being the Highest Mystery of our Religion, we must
not dare to Celebrate it after a rude and rash manner; but come unto it after
great Preparations, having first searched into our State, and measured our
selves by the line of the Gospel, according to which we shall be Judged in the
Great and Terrible day; and so presenting our selves before the Holy Table,
with clean Hands and a Pure Heart, and with Souls full of God, and in Love with
all manner of Piety and Goodness. Those Ceremonial Rites, which were made
necessary Preparatives in order to a due Celebration of the Paschal Feast, were
of Mystical signification; pointing out that inward and substantial Purity,
which is now required of those that enter into Covenant with God, by taking the
Pledges of his Covenant into their Mouths. They must Circumcise their Hearts,
as the Jews did their Flesh: They should Examine their Souls and Consciences,
as the Jews did their Chambers: They should keep the Feast, not with the Old
Leaven, neither with the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness, but with the
Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth: They should purge and Sanctify their
Affections, as Jews and Pagans were wont to wash their Hands and Feet; and so
compass the Altar of God, having first cleansed their Bodies and Spirits in
Innocence. These are the Moral Duties, which those Ritual Ordinances did
signify, and which were the substance and inside of them. And therefore
perhaps it was, that our Savior delivered no particular Rules (that we Read
of) about this matter; because those Purifications which were every where in
the world, used in order to a right Participation of Sacrifical Feasts, did
plainly Indicate to all Christians what their Duty was; and did speak enough to
inform us all, that we ought to be Religiously Qualified, Prepared, and
Disposed, before we approach unto his Table; and thus much he seems to have
intimated, when he washed his Disciples feet with his own hands, before he
proceeded to the Institution of this Solemnity.

2. NOW though this be sufficient to show the Necessity of due Preparation in
order to a Worthy Receiving of this Sacrament, yet for further proof hereof, we
are, in the next place, to add these words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a Man
Examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. There
is not a Text in all the Scriptures, but this only, which gives us a Command
and Direction concerning this thing. But this is full and comprehensive, if we
understand it in its just Latitude, (...) is the word in the Original Greek,
and it signifies two things. 1. First, it imports searching and trying; every
one should look into his Breast, and see how his Heart stands affected and
disposed, before he goes to the Holy Communion. Seldom is a Man so well
acquainted with himself, but that he has often Reason (especially before he
draws near to God, to Contract for an Eternity) to ask his Conscience
seriously, Is there not any Wickedness in me? The great Sages of Old thought it
one of the most difficult matters, for a Man to know himself thoroughly. For
such is the Pravity of our Nature, that we are commonly very loath to search
into our Bosoms, for fear we should discover some ugly Monster there, like ill
Husbands that are afraid to look over the Account of their Debts, lest their
minds should be disquieted at the sight of them. And when we do take our selves
to task, such is our Partiality, that for the most part we pass too favorable
Judgment in our own Case, and are apt to think our selves Clean, though our
Defilements are more than the spots of the Sun. Considering therefore that at
this Sacrament we present our selves, before that Great God who is the searcher
of the Reins, and the Rewarder of all Evil, we are very highly concerned to rip
open our Hearts before hand, and to Examine every Angle of our Souls, lest we
receive the same Answer, which that rude Guest received. who came Unprepared to
the Wedding Feast, Friend, how came thou hither, Matthew. 22. Indeed it would
be needful for us, were we not Christians, but Men only, to cast our Eyes back
upon our ways every Night, and see how we have passed over the Hours of the
day, before we climb up into our Beds: For this was the grave Advice even of a
Pagan Philosopher, That e're we suffer our Eyes to Sleep, we should thrice run
over the (...), etc. Pythag. (...). in (...).
works of the day past, and ask our selves, Where we have been? What we have
done? What necessary thing we have omitted? So reckoning up the several
passages of our Life from the first dawning of the Light, as says Pythagoras.
For as Hierocles has rightly Noted, This Hyerocl. in Pythag. page 210.
course will serve very much, either to Crown us with Joy, for what we have
done well; or to increase our Repentance for whatever has been done amiss. But
never should we be more careful of this, than when we resolve to make our
Approaches to the Table of the Lord; then it is most necessary to lay aside
some portion of time, to enquire into our Condition with all diligence, to
peruse the Register of our Actions; and to call our selves to an account even
for our words and thoughts. For hardly does any Man walk so in this world, but
that he contracteth some filth daily; some Defilements or other are apt to
stick to his Heels. Even the Conscientious mannagement of our common Affairs,
and our Lawful Callings, though it be in its kind a good Preservative against
Sin, yet it is apt to steal away our Hearts from God, and to draw us sometimes
into a Snare. And for this Reason, the most Righteous Man among us has need to
sequester some hours from other Employments, and to enquire whether he be fit
to come to the Supper of the Lamb.

2. BUT then, Secondly, we must note, that this Examination is not required for
it self, but as a Relative Duty, that is. an Excellent Means to a farther end;
that a Man may be able after Trial and search, to make right Judgment of
himself; and may be provoked and persuaded to Correct the several Errata of his
Life. And this is the full meaning of St. Paul in that place; where he does
chide the Corinthians for their shameful Miscarriages in the Church at the
Communion time. For first of all, when ye come together in the Church, I hear
that there be Divisions among you, says the Apostle, v. 18. And then, in
Eating every one takes before other his own Supper, and one is Hungry, and
another is drunken, v. 21. These were Vile and Scandalous Actions; and when the
Apostle Commanded, them to Examine themselves, his meaning could not be, that
he would have them enquire, whether Matter of Fact was not true, or whether the
things laid to their Charge were not Evil, for all this was plain and open, and
manifest already, and needed Censure rather than Examination. But when he
Commanded them to Examine, his purpose was, that they should Reform themselves,
and for the future take care; not to meddle with that Sacred Mystery, till upon
searching of their Hearts, they could approve themselves to God and the Church,
and to their own Consciences, and should find themselves fit to be
Communicants. Examination here, is as much as Approbation; and in this Sense,
we find the word used as well in Profane as in Sacred Writers. The Men of
Sparta were wont to be Tried, whether they had well observed the Laws of
Lycurgus; and such of them as were found to have done so, were called (...),
approved Persons, Men that were fit and well Qualified to be Citizens. And
according to this Sense we are to understand that of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3. 10.
where speaking of such as were to be chosen Deacons, he said, (...), let them
be first approved of; let them be Esteemed as Men that are fit for that
Function; (...), persons that are blameless in every respect. And speaking of
himself being appointed to be an Apostle, he uses the same Expression, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4. (...), we were Approved of by God, and thought Meet to be
entrusted with the Gospel. And many more places there are in the New Testament,
where the word signifies, not only Examination, but Approbation, or Liking; and
questionless this chiefly is the meaning of St. Paul in this place: Let a Man
Examine himself; that is, let every Man see that he be fit to be a Receiver,
that he be rightly qualified and disposed, that he be such as the Conditions
and Laws of the Gospel require him to be. His Conscience must not Condemn him
for any known Sin Unrepented of: He must have this Testimony within himself,
that his Heart is sincere: He must be an Holy Person that makes use of this
Mystery; one that has led an Holy Life, or at least, that has now Holy
Purposes and Vows, that he will Redeem the time for the future, and yield up
the Members of his Body, and the Faculties of his Soul, as Instruments of
Righteousness and Holiness. He that has not any Comfortable Confidence, that
he is thus Religiously and Honestly disposed, ought not to Communicate of these
Mysteries.

3. FOR in the Third place, to show you yet further the Necessity of due
Prepararation, the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 11. 27. Whosoever shall Eat this
Bread, and Drink this Cup of the Lord Unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body
and Blood of the Lord. And again, v. 29. He that Eats and Drinks
Unworthily, Eats and Drinks Damnation (or Judgment) to himself, not
discerning the Lord's Body. In which two Verses, the Apostle sets down the Sin
and the Punishment of those, who go to the Lord's Table, as the Corinthians
did, with Factious, Irreverent, and Unprepared Hearts. Their Sin is twofold. 1.
First, they discern not the Lord's Body; meaning, that they make no difference
between this Supper, and an ordinary Meal; they De iis erat Sermo, qui domini
corpus veluti quemlibet alium cibum indiscrete, negligenterque sumebant.
August. Tract. 62. in Joan. Sic and Hieron. in Loc. and Author Librorum de
Cardinal. oper. Cypriano ascript. and S. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11. 29.
take the Body of the Lord with the same Indiscretion and Negligence, wherewith
they take Unhallowed and Common Food, not considering the greatness of the
things that are Exhibited, nor the Amplitude of the Gift that is here given to
every well Prepared Soul. For no less than the Spiritual Body of Christ is
tendered by the Elements. And so, Secondly, the Unworthy and Irreverent
Communicant Sins directly, and immediately against the Body of his Savior;
he becomes Guilty of his Body and Blood, showing by his Actions, that he has a
very low and mean regard, of that most Precious and Salutary Offering upon the
Cross. Now according to this twofold Sin, the Unworthy Receiver has a twofold
Punishment. 1. First, he Eats and Drinks his own Damnation, says St. Paul.
As the Devout and Sincere-hearted Communicant Receives the Pledges of a
Glorious Immortality, by Receiving the outward Symbols; so does he that
intrudes rudely, take that which is the occasion of his Everlasting Ruin,
without true Repentance. The Devil enters in with the Morsel, as he did into
Judas, not to be cast out, but by Prayer and Fasting, and a strong Repentance.
For as the Bodily Presence of Christ in the Flesh, was an occasion of
Condemnation to those who Received him not then by Faith; so does his Mystical
and Spiritual Presence here, accidentally turn to the Prejudice of such as
Receive him not now in a due manner. Nay, 2dly, such Bold and Presumptuous
Persons, do draw a Curse down upon their Heads even in this World. For this
Cause, says St. Paul, many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.
Whence come many lingering Diseases, many sudden Deaths? Why, it is very
probable, that many of them are owing to the Irreverent use of this Ble^^ed
Sacrament. Certain it is, that as God threatened under the Law, Exodus 12. 15. to
cut off those Souls that should eat Leavened Bread at the Passover; so in the
Primitive times of Christianity, many were remarkably visited with Plagues, and
sundry kinds of Death (and some People were possessed with the Devil too) by
Reason that they came not to this Mystery, well Prepared and Qualified for it,
as they ought to have been. I shall say no more upon this Theme, supposing that
what has been delivered now, is sufficient to Convince Men of the Necessity of
due Preparation: And I had scarcely said so much, but that it is a thing which
lies before us in our way, and I could not leap over it with an Honest
Conscience. In many other Cases Men need a Bridle, rather than a Spur; but in
this Case, a Spur seems to be more necessary than a Bridle; because such is the
shameful neglect of this Ordinance, which many are Guilty of, that we should
rather use Protrepticks, to provoke Men unto their Duty, than Threats and
Menaces to deter them from Receiving. However, that they may not make more
haste than good speed, it behoved me to show, what Cautions they are to take
along with them, lest they take a step toward their Perdition. Keep thy foot
when thou go to the House of God; and be more ready to hear, than to give
the Sacrifice of Fools, as the Royal Preacher said, Eccles. 4. 1.

Thus having made it appear, that we are strictly bound to Communicate, and to
Prepare our selves rightly and duly in order to a Profitable Communion (which
was the first thing I was to discourse of upon this point) I shall now go on
according to this plain Method, and Treat in the next place of the Nature and
Quality of this Preparation, and show you wherein that does consist.

CHAP. IV. Of the Nature of Preparation, in general, and in particular.
THIS is a Matter of great weight and Consideration; though a very slight
account is made of it by those, whose great care and solicitude seems to be, to
whisper their Crimes to the Ear of a Confessor, and to undergo or Promise some
trifling Penance; and if after these little Practices, they have the
Absolution of a Priest (who yet perhaps, is equally involved in the Communion
of Guilt with his Penitents) they think themselves sufficiently purged from the
Conscience of Sin, and to be perfectly Innocent. And this naturally follows
from the Principles of those Doctors, who Teach, that Confession and Penance,
are the necessary Preparatives before the Sacrament; without making any the
least mention of a Lively Faith in Christ. And although they speak of the
Necessity of Contrition (or Attrition at least) yet by those words, they
understand no more, but a little grief for Sin, with some few purposes at
present to amend hereafter; which they think to be sufficient, because,
according to their Fancy, the work of the Priest supplies and makes amends for
the want of a true and Manly Repentance of the Heart. Now this is so far from
being a due Preparation for the Sacrament, that it is a Ridiculous and trifling
Method, made up of lucrative Arts and absurd Performances; and serves to
Corrupt and Debauch Christianity, and to encourage People in a Wicked and
Irreligious course of Life; as any Man may discern, that will but observe, the
Natural Consequences thereof.

1. THEREFORE for the Resolution of this point, and for the Satisfaction of
Men's Consciences in this particular, we are first to Note, in the general, that
Universal Sanctity and Purity of Mind is required of us, in order to a
Profitable and Comfortable Communion. It was the Opinion even of a Pagan, that
such as meddle with things Sacred, ought to be Chaste and Holy, not (...), etc.
Demoth. Cont. Timocrat.
for a certain number of days only, but throughout their whole Life. And
certainly a constant course of Holiness, is the best Prepaparative for a due
Celebration of this Mystery; because nothing can be presumed to be so
acceptable unto God, as a Life of Innocence. Yet if a Man has lost his
Innocence, either through the Practice of Habitual Sin, or through the
Commission of some Unlawful Acts; his Repentance nevertheless is for Christ's
sake accepted of in lieu of it, if that Repentance be Hearty and Sincere.

NOW Repentance cannot be right, unless the Heart be entirely good, so as to be
out of Love with every thing that is base and inconsistent with the Laws of
Christ's Religion. And therefore a Communicant's mind and purpose must be
resolutely fixed upon the Practice of Universal Christian Piety. Though some
particular Virtues are here more especially to be Exercised, because there are
at this time particular Reasons, and special Objects to Exercise his Faith,
Charity, and the like; yet there ought to be an Habitual Presence of other
Virtues too; the frame and disposition of our Spirits must be such, as is
Answerable to the whole Tenor of the Gospel. Bonum ex integris, malum ex
quolibet defectu: He cannot be said to be an entire Good Man, nor a right Good
Communicant, that has not an entire and Universal Love of Religion, in such a
measure, as by the Mercies of the New Covenant is now accepted of. Each Divine
Grace must contribute something to make up our Wedding Apparel; the covering of
Charity, the Ornaments of a meek and gentle Spirit, the clothing of Humility,
the sackcloth of Repentance and self-denial, the long Robe of Patience and
Constancy, the New Apparel of Mercy and Forgiveness. In a word, we ought to be
so Perfect, as to be Sincere, and to be ready unto every good work, according
to the best of our Knowledge, and to the uttermost of our Power. All Affection
and Love to Sin must be cast off; and Men's Hearts must be Devoted to the
observation of all the Laws of our Redeemer, as his Spirit shall enable us, by
working in us, and with us, and by helping our Infirmities. He that is not thus
disposed, cannot Communicate Worthily, and so as to obtain a Blessing. And the
Reason is clear, because (as I have showed at large) this is a Covenant Feast
under the Gospel, as the Paschal Supper, and other Sacrifical Banquets were
under the Law. By tasting of this Bread and Wine we enter into Solemn
Engagements unto God, as the Jews did by Eating of the Lamb. As they did by
that Holy Rite addict themselves to the Worship of God, and engage their
Obedience to him, conformable to those Laws and Ordinances, which were Enacted
then; even so do we Christians Consecrate our selves by this Evangelical
Solemnity to the Service of God, and vow Obedience to him, answerable to that
way and platform, which he has laid before us now. This is the meaning of this
Mystery; and therefore it is called a Sacrament, because it is like the old
Military Oath, binding all of us to be Faithful and True to the Captain of our
Salvation. Now this is that which he has commanded us by the Mouth of his
Apostle, that as he who has called us is Holy, so we also should be Holy in
all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. And this we undertake to do, when we
Eat and Drink here before the Lord, if we rightly understand what we do. We
stipulate and vow to Obey the Will of God in all things; and promise Solemnly
to deny all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and in express terms do offer and
present unto God our selves, our Souls and Bodies, to be a holy, reasonable,
and lively Sacrifice unto him. Now unless we really intend what we do Profess,
and do steadfastly purpose, and diligently endeavor to make all our Promises
good, what else can we be supposed to do, but to set forth our own shameful
Hypocrisy, instead of showing forth the Lord's Death? Therefore, if we intend
to Receive this Sacrament with Profit, and to our Eternal Salvation, we must
resolve with our selves to be upright and sincere in Heart; to lay aside all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God; to take
to our selves the whole Armor of God, and to quit and behave our selves like
Men. We must resolve to serve God all our days with Reverence and Fear, and to
make him the Object of our Desires, and the Portion of our Souls; to be Holy in
our Affections, to be Humble in Soul, to be Meek and Peaceable in Spirit, to be
Sober and Temperate in our Delights; to be Contented in all Conditions, and to
be Patient under our Crosses, as the Prince of Peace was under his: To be
Thankful for our Afflictions, to be constant and firm in our Trials, and to be
Charitable in all our Prayers, as he himself was, who Prayed unto his Father at
the very last gasp, for the Forgiveness of his Enemies. Men must not be so
vain, as to imagine, that they are sufficiently Prepared, if they do but find
within themselves some present Raptures, and Liquorish apprehensions of the
Love of God; if they can but breath out some Groans, or dissolve themselves
into a shower of Water. No; the right Preparation of the Heart consists in
the entire Love of Virtue, of whatsoever things are True, and Honest, and Just,
and Pure, and Lovely, and of Good Report, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 4. 8.

AND thus much may suffice to be spoken briefly, of the Quality and Nature of
due Preparation in general: It must be an Universal Rectitude and Holiness of
Heart, an entire Goodness of Disposition, a sincere Love of that Religion,
which is Pure and Undefiled, and such a Divine frame and bent of Soul, as
utterly Abhors all that is Evil and Destructive of that Obedience, which is
due both to the first and second Table of the Decalogue.

2. BUT then we must Note, in the next place, that as there ought to be this
general and habitual Preparation, so there are some Particular and Special
Duties, which are now to be performed, because (as I said) here are special
Objects and Reasons to stir us up to the performance of them. Here the Passion
of Christ is represented, the Pardon of our Sins is tendered, and the infinite
Love of God is Exhibited to us. And accordingly we are to lay hold on Christ's
Merits with all our Souls, because his Merits are available to such only as do
Believe: We are truly and earnestly to Repent of our Sins, because Sin was that
which Christ Dyed for, and it is upon our Repentance that our Pardon is Sealed;
and moreover we are to express our entire Love to our Brethren, in all its Acts
and Offices; because, if God so Loved us, we ought also to Love one another, 1 John 4. 11. Hence it is, that Divines commonly Prescribe Faith, and Repentance,
and Charity, as most necessary Preparatives in order to a worthy Receiving; not
as if other Virtues were to be excluded, but because these are specially to be
Exercised, forasmuch as this great Solemnity does afford us Special and Eminent
Objects for the Exercising of them. I shall therefore observe the usual Method,
being now to show, how Prepared you ought to be, and what Preparations are
sufficient; and for your more Profitable Instruction, I shall Discourse
particularly of those three Qualifications, in their due order.

1. AND first of Faith, which is the Mother and Nurse of all True Religion. By
Faith I mean here, in the strict Notion of it, an Act of the Understanding,
whereby a Man is convinced and satisfied of the Truth of those things which are
propounded to our Belief by Divine Revelation, distinguishing Faith from Hope
and Obedience, and other Acts of the Will, which are included in the Notion of
Faith, when it is taken in a larger and more comprehensive Sense. Now in the
pursuit of this Subject, I shall do these two things. 1. First show, why Faith
is required in a Communicant, that we may understand the Necessity of this part
of our Duty. 2. What Faith is required; or what we are bound to Believe; that
we may see the Extent of it. And when this is done, I know not what more will
be needful to be spoken, touching this matter.

1. WHY Faith is required in a Communicant? And the Reason of it is obvious;
because it is the Principle that does influence, move, and govern our Actions;
it being unconceivable, how a Man should be wrought upon, either to put his
Trust in God, or to forsake his Impieties, or to do any other Act of Religion,
unless he be first persuaded in his Mind, that the Author of our Religion had
Authority from God to exact these things at our Hands, and that there is Mercy
with God if we be careful to do our Duty; and that nothing but Punishment is to
be expected, if we neglect and despise so great Salvation. So that without
Faith, as it is impossible to please God, so it is impossible to answer the
ends and purposes of this Ordinance; and consequently, the Elements that are
taken by an Unbeliever, can do him no more good than a Morsel put into a Dead
Man's Mouth. Even the Word that is Preached does not profit at all, if it be
not mixed with Faith in them that hear it, Heb. 4. 2. A thousand Homilies of
Righteousness are no more to such, than Metaphysical Discourses to a Brute. In
like manner, the Administration of this Sacrament, though to well-prepared
Souls it be the Communication of Christ's Body and Blood, yet it avails not,
except there be a Disposition and Principle of Faith in them that Receive it.
It is observable, that while our Savior's Body was on Earth Locally, though a
Medicinal Virtue went out of it, so that they who did but touch the borders of
his Garment, were Healed of their Diseases, yet it did not operate effectually,
without some previous Preparation of Faith. In Matthew. 15. 28. He told the Woman
of Canaan, that would not be put off, before he had taken Compassion upon her
Child, O Woman, great is thy Faith; be it unto thee, even as thou will. And
when the Woman with a Bloody Issue, had but touched his Clothes, though she was
afraid, for her Presumption, being at last discovered, yet received she this
Gracious Answer, Daughter, be of good Comfort; thy Faith has made thee whole,
Matthew. 9. 22. On the contrary. you shall find, that the Incredulity of People
did, as it were, bind up the Hands of his Omnipotence, and shut up the Bowels
of Compassion, so that his Miracles were very few, where their Faith was very
rare. A clear instance we have in Matthew. 13. in his own Country (at Nazareth)
he did not many Mighty Works, because of their Unbelief, v. 58. some indeed he
did; for he Healed a few Sick Persons who had Faith to be Healed; but St. Mark
tells us, that many mighty works he could not do there. Marc. 6. 5. Now to
bring down this Consideration to our present Business: The Body of Christ does
still cast like Influences and Virtues from Heaven, and his Spirit does
Dispense them at this Sacrament; but he Dispenses them according to his good
Pleasure; and he is not pleased to work Miracles on such as do not Believe; but
every one Receives it, according as he is Prepared by Faith. We see the Sun
darteth his Beams into the bowels of the Earth insensibly, and makes every
Plant to Bud, and Germinate, and Shoot forth; but yet his Rays have no Power
over Roots that are Dead and Rotten. And yet there is a Natural and
Irresistible power over things below; whereas the Influences which flow down
from the Man Christ Jesus, do not act Physically and after an uncontrollable
manner, neither is there that intrinsic Power in the Sacrament, or such
Virtues of the Spirit going along with it, as to work upon Hearts, that are not
opened to its Operations by a Lively Faith. No; the Sacrament is the outward
and Ritual Means; but Faith is the Moral and inward Instrument of bringing
Christ to the Soul, and every Man's Receipts are according as he Believes. And
therefore among other things which we are to search and enquire into, we must
be careful to look well into our Creed, and in the first place Examine our
selves, whether we be indeed in the Faith, as St. Paul speaks, 2 Corinthians. 13.
1. Meaning, that we must approve our Faith unto God, and our Consciences, and
see that it be such as the Gospel requires; and our Hearts must bear us
Witness, that we Believe as we should do, before we presume to Eat of this
Bread, and to Drink of this Cup.

2. NOW because no Man is able to approve his Faith, or to make any Judgment of
it at all, unless he does first know, what his Faith ought to be, and how far
it is required to extend; therefore I shall proceed to the second thing I
promised to show, viz. What it is that every Communicant is obliged to Believe,
that you may be satisfied in your Minds, whether you are sufficiently Prepared
for the Communion in this respect. And this I shall do the rather, because many
have spoken very loosely and extravagantly upon this Theme, as if none could be
a Worthy Receiver, except he be persuaded in his Mind, that God Elected him to
Salvation from all Eternity, and except he be assured that all his Sins are
certainly Pardoned, and that he shall be Absolutely and Infallibly Saved in the
day of the Lord. Which Conceits, I am confident, have served to deter thousands
from this Admirable and Heavenly Ordinance; who, though they had never such
good Meanings, and honest Purposes, and were (as we may believe) Sincere in
their Hearts, yet because they could not find themselves thus persuaded, have
refrained coming to the Lord's Table, to the great disquiet and prejudice of
their Souls. Therefore to remove this rub out of the way, be pleased to take
notice, that it is not absolutely necessary for a Man, before he goes to the
Sacrament, to be confidently assured of his present Forgiveness, or his Future
Felicity. We do not deny, but all Men must be assured of the Truth of God's
Promise in the general. Nor do we deny, but that every one is to believe in
particular, that he himself may be Pardoned, and shall be Happy on Condition,
that he Sincerely and Honestly endeavors to observe the Precepts of the
Christian Religion. We do not deny neither, but a strong assurance there may be
in some Eminent Members of the Church, especially when they come to Dye. But
that every one is bound before he does Communicate, to be Absolutely and
Peremptorily assured of his Happiness, is a very Extravagant and groundless
Conceit: And that for these two Reasons.

1. BECAUSE the Scripture says nothing of this or that Man's particular
Condition. God has not made any such Revelations in his Word, and therefore we
are not bound to be assured of the thing. For the Word of God written is the
Adequate Rule of our Faith: So we rightly affirm against the Romanists, with
respect to their Traditions; and so we are to affirm against all Enthusiasts
too, with reference to their Airy and Confident Opinions. The Holy Scriptures
are our Guide; and what they do not say, is not necessary for any of us to
Believe. Quod de Scripturis non habet autoritatem, eadem facilitate
contemnitur, qua probatur, as St. Jerome said; meaning, that whatsoever cannot
be proved by the Authority of the Scriptures, ought not to be Believed as a
Necessary Article of Faith. Now look into the Bible, and see if you can find
your Names written there, or in the Book of Life; if you can any where find it
said, that your Sins are Pardoned; or if you can discover any Absolute Decree,
that you shall Infallibly be Saved. It Is true, the Word of God gives us all
many Excellent Promises, many great and comfortable Hopes, but still it speaks
in General; that they who Believe shall not Perish; that they who Repent shall
be Forgiven; and that they who persevere in well-doing unto the end, shall be
Saved: But it says not in particular, that I am such, or that I shall fare so:
Only indeed I may draw Particulars out of Generals, by way of Argumentation
and Rational Discourse; and I may Judge of my self, by measuring my self with
the Rule, and by comparing my Condition and State with the Gospelterms; and so
I may have very comfortable and strong Hopes (enough to quiet my Mind and
Spirit) that I am in a State of Grace, and that God will show Mercy unto me in
that day; but to go farther, and to be Absolutely Assured of all this, is not
necessary, because we have no plain Revelation to ground that assurance upon.

2. Because such an assurance, were I possessed of it, could not be a Divine, but
an Humane Faith; and consequently it would be Fallible and very uncertain. For
it must be grounded merely on my reflecting upon my self, and upon my comparing
my Condition with the Word of God: So that my Judgment touching mine own State
is still but an Humane Act, arising from those Observations which I my self
make; and I cannot as firmly and reasonably believe that I am a Penitent, as I
do believe that God will Pardon Penitents, because I have His word for the
latter, and only my own word for the former: And we know that every Man is
ready to be Partial to himself, and Naturally apt to think better things of
himself than he ought to think, and to take every Mole in his Face for a
Beauty-spot. Therefore since a Man cannot have any assurance of his State, but
by private Reflections upon himself; seeing such a reflection is an Humane Act;
and since every work of Man is deceitful, it plainly follows, that such an
assurance is not necessary. I wish therefore that Men would be Modest in these
and the like Cases, and not impose such burdens upon their own and other Men's
Consciences, as may serve, to rack and disquiet their Minds, but cannot settle
them upon a firm bottom. The Faith of Christ is of an obvious Nature; and since
the way to Heaven is strait already, Men should be very careful, that they do
not add to the difficulties, by inventions of their own Brains, and render that
entrance impossible, which already is so narrow, that few there be that find it.

IN Answer then to this Enquiry, What it is that every Communicant is bound to
Believe? I shall lay down this as a fair and satisfactory Truth, that the Faith
required, is a Cordial and Comfortable Persuasion of the verity of the common
Principles of Christianity comprised in the Creed; and particularly, that
Christ is so the Savior of the World, that he is able to save all to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, which is the Sense of that Article,
touching the Remission of Sins. These are plain Assertions, for which we have
the Authority of the Scriptures; and when I call this, a cordial and
comfortable Persuasion, I mean such a steadfast Belief in Christ, as serves to
apply Christ's Merits to a Man's own self; which Divines call, a Particular
Faith. To believe in Christ Comfortably, is not only to Assent to the Truth of
the Gospel at Large, and in a General Proposition; but moreover, to believe for
ones self; to be thoroughly satisfied, that Christ was the True Messiah, that
came to seek and to Save that which was lost, and to Save even Me among others:
That he Tasted Death for every Man, and in particular for Me, that his Blood is
the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, and even for Mine; that he is
an Advocate with the Father for my Brethren, and for Me also; that he has
Promised Eternal Life to all that do Obey him, and that even I shall have
benefit by his Promise, if I make good the Condition. In a word, that He is the
Redeemer of all Mankind, and that with him there is Plenteous Redemption for
Me, and for Thee, and for us All, if we be not wanting to our selves. To be
thus persuaded, is enough for any Communicant, in genere fidei, and as to
Matters of Faith. Indeed, in genere morum, as to Matter of Practice, Repentance
and Universal Obedience is necessary too: But now we are considering, not how
much it is necessary for a Communicant to Practice, but how much is needful for
him to Believe; and such a Faith as I have now described, is sufficient, if Men
do but add to this Faith, Virtue.

1. THAT this is so, will easily appear, if we impartially consider, first,
that this is the Faith which is necessarily required of all Christians; and is
sufficient for all. This is Eternal Life, that they know Thee the only True
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, says our Blessed Savior himself,
Joh. 17. 3. The Sense of which place is, that the sincere and hearty
acknowledgment of the True God, and of his Holy Child Jesus, is the Infallible
way to Everlasting Happiness. There are many Truths wrapped and folded up in
the Bosom of that Text, which the Compilers of the Apostolical Creed have
drawn out into several Articles. To know Jesus, or to Confess him to be the
Christ, signifies in the Dialect of the Holy Ghost, to own him to have been
sent by God's Commission; that he came to Redeem us, and to Bless us, and to
Dye for us: To have a deep Sense of the All Sufficiency of his Merits; to
believe that all Power both to Save and to Destroy, is put into his hands; and
to be firmly persuaded, that in, and through him Forgiveness of Sins and a
Glorious Immortality may be obtained by all, that will lay hold on him, and
Love him in Sincerity. Now if this Faith be sufficient (as touching Matter of
Faith) to Entitle a Man to Eternal Life (as our Savior says it is) then it is
enough also to give a Man the Liberty of Communicating; because more cannot be
required to admit us to the Lord's Table, than is necessary for our admission
into Heaven. Certainly that Faith which suffices to bring us hereafter into
the Presence of the Lamb, must be sufficient to bring us to the Supper of the
Lamb; and that is, not a confident Presumption of a Man's absolute Pardon and
Election unto Happiness, but a firm and comfortable Persuasion, that Jesus
Christ came into the World, to Save Sinners, which is a most faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

2. THAT this Faith is enough for a Communicant will appear, Secondly, from its
Anaglogy and Proportion to the Faith of the First Disciples. It was St. Peter's
Confession (for which he was called Blessed) Thou art Christ the Son of the
Living God, Matthew. 16. 16. It was Martha's Confession, Lord I believe that thou
art Christ the Son of God, that should come into the world, Joh. 11. 27. It was
the Eunuch's Confession, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, Act. 8.
37. Nay indeed, it was the Confession of all the Apostles, before every
particular was extracted which lay hid and folded up in it, We believe and are
sure, that thou art that Christ, the Son of the Living God, Joh. 6. 69. Now do
but consider and judge in your selves: Is it possible for any Ratianal Man to
believe, that the Faith which served for the Salvation of those, will not be
enough to Dispose and Fit Us for the Sacrament? Certainly, by the same Faith
whereby the Disciples of Old felt and handled the Word of Life, we may also
Feed on him. For this Faith is as unalterable as the Author of it, who is the
same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. And if in that plain and easy Belief
the Church went to Heaven of Old, why may we not do so still? And why may we
not go to the Sacrament, as to Heaven-gate, by that Faith whereby so many
Thousands have all along entered into Paradise.

3. ESPECIALLY if we Consider, in the 3 d place, the Nature and Reason of this
present Solemnity. It is the Evangelical Feast, by partaking whereof, we do
Renew our Covenant with God, as the Jews did by Eating of the Passover. And
hence we may conclude, that which Capacitates a Man to enter into Covenant with
God first of all, is sufficient to Qualify and Fit him for the Renewing of
that Covenant now; because the Terms of the Covenant are all along the same;
and what we did at our Baptism, and do now again, is but the same thing acted
over and over. Now it is evident from the Holy Scriptures, that the cordial
belief of the Authority and Merits of Christ, was accounted enough in the
Apostles days for the admission of People unto Baptism, which is the Initiating
Mystery, at which God and Men do interchangeably Seal Indentures first of all.
In Act. 8. we find Philip Preaching to the Ethiopian Eunuch, and requiring a
Confession of his Creed, that he might be Baptized; and when the Eunuch made
this short Confession, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, it was
thought enough to give him a right to the Seal of the Covenant; and so
straightway Philip went down into the Water, and Baptized him, v. 38. The like
we Read of Paul and Silas, how they directed the frighted Jayler, to believe on
the Lord Jesus, Act. 16. 33. and instantly upon that Confession, Baptized him.
Now we do not any where read, or find any Reason to conjecture, that the
Apostles demanded any other Faith of their Converts before the Communion, than
what they had delivered unto them to prepare them for Baptism. The same Belief
which qualified them for that, did also Qualify them for this other Sacrament;
for in Act. 2. where we meet with the first Converts, and a great number of
them, even three Thousand Souls, St. Luke relates, that they were Baptized, and
continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine, and in breaking of Bread, v. 42.
And by the Story it seems to be intimated, that in a very short time after they
were Baptized, they were all admitted to the Lord's Table.

I add to this, in the last place, that the Primitive Church of Christ required
this of Communicants, that they should believe those things to be True, which
were taught them by their Pastors; for so Justin Martyr expressly tells us; and
those things were no other, than the common Faith of all true Christians in all
Ages, and which in the Athanasian Creed is called, the Catholic Faith;
consisting of the Fundamental Articles of our Religion, which were anciently
drawn up into short Summaries. And by a passage in St. Ambrose it does appear,
that Baptized Persons were not prohibited from coming to the Communion, but for
the space of a few days after their Baptism: And this Prohibition was intended,
not that they might in that time learn a New Creed; but only gain some further
Knowledge, touching the Nature and Ends of this Religious Mystery; still the
Faith was one and the same, even a comfortable belief in Jesus Christ, and him
Crucified.

TO all which, I shall only add the Judgment of the Church, as to the Nature of
that Faith, which is necessary for Baptism, etc. as it appears in the Office of
Public and Private Baptism, in the Visitation of the Sick, in the Exposition
of the Creed, in the Catechism; as also in that old useful Book, called the
Institution of a Christian Man: In all which, no more is looked upon as
necessary, but an hearty assent to the Truth of those common Doctrines of
Christianity contained in the Apostolical Symbol.

BY what then has been thus particularly showed, any ordinary Communicant may
easily discern, whether his Faith be genuine, and right, and approved, and such
as the Gospel does require. In short, do you believe that the Holy Jesus was
the Son of God? That he came into the World, by the Appointment of his Father?
That his great Errand, was to Redeem an undone and (without him) a lost World?
That he Dyed upon the Cross for this purpose? That his Blood was shed as a
Ransom for all? That he paid a Price even for thy poor Soul? And that for his
sake thou may find Mercy at the hands of God? If this be thy Faith, thou
may be assured, that thy Faith is as right and true, as ever was the Faith
of an Apostle, though thou can not Remove Mountains, nor Heal the Sick with thy
shadow. And therefore thou art thus far well Prepared to be a Receiver, because
this is the proper Object of every Christian's Faith, That Jesus Christ is the
Savior of the World; and to believe thus much, with a particular application
of Christ's Merits to thine own Soul, so that thou can believe it with Joy,
and cast thy self on him with an Humble Confidence, and trust to him for thy
present Pardon and future Felicity, this is the proper Act of a Worthy
Communicant.

CHAP. V. Of Repentance.
THERE is another Special Act of Religion, which not only every Communicant,
but indeed every Christian ought to employ the utmost of his Care about, and
that is, Repentance from dead works, the Natural Fruit of Faith toward God. In
discoursing of this, it is requisite for me to show, 1. First, the true Nature
of Repentance, wherein it does consist. 2dly, Upon what Special Grounds and
Reasons it is necessary, before we go to the Communion. And 3dly, how far, and
in what Degree it is necessary.

1. FOR the right understanding of the Nature of Repentance, we must not rely
upon the groundless, nay Superstitious Conceits of the Schoolmen, who place
the whole Work of Repentance, in Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction;
meaning, that though a Man be never so broken in Heart, yet he is not a right
Penitent, nor fit for the Communion, till he has privately made an enumeration
of his Sins to a Priest, and does undergo, at least does Vow, and Promise to
undergo some Ritual Penance, to Expiate his Offenses. At the bottom of this
Doctrine there is a great deal of Trick and Artifice, which is quite Foreign to
the design and business of Christianity. For Christ's Religion is a plain and
admirable Method, to make Men universally Good; and to bring us to the Love of
solid and substantial Virtue, that we may Live the Life of Angels (Pure and
Holy) as far as it is consistent with the Nature and Condition of Mortal Men.
Accordingly Repentance, means a Zealous and Passionate Abhorrence of every
thing that is Evil in the Eye of God. The common Notion of Repentance implies
thus much, that what a Man has done, he wishes were undone, and resolves to
do so no more. And this is the Notion, which the Christian Doctors of Old
entertained of this matter (as Lombard. lib. 4. did. 14. Est autem
poenitentia, ut dit Ambrosius, mala praeterita plangere, and plangenda iterum
non committere. Haec vera est poenitentia, cessare a peccato. Id. Item
Gregorius, poenitere est anteacta peccata deflere, and slend^ non committere.
Ita and Isidorus, Irrisor est and non poenitens, qui adhuc agit quod poenitet.
Item Augustinus, Inanis est poenitentia quam sequens culpa coinquinat. Quibus
addendum illud Tertulliani, ubi emendatio nulla poenitentia vana.
Peter Lombard himself does very plainly acknowledge) that true Repentance,
lies in a sincere Sorrow for all past Miscarriages, and in a resolution never
to return again with the Dog to his Vomit, or with the Sow that is washed, to
her wallowing in the mire.

THE Holy Scripture (which in this and all other necessary Speculations is our
only sure and infallible Guide) gives us this short account of the Nature of
Repentance, that it is the eschewing of Evil, and the doing of Good. So that it
is a perfect change of a Man's purposes and courses, the forsaking of all
Iniquity, a New State, a Life of Sanctity and Goodness: And they that place it
in a little sorrow of the Mind, joined with Auricular Confession, and the
outward Austerities and Chastisements of the Body, show more their Love of
Childishness, and a regard for their own Interest and Authority over Poor
People, than their Skill in sound Divinity. To Repent signifies in the Sacred
Dialect, to become a New Man, to have an Heart Renewed and Transformed, and to
follow a New, that is a Religious course of Life. The Scripture indeed has
several Expressions that signify this change: It Is called a New Creature; the
Renovation of the Mind and Spirit, the putting on of the New Man, the purging
of the Heart from an Evil Conscience, the abhorring of Evil and cleaving to
that which is Good, the turning to God, the Dying to Sin, the Mortifying of our
Lusts and Affections, Repentance from dead Works; and many more the like
Expressions there are; but these are only various delineations of the same
thing; several Words and Phrases (proper to Divinity) whereby is meant, the
total rectifying of a Man's Temper and Life; or as even an Heathen Hierocles
Hieroc. in Pythag. p. 166.
describes it, the recovering of that clean Life, which by a mixture of
Passions was Defiled, the correcting of all inconsiderate courses, the shunning
of all Foolish Actions and Words, and the Institution of such a Life as is not
to be Repented of. For our Nature being vitiated and depraved, the Business of
Religion is, to new-mould our Tempers, to take away every thing that sowers
Humanity, and unbecometh Creatures that ought to be governed by right Reason,
and so by degrees to bring us, as near as it is possible, to the Temper of
Christ, and to the Nature of God himself. The Reason of it is, because the
ultimate end of Christ's Religion, is to make us perfectly Happy in another
World; in order whereunto, it is absolutely necessary for us to partake of the
Divine Nature in this Life, and to be made like unto God in Goodness and
Purity. For all Happiness does consist in the Enjoyment of that which Answers
ones Desires, which agrees with his Mind, which is suitable to his Faculties,
which gives him all manner of Satisfaction. So that in the Nature of the thing,
it is impossible for a Man to be fit for the Enjoyment of Heaven, that is not
of an Heavenly Mind and Temper. The Condition of that place is not suitable to
the frame and disposition of any filthy Heart: And therefore every Evil Man
that Dies before his Heart is changed, must be Miserable of course, for he
carries a Hell along with him, he goes out of the World with such a Temper, as
makes him fit only for the Society and Conversation of Wicked Spirits. Men that
are Fierce, Haughty, and Froward, Men that are full of Malice and bitterness;
Men that hate every thing that is good; Men that delight in Cruelties and
Bloodshed; Men that are Contentious, Vexatious, and Troublesome; Men that are
in Love with Mischief, that Live without God, that mind only Earthly and Wicked
things, and that wallow in Sensualities and Uncleanness; whither can we suppose
such Devilish Tempers fit to go, but to the Company of Devils and Spirits like
unto themselves? It requires a great deal of care and pains, to mend a Man's
Nature, to rectify and regulate his Temper, so as to dispose him for the
Enjoyment of God, and to make him receptive and capable of the Felicities of
Heaven. It is an exellent Expression that of St. Paul's, Col. 1. 12. Giving
thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light; (...), that has made us fit for a Portion
of that Inheritance; that has so wrought upon our Hearts, that we are Prepared
and Qualified, rightly Fitted and Conditioned for the Enjoyment of Heaven.

NOW all this is done by a sincere and hearty Repentance; when a Man reflecting
upon the Love of God, and upon the Folly, Turpitude, and Heinousness of his own
Sins, is broken in Heart through a deep Sense of them, and from that hour vows
and resolves upon entire Obedience to the Divine Will. Accordingly he enters
presently upon a New State of Life, governing his Desires with a strong hand,
checking his former Inclinations, keeping his Lusts and Affections under
command, and steadfastly resisting those Temptations which Betrayed him before
into the hands of the Destroyer. By this means he extirpates by degrees those
vicious habits, which once were not only his Life, but his Plague too, and by
using himself to a course of Virtue and Religion (which he finds to be
infinitely more easy and delightful as well as safe) he soon comes to be out
of Love with Sin, and is so renewed in the Spirit of his Mind, that the great
care and employment of his Life, is to Reform himself Universally, and to yield
up his Members as the Servants and Instruments of Righteousness.

THIS is briefly the Nature of Repentance, a perfect and total change; and they
are very dangerously mistaken who are taught to believe, that if they find in
themselves some Remorse of Conscience, some trouble of Mind, together with
general and imperfect purposes of amendment, their Penitence is sufficient, as
long as they have the Priest's Absolution. Alas! all this comes vastly short of
Reformation; without which all the rest are Unprofitable: For all the
Absolutions in the World will do no good, without an utter detestation and
forsaking of Sin in the Penitent: nor will all his Fears, all his Remorse, all
his Confessions avail him, if when he goes for Absolution, he looks with a kind
and friendly Eye upon his Vices, and cherishes that Uncleanness in his Bosom,
which by the Laws of God he is bound to cast away. For it is no easy matter
for any to lead a Lewd Life, without some trouble and unquietness of Mind; and
for a Man first to Sin, and then Confess, and then Sin again, is nothing else,
but to drive a circular Trade of Hypocrisy; for all this is very consistent
with a Wicked Life: Because after this rate, there is no necessity of entire
and universal Holiness, (without which, St. Paul says, there is no seeing of
God) but People may give themselves up all their days to all manner of
Wickedness and Villainy, and may think to be Saved nevertheless. What a smooth
and pleasant way would this be into the Kingdom of God, were it but true? How
easily after this rate is the Sinner and the Saint reconciled? But what a
Scandal is it to Christianity, and what a fatal prejudice is it to a good Life,
when Men are taught such an Artificial Method, how to Save their Souls, and
their Sins too? For who will undertake that troublesome and painful task, of
Mortifying his Lusts, of parting with a right Eye, of cutting off a right hand,
and of being Crucified to the World, if he be persuaded that he cannot possibly
miscarry, as long as he has at hand such a present and easy Remedy as this
is, Confess and be Absolved. Be not therefore deceived in a case of such huge
moment and weight. True Repentance is not a thing of such quick and superficial
dispatch, it must reach to the very Heart and Marrow; it must alter and
transform the whole Man, it must bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance; it
must express it self by an Universal Obedience to the Precepts of the Gospel,
it must have that good effect upon Men's Spirits, as to make them follow
whatsoever things are Just, and Honest, and Pure, and Lovely, and of good
Report.

2. THE Nature of Repentance being thus Explained, I shall not need to spend
much time upon the next point, touching those Special Grounds and Reasons,
which render Repentance necessary, before we go to the Communion. For every
Man's Conscience cannot but tell him, that he ought to come to so Sacred a
Mystery with clean Hands, and a very pure Heart. However, that Discourses of
this kind may not seem fantastical and groundless, the Necessity of this thing
will plainly appear from these following Considerations.

1. From that Analogy which this Evangelical Christian Feast bears unto those
Ancient Sacrifical Feasts, of which I have formerly Discoursed at large. At
those Solemnities (as Gyraldus observes) even the Heathens thought it the most
necessary part of their Religion, to be free from an Evil Conscience. In
Sacrificiis rite celebrandis majorem nullam ceremoniam fuisse videmus, quam nil
sibi conscire, bonos ac pios esse. Gyrald. Hist. deor. synt. 17.
They were wont at those times, to Confess their Guilt, to Profess Repentance
for all their Faults, and by their dejected Countenances, and Id. ibid.
modest Behavior, to express their great Sorrows for what was past. They would
wash their Bodies in Rivers, and present themselves at the Altars of their Gods
in pure and clean Apparel, with washen Hands, and naked Feet, as significations
of the Purity of their Minds; and when the Solemnity began, as the Priest asked
with a loud voice, (...) who is here? So the People answered, (...) many Men
and Good; esteeming Sanctity and Goodness to be absolutely necessary in such as
were to Feast before their Deities. Among the Jews it was customary to use
several Ritual ways of Sanctification (such as the cleansing of their Bodies,
and the scowring of their very Clothes) before they presented their Oblations
unto God, or durst to feed upon the remains of their Sacrifices. They had
diverse washings and carnal Ordinances imposed upon them, until the time of
Reformation, says the Apostle, Heb. 9. 10. One eminent instance we have, 1 Samuel 16. there Samuel goes to Bethlehem, to Sacrifice unto the Lord, and to
Feast with Jesse and his Sons upon part of the Oblations; but before he would
either slay the Heifer, or sit down with them at Meat, he commanded them to
Sanctify themselves, (according to the Custom) v. 5. Now these legal
Purifications, were so many Notices and Indications of that inward and
Spiritual Purity, which is necessary in all, who present themselves before the
Lord, and profess to be of his Household and Family. For which Reason the
Prophets, who were Expositors of the Law, called upon the People at every turn,
to mind that Sanctity of Heart and Spirit, which was signified by these
External Rites, and without which, all their Services were so many vain
Oblations. So God himself calls them, Jer. 1. 12, 13. When ye come to appear
before me, who has required this at your hand, to tread my Courts? Bring no
more vain Oblations; that is, Heartless Sacrifices, such Sacrifices as were
without the Heart, not of the Beast, but of the Man; empty Services, that were
without a broken and contrite Spirit. To this purpose it is said, Isa. 66. 3. He
that kills an Ox, is as he that Slew a Man; he that Sacrifices a Lamb, as he
that cutteth off a Dog's neck; he that offers an Oblation, as he that
offers the Blood of Swine; and the Reason follows, because they have chosen
their own ways, and their Soul delights in their own Abominations. It Is
Holiness that God requires, rather than Sacrifice; and so much was intimated to
them, when they were appointed to wash, before they entered into the Sanctuary.
To which purpose, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 26. 6. I will wash my hands in
Innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar: Meaning, that by cleansing the
outward parts, Men were taught to Cleanse and Sanctify their Minds, chiefly,
and that Innocence is mainly necessary in such as go about to meddle with Holy
things. And this is particularly observable from the Ordinance concerning the
Passover, which was a Type and Shadow of this Christian Ordinance. Though every
Jew that was rightly Qualified, was bound under pain of Death, to bring the
Offering of the Lord in his appointed Season; yet if he had any Legal
Impurities upon him; if he were a Leper, or had a running Issue, or had been
Defiled by touching a Dead Carcass, then he was severely bound to forbear the
Passover for a time; he was to defer it for the space of a Month; because it
was a general Rule, the Soul that eats the Flesh of the Sacrifice of
Peace Offerings, having his Uncleanness upon him, even that Soul shall be cut
off from his People, Lev. 7. 20. Philo the Jew has rightly observed, that God
Instructed Men by these Rites and Forms and outward Symbols, how they ought to
make their approaches unto his Altar, either to Pray or to give thanks unto
him; that they should bring no latent Diseases, no Corruptions of Soul along
with them. And never is it more necessary for Men to lay their Impurities
aside, than when they come to this Christian Sacrifice. The Body of the Lamb
was a Type and Figure of the Flesh of Christ; and as we cannot refuse Eating
without being Guilty, as well as Foolish and Improvident; so neither can we be
Innocent, if we Eat with our Uncleanness about us; this is no other, than to
Eat and Drink Judgment to our selves, 1 Cor. 11.

2. BESIDES, 2dly, the Nature of this Great Mystery is well to be considered,
for (as I have showed) it is the Covenant Feast under the Gospel, even as the
Paschal Supper, and other Sacrifical Banquets were under the Law: And
Repentance is indispensably required of all that come to Contract with God.
There is a remarkable place in Psalm. 10. 16, 17. Unto the Wicked God says, why
do thou Preach my Laws, and take my Covenant into thy Mouth, whereas thou
hate to be Reformed? The Psalmist does manifestly allude to an Ancient Custom
of making Covenants with God by Sacrifice, as it is, v. 5. For the Offering
being made upon the Altar, and part of it being burnt as God's Portion, the
remainder was taken away by the Covenanting Parties, as their share; and their
manner was, to Eat it together before the Lord, thereby testifying that they
were now in Communion and Fellowship with him. And this the Psalmist calls; the
taking of God's Covenant in their mouths; for it was the Eating of his
Sacrifice, which was a Sign and Token of the Covenant. Now, what they did of
Old, when they did Communicate of the Flesh of Beasts, That (the very same
thing) we Christians do now; when we partake of Bread and Wine, we do Solemnly
Profess that we are in Covenant with God, and Solemnly Confirm this Covenant at
his Table. Now the Terms of the Covenant under the Gospel, are these on our
part, that we will serve God in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our
Life; and if our inward intentions be not according to our outward Profession,
but we hate to be Reformed, what horrible Presumption is it to take the Symbol
and Seal of God's Covenant into our Mouths? All this is Mockage, and
Hypocrisy, a Solemn and Theatrical kind of jeer, if Men do not stedfaly
resolve and purpose in their Hearts, to become New Men, and for ever to please
God in Newness of Life.

3. ADD to this, in the third place, that the Blessings tendered us at this
Sacrament, are such, as do require a Sincere Repentance from dead Works, as a
Qualification and Disposition to make us meet to be Partakers of them. For here
Christ is tendered, with all the Fruits and Benefits of that Sacrifice, which he
once for all offered up to his Father upon the Cross: And of these, Forgiveness
of Sin is one great Blessing. But there is no Pardon to the Wicked, to such as
are still in Love with their Abominations, and intend to persist and go on in
their Wickedness. In order therefore to a due Celebration of this Mystery, as
every Knee should bow, so every Heart must be broken, and every filthy Lust
Mortified. For Conversion goes before Forgiveness, as the Condition that
Capacitates the Receiver; and the Dominion of Sin must be Conquered, before the
Guilt of it can be removed; it being impossible for Vice and Grace to Reign
together, or that God and Belial should sit together in the same Throne. It Is
Repentance that Prepares the way for Mercy, and makes room for that Pardon,
which we beg for at the Altar; and that we may be sure of Forgiveness, we must
so Condemn all our Impieties, as to forsake them, and so to grieve for them, as
to detest and abhor them. For Christ is not an Absolute, but a Conditional
Savior: Nor does he Ransom any by his Blood from Eternal Death, but whom he
Redeems, first by the assistance of his Grace from those Iniquities, whereof
Death is the Wages. All that Bliss and Happiness, which is reserved for us in
Heaven, and whereof we have a foretast and earnest at this Sacrament, is the
Portion of Holy Souls only, that Love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity, and resolve
to Obey him.

CHAP. VI. Of the Degrees and Measures of Repentance. According as Men's Sins
are. Of Unwilful Sins.
THIS being enough to show the Necessity of Repentance in order to a due
Communion; I proceed in the next place to show, what Measures and Degrees of
Repentance are necessary. For the clearing of this too, we must of necessity
consider the different Degrees and Measures of Sin; because Repentance must
bear some Proportion to the Offense; and as a Man's Sins are of a greater or a
lesser Nature, so must his Repentance be also.

NOW considering that the Act and Consent of a Man's Will, is that which
renders an Action formally Sinful, and the more wilful any Sin is, the more it
rises and swells in greatness; we must first distinguish between Wilful and
Vnwilful Sins; for so it will the more fully and evidently appear, what degree
that Repentance must be of, which is to be proportionable and suitable to both.

WILFVL Sins then are such, as are committed with a Man's full Approbation and
Choice; when he deliberates upon it, or at least has means and time to
deliberate, and resolves with himself to do the thing; either for the
gratifying of some Lust, or for the procuring of some worldly end, though he
knows the Action to be contrary to God's Law, and might refrain from it, if he
would make a due use of that strength which God has either fixed in his
Nature, or added by his Grace. Such an Action is rightly said to be wilful,
because a Man's Will has the greatest hand and stroke in it. For we suppose in
this case, that the Understanding is or may be sufficiently informed, and that
the Inclinations are not so strong, nor the Temptations so great, but that they
might be Victoriously Resisted, if the Party would but give his mind to it, and
set his Heart to employ his Power and Abilities. And therefore the Sin is
called Wilful, because though some little fault may perchance lie both in his
Understanding and Affections too, yet the main blame lies upon the Will, for
carrying the Action on with Resolution and Obstinacy; because he is set upon
frowardness.

VNWILFVL Sins are such, as have not the Consent, or not the full Consent of
the Will; but proceed rather from some Natural and Hereditary Imperfection;
either from a defect of Knowledge, by means whereof a Man either wants light in
his Understanding, or looks upon things in a wrong light (and then it is a Sin
of Ignorance:) or else it proceeds from a defect of Strength, from some
Inability and Lameness of Humane Nature, by means whereof his own corrupt
Inclinations within are too quick for him, or some Temptations from without are
so sudden, so thick, so violent against him, that he cannot hold out against
himself, as the case stands, but does that which he knows he should not, in a
hurry and without due Consideration, his poor feeble Nature being overborn;
and his Councels, which otherwise he would use, being prevented by a surprise
(and this is that which is called, a Sin of Weakness and Infirmity.)

1. OF these Vnwilful Sins I shall speak in the first place; and in the Process
of this Discourse, I shall, 1. give some particular account of these Sins: And,
2. show how far, and to what degree we are to Repent of them, before we come to
the Blessed Sacrament.

1. THE First kind of these Vnwilful Sins, and that which is the ground and
Original of all the rest, is the Sinful Inclination in every Man's Nature, that
Proneness, Propensity, and Aptness unto Evil, which cleaves to every Child of
Adam inseparably from the Womb; so that his Nature through mere Impotency and
Hereditary weakness, lies always bending and bowing toward Wickedness. Though
good Men do not yield to this Inclination, and every Man has sufficient
assistance from God to check it; yet all Men have more or less their share of
it, so that they are still apt to flag and swerve from their Duty, though they
be in a State of Grace and Regeneration. This Natural Inclination and
crookedness is termed Sin, because materially it is so, being a repugnancy to
the Law of God, and a deviation from it. For all Sin is, (...), as the Apostle
defines it, 1 John 3. 4. A Transgression of, or a Contrariety unto, or a
deflection and dissonancy from the Law; and because the Hereditary Propensity
of our Nature is such, therefore is it truly said to be Sin and sinful
materially and in it self. But yet on the other side, it cannot by any means be
reckoned among wilful or voluntary Sins; because this Inclination of Nature is
not contracted by any Act of Man's own Will, by any consent, choice, or
approbation of his own; nor indeed has he any more hand in it, than he had in
the Formation of his Body. It is no more his Will that he is Born with Evil
Inclinations, than 'twas his Will he was made up of such and such parts, or
that he came into the World, with an Appetite after Food, or with an
Inclination to Sleep and Rest, and such other Natural Actions.

2. BESIDES this Natural Inclination and Aptitude unto Sin, there are several
other things which come under the Notion of Evil, but yet cannot be called
Wilful Acts, but mere Infirmities. 1. As Evil thoughts, especially in the first
rising of them, and when they are not attended with subsequent Actions, nor
entertained with Pleasure and Delight. I call such thoughts Evil, because they
are of themselves breaches of that Spiritual Law of God which reaches the very
Heart and Soul, and requires Purity in the inward parts: But yet they are not
to be accounted voluntary Transgressions, because they are not Acts of the
Will, the Results of deliberation and choice, but the sudden breakings out of a
Distempered Nature, things which our inward Corruptions do ever and anon cast
out; as Putrified Blood is apt upon fermentation to throw out Boyls and
Blisters, and the like. Indeed our Blessed Savior, speaking of those things
which come forth from the Heart, and Defile a Man, mentions particularly Evil
Thoughts: Matthew. 15. 18, 19. Those things which proceed out of the mouth, and
come forth from the Heart, they Defile the Man; for out of the Heart proceed
Evil Thoughts, etc. But in this place is meant, not those indeliberate and
sudden startings of the Mind, which I have now been speaking of, but black
Designs, studied Purposes, and Malicious Contrivances of the Heart, especially
against a Man's Life, as our Learned Paraphrast has very rightly Dr. Hammond
in Loc.
noted. These inward motions which we feel within us, and which all Good People
complain of, as long as they are bare thoughts and surprises of Soul, are not
to be reckoned as Wilful-Sins, nor are they inconsistent with a State of Grace
and Salvation. They are many times the effects of a Disordered Brain, and of a
Body Distempered with the Spleen, Melancholy, and the like; so that they are
often as Natural Effects of some Disease, as hot and cold fits are the effects
of an Ague. They rise in the Mind without ones Will, nay against it; and they
are to Good Christians an Affliction and Trouble: As they are afraid of them
before hand, so they are apt to be ruffled when they come, and to be
Discomposed and Tormented for them when they are gone. This is a plain
Argument, that in such Persons they are not Wilful Sins; and therefore they do
not Defile them, so as to render them loathsome or impure in the Eye of God:
However they must be Repented of in some measure, as I shall show in its proper
place.

2. There are too diverse Omissions, which the best of Men are Subject to be
guilty of, through the common and inevitable course of Humane Affairs, and by
Reason of the insufficiency of Humane Nature, though assisted with Divine
Grace. Now God forbid we should think, that all such Omissions are Sins of
Wilfulness; for many of them proceed from an hurry of Secular Matters, which
makes even Good Men forgetful of some things, and unwilfully wanting in others;
nor is it possible it should be otherwise. Many Omissions also proceed from
mere Inadvertency, in cases which have no room for deliberation: Nay though a
Man be never so cautions and considerate, yet it is not in his power to debate
and consult with himself in every particular and minute contingency; the frail
and narrow condition of Humanity will not allow it; nor is it imaginable, that
any Man can be so watchful at all times, as not to Sleep at all, nor suffer any
thing to escape him. The Spirit truly is willing, but the Flesh is weak, as our
Savior told his Disciples when they slept instead of Ministering Comfort to
him, and Praying for him in his great Agony, Matthew. 26. And as long as we carry
Flesh about with us, so long we shall be wanting in some part or other of our
Duty. The daily Sacrifice may be some times neglected, at least in some
measure, and our Devotion may be missing for a while in a crowd of Business.
Serene and Pleasant times are apt to draw out our thoughts from their close
retirements, like Bees sporting in the Sun. The Necessities of the Saints are
not always in our thoughts, and so those thirsty Channels may remain without
any Water from our Cistern. Many Blessed Opportunities, of doing our selves and
others good, slide away from us insensibly; nay even in our Callings, to which
commonly we Sacrifice most of our time and care, we are not always so vigilant
and industrious, but that we may deserve the Censure of some Negligence, though
we may not deserve the charge of Dishonesty.

3. There is another sort of Infirmity, viz. a mixture of Imperfection in our
very best Performances. Though the thing be done with an Honest and Good Heart,
yet we come short as to the Degree, and fail more or less in the manner of
doing it. Who can understand his Errors? says the Psalmist, Psalm. 19. 12. Such
is our Condition, that like the Image which Nebuchadnezzar saw in his Dream, it
is not all of a Temper, but consists of a medly, so that there is something
in us of Gold, something of baser Metal, and something of Clay: By means
whereof it comes to pass, that our good Works are defective, and stand in need
of a Pardon. We find by daily Experience, that what State soever we are in,
what Graces soever we are to Exercise, what Duties soever we are to perform,
many Infirmities still cleave to us like a Leprosy which we cannot totally
cure. In our Prosperity we are apt to be lifted up in our Minds; and when a
sweeping Affliction comes upon us, we are as ready to be discouraged and cast
down. Our Faith is apt to be attended with some distrust, our Hopes with some
Presumption, our Obedience with some abatements of Love, our Charity with a
little touch of Pride, our Meditations with a great deal of Distraction; and
even at our Devotion, when we take down the stringed Instruments from the wall,
to chant out Praises and Prayers to our God, our Zeal suffers some alloy by
many wandering thoughts, nor do our Hearts keep exact time with our Voice, but
are apt to flatten, and be out of tune, when our Mouths are full of Hosanna's
in the highest. Briefly, our Imperfections are so deeply rooted in us, that we
cannot get rid of them; in our Closets, in our most serious and fixed
Contemplations, they are with us; nay, the very House of God is not a Sanctuary
from them, but they are apt to bear us company even to the Altar: Yet this is
for our Comfort, that if we sincerely endeavor to Conquer and cast them off,
they are not Wilful Sins, nor will God reckon them unto us to our Condemnation,
because they are Infirmities which we cannot help.

4. Besides all these Infirmities, there are several indecent Actions, which
though they cannot be justified, or totally excused, if rigorously considered,
yet cannot properly come under the Notion of Sins that are perfectly Wilful;
because they are not the result of mature Deliberation, but rather are done
casually, by means of some surprising Temptations without, which on a sudden
overcome ones Passions, or by means of some great disturbance within, which for
that time hinders the use of Reason, and are too hard for it. Even in a State
of Innocence, Man was set lower than the Angels, though the Brutish part was
so Subject to the Rational Faculty of his Soul, that it was wholly under its
command. Ever since the Fall, Men's Affections have been Rebels; which have been
apt to over-master them, and carry them away against their Reason; because
Reason being many times wonderfully disturbed by them, it is not powerful
enough to Govern and Rule them. And though the Grace of God be abundant under
the Gospel, and very powerful in such as humbly obey it; yet even in Men that
are Regenerated by God's Spirit, there is still a mixture of Good and Evil, as
the hottest Tempers have some degrees of Cold; so that a Wise and Holy Man, may
through Surprise, or Incogitancy, or the Violence of a Temptation, be overtaken
unawares. It was not the case of Moses alone, to speak unadvisedly with his
Lips, being provoked to it by the Peoples Murmurings: Nor was it David's Case
alone, to say in his haste, all Men are Liars; nay, it was not Peter's Case
alone, to deny his Lord through extremity of Fear. Every one is apt sometimes
to be born down by the Tempter, or by his own masterful and disorderly
Passions; nor is there any Man but is sensible of some petturbations of Soul,
which are usually occasioned, either by his own Hereditary weakness, or by some
ill Accidents in his Family, or by some Troubles in his Calling, or by the
disappointment of his Expectations, or by the common Crosses of the World, or
by the Apprehensions of some Evil to come, or by the Sense of some Calamity
that is past, or by a Natural Distemper and Sickness, in his Constitution, and
by diverse Accidents more, which the Subtilty and Malice of the Tempter makes
use of to disturb his Peace. Now, though in these Actions there be some little
concurrence of the Will, enough to make them imputable to us, if God should
deal with us according to rigor and severity, yet by the Mercies of the
Gospel, they are not actually imputed to a Good Man, because they are not
properly voluntary, that is, they proceed not from propense Malice, or a
deliberate Judgment, but from sudden and displeasing Contingencies, so that he
would not be Guilty of them, were he not in Unfortunate Circumstances.

2. THE Nature and Quality of Unwilful Sins being thus Explained, it is
necessary now in the next place to consider, how far, and to what degree, we
are to Repent of them before we Eat and Drink at the Lord's Table: For if Men
entertain false Notions of this matter, it is impossible for them to be
Satisfied that they are duly Prepared, as long as they labor under those
Notions, especially if they be People of Tender and Scrupulous Spirits.

1. FIRST then in general we must Note, that we are not obliged to Repent of
Infirmities in such an high degree, as to Vow, Promise, and Undertake, that we
will keep our selves free from all manner of Sin. Though we are bound to be
very watchful over our ways, and must resolve with our selves not to act
knowingly and presumptuously against God's Commandments; yet it does not lie in
our Power to live wholly Innocent from every the least offense. The Divine
Grace does assist and strengthen our Natures, but it does not Destroy them: Men
we are still, subject to the Frailties of Poor Mortal Creatures, and as long as
we are compassed about with Flesh, we cannot lead such an Angelical Life, as to
be clean from all Impurities, as those Blessed Spirits in Heaven are. The
Condition of our Nature cannot bear it; therefore the thing being impossible,
we are not obliged at any time to resolve upon such high degrees of Sanctity as
are out of our reach. For which Reason we cannot conceive our selves obliged to
it in order to a due Celebration of the Eucharist: For at this great Solemnity
we renew that Covenant we made at our Baptism, which is, not to be void of all
manner of uncleanness, but to Renounce the Devil and our own Lusts, so as not
to follow or be led by them, (as our Church has excellently expressed it in the
Office of Baptism) that is, so as not to be Governed, or Commanded, or
Persuaded by them, to do that which we know to be Evil. It Is said indeed, 1 John 3. 9. that whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; nay, that he
cannot Sin, because he is born of God. But this is to be understood of Sins of
forecast and deliberation, which profligate Persons commit willingly and with
greediness. There is in a Regenerated Person, such a Vital Principle of Grace
and Goodness, as does alter and rectify his Nature; so that if he does readily
obey the energy thereof, it must needs have such an influence upon him, that to
Sin Wilfully, is, as it were, against his Nature and Temper; and though it be
not absolutely, yet it is Morally impossible for him to Act Presumptuously; it
goes against his Stomach, like a Dose of Poison, which he cannot away with, but
abhors the very thoughts of it. Now when a Man is thus disposed, his Repentance
is right, and he ought to be comforted with it, and to bless God for it: And
though he finds himself liable to many Infirmities, he should not be cast down
so, as to conclude himself utterly unfit for the Communion; because it is not
in any Man's Power to be absolutely perfect in this world. And besides, there
is a great deal of difference between Infirmities and Sins, if we speak
properly, and according to the Language and Sense of the Holy Scriptures. For,
as our Learned Paraphrast has well observed, to Sin, and Dr. Hammond, in 1 Jo.
3. 8.
to commit Sin, and the like Phrases, denote a Deliberate, Presumptuous,
Commission of Sin; not to every Sin of Ignorance, incogitancy, or frailty; but
Sins after deliberation, and advised Commission of it. This is that which is
meant, by letting Sin Reign in ones Body, by obeying it in the Lusts thereof,
by yielding up ones Members as Instruments of Unrighteousness, by being the
Servant of Sin, by fulfilling the Lusts of the Flesh, by walking after the
Flesh, and the like Expressions, which signify, not acts of Humane Infirmity,
but Wickedness done with an high hand, and a stiff neck, and contrary to the
Dictates of a Snubbing and Clamorous Conscience, with the full Consent and
Approbation of a Froward Will. Such a course as this, every one is bound at his
peril so to Repent of, as to relinquish and forsake it utterly, (as I shall
show hereafter.) But this is not the Case of a Good Man, who slips by Reason of
mere Weakness, and who Labors and Groans under the Sense of his manifold
weaknesses, and strives daily to overcome them. His sincere endeavors are
accepted, although he cannot perfectly and totally overcome them.

2. TO speak now more particularly in reference to those several sorts of
Infirmities, which I have mentioned and discoursed of before: Though they are
but Infirmities, and such too as are more or less unavoidable, yet it is to be
remembered, that they are Sinful Infirmities; Sinful materially, and in some
degree; and therefore are not to be past by, without a suitable Repentance.

1. And first for that Sinful Inclination, which is in our common Nature:
However it was propagated and derived to us without our consent, it must not
remain in us with our liking or approbation; much less must it be served with
our willing compliance. No, our Repentance in this case must consist in two
things. 1. There must be a true Sorrow and Grief of Heart for this Evil
Inclination, as the unhappy Original of all actual Sin. 2. This Sorrow must be
improved into a striving and struggling against our very selves; so that sincere
endeavors be used to check this bias of Nature, which continually bends
toward the wrong way. This may be done by several ways; as, by Reading of good
Books, especially the Holy Scriptures, and particularly our Savior's Sermon on
the Mount, and the sad History of his Sufferings, enough of it self, to correct
a Man's Proneness to those Sins, which did cost the Redeemer of our Souls so
dear: So likewise, by constant Prayer, by frequent Communion, by serious and
Godly Meditations, by the diversions of an Honest and Profitable Conversation;
by having the Promises of God often in ones thoughts; by Contemplating daily
upon the Glories and endless Felicities of another World; by due reflections
upon the Nobleness of Virtue, and upon the Folly as well as Foulness of a base
Action; by thinking upon ones latter end; and I must not omit to say too, by
furnishing ones Mind with sound and Virtuous Principles. For there are many
Principles in the World, which serve to Debauch, even the Depraved Nature of
Mankind, rendering the Practice of Substantial Religion altogether unnecessary,
making Sin Venial, and turning Piety, the G^^vest thing in the World, into a
mere empty Formality, I had almost said, into a ludicrous piece of Craft and
Traffic. Such Principles are so far from mending Nature, that they make it
worse than they found it, and raise Men's inclinations into a Career and
Greediness after Vice, and into Luxurious Satisfactions in it; so that too
great care cannot be taken of seasoning the Heart with wholesome and sound
Doctrine, as St. Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 4. That is, with such Principles as are
Sanatary of Nature, and Restoratives of Virtue, wherein the Life of Religion
does consist. Now if a Man be diligent and careful to act after this manner, it
is enough as to this point; for though he cannot wholly Conquer his
Inclinations, yet by these methods he will by degrees subdue them in a very
great measure; so that though they still continue within him, they shall not
hurt him, because he does all that is in his power to do; and he may be sure,
that what he cannot help, God will certainly Pardon.

2. MUCH to the same purpose we may say of those Evil Thoughts, which are apt
to break out upon the Mind insensibly, and unawares; they are so to be Repented
of, as to be bewailed and stifled with all possible speed. For if they be
morosae delectationes, (as Casuists are wont to speak) cherished and indulged
for some Pleasure they bring along with them, then they become somewhat more
than Infirmities. Though they are Involuntary in respect of their first
starting, yet they grow into Wilful Sins by that Continuance which is consented
to, and usually prove fatal in their Consequence, and Issue; because many times
they are a Prelude to dishonesty, when opportunity serves: As Adultery in the
Heart often breaks out into Adultery in the Eye; so that a Wise Man must deal
with his Evil Thoughts, as a vigilant Governor does with Rebels, Suppress and
Dissipate them as soon as possibly he can. The Methods I have mentioned already
are very proper in this Case also; and if a Man does sedulously apply himself
to the use of them, though he will meet with some struglings and difficulties
in the Conflict, yet by degrees he will be a Conqueror: To be sure, his hearty
Resistance will be rewarded as an act of Fortitude and Virtue. It Is this
Resistance of our own Evil Thoughts, that the God of Purity regards; and when
the first motions of them are thus resisted, the malignity of them is gone,
because they are unwilful acts, that proceed from an invincible debility of
Nature; nay many times from some inveterate Distemper in ones Body, which as
naturally casts up ugly Idea's into the Brain and Fancy, as over moist Soyls
cast up Vapors and Fogs into the Air; and though for a while they bring a
Cloud over ones Spirit, yet common Experience shows, that the day breaks up
again; and therefore he that is disturbed with things of no greater moment than
these, ought no more to be frighted from the Holy Communion, or dejected in his
mind, than if he were sick of the Spleen; there being such a vast difference
between Matters of this nature, and an Evil Conscience.

3. THE other Particulars I shall bring under one common Consideration, because
the same things in a manner are to be said of them all. As for those
involuntary Omissions which the best Men cannot but be sensible of, and those
mixtures of Imperfection which they find in their Noblest Actions; and those
irregularities to which the common frame and condition of Humanity makes us all
subject; every Man ought, as to be humbled for them by a general Repentance, so
to beg pardon for them in David's Style; O cleanse thou me from my secret
faults, Psalm. 19. 12. So also to guard himself from them with that care and
vigilance which becomes a Man of an honest and sincere heart. This is certain,
that if we do but secure our hearts unto God, he will secure all his mercies to
us. It is not absolute and spotless perfection he expects from us, but
sincerity, which is Evangelical Perfection. As long as we are Men we shall be
feeble, and as long as we are feeble, it cannot be but we must trip sometimes,
or tread a little awry, especially where our way is long, and the ground
slippery. But if we do not wilfully turn aside out of the right Path, nor fall,
so as to Apostatise from the Truth, or cast away our Righteousness, such is the
Divine Goodness and Mercy that we shall not fall into Perdition. There is not a
Righteous Man on the Earth that Sins not, Eccles. 7. 10. Bring in all the
whole Army of Noble Saints and Martyrs, and you shall hear them complain of
their Infirmities. God gives us Grace sufficient to enable us to maintain a
Combat with the World, the Devil, and our own Lusts; but not so much as will
gain us a perfect and entire Victory, so as to free us from all further
Allarms, and Onsets. And indeed there is good Reason why we should not be
unexercised by Temptations; that we may not be Proud. As God left the
Canaanites among the Jews, to humble, and to try them; so does he leave our
Infirmities in us, even when he gives us the Spirit of Promise, that he may
make us sensible of our failings, and lay us in the dust under the sense of
them; so that the setting of a Crown upon our heads, may be acknowledged to be
an act of his free Grace, and that we may Triumph in the Name of God alone, who
has concluded all under Sin, that he may have Mercy on all. By reason of these
Infirmities we are commanded to Watch; which is a plain argument, that we are
still in danger of being assaulted, and our most treacherous Enemies may be
those of our own Household. Now what we cannot avoid, by the Mercies of God we
shall not be accountable for: But our Frailties and Infirmities, if they be
acknowledged, and bewailed, and prayed against, and strugled with, are Pardoned
of course; and every Man is accepted according to that which he has, and not
according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8. 12. Christianity is neither a soft
Pillow for Wicked Men to sleep on, nor yet a weary yoke for Good Men to sink
under; there being in the Gospel such an admirable mixture of the Promises with
the Threats; that as a vicious Wretch has no reason to presume, so a Sincere
and Humble hearted Man has no reason to Despair. Thou Lord art Merciful, faith
the Psalmist; for thou rewardest every Man according to his Works: And it is
the usual Course and Tenor of a Man's Life, that God does judge of him by,
making a great abatement for his Humane Infirmities; and were it not thus, no
Flesh living could be Saved; because our present state of imperfection will not
suffer us to be without all manner of blemish; and he that boasts of absolute
Perfection, is not more a Pharisee, than a Fool; because in many things we are
apt to offend all. But every Sin grieveth not the good Spirit of God, nor is
every Offense inconsistent with a State of Regeneration; nor does every little
transgression dis-entitle us to the Divine Favor. The daily Sacrifice of the
Heart in Prayer, and the constant striving with our manifold Infirmities, do so
effectually Operate through the Merits of Christ, who died even for weak ones,
that an Act of Frailty is not a Sin armed with a Damning Power. Though there be
something of the Viper in us, yet as long as we do not Cherish, or Indulge, or
keep it warm in our bosom, it cannot Hurt, however it may fright us, and create
in us some trouble and horror. And so much be spoken of Sins of Infirmities,
and of those degrees of Repentance which are necessary for them.

CHAP. VII. Of Wilful Sins.
I PROCEED next to Discourse of Sins of Wilfulness; that nothing may escape us
which is necessary to be known, in order to a full understanding of that
Repentance which is to be preparatory to the Holy Communion. Now Wilful Sins
are such as are Advisedly and of set purpose committed; when a Man
considerately does this or that Evil action, either for his pleasure, or for
his profit sake, or upon any other such unreasonable inducements. And these
Sins are of two sorts, Habitual, or Occasional. Habitual Sins are such as are
the general Tenor and Course of ones Life; which he allows himself in, and
gives himself up to, and usually follows as his common Trade and Way. As, when
ill Men accustom themselves to Profane the Holy Name of God, or addict
themselves to Drunkenness, or follow a Lascivious and lustful kind of Life; or
make Fraud and Cheating a great part of their Trades; or live in Malice, and
Uncharitableness, or whatever other sorts of Wickedness they suffer themselves
to Continue in. These must needs be Wilful Habits, because it is impossible to
conceive how any Man can persist in such Courses, having so much Time and
Leisure to consider of them, and not give his full consent to such Impieties.
For if it be said (though it is strange it should) that the Man may believe
these things to be Lawful, and so Labor under an Erroneous Judgment, which
allows him in such actions; yet it cannot be any thing but his own Obstinacy
that misleads his Conscience into such an Error, the Crime being so apparent
to common Reason. Or, if he acts contrary to his judgment (which is most
likely) it is a Sin against Conscience, which is the Highest aggravation any
action is capable of: So that let him palliate it as he can, it is undoubtedly
a Wilful Habit.

And because it is so, such a Repentance is necessary, as changes the whole
frame of his Heart and Life; such a Repentance, as makes a Man lay aside
utterly every vicious Custom; such a Repentance, as effectually bends his Mind
to an entire Practice of Virtue and Religion. For, the great business of
Religion being to transform every one into the Divine Image, to make him
Partaker of the Divine Nature, and to render him, according to the Capacities
of Humane Nature, Holy and Pure as God himself is; and sorrow for what is past,
being the first Beginning of such a God-like Life: That Repentance must needs
be Trifling and Impertinent, which does not powerfully carry on those Divine
Purposes; and it is as impossible for one that persists in an Evil State and
Course, to be a true Penitent at the same time, as it is to make Hell and
Heaven meet together in one. Repentance is an High and Noble act of the Mind,
that does not lie in Sobs and Groans, nor merely in the Anguish and Throws of a
Spirit that is upon the Rack; for notwithstanding all this, Guilt and the Love
of Sin may be at the bottom; and inward torment may proceed purely from a
present apprehension of vengeance, which every Man would willingly avoid,
though he delights in that which brings it upon him. No; Repentance that is
genuine, works a total Change, turns the Desires toward the Glory of God,
which is the True and Proper Object of the Mind, and so by degrees improves and
raises up the depraved Nature of Man to those perfections which are in God, of
whose Glory those Divine Graces, which Religion proposes to our practice, are
a Copy and Transcript.

INFINITELY distant from this, is the Life of that Man, who Loves to wallow in
Vice, Sensuality, and Corruption. People of this sort and Temper, are so far
from having a right to the Promises of Pardon and Peace, which are tendered by
the Evangelical Covenant, and which are Sealed at the Holy Sacrament, that the
Scripture plainly threatens Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish to
every Soul that works Evil after this manner; to such as obey
Unrighteousness, to such as are the Servants of Sin, to such as let Sin reign
in their Mortal Bodies, to such as yield themselves up to Unrighteousness, to
such as make Provision for the Flesh, to such as obey it in the Lusts thereof,
to such as walk on in darkness, and lie in wickedness; and conform themselves
to this world; by all which Expressions, and many more to the same purpose, the
Scripture means such as continue and persist in an Ungodly course, in a
crooked way, in a vicious Manner and Habit of Life. For which Reason, when Men
intend to go to the Holy Communion, (where every one is sure to receive
something, either Mercy, or Judgment to himself) they should take themselves to
a very strict account, and impartially observe what that way is, wherein they
are used to go: And if they find themselves so ill given, as that they
willingly follow their own hearts Lusts, and resolve to do so still, in spite
of God's Word, and the checks of their own Consciences, they must not in any
wise present themselves at the Lord's Table, but utterly forbear, 'till they
have truly humbled themselves under such a sense of their impieties, as works
that Repentance which is the entrance upon a Life of Virtue, and True Religion.
If there be not this Divine disposition of Soul in them, they are no more fit
to receive the Body of Christ, than Judas that Betrayed him, or Pilate that
Condemned him, or the Jews that Mocked him, or the Soldier that stuck a Spear
into his Side. And if he goes to the Holy Sacrament, while he goes on still in
his wickedness, he does but take a large step toward his own destruction. Such
a one despises the Sufferings of the Son of God, tramples the Blood of the
Covenant under his feet, and accounts it an Unholy Thing, as if it were a
refreshment for a Beast; and he is like one, that brings a Swine into the
Sanctuary to feed upon the Bread of Eternal Life. Therefore, before we
Celebrate so Great a Mystery, we are to enter into the strictest Engagements,
to bind our Souls with the most serious Vows, and to set up very strong and
powerful Resolutions of Amendment, lest in making too great haste to so Divine
and Solemn an Ordinance, we make haste to Perish, and to be Undone. For nothing
makes us capable, without Repentance from dead Works; as Justin Mart. Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr said. The food at the Eucharist is not lawful to be received but
by such as believe the Doctrines of Christianity to be true; and have been
washed in the Laver of Regeneration, and lead their Lives according to Christ's
Prescriptions. Habentem adhuc voluntatem peccandi gravari magis dico
Eucharistiae perceptione, quam purificari, S. Aug. de Eccles. Dogmat. c. 53.
And he that approaches to the Lords Table with a Design and Purpose to Sin on
still, instead of being refreshed and purified by receiving, is the more
heavily Laden, and receives a Cup of Bitterness, instead of a Salutary Cordial.

Here a Question may arise, whether it be Lawful for one to Communicate upon
serious Vows and Resolutions only? That is, before he has tried the strength
and efficacy of them? For it is possible for a Man who has led a dissolute
Life, to be through the piercing Power of the Word of God, struck so on a
sudden into the Sense of his Guilt and Danger, as to resolve and undertake
presently to forsake his Impieties. And perhaps too his outward circumstances
may be such, that if he misseth the opportunity he has now before him, he may
be in a very great danger of not meeting with another. In which particular
case, I know no Reason sufficient to debar him from the use of this Ordinance,
which effectually gives the Benefits of our Savior's Passion to every true
Penitent, as our Savior himself gave them to that Thief upon the Cross, who
was Converted in a moment. Indeed, where Men seem not to be straightened in their
circumstances, but have probably time before them to make some Experiment of
their Resolutions, it is very expedient for them to betake themselves to their
Retirements, to weep bitterly, to observe what ground they are able to gain of
their Habitual Vices, what Victory they get over their own Hearts, by suitable
Acts of Mortification and Self-denial, which are necessary to be undertaken for
the eradicating of inveterate Habits. By these means they will afterward come
to the Blessed Sacrament with better advantage, because with more Comfort, with
more Confidence and Peace of Mind, than such as have not made any Trial of the
firmness and stedfastness of their Vows and Resolutions. And yet I do not know,
but even these may come with Safety; especially if (as I said) they find
themselves straightened in their Circumstances, and verily believe their
Resolution to be sincere in it self, and such as will be productive of Good
Fruits. For all perseverance does suppose a Beginning, and a continued State of
Repentance is founded upon some foregoing Acts; and the very first act of
Repentance begins and works in the Mind; so that if that be sincere and
genuine, there is no doubt but it is very acceptable with God. But because the
proof of this Sincerity depends upon Experience, and it is no easy thing, to
skip in an instant from a course of Immorality, to a Life of Holiness, it is
necessary for Men to use all possible means to approve themselves to God and
their own Consciences, before they presume to Eat of this Bread, and to Drink
of this Wine. And so much shall suffice to be spoken of Repentance, from such
Sins as are habitual.

2. THE other sorts of Wilful Sins, I call Occasional; because they are not a
settled Trade, but the contingent Effects of some emergent and occasional
Temptation, which a foolish and negligent Wretch does not exert his Strength
and Courage to overcome, nor perhaps endeavors to resist, by Reason of some
base advantages which are offered him upon his Wicked Compliance. A Man whose
Life is unblameable in respect of its usual tenor and course, may fall in some
single instances, and that deliberately; witness King David; whom the Scripture
gives a great Character of as to the main; and yet we know how miserably he
Sinned, first in the Case of Bathsheba, whose Embraces he longed after so
passionately, though he knew the thing to have been most plainly forbidden by
the express Law of God: And then in the Case of her Husband Vriah; a faithful
Subject, that had so merited of him by the most Eminent Services; and yet
nothing would satisfy David at last, but Vriah's Ruin; an horrible Sin
against another express Law of God; and to aggravate it, a Sin which he brought
about after the basest manner, by Dissimulation, Hypocrisy, Perfidiousness,
and in cold Blood too, and with all the Deliberation that usually attends such
Politic but Barbarous Artifices. I call these Wilful occasional Wickednesses,
because they were done with his Consent, and he became voluntarily Guilty of
them upon some special Emergencies. And of the same Nature are those
Wickednesses, which are acted by Persons, who are in other instances Men of a
fair Reputation, and of tolerably good Consciences; and yet for some Carnal or
Worldly ends, do basely yield themselves up by occasion of some Occurrences, to
commit such Iniquities, as make the World to ring, and all but themselves to be
ashamed of.

QVESTIONLESS such Sins as these, are both for the Matter and Form of them, of
a very Criminal Nature, and a very deep Die, and therefore stand in need of a
very deep Repentance, if God peradventure shall grant it, for the recovery of
such Men out of the Snare of the Devil. For such Impieties as these, though but
occasional ones, do strangely waste and make havoc of the Conscience, make the
Heart callous and crusty, are vocal and obstreperous, crying aloud to Heaven
for Vengeance, Grieve the Good Spirit of God, and if not thoroughly and timely
retracted, by degrees quench him; they are horribly Scandalous to Religion,
Injuririous to the Interests of Mankind, and because they are done deliberately
and of set purpose, are very high Affronts and Contumelies to God himself. Nor
will it mend the matter to pretend, that they do these things with a great deal
of reluctance; for it cannot be otherwise, if Men have any Sense of God and of
their Duty, and have any thing of Conscience left them, that is not quite
seared and past feeling. Conscience will recoil, though it be never so
smothered or drowned; and the Sin the greater still, because acted against
Conscience; the resistance of Conscience, argues the opposition against it, to
be the stronger and the more violent, and consequently renders the act it self,
the more Malicious and Deadly.

THEREFORE, before such Men presume to go to the Blessed Sacrament, it vastly
concerns them to make their Peace with God, with their own Consciences, and
with the World too, by a pungent and proportionable Repentance. For without
this, their case is equally as bad and dangerous, as the most habitual
Offenders; Repentance from dead works, being equally prescribed unto all. Nor
will it be so much considered in the dreadful day of Judgment, who Sinned
oftnest; for if a Man be an hardened Wretch, let his Sins be many or few,
Habitual or Occasional, his Impenitence must necessarily throw him into a place
of Everlasting Torments.

NOW that Repentance for these occasional Wickednesses may be adequate and
full, it must have, as I conceive, these following Qualifications, with which I
shall conclude this Subject. 1. It must be as speedy as it is possible. For if
notwithstanding the inward motions of God's Spirit, and the importunities of a
Man's own Conscience, he puts his Repentance off, what is this but a plain
Approbation of what he did? Which approbation continuing, the Sin becomes
Habitual, though it was a single act, and though you suppose it to have been
the first and only Sin of his whole Life; though it be not repeated, yet, not
being Repented of, it is Beloved, which is the same thing in God's Account, as
if it were acted over and over again. For which Reason it comes to pass by the
just Judgment of God, that one Occasional Wickedness Unrepented of, does
sometimes by degrees and delay harden the Heart strangely, and emboldens the
Man to go on; so that having once Violated his Conscience presumptuously, he
sticks not to violate and wound it still. And thus one Wickedness draws on
another: God delivering him up to himself, for his first Presumption and
subsequent Impenitence, the Wretch runs on headlong, till his Conscience proves
Deaf, and his Case becomes very deplorable; like some obstinate Fools, that
having made but one false step, pursue their Error, and trudge forward through
thick and thin, having not the Heart to retreat, though there be a fatal
Precipice before them: And thus the Man breaks his Neck in the end, and falls
into Ruin, which at first he did not foresee, or suspect; and all by means of
one Occasional Wickedness not retracted, not Repented of in time. 2. This
Repentance ought to be not only speedy, but also vigorous, extensive, and
commensurate to the Sin. For, as it was presumptuous in the Commission, so in
respect of its circumstances and manifold Enormity, it may be exceeding sinful.
Perhaps it was acted by one whose Place, Office, and Dignity, renders it the
more open, the more foul, and the more Infectious. Perhaps it was a Complicated
Sin, against God, and against Men too; an Act of Impiety, and of Injustice and
Oppression. Perhaps it was highly Scandalous, an encouragement to thousands of
others to do the like, a great reproach to Religion, and that whereby the Word
of God is Blasphemed or evil spoken of. A great many circumstances there are
which may attend the Fact, to aggravate and heighten it; and accordingly the
Malefactor's Repentance must bear a proportion to the several Branches into
which it spreads. There are required great Humiliations and Terrors of Soul to
implore God's Mercy; a deep remorse and anguish to propitiate his own
Conscience, a through detestation of the Sin it self, many acts of self revenge
for having complied with the Temptation; and if the Sin be injurious to others,
all possible Reparation and Restitution must be made to the injured Party; for
the Laws of God have equally provided for the interests of all men; and for an
Oppressor, or any other Unjust Person to pretend sorrow without making amends
for his Injustice, is the same thing as if he should Plunder and Sequester his
Neighbor, and then say he Repents, though with the same Injustice he keeps at
the same time the Mammon of Unrighteousness in his Clutches.

3. THERE is required also for all Wilful Occasional Transgressions, such a
strong Repentance, as makes a Man to be very jealous of himself, to be very
watchful and circumspect for the future; to stand strictly upon his Guard, to
be afraid of the Temptation, to beware of coming near it, or near the occasion
of it: Briefly, to give all Moral Diligence, that now he stands upon his Legs,
and in the favor of God again, he may not fall the Second time. It is a
dangerous thing to be within the reach of a Temptation, to be within the
hearing of the Devil's Proposals. All these Things will I give thee, if in this
single instance thou will resign up thy Conscience, and fall down and Worship
me. It Is dangerous, I say, because in such a Case a Man is under a necessity,
either to venture his ruin by Compliance, or to use his utmost Courage to
Conquer the Temptation; which because many do not, but rather Exchange their
Consciences, as a Price and Composition for some present advantages; therefore
it is very necessary for such as did once make such a bad bargain, to keep
hereafter out of harms way. For he that Loves the Temptation, cannot be
supposed to dislike the Sin; but Sin he will again, even for a morsel of Bread,
if he be but Solicited; and therefore that Repentance must needs be
counterfeit and Hypocritical, when a Man is sorry only because he wants
Encouragements to be wicked.

4 SUCH Repentance is necessary, as is attended with a firm and sturdy
Resolution to be truly Honest and Upright all the days of ones Life. Such an
Obstinate and Manly Resolution is by the Grace of God sufficient alone to carry
a Man safe out, through the midst of a thousand Dangers. For either he will not
be Tempted at all, especially when the firmness of his Mind and Temper is
discovered, (the Devil himself will not easily throw away his Baits upon those
he finds Inflexible) or else he will have Courage enough to resist all
beginnings of Evil, lest by yielding, though it be but a little, he should be
ensnared (as commonly Men are) into direct Engagements to Wickedness. It is a
most dreadful thing to be Engaged to work Iniquity, to be under a sort of
necessity to do it, and to be involved in guilt to that degree, as if he were
forced as it were to go on further still, as if one had no other seeming
Security but to push forward, and now to work that Iniquity with Greediness,
which at first was only proposed to his Choice. Yet this is the Devil's way to
make himself sure of Men's Partnership with him in his Torments; first to lead
them into a willingness of submitting to his Conduct, and then, when once he
has them under the whip-hand, to drive them into Perdition. And with none does
he so easily prevail, as with People of unresolved Minds, of mean, pliant, and
easy Tempers; by means whereof, he drills them on into such a course of
Impiety, that they know not well where or how to stay their foot. A Man of
Resolution easily prevents this mischief, by generously resisting the very
first appearances of Evil; nor would any be persuaded to act that to day, which
yesterday he was Troubled at, and Repented of; did he but arm himself with a
strong and powerful Resolution never to do so more.

TO these might be added several things more, to show what Repentance that is
to be, and to what degrees it must reach, which is necessary to recover a Man
from the guilt and power, as well of all Habitual, as of all Occasional Sins
that are deliberately committed. But I suppose what has been said already is
enough; and the short of the matter is this, that God delights in nothing more
than in a Man's innocence; and if through Folly or Design a Man has cast it
away, he has no other way left him, but as far as possibly he can, to Regain
it by such a Sincere, Universal, and Steadfast Repentance, as will be apt to
make him live up to the Precepts of Christ's Religion, and to express in some
measure a resemblanee of those Divine Perfections which are in God himself.

And never is this more necessary, than when we prepare for the Holy Communion,
where the memory of Christ's Suffering for Sin is Celebrated, where Pardon of
Sin is solemnly prayed for; where that, and all other Benefits of our Savior's
Passion are verily and indeed offered, and where we profess to offer and
present our Selves, our Souls and Bodies, to be a Reasonable, Holy, and Lively
Sacrifice unto God.

IT IS not a few Trifles that can fit you for this Solemnity? It Is not going
barefoot, or lying upon the ground, or the putting on uneasy Apparel, or
Scourging of the Flesh; it is not thumping of the Breast, or abstinence from
certain sorts of Meat, or a few Sighs and Tears flowing from a little sense of
Sin, and from a great fear of Hell; nay, it is not the Absolution of the Church
(though that be a Sacred Thing, and where people are rightly disposed, an
effectual Ministration, and such as we use too; it is not this neither) that can
prepare you sufficiently for the Worthy eating of the Bread, and drinking of
the Cup, without a Broken Heart, without a Change of Mind, without full purpose
and Resolution to mend your Lives, and to serve God in true Holiness and
Righteousness all you days. For this is the true end and Scope of Christ's
Religion, without the Practice whereof, all outward Observances are but sorry
and empty Formalities; things which are very consistent with a Life of Sin
(though that be the great thing which Christ came into the World, and dyed upon
the Cross, that he might destroy) nor do I see by the Principles of some Men,
how any of those External Rites can lay the least restraint upon our Vices and
Lusts; but must be rather Encouragements to all manner of Sin and Wickedness;
it being such a strong Temptation to Men to run presently upon a new Score,
after the Sacrament is over; when they believe that all their accounts may be
wiped out by those mean and easy methods, which reach not the Heart, nor
meddle with Lusts, but let all manner of inward impurities alone, though those
be the great things which God is angry at.

EXTERNAL Penance is one thing, but the Repentance of the Heart, and the
Mortification of the Spirit is another, and a far different Matter; and that
which infinitely more deserves our strictest regard; for it is the Original of
a Divine Temper, and of a Life that is truly Christian. And I have been the
more Copious in Discoursing upon it; not only because it is a necessary
Preparative to this Heavenly Mystery, but also because it is the great business
of our whole Life; it is the root of all Religion, out of which spring all those
particular and various branches of Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety,
which together make up the whole Duty of Man, and are the Genuine and Salutary
Fruits of Repentance.

CHAP. VIII. Of Charity.
I PROCEED next to the Subject of Charity; for that is another necessary
Preparative; it being impossible for Men rightly to Celebrate the memoria^ of
Gods infinite Love to Them, or to answer the Love of God in any due measure,
unless their own Souls be inflamed with an Unfeigned and Universal Love to
those for whom Christ dyed. It is the Apostles own inference, 1 John 4. 11.
Beloved, if God so Loved us, we ought also to Love one another. In Discoursing
upon this Point, I am to speak, 1. Of the Nature; 2. Of the Exercise of Charity.

1. AS to its Nature; Charity is a Virtue of vast Extent and Latitude, so that
St. Paul calls it the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. Though the vulgar sort are
apt to restrain it to Alms-deeds; yet that is but one Branch of Charity, nay,
when it is done out of Ostentation, and for Popular applause, it loses the
Reward, and deserves not the very Name of Charity, as we find by the Apostle,
where he tells us, that though I bestow all my goods to feed the Poor, yet if I
have not Charity, it profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13. In which Chapter, we have
a large description of Charity, that it suffers long, and is kind, that it
Enviet not, that it vaunteth not it self, that it is not puffed up, that it
behaveth not it self unseemly, that it seeks not her own, that it is not
easily provoked, that it thinks no evil, that it rejoices not in iniquity,
but rejoices in the Truth; that it bears all Things, believes all Things,
hops all Things, endures all Things. By which several Expressions is meant,
that true Charity has such an Universal influence upon a Man's Mind, that it
creates in him an entire Goodness and Loveliness of Nature, and restrains him
from every thing that is either inhumane, or injurious, or unbecoming the
temper of one that professes himself a Disciple of the Meek, Humble, and
Beneficent Jesus. Therefore before you go to the Lord's Table, you should
examine and look into your Temper, and endeavor to rectify it, wherever any
crookedness appears, wherever it crosses the Christian Law, wherever it
swerves from that Divine Nature and Spirit which was in the great Exemplar of
Charity. People that are impatient of every little provocation; that are rough,
uncompassionate, insensible of other Men's Miseries; that begrudge any good
which the providence of God casts into their Neighbor's bosom; that out of
a Towering and Lofty Conceit of their own Merits, look contemptuously and
spightfully down upon their Brethren; that are intractable, disorderly, and
pursue only their own private satisfaction; that are full of rancour and
malice; that employ their minds upon wicked and mischievous Contrivances; that
take pleasure in the Sins or Frailties of others; that instead of covering and
concealing them, spread the infamy of them abroad, and proclaim them as it were
from the House top; that are prone to believe any thing that is Evil of those
they have no kindness for; to judge the worst of them, to turn every thing they
do to a hard Construction, and to treat them so as if they were no other than
Reprobates, and Cast-aways: People I say, of this harsh and sower disposition,
should new-mould their Tempers before they come to the Supper of the Lamb,
which was Meek, Innocent, and Spotless, and which readily offered up himself a
Sacrifice and Atonement for the Crimes of the whole World. Purge out therefore
the old Leaven, says the Apostle, that ye may be a new Lump; for even Christ
our Passover is Sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the Feast, not with
old leaven, neither with the leaven of Malice and Wickedness, but with the
unleavened Bread of Purity and Truth, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.

But there are two special acts of Charity, which I am more particularly to
speak of, because there are at this Solemnity some Special Reasons for them;
some special Considerations to stir us up to the exercise of them, and to
single them out particularly from the rest; and they are. 1. Liberality to the
Poor. 2. Fraternal Forgiveness.

1. FOR Liberality to the Poor. Gyrald Syndagm. c. 17. Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 4.
c. 17. and multi alii.
The Old Heathens themselves, especially the Greeks, were wont at their
Sacrifical Banquets to remember their absent Friends, and to send them portions
of the Sacrifices. Justin Martyr, Apol. 2.
The like Custom was in the Christian Churches, (as Justin Martyr tells us) in
the very next Age to the Apostles, of sending some of the Consecrated Bread and
Wine to such Christians as were absent; which makes me still believe, that the
Primitive Christians looked upon this Sacred Solemnity as Analagous to those
Sacrifical Feasts which had been used all the World over. In this there seems
to be a great difference; that among the Pagans distribution was made to their
Friends and Relations only; whereas the Charity of Christ's Disciples was not
limited, but extended unto all that were necessitous, though they were more
especially regarded, who were of the Household of Faith.

THIS kind of Charity to our Fellow Creatures, God who extends his Mercies to
all his works, has still required of Mankind, and more abundantly since he
has sent his Son to us, which was the most Eminent instance of his own sincere
Love and Goodness to the whole World. How many Commands do we find in the New
Testament, to be Merciful, as our Heavenly Father is Merciful; to lay up our
Treasures in Heaven; to do Good; to be ready to give; to be glad to distribute;
to be Rich in good works, and the like? But at the Blessed Eucharist we are
more especially concerned to be mindful of this matter, because there are more
especial Considerations to excite us to it; for here we commemorate the Charity
of the Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was Rich, yet for our sakes he became
Poor, that we through his Poverty might be Rich, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
8. 9. Here we see how he parted with his Heart-blood, and laid down his very
Life for us. And here he feeds us with Food from Heaven, with that Divine and
Spiritual nourishment, whereof the Manna in the Wilderness was a poor Type and
Figure; with the true Bread of Life; with his Flesh which is Meat indeed, and
with his Blood which is drink indeed; more strengthening than the Manna, more
efficacious, more durable; for he that partaketh hereof shall Live for ever.

2. THESE Considerations do of themselves Naturally tend to stir us all up to
these acts of Mercy and Charity at this time. A thing so Universally, so
Constantly observed by all Christian Churches since the beginning of
Christianity, that we cannot show any one Age when this Blessed Sacrament was
ever administered without it; perhaps it is the only Ecclesiastical Right, which
has come down to us without any contradiction; and because the thing may be of
some considerable use and satisfaction, I shall give this short account of it.

1. OUR Savior in his Sermon on the Mount had said, If thou bring thy Gift to
the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave
there thy Gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift, Mat. 5. 23, 24. The Primitive
Christians understood these words to have been spoken by way of Anticipation,
with respect to that Charity which all were to express at this Sacrament. See
Mr. Mead 's Learned Discourse of the Altar.
Because all Legal Sacrifices were now in a short time utterly to cease; they
could not conceive why our Savior should prescribe a New Right and Duty to be
used at the presenting of the Mosaical Oblations, and that in a Sermon which he
purposely intended for the perpetual and standing use of his own Church; and
therefore they looked upon it as a standing Law, which he gave occasionally, and
beforehand, to oblige all his Followers to acts of Charity, especially when
they come to his own Table. Hereupon arose two Customs, which all Christians
universally observed in the Primitive Ages, and which had no other plain Text
of Scripture in all the New Testament to warrant them, but this Text only. One
was in token of their mutual Reconciliation and sincere Love, for as they were
going to Celebrate this Divine Mystery, the Deacon cried aloud to this purpose,
(...), Let no Man have a quarrel against any; whereupon the Devout Communicants
presently Saluted one another with an Holy Kiss. The other Custom was what I am
now speaking of, of providing for the necessities of the Poor. None came before
the Altar with empty hands, but every one according to his abilities brought
something to be offered upon the Holy Table for the use of their indigent
Brethren; part of the Offerings being first Consecrated for the Celebration of
the present Solemnity; and these they called (...), Holy Gifts, according to
our Savior's Language.

WHICH Custom was undoubtedly observed even in the Apostles time; as you may
see by these Proofs. 1. First says St. Paul, upon the first day of the week
let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, 1 Cor. 16.
2. Though the Apostle here spoke directly and chiefly of a special Collection
which was then to be made for the poor Christians in Judea, yet because he
directed the Corinthians to lay by something in store upon the first day of the
week, the day on which the Holy Sacrament was constantly administered in the
Apostles time, it seems highly propable that St. Paul spoke of an Accumulation
of Charity, over and above the ordinary proportion which they were wont on that
day to present before the Lord's Table.

2. BUT there is another passage of St. Paul's, and that in the very same
Epistle to the Corinthians, which puts the thing out of all Controversy; 1
Cor. 11. 20, 21, 22. When ye come together in one place, this is not to eat the
Lord's Supper; for in eating every one takes before other his own Supper, and
one is Hungry, and another is Drunken. What, have ye not Houses to eat and to
drink in? or despise ye the Church of God? and shame them that have not? Here
the Apostle expressly speaks of eating the Lord's Supper, and that in the
Church, the Place of Public Religious Assemblies, which he plainly
distinguishes from their Private House; and he blames them for those
Disorders, and profane extravagancies they committed in the Church at that
time; and I will represent the Case in the words of our Learned and
Incomparable Paraphrast Dr. Hammond. Those Public Common Meetings which should
have been as at the Table of the Lord, to eat a Church-meal, a common Christian
Feast, were made by those Corinthians much otherwise, none of that
Communicativeness and Charity was among them, as was required in Such. For at
their Feasts of Charity, accompanying, the Lord's Supper, which were intended
for the relief of the Poor, and wherein all the Guests were to be equal, no Man
to take place, or eat before another, no Man to pretend any right to what he
brought, but every Man to contribute to the common Table, and to eat in common
with all others; this Custom was utterly broken among them, he that brought a
great deal, fell to that, as if it were in his own House, at his own meal, and
so fed to the full; whereas another, which was not able to bring so much, was
fain to go hungry home; and so their Meetings were more to fed themselves, than
to practice a piece of Christian Charity, to which those Sacramental Assemblies
were instituted. This certainly was to do as they were wont at home, and they
might as well have stayed there, as have done thus; this was quite contrary to
the institution of Church-Meetings, and not only to send away hungry, but even
to Reproach and put to shame those that were in want, and were not able to
bring any great offering along with them.

HENCE it appears, that the Regular way of Celebrating the Eucharist in the
Apostles days, was for all men, especially for the Rich and Wealthy sort, to
bring liberal Oblations with them to the Church to relieve the Poor, and upon
part of those Oblations to feed together, with that Humility, Impartiality, and
Communicativeness of affliction, which became a Family whereof the
tenderhearted Jesus is the Head.

3. AND to confirm this thing further, it is observable, that these Feasts
which accompanied the Holy Sacrament were called Agapae, or Feasts of Love; and
St. Jude makes express mention of them at the 12. verse of his Epistle, where
speaking of the lewd Gnostics, he says, These are Spots, (...), in your
Feasts of Charity. And the same sort of Feast seems to be meant by St. Luke,
Act. 2. 46. for having told us of the first Apostles, that they continued daily
in the Temple, that is, at the ordinary Service, and Worship, used by the Jews:
He mentions next their retiring afterward to some of the upper Rooms about the
Temple to celebrate Christian Eucharist; there they brake Bread, and did eat
their Meat with gladness and singleness of Heart, with that Simplicity and
Liberality which became them.

AT first, the Celebration of the Sacrament followed these Feasts of Charity,
and came at the close of all; Herein Christians follow the Example of our
Savior, who instituted the Eucharist at the end of his last Supper: But
because some were disorderly at these Solemnities, and brought a Scandal upon
Religion by their Excess and Intemperance, in process of time this Custom was
altered; and Christians were wont to receive the Sacrament Fasting, and then
they proceeded to the Love-Feast upon some Remains of the Offerings. But the
former Abuses continuing still, those Feasts too, were at last wholly laid
aside; because what was intended for purposes of Charity, was perverted to Riot
and Excess, by the extravagant and ungovernable Liberty which some ill Men
took, to whom St. Peter points, 2 Pet. 2. 13. These are Spots and Blemishes:
(Agreeable to St. Jude's Character of them) Sporting (or Rioting) in their
Agapae, while they Feast with you. For so the places should be rendered; as the
Learned Grotius and others have observed; the Scribe by an easy mistake having
put (...) deceivings, for (...), or Feasts of Charity and Love.

HOWEVER, both before and after the Abolition of those Banquets, liberal
Oblations were still made at the Sacrament for the support of the Ministry and
the Poor. And Justin Martyr in the very next Age to the Apostles, gives us this
Account of it: Apol. 2.
That the Faithful having ended their usual Prayers, and saluted each other
with a kiss, they offered to the Chief Minister Bread, Wine, and Water, which
he receiving at their hands, offered to God with large Praises and
Thanksgivings for their enjoyment of his Creatures; to all which the whole
Congregation devoutly said, Amen. This Thanksgiving being ended, distribution
was made of those things over which those Solemn Thanks had been given; every
Communicant had a share, and some of the Oblations were by the Deacons carried
to such as were absent. But, says Justin Martyr, they that were Wealthy and
Liberal, gave every Man what he would according to his own Pleasure: And the
Collection was committed into the hands of the Chief Minister, who relieved out
of it Orphans, and Widows, those that were sick, and those that were in want
upon any other account, Prisoners, Strangers, and in short, all that were in
necessity.

THE Primitive Christians, though they knew themselves to have been discharged
from their Mosaical Ordinances, and consequently not bound to offer any Bloody
Sacrifices, or other Oblations that were Types and Figures of our Savior; yet
they looked upon some Oblations as Expressions of a Moral Duty, as
acknowledgements of God's Sovereignty over all things, as Expressions of Honor
and Gratitude to him, and as necessary Acts of Charity to his poor Creatures.
And thus we are told by St. Irenaeus, who was but one remove from the times of
the Apostles: Iren. Lib. 4. c. 34.
The Oblation of the Church, which the Lord would have to be offered in the
whole World, is reputed by God a pure Sacrifice, and accepted by him; not that
he stands in need of any Sacrifice from us, but because the advantage of it
redounds to the Offerer, when his Gift is accepted; for a Gift to a King is an
Expression of Honor and Affection; which our Lord, willing that we should
offer in Simplicity and Innocence, said, when thou bring thy Gift to the
Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee: leave
there thy Gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift. Therefore, says Irenaeus, We are to
offer unto God the first Fruits of his Creatures; even as the Law said, Thou
shall not appear before thy God empty. And it is not Oblations in General that
is forbidden; no, there were Oblations among the Jews, and there are Oblations
among us; there were Sacrifices at the Temple, and there are Sacrifices in the
Church; it is only the kind of Sacrifices and Oblations that is changed.
Therefore it behooves us to make an Oblation, that we may show our Gratitude
and Thankfulness to God the maker of all things, with a pure Mind, with Faith
unfeigned, with a firm Hope, with fervent Love, offering unto him the first
Fruits of those Creatures which are his own. Therefore St. Cyprian severely
reprehended S. Cyp. de oper. and eleem. p. 203 edit. Oxon.
a rich Widow for coming to the Sacrament without bringing something to the
common Treasure, and for eating of that Sacrifice which the poor had offered,
without presenting any Sacrifice of her own.

SEVERAL more Testimonies might be produced were it needful; but those are
enough to show that in the first and purest ages of Christianity, the
Celebration of the Eucharist was constantly attended with Oblations, first to
be offered unto God as an humble and grateful acknowledgement that he is the
great Lord of all, and then to be applied as necessary and charitable
Provisions for the uses of the Church, and especially for the substance of the
Poor.

HENCE it is, that we read so often in the Ancients of Offering and
Sacrificing, and the like; by which expressions they meant, not any new and
real Sacrificing of Christ by the hands of the Priest, as some would make us
believe; for the Primitive Christians did not look upon the Eucharist as such a
formal Sacrifice, but only as a Commemoration of that Sacrifice which Christ
only for all offered upon the Cross: but by Sacrificing they meant, partly the
offering up of the joint Devotion of the whole Congregation, their Prayers, and
Praises, which are the Spiritual Sacrifices of the Heart, and partly also the
Alms of the Congregation, which they first offered to the Priest, and he
presented and laid upon the Table; these were their Sacrifices; and so they are
expressly called by St. Paul himself, Heb. 13. 16. To do good, and to
communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

And hence also the Ancients familiarly called the Communion Table the Altar; a
word, which in all likelihood, they borrowed of Christ out of that
forementioned place of Scripture, whence they took the thing, the Rite of
Oblations. That the Primitive Professors of our Religion commonly used the
Word, is abundantly evident out of the most ancient Writers, Ignatius,
Tertullian, St. Cyprian, the other See Mr. Mede 's discourse upon this point.
Apostolical Canons, and a great many Testimonies more. And though contentions
about words are trifles, yet to speak freely, I see no just exception against
the use of this word, as long as we use it in the genuine sense of the Ancient
Christians: For they called it an Altar, not upon this supposition, as if the
true Natural Body of Christ were really offered upon it, and that too, as a
propitiation for the Sins of the Living and the Dead; no, neither was any such
Corporal Presence, or any such Oblation either believed, or so much as dreamt
of by the Church for several hundred years after the beginning of Christianity.
But so they styled it, perhaps because the Death of Christ is Commemorated, and
Annunciated Solemnly at the Table; but most plainly, because the Congregation
of Communicants did gather themselves to it, to call upon God, and to present
their Alms to be laid upon the Table, and this, not only for the more easy
Celebration of the Eucharist, but as a decent signification too, that whether
they prayed, whether they gave Thanks, or whether they offered Alms, they did
all to the Glory of Christ, and in the name of Christ, the Memorial of whose
Death was celebrated there; and because these Prayers, these Praises, these
Alms were called Sacrifices and Oblations, therefore was the Table it self, at
which they were offered, called an Altar.

TO conclude this point now. I think enough has been said concerning this
Branch of Charity, at the Holy Communion, which consists in showing Mercy and
Liberality to the Indigent, especially to those who have the same Faith, and
the same Hope with us. You see what special Reasons there are to excite you to
it at this great Solemnity, and how Ancient, Constant, and Uniform, the
practice of all Christians has still been as to this particular; which I was
the more willing to show, because Examples commonly are very operative; and I
am sure, Ancienter, Nobler, Better grounded Examples, we cannot have of any
Christian Office that is required at our hands.

CHAP. IX. Of Brotherly Forgiveness.
2. I Proceed now to the consideration of the other Branch of Christian
Charity, which consists in Fraternal Forgiveness. In discoursing upon this, I
am to show. 1. What is meant by Fraternal Forgiveness. 2. How necessary it is
when we come to the Lord's Table. 3. How this matter is to be made practical.

1. First then, Fraternal Forgiveness, as it is required and stated by the
great Law of Christ, consists in two things. 1. In laying aside all Desires
and Intentions of pure Revenge. This the Scripture calls, rendering of Evil for
Evil; when an injured Person punishes the Offenders, not for any ends of
Charity or Justice, but merely for Punishment sake, because he delights in his
Sufferings, and seeks only to satisfy a provoked and distempered Passion. For
the clearing up of this, because it is a very material point, we must note,
that when an Injury is committed, either against ones Person, or Interest, or
good Name, one or other of these three things is apt to follow, between which
we must carefully distinguish; either Discipline, or Reparation or Revenge.
Discipline is, when the Offender is made to undergo Rebuke, or Shame, or Smart;
and this, for his own Correction and future Amendment. Now the end of this,
being nothing but Charity, or the doing of an Offender Good, it is not only
very consistent with, but very agreeable unto the Law of Christ: And so you
Read it, St. Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. If thy Brother shall Trespass against thee,
go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee,
thou have gained thy Brother: But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee
one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be
established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church: But
if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man, and a
Publican. Reparation is, when an Offender is punished in his Fortunes, for the
making up of that loss or damage, which by the Injury his Brother sustains.
Now the end of this being nothing but Justice, it is very consistent also with
the standing Laws of Christianity, that every Man must provide for his own,
that we must live Righteously in this World, and that he that does wrong, shall
receive for the wrong that he has done, Col. 3. 25. But pure Revenge is, when
a Man is punished, not out of any good intentions to himself, nor out of hopes
of Repairing the injured Man's Losses, but only to retaliate one Act of
Hostility with another, thereby to satisfy his Hatred and Anger. As for
instance; a Man wilfully strikes out thine Eye, and to recompense the blow,
thou strikest out his too; this is properly Revenge; here his Eye does not make
Amends or Reparation for the loss of thine. Therefore the end of this being
nothing but to hurt another, and to satiate a Brutish Appetite by inflicting
Punishments, that are both Uncharitable and Impertinent, and that have nothing
to be pretended for them, but an inhumane Pleasure in doing Mischief, it is
utterly repugnant to his Religion, whose business in the World was to go about
doing good, and to teach all his Followers to do the same. Ye have heard (says
our Savior) that it has been said, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a
Tooth: but I say unto you, that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite
thee on thy right Cheek, turn to him the other also, Mat. 5. 38, 39. That is,
rather than return Injury for Injury, be contented to receive another. Though
God by his right of absolute Sovereignty over all, may punish obdurate Wretches
to show his wrath and power, especially when there are no hopes of amendment;
yet we poor Creatures, who stand upon the same level, and are all of us akin
on Adam's side, ought ever to propose to our selves some Charitable ends in our
proceeding with one another, not recompensing any Man Evil for Evil; not
avenging our selves, but rather giving place unto wrath; because it is written,
vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord, Romans 12. 17, 19. This is one
part of Fraternal Forgiveness, to slight all that is past, without strict
Retaliation, to void our minds of all malicious intentions, and not to think of
any Punishments which are not required by the Rules of Charity, or common
Justice; of which Cases I shall speak by and by.

2. FRATERNAL Forgiveness must rise higher yet; and that it may fully answer
its measures in the Gospel, it must consist in doing an Enemy Good too. This is
the perfection, and the most perfect expression of it; instead of Hurting after
a revengeful manner, to Help, to Succor, and to Entreat kindly every one,
whoever he be that has offended us. And this is that new sort of Patience,
which Christ has taught his Disciples, says Novam plan^ patientiam docet
Christus, etc. Tertul. adv. Marcion, l. 4.
Tertullian; to do good unto all Men without distinction or limitation. Even
the Old Law required the Jews not to hate their Brethren in their hearts,
Levit. 19. 17. Nay, it required them to do friendly Offices to one another,
although there were enmity between them, as we find, Exodus 22. 4, 5. If thou
meet thine Enemies Ox or his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back
to him again, etc. But all this was meant with peculiar respect to their own
Tribes and Countrymen; for other Nations they were permitted to hate, and in
many Cases were bound to treat them after an hostile manner. But Christ's
Religion carries a far different Spirit with it. A Christian is bound to look
upon every Child of Adam as his Neighbor, though an Enemy even to the Faith,
though without Christ, though an alien from the Commonwealth of Israel; and
consequently he is obliged not only to abhor all malicious Designs against him,
but moreover to extend the utmost of his Charity unto him, like the common
Maker and Father of us all, whose mercy is over all his Works. Ye have heard
(says Christ) Mat. 5. That it has been said, thou shall love thy Neighbor,
and hate thine Enemy; But I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despightfully
use you, and persecute you; that you may be the Children of your Father which
is in Heaven; for he makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the Good, and
sends rain on the Just, and Unjust. For if ye love them only which love you,
what reward have ye? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if ye Salute your
Brethren only, what do you more than others? Do not even the Publicans so?
Alas, this comes infinitely short of the boundless and most generous Spirit of
Christianity, which teaches us, not to be overcome by Evil, but to overcome
Evil with Good; if an Enemy hunger, to feed him, if he thirst, to give him
drink; and by so doing, to heap coals of fire upon his head; to melt and
intender his Spirit, instead of calling for fire from Heaven to consume him, as
those Disciples would have done upon the heads of the Samaritans, who knew not
what Sweetness and Charity the Christians Spirit is of.

2. THUS you see the nature of that Charity, which consists in Fraternal
Forgiveness, in its full Latitude and Extent. To come closer to our purpose
yet, let us now in the next place consider the particular necessity of this
thing when we Celebrate this Divine Mystery. Forgive us our Trespasses as we
forgive them that Trespass against us, is a Prayer we use daily by our Lord's
own directions; and thereby we are taught, that Charity is always to be mixed
with our Devotion, and that we should pity the necessity of others Souls, as
often as we call for mercy upon our own. But, as I have already shown you,
there are at this great Solemnity Special and Peculiar Reasons to to actuate,
not only our Faith and Repentance, but our Charity too, in its several Parts
and Properties; and therefore laying aside at present the Consideration of
those General Obligations which are derived from the Commands of Christ, that
were given on other Occasions; I shall take notice only of those special
Reasons, which have a more peculiar influence upon our minds, from the
Consideration of this Mystery.

IF thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother
has ought against thee, leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift, Matthew. 5.
23, 24. It was this place of Scripture which gave occasion to the Primitive
Christians to call the Lord's Table an Altar, and just as they went about to
offer up their Sacrifices of Prayer, Praises, and Alms-deeds, to express their
Reconciliation and perfect Love, by Saluting each other with an Holy Kiss, the
Deacon having called out unto them, (...), let none have ought against another.
The peculiar Reasons of this Charity, may be drawn from these 4 Considerations.

1. FROM the Consideration of that Analogy, which this Christian Feast bears to
the Sacrifical Banquets of old, to which this Banquet does in some measure
correspond. Illud autem observatum ab antiquis videmus, ut quoties
Supplicationes aut lectisternia indicerentur, a jurgiis and litibus
abstinerent, and vinctis vincula demerent. Gyrald. Syntag. 17. page 482.
The Heathens themselves were wont at those Solemnities to give over all
Strifes and Controversies, and to release such miserable Creatures as were in
Prisons and Bonds. By the common light of Nature, they found it necessary for
them all to appear before God with Calm and Unpassionate Minds, to testify
their freedom from sowerness and rancour, by expressions of Humanity, and
Forgiveness; so that their Religious Feasts seemed to resemble that Charistia,
which Valerius Maximus speaks of, a Feast of Love and entire Friendship. I do
not speak this to lessen the Dignity of this Christian Eucharist, but to show,
that if they made it a great part of their Religion to be thus disposed, who
wanted the assistance of Divine Revelation, and fed only upon Ritual and mean
Entertainments, which the Custom of Nations had made every where common;
certainly the Noblest acts of Charity must be required of us, who have been so
often told of the infinite Love of God to us, and have the singular Honor and
Happiness to feed together upon that Lamb of God, which was Sacrificed for the
forgiveness of the whole World.

2. HERE we Celebrate the Memorial of our Savior's Sufferings; who refused not
to be kissed by the impurest lips in the World, even when he knew that Judas his
own Disciple, his Almoner, came to betray him; who called him by no harder Name
than Friend; who healed the Officers Ear which had been cut off by the rash
zeal of another Disciple; who held his peace, though oppressed at his Trial
with false accusations; who took no notice of the rudeness of their malice,
when his implacable Enemies spit upon him, buffeted him, smote him on the face
with their hands, that wanted nothing but to be embrewed in his Blood; who
forgave Peter, though he had Apostatized, and flatly denied him with Oaths and
Imprecations; who pityed not himself, but those poor People that followed him
with tears to his Crucifixion, and used that soft expression to them, Daughters
of Jerusalem weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your Children;
who was led as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep that before his Shearers
is dumb, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, and when he suffered,
threatened not; but closed up his Life with a most Charitable Prayer for his
Enemies forgiveness; in a word, who throughout this whole affair behaved
himself with the most eminent Candor, Meekness, Goodness, and Clemency that
was possible, for him to express; and all this, that he might leave us an
Example that we should follow his steps, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Now
when we see at this Memorial of that Great Sacrifice, the Bread broken, and the
Wine poured out, the one representing the bruising of his Flesh, the other the
pouring out of his Blood, both showing how he was smitten of God, and
afflicted; when we see this, and call to mind his Exemplary Patience and
Charity throughout all his Sufferings; what can we gather hence, but these
natural thoughts, that we should be likeminded; that Christ our Passover having
been thus Sacrificed for us, we should keep this Feast without the Old Leaven,
and without the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness; that we should put on as the
Elect of God, Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, and Humbleness of Mind; that all
Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil Speaking should be put
away from us, with all Malice; and that we should be kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven us, and as Christ for his Mercy sake forgave his very Murderers.

3. AT this Great Solemnity, there is not only a Spiritual Union between
Christ, and all good Christians, but a Representation also of that perfect
Union which ought to be among Christians themselves. That one Loaf that is made
up of many Grains all molded together into one Lump; and that Cup that is made
up of many drops all mixed together into one Mass, show that all who
participate of these Symbols should be joined together into one Society, a
Society animated with one and the same Spirit, a Society knit together by the
Band of one Discipline, a Society of one Heart, and of one Mind, as well as of
one Faith, and Hope. Many of the Ancients insist much upon this, that the Holy
Sacrament is a Figure, both of that Natural Body of Christ which Suffered upon
the Cross, and moreover of that Mystical Body of Christ, of which he was made
the Head after his Resurrection: And one Reason of that Unity which ought to be
among the several Members of this Body is, because they are all fed and
nourisht at one Table; and so St. Paul himself tells us, that we being many are
one Bread, and one Body, because we are all partakers of that one Bread (or
Loaf) 1 Cor. 10. 17. This then is another peculiar Reason, why we should appear
at this Solemnity, a New, and unleavened lump, with Minds purged from all
ferment of Malice and Wickedness, like Children of the same Father, and of one
Family round about his Table, with Souls full of the most extensive and
unfeigned Charity, and with Spirits enflamed with the Love of God, and with
Love to all that belong to God; the true Spiritual Incense which gives a sweet
smelling Savor to all our Offerings at the Altar. I beseech you, Brethren,
(says St. Paul in the beginning of that Epistle, wherein he taxed afterward
the disorders of the Corinthians at the holy Communion, I beseech you,
Brethren) by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same Mind, and in the same-Judgment, 1 Cor. 1. 10.

4. TO this Solemnity we come to receive the pledges of our reconciliation unto
God, the Ratification and Seal of our own Pardon and Forgiveness. This (says
our Savior, speaking of the Creature we are to drink, of the Fruit of the
Vine, as it is expressly called in the very next verse, this) is my Blood, or the
Communion of my Blood of the new Covenant, which is shed for many, for the
remission of Sins, Mat. 26. 28. But how can we expect to be pardoned our
selves, if we do not let all Hatreds and Animosities drop to the ground before
we go unto the Altar? If we do not freely, heartily, and sincerely pardon all
others, as we our selves would be pardoned? If ye forgive Men their Trespasses,
your Heavenly Father will also forgive you: But if ye forgive not Men their
Trespasses, neither will your Heavenly Father forgive your Trespasses; says
our blessed Lord, Mat. 6. 14, 15. Whence it is clear, that mutual Charity is
one of those many conditions which are necessary to make us capable and
receptive of God's Mercy. As when Christ gave the Keys of his Kingdom to Peter,
he intended all the other Apostles should have an equal share of the Authority;
Petro soli claves dedit, coeteris communicandas. Optat.
and to this purpose, he said afterward to all the Apostles, when he breathed
on them, Whose soever Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose
soever Sins ye retain, they are retained, Joh. 20. 23. So, where pardon of Sin
is promised to this or that Grace, there all other Graces are taken in, and
supposed, because there is required a Complication of all Virtues in order to
perfect Remission. Now of these Virtues, mutual Charity, or our forgiving each
other, is one. Not that it procures our forgiveness by way of Merit (take heed
of that conceit, so vain in it self, so deadly in its consequences, so
reproachful to the free Grace of God, and to the infinite Merits of our
Redeemer) but that this mutual Charity does dispose, qualify, and fit us for
God's pardon. Therefore it is observable, that when our Lord gave his Church a
Form of Prayer of his own composing, and in it taught us to pray; Forgive us
our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. As soon as ever he
had ended that Prayer, he presently singled out this part of it to speak to,
inculcating and reasoning upon this sole point of fraternal forgiveness, as
being a point of such great Moment and Weight, that without the practice of it,
the rest of the Prayer would be to little or no purpose. And to strengthen the
necessity of this thing farther yet, he spoke of it again afterward, Matthew.
18. where we find a Parable of a wicked Servant, to whom his Lord forgave a
Debt of ten thousand Talents; but because upon his forgiveness, he dealt
unmercifully with his Fellow Servants, taking him by the Throat, and casting him
into Prison for an hundred Pence, his Lord was very wroth with him, saying, O
thou wicked Servant, should not thou have had Compassion on thy Fellow
Servant, even as I had pity upon thee? And so he delivered him to the
Tormenters, till he should pay all that was due unto him. The Application of
all which is very plain, but very terrible; so likewise shall my Heavenly Father
do also unto you, if ye from your Hearts forgive not every one his Brother
their Trespasses, Mat. 18. 35.

3. TO draw now to a Conclusion, and to bring down this whole Matter closer yet
to our Christian Practice. Let Charity and perfect Love be at once both the
Rule and the Tenor of our whole Life in all Instances and Occurrences. Whatever
Objections against our Religion are wont to be made by some (who yet of all
Mankind are most to be blamed for their Uncharitableness) let us never give
them occasion to lay this blame upon our Manners (though it does not so much as
touch our Profession it self) that a Spirit of Strife and Hatred is among us.
But when we are about to Celebrate the blessed Eucharist, then especially we
should consider the Angels Doxology, and prepare our Minds so that we may use
it with enlarged and devout Hearts, Glory be to God on high, on Earth Peace,
good will toward Men. Then all undue Heats that by any Emergency may have been
raised, should vanish away from us like Smoke; then we should put on, as the
Elect of God, Holy and Beloved, Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind,
Meekness, Long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if
any Man have a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave us, so should we;
and above all things put on Charity, which is the bond of Perfectness; and let
the Peace of God rule in our Hearts, to the which also we are called in one
Body; as the Apostle himself speaks, Col. 3.

TO provoke you hereunto, many arguments might be drawn, not only from the
sense of the best Heathens, who held it unlawful to revenge Injury with Injury,
(upon which Subject Maximus Tyrius spends a whole Discourse) but from the Noble
Examples of many of them also, Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 12. c. 49.
and particularly that of Phocion, who after all the eminent Services for his
Countrymen, the Athenians, being at last condemned to be poisoned, before the
drank off the deadly Potion, left this strict charge with his Son, that he
should never remember so as to be revenged for the Injustice and Ingratitude of
the Athenians.

BUT because Christianity is a Religion of a most elevated Nature, and that
which speaks so plain, and so loud as to this point; and because that noble
part of it, this Christian Solemnity, does of it self Minister arguments enough
to command our Obedience as to this particular, I shall not go out of my way to
pick up Observations, that may be more curious than necessary; but rather
content my self with what has been said already, and so shut up this Subject
with a few Considerations which immediately relate to our Christian Practice.

I told you before, that all Acts of Revenge are quite contrary to the Laws of
Christ's Religion; meaning by Revenge all spiteful acts, or purposes of hurting
another for hurt-sake, without consideration had of a good end, whether of
Charity or Justice: and then I distingush pure Revenge from such acts as
concern Discipline or Reparation; which two last cases being so incident to
human life, and cases wherein the Consciences of Men ought to be well
instructed and governed, I shall now at the close of all speak something by way
of direction as to these two cases; and the rather, because I have found by
frequent experience, that upon Injuries which too commonly happen between Man
and Man, diverse have been hindered from the use of the blessed Sacrament, for
want, as I am willing in Charity to suppose, of due Information.

1. FIRST then, as to acts of Discipline, It is not at all inconsistent with
the great ends of this Sacred Ordinance, nor with our Duty in order to it, or
at it, to use honest means of reprehending or correcting an Offender, provided
those means be used after a discreet and friendly manner, and for the
Offender's good. So the Magistrate may punish a disorderly Subject, a Father
his Child, a Master his Servant, in all necessary cases. For this is not
properly Revenge; because the Methods, though they may be somewhat strict, are
still for charitable ends, viz. For the amendment and Reformation of the
Offender; which in such cases every Man should carry in his Eye: for what St.
Paul said of his own Authority in the Church, is very applicable to all just
Power whatsoever, the Lord has given it for Edification, and not for
Destruction, 2 Cor. 10. 8.

2. AS to Cases which concern Reparation for Injuries, they admit of great
variety, according to the variety of particular Circumstances; but I think what
is generally necessary to be known, may be comprehended within these following
Rules, or reduced to them.

1. WHERE an injury is Plain, Evident, and Palpable, Men are to seek for
redress first, by fair and private applications. This is not Revenge, nor any
breach of Duty, because it is a Case of Justice purely, and the method is
Friendly and Charitable. To this may be applied those words of our Savior,
Matthew. 18. If thy Brother Trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee
one or two more, etc. And if any thing be needful to be added, certainly a more
prudential Course cannot be taken, than what our Lord elsewhere prescribes,
Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him, Matthew.
5. 25. Such Timely and Pacifick means of accommodation are apt to preserve
Charity; whereas other Methods that are rough may, like a wound that festers,
make a deep impression upon the Sense, and corrupt Friendship, so as to turn it
into Rage, or a settled hatred.

2. IF such Christian applications cannot obtain their End, the Offender must
be forborne; provided the injury be not considerable in it self or in its
Consequences, although it be evident. It Is true, a wrong being done, he that
did it becomes liable to Justice; but it does not follow, that a Man may not
forbear him in light and trivial matters; for Charity and Peace sake we are to
possess our Souls in Patience, with an humble submission to the good Providence
of God for reparation in his way. And to this purpose is that Law of Christ,
Matthew. 5. 39, 40. Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him
the other also; and if any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy
Coat, let him take thy Cloak also. These are Proverbial Expressions, which
signify light and inconsiderable Injuries; and they are to be understood in a
Comparative sense to this purpose; that when wrongs are small, and of no
greater account than a little blow, or an upper Garment amounts to, rather than
venture the breach of Peace or Charity, we are to be content with the loss, if
Reparation cannot be obtained by soft and gentle Proceedings.

3. WHERE the injury is heavy and grievous, so that Reparation becomes
necessary, you are not to require it with your own hands, or by private and
personal violences, but by the help of the Magistrate. Vid. Grot. de jure
belli. lib. 2. c. 20. Sect. 8.
To this purpose is that other Law of Christianity, Romans 12. 9. Dearly Beloved,
avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, says the Lord.

4. AS appeals to the Magistrate in weighty Cases are Lawful (for he is the
Minister of God, and his Office is to Relieve such as are Oppressed) so must
the Proceedings before him be without Covetousness, without Envy, without
Sinister Arts, and without any Gall and Bitterness of Spirit. For whatever a
Man's Losses are, he must not lose or let go his Charity. He should Love and
Pity, and be ready to show Mercy, and to do good Offices to the Offender, even
when he seeks Reparations for the Offense it self. An enraged Heart, an
Ulcerated Mind, Affections foaming out hatred and malice, these are the worst
of Plaintiffs in the best of Causes: They spoil in a great measure a very just
Controversy, and make it all one in effect with Cruelty and Revenge; with this
scurvy difference, that a Malicious Suit many times cuts deeper wounds than a
private stroke, when it is commenced upon premeditation, and carried on with
implacability, and is at last armed with the Sword of public Justice.

NOW by these Four Rules a Man may examine his Condition, and make a right
judgment of his Charity; as every one ought to do, before he comes to the Holy
Communion. If he seeks for Reparation by fair means, and after a Friendly and
Christian manner; if it be not any inward rancour or hatred that moves him to
it, but only the nature of the injury; if it be of such importance as that it
makes Redress necessary either for himself, or for his Relatives, who have a
dependence upon him, and some share with him in all his Civil Rights; if he be
not his own avenger, but commits his Cause into the hands of those who judge
for the Lord; and if in his whole Behavior he manageth himself with Christian
simplicity and candor of mind, and with an heart desirous of perfect
Reconciliation and Peace. I do not see what just reason such a Man has to
forbear the use of the Holy Sacrament. The Injurer indeed is bound to make
Reparation, and by all possible means to Solicit his Friendship, and to beg
his Forgiveness; but the injured Party has done all that either a Good or a
Prudent Person can be supposed able to do in such Circumstances. But if Malice,
or Spite, or Inhumanity, a Quarrelsom Mind, a vexatious Spirit, an Oppressive
or Revengeful Humor be at the bottom of all this, or in any part of it, I have
no more to say, but that such a one must bewail his great wickedness, and
Repent of it, and implore the forgiveness of God and Man for it, and endeavor
to new-mould and rectify his Uncharitable and Unchristian Temper, before he
presume to go to the Lord's Table; the Blessed Sacrament being too Holy a
Thing, to be put into the mouth of a Tiger, or a Wolf. And so much shall
suffice to be spoken upon this Subject.

CHAP. X. Of our Behavior at the time of Receiving.
HAVING thus Largely Discoursed upon the point of Preparation, because it is of
such vast Concernment in order to our acceptance with God, I proceed now to
what is yet behind. For hitherto I have brought you but as it were to the Porch
of the Temple, and must lead you next to the very Altar of God; and
consequently must show, first what you are to do there, and then how you are to
behave your selves after your departure thence.

1. FIRST then we are to Consider, that we are going upon no less a business
than to offer up our Whole Man, not our Souls only (though that be the chief
Oblation) but our very Bodies also, a Living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God, which is our reasonable Service, as St. Paul speaks, Romans 12. 1.

2. THAT we may not present the Sacrifice of Fools, nor turn our Offerings into
an Abomination; it is necessary for us to entertain very serious and awful
thoughts of God's Omniscience, that we are in his presence, and under his eye,
that he observes our whole deportment, that he searches our Hearts and Reins,
and understands our Thoughts afar off. Accordingly we must present our selves
before him, not as a thing of course, or only to comply with a Custom, but as
in the sight of God, with reverent apprehensions of his Divine and Infinite
Majesty, with all Lowliness and Humility of Mind, with Souls bowing and cast
down to the dust, under the sense of our own unworthiness, with Consciences
void of all Offense, with Spirits enflamed with the Love of God and Man, and
with that true sincerity and simplicity which is the inseparable Ornament of
every honest heart, and which in the sight of God is of great price.

3. THE happy hour being now come, that we are to be entertained at God's
Table, and must take the Seals of his Covenant into our Mouths, we should
remember the promises we made to God in private, we should repeat our Vows and
Resolutions, and put our Souls upon fresh exercises of Faith and Holiness.

SEEING Holiness ever becomes the House of God, and especially when we
Celebrate this Holy Mystery, we are to void and empty our Minds, as much as
it is possible, of every thing that is earthly or unclean; to lift up our
hearts, and fix them upon things above; to employ our thoughts only upon that
Divine Service we are now concerned in; to be full of Heavenly Contemplations,
and so to warm our affections by them, that with Angels, or Archangels, and
with all the Company of Heaven we may most devoutly Praise and Magnisie the
Name of him, whom those Blessed Spirits above continually worship, and rest not
day and Night, saying Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is,
and is to come.

BE sure to act your Repentance over again, because this is the thing which
through the blood of Christ does sanctify the unclean, and render us capable
of the Benefits of the Sacrament. Mortify therefore your Members which are
upon the Earth, and all the sinful deeds of the Body, Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, Evil Concupiscence, Covetousness (which is
Idolatry) Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, of which the Holy
Scripture plainly tells us, that they which do such things shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 21. These Vices therefore, and whatever else any of
us may be more especially addicted or inclined to, we must seriously endeavor
by the help of God's Grace, and to the utmost of our power to subdue and cast
away from us; and then is a most necessary time to do this, at least to do it
in purpose and resolution of heart, when we are now going to the Holy Table;
then it is time indeed to resolve upon amendment and newness of Life, and to
vow entire obedience to the Laws of Christ's Religion, as far as it is
consistent with this State of mortality and weakness, and as far as it is
possible for poor Creatures that are compassed about with so many infirmities;
then it is time to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit,
to enter at least upon a Life of Holiness; to wash our hands and hearts in
Innocence, and so to compass the Altar of God.

BEING thus rightly disposed, we are then to behold the Fountain which is
opened to us for Sin, and for Uncleanness, I mean the blood of Christ, which
purges our Consciences from all dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9.
14. Now it is a seasonable time for us to call to mind the coronary Thorns, the
Scourge, the Nails, and the Spear which opened this Fountain. To remember our
blessed Lord's Agony in the Garden, his bloody Sweat, his Buffetings and
Stripes, his dolours and most bitter Death upon the Cross. To consider that all
this was for us sinful Men, and for our Salvation, to reconcile us to his
Father, to Redeem us from all Iniquity, and to beget us again to a lively Hope,
to an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven for us; because he so loved us all, that whosoever believes
in him shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life. These Holy Meditations are
not only proper and seasonable, when we are now at the Supper of the Lamb, but
they are moreover naturally apt to inflame your Affections with the love of
Jesus, to dissolve and melt you into Penitential showers, to ravish your Hearts
with a sense of his infinite Goodness, to fill you with Divine Ecstasies and
Raptures, and to fix your Resolutions of obeying for ever the Author of your
Salvation; of following his blessed steps with all Meekness and Humility, and
of bearing, not only his Yoke, but even his Cross too, and in all things of
being made conformable to his Image.

NEXT to the love of God, and of Christ, let the love of all Mankind replenish
and possess your Hearts. God forbid that Malice, or Uncharitableness, or
Bitterness, and Rancour of Spirit, God forbid that any of these, or such
unclean things should ever be brought before the Altar of Peace, and
Reconciliation. If he so loved us, we ought to love one another; because, he
tasted Death for every Man; he is not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to Repentance, he is the Savior of all Men, especially of them
that believe; and seeing every Soul is precious in his sight; every Soul should
be dear to us; and our Love to all Mankind should be extensive and unlimited,
as his was: And to express this Love we should be ready to do good to all,
desire and endeavor the Salvation of all, and devoutly pray (as the Primitive
Christians did, whose Hearts were so warm with the Blood of Christ) for the
whole Race of Mankind, not only for the Church of God, and for every part and
Member thereof, but for all too that are as yet without the borders of the
Sanctuary, and for all Estates and Conditions of Men, that no corner of the
Universe may be too remote for our Charity, and that however the Uncertainties
and Chances, or the Evils of this World may sever or distinguish us, yet
nothing may be able to separate us from the love of those for whom Christ died.

THESE are Divine things to exercise and employ your Minds at this great
Solemnity. And as touching your outward deportment, there are these
particulars, which I would recommend to your Christian practice at the time of
Ministration.

1. THAT ye dispose of your selves as near as may be to the Lord's Table, that
you may behold what is transacted there. For besides the Decency, which is in
the thing it self (when the Children of God humbly present themselves round
about his Table) this is apt to exalt and heighten your Devotion still, and to
give your Affections a new warmth, when you see, as it were, Jesus Christ
crucified before your Eyes.

2. THE Mystery of his Passion being thus visibly represented, by the breaking
of the Bread (the Symbol of his Body) and by the pouring out of the Wine (the
Symbol of his Blood) then sursum corda (as the Exhortation was in the Primitive
Ages of Christianity) lift up your Hearts to him who was dead, and is now alive
for evermore, and offer unto him privately these, or the like holy
Ejaculations: O Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the World, grant us
thy Peace: O Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the World, have Mercy
upon us.

3. THROUGHOUT the Prayer of the Church wherein you are concerned, be sure to
bear your Parts with Heart and Voice too. For this does not only help to
preserve a Man's own Zeal in a due Fervor, and to keep his mind fixed and
intent, and free from distraction, but it is moreover an excellent means to
raise the Devotion of other Communicants. When every one assisteth, and all
jointly mingle their Devotions, the common flame is very much increased, every
one bringing sparks to the Altar, to kindle in each others Heart the love of
Christ. For the confirmation of this, I appeal to every sensible Man's
experience, who desires to serve God in the Beauty of Holiness. How lovely, how
delightful a thing is it, when People meet together to Worship God, to send up
their Prayers and Praises to him with one Lip? And how apt is this to inspire
every good Heart with Fervency, and to heat every ones Affections, each Man
catching some fire from his Neighbor? How like then is the Church to Heaven,
and how transported do we seem to be, as if we were among that blessed Quire
above, where St. John in his Vision saw the four and twenty Elders falling down
before him that sat on the Throne, and worshipped him that lives for ever and
ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord,
to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; for thou have created all things, and
for thy Pleasure they are and were created, Rev. 4. 10, 11. And where should we
imitate this blessed and Heaven-like Harmony, if not at this Divine Solemnity,
where we celebrate the memorial of our Redemption too? of our Redemption, I
say; the great work of God, a work so worthy of God, so stupendous, so full of
the Riches of his Grace, that to be unconcerned among the common Thanksgivings
of the Church, must needs be an Argument of a Mind very dull and insensate,
very deeply possessed with a Spirit of Slumber.

4. WHEN you are now to receive the Divine Food, and Jesus, as it were, coming
under your Roof, receive with all Humility; let every lofty imagination fall,
and every Knee Bend: Not that we may adore the Sacramental Bread and Wine (that
were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians) but as an humble
Profession of our own great unworthiness, and as a grateful Acknowledgement of
those infinite Mercies werewith God is pleased to crown us at this time, it is
no more than what is decent and becoming us to be prostrate before him.

CHAP. XI. Of Kneeling when People Receive.
ANY Reasonable and Humble Man may think, that of those few Ceremonies which
are enjoined in the Church of England, none can be less liable to Objections,
than the posture of Kneeling at the Celebration of this Mystery, where we poor
sinful Wretches are to receive so many stupendous Mercies at the hand of God.
And yet considering the Scruples which have been created in some Peoples minds
about this Ceremony, and that many have run away from this great Christian
Ordinance, upon pretense that Kneeling is unlawful; I have thought it needful
to insert here a short discourse, to undeceive well disposed Persons as to this
particular.

FOR your satisfaction in this case, I must lay down this principle, that
whatsoever is unlawful, must be contrary to some Law or other, either Moral or
Positive, either Natural or Revealed. For a Man cannot be said to do an
unlawful action, if that which he does be not against some Rule: because Sin is
the Transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. So that where no Law is, there is no
Transgression, says St. Paul, Romans 4. 15. And again, Sin is not imputed where
there is no Law, Romans 5. 13. If then the posture of Kneeling when we receive
the holy Sacrament, be unlawful, we must suppose it to be a Violation of some
Law; and then these three things must be supposed also.

1. THAT the Law against Kneeling (if there be any such) is plain. For every
Law being the Rule of Action, of Necessity it is required that it must be
evident; because, otherwise we cannot know when we go right, or when we go
wrong; which would be so far from governing us, that it would hinder us from
acting at all; because in all dark and doubtful cases infinite Scruples must
arise, which would render our Duty impracticable. As for instance; if it be
said that there is a Divine Law about receiving the Holy Sacrament in such or
such a posture, unless I can clearly discover and see the Law, it will be
impossible for me to tell what posture I am to use; and consequently I must be
discouraged from receiving at all; because if I should, I must act wholly upon
uncertainties, my Conscience being utterly unresolved, whether I use the right
or wrong posture. A Law must be discernable and easy to be found out,
especially in this case, wherein all Christians whatsoever, both Learned and
Unlearned, are equally concerned.

2. IT must be supposed, that this Law lies in some positive Precept or other,
or else is fetched from some leading and Authoritative Example. For considering
that every posture is indifferent in it self, neither absolutely necessary, nor
absolutely sinful, it is impossible to conceive how I should be determined and
bound up to the use of one, rather than another, but by some Command that
peremptorily requires my Obedience, or by some overruling Example that exacteth
my imitation. One of these things must be the Law in cases of this nature; or
else there can be none.

3. IT must be supposed too, that this Law (whether it be grounded upon some
positive Precept, or upon Authoritative Example) is clearly and evidently to be
found in the Word of God. For, to make that unlawful, which the Word of God
has no where forbidden, is to say in effect, that the Word of God is not the
Rule we are to go by, that the Scriptures are scanty and imperfect, as to the
definitions of Good and Evil; that there is another Standard of our Duty over
and above that Law of Liberty which is extant in the Bible, and that the great
Lawgiver of the World did not make sufficient Provisions for the Information
and Government of Men's Consciences; and then the next thing is, that Men will
set up any pretense against the Law of Christ, and call Evil, Good; and Good,
Evil; according as their Fancy is, and just as the Humor takes them.

THESE three things being premised, we now desire our Dissenting Brethren to
show us where any Law against Kneeling at the Sacrament is plainly delivered in
the whole Word of God. If they say the thing is unlawful, when there is no Law
against it, all their talk is nothing but an heap of Nonsense. If they suppose
such a Law, but cannot tell where to find it clearly, they ought to consider
that doubtful Suppositions and uncertain Conjectures are no Rules of
Conscience, nor sufficient grounds for separation from a Church that cannot be
proved a Transgressor. If they will ingeniously confess (as they ought) that
there is nothing in the Scripture that condemns a kneeling posture, we shall
take it as a sufficient Vindication of our Innocence, and thank them for being
so just to us; but withal, must leave it to their serious consideration,
whether they have not forsaken the Protestant Principle, of the Perfection of
the Holy Scriptures, in making that to be Sinful, when in the account of
Scripture it is not so?

BUT to bring the Controversy to a full Issue in this case, we of the Church
of England do go upon three sure Principles. 1. That Christ gave no positive
Command (that we read of) about any one particular kind of posture. 2. That
nothing can be clearly against our kneeling posture, from the Example of our
Savior, or of his Apostles. 3. That were we sure what their posture was at the
Institution of this Mystery, it ought not to be judged a leading and
Authoritative Example nevertheless.

1. FIRST, we say, that Christ gave no positive Command (that we read of) about
any one particular kind of posture. Of the truth hereof, any Man may be
satisfied presently, by looking into the account that is given in the
Scriptures of the Institution of this Sacrament. For neither do the
Evangelists, nor St. Paul speak one word of any particular posture that was
ordered at the Celebration of this Mystery. Indeed, our Savior said, Do this
(meaning what he and his Disciples did then) as St. Luke and St. Paul affirm.
But that Command relates only to the Action of Ministering and Receiving of
Christ's Passion; it does not in any wise respect a Posture. For St. Matthew
and St. Mark render it, Take, eat, and drink ye all of this (as St. Matthew
speaks of the administration of the Cup:) So that by doing this, must be meant
only the Sacramental Action. Besides, it is not said simply, Do this, but Do
this in remembrance of me, which manifestly relates to the breaking of the
Bread, and to the pouring out of the Wine, whereby the Passion is represented;
and it is not the Posture (be it what it will) but the Ministration that is the
Memorial of a broken and Crucified Jesus. Lastly, the Posture is a Circumstance
only; and if Men suppose that the Command, Do this, respects that
Circumstance, they may as well suppose that it respects all the other
Circumstances too; and then they must think themselves bound to Celebrate the
Lord's Supper at Night too, and after a Meal, and in a private House, and in an
upper Room, and with such a Select Number, and with Unleavened Bread, and the
like. For the Command extends to all, as well as to one Circumstance, if Men
argue that way; but the truth is, it extends to no Circumstance at all, and
consequently not to any one sort of Posture; and therefore it must be
concluded, that neither Kneeling, nor any other Posture is in it self Unlawful,
or Contradictory to any positive Command of Christ.

2. IT must be then some Example or other of Christ and his Apostles, that is
pretended to be against us; and this I know is the general Objection, which I
shall consider distinctly, because at the first sight there seem to be some
intimations in Scripture, which are apt to startle such people as do not read
the Sacred Story with due Consideration and Care.

1. THEY say that Kneeling was not our Savior's posture, when he himself did
eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup. But now, what if our Blessed Savior
did not receive this Sacrament at all? Indeed it is commonly thought, and
confidently affirmed that he did so; but if we look well into it, we may find
it a very improbable presumption; and I am clearly of Opinion, that it is a
vulgar Error, and my Reasons are these.

1. WE cannot gather so much from any part of Scripture. Indeed we read, that
Christ did eat of the Passover with his Disciples, and that when he had Supped
upon the Passover, he instituted this Solemnity; but we find not the least
intimation that he Communicated of the Sacred Elements, at or after the
Institution. St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke, and St. Paul do all agree, that
he took Bread (into his hands) that he blessed it, that he brake it, and then
gave it to his Disciples, commanding them to take and eat; moreover that he
took the Cup (into his hands likewise) that he gave thanks over it, and that
then he gave it to his Disciples, that they should drink of it. But in all the
relation of the Story, there is not one word of his own eating of the Bread, or
drinking of the Wine. Nor, 2dly, is it probable, that he would do so, because
there was no reason for his own doing of it. He was bound indeed to Communicate
of the Passover, because he was a Jew, made under the Law, and consequently
obliged to observe the Mosaical Ordinances; but this was a Mystery of his own
appointing, and the Ends and Effects of it did concern his Church only; that
his Church might Celebrate a public Memorial of him, that his Church might
seal her Duty to God, and might have the pledge of God's Mercy and Loving
kindness to Her; that his Church might partake of Him, and of his Spirit, and
receive all the blessings of the New Covenant. These were weighty Reasons in
respect of Christ's Church; but they did not at all concern Christ himself. It
was not reasonable that he should do this in memory of himself; it was not
needful that this should be a Covenant-Rite between him, and his Father; it is
not conceiveable that he should Communicate of his own Body and blood; it was
not possible, that he who was without Sin, should Eat and Drink for the
Remission of Sins; and therefore it is not probable at all, that he did
Communicate of the Sacramental Bread and Wine with his Disciples. And hence it
necessarily follows, that it is most irrational and absurd to argue for or
against any posture, from our Savior's bodily deportment at the Institution of
this Sacrament, because he himself was no Communicant at that time. For as
touching the Posture that was used at the Paschal Supper (whatever that posture
was) it is a thing of Foreign Consideration, and impertinent to the Question,
and concerns not Us, because the Customs of the Jews at their Passover (being
grounded upon Peculiar and Special Reasons) lay not the least tie upon
Christians at this Sacrament. The Enquiry among Us is, touching Christ's
Example at this new Solemnity; and it is Ridiculous to conclude, that to kneel
in the act of Receiving, is against the Example of our Lord, when it appears
more than probable that he himself received not; what he did at that time with
his Disciples, he did purely as their Master, and Priest, but not as a Guest
with them then; so that if any Directions be to be taken from the Example of
Christ, they serve to guide those who in Christ's stead Minister at the Holy
Table, rather than to Govern any that are Partakers of the Altar.

2. SEEING then there is no Argument against Kneeling from our Savior's
Example, let us proceed to the second branch of the Objection, and see whether
this posture be against the Example of our Savior's Disciples? And for the
voiding of this pretense also, I think we may lay down this as a very safe
Proposition, that it is utterly uncertain in what posture the Disciples received
the Sacrament at the Lord's hand. For the right understanding and full proof of
this Matter, we must remember that there was a Twofold Feast which was
Celebrated at that time, the Jewish Passover first, and after that was ended,
this Christian Banquet. Now as to the posture both of our Savior, and his
Disciples at the Paschal Supper, there is not much difficulty; for it was for
the most part a Recumbent or Leaning Posture upon little Beds. According to the
ancient Custom of Feasting, every Guest had his Pallet, and thereon he rested
himself, with his body leaning upon his left side, that his right hand might be
at liberty for Food. Vid. Dr. Lightfoot, Hor. Heb. in. Matthew. 26.
This Custom was generally used in the Eastern Countries (especially by the
Assyrians) thence it came among Grot. in Matthew. 26.
the Greeks, and from them the Romans borrowed it too. Now this same Custom was
observed by the Jews in our Savior's time, and indeed long before, especially
at the Passover Supper; and they used this Recumbent or Leaning posture the
rather, because it was a signification of Liberty, a Token that they were at
Rest in the Promised Land; and it looked Great and Stately, as being used
(says my Author) by Princes, and Great Men, whereas to stand was an argument
of a Slave. Tenemur ad accubitum dum Comedimus, ut comedamus more Regum and
Magnatum; Maimonid. Mos servorum est, ut edant stantes; R. Levi, cited by Dr.
Lightfoot, ubi supra.
The Holy Jesus being desirous to Eat the Passover with his Disciples, yet not
willing to cross an innocent Custom, sends two of his Company before hand, to
make the Banquet ready in a large upper Room, that was ready furnished and
prepared, Mar. 14. 15. and there he sat down with the Twelve, as it is, Matthew.
26. 20. But in truth the Phrase is not fitly rendered in our English Bible,
though it be rendered so in every one of the Evangelists. It should be
Translated rather, he laid down with the Twelve. (...), Matthew. (...), Marc.
(...), Luc. (...), Joan.
For they that are skilled in the Greek Language, do know that none of those
words which are used in the Original, do strictly Signify a Sitting (nor
indeed any determinate) posture, but note at large an Inclination of the Body.
And that this was a Leaning Posture we may easily gather out of St. John 13.
Where it is said that (Jesus having declared that one of them should betray him)
Peter beckned to John (who was leaning on Jesus's Bosom, and lying on his
breast) to ask who it was? For the Custom was, that where three Guests were in
company the Chiefest of them lay on a Pallet in the Middle; the next on a
Pallet behind his Neck, somewhat above Cum duo essent, dignior primus accubuit
in lectulo suo, and secundus ab eo supra eum accubuit, id est, in lectulo juxta
cervical dignioris posito. Si tres essent, dignissimus accubuit in medio, and
secundus ab eo supra eum, and tertius infra eum, id est, juxta stragulas pedum
ejus. Hebrew Gloss, quoted by Dr. Lightfoot, loc. laud.
his Pillow; and the third, on a Pallet before him, with his Face toward the
most Honorable Person, and near his Bosom. And our Savior and those two
Apostles being thus placed, St. Peter could easily becken to St. John, by
looking over the holy Jesus, and our Lord could as easily answer St. John's
Question, without lifting up his Body, which would have been somewhat
necessary, had he talked with St. Peter. And if this be not enough Si vult
dignissimus cum secundo ab eo colloqui, necesse est ut se erigat a recubitione
sua, ita ut erectus sedeat. Ibid.
to show, that a leaning posture was customary among all the Jews at their
Solemn Feasts, I shall only add, that the Hebrew Doctors do usually distinguish
between sitting and Recumbency, before a Table; and do tell us, that the
Israelites Istiusmodi recumbentiam in capiendo cibo Israelita gestum maxim
idoneum reputarant, in epulis sacris requisitum, in coena Paschali sum
necessarium and requisitissimum. Ibid. 9. v.
thought a recumbent posture very decent at an ordinary meal, very requisite at
all holy Banquets; but at the Paschal Supper most necessary, unless it was at
the eating of the bitter Herbs, and of the drinking of the two last
Eucharistical Cups.

2. Now by this that has been spoken it does appear, that our Dissenting
Brethren get nothing at all on their side for either of those Gestures which
they use at the Sacrament, though we should grant the Example of Christ and his
Disciples at the Passover to be imitable. But for the further satisfaction of
such deluded people, let us go on still. And the first point being already
cleared, touching the Example of our Lord and his Retinue and the Paschal
Solemnity, I proceed, secondly, to show how difficult it is to determine what
posture the Disciples used at the Sacrament that succeeded the Passover, and
how very uncertain that Principle is, which our Dissenting Brethren go upon,
whether it be a sitting or a standing Gesture which they are for, and how
vainly and weakly they argue from the practice of the Apostles.

THE Paschal Supper being ended, and our Savior being now at perfect Liberty,
how to employ the rest of his time, he rises from his Pallet, and washes his
Disciples Feet, as we find, Joh. 13. (for this washing was, as I conceive, at
that time, whatever reasons have been offered by some learned Men to the
contrary.) And after the most humble Ministration in all probability it was,
that the Blessed Sacrament was instituted; but what the exact minute was, is
uncertain; and what the Disciples posture was at the receiving of it, is
uncertain also. That it was a sitting posture with their Bodies erect, there is
not the least Color to imagine. For though variety of gestures was used See
the case of kneeling. part 1.
at the Paschal Solemnity, yet I do not find that a sitting gesture was used
then at all; rather, it was looked upon then as an Irregular, Indecent, and
Scandalous posture. That the Disciples communicated in the usual Table posture,
as they lay along upon Beds, is an Opinion that is somewhat favored by a
Passage in Joh. 13. where we read, that having washed his Disciples Feet,
Christ laid himself down the second time; and after that, we read of St. John's
leaning by his Bosom; so that since this was St. John's posture, it is
reasonable to believe that 'twas the posture of the rest too; and then it may
seem probable that they all received the Sacrament as they lay in that manner.
But then on the other hand, all this is but bare Probability; for it is
uncertain what part of time it was, that the Disciples were leaning again in
that posture, whether it was before, or at, or after the Administration of the
New Sacrament. For after the Passover-Supper, our Lord spent much time in the
upper Room with his Disciples; some, in instituting this Mystery; some, in
giving hints to Judas, and in discovering the Treachery of his Heart by
degrees: Some, in discoursing upon the necessary Virtue of Humility; some in
comforting the Spirits of his sorrowful Retinue; some in teaching them Love and
Charity; some in Prayer; and some in singing an Hymn before they departed. Now
we cannot certainly tell what particular point of time it was, yet St. John and
his Fellow-Disciples lay upon their Pallets the second time; and therefore it
is not evident, whether they communicated of the Symbols of their Master's
Passion, in that Recumbent posture or no. Some again are of Opinion, that the
Disciples received the Sacrament in a standing posture; because the Jews were
wont to stand when they Blessed, and gave Thanks to God; and they were acts of
Worship which the Lord Jesus performed at the Institution of this Ordinance;
and therefore he might perform them perhaps after the accustomed manner: but
still this is only Opinion and Probability; it is not certain, because the
Scripture gives us no account of it; it is altogether silent as to this matter;
and therefore we dare not (we must not) define positively, or subscribe to the
truth of it. Upon the same (and possibly better) reasons, what if some should
affirm, that the Disciples received in a kneeling posture? I know the notion
will seem to be new; but yet it seems to be built upon as fair an Hypothesis,
as any of the former; at least that they communicated in an Adoring and
Worshipping manner. This I am sure of, that there are as substantial and
certain grounds for this opinion, as for any of the rest: This plainly appears,
that diverse Persons being surprised with a sudden apprehension of our Savior's
dignity, of the greatness of his Power, did (after the accustomed manner in
that Country) fall down before his Feet, so that St. Peter himself did it, upon
the miraculous Draught of Fish, Luke 5. And why might not all the Disciples do
this, at his institution of the Blessed Sacrament (which he told them was the
representation of his own Flesh and Blood) especially after he himself had
Preached unto them a Lecture of Humility, when he had washed their Feet?
Indeed, the Sacred Story gives us no Authority to affirm this positively and
dogmatically; but yet there are probable Arguments for Men's Conjecture this
way: And as far as I can see, all other Opinions are but Conjectures; and I
hope we may have leave to opine as well as other Men.

BUT we cannot be so confident, as to determine this matter, in regard that we
want the Testimony of Scripture, though Reason may be on our side. And herein
we would give a Pattern to our Dissenting Brethren, to be modest in Opinions,
for which they have no solid Foundation; where, I pray, is the ground they go
upon, touching the unlawfulness of Kneeling, as a thing repugnant to the
Example of the Apostles; since it cannot be proved, what that Example was? It
might be a posture of Kneeling and Adoration, for ought they know. Sitting it
was not (I dare confidently affirm:) In all probability, 'twas not a standing
posture neither; perhaps it was the posture which we customarily use; if not,
it was a leaning posture upon Pallets: And no body now insisteth upon that for
an Example to us.

3. AND yet, Thirdly, were the Examples both of Christ's Disciples, and of
Christ himself, apparently such, as some Men conjecture, they would not yet be
leading and Authoritative Precedents to us in this point. For it is generally
agreed by all Christian Divines, that the Example of Christ is not universally
to be followed (much less the Example of his Disciples) In some things it is not
possible, in other things it is not proper, in many things it is not necessary
for us to follow that Copy. Where we have the Example and the Precept too,
there indeed we are bound (and I wish Men would consider of those weighty
things, rather than of Matters of slender importance.) But where we have no
Command, there to take an Example for our Rule, is to make our selves guilty in
some instances of Folly, and in some of Superstition, and Presumption. The
Practice of our Lord and his Disciples is no Rule for us in Circumstantials and
Rites, unless they are made necessarily Practical by some Positive Direction
and Command. Now we have no Command in this Case, the one way, or the other
(no, not evident Example) to direct us, and therefore they talk vainly and
impertinently, who Condemn Kneeling at the Sacrament as an unlawful Posture;
since no Law can be derived either from Christ's Precept, or from His or his
Disciples Practice, that does evidently rise up in Judgment against it.

THE Church then being left to her Liberty what posture to use, thought fit to
choose that of Kneeling, for these three Reasons chiefly.

1. TO testify our belief of our Savior's Godhead. Had he been a mere
Creature, as all other Men are, we might have had some encouragement to present
our selves at his Table, as his Fellows, and in a common Table Gesture, as
those are wont to do, who deny the Doctrine of his Divinity. But being the
Eternal Son of God, and equal to the Father, he has a Right and Claim to the
humblest Services we can think of, to express in some measure the sense we
should have of his Infinite Greatness and Majesty; especially at an Ordinance
which was instituted in Honor to him.

2. AS a Posture that is most suitable to the Nature of the Mystery it self.
Here we Commemorate the Lord's Infinite Goodness and Love, his unexpressible
Sufferings for us, and his humbling of himself to Death, even the Death of the
Cross. Here we feed upon the Symbols of his Body and Blood for the Pardon of
all our Sins. Here we Seal anew unto God our Covenant of Faith, Mortification,
and Obedience; and God renews unto us his Covenant of Grace and Morcy. Here
all that we do is Divine Worship; the Mystery is a most Solemn Encharist, or
Thanksgiving; a real and lively Form of praising God, as Psalms and Hymns are
at other times: And all this is attended with devout Prayer from the beginning
to the end; the whole Congregation praying for all Estates and Conditions of
Men; the Minister praying for every particular Communicant; and each particular
Communicant consenting to the Prayer, joining his own suffrage, and praying in
his own person for the preservation of his Soul and Body. So that Adoration and
Worship being our whole work at this time, it ought to be performed in an
adoring posture; not only with Eyes and Hands lifted up, but with bended Knees
too, which all Nations have ever thought the most solemn and suitable posture
of Adoration.

3. THE Church has chosen, it as a Posture that is most expressive of our
Gratitude to God for the astonishing Mercies which all Worthy Communicants
receive at this Great Solemnity; Forgiveness of Sin, Peace with God, the
Increase of the Holy Spirit, Divine Influences from above, from the Man Christ
Jesus; with an Earnest and Pledge of a Happy Resurrection, and a Glorious
Immortality.

FROM all which Considerations every Pious and Humble Soul may argue after this
manner. Since this is the Symbol of the blood of God, which was shed for me,
and for many, for the Remission of all our Sins, shall I not receive it upon my
Knees? Since Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his Footstool, what place can
be too vile, or what gesture too lowly, for Sinful dust and ashes? Since we are
now admitted to the presence of the Lamb, and to the Gate of Heaven; O come let
us Worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker, and Redeemer.
If the Blessed Jesus in his Agony fell down with his Knees placed on the bare
ground, how can I now begrudge the bowing of mine? Since the Praises of God are
now to be in my mouth, what better Example can I follow, than those Elders in
Heaven, who fell down before Him that sat on the Throne, and Worshipped Him that
lives for ever, and ever, saying -- Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, which
was, and is, and is to come? Since my Blessed Redeemer was pleased to humble
himself even to the Death of the Cross, what humility can be great enough for
Me, who am now to gather up my Life and Happiness at his feet? Since I am now
to beg for a Blessed Eternity, and to offer up my whole self a Reasonable,
Holy, and Living Sacrifice; what more reasonable for me, than to beg God's
acceptance of my Prayers and Oblation upon my bended Knees? And since my Eating
and Drinking at the Lord's Table is a Pledge of so many stupendous Mercies to
come, how can I choose but kneel, when I take the Seals of his Promises at his
hands?

THIS is enough to show what a becoming and suitable posture Kneeling is at
this Great Solemnity, and how Naturally it follows, where People entertain
right Notions of it, and come unto it with humble Minds. Nor can I sufficiently
admire, that of all the Usages in the Christian Church, this so Significant, so
Decent a Ceremony, should ever become a stumbling block, and matter of Dispute.
Certainly it must be an ill sign of very Lofty Imaginations, when there is such
stiffness in Men's Knees.

BUT it is high time for me to proceed.

CHAP. XII. Of our Behavior after Receiving.
WHEN we have thus devoutly employed this blessed hour, we must not imagine
that our great Business is at an end; that we may now drop those Religious
Considerations which hitherto took up our time and thoughts; that we may now go
home, leaving our Vows and Resolutions behind us in the Church, much less may
we think our selves free to fall afresh upon our former course of Life. I must
tell you, the greatest part of our business is yet before us, and to stop and
rest here in the performance of those things which have hitherto employed our
minds, is the ready way to unravel our whole work, and to defeat the design of
this Heavenly Ordinance. For this Rite of Eating and Drinking at the Lord's
Table, though it be of admirable use, yet it is not naturally and intrinsecally
good, as those Acts and Dispositions of the Mind, are, wherein the Substance
and Excellence of Religion does consist; but it i^ a Relative thing, instituted
by our Savior as a Means to promote and carry on that Noble End, for which the
Grace of God has appeared unto all Men; that denying all Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present
World, Tit. 2. 12. Here indeed we lay the Foundation of a life of Virtue, by
devoting unto God the Powers and Faculties of our Souls, and the Members of our
Bodies: but as the Groundwork is in order to a Superstructure; so are our
Actions now in order to the further edifying and perfecting of us, that we may
be built up more and more in our most Holy Faith, and being sitly framed
together and compacted, may grow and rise up by degrees to an Holy Temple for
the Lord, to be an Habitation of God through the Spirit.

THIS you will easily perceive, if you observe, 1. The Nature of the Ordinance
it self. It is first, a Representation of the very Death of Christ; a
Representation exhibited to our Senses, by the breaking of the Bread, and the
effusion of the Wine. And what does this mean, but to awaken our Fears, by
showing us the Terror of the Lord, who for the expiation of the World's Guilt,
spared not his own Son, nor would be reconciled to the World at a lower rate,
than by delivering him up to Torments and Death for us all? What does it mean,
but to set our Zeal a work upon mortifying all our Lusts and Affections, and
upon perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, because Christ gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and Purify unto himself a
peculiar People, zealous of good works? What does it mean, but to make us ever
watchful and circumspect, lest we tread under foot the Blood of the Son of God?
Because, if we sin wilfully after we have received the Knowledge of the Truth,
there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, Heb. 10. 26. It is, secondly, a
Memorial of Christ's Love, Love stronger than Death, that made him give his
life a ransom for the ungodly. And what does this mean, but to kindle in our
Hearts the most ardent Affections to Him again, who so loved us, as to die for
us? The greatest Affection this, that it is possible for any Mortal Man to
express, to lay down his Life for the Brethren: But yet infinitely short of
that, which the Son of God expressed upon the Cross, for his Enemies: In this
he commended his Love toward us, above all proportion and comparison, in that
while we were yet Sinners Christ died for us, the Just for the Unjust. It is
thirdly, a foederal Solemnity, whereby we renew the Covenant we entered into at
our Baptism, Vowing, Promising, and Engaging over the Symbols of Christ's Body
and Blood; and Swearing, as it were, with our Hands laid upon the Redeemer of
our Souls, that we will henceforth walk in Newness of Life. And what does this
mean, but to bind us with the most Solemn Securities, and under the most
dreadful Penalties, to renounce the Devil and all his Works; to deny all the
Lusts of the Flesh, so as not to follow or be led by them; and not only to
offer up our Hearts and Spirits unto the God of Purity, but to present even our
Bodies a living Sacrifice, Holy and Acceptable to him? And for the farthering
of all these Noble Ends, this Mystery is, in the Fourth place, the very Means
of Grace and Salvation, an Instrument that conveys to us the present Possession
of all necessary and suitable Assistances, and a Title under Seal to all the
Evangelical Promises, and particularly to this, that he that persevereth unto
the end, the same shall be saved; and that to them who by patient continuance
in well-doing, seek for Glory and Honor, and Immortality, God will render
Eternal Life, Romans 2. 7. And what does this mean too, but that we should grow
in Grace; that we must not grieve the good Spirit of God, whereby we are Sealed
to the day of Redemption; but that we should be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his Might, and give all manner of diligence to make our Calling and
Election unto Grace sure and effectual, by adding to our Faith, Virtue (or
Courage) and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to
Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly
Kindness; and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity; Charity, in the highest degree,
to all Mankind, and even to our Enemies? Thus, you see, the nature of the
Ordinance it self is such, that it is not only highly useful for the present,
but of mighty Importance for the future; it has a tendency forward; and it
drives at mighty Ends, which our endeavors are to be employed about, after the
Celebration of it is over; that we may be more and more Partakers of the Divine
Nature, and come every day nearer and nearer to the Life of God.

TO confirm this still, we may observe, Secondly, That those very Preparations
which are required in order to our worthy Communicating, do all look the same
way, and have a direct tendency to the same purpose. Thus Faith, or the hearty
belief of the truth of our Religion upon those Evidences and Motives it carries
with it, is naturally productive of constant Obedience to the Precepts of it,
throughout the whole course of our lives. For as it discovers to us the Folly,
the Shamefulness, and the bitter Fruits of Sin; so it shows us on the other
hand the excellence of Virtue, and the beauty of Holiness. It proposes Christ's
Yoke as an easy thing, especially to such as make a due use of the Spirits
Assistance, and accustom themselves to the familiar practice of Religion. And
though at the first entrance upon a Life of Holiness, there may be many
difficulties for us to grapple with, Affections to be regulated, evil Habits to
be eradicated, Pleasures and secular Advantages to be denied, when they stand
in competition with our Duty; and though in the progress of our life many
temptations from within and without us are to be resisted; many hardships and
trials to be expected, and abundance of discouragements of several kinds to be
met with before we die; yet we learn from our Religion, that the present
satisfactions which attend a course of Virtue are so great, and the future
Rewards which are to crown it, are so endless and unspeakable, that upon
weighing the one against the other, we cannot but conclude, that neither the
Pleasures nor the Sufferings of this life are worthy, in the least measure, to
be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed. Now if we bring such a
Faith as this with us to the Sacrament, if we be strong and stablish'd in it,
this alone will naturally serve to defend us as with a Shield from all Fiery
Darts of the Devil; and to render us puissant enough to overcome the World, 1 John 5. But to prepare us the better still for an uninterrupted course of
Virtue, we are moreover to repent us thoroughly for all our past Sins, and to
present our selves before God with new Hearts and new Spirits, which is not
required as a Temporary Disposition, to be brought only at this time before the
Altar, there to languish and die with Vows that are Abortive, and that yield
either no Fruits at all, or at least no perfect Fruits of Repentance: No, this
is to be the beginning of a new life, the first rise and starting toward the
Race that is set before us; and as we run it, our Repentance must improve and
grow, from Shame and Sorrow for Sin, to an Hatred of it; from this Hatred of
it, to strong Resolutions against it; and from those Resolutions against it, to
an utter abandoning and forsaking of it, abstaining not only from all sorts,
but as far as it is possible, from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. 22. In
like manner those Bowels of Mercy and Kindness, which we put on at this time,
are to entender our Nature for ever, and to produce in us such large and
generous Affections, as may extend, not only to our Brethren and Friends, and
to the Family of Christ, but to the whole Offspring of Adam; to whom we are so
to open our Compassions, that such as are within our reach may participate,
those of our Bread, those of our Instructions, all of our good Wishes and
Prayers, in imitation of that most blessed Pattern and Idea of Charity, who
went about doing Good, Heb. 10. 38. Briefly, all other Spiritual Graces, as
Humility, Meekness, Patience, Self-denial, Heavenly-mindedness, and the like,
wherewith our Souls are to be arrayed and adorned at this Solemnity; if we
consider the tendency of them, they are so many initial Virtues, to be improved
and heightened still by the continual practice of them; so that from Acts they
may turn into Dispositions, and from Dispositions may grow into Habits, which
will quite change, purify, and raise our Nature, till we all come in the Unity
of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto
the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13.

I have the more particularly insisted upon this, to show you the necessity of
your Watchfulness and Industry after this blessed Solemnity is over. You must
not, by any means, sit down presently, as if the work of the Day, and the
business of your Souls were quite done. You must ever bear it in your minds,
that Christianity requires a life of Virtue: You must carry a steady Eye upon
the Scope and Design of our Holy Religion; and employ all your utmost
endeavors in the vigorous pursuit of its noble End. Brethren (says the
Apostle) I count not my self to have apprehended: but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before; I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 13, 14. And, as it follows there, Let us, as many
as be perfect, be thus minded; still running and stretching as hard as we can,
toward the end of our Faith and Hope, by an earnest pursuit of whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, and whatsoever things
are of good Report, Phil. 4. 8. Remember, I beseech you, that this and other
instituted Ordinances, though they bring great Peace and Comfort to pious Souls
by the present Administration of them, they are still instrumental Helps to
carry on the main Purpose and Will of God, even our Sanctification. So that if
we do not use this Ordinance, as an Instrument of improving and perfecting
Holiness, and as a Means pursuant thereunto, whatever Relish and Pleasure it
carries with it for the present, it will not avail us as to the main.

FOR the benefits which are conveyed to all well-disposed Hearts by this
Sacrament are, not only the enlivening Influences of Christ's Spirit, called
Christ's Spiritual Body and Blood, (because they flow, and are derived from
him, as he is the Head of his Church, and the Disposer of all those Blessings
which are the Fruits of his Intercession; (but moreover the Pardon of Sin past,
and a Title to an happy Resurrection, and Eternal life to come. Now as the
First of these, the Influences of Christ's Spirit are intended to transform us
into the Image of God, and to con-naturalize our Spirits to the Nature of God;
so are the latter, the Effects of his pure Love and Goodness, whereby he
rewards those that resemble him by a similitude of Nature. I speak now, not of
God's general love of Benevolence, which moves him to do good to us as we are
merely his Creatures, without any regard had to our probity, or improbity; in
which sense he is said to have loved the World, Joh. 3. 16. But of that
particular Love, which Divines call Love of Friendship and Complacency, the
formal Object whereof, is Righteousness, or a Rectitude of Nature conformable
in a great measure to his own, as the Psalmist tells us, Ps. 11. 7. The
Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, his Countenance does behold the upright.
This is a ray of his own Glory; and the Correspondence thereof to his own
Divine Perfections is the true Ground and Reason of that especial Love he bears
to some more than he bears to others; because it is impossible but he must love
the Image of himself wherever he finds it, and as impossible for him to love
any Man without it, so as to be pleased and delighted with the Object: And
accordingly, the more or less this Image does resemble him, the greater or less
are the Degrees and Measures of his Love. The Reason therefore of this Love
being drawn from that Godlike Frame and Disposition of Mind, which is wrought
in Men by the gracious Energy of Gods Spirit, and their own kindly compliance
with his Operations, it is a senceless thing to depend upon those effects of his
Love, which I have now mentioned, Forgiveness of Sin, and a Title to
Everlasting Happiness; unless we be in some measure Holy, Just, and Good, as
the ever-blessed God is; these being Perfections which he loves, because they
are his own. Hence it appears, that though we go to the blessed Sacrament with
Religious and Devout Minds, yet if we go not on to answer the great End of
Christianity, the bare Reception of it can never be enough to answer our own
expectations; because it is a Relative Ordinance that looks forward upon a
Christian Life; for the leading whereof, this Mystery lays all possible
Obligations upon us, and takes all possible Securities at our hands here at the
Altar of God.

THIS being cleared, give me leave now to recommend unto you these following
Directions, that you may not receive this Sacrament, and the Grace of God in
vain, but may, in one sense, as the Founder of this Ordinance did in another,
see of the Travel of your Souls, and be satisfied.

1. HAVE a very great care, that you relapse not into any known and wilful
Sins, of which it is presumed you have repented; and especially beware of such
as you have been most apt and inclined to commit. People are subject to
different Vices; either by means of their different Constitutions, or by means
of their different Ages, or by means of their different Opinions, and sometimes
too, by means of their different Callings. For though those Callings may be
Innocent in themselves, nay commendable in respect of their use for the public
Good; yet by means of Men's own corrupt Dispositions, they are accidentally apt
to betray them to various sorts of Wickedness; some to Luxury, some to
Wantonness, some to Pride, and most to Frauds and Injustice; a bitter root of
Covetousness spreading generally through all Secular Vocations, though it
always hurts the Soil, and many times is the Bane of the Proprietor, however it
be thought a thrifty Vice. Here then, every one must carefully observe which
are his own Iniquities, the Sins that do so easily beset him; and accordingly
must stand upon the strictest Watch, to guard himself from all dangers of
relapsing, especially from such dangers as he is most ready to fall into upon
any occasion. For as the Devil is always most busy about Men when they have
been doing their Souls good, to lay his old Snares in their way, and, if they
fail, to minister to them fresh and new Temptations; so is their yielding to
those Temptations, of very mischievous and deadly consequence.

1 IT is an Act of the highest Perfideousness, to be false to those Sacred
Obligations which we have now taken upon us after the most Solemn manner, in
the presence of God and his Holy Angels, and over that broken Body of Christ
which was given in Sacrifice as well to expiate as to destroy the works of the
Devil. Therefore (says the Preacher) When thou vowest a Vow unto God, defer
not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in Fools; pay that which thou have
vowed. Better is it that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow,
and not pay. Eccles. 5. 4, 5.

2. IT is an Act of inexcusable Hardiness and Presumption, to return to those
Impieties which have already cost us so dear. Who but a true Penitent can be
sensible what the Terrors of God are, when he awakens a sleepy Conscience?
What that Shame is, which tinctures the Forehead at the secret remembrance of
ones Guilt? What those Dolours are which corrode the Heart, like Vipers which
gnaw the Womb that bears them? What those throws and Agonies are, which the
Soul endures when it comes to be ruffled by the hand of God? And how violent
the Pangs and Convulsions of a new Birth are, when so many inveterate Habits
come to be torn up out of ones Breast by the Roots? Repentance is a most
painful thing, if it be Genuine and Hearty, when a poor Wretch is a recovering
out of that miserable State, wherein a long course and trade of Wickedness has
plunged him; and I think it is Oecumenius that has somewhere observed, that
it is no easy matter to fall back again into such a course of Life, as has
once put one to so much expense of Shame, Sorrow, and Vexation. The sense and
experience of smart, is naturally apt to make Men very fearful of being wounded
any more: So that when they relapse into a wicked State with so much Facility,
it is a certain Sign, that either their smart was not pungent and acute enough,
or else that they are of very hardy and desperate Spirits, that can break
through all the Pricks and Twinges of Conscience to rush upon the Pikes again.

3. IT is the ready way to lose all the Profit of Repentance, though it were
never so chargeable and costly. Therefore is Apostasy compared to the most
odious and filthy Spectacle; to a Dog's licking up his Vomit, and to the
wallowing again of a Sow in the mire, 2 Pet. 2. 22. Nor can it be, but such
Creatures must needs appear abominable in the sight of God, because his Love
and Hatred still go along with the Reasons of them; which are never grounded
upon any partiality toward Men's Persons, but upon a just view of their
Qualifications and Tempers; so that as these vary from better to worse, and
from Purity turn to Corruption, so they become instead of Objects of Gods Love,
the Objects of his Hatred, which always runs out in a direct course against all
Impiety, and still follows it at the heels: and hence is the terrible Menace in
the Prophet Ezekiel, When the Righteous Man turns away from his
Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, and does according to all the
Abominations that the Wicked Man does, shall he live? All his Righteousness
that he has done shall not be mentioned: in his Trespass that he has
Trespassed, and in his Sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die, Ezekiel. 18.
24. This is not only one of God's immutable Decrees, but moreover the natural
Result of Relapses, from the common method and course of Things; especially
when a Man's Relapses are frequent, habitual, and lasting.

4. FOR that which is further considerable, is, That the Recovery of such Men
is very difficult and uncertain. St. Peter, speaking of some miserable
Converts, who, though they had been cleansed from their Heathen Sins, upon
their Embracing of Christianity, fell back again into that wretched State out
of which they had been delivered, says, That since after they had escaped the
Pollutions of the World through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they were again entangled therein and overcome, the latter end is worse
with them than the beginning; and that it had been better for them not to have
known the way of Righteousness, than after they had known it, to have turned
aside from the holy Commandment delivered unto them, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. I
confess, he speaks there of their Apostasy from Christ's Religion to those
abominable Impurities which they had customarily practiced while they were yet
Pagans; which was Wickedness in the highest degree, far beyond any Vice, I
hope, that has been acted by any who have been at the Lord's Table. But yet
the thing is in a very great measure applicable to those, who having devoted
themselves to God by this Federal Mystery, take the confidence afterward to
let themselves loose again to their Enormities, wherewith they had polluted
their Souls and Consciences before. The last State of those Men must needs be
worse than the first; and that according to the Nature of the thing it self.
For hereby Vice becomes familiar with them: It loses that ugly and ghastly
Aspect, which at first makes it appear very shameful and frightful; their
Acquaintance with it makes it the more friendly and free, like ones conversing
with the Devil, that by degrees wears off that Horror, which is ready to strike
another through at the very Thoughts of his Appearing. There is naturally such
Turpitude in Wickedness, and so contrary it is to our Reason and true Interest,
that an innocent Person, when solicited to it, is apt to be startled at the
first Motion; and if he be persuaded to act it, he cannot but feel great
Remorse and Anguish in his Mind after the Commission. But Custom and
Familiarity directly tends not only to remove that Fear and Shame, which was
once such Guards to the Mind, but moreover to make the Conscience hard and
crusty; like Flesh seared with an hot Iron, so that it loses the faculty of
Sensation. And when a Man is come to such a wretched pass, it is as impossible
for him to Repent and come to himself again, without the mighty Assistance of
God's Spirit, as it is to live, and move, and breathe in a Grave. And what
Reason and Grounds are there to expect that extraordinary Assistance, after
such monstrous Provocations given, notwithstanding the strictest Ties and
Engagements to the contrary? We read in Scripture, of Resisting, of Grieving,
and of Quenching the Spirit. Nor is it possible for those, who were once
enlightened at the other Sacrament, and afterward at this have tasted of the
heavenly Gift, and been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the
good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come: It Is not possible, I
say, for such to fall of to a vicious Course of Life, but by contumeliously
entreating the Spirit of Grace, by offering great Violence against his
strivings, by spoiling his holy Workmanship, and by bringing to naught those
Virtues and Perfections of Nature, which were the Results and Effects of his
Divine Operation. And what is all this, but the next way to stifle and put an
end to all his Motions, and to force him utterly to depart? Because these
Hostilities thus acted against the clear Light of Reason, and the loud Clamours
of Conscience, cannot proceed from any other cause, but from Wills that are
obstinately set upon Evil, and from Affections that are desperately in love
with that which necessarily leads to Destruction. For it is to be supposed,
that whoever comes to this tremendous Mystery, must, if he comes with sincerity
of Heart, carry with him these Convictions, That the Religion he professes is
of God; That Christ sealed it upon the Cross with that Blood, whereof there is
a Representation in this Mystery; That the Covenant between God and Mankind is
immutable; That eternal Life therein promised is to be chosen before the whole
World; That a Life of Sanctity is the certain way to it; That Virtue is
Eligible of it self, and for the Peace and Satisfaction it rewards them with in
this Life, beyond the gross and transient Pleasures of the Flesh; and that it
is the extremest Folly for a Man to choose those Courses which bring a kind of
Hell to him, before he arrives at that which burns with Fire and Brimestone.
There is no understanding and serious Person, but must grant all this and more:
And therefore to Relapse into a State of Wickedness, after so many Vows, after
so many Convictions, and consequently after so many Reluctancies and Struglings
of Conscience, can proceed from no other Cause but the strong Malignity of a
carnal Mind, which is perfect enmity against God, utterly inconsistent with the
things of the Spirit, Romans 8.

THESE are the Reproaches and Dangers of Relapsing into a wicked State of Life,
after the reception of this Sacrament; and should a Man die in such a wretched
Condition, I tremble to consider what an endless State of Misery he must drop
into next, because (as I have already showed) nothing but entire Probity of
Mind, and a virtuous Temper, can capacitate or dispose us for the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light. I do not now speak of Sins of Ignorance, of
Inadvertency, of Infirmity, and humane Weakness. For as there is no possible
sufficient Fence against them, so there is no strict Obligations upon us to
keep our selves free entirely from them; nor are these the Sins which the Word
of God cries out upon so, as to threaten them with eternal Death, or with the
Derelictions of Christ's Spirit. No; it is sinning with an high hand, and
against an Honest Conscience; and against Stipulations and Promises which were
in our Power to perform; this is that presumptuous acting, which lays Men naked
and destitute of the Grace of God in this Life, and leaves them exposed to
God's everlasting Displeasure in the next.

YOU have therefore great need, as soon as this Solemnity is over, as to bow
your Knees to the Father of Lights, from whom every good and perfect Gift
comes, that he would now hold up your goings in his Paths, that your Footsteps
may not slide; so to be very circumspect and diligent your selves, to make
straight Paths for your feet (as the Author to the Hebrews speaks) lest any Man
should fail of the Grace of God; lest any Man should turn Fornicator or
Profane Person, as Esau, Who for one morsel of bread sold his birthright. For
ye know, how that afterward, when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was
rejected; for he found no place of Repentance, (no way of changing his Father's
mind) though he sought it earnestly with tears, Heb. 12.

CHAP. XIII. Of Perseverance.
I HAVE discoursed against Relapsing into a sinful course, not as if it were
sufficient for us to forbear going backward, or to stand at a stay, but because
in order to our progress in Virtue, it is the first thing necessary, to stand
upon your Legs, and to be in a moving and walking posture.

2. THE second thing therefore we are to be careful of, is, to remember the
Promises and Resolutions we have made, and to pursue them so as to transmit
them into a settled Practice of all manner of Virtue. This Direction consists
of several Branches.

1. WE are to keep our Vows of Amendment as fresh in our Memories as it is
possible. For the Understanding being the original Principle of Action, which
governs the Lower Faculties of the Soul, according to those Idea's and Notions
that it works by it self, it is impossible to act with any certain regularity,
when a Man does not Apprehend, or does not Remember what he is to do. Notions
that are quite lost have no more Power and Influence upon us, than if we had
never entertained them: And this is one great cause of the Decay of Religion,
that Men do not sufficiently charge their Duty upon their Memories, nor revolve
their Obligations in their Minds as they should do, but lay aside the thoughts
of their former Engagements, like those unfruitful Hearers St. James speaks of,
who though they find by the Precepts of Christ how Undefiled and Pure their
whole Man should be; yet inconsiderately drop all care of cleansing themselves
from their Pollutions, as those who behold their natural face in a glass, and
then go their ways, streightway forgetting what manner of Men they were; that
is, what Spots there are in their Faces which are necessary to be wiped off,
Jam. 1. 23, 24. when the consideration of those Resolutions we made at the
Lord's Table, does slide so soon out of the mind, it is impossible to conceive
how they should bring any Fruit unto Perfection, though many were serious and
strong for the time, because they are not rooted enough in the Heart to spring
up, like Corn cast into the Bosom of a Kindly Soil, but are lost presently for
want of deep digestion, like Seed scattered by the way side, upon stony ground,
which lies a little, to be picked up by the next Bird that comes. Due
Consideration is very powerful to Invigorate the Faculties of the Soul, and to
make them productive of a New Life; because it keeps the mind in such a
constant motion as maintains the whole Soul at its daily Work. Be sure
therefore often to renew the remembrance of those Vows, which you made to God
at this Covenant-Feast; consider and meditate upon them every day, as you
should upon your Latter End; or, that I may allude to Moses in another case,
Lay up those Vows in your heart, and in your soul, and bind them for a sign
upon your hand, that they may be as Phylacteries before your eyes; and think of
them when you sit in your Houses, when you walk by the way, when you lie down,
and when you rise up, Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19.

2. THE next business is, to transmit them into Practice. For neither are lazy
Wishes to any purpose; nor can feeble Resolutions or faint Endeavors ever
answer the great Ends of Christianity. As Virtue is acquired by single Acts, so
is it Improved by repeated exercise, and Perfected by the assiduous Discipline
of Perseverance. It Is a mistake to think, that Christ's Spirit works after such
a Physical Manner, as to Transform a Man perfectly in a moment, or to make him
completely Religious all at once, by a sudden and uncontrollable Infusion of
Habitual Holiness. His Operations are successive; alluring, stirring, and
strengthening Men to perfect Holiness in the fear of God gradually; and by
helping them to Rectify and Refine Humane Nature more and more, just as evil
Custom helps to deprave it. Therefore the Practice of Virtue is absolutely
necessary, because it cannot be thought how the frequent Lusts of the Flesh can
otherwise be mortified, or how a crooked Disposition can otherwise be Reformed
and straightened; or how inveterate Habits can otherwise be eradicated to the
full.

3. THIS, Thirdly, must be a settled Practice, a State, a Tenor, a Life of
Virtue. To resolve one Day upon a regular Progress, and then to let those
Resolutions go off with ones first Sleep, is but a parting with ones Sins in a
kind of pet, like the parting of Lovers, whom the next opportunity reconciles.
Many things may provoke People to fall out with their Lusts for a while; either
the penetrating faculty of the Word of God; or a sudden and surprising prospect
of Hell; or the snubbings and lashes of a restless Mind; or some outward
Calamity that renews the smart of an old Sore, and revives the sense of
former Guilt, as the Imprisonment of Jacob's Sons in Egypt brought it into
their fresh remembrance how guilty they had been concering their Brother, Genesis
42. Nor do I deny, but such Passions are sometimes preparatory to a true
Repentance, if right reason steps in before the fit be over, and obtains full
Liberty of Audience. But if these motions of the Soul do not settle into a
composed State of Virtue, but are only Temporary and Transient things, like a
Morning Cloud, and the early Dew that goes away, to use the Prophet's
comparison, Hos. 6. 4. They cannot profit as to the main, because they fall
short of the Ends of our Religion, being not effectually perfective of our
Natures.

4. FOR, Fourthly, our Resolutions should pass into the practice of Universal
Holiness. The Perfection of God himself consists in the Infinite Glory and
Rectitude of his Nature, that he is most perfectly Wise, Just, Good, Pure,
True, and the like; and that there is such an entire Harmony within himself,
that there cannot be the least Aberration or Declension of his Will from the
Infinite Reason of his Mind; but that in all his Actions his Power is conducted
by Reasons that are suitable to his own Perfections; that is, by reasons that
are perfectly Just and Good. And upon this account it is, that he is perfectly
happy in himself, because he has the Possession and Enjoyment of the most
Excellent and Infinite Good. Now this shows, that as our Happiness does consist
in our drawing near unto God, by a Rectitude, Goodness, and Purity of Nature,
as far as it is consistent with our Finite and Mortal condition; so our
Perfection does consist in an entire and Universal Conformity of our Wills and
Affections to His, when we choose and refuse, Love and Hate in every Particular,
just as he commands us. This, I say, is our Perfection; because, hereby we are
conducted as he himself is, by the Infinite Reason of his Mind; only, indeed,
we are Governed by it at Second Hand: For as His Will goes along by the
prescriptions of his own Reason, which is the Law of all his Actions; so we go
along by the Prescriptions of his Will; and then we are perfect as God is; I
mean still, according to the capacities of Humane Nature. It is necessary
therefore, that our Practice of Virtue be Universal and Uniform, or that we
habitually live according to the whole Will of God; because where we come short
of this Uniformity, there we come short of that Perfection, and by consequence,
of that Happiness, which is the great scope and design of Christianity. This is
the meaning of Divines, when they tell us, that there must be in us a
Perfection of Parts, though we are not capable of a perfection of Degrees; that
is, there must be the presence of every Virtue, though there be at the same
time such a mixture of Corruption with our noblest Endowments, that we cannot
exercise them in that high pitch as we shall do in the next Life, when we shall
be of perfect Stature; even as a Child in the Womb has all the necessary Parts
and Lineaments of a Man, though it will be long before he comes to a full
Growth and Proportion.

CONSIDER then, I beseech you, and you especially who have been Partakers of
the Blessed Viands of Immortality, what strict Obligations ye have entered into,
and what manner of Persons ye ought to be in all Holy Conversation and
Godliness. You are now to fulfill all Righteousness; you are now to deny all
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts; you are now to do, as the Combatants in the old
Olympic Games, to lay aside every weight that might oppress, and every
Encumbrance that might entangle you, and to run with Perseverence the race that
is set before you; and you are to remember, what the Apostle tells us, Jam. 2.
10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is become
guilty of all; that is, Guilty of Disobedience, and Obnoxious to Punishment, as
well as if he had violated all.

THAT you may not miscarry therefore, through the Wilful neglect of any
necessary Duty, or by the presumptuous Commission of any heinous Sin, lay daily
before your Eyes the perfect Law of Liberty, which our Blessed Savior and his
Apostles have left us as the Infallible Rule of a perfectly Christian Life. And
for your more easy performance, I shall now briefly represent to you a Scheme
and Platform of Virtue, agreeable to those Precepts which are scattered up and
down in the Holy Scriptures, as a very fit and proper Undertaking, to come at
the close of this whole Subject.

I begin with that which is the source and Principle of our Actions, whether
they be good or evil, the inner Man. Keep thy Heart with all diligence; for out
of it are the Issues of Life, Prove. 4. 25. As a good Man cut of the good
Treasure of the Heart, brings forth good things, so an evil Man out of the
evil Treasure brings forth evil things, Matthew. 12. 35. For out of the Heart
proceed evil Designs, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false Witness,
Blasphemies, Mat. 15. 19. It is a good thing therefore, that (principally in
this sense) the Heart be established with Grace, Heb. 13. 9. Blessed are the
pure in Heart, for they shall see God, Matthew. 5. 8.

THE good things which come out of this hidden Treasure are usually divided
into three general kinds, as St. Paul has reckoned them, Tit. 2. 12. Sobriety,
Righteousness, and Godliness: Under which three Heads are comprehended all the
several Duties which relate to our selves, and to our Neighbors, and to God
himself. According to which Division, I shall proceed:

FIRST, to lay before you those Virtues which more immediately relate to your
selves in a separate and Personal capacity, as I find them proposed in the Holy
Scriptures.

LEARN of Christ in the very first place, to be lowly in Heart, Mat. 11. 29.
God has respect unto the lowly, Ps. 138. 6. He gives Grace unto the lowly,
Prove. 3. 34. Be ye therefore clothed with Humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Let this mind
be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God,
thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no Reputation,
and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men;
and being found in Fashion as a Man, he humbled himself and became Obedient
unto Death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. That no one of
you be puffed up, 1 Cor. 4. 6. That ye be not high minded, but fear, Romans 11.
20. That ye mind not high things, but condescend to Men of low Estate, Romans 12.
16. That ye think not of your selves more highly than ye ought to think, but
think soberly, according as God has dealt to every Man the Measure of Faith,
Romans 12. 3. And that ye trust not in uncertain Riches, but in the living God,
who gives us richly all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17.

NEXT of Kin to this Virtue of Humility is that of Meekness; such a Beauty of
the Mind, that it is called the Ornament of a meek and a quiet Spirit, which
even in the sight of God is of great Price, 1 Pet. 3. 4. To recommend it unto
us, God requires us to be (as he himself is) slow to wrath, Jam. 1. 19. To
cease from Anger, Ps. 37. 8. Not to be angry without a cause, Mat. 5. 22. Nor
to be angry in such a measure as to Sin; or to let the Sun go down upon our
Wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26. But to put on Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, Meekness,
Long-suffering, Col. 3. 12. And to let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger,
and Clamor, and Evil-speaking, be put away from us, with all Malice, Ephesians. 4.
31.

THESE two Virtues being deeply radicated, Patience.
will naturally produce in us great Temper and Firmness of Mind in any grievous
Circumstances. God himself, though he be provoked every day, is long-suffering
toward us. The Blessed Jesus endured all the Contradictions of Sinners against
himself, Heb. 12. 3. And when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed
himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 23. And all this, to leave
us an Example that we should follow his Steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21. That we should
possess our Souls in Patience, Luke 21. 19. That we be patient in Tribulations,
Romans 12. 12. That we endure Afflictions, 2 Timothy 4. 5. That we endure to the
End, 1 Pet. 1. 13. And when any fiery Trial comes, that we should not wonder,
or be troubled, as if some strange thing happened; but rejoice, inasmuch as we
are partakers of Christ's Sufferings; that when his Glory shall be revealed, we
may be glad also with exceeding Joy, 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13.

THIS leads on the slighting of all Mortification.
things here below, when they stand in competition with the love of God and a
good Conscience. Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World;
if any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15.
Therefore, let your Conversation be without Covetousness, Heb. 13. 5. Lay not
for your selves Treasures upon Earth, Matthew. 6. 19. If Riches increase, set not
your Heart upon them, Ps. 62. 10. Neither take any (anxious) thought for your
life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye
shall put on, Matthew. 6. 25. But use this World, as those that use it not, for
the Fashion of this World passes away, Heb. 7. 31.

INSTEAD of this, set your Affection Heavenly-Mindedness.
on things above, Col. 3. 2. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, Matthew. 6. 33. Let your Conversation be in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20.
Walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called; and put off, concerning
the former Conversation, the old Man which is corrupt according to the
deceitful Lusts; and be renewed in the Spirit of your mind, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23.
For to be carnally minded, is Death; but to be Spiritually minded, is Life and
Peace, Romans 8. 6.

FROM this Heavenly-mindedness, naturally Contentment.
springs another great Duty; viz. to be satisfied with such a share and Portion
of this World, as it shall please God to dispense to us; to be pleased with
such things as we have, Heb. 13. 5. And with that Food which God shall judge
convenient for us, Prove. 3. 8. And having Food and Raiment therewith to be
content, 1 Timothy 6. 8.

WHOSOEVER will come after me, Self-denial.
let him deny himself, says our Savior, Mark. 8. 34. And these are necessary
Acts of Self-denial; to cast down Imaginations, and every thing that exalts
it self against the Knowledge of God, and to bring into Captivity every thought
to the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. To count all things but loss, for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 8. Not to trust in your
selves, that ye are Righteous, Luke 18. 9. But to renounce your own
Righteousness, Phil. 3. 9. To deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, Tit. 2.
12. To part with a right Hand, and right Eye, Matthew. 5. 29, 30. (that is, with
every the dearest and most useful thing, when it is an occasion of Sin, or an
hindrance to Virtue) and to forsake Houses, Lands, Father, Mother, and all that
a Man has for the sake of Christ, Luke 14. 33.

TO this, add that other Evangelical Grace, of Purity of Heart: which is,
Purity of Heart.
when you mortify your Members which are upon the Earth, Fornication,
Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, and evil Concupiscence; and when laying
aside all Naughtiness, and all Guile, and all Hypocrisy, as new born Babes you
desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2.

IN order to this, Temperance is a very Temperance.
necessary Virtue. Every Man that striveth for the Mastery, is Temperate in all
things, 1 Cor. 9. 25. And to this purpose are those Directions, that we should
cast off the works of Darkness; that we should walk honestly, as in the Day,
not in Rioting and Drunkenness; not in Chambering and Wantonness, Romans 13. 12,
13. Not in Excess of Wine, Revellings, and Banquetings, 1 Pet. 4. 3. Not to
suffer our Hearts to be overcharged with Surfeiting, Luke 21. 34. But to
abstain from such Fleshly Lusts, as War against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. To add
to our Knowledge, Temperance, 2 Pet. 1. 6. To keep under the Body, and bring it
into Subjection, 1 Cor. 9. 27.

AND for the Improving and perfecting Fortitude.
of all these Virtues, we are to arm our selves with Resolution and Courage; to
watch, to stand fast in the Faith, to quit our selves like Men, to be strong, 1
Cor. 16. 13. To resist the Devil, Jam. 4. 7. To endure Temptation, Jam. 1. 12.
Not to fear them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but
rather to fear him which is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell, Mat.
10. 28. Finally, to be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might; and
to put on the whole Armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the
wiles of the Devil; and having done all, to stand, Ephesians. 6. 10, 11, 13.

AS for those Christian Virtues which have reference to others, they are of
great Variety, according as we stand related differently unto them.

SOME more immediately concern our Virtues concerning private Families.
respective Families: So Husbands are to love their Wives, even as Christ loved
the Church, Ephesians. 5. 25. Not to be bitter against them, Col. 3. 19. But to
dwell with them according to Knowledge, giving Honor to the Wife, as to the
weaker Vessel, and as being Heirs together of the Grace of God, that their
Prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3. 7. Wives are to submit themselves to their
own Husbands, as unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 22. Not learning to be Idle, or to
wander about from House to House, neither to be Tatlers or Busybodies,
speaking things which they ought not, 1 Timothy 5. 13. But to be in Behavior as
becomes Holiness, to be Discreet, Chaste, Keepers at home, Good, Obedient to
their own Husbands, that the Word of God be not Blasphemed, Tit. 2. 3. 5.
Parents must not provoke their Children to Wrath, but to bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6 4. And to lay up for them, 2 Cor.
12. 14. Children on the other hand, to obey their Parents, in the Lord; for
this is right. Honor thy Father and Mother (which is the first Commandment
with Promise) that it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the
Earth, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3. Servants to be subject to their Masters with all
fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward, 1 Pet. 2. 18.
Not answering again, not purloining, but showing all good Fidelity, Tit. 2. 9.
10. Being Obedient with Fear and Trembling, in singleness of Heart, as unto
Christ; not with Eye-service as Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ,
doing the Will of God from the Heart. With good will doing service, as unto the
Lord, and not to men. And ye Masters do the same things unto them; forbearing
threatening; knowing that your Master also is in Heaven; neither is there
respect of Persons with him, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 9.

SOME Virtues relate to larger Societies; Larger Societies. Justice.
as, Righteousness and Equity in your Dealings. He has showed thee, O man,
what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly? Mich.
6. 8. Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even the same to
them, Matthew. 7. 12. To do violence to no man, Luc. 3. 14. Not to make haste to
be rich, Prove. 28. 20. By diverse Weights and Measures, both which are alike
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 20. 10. Not to go beyond or desraud our Brother
in any matter, 1 These. 4. 6. Not to do wrong, but rather to take it, 1 Cor. 6.
7. But to have an honest conversation, 1 Pet. 2. 12. In s^mplicity and godly
sincerity, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Because he that does wrong, shall receive for the
wrong which he has done, and there is no respect of persons, Col. 3. 25.

TO forbear all Fashood, Dissimulation Truth.
and Insincerity. And so the Holy Scripture commands us, Not to lie one to
another, Col. 3. 9. but putting away all lying to speak every Man truth with
his Neighbor, Ephesians. 4. 25. Because lying lips are abomination to the Lord;
but they that deal truly, are his delight, Prove. 12. 22.

TO be candid in our Behavior toward all men. Not to be given to reviling,
Candor.
backbitings, whisperings, railings, evil surmisings or judging one another;
but in all points to walk by the Rule of Charity, which suffers long and is
kind; which envieth not; which vaunteth not it self; which is not puffed up;
which behaveth not it self unseemly; which seeks not her own; which is not
easily provoked; which thinks no evil; which rejoices not in iniquity: but
which rejoices in the truth; which bears all things, believes all things
(that are good) hops all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7.
and which covers a multitude of Sins, 1 Pet. 4. 8.

TO be merciful to the Necessitous. Using Hospitality without grudging, Mercy.
1 Pet. 4. 9. Visiting the Fatherless and Widows in their distress, Jam. 1. 27.
Praying for the sick, Jam. 5. 16. teaching and admonishing one another, Col. 3.
16. Distributing to the necessity of Saints, Romans 12. 13. Doing good to the
poor, being rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate;
laying up in store for our selves a good foundation against the time to come,
that we may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19.

TO be kind and obliging in our deportment; Courtesy.
having compassion one of another, being pitiful and courteous, 1 Pet. 3. 8.
Being gentle, and easy to be entreated, Jam. 3. 17. bearing the infirmities of
the weak; every one pleasing his Neighbor for his good to edification, Romans
15. 1, 2. Comforting the feeble minded, supporting the weak, being patient
toward all men, 1 These. 5. 14. Rejoicing with them that rejoice, and weeping
with them that weep, Romans 12. 15.

TO be kindly affectioned even to our Forgiving Enemies.
Enemies. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil-speaking be put away from you, with all malice, Ephesians. 4 21. Instead of
rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, 1 Pet. 3. 9. Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you, Matthew. 5. 44. Dearly be loved, avenge
not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, vengeance
is mine: I will repay, says the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed
him; if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shall heap coals of
fire upon his head, Romans 12. 19, 20.

TO be modest and inoffensive in your familiar discourse. Swear not at Modesty.
all, Matthew. 5. 34. Bless, but curse not, Romans 12. 14. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the hearers, Ephesians. 4. 29. And let
your speech be always with Grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye
ought to answer every man, Col. 4. 6.

TO be lovers and makers of peace. If ye have bitter envying and strife in
Peaceableness.
your Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth; this wisdom descends
not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish; for where envying and
strife is, there is confusion and every evil work, Jam. 3. 14, 15, 16. Study
therefore to be quiet, and do do your own business, 1 These. 4. 11. Follow peace
with all men, Heb. 12. 14. Be at peace among your selves, 1 These, 5. 13. Seek
peace, and ensue it, 1 Pet. 3. 11. And follow after the things that make for
peace, Romans 14. 19. And if it be possible, and as much as lies in you, live
peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18.

FOR the obtaining of this, the greatest Blessing upon Earth; such a perfect
Virtues relating to Civil Government.
Peace as may resemble the State of the Blessed in Heaven; there are other
Virtues still, which relate directly to our Governors. To our Temporal
Governors; That we render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Matthew. 22.
21. That we pay to all their dues; Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to
whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. Romans 13. 7. That we
submit our selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; whether it be
to the King, as Supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him
for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well: for
so is the Will of God, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. And that every Soul be subject unto
the higher Powers: because there is no power but of God; the powers that be,
are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
Ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.
Wherefore we must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience
sake, Romans 13. 1, 2, 5.

TO our Spiritual Gevernors also, the To our Spiritual Governors.
Bishops and other Pastors of the Church. That we obey them that have the rule
over us, and submit our selves: for they watch for our souls, as they that must
give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for us, Heb. 13. 17. That we know them which labor among us, and
are over us in the Lord, and admonish us: That we esteem them very highly in
love for their works, 1 These. 5. 12, 13. That such as rule well, be counted
worthy of double honor, especially they who labor (with toil and hazard) in
the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17.

TO the whole Estate and Body of the Church also. That we forsake not the To
the whole State of the Church.
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10. 25. That
we be not contentious about Circumstantials, where we have no such Custom, nor
the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16. That we endeavor to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace; because there is one Body, and one Spirit, even as
we are called in one hope of our calling: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one
God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all, Epes.
4. 3, 4, 5, 6. Therefore, I beseech you, Brethren, by the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no division
among you; but that ye be perfectly joined in the same mind; and in the same
judgment, 1 Cor. 1. 10. And that ye give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor
to the Gentles, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 32.

IF these things be in you and abound, Virtues relating unto God.
you will be the better able to exercise those Virtues which relate immediately
to the ever-blessed God: The Original whereof is, Love; according to that in
Matthew. 22. Love.
37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind. Whereby are understood the Three Faculties of a
Man's Spirit, the Will, the Affections, and the Understanding: And with these
we are said to love God, when they are vigorously employed about him; when out
of a deep sense of the Glory of his Nature, and of his wonderful Goodness to
his Creatures, especially to Mankind, we give up our selves entirely unto him,
obeying his Pleasure, desiring and rejecting as he directs us; still having him
in our Thoughts and entertaining our Minds with ravishing Contemplations of his
Divine Perfections. And this is that which in the Scripture Language we call,
The submitting unto God, Jam. 4. 7. The yielding of our selves unto God, Romans
6. 13. Not the doing ones own Will, but the Will of God, Jo. 6. 38. The serving
of him with Reverence and Godly fear, Heb. 12. 28. Delighting our selves in the
Lord, Psalm. 37. 4. And in one general Expression, our walking with God, as it
is said of Enoch, Genesis 5. 22.

UPON full Convictions of his Infinite Devotion.
Greatness, and his All Sufficiency and Readiness to help us, there arises
another Virtue, viz. Devotion; That we offer up daily unto him the sacrifice of
our lips, and the more valuable Oblation of a broken spirit, Psalm. 51. That we
pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17. That we offer up the Sacrifice of Praise
to God continually; that is, that we pretermit no good Opportunities of making
our Supplications and Addresses unto him.

CONSEQUENT hereunto is, a Trust in him, a Dependence upon him, Resignation
and an entire Resignation of our selves to his Care and Providence. That we
cast not our confidence away, Heb. 10. 35. That we cast all our care on him,
who cares for us, 1 Pet. 5. 7. That we commit the keeping of our Souls to him
in well-doing, 1 Pet. 4. 19. That we put our Trust in him, as the holy Psalmist
speaks over and over; and that even against hope we believe in hope, as it is
said of Abraham the Father of the Faithful, Romans 4. 18.

THE Contemplation of those amiable Imitation.
Perfections in God, upon which these Virtues are grounded, is naturally apt to
produce in us a most earnest Desire to Resemble him as far as it is possible;
that we be Holy, as he is Holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15. That we be merciful, as he is
merciful, Luc. 6. 36. And that we be perfect, as our heavenly Father is
perfect, Matthew. 5. 48.

AND because the Nature of God is Universal Obedience.
the measure and Rule of all Moral Perfection, and the Laws he has given to
Mankind from the beginning are so many Revelations of himself; therefore it is
necessary for us, Uniformly and Universally to observe those Laws, whether we
find them written in our Nature, or in his Word. And this is the utmost
Perfection that a Man is capable of in this Life, to show our Love to him, our
Dependence upon him, our profound Adoration and Imitation of him; viz. Our
keeping his Commandments. Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter, says
Solomon, Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole Duty of
Man, Eccles. 12. 13.

I HAVE now done with all that I thought needful for you to Understand
concerning this Sacrament. And whether it be the Necessity of Receiving it, or
the Necessity of due Preparation, or the Quality of the Things preparatory to
the Communion, or the Tendency of the Ordinance it self, or the Care to be
taken after the Solemnity is over, you see what they all drive at in the End;
viz. a Sober, Righteous, and Godly Life. And though in enumerating the several
Particulars thereof, some Virtues may have escaped me, yet there are none, I
think, untouched, but what are fairly reducible to some of those things, which
I have mentioned: Things, which you cannot but say are suitable to Humane
Reason: Things, which are highly Perfective of Humane Nature: Things, which are
Good, Lovely, and of Infinite Satisfaction to our Minds: Things, which are
Easy too, if we will but heartily Apply our Minds to the Practice of them, and
make Use of that Divine Assistance which God gives unto all that need it. I
dare say, if you do these things, you shall never fall. And the very God of
Peace Sanctify you wholly, that your whole Spirit, Soul and Body, may be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by W. Crook, at the Green-Dragon without
Temple-Barr, 1692.
1. THe London Practice of Physic, or the whole Practical Part of Physic,
contained in the Works of Dr. Tho Willis; faithfully made English, and printed
together for the Public good: To which is bound his Plain and Easy Method for
preserving from, and Curing of the Plague, and all other Contagious Diseases,
in 8 o. price bound 8 s.

2. The Christians Manual, in three Parts.

1. The Catechumen, or an Account given by the Young Person of his Knowledge in
Religion, before his Admission to the Lords Supper, as a Groundwork for his
right understanding the Sacrament: alone, price 8 d. To which is added the
Communicants Assistant.

2. An Introduction to a plain and safe way to the Communion T^ble, with
Prayers fitted for the Communicant, Before, At, and After the receiving of the
Lords Supper: alone, price 1 s.

3. The Primitive Institution, showing the great Benefit and Necessity of
Chatechising, to save the Souls of particular Persons, and to heal the present
Distempers of the Church, in 12 o. price bound 1 s.

But the whole together 2 s. bound; Entitled the Christians Manual, all 3 by
Dr. Addison Dean of Lichfield.

3. The Historians Euide, Brittain's Remembrancer; being a Summary of all the
Actions, Battles, etc. Preferments, Changes, etc. that happened in His
Majesty's Kingdom, from An. Dom. 1600. to 1690. showing the Year, Month, and
Day of the Month each was done in; with an Alphabetical Table, for the more
easy finding out any thing in the Book, in 12 o. price bound 2 s.

4. Compendium Geographicum, or a more plain and easy Introduction into all
Geography than yet extant, after the latest Discoveries and Alterations; with
two Alphabets, 1. Of the Ancient, and 2. Of the Modern Names of Places, etc. by
P. C. Chamberlain of the Inner Temple, in 12 o. price bound 1 s.

5. Bucaniers of America, or a true Account of the most Remarkable Assaults,
committed of late Years upon the Coasts of the West Indies, by the English and
French; with the unparrallel'd Exploits of Sir H. Morgan, Captain Cook,
Captain Sharp, and other English Men: Also the great Cruelties of the French
Bucaniers, as of Lolonris, Barti, Portugues, Rock Brasiliano, etc. in two
Volumes; both bound together, price 10 s. in 4 to.

6. The Works of Homer, viz. His Illiads and Oddises, Translated out of Greek
into English by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, Third Edition, price bound 55.

7. Nine Treatises of Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, bound in Two Volumes in Octavo,
viz. 1. His Behemoth, or Civil Wars of England. 2. His Historical Narration of
Heresy. 3. His Answer to Bishop Bramhall in Defense of his Leviathan. 4. His
Seven Problemes: with an Apology to the King for his Writings. These Four were
printed all at one time, and called his Tracts: price bound 5 s. -- 5. His Life
in Latin, writ part by himself, and finished by Dr. B. 6. His Consideration on
his own Religion, Loyalty, etc. 7. His Art of Rhetoric in English. 8. His
Dialogue about the Common Law of England. 9. His Ten Dialogues of Natural
Philosophy in English. These Five last were printed at several times, and sold
single; but for convenience, also bound in a Volume together, and sold for 7 s.
6 d.

8. A Modern View of such parts of Europe that has lately been, and still are,
the Places of great Transactions, viz. Italy, with all its Principalities:
France, with all its Provinces and Bishoprics; Germany, with the Dukedom of
Lorrain, and all the Electorates and Lordships of the Empire; Spain, with all
its Dominions, etc. Wherein is showed the Present State of all those Countries,
with curious Remarks of Antiquity interwoven, in 8 o. price bound 2 s. 6 d.

9. The Case of the Resistance of the Supreme Powers Stated and Resolved,
according to the Holy Scriptures, by W. Sherlock, D. D. Master of the Temple,
the Second Edition, in 8 o. price bound 2 s.

10. A Plain and Easy Method, for preserving those that are well from the
Infection of the Plague, or any Contagious Distemper in City, Country, Camp,
Fleet, etc. and for Curing such as are infected with it; Written in the Year
1666. by Dr. Tho Willis, never printed before this Year; and now by the
Authority of the College of Physicians: price bound 1 s. 6 d.

11. De Mirabilibus Pecci, being the Wonders of the Peak in Darbyshire,
commonly called the Devil's Arse of Peak, in Latin and English, by Tho. Hobbs
of Malmsbury, in 12 o. price bound 1 s.

12. Brittain's Glory, and England's Bravery, wherein is showed the Degrees of
Honor from the Prince to the Peasant; the Precedence of all Persons; from the
Throne to the Bondsman, useful for all, especially for Feasts, Funerals,
Processions, and all great Assemblies, etc. With the Heralds Duty and Power;
and a Dictionary of the Terms in Heraldry, and an Account of all the Orders of
Knighthood in Christendom; and of the Weights and Measures of England, by B.
Smithurst in 12 o. price bound 1 s. 6 d.

13. The Court of Curiosity, wherein the most intricate Questions are resolved
by the most exact and curious Fortune Book that is extant. And Dreams and
Visions Interpreted and Explained according to the Doctrine of the Ancients,
and Practice of the Moderns. Much enlarged and explained in this third Edition,
12 o. price bound 1 s. 6 d.

14. Peppa, or the Reward of Constant Love, a Novel. Done out of French by a
Young Gentlewoman: with the several Songs set to Music, in 12 o. price 1 s. 6
d.

15. Dr. Hascard, Dean of Windsor his three Sermons on Public Occasions.

16. Dr. Maningham's Six Sermons on several Occasions, in 4 to.

17. -- His Two Discourses, 8 vo.

18. Mr. Budgel's Sermon of Prayer, 4 to.

19. Mr. Loightonhouse's Sermon on the Sacrament, 4 to.

20. Mr. Buckly's Sermon at Hereford, 4 to.

21. Dr. Harrison's Sermon on the Plot, 4 to.

22. Mr. Wright's Disc. of Schism, 4 to.

23. Mr. Chillingworth against the Papists, in Quarto and in Folio.

24. Des Escotai's Sermon at the Savoy, French and English.

25. Mr. Ellesby's Sermon on Jan. 30. 4 to.

26. -- Discourse of Conscience, 4 to.

27. Mr. Howell's Visitation Sermon, 4 to.

28. Grotius. Chatechism, Greek, Latin, and English, 8 vo.

29. Mr. Howell's Spirit of Prophecy, 8 vo.

30. Dr. Addison's State of the Jews, 12 o.

31. -- Modest Plea for the Clergy, 8 vo.

32. -- First State of Mahumetism, 8 vo.

33. -- On the Sacrament, 12 o.

34. -- Primitive Institution, a Discourse of Chatechising, 12 o.

35. -- Moors baffled in Tangier, 4 to.

36. -- Chatechumen, 12 o.

37. -- Souls Communion with her Savior, 12 o.

38. Kitchin's Jurisdiction of Courts, 8 vo.

40. Lord Hobart's Reports.

41. Cook's Institutes, 2 d, 3 d, and 4th. Parts.

42. Duke's Law of Charitable Uses, fol.

43. Officina Brevium, fol.

44. Several Statutes of Bankrupts.

45. Complete Clerk.

46. Lord Litcleton's Reports.

47. Complete Solicitor and Attorney.

48. Lord Saunder's Reports.

49. Mr. Hansard's new Book of Entries.

50. Doctor and Student.

51. Fitzh. Natura Brevium.

52. Keilway's Reports, with the new references to the Modern Reports.

53. Wingate's Abridgment of all the Statutes in force to K. W. and Q. M.

54. Leonard's Reports.

55. Bulstrode's Reports.

56. Register of Writs; with new Additions to it.

57. Dr. Howell's History of the World. The first and second Volumes published
by the Author in his Life time, Fol.

58. Clelia, a Romance.

59. Scarron's Comical Romance: being a facetious History of a Company of
Stage Players, Fol.

60. Journal of the House of Peers.

61. Journals of the House of Commons.

62. Townsend's Historical Collection of Queen Elizabeth's four last
Parliaments.

63. Last Seventeen Years of Queen Elizabeth.

64. The Connection in King James I. Reign, being a Supplement of remarkable
Passages omitted betwixt Mr. Townsend and Mr. Rushworth's Collections.

65. Fathers Advice to a Son on a Voyage.

66. Flower-Garden, and Complete Vineyard, by Mr. Hughes, 12 o.

67. Plutarch's Lives English, in five Volumes 8 vo.

68. King killing Doctrine of the Jesuits.

69. Brevis Demonstratio, or the Truth of Christian Religion demonstrated by
Reason, price 10 d. in 12 o.

70. Blunt's Voyage into the Levant.

71. Bridall's Present State of London.

72. Sander's Astrological Physic.

73. Clark's Manual; a Book of Presidents for young Clerks, price bound 4 s.

74. Hobbs's Homer in English, both Illiads and Odisses, with a large Preface
of Mr. Hobbs's about Heroic Poesy, 12 o. price 5 s.

75. -- Travels of Ulysses, Eng.

76 -- Behemoth, or Civil Wars of England.

77. -- Natural Philosophy.

78. -- Vita per Dr. Blackborn.

79 -- Poem on his Life, in English.

80. -- Poem on Darby Peak. Latin and English.

81. -- Narration of Herresie, and the Punishment thereof.

82. -- Answer to Bramhall's in Defense of Leviathan.

83. -- Letter of Liberty and Necessity.

84. -- Seven Problems.

85. -- Whole Art of Rhetoric, English.

86 -- Dialogue of the Laws of England.

87. -- Consideration on his Loyalty, Religion, Reputation, and Manners, 8 vo.
price bound 1 s.

88. -- Leviathan in 4 to. in Latin.

89. -- De Principiis and Ratiocinatione.

90. -- De Duplicatione Cubi.

91. -- Quadratura Circuli.

92. -- Rosetum Geometricum.

93. -- Principia and Problemata.

94. -- Epistola ad Ant. a Wood.

95. -- Lux Mathematicus.

96. -- Historia Ecclesiastic.

97. Heath's Chronicle of the Civil Wars, fol.

98. Popish Cruelties, being Dr. Parry's Trial.

99. Mr. Hallely's Golden Rule of Arithmatick made easy.

100. The True Englishman, 4 to. by Dr. Harrison.

101. The Queen's Birthday Song, for Ap. 29. 1691.

New Books.
102. Cicero's Laelius, being a Discourse of Friendship: Written by M. T.
Cicero, in the latter part of his Age, when all the World were at Wars,
curiously Translated into English: Price bound, 1 s. 6 d.

103. Mr. Wright's Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Greswald, Wife to Mr.
Greswald, Rector of Sollyhull in Warwickshire.

104. A Brief Character of Ireland; with some Observations on the Customs,
Manners, and Behavior of the Native Irish. Written by J. B. Gent. that lived
among them long, 12 o. Price bound 8 d.

105. A Sermon Preached before the Queen, March, 16. 1691/2. by Dr. Pelling,
Rector of Petworth.

106. A Sermon concerning Public Worship, Preached before the Queen, March 23.
1691/2. by Dr. Manningham, Rector of St. Andrew Holbourn, London.

107. A Sermon Preached at the Assizes held at Lincoln, March 6. 1691/2, by the
Lord Chief Justice Sir John Holt, by Mr. Leighton-house, Rector of
Washingburge, ^igh Lincoln, late Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxon.

Dr. Willis's famous Pills for the Cure of the Scurvey, at 3 s. a Box, are Sold
by W. Crook aforesaid, Mr. Bird in Westminster Hall, Mr. Harbin against the
Golden-Tun Tavern in the Strand, at Lichfield, Tamworth, Launceston,
Northampton, Tocester, Durham, Ipswich, Colchester, Bath, Bristol, etc.

FINIS

