A FOURTH LETTER TO A PERSON of QUALITY, BEING AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE
DOCTRINE OF THE SACRAMENT, From the PRIMITIVE Times, TO THE COUNCIL of TRENT;

SHOWING The NOVELTY of Transubstantiation,

LONDON, Printed for Ben. Griffin, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, 1688.

IMPRIMATUR.

Liber cui Titulus. (A Fourth Letter to a Person of Quality.)

May 17th. 1688. H. Maurice Rmo. in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a
Sacris.

A FOURTH LETTER TO A Person of Quality; BEING AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT, OF THE
DOCTRINE OF THE SACRAMENT.
SIR,
I HAVE been longer in your Debt than I intended, when I last engaged my Credit
to you. I hope now to give you satisfaction in full; but you must not expect
Interest to make the payment swell, because the thing I am accountable to you
for is so Trite and worn, that I think it a kindness to you to make as short
payment as is possible, because 'twill save you the trouble of Examining a
world of small quotations, which is worse than the telling of odd and broken
Money. I promised you an account of the Doctrine of the Holy Sacrament; which
the Church of Rome has turned at last into the Doctrine of Transubstantiation;
By which they mean, that upon the Priests Consecration of the Bread and Wine,
the Substance of them is turned into Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood, nothing
remaining but the Species, and Properties of the Elements; that is, the Smell,
the Taste, etc.

This absurd Doctrine being so repugnant to Scripture, to Reason, and to the
very Senses of Mankind, their main business is to delude poor People into an
Opinion, that it was the sense of the Primitive Churches of Christ. We are
desirous to come to a fair Trial of this matter, and that I may do my part
toward it, I shall endeavor to bring it to a very short issue by this Method.

1. I shall show you the Faith of the Ancient Churches, from a long
Controversy they had with those Heretics, the Apollinarians and Eutychians:
Which being undeniable and public matter of Fact, will clear up the sense of
the Ancients far better than single, broken passages out of the Fathers, which
Men of parts know how to interpret to their own advantage.

2. I shall show you when and how the sense of the Ancient Church came to be
altered, what Progress that alteration made, and what strong opposition it met
with for several Ages after it began. And by this plain Historical Account, you
will easily discern what an Innovation the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is.

3. And then I shall give a Summary Answer to those things which the Modern
Romanists do urge out of the Fathers, by showing you the Genuine meaning of
them, which they by wresting, or by not understanding them rightly, have used
to deceive the world with false Notions.

I. As for the Faith of the Ancient Churches it will soon appear, if you do but
observe this One thing, and bear it carefully in your mind. About the year of
Christ, 370. or a little before, Apollinarius Bishop of Laodicea, had spread
about this Heretical Opinion, that the humanity of Christ was turned and
swallowed up into the Deity? so that tho his two Natures were distinct before
the Union, yet by and upon the Union, they became one Nature, his humane part
being converted or Transubstantiated into the Divine, the Properties only and
appearance of Humane Body remaining. This indeed was not all his Heresy, for
he asserted too, that Christ took a Body without a Rational Soul, the Deity
supplying the place of it; and several other strange Opinions he held, to the
great disturbance of the Church. But it is too notorious to need any proof,
that this was part of Apollinarius his Heresy, that upon the Union of Christ's
two Natures, his Manhood was changed into his Divinity, saving only the
Properties of it; so that, he was forced to yield, that the Deity was
Circumcised, and suffered upon the Cross, in the appearance, or (if you will
have it in the Language of the Romanists) under the Species of Humane Flesh.

Within the compass of Twenty Years, Apollinarius his Heresy was condemned by
Three Councils, at Alexandria, at Rome, and at Constantinople. But about Sixty
Seven years after, I mean Anno 448. it was revived by Eutyches, a Presbyter at
Constantinople whose positive Opinion was, that the two Natures of Christ being
United, the substance of the one utterly ceased, his Humanity being quite
converted into his Divinity, so that nothing was left of his Humane Nature, but
the Qualities and Accidents.

This Heresy, begun by Apollinarius, and promoted by Eutyches, lasted a long
time; and it is very well worth your Observation, how nearly it resembles the
Romish Doctrine of Transubstantiation in the Sacrament. For as our Adversaries
hold, that the Substance of Bread and Wine is upon Consecration turned into the
very Substance of Christ's Flesh and Blood, nothing of them remaining but the
Accidents; so the Apollinarians and Eutychians held, that the Substance of
Christ's Humane Nature was, upon its Union, turned into the Substance of his
Divinity, nothing of his Humanity remaining but the Qualities and Properties.
As these hold, that the very Substance of Christ's Body and Blood is received
under the Species of Bread and Wine; so those Heretics held, that the very
Deity Vide Histor. Council Chalced. in init. and Leonis ep. 17. ad Maxim. part
3. istius Concilii.
of Christ was Born, and did Grow, Suffer, Dye and Rise again under the Species
of Humane Flesh: Or, briefly, that Christ appeared not in the Truth or
Substance of Humane Nature, but only in the outward Form and Figure of a Man;
his Humanity being transubstantiated as they presumed into his Divinity, all
but the Idea of it.

Now among many Arguments which the Ancients used against those Heretics, some
of the Greatest Men in the Church drew One Argument from the Doctrine of the
Sacrament; and made use of Our principle against Transubstantiation, to expose
the Heresy of the Apollinarians and Eutychians; which plainly shows, that Our
Opinion as to the Holy Sacrament, was in those times the received Opinion of
the Catholic Church.

To prove this particularly: St. Chrysostom, Patriarch of Constantinople,
writing to his old Acquaintance Caesarius to reclaim him from the Apollinarian
Heresy, into which he had unluckily fallen, among other Arguments he used to
convince him, he drew a parallel from the Eucharist to show, that Christ had
two distinct Natures in one Person. As, says he, before Consecration we call
it Bread, but the Divine Grace having sanctified it by the Prayer of the
Priest, it is no longer called Bread, but is thought worthy to be called the
Lords Body, although the Nature of Bread remains in it, and we do not say there be
two Bodies, but one Body of the Son; so here, the Divine Nature (of Christ)
being joined to the Humane, they both make one Son and one Person.

You must know, that the Greek Copy of this Epistle is not yet come to light:
Very probably it is suppressed by those, who know how to suppress many things
which hurt their Cause, But a Latin Copy of it was found in Archbishop
Cranmer's time in a Library at Florence by Peter Martyr, who brought a
Transcript of it with him into England, and put it into the Archbishops
Library. And this passage in it is such a stabbing blow to the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, that the Romanists have turned and twined themselves every
way to evade the force of it, were it possible.

First they denied this Epistle to be St. Chrysostom's. But this pretense has
been since thrown out of doors by some learned Doctors of the Roman Church her
self.

Stephen Gardener, that dissembling and bloody Bishop of Winchester, being
somewhat conscious to himself that this Epistle was Genuine, pretended
Secondly, that by the Nature of Bread which St. Chrysostom says remains, he
meant not the Substance, but the Accidents and Properties of it: wherein he was
followed by Bellarmine and diverse others; and this is pretended still by some
Popish Writers here in England now. But this is flatly to contradict the
plainest and most natural expressions in the world. And besides it utterly
overthrows the great design of St. Chrysostom: for his purpose was to show
Cesarius, that the Substance of Christ's Humanity remained after its union to
the Deity; for this was the thing in dispute with the Apollinarians. They owned
the Accidents, the Properties, the Qualities of Humanity to remain in Christ,
but affirmed the substance of his Humane Nature to be turned into the Deity. So
that had St. Chrysostom meant, that the Accidents only of Bread remained in
the Sacrament, the example would not have been to the purpose, nor would the
Argument have had any force at all, but St. Chrysostom would have proved
himself the most weak and impertinent man at reasoning that could be. I will
give you the words of a learned and moderate person of the Roman A Treatise of
Transubstant.
Communion now living, whose Book, I hope, you have by you. St. Chrysostom
says plainly, that the Nature of Bread abides after consecration; and this
Fathers Argument would be of no validity, if this Nature of the Bread were
nothing but in show; for Appollinarius might have made another opposite
Argument, and say, that indeed it might be said there were two Natures in Jesus
Christ, but that the Humane Nature was only in appearance, as the Bread in the
Eucharist is, but in show, and has only outward and visible Qualities
remaining in it, whereby it is termed to be Bread.

One thing more I will observe to you, concerning this Epistle, to show how
injuriously some have dealt with St. Chrysostom, and how those men speak
against their own Consciences when they tell us, as they have often done, that
this great man is on their side, A few years ago the learned Mounsieur Bigotius
found this Epistle at Florence, and Anno 1680. printed it in his Edition of
Palladius with the best Apology he could make for this passage. But when the
Book was now ready to be published, some of the Sorbon Doctors fraudulently cut
out this Epistle, and Bigotins his Preface to it. What an Art is this, first to
cut out an Authors Tongue for speaking against them, and yet to pretend that he
spoke on their behalf? Yet it was not so cunningly done, but that the abuse was
complained of; and by good Providence the Leaves which were thus shamefully cut
out, are lately fallen into the hands of a learned man of our Church, who has
given us a full and particular account of this whole matter, in his excellent
Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, to which I
refer you for your more ample satisfaction, both as to the Epistle it self, and
as to the strength of St. Chrysostom's Argument against the Apollinarians,
which utterly destroys the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

To go on now with our Historical Account. Our next ancient Writer is
Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus in Syria, a great Man at the Council of Chalcedon,
Anno 451. and without controversy one of the most learned Men of that Age.

The Heresy of Apollinarus had now been espoused by Eutyches of
Constantinople: Theodoret undertook the quarrel and wrote excellently against
the Eutychians by way of Dialogue: and among several other strong Arguments he
drew an example from the Holy Eucharist, as St. Chrysostom had done before
him. I think it is my best way to lay before you that part of the Dialogue,
which chiefly concerns us, nakedly as it lies in Theodoret; only you must
remember that it is between Orthodoxus and Eranistes; now Orthodoxus personates
the Catholic, and Eranistes the Heretic; the former held, that Christ had two
Natures in one Person; the latter, that his Humane Nature, was absorpt, and
substantially changed into his Divinity.

Eran. It is necessary to turn every stone, as the Proverb is, that Truth may
be found, especially in Divine Matters.


Orthod. Tell me then; those mystical Symbols which are offered by the Priests
(at the Eucharist) what are they representations of?


Eran. Of the Lords Body and Blood.


Orthod. Of a True, or not of a True Body?


Eran. Of a True Body.


Orthod. Right; for there must be an Original of a Copy; for even Painters
imitate Nature, and draw Pictures of things that are seen.


Eran. It Is true.


Orthod. If then the Divine Mysteries be the Similitudes (or Figures) of a True
Body, then is the Body of our Lord even now a True Body, not changed into the
Nature of the Divinity, but filled with divine Glory.


Eran. You have spoken very seasonably of the Divine Mysteries (or Sacrament:)
For I will from thence show the Conversion of our Lords Body into another
Nature: Answer my questions therefore.


Orthod. I will Answer.


Eran. What do you call the Gift that is Offered before the Invocation of the
Priest?


Orthod We are not to speak plainly least some should be here that are not
sufficiently instructed.


Eran. Answer then Aenigmatically.


Orthod. I say then, it is Nourishment from certain Seeds.


Eran. But how do we call one of the Symbols?


Orthod. Why, it is a common Name that signifies a kind of Drink.


Eran. But what do you call those things after Consecration?


Orthod. The Body of Christ, and the Blood of Christ.


Eran And do you believe that you participate of Christ's Body and Blood?


Orthod Yes, I believe so.


Eran. As then the Symbols of our Lords Body and Blood are other things before
the Priests Invocation, but after Invocation are changed, and become other
things; even so was the Lords Body after its Assumption changed into the Divine
Substance.


Orthod. You are taken in the Nets, which you your self have made; for the
Mystical Symbols do not in any wise pass out of their own Nature, no not (...).
Theod. Dialogue. 2.
after Consecration; for they remain in their own former Substance, and figure,
and kind, and are to be Seen and Touched as they were before.


Nothing can be plainer than this to Men who are not obstinately addicted to an
Opinion in spite of all Reason and Sense. And what Theodoret says here, is
very agreeable to* what he told Eranistes in the First Dialogue, viz. That our
Savior honored the visible Symbols with the Appellation of his Body and
Blood, not changing the Nature of them, but adding Grace to Nature. To avoid
all this, our Adversaries pretend, that by Substance and Nature Theodoret means
the Accidents of Bread; which is in effect to tell us, that they are utterly
resolved to believe, or at least to befriend a Lie: For who, that really loves
Truth, would thus confound things, so as to make Substance and Accident the
same? But if they will strain their parts to play tricks with words, how can
they make this their interpretation to come up to Theodoret's design, or to
reach the Argument he had in hand, which was about the supposed substantial
change of Christ's Humane Nature into his Divinity? Theodorets purpose was to
Confute this by Arguing from the Doctrine of the Sacrament; and had the Church
believed a Substantial change of the Bread, this would have confirmed the
Eutychian in his Opinion, but it could not have Confuted it: For the Heretic
desired no more to be granted him, but this, that the Nature, or Substance of
the Elements does cease, though the Accidents continue: And this indeed would
have favored his conceit, that the Substance of Christ's Humanity did cease,
the Properties of it Remaining still: But Theodoret could not be so weak as to
yield this; for then he would inevitably have lost himself in his Dispute.

But what think you of a Pope that disputed against the Eutychians too, and
that from the very same Doctrine of the Sacrament? It was no less a Man than
Gelasius, who was Bishop of Rome Anno 492. and wrote a Celebrated Book of the
two Natures in Christ: Which though Bellarmine, and some more about
Bellarmine's time denied to be this Galasius his Book, yet the Arguments
against them are so strong, that Cardinal Perron, Petavius and other Learned
and more Ingenuous Men since, have yielded us that point: And the moderate
Writer I quoted before, says, This Work is assuredly of Pope Gelasius, etc. In
that piece of Gelasius his Book which we have extant Treatise of Transub. p. 40.
in the Bibliotheca Patrum, he teaches the same Doctrine which Theodoret did,
and for the confirmation of the same thing, as Cardinal Bellarmine does
Bellarm. de Euch. lib. 2. cap. 27.
confess. And what can be plainer than these words of Gelasius? Viz. That the
Sacraments which we receive of the Body and Blood Certe Sacramenta quae sumimus
Corporis and Sanguinis Domini divina res est, propter quod and per eadem
divinae efficimur consortes naturae; and tamen esse non desinit Substantia vel
Natura Panis and Vini, etc.
of the Lord is a Divine thing, because by them we are made partakers of the
Divine Nature; and yet the Substance or Nature of the Bread and Wine does not
cease to be. And truly the Representation and Similitude of Christ's Body and
Blood is Celebrated in the Ministration of these Mysteries; and therefore it is
plain that we must think that of Christ himself, which we profess and Celebrate
in this Representation of him. His meaning evidently is, that we must believe
the Permanency of Christ's Humane Nature, though united to the Divine, because
in the Holy Eucharist, which is the Representation of Christ, the Nature and
Substance of Bread and Wine remains, though Consecrated by the Minister.

And yet we have another eminent Writer on our side, no less a Man than Ephram,
who was Patriarch of Anti^ch about Anno 540. He disputed too against the
Eutychians, and drew the very same Argument from the Sacrament which others had
used before him, showing, that the Humanity of Christ did not Cease in its
Substance by being united to the word, no more than the Bread cease in its
Substance by the Addition of Spiritual Grace. That (says he) Phetii Bibliothee.
cod 229.
which is received by the Faithful does not depart out of its own sensible
Substance and yet continues undivided from the intelligible Grace. And least it
should be replied (though it is strange it should) that by Substance, he means
the Species and Accidents of the Bread, he says the same thing of the Sacrament
of Baptism, where no Romanist ever affirmed any Transubstantiation to be. His
words are these; Baptism also, which becomes entirely a Spiritual thing, and is
One, does conserve still the propriety of the sensible Substance. I mean Water,
and loses not what it was, Whence it is clear, that Ephram looked upon the case
in both Sacraments to be the same, an Addition of Spiritual Grace to be in
both, but a loss of Substance to be in neither, nor any other change to be in
the Eucharist, than what is in Baptism.

Sir, I have instanced in those four Writers particularly, not only because
they were all Great Men in their Times, (Three of them Patriarchs, nay one of
them Patriarch of Rome) but because they all argued against the same Heresy
after the same manner; which to me seems very observable and providential: For
tho the Eutychian Heresy prevailed so long, and did spread so far, that it did
vast mischief, yet God directed the issues of it so, that 'twas an occasion of
showing us what the Catholic Faith was, both in the Greek and Latin Churches,
in those most Learned and flourishing times of Christianity, concerning that
great point which in these latter Ages has made so many distractions in
Christendom. For it is not to be imagined, but that these Eminent Bishops spoke
the sense of the whole Catholic Church, over which they presided. For having
to do with obstinate Heretics, they were obliged to encounter them upon
principles which all Christians consented to, and were agreed; otherwise the
Disputations would have been Endless, had they argued from principles of their
own, and which they were still to prove. It was necessary for them to proceed
upon some common Foundation, whereon both Heretics and Catholics did stand,
and such was this Doctrine of the Sacrament; for which Reason the Learned
Doctors of the Church chose to insist upon it; nor do I find that the Heretics
did contradict it, or endeavor to destroy it; which they would most certainly
have done (considering how much it made against them) had they not known it to
have been a principle, universally received, that the Bread and Wine are not
Transubstantiated, but remain still in their own Nature and Substance, even
after Consecration.

For this Reason I have omitted an hundred other quotations out of the
Ancients, and have taken notice only of this their common Argument against the
Eutychians, because I think it a plain and concise way of confuting the Popish
pretense, touching the Antiquity of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. For it
is not imaginable that the Ancients would have spoken so peremptorily and
dogmatically in this point, had they not had the Authority of the whole Church
to have backed them: And because they spoke this so freely, and that as a
common Argument against those Learned Heretics, we may be sure, that what they
said was the common Faith of the Catholic Church in those times; I mean in the
Sixth Century.

And now, Sir, I shall proceed to Examine, how the matter stood as to this
point in the times following. It is evident, that the great Council of 338.
Fathers, who met at Constantinople, Anno 754. were of this Faith, That the
Bread in the Eucharist is not Christ himself, but the Image of him. For this
they urged, as an Argument against the use of all other Images, because the
Symbols in the Eucharist are the only Image of himself which he left his
Church. Now this utterly overthrows the Doctrine of the Corporal presence (and
much rather the conceit of Transubstantiation.) For if the Bread be the Image
of his Body, it cannot be the Body it self, as the Second Nicene Council
argued, when they opposed the Definitions of this Council at Constantinople.
And besides, there is something very observable in the Discourse of this
Council upon this point, which I wonder so many Writers have not taken notice
of, and it is this, that Christ Ordaining at his last Supper this Image of
himself, intended to show the Mystery of his Incarnation. And to this purpose
they expressed themselves, as any one may see by consulting the Acts of the
Council; As Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 6.
when Christ took our Nature, he took barely the matter of Humane Substance,
not his whole Person, Divinity and all; for to suppose that would be an
Offense, or Derogation to the Deity; so when he appointed this Image of
himself, he chose barely the Substance of Bread, not any shape of Man in it but
only a Representation of his Natural Flesh; for that would have been an
Intreduction of Idolatry. Moreover they say, that as Christ's Natural Body was
Holy by being filled with the Deity; so this Image of him becomes Holy, by
being Sanctified by Grace; and as that Flesh of ours, which Christ took, became
Sanctified by being united to the Deity, so is the Bread in the Eucharist (the
true Image of his Natural Flesh) Sanctified by the Advent of the Holy Spirit,
etc. Is this at all consistent with Transubstantiation, or with the Doctrine of
Christ's Corporal presence in the Sacrament? And yet this was the sense of
those 338. Fathers which they Dogmatically delivered as the sense of the
Church, whereof they looked upon themselves as the Representatives. Therefore
Cardinal Bellarmine understanding their sense thoroughly, and finding how
strongly and invincibly it made against Transubstantiation, had no other way
left him but to rank this great Council among Heretics; nay, he says they were
the first, that ever called in question the Truth of the Lords Body in the
Eucharist. Now this Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 1.
is easily said; but by his favor, they denied not the reality of Christ's
Spiritual presence, but of his Corporal presence only, as we Protestants do.
Nay he himself rightly observes in the same place, that the Protestant Faith in
this point was not reckoned among any of the Ancient Heresies, nor so much as
disputed against by any one of the Ancients for the first 600. Years. For how
should any Dispute against that, which was the Common Faith of the Church, and
had been so all along, to the time of this Constantinopolitan Council? Those
Fathers did no more but declare that publicly, which they had received from
former Ages, and now made use of as a proper Argument against Images.

The Patrons of Images finding themselves pinch't with this Argument, began to
move a point which hitherto lay quiet, and to strain those words, This is my
Body, to a sense beyond what had been formerly taught, though it was a great
while before they could hammer out their New Notions into any Form; for they
spoke very confusedly, inconsistently, and grossly, as if Christ's Natural Body
were in the Sacrament.

And though I do not find that any of them went so far as to own yet a
Substantial change of the Nature of the Bread and Wine into the Substance of
Flesh and Blood (which is the conceit of the Church of Rome now) yet it is
plain, that what these Innovators said, caused a New Great Controversy in
Christendom, and that just upon the neck of the former Quarrel about Images,
whereof I have already given you a particular and Faithful account.

II. And now I am come to the Second Thing I promised to show you; which was,
when, and how the sense of the Ancient Church about the Sacrament, came to be
altered, what progress that alteration made, and what strong Opposition it met
with for several Ages after it began.

It is generally agreed, that Paschasius Rathbertus was one of the first
Innovators in the Latin Church, Vide Albertin. de Sacram. p. 920.
about Anno 818. He was first a Monk, and afterward Abbot of Corbey in France,
and a Man of some considerable Reputation (especially for those times, when
Learning was most decayed,) which perhaps might transport him into an undue
Opinion of his own abilities; and that might make him affect singularity.
However it came about, two very Learned Jesuits are agreed, that Paschasius
was a Leading Man in this business, So says Bellarmine, that Paschasius
Bellarm. de Scriptor. Eccles. in Paschas. and Sirmond. in vita Paschasii
operibus ejus prefix.
was the first Author that wrote seriously and copiously of the Truth of the
Lords Body and Blood in the Eucharist. And so says Sirmondus, that Paschasius
was the first that explained the Genuine sense of the Catholic (he means the
Roman) Church so as that he opened the way to others, who afterward wrote upon
the same Subject.

The Book which they chiefly mean, is that of the Body and Blood of the Lord,
written to one Placidus, a young man whom Paschasius dearly loved. In reading
of this Book one shall find so many dark Riddles, unconquerable perplexities,
and plain inconsistences, that it may be justly questioned, whether they are
possible to be reconciled to Truth or Sense; nay, whether the Man himself
understood what he would be at. One while he will have it to be nothing else
but the Flesh and Blood of Christ; and another while to be a Figure, and the
Flesh and Blood of Christ Mystically. Now he says, that Christ's Body is
Created in the Sacrament, than that it is made of the Substance of Bread, and
by and by, that the Mystery is Celebrated in the Substance of Bread and Wine.
Sometime he tells us, that it is the very Body which Christ took of the Virgin;
and presently that it is wholly a Spiritual and Divine thing which we Eat of,
and that it is his Spiritual Flesh. In one fit he says it is the Flesh of Christ
which repairs and nourishes our Flesh, because the whole Man is redeemed; and
in another he says as positively, that all must be spiritually understood, that
we must not think of any thing here that is Carnal, and that if there were a
real change of the Bread into Flesh, it would be no more the Flesh of Christ,
than now it is, because the whole Mystery is Spiritual. Throughout the whole
book there are so many loose, uncouth, and inconsistent Notions, that there is
hardly any thing plain in it but this, that he owns a Real presence, though the
Man seems miserably confounded how to make you in any measure to understand it,
or how to understand himself his own meaning.

As I was reading the Book, I was apt to believe, that either he harped upon
that Notion of Christ's Spiritual Body and Blood in the Sacrament, which
several of the Ancient Fathers insisted on, and which is of such great use for
the unfolding of this mystery; or else that his conceits were merely the raw
issue of an unripened Judgment (for he Wrote that piece while he was yet a
Monk.) But comparing it with his Epistle to Frudegard, and his exposition upon
St. Matthew 26. v. 26. (both which he wrote when he was now Abbot and an Old
Man) I thought it more reasonable to conjecture, that as at first he affected
singularity, so to the last he was resolved to persist in it. For he stiffly
held it, that the very Body of Christ wherein he Suffered and Rose again, is of
a Truth in the Sacrament materially and in the propriety of its Nature. And yet
to do him right, I do not see that he believed the Nature of Bread to be
Annihilated, or Transubstantiated, no, his opinion seems quite different from
that. He comes nearer to the Doctrine of Consubstantiation, that it is true
Bread and true Flesh too; or rather to the conceit of Impanation (as they call
it) as if Christ assumed the Bread, and united it Corporally to himself upon
the Consecration, as he assumed our Flesh, and united it to the Divinity at his
Incarnation. But this is a Candid interpretation. Whatever his fancy was, it
soon startled many Learned and Great Men in the Church. For Paschasius himself
does confess, that many doubted of of the Truth of his Doctrine, that many
questioned, how the Sacrament could be the Body and Blood of Christ, and yet
Christ remain entire; that he had provoked many to look narrowly into the
thing, because it is said, the Flesh profits nothing; Ep ad Frudegard. and
expos. in Matthew.
that others understood it to be not true Flesh, and true Blood, but only the
Virtue of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament; that some reprehended him
for what he had written in his Book of the Sacrament, believing that it was not
true, and suspecting that his design was to be in the head of a Faction; and
then with some choler he calls them Prating and Unlearned Men, that would not
believe, but that a Body must be palpable and visible.

But hard words were far from stifling this matter. Paschasius his New Opinion
had taken air, and though it fell vastly short of Transubstantiation, yet there
was enough in it to stir the the zeal of the Orthodox; and so it was
ventilated, till by degrees it brake out into a flaming Controversy.

Paschasius his Contemporary Rabanus was one of the most Eminent Men of that
time; first a Monk at Fuld in Franconia, where afterward he succeeded his
Friend Egilo in the Abbacy, Anno 822. and at last was Archbishop of Mentz: The
Glory of Germany, and admirably skilled in all sorts of Learning, especially in
the Hebrew, Greek and Latin Languages, as the Romanists themselves do confess.
As soon as Paschasius's Book came abroad and made a noise in the World, this
Rabanus undertook and confuted it, in an Epistle directed to Egilo then Abbot
of the Monastery at Fuld. Indeed this Epistle is not now extant (care enough
has been taken by some, who thought themselves concerned to suppress it:) But
that such an Epistle was Written by Rabanus against Paschasius undeniably
appears from several Manuscripts of an Author of the same Age, and a Friend to
Paschasius his Opinion. Three of these Manuscripts were seen by the Learned
Albertinus in some Libraries in France; and a Fourth is in the Cottonian Albert
de Euchar. lib. 3. page 921. Usher. Answer to the Challenge, p. 17. and de
succes. and stata p. 38, 39.
Library, and a Fifth at Sidney College in Cambridge; both which were perused
by the incomparable Bishop Usher. This Author I say, having laid down
Paschasius his Opinion, that the Flesh which is received at the Altar, is no
other than that which was born of the Virgin Mary, suffered on the Cross, Rose
again from the Grave, and as yet is daily offered for the Life of the World; at
last he says, contra quem (sc. Paschasium) satis argumentatur and Rabanus, etc.
against Paschasius both Rabanus in his Epistle to Abbot Egilo, and one
Ratrannus in a Book written to King Charles (of France) argue largely, saying,
that it is another kind of Flesh. And besides Rabanus himself tells us, that he
wrote against this Error of Paschasius's in an Epistle to Abbot Egilo. For in
his Penitential set out at Inglostad by Peter Steuart, he says (repeating the
very words of Paschasius) some of late, not having a Right opinion of the
Sacrament of the Lords Body and Blood, have affirmed, Raban penitential. c. 33.
de Euchar. ad Heribald.
that it is that very Body and Blood of the Lord, which was born of the Virgin
Mary, and in which the Lord suffered on the Cross, and rose again from the
Grave: Against which Error (says he) we have employed our last endeavors,
writing to Abbot Egilo, declaring what is truly to be believed concerning
Christ's Body. It seems there was a little Dash, or rasure in this passage of
Rabanus, supposed to have been made by the Monks at Heingart, where the
Manuscript was found, and indeed it is an Artifice which has been commonly used
by many disingenuous Romanists, and a very great Honor it is to their Cause,
to mutilate and corrupt writings which make against them; but it is sufficient
for me to note, how Rabanus calls the conceit of a Corporal presence, a late
Error; and yet then it was not so bulky, as in later Ages, when it swelled
into the most gross Opinion of Transubstantiation.

Anno 837. or thereabout, a great Council was held at Carisiacum in France; the
same Council, if I mistake Vide Usser Histor. Gottes. Chalch. p. 87.
not, where the Opinions of Gotteschalchus touching Predestination were
considered and condemned, and Paschasius Ratbertus, then Abbot of Corbey, was
one of that Council. Whether they determined any thing against Paschasius
himself, is not certain; for the Printed Account we have hitherto had of that
Council is very imperfect, but the Learned and inquisitive Du Plessis saw some
Manuscript Acts of this Council, which though they struck immediately at
Amalarius for some Errors he held about the Sacrament, De missa. lib. 4. cap.
8. page 743.
yet are they so Opposite to Paschasius's Fancy and Destructive of it, as if
the Council had intended to wound Paschasius through Amalarius his side. Thus
it was: Amalarius, Archbishop of Lions, was a considerable men in that Age; but
in some points he held very absurd and monstrous Opinions; for which reason the
Church of Lions afterward took it ill, that Amalarius Multum moleste and
dolenter accepimus, ut Ecclesiastici and prudentes viri tantam injuriam
sibimetipfis fecerint, ut Amalarium de Fedei ratione consulerent, qui and
verbit, and Libris suis mendaciis, and erroribus and fantasticis, atque
hereticis disputationibus plenis omnes pene apud Frauciam Ecclesias, and
nonnullas etiam aliarum regiontum quantum in se fult infecit atque corrupit,
etc. Eccles. Lug. dunens. de tribut Epistolis; Bibliothec. P 9.
had been consulted in the cause against Gotteschalchus, because he had done
his endeavor to infect and corrupt all the (hurches in France, With Lies and
Errors, and with fantastical and He retical disputations, that his Writings
ought to have been burnt. The Errors thus objected against him seem plainly to
have been those concerning the Sacrament. For this was one of his Fantastical
and Heretical Notions; that Christ has a Tripartite Body; one that he took of
the Virgin; another that is in us who live upon the Earth; and a Third that is
in those who are dead. This monstrous Opinion we find in the 35th. Chapter of
his Third Book de Officiis Ecclesiasticis; and it was laid to his charge by the
Carisiac Synod, as Du Plessis shows: And this seems to be that foolery about
the Tripartite Ready of Ad ultimum quoeso ne sequaris ineptias de Tripartito
Christi Corpore. Paschas. ad Frudegard. in fine.
Christ, which Paschasius himself cautioned Frudegard against. For this was a
different thing from Paschasius his Imagination of the threefold Body of
Christ. Though Amalarius favored Paschasius his Opinion as to the main of it,
yet in some things they were divided, that Innovation being as yet Raw and
Undigested. But besides this, Amalarius had another New conceit agreeable to
that of Paschasius, that the simple Nature of Amalar. de Offic. Ecclesiast. c.
24.
Bread and Wine is turned into a reasonable Nature, that is the Nature of
Christ's Body and Blood; though he could not tell what becomes of this Body
when it is received, whether it goes up to Heaven, or flies out into the Air, or
remains in the Communicants Body till death, or goes out at the opening of the
Vein. Such fantastical and heretical conceits had this Man Answer to the
Jesuits Challenge page 79.
about this matter; for Bishop Usher saw in Bennet's College Library one of
his Epistles in Manuscript to Guitard wherein he expressed himself to this
purpose; and the same Errors were charged upon him by the Carisiac Synod also.
Now the Councils definition upon this strikes at all in short, to the ruin of
Amalarius and Paschasius his cause too; viz. That the Bread and Wine is
Spiritually made the Body of Christ, that is, the Mystery of our Life and
Salvation, wherein one thing is seen by the Eye of the Body, and another by the
Eye of Faith; that it is the Food of the mind, not of the Belly, that in that
visible Bread and Drink a Man receives the virtue of invisible Grace, and that
the Body of Christ is not in the visible thing, but in the Spiritual Virtue,
etc.

The Acts of this Council were written by Florus, and dedicated to several
Bishops, and other Great Men at that time: Which is a clear Argument, that the
sense of the Carisiac Synod was very agreeable to the received Doctrine of the
Church then: Which I note the rather, because for the space of about 200. years
no Council but this took any notice (that I know) of the Doctrine of the
Sacrament; and yet a great many Synods were held on several occasions in that
long tract of time; and a Controversy upon such a weighty point could not have
escaped them all, and this being the first that ruined the pretense of a
Corporal Presence, it is easy to believe, that till now there had been no
occasion for a public difinition in this point; and that when this occasion
was offered, they were resolved to stifle this Innovation upon its first
appearance.

To go on now with matter of Fact: Of those that singly engaged in the quarrel
with Paschasius, Bertram was the next. You find by the Nameless Author above
mentioned, that not only Rabanus wrote against him, but also Ratranus, who is
now usually called Bertram (for he is indifferently called Bertramus,
Ratramnus, Ratrannus.) Whatever his right Name was, he was a Monk of Corbey,
and a very Eminent Person about Anno 840. for the Controversy now growing hot,
especially in France where it had been kindled, and Carolus Calvus being very
desirous to quench it in time, directed Bertram (so I will now call him) to
give his sense of it. Bertram in obedience to the King's Command wrote an
Excellent book upon the Subject; in the beginning whereof he takes notice of no
small Schism that then was in the Church, about the Mystery of Christ's Body
and Blood; and then he states the Two Great Questions which Carolus Calvus had
proposed to him.

I. Whether the Sacrament be a Figure of some secret thing which is exhibited
with it, and which is the Object not of Sense, but of Faith.

II. Whether that thing so exhibited be the very Natural Body of Christ, which
was Born of the Virgin Mary, which Suffered, which was Dead and Buried, which
Rose again, which Ascended into Heaven, and Sits at the Right Hand of the
Father (which was the Opinion, and the very words of Paschasius?)

I. As to the First, though (at the close of his Book) he denies the Sacrament
to be a mere Figure, a bare Shadow, an empty Sign without Christ's real
Presence; yet he owns it to be a Figure; and solidly proves from Scripture,
Reason and the Authority of several Ancient Fathers, that it is a Figure, and
that under the visible and corruptible Elements, as under a Cover, is contained
a Divine and Spiritual Thing, which is believed to be there upon Consecration
through the Operation of the Spirit, without any Corporal change of the things
we see, but the Elements Neque ista commutatio corporaliter, sed spiritualiter
facta. Quoniam sub velamento Corporei panis, Corporeique vini spirituale Corpus
Christi, spiritualisque sanguis existit. Nam secundum Creaturarum Substantiam,
quod fuerunt ante Consecrationem, hoc and posten consistunt.
remaining still Corporeal Bread, and Corporeal Wine. For as to that he is
positive, that in respect of the Substance of those Creatures, they continue
the very same thing which they were before Consecration:

II. And as to the Second Question, he distinguishes with St. Ambrose and St.
Jerome, between the Natural and the Spiritual Body of Christ, and peremptorily
determines against Paschasius, and that over and over, that it is not the true,
proper, and Natural Body, which was born of the Virgin, which Suffered and was
Dead, etc. which is received in the Sacracrament, but his Spiritual Body; that
it is Christ's Body, though not his Corporal, but Spiritual Body; that it is the
Blood of Christ, though not his Corporal, but Spiritual Blood: Which he
explains thus, not that Christ has two Bodies severally existent, and utterly
different from each other in Nature, as Body and Spirit are; but because a
Spiritual power and efficacy goes along with the bodily Bread and Wine; because
by and with these Creatures, there is Ministered to the Faithful a Vital Virtue,
the vigor of a Spiritual Life, that word of God which is the living Bread, a
Divine Virtue which secretly dispenses Salvation to all Faithful Receivers, an
invisible Power, which spiritually ministers the Substance of Eternal Life, a
Substance of Spiritual Operation, of invisible efficacy, and of Divine Virtue
(as Bertram often expresses himself) all which is supposed to be derived from
Christ's Glorified Humanity, and therefore not improperly called his Spiritual
Body, according to that Old Notion which St. Cyril of A'exandria, and the
Ephesine Council had of the vivisick power of Christ's Body, as being
replenisht with the Deity.

But I will not give you a large account of this Book, because it is common,
and because every one knows how strongly it confutes the Opinion not only of
Transubstantiation, but also of a Corporal presence, which was the New fancy
of Paschasius.

I shall only observe this to you by the way, that the blessed Masters of the
Inquisition, whose business it was to search into Books, and to let Men know
what Authors they were not to use (for the pretended Catholic Faith cannot
well endure Examination) that they might be lustily revenged upon poor Bertram
for his plain dealing, ordered this invaluable Piece of his to be suppressed, and
accordingly it is ranked among the Prohibited Books in the Tridentine, Roman and
Spanish Indices Expargatorii. Only the Men of Doway, mistrusting that this
course would turn to the shame and prejudice of their Cause, the Book being
abroad in all Men's hands, thought it better to Tolerate it with some Blottings,
Alterations, and Constructions of their own making. Whereas (say they) there
are very many Errors in other Old Catholic Writers, which we bear with,
extenuate, excuse, many times deny by some Artificial device or other, and fix
a commodious sense upon them; we see not but Bertram sudex Belgic.
(a Catholic Presbyter) may deserve the same Equity, and diligent Rivisal. But
with what Equity they have used him, or rather how basely and barbarously they
have wronged him, any man may see, that will but look into the Belgic Index
Expurgatorius; for here they have quite rased him, there they have wrested him,
there again they have made him speak flat Contradictions, throughout they have
used so many Charms and Spells over him, as if they had perfectely designed by
hook or by crook even to Transubstantiate Old Bertram out of himself.

But these Great Men stood not alone in this quarrel. Bertram's contemporary,
the famous Joannes Scotus Erigena was deeply concerned in it too. I give him
that Character, because the Historians which speak of him mention him with
Honor. Carolus Calvus of France had such a value for him, that he made
Hovedan. Annal.
him his Companion at Bed and Board, Pope Nicolas himself gave him the
Character of a Man renowned for his great knowledge: Nor was it any thing but
his Eminent worth that made King Alfred, that Lover of Learning, invite him
back into England; and fix him in the Monastery at Malmesbury, for the
advancement of good Literature. Briefly, those disputations of his, which,
while he was yet in France, he wrote against Gotteschalchus, and which did so
trouble the whole Church of Lions how to Answer, are a sufficient Argument of
his Abilities Now all agree, that this Joannes Scotus Erigena went hand in hand
with Bertram, as to the Doctrine of the Sacrament, insomuch that some would
make us believe, that the Book commonly ascribed to Bertram was composed by
this Scotus. And though I see no good Reasons to think so, yet certain it is,
that he wrote a Tract upon the same Subject, and to the same effect, and very
probably at the Command of Carolus Calvus also. About two hundred years after,
when Berengarius his business grew hot, and the Opinion of a Corporal Presence
by the interest of a Faction had gotten ground, Scotus his Book was urged and
Vindicated by Berengarius; and his adversary Lancfranck owned, that 'twas
written in Opposition to Paschasius; for which Reason it was condemned by that
partial Synod at Vercellis Anno 1050. By the account we have of it now, it
appears, that Scotus fairly went, as Bertram did upon the sense of St. Ambrose,
Jerome, Austin and other of the Ancients. And this is very observable, that in
the Controversy with Gotteschalchus about Predestination which was ardent at
that time, these two Learned Men were divided; for Bertram was on
Gotteschalchus his side, and Scotus was against him: But however they differed
in that Point, in this concerning the Sacrament they were both agreed, which
shows, that it was not Friendship, or Prejudice, or the love of a party which
Governed them in their persuasions, but the entire love they had for those
things which seemed to be True; and that it appeared to them both as an
unquestionable Truth, from Scripture, Reason, and the Catholic Doctrine of the
Ancient Church (which they both insisted on) that Christ's Presence in the
Sacrament is only Spiritual.

I end this with an Observation of a moderate Writer, yet living in the
Gallican Church, concerning this Scotus; that if he had advanced any New
Doctrine, he would certainly have been reproved for it Treatise of
Transubstantiation turned into English, and Printed at London. 1687. page 58.
by the Church of Eyons, by Prudentius, by Florus, by the Colineils of Valence
and Langres, which condemned and censured his opinions on the Doctrine of
Predestination.

As for his Death; though he wsa barbarously Murdered by his own Scholars at
Malmesbury, it is so far from being a Blot upon his Memory, or a disparagement
to his Cause, that it is an Honor to Both: For every one knows, he was
reckoned a Martyr. Indeed it is not certain what the true occasion of that
horrid wickedness was. Very probably he had been too liberal of his Wit against
the dull and wanton Monks: Though Genebrard insinuates, that it was for his
Doctrine of the Sacrament, yet Monsieur Duval consesseth, this was Genebrards
private conjecture, not founded on any Authority or Testimony. I believe,
Genebrard. in Liturg Dionys. Duval annot. in lib. Ecclesiae Lugd. adv. Scot.
the conceit of a Corporal Presence was hardly so much as known at that time in
England; and after it came to be vended here? it was a long time e're it came
to that value, as to be made the price of Blood.

There were many other men of note in this Ninth Century, whom diverse Writers
on our side have proved to have declared their minds against the Innovation of
Paschasius; such as Hincmarus, Walesridus Strabo, Heribald, Drusilmanus, and
several more, whose names you meet with in many Latin Tracts, and in that
English Treatise I mentioned just now. But I will not spend my time upon every
little quotation, least I should make this Letter swell beyond a due
proportion; and besides I think it not amiss to divert you a little with some
account of the posture of this affair about that time here at home, because I
have just spoken of Scotus, who was either our Country Man, or a near Neighbor.

Somewhat after the 900th. year from Christ, Odo was ArchBishop of Canterbury;
and he would have brought into England the belief of a Corporal presence: But
it seems the Clergy were too Honest to be wrought upon. In those days most
doubted of the Truth (meaning, the Substantial Presence) of Christ's Body in
the Sacrament, says William Malmesb. de gest. pontif. Angl. p. 201. Osbern. in
vita Odon.
of Malmesbury: Some Clergy Men asserted (says Osbern) that the Bread and Wine
after Consecration remain in their own former Substance. He says, some, but he
should have said the Generality of Men believed so, for it was then the common
Opinion in the Church of England. But this has been the custom of that sort of
men, when they are to tell Noses, or go to the Poll, to represent the adverse
party as a little Handful, though sometimes to their cost they find themselves
sadly mistaken in their account.

For after the death of Odo, this was the common Faith of the Church of
England, even in the days of Elfrick (or Alfrick) who was made Abbot of
Malmesbury by King Edgar Anno 974. if Ingulphus be right in his computation.
Indeed about that time Men did search, how bread that is gathered of Corn, and
A Saxon Homily on Easter Day.
through fires heat baked, may be turned to Christ's Body, etc. But the
Doctrine of our Church which was then professed, and which upon that search was
the more vigorously maintained, was, that it is Christ's Body Mystically,
Spiritually, and by signification. The Reason why I say it, is this. Elfrick
was of such great esteem in the Church, that his Writings were sorted among the
public Acts of the Church, and judged to contain the avowed and Authentic
Doctrine of the Church of England then: For some of them were put among the
Ecclesiastical Canons and Constitutions for the instruction and good Government
of the Clergy; and some of his Writings were publicly read, in Churches, as
Authorized Homilies for the Information of all People. This account I find in
in the Preface to a very scarce Book, under this Title, A Testimony of
Antiquity, showing the Ancient Faith of the Church of England touching the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of the Lord here publicly preached, and also
received in the Saxon time. This Book was Printed in Archbishop Parkers days
(but there is no printed date of the year, only in MSS. 1567.) and Mr. Fox
seems to have taken out of it all that account which he gives us of this matter
in his Acts and Monuments. It is a little Manual of some of Elfrick's Works:
First a Sermon Translated by Elfrick out of some Latin Author into the Saxon
Language (which was publicly read here on Easter Day) and then two of his
Epistles to two Bishops: Out of which, says the Prefacer, it is not hard to
know, not only so much what Alfrickes judgment was in this Controversy, but
also, that more is, what was the common received Doctrine herein of the whole
Church of England as well when Elfricke himself lived, as before his time, and
also after his time, even from him to the Conquest.

The piece I now speak of being a Rarity, I will give you this account of it,
premising this only, that by Housel is meant the Elements in the Sacrament, the
Sacramental Bread and Wine. In the Sermon for Easter (the Saxon Language on the
one Page, and the common English over against it on the other) after a pretty
long comparison made in the beginning between the Paschal Lamb in Egypt, and
our Blessed Savior, these words follow: Now Men have often searched, and do
yet often search, how Bread that is gathered of Corn, and through fyers heat
baked may be turned to Christ's Body, or how Wine that is pressed out of many
Grapes, is turned through one blessing to the Lords Blood. Now say we to such
men, that some things be spoken of Christ by signification, some things by
thing certain. True thing is and certain, that Christ was born of a Maid, and
suffered Death of his own accord, and was buried, and on this day rose from
Death. He is said Bread by a signification, and a Lamb, and a Lion, and a
Mountain. He is called bread, because he is our Life and Angels Life. He is
said to be a Lamb for his innocence; a Lion for strength wherewith he overcame
the strong Devil. But Christ is not so notwithstanding after true Nature,
neither Bread, nor a Lamb, nor a Lion, why is then that holy Housel called
Christ's Body or his Blood, if it be not truly that it is called? Truly the
Bread and the Wine which by the Mass of the Priest is Hallowed, show one thing
without to humayne understanding, and another thing they call within to
beleving minds. Without they be seen Bread and Wine both in Figure and in
taste; and they be truly after their halowing Christ's Body and his blood
through Ghostly mystery. An heathen Child is Christened, yet he alters not
his shape without though he be changed within. He is brought to the Font-Stone
sinful through Adams disobedience: Howbeit he is washed from all Sin within
though he has not altered his shape without. Even so the Holy Font Water that
is called the well spryng of Life is like in shape to other Waters, and is
subject to corruption; but the Holy Ghostes might comes to the corruptible
Water through the Priests Blessing, and it may after wash the Body and Soul
from all Sin, through Ghostly might. Behold now we see two things in this
one Creature. After true Nature that Water is corruptible Water, and after
Ghostly mystery has halowing might. So also if we behold that Holy Housell
after bodily understanding, then see we that it is a Creature corruptible and
mutable: If we acknowledge therein ghostly might, then understand we that life
is therein, and that it gives immortality to them that eat it with belief.
Much is betwixt the invisible might of the Holy Housell, and the visible shape
of its proper Nature. It is naturally corruptible Bread, and corruptible Wine,
and is by might of Gods word truly Christ's Body and his Blood. Much is
betwixt the Body Christ suffered in, and the Body that is Hallowed to Housell.
The Body truly that Christ suffered in, was born of the Flesh of Mary, with
blood and with bone, with Skin and with Sinews, in Humane Limbs, with a
reasonable Soul living: And his Ghostly Body; which we call the Housell, is
gathered of many corns, without Blood and Bone, without Limme, without Soul,
and therefore nothing is to be understand therein bodily, but all is Ghostly
to be understand. Whatsoever is in that Housell which gives Substance of Life,
that is of the Ghostly might, and invisible doing. Therefore is the Holy
Housell called a misterye, because there is one thing in it seen, and another
thing understanded. That which is there seen has bodily shape, and that we do
there understand, has Ghostly might. Certainly Christ's body which suffered
Death and rose from Death, never dies henceforth; but is Eternal and
unpassible: That Housell is Temporal, not Eternal; corruptible, and dealed
into sondrye parts; Chewed between Teeth, and sent into the Belly: Howbeit
nevertheless after Ghostly might, it is all in every part. -- This misterye
is a pledge and a Figure; Christ's Body is Truth it self. This pledge we do
keep mistically, until that we become to the Truth it self, and then is this
Pledge ended. Truly it is so as we before have said, Christ's Body and his
Blood; not bodilye, but Ghostly. -- The Savior says, He that eats my
Flesh, and Drinks my Blood, has everlasting Life. And he bad them not eat
that Body which he was going about with, nor that blood to drink which he shed
for us, but he meant with those words that Holy Housell, which Ghostley is his
Body, and his Blood; and he that tastes it with beleaving heart, has that
Eternal Life. -- Certainly this Housell which we do now halow at God's Altar,
is a remembrance of Christ's body which he offered for us, and of his Blood
which he shed for us.

The meaning of this Mystery being there thus unfolded, the rest of that Sermon
is, touching the manner how people should receive it; which I shall not
transcribe, because it is not so much to my present In Hen. 8. about the six
Articles.
purpose; and the whole is in Mr. Fox, where you may peruse it at your leisure.

The next thing is an Epistle of Elfrick's to Wulfsine, Bishop of Scyrburne, by
occasion of an ill custom the Priests had of keeping the Consecrated Elements
by them an whole year. It is a short one, and you shall have it all.

Some Pristes keep the Housell that is consecrate on Easter Day all the year
for Syke Men. But they do greatly amysse, because it waxes horye and rotten.
And these will not understand how grevous penance the paenitential Book
teaches by this, if the Housell become horye and rotten; or if that it be
lost; or be eaten of Beasts by negligence. Men shall reserve more carefullye
that holy Housell, and not reserve it to long, but Consecrate other of new for
Syke men always within a weke or a fortnight that it be not so much as horye.
For so holy is the Housell which to day is hallowed as that which on Easter Day
was hallowed. That Holy Housell is Christ's Body, not bodily but Ghostly. Not
the body which he suffered in, but the Body of which he spoke, when he blessed
Bread and Wine to Housell a night before his suffering, and said by the Blessed
Bread, this is my Body, and again by the Holy Wine, this is my blood which is
shed for many in forgiveness of Sins. Understand now that the Lord who could
turn that Bread before his suffering to his Body, and the Wine to his Blood
Ghostlye, that the self same Lord blesses daily through the Priests hands
Bread and Wine to his Ghostlye body, and to his Ghostlye blood.

The other Epistle is to Wulfstane Archbishop of York, to the same purpose
with the former, only somewhat longer; and about the middle of it he says,
Christ Haloweth daily by the hands of the Priest Bread to his Body, and Wine
to his blood in Ghostly mystery, as we read in books, And yet that lively bread
is not so notwithstanding, not the self same Body that Christ suffered in. Nor
that Holy Wine is the Saviors Blood which was shed for us in bodily thing, but
in Ghostly understanding. Both be truly that bread his Body, and that Wine
also his blood, as was the Heavenly Bread, which we call Manna, that fed forty
years God's people.

This Epistle to Wulfstane was first Written by Elfricke in Latin, and then by
Wulfstanes directions Translated by him into English, though not Word for Word,
as Elfrick tells him. And the Words observable in the Latin are these:
Intelligite modo sacerdotes, quod ille Dominus qui ante passionem suam potuit
convertere illum panem, and illud Vinum ad suum Corpus and sanguinem; ipse
quotidie sanctificat per manus Sacerdotum suorum Panem ad suum Corpus
spiritualiter, and Vinum ad suum Sanguinem (non fit tamen hoc Sacrificium
Corpus ejus in quo passus est pro nobis; nec Sanguis ejus, quem pro nobis
effundit: Sed spiritualiter Corpus ejus efficitur and sanguis; sicut Manna quod
de Coelo pluit, and aqua quoe de Petra Fluxit)

Sir, These Three Things of Elfrick's are a Noble Monument of the Faith of the
Church of England even to the Tenth Century: And though we find them in Mr. Fox
and some other Authors, yet I thought my self obliged to give you this short
account of them out of a little Manual (which a Reverend Friend of mine has
lent me) because at the end of it there is an attestation in Manuscript signed
by Seventeen Bishops of our Church, under their own hands (as it seems) that
the English Translation of this Sermon and the two Epistles is exactly
agreeable to the Saxon Copies, which upon the Reformation were found in the
Libraries of the Cathedral Churches, Worcester, Hereford, and Exeter; from
which places (says the Preface) diverse of these Books have been delivered into
the hands of the most Reverend Father, Matthew Archbishop of Canterbury (I
suppose Dr. Parker) Least any doubt should arise about the Translation, whether
it were skillfully or faithfully done; there is (as I told you) at the End,
this attestation in Manuscript: Now that this foresaid Saxon Homily with the
other Testimonies before alleged do fully agree to the Old Ancient Books
(whereof some be written in the Old Saxon, and some in the Latin) from whence
they are taken. These here underwritten upon diligent perusing and comparing
the same, have found by conference that they are truly put forth in Print
without any adding, or withdrawing any thing, for the more faithful reporting
of the same. In Witness whereof they have subscribed their Names (I will not go
about to imitate their several different hands least I prove a Bungler at it;
but I observe, the Bishop of Durham's Title is very differently Written from
all the rest; for it is in Greek Characters)

1 Matthue Archbishop of Canterburye. 2 Tho. Ebor. Archiepiscopus. 3 Edm.
London. 4 Ja. (...) 5 Rob. Winton. 6 William Bushoppe of Chicester. 7 Jo.
Bushop of Heref. 8 Richard Bishope of Ely. 9 Ed. Wigorn. 10 N. Lincoln. 11 R.
Meneven. 12 Thomas Covent and Lich. 13 John Norwic. 14 Joannes Carleolen. 15
Will. Cestren. 16 Thomas Assaphen. 17 Nicolaus Bangor.
Hii Patres precedentes subscripserunt manibus suis propriis in hoc Libello.

Now out of the whole four things are observable. 1. That even before the time
of Elfrick, the Doctrine of Christ's Spiritual presence only, was the Doctrine
commonly and currently received in all the Western Churches, whatever
fantastical Notions some private men might entertain to the contrary. For those
Eighty Sermons which Elfrick spoke of, as of his Preface to the Book now
mentioned.
own Writing (whereof that upon Easter Day was one) were not of his own
composure, but Tranflations which he made out of Latin Writers; which Ib.
shows, that the Latins whom he followed and Translated had been positive
against the new conceit of a Corporal presence.

2. That in Elfrck's time the same Doctrine was constantly held throughout the
whole Church of England as the True Doctrine. For how can we imagine, that
Elfricks Translations could be read publicly in the Churches in England, if
the English Bishops did not believe them to contain Doctrines that were found
and agreeable to the Catholic Faith? Or how can we conceive, that Elfrick's
Epistles should be put among the public Writings of our Church, had not the
Doctrines in them been publicly owned and professed here? And yet it is evident,
that among other Canons which our Bishops collected out of Gildas, Ib.
Theodorus, Egbert, Alcuine, and out of the Fathers of the Primitive Ages, they
did sort those Epistles of Elfrick, for the better ordering of the English
Church.

3. That those Writings of Elfrick's did so directly strike at the Errors of
Paschasius, as if he had purposely designed to prevent those Errors from
creeping into this Kingdom, and thoroughly to season the whole Nation against
them. For in some places he takes the Opinion, nay the very words of
Paschasius, and contradicts him so flatly in the words of Bertram and others of
the former Century, that you would think he had some of those Authors before
him, as perhaps he had.

4. That upon the Conquest, when diverse of the Foreign Clergy came hither with
and after Lancfrank (an Italian Patron of Paschasius's gross Opinion, and now
sent for by the Conqueror to be Archbishop of Canterbury) they found the
Doctrine of the Spiritual presence only taught and professed in the Church of
England. For this reason they fell soul upon the Records of our Church; and
especially upon those Latin Authors which Elfrick had made use of, and upon
what they could understand of Elfrick's own Writings So that those Eighty Latin
Sermons, which Elfrick had Translated, are long ago lost; nor did the Latin
Epistle to Wulfstane (which they found in the Library Ibid.
at Worcester, and probably was given to that Library Ibid.
by Wulfstane himself) escape them neither. For in part of that Epistle, where
the tender point lay, a perfect Rasure was committed: I have Noted the words
above in a Parenthesis, viz. that this Sacrifice is not made that Non fit tamen
hoc Sacrificium Corpus ejus in quo passus est pro nobis, neque Sanguis ejus
quem pro nobis effudit; sed spiritualiter Corpus ejus efficitur and Sanguis,
sicut Manna quod de Coelo pluit, and aqua quoe de Petra fluxit.
Body of Christ in which he suffered for us, nor that Blood of Christ which he
shed for us, but it becomes Spiritually his Body and Blood; as the Manna that
descended from Heaven, and the Water which flowed out of the Rock. These words
were flatly and expressly against the Opinion of Paschasius; and therefore they
were quite rased out; though afterward they were restored to us, out of another
Latin Copy of the same Epistle in the Church of Exeter, which by good luck had
escaped their Tallons.

Had these Men understood the Saxon Language, perhaps we should have had very
little or nothing of Elfricks Writings left us. But such foul play is an
evident Argument of a very bad Cause: And so I shall leave it to your
consideration, what little Reason the Romanists have to call us Heretics and
Innovators in this point, when it is so plain that the Innovation lies at their
own door, and that when it first began to peep into the World, the Church of
England would not endure it; but even in the days of the Saxons, when the
Controversy about it was so hot abroad (especially in France) She still
maintained the Doctrine of the spiritual presence, so that it held on
constantly here to the time of the Conquest; and might have held on still in an
uninterrupted course from Age to Age, had it not been for some Workers of
Iniquity.

Let us now cross the Sea again, and go on with out Relation of this matter,
how it stood abroad; whence I have a little diverted you, though I hope with no
unuseful or unpleasant Digression.

In the Tenth Century this Controversy seemed to lie pretty Quiet; some
following the fancy of Paschasius, that Christ's Natural Body is in the
Sacrament, his Body properly so called, that which he took of the Holy Virgin,
that which suffered upon the Cross, etc. Others following the Catholic Faith
of the Ancient Church, that it is Christ's Spiritual Body; meaning, not his
Flesh properly, but the Virtue of his Flesh; Qui dicunt esse virtutem Carnis
non Carnem, virtutem Sanguinis non Sanguinem. Paschas. in Math. 26.
not his Blood, but the Virtue of his Blood, as Paschasius himself represents
their meaning in his time. The Truth is, this Tenth Century abounded with Men
from whom the World could not expect any thing that was good, some very
illiterate; some very Dull and Unactive; some very Lewd; some very Ambitious
and self ended, and some quite discouraged by the tempestuousness of the times.
By the account all Learned Men have given us, it was a most Infamous Age; the
worst that ever was, or has been hitherto, since the beginning of Christianity.

Probable it is, that at this time Paschasius his Opinion did spread, and even
to the Court of Rome, when nothing in comparison was in the way to stop it. And
when it was once gotten thither, it is easy to believe that indigent Men or
flatterers would be found to comply with it. For how can you think that such
Men in such an Age would resist the strong Temptations of a Court, and not
resign up Truth and their own Consciences as a composition for their Crimes, or
as a price for their Preferments, the Popes having now got so much power into
their hands? Besides the Priests might easily foresee what a prositable Error
this would prove in time; what Authority they would hereby gain over people,
and how easily they might have their Purses and Consciences at Command: For
what will not Men do, to have the very Body of their Savior put into their
Mouths? And when a Priest has his Penitent at his knee, he must needs have
full power over him, if he can make him believe that he has his God in his
hand too.

For these and the like Reasons, the Paschasian Opinion of the Corporal
Presence stole about, without meeting with any public opposition in this Age,
wherein there was such a great scarcity of Writers, and a greater of Scholars.

Yet in all this time I do not find any footsteps of Transubstantiation. That
Doctrine was grafted afterward upon the wild conceit of Paschasius, to the
great mischief of the World, that has been poisoned since with its very
unsavory and deadly Fruit, somewhat like that which grew upon the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil, the occasion of Man's Fall.

I will not dissemble with you. The most Learned and impartial Men about this
time, both before and after the Tenth Century, did speak of the presence of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament in very high terms. But their Opinon was this;
that the consecrated Bread becomes Christ's Body, not by a Substantial change of
the one into the other, nor by an Identity of Nature in Both (for they all held
the True Body of Christ to be still in Heaven, and in Heaven only) But they
conceived the Bread and the Body to be United, by means of a Third Thing (that
is by the Holy Spirit) whereby the Bread and the Body were United by a
mystical Consociation, and by an ineffable Conjunction; both Bread and Body
remaining still distinct in their own proper Natures. I pray observe it: They
believed (as very many of the Ancient Fathers did) that upon the Priests
blessing, that Divine Spirit which replenisheth, and dwells in Christ's
glorified Body in Heaven, does also replenish the Bread and Wine at the
Eucharist; and that by this mediation of the Spirit, the Holy Elements are
joined to Christ's Body by a Divine and Spiritual coadunation. Now this is a
quite different thing from Transubstantiation; for that supposes the matter of
the Elements to be annihilated, or to pass into another Substance; whereas the
Divines of former Ages believed no more but a Mystical and Spiritual Union: And
howsoever they expressed themselves about the Conversion, Transmutation, and
Transfusion of the Elements, it is evident they meant only the transferring of
them, from a Common to a Sacramental Use, and the raising of them up from the
mere condition of Earthly Creatures to an high degree of Divine Dignity and
Excellence; being now no longer bare Bread, and bare Wine, but things of a
sublime Quality and Condition, the venerable Means and Instruments of
Communicating Christ's Body and Blood to us, through the secret Operation of
the Holy Ghost. All which is very consistent with the Church of England's
Notion of Christ's Real Spiritual Presence; but is opposite to the Paschasian
conceit of a gross Corporal Presence, and utterly Destructive of the later
conceit of Transubstantiation.

But to go on. In the beginning of the Eleventh Century, the Paschasian
Doctrine met with fresh Opposition. For the Romish Writers themselves confess,
that Leuthericus (who was Archbishop of Sens in France, Anno 1004) was a Great
Stickler against it. Baronius tells us, that he fell under King Roberts
displeasure for that Reason. The Writer of the Life of Pope John the
Seventeenth, in one of the Tomes of the Councils, would have it, that this
Leuthericus scattered Hujus tempore Leuthericus Senonensis Archiepiscopus
hoeresis Berengarianae primordia and semina sparsit.
the Seeds of the Berengarian Heresy. And Spondanus insinuates that Fulbertus
in his Epistles to Leuthericus reprehended him for dissenting from the
Catholics in this point. But upon perusing those Epistles, as they are set out
by Carolus de Villiers in the Bibliotheca Patrum, I find no such thing. Some
hard words indeed past upon the score of Ecclesiastical Discipline; but as to
this matter I can see nothing.

Nor can I conceive how it should be so; not because Fulbertus was Berengarius
his Instructor, but because his Writings show him to have been of an Opinion
quite different from, nay contrary to that of Paschasius; though indeed the
Romanists would fain pull him on their side, because he was of such Authority
and Eminence in his time, so greatly admired, that some Dreaming Monks devised
this pleasant Romance of him (which some Learned Writers too, have been willing
to report) that when he was Sick, the Virgin Mary was seen to come and Suckle
him with Milk out of her own Breasts.

But let us be serious. This Fulbertus was Bishop of Chartres, in the Province
of Leuthericus, Anno 1007. And the first thing to our purpose, which I find in
his Epistle to Adeodatus is very remarkable. For having mentioned Three Things
necessary to be understood, whereof this is the Third, viz. what the two
Sacraments of life, that is of the Lords Body and Blood, do consist of;
presently he says, that many looking on this and other things too Carnally,
while they gazed on a Carnal Sense, (or, meaning) more than on the secret
Mysteries of Faith, they tumbled down the precipice of a pernicious Error. And
is not this directly against the Carnal opinion of Paschasius, as well as
against those who looked upon these Mysteries as Empty things? And after he
says, because Christ was to take away into Heaven that Body which he offered
up for us, that we might not want the help of his Body so taken away, he left
us this Pledge of his Body and Blood; not the Symbol of an empty Mystery, but
that which a secret Virtue invisibly works in under the visible Form of a
Creature, the Holy Ghost joining the True Body of Christ to it. You see
Fulbertus runs clearly upon that Mystical 'Compaginante Spiritu Sancto Corpus
Christi verum.
Union I spoke of before, which supposes the Substance and Nature both of Bread
and Body to remain still in themselves distinct.

In his Epistle ad Finardum he plainly distinguishes that Body which Christ
took in the Virgin's Womb, from that which is in the Sacrament: And at the End
of his Sermons, he tells us, that some Eat to Life, and others to Destruction;
but that the Thing represented by the Sacrament is to every Man for Life only,
so that he who Eateh to his Condemnation, Eats not the Flesh of Christ, nor
Drinks his Blood although he Eats and Drinks that which is the Sacrament of so
great a thing. All which, how can it possibly consist with the fulsome Doctrine
of a Corporal presence, which supposes that very Flesh and Blood which Christ
took of the Virgin to be truly, Really, Substantially and materially in the
Sacrament?

This last passage in Fulbertus is probably thought to have been that, which
did stick so deeply in the mind of his Scholar, Berengarius: Whose famous case
I am at length come to, and shall search into it impartially, though it be no
small unhappiness that we must have recourse to the Writings of his professed
Adversaries; there being little extant which either he wrote for himself, or
his Friends for him, though it was a case wherein we may be sure many Pens were
at work: And so we are expressly told by Sigebort, who lived near the time of
this Controversy, that many disputed much both in their Discourses and
Writings some Contra eum (Berengarium) and pro eo multum a multis, and Verbis
and Scriptis, disputatum est. Sigeb. Chron. ad an. 1051.
against Berengarius, and some for him: And the Truth of this will appear in
the Sequel.

Though some Romanists have endeavored to oppress the Memory of Berengarius
with a heavy weight of ill Characters (as it is usual with them in all such
cases) yet several of that side have ingenuously acknowledged, that he was a
most Eminent person in his time, not only for his great Charity, Humility and
Austerities of Life, but also for his great Parts and Learning. And the thing
is evident, partly from his Dignity in the Church; for he was Archdeacon of
Angers in France, entrusted with the Office of Instructing the Clergy, and of
training them up in the Studies of Divinity: And partly from those great stirs
which happened in so many parts of Christendom upon his Quarrel. Not that I can
imagine such hot contentions should arise in France, England, and Italy (as
it is plain there were) purely upon the personal account of Berengarius: For it
is impossible to conceive how one single Frenchman, though of the greatest Note
could engage such distant Numbers in a common Controversy by any New Doctrines
of his own. No, their general Concurrence with him is a plain sign, that they
had a deeply radicated Love for the Ancient Truth, however it was Deprest by
the then prevailing Patrons of the Paschasian fancy; that they were well
prepared for a public Declaration of the Truth; and that they waited only for
a fair Opportunity of declaring it, and for some such Leading Man as
Berengarius was to appear in the Head of them. So you know it was at the time
of the Reformationl people had had such bitter Experience of the Spirit of
Popery, that't was every where Hated, and the World was well disposed for the
entertainment of Christ's Religion; so that when Luther cried out against
Indulgences and Priestcraft, the cry went presently round, not so much for
Luthers sake, as for the respect men had for Truth and honesty, and out of
their detestation of a Lucrative contrivance which some Popes and their fellow
work men had formed to oppress the world. Thus a great part of Christendom
seems to have been disposed in Berengarius his days, if that had been God's
time for a general Reformation: But the Sins of the World were to be punished,
and God in his Wisdom chose rather to bring good out of evil afterward, than
to prevent the evil at that time.

As to Berengarius his Principles, I must entreat you to observe, that his
First opinion seems to have been, that the Bread and Wine are barely Figures
and Shadows, without the invisible thing, if we may believe those that wrote
against him, Lancfranck, Adelmannus, Durandus of Liege, and especially
Guitmund. But searching more narrowly into this point, and finding how
obnoxious he was to his adversaries, who could not but object against him the
sense of the whole Catholic Church, his Opinion afterward rose higher, as to
this, and his settled Judgment was, That the Lancfranck de Euchar. Sacram.
Sacrifice of the Church consists of two things, the visible Sacrament, and
the Thing of the Sacrament, that is, the spiritual Body of Christ, as the
Ancients themselves spoke. And to this exactly agrees what Guitmund fairly said
of the Berengarians, that they were divided in their positive Opinions; some of
them believing that there is Berengariani multum in hoe differunt, quod alii
nihil omnino de Corpore and Sanguine Domini Sacramentis istis in esse, sed
tantummodo umbras hoec and figur as esse dicant. Alii vero dicunt ibi Corpus
and Sanguinem Domini revera; sed latenter continueri, and ut sumi possint
quodammodo (ut ita dixerim) impanari. Et hanc ipsius Berengarii subtiliorem
esse Sententiam aiunt, Guitmund, de Veritate Euchar. lib. 1. non procul ab
initio.
nothing at all of the Lords Body and Blood in the Sacrament, but that the
Symbols are shadows and figures only; whereas others of them confessed the Lords
Body and Blood to be there truly, but secretly, and as it were joined with the
Bread and Wine, that they may be received; which they say (says Guitmund) is
the more subtle Opinion of Berengarius himself.

So that the main of the Controversy, wherein Berengarius and his Party where
concerned, lay in these two Negative Points, which are now the great Points in
Controversy between us, and the Church of Rome. 1. They utterly opposed the
Paschasian Error of a corporal Presence. 2. They absolutely denied any
Essential change of the Nature and Substance of the Bread and Wine: For now the
Evil began to swel to a very high degree: Tho I do Isti enim licet inter se
diversi sint, contra nos tamen unam habent pene sententiam, and argumentis
nituntur eisdem. Utrisque enim nibil de pane and vino mutari essentialiter
asserunt. Id.
not yet find the word used, yet the Doctrine of Transubstantiation began now
in this Age, in the 11. Century to be introduced, as an Additional Doctrine
which some endeavored to obtrude upon the World, because they found it
impossible for them to maintain their new Paschasian conceit of a corporal
Presence, without maintaining lustily this Newer fancy of a substantial change
of the Sacramental Elements.

But the extreme Novelty of this Opinion will easily appear from these
following Considerations. 1. Cardinal De sacr. Euch. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Bellarmine, tho he seldom yields any thing that is against him, and when he
does it is with a sparing hand and against His own Will; yet he confesses that
Berengarius was not reputed the first Inventer of his Error, as he is pleased
to call it. Durandus the Bishop of Liege, who wrote against Berengarius,
Qualiter Bruno Andegavensis Episcopus, item Berengarius Turonensis, antiquas
hoereses modernis temporibus introducendo, etc. Durand. Ep ad Henr. 1.
and was his Contemporary, reckons it among those old Heresies, which he
accused Bruno the Bishop of Angers, and Berengarius for reviving at that time.
You must make the man allowance for the word, Herisie: It was a scolding
expression which some used in those days for want of strong Arguments: But if
you strip the Malice and Virulency off, the naked and true meaning is, that
Berengarius held an Ancient opinion, and you may easily see it by comparing his
last judgment with the Faith of the Ancients. 2. Though some private Doctors of
the Roman Church strove at that time to Establish the Doctrine of the Corporal
presence, and to Introduce the other, of a Substantial Change of the Holy
Symbols in the Eucharist, yet these Inovations were so far from being generally
received, that the Writers of those times, nay on that very side, sufficently
show us, how distracted the world was about those points, and what vast numbers
in several parts of Christendom sided with Berengarius. Durandus in his fierce
Sanguinary Letter to Henry the first of France, called the Berengarian Faith,
the foul reproach of his whole most Noble Kingdom. And Totius nobilissime regni
vestri (heu nimis turpe) opprobium.
hearing that the Berengarians defired to be heard in a public Council, and
that King Henry had summoned a Council in order to it, he dissuaded him from
that course, because (as he told the King) He and others were very much afraid,
least the Berengariand should come off, and so the last State of things would
be worse than the first; therefore he besought the King to punish them unheard.
After this Man, Guitmund tells us, that not the Berengarians only, but several
others, though Enemies to the Berengarians, were very much divided in their
sense about the Sacrament; some believing the Bread and Wine to be changed in
part only; others imagining, that though there should be an entire change, yet
where there are unworthy Receivers, the Sacrament Returns into Bread and Wine
again, Some years after Algerus, speaks of Alger. Prolog. in Librum de
Sacrament.
no less than six different opinions about the Sacrament, besides that New
Opinion which now begun to spread. Some held no other change to be in the
Symbols, than is in the Water at Baptism. Others held such an Union between
Christ and the Symbols, as is between his Divinity and his Flesh. Others held a
change of them to be into the Flesh and Blood not of Christ, but of some Son of
Man who is acceptable unto God. Others believed that no change could be made by
a wicked Priest. Others again, that though there were a change, yet it does not
continue, but that there is a return into Bread and Wine; And others again,
that the Sacrament is Digested, and does Corrupt after eating. All these hot
Disputes, which naturally sprang out of the Bowels of a gross opinion, so full
of sensible difficulties, did plainly show it to be a quite different thing
from the Faith of the Ancient Church, when there were none of these quarrols
because the prolysick Doctrine which Naturally brought them into the World was
not then in being: for had it been so, those many difficulties it necessarily
yields, must have brought forth abundance of Disputes; especially in times when
Men had a greater Liberty of disputing, than in Berengarius his Days, when the
Pope and his party had usurped and did not stick to exercise a Tyrannical power
over Princes themselves.

But of all these disagreeing parties, they that stuck to Berengarius was the
most formidable Body to the innovating Faction. Sigebert shows that all France
abounded with them. William of Malmesbury, though a hater of Berengarius his
memory, tells us the same Malmesbur. ad an. 1087.
thing; so does Matthew Paris; and Matthew of West-minister faith, that
Berengarius had almost corrupted (as his Language is) all the French, Italian,
and English. And indeed the vast endeavors the Popes used to suppress the
Ancient Faith, not in those Countries only, but in Germany too, plainly shows
that their Innovations did not gain ground without meeting with strong
opposition, how lightly soever Lanfranck and Guitmund speak of this matter,
thinking thereby to disgrace Berengarius.

3. Nay, It is very observable, as a further plain sign of the Novelty of
Transubstantiation, that the very Men who were the Patrons of it found so many
perplexities in bringing it to its form, that they could not agree among
themselves, but spoke inconsistently, so that it cost them much time to mould
the absurdity into the shape, wherein it appears now: And this I shall show you
as briefly as the Matter will give me leave, according to the Series of time:
The best Key to open the whole thing, and the only way of doing right to
Berengarius his Memory and Cause.

It being found by his Letters to Lanfranck then Abbot of Caen in Normandy,
that he was against the Opinion of Paschasius, it was thought he held the
Sacred Symbols to be nothing but empty Types and shadows; which, as I said,
perhaps might have been his first Opinion. Hereupon, to make him an Example to
all of that persuasion. Several Synods were called one after another, at Rome,
and Verceil Anno 1050. under Leo the 9th besides several other Assemblies which
Mabillon mentions; in some of Mabillon Analect. vet. Tom. 2. p. 477. etc.
which Synods Berengarius was condemned, though absent. Now to give you my free
thoughts, and to be just to all parties, very probable it is, that they
condemned him thus only upon his First supposed Opinion, and therein indeed
they seem to have been unanimous. My Reasons are these.

1. For in the Synod at Tours under Pope Victor II. Anno 1056. where and when
Berengarius appeared in person, he owned his Correct Opinion, which in common
construction amounts to no more but a Citat. ab Usser desucc. and statu, cap.
7. p. 201.
Confession of the Real Spiritual presence, that the Bread and Wine do become
not umbratically, but truly the Flesh and Blood of Christ. This does not favor
either Transubstantiation, or a Corporal Presence, and yet this gave
satisfaction, so that he was not only dismissed, but kindly received into the
Communion Guitmund. de Sacram. lib. 3.
of the Roman Church, says Guitmund.

2. Mabillon tells us of another short Confession which he saw in a Manuscript,
and which is supposed Mabillon Analect. Tom. 2. p. 487.
to have been voluntarily drawn up by Berengarius, and presented to Gregory the
7th. Anno 1078. that the Bread is the true Body of Christ, and the Wine his
true Blood Nor does this Confession reach to the business of
Transubstantiation, without straining of it after a most violent manner, but
only asserts the Truth of Christ's presence in the Sacrament in opposition to a
bare Type or shadow; and therefore Mabillon himself does acknowledge, that this
Confession was Artificially and cunningly worded: And though all this fell
short of the New Opinion then, so that it satisfied not the bigoted Men at
Rome, yet it gave satisfaction to others, nay to the Pope himself, so that the
Case of Berengarius was put off to further consideration another year.

Now if the matter was thus (as in all probability it was) I cannot see what
hurt this does Berengarius's Reputation, or why thy Romanists should take
occasion hence to roar against him so for a perfidious and perjured person,
when in these instances he declared his ripened and deliberate judgment, as far
as the belief of a Real presence went, to which, as far as I can find, he was
constant all his Life time. Nor do I see what advantage those Condemnations of
him in his absence can bring to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; because
those Synods seem to have been so zealously concerned only for the Catholic
Doctrine of the real presence, and to have been unanimous as to that sole point
not understanding rightly the sense either of Scotus or Berengarius. For when
the business was carried further from a real to a Corporal presence, and from
the belief of the main Thing to a belief of the Modus; I mean, when once it
came to be urged that Christ's Body is Substantially and Materially in the
Sacrament, and that by a Substantial Conversion of the very Nature of the
Elements into it; when the matter was brought to this height Berengarius's very
Judges blunder'd miserably, and were much divided about it, and inconsistent
with themselves. Thus we are expressly told by Zacharias Chrysopolitanus Sunt
nonnulli, imd forsan multi, sed vix notari possunt, qui cum damnato Berengario
idem sentiant, and tamen eundem cum Ecclesia damnant. In hoc videlicet damnant
eum, quia formam verborum Ecclesioe abjiciens, nuditate sermonis seandalum
movebat. Non sequebatur, ut dicunt, usum scripturarum, quoe passim res
significantes tanquam significatas appellant, presertim in Sacramentis Zachar.
Chrysopol. in concord. Evangel. lib. 4. cap. 156. BB. PP. Soec. 12.
in the next Age, That there were some, yea perhaps many, who held the same
Opinion with Berengarius although they condemned him. In this thing they
condemned him, that laying aside the Churches way of speaking he gave offense
by his open manner of expressing himself. He did not observe the Language of
Scripture, which frequently gives the Name of the thing signified to that which
signifies it, especially in Sacraments. This was the only quarrel which many
had against him, who as to his Doctrine perfectly concurred and agreed with
him. The truth is, Berengarius his Judges were much to seek, what to say to
him, or how to deal with him, when he appeared personally before them. Of which
we have two plain instances in Two Synods at Rome, the one under Nicolas the
Second Anno 1059. the other under Gregory the 7th in February 1079.

The first of these two Synods was called chiefly about the Election of Popes,
and against Simony, which was then a great Trade at Rome. Thither Berengarius
was summoned; and there he defended himself with such irrosistible Evidence of
truth against a material change in the Nicolaus Papa comperiens te docere panem
vinumque altaris post Consecrationem sine materiali mutatione in pristinis
essentiis remanere, concessa tibi respondendi licentid, etc. Lankfranc. de
Euchar. adv. Berengarium, Eique (Berengario) cum nullus valeret obsistere,
Albericus evocatur ad Synodum, etc. Leo Ostiensis in Chronic. Cassinens. lib.
3. c. 33.
Sacrament, that he quite confounded the whole Synod though it consisted of no
less than 113 Bishops. Not a man of them had a word to say against his
Arguments; so that they were forced to send for Albericus, a Cardinal Deacon,
and a man of great reputation for his Learning: But he was so confounded too,
that he desired a Weeks time to write against Berengarius. Lanfranck (who
relates things partially, as the modern Romanists have done after him) not only
omits the main of this story, but falsifies one part of it, as if Berengarius
had not answered for himself, though the Pope had given him leave: Whereas Leo
Ostiensis, who lived about that time relates the particulars of the story; and
Sigonius confirms it; nay Guitmund himself, though a bitter Adversary to
Berengarius, owns there was a conflict in that Synod: All which the Learned
Bishop Usher De succes. and statu cap. 7.
has noted to my hands.

It Is true, after all this Berengarius Elegisti-palam atque in audientia Sancti
Concilii orthodoxam fidem non amore veritatis, sed timore mortis confiteri.
Lanfrane. de Euchar. in initio.
recanted in that Synod merely for fear of Death: An Argument that even great
Men are subject to humane srailty, especially in extremity of danger, though the
scandal of his compliance falls upon that cause; which needed Fire and Faggot
for its last Argument, and an Executioner instead of a Disputant to bring it to
a Conclusion. But observe, what a Blunder these Men committed in this their
Sanguinary attempt on behalf of the New Opinion. Humbertus was ordered by the
Pope to draw up the Form of a Confession; the Synod approved it; and poor
Berengarius to save his Life was forced to subscribe it: Now the Confession was
this in short, That the Bread and Wine which are set upon the Altar, after
Consentio autem sanctoe Romanoe Ecclesioe -- scilicet Panem and Vinum quoe in
altari ponuntur, post Consecrationem non solum Sacramentum, sed etiam verum
Corpus and Sanguinem Domini nostri Jesu Christi esse, and sensualiter non solum
Sacramento sed in veritate manibus Sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium
dentibus atteri. Lansranc. Alger. and alii multi.
Consecration are not only the Sacrament, but also the true Body and Blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ; that (this true Body) is sensually not only in the
Sacrament, but in Truth handled and broken by the hands of the Priests, and
ground or torn, by the Teeth of the Faithful. This was very harsh; for it
renders Christ liable to New Sufferings every day, it is inconsistent with the
finer Notion of the presence of Christ's Body after the manner of a Spirit, it
introduces such a crass sort of Eating as our Savior rebuked the Capernaites
for thinking of; it makes us to be not only Eaters of a Sacrament, but in very
Truth Eaters of Man's Flesh. Therefore the present Church of Rome will not stand
to these Expressions; diverse of her Doctors formerly have renounced this
definition as erronous and absurd, though it was made by the Pope in Cathedra
and in a public Synod, the boldest Writers have been lamentably put to it how
to give it a Tolerable construction: The Glossator upon the decrees confesses,
that if it be not understood in a sound sense, it leads into a greater Heresy,
than what Berengarius himself was charged with. But the Doctrine being a
Novelty, they knew not as yet how to express it warily enough. Caution comes by
experience, and it is the meeting with objections that puts men upon a necessity
of digesting their Notions better; therefore it is no wonder that the conceits
of these Men were crude, because they were not yet thoroughly considered and
disputed. As time and debates showed them their Error, so they became sensible
and ashamed of it. For though Guitmund endeavored to desend those raw
Expressions, and with the coursest and boldest Explications that I ever read,
yet all he could do, could not make the thing palateable; the very men of those
times that were concerned for the New Opinion took distaste at the definition,
as appears by this. For at the next Synod at Rome under Gregory the Seventh,
twenty years after when Berengarius was summoned again, and another Confession
was prepared for him to subscribe, this foul Notion of sensually handling,
breaking, and grinding the true body of Christ was quite dropped; nor was a word
of it mentioned; but the Doctrine they compelled him to sign by frightning the
poor Old Man with Death, was this, That the Bread and Wine which are set upon
the Altar are substantially converted into the true and proper and quickening
Flesh and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; and after Consecration are the true
Body of Christ, which was born of the Virgin, and which was offered up upon the
Cross for the Salvation of the World, and which sits at the right hand of the
Father, etc. Here was the Paschasian Opinion improved now at length into
Transubstantiation; and this they thought was a Correct Confession, not liable
to so many Objections as they found that was which had been contrived by Pope
Nicolas.

But yet it is observable, that before this New Cunfession was drawn up, it is
acknowledged by the Romanists themselves that there were very warm disputes in
this Synod, and that not so much about the wording of the Confession, as about
the Opinion it self; many of them believing one thing and some another. The
greatest part of them affirmed the Bread and Wine after Council. Romans sub Greg.
7.
consecration to be Substantially changed into that Body of our Lord which was
born of the Virgin: but some endeav. oured to maintain that it is a Figure
only, etc. Indeed this party was over power'd by the other; nevertheless it
plainly appears, that neither the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, nor that of
the Corporal presence prevailed so yet, but that there were several in this
Synod who believed neither. Nay, tho some late Romanists have had the
confidence to deny it, I see no reason we have to discredit those who have
positively affirmed, that Pope Gregory himself doubted much in this point.
Engelbert Archbishop of Treves (as Severral of our Authors have observed)
consesseth, that this Gregory questioned whether that which is received at the
Lords Table be the True body and blood of Christ. Cardinal Benno who wrote the
life of this Gregory tells us (and the Romanists themselves own the Book to be
genuine) that he commanded all the Cardinals to keep a strict Fast, to beg of
God that he would show by some Sign, whether the Church of Rome or Berengarius
were in the right opinion touching the body of our Lord in the Sacrament. Nay
Conradus the Abbot of Ursperg relates, how that Synod which began at Mentz and
was Vide Council. Brixien. Anno 1080. apud Binium.
removed to Brescia Anno 1080 deposed this Gregory, as for many other things,
so for this in particular, because he called in question the Catholic and
Apostolic faith concerning the body of our Lord, and was an old disciple of
the Heretic Berengarius (as they were pleased to speak.) To all which the
sticklers for Transubstantiation have nothing to say, but this, that these are
lies and calumnies invented by Benno and Conradus; which is a senseless shift,
and the same thing in effect as if they told us, they are resolved to
contradict matter of fact though it be related by their own party, and disown
every thing that hurts their cause, or but touches the credit of any one of
their Popes, though he were a very wicked wretch, as every one knows this Pope
Gregory, or Hildebrand was.

Mr. Allix has lately given us a passage out of a Manuscript piece of this
Hildebrands now in the Liberary at Lambeth, which is enough to put the matter
out of controversy, and to justify these allegations: his Proefat. ad
determinat. Joan. Paris. page 7. Cum autem Panis and Vinum dicantur a cunctis
Sanctis, and a fidelibus creditur transire in Substantiam Corporis and
Sanguinis Christi, qua fit illa conversio, an formalis an Substantialis quere
solet? Quod autem formalis non fit, manifestum est, quod forma Panis and Vini
remanet. Utrum vero sit Substantialis; perspicuum non est.
words are these, That whereas (says he) the Bread and Wine are said to pass
into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood, a question is wont to arise, how
this conversion is made, whether it be a Formal or a Substantial change? That
it is not a formal one is manifest, because the form of Bread and Wine remains:
But whether it be a Substantial one, is not manifest. I know some subtle
notions and seeming inconsistences do follow there, which may puzzle a Reader
how to understand them: But what can any man gather from these words (whether
it be a Substantial change, is not manifest) but this, that there were in this
Pope Gregory's time several questions about the change in the Sacrament, and
that he himself was not able to resolve them, but was inclined to believe, that
the change is not Substantial.

That I cannot give you a more perfect and exact account of all the particulars
relating to this Synod and this Pope, is, because some have been very careful
to suppress them, and have given us no other account of them than what they
pleased themselves. And indeed the Age wherein these things were transacted was
so barbarous, and the Books I have searched are of that sort, that no man would
willingly moyl in such a barren study, but out of an earnest desire to pick out
what matter of Fast he could, and to digest it right: which is the only
business before me now in tracing the doctrine of Transubstantion. And upon the
whole you cannot but easily disern, what shifts the Patrons of it were put to,
what Arts they were forced to use, what perplexities they found in their way,
what Heats and distractions happened among them, before they could make it be
belived in the Roman Church her self, though in times that were not only
scandalous for Ignorance, and consequently very Receptive of the grossest
Errors; but Infamous also for all those many violences and oppressions, which
commonly attend a blind Zeal. Many even of the Church of Rome verily thought
that then the Devil was let loose, and that prediction fulfilled Apocal. 20.
that after the expiation of a thousand years Satan should be loosed out of his
Prison, and should go about to deceive the Nations which are in the four
quarters of the Earth. Such commotions and convulsions then happened in the
world, especially in the Papacy of this Gregory, as if the Prince were come a
broad with storms and tempsts to mingle Heaven and Earth together. This was
the Pope of whom such Horrid, yet true Characters were given by some of the
very Romish Communion, that it would weary one to transcribe but the half part.
The Pope who decreed, that the Bishop of Rome alone is to be called Universal;
that He alone can depose all Bishops, that Vidr Registir. Gregor. 7. lib. 2.
He only can use the Imperial Arms that all Princes are to kiss his feet, that
it is Lawful for him to depose Emperors, that an unlimited power of Ordination
is in him, that no Synod may be called a general Council without his command,
that no Chapter nor Book is to be acounted canonical without his Authority,
that there is no appeal from his Sentence, that he can be judged by none, that
the Roman Church never did, never can Err, that by his leave Subjects may call
their Princes to account, that be can absolve Subjects from their Allegiance,
and the like.

Notwithstanding all these terrible usurpations many were Thunder-proof still.
One Synod at Worms condemned the Pope, another at Pavia excommunicated him; a
third at Brescia deposed him. Setting aside those Flatterers at the Court of
Rome, who did not stick to prostitute their Consciences to their Interest and
Ambition: men of all ranks, orders, and degrees made the world ring with their
outcries. Princes began now to resist the Pope, being too late sensible, that
what power their excessive zeal had given him, he armed himself with against
his over kind Benefactors, so that there was no such Enemy to Crowns, as the
Tripple Diadem: the Bishops finding themselves robbed of their just authority,
by one Usurper, opposed him to his Face. The whole considerate world Groaned
and Wept for the abominations in Babylon, complained of the Errors and
Corruption which had crept into the Church, longed for a Redress of abuses, and
would fain have had a Reformation, but could not obtain it, being hindered by a
potent Faction, who should have Cured the Common Disease, but were themselves
the greatest Plague.

Among other Innovations, the New Doctrine of the Sacrament was still opposed.
For to go on: Though Berengarius died about nine years after the Synod at Rome,
yet the Truth expired not with him. I confess in the Twelfth Century the word
Transubstantiation was used by Stephen who was Bishop of Autun in Burgundy,
about Anno 1120 and as far as I can yet find, the First that used it. And it is
no wonder if the Doctrine which went along with it found entertainment, when it
was sent abroad by those, whose Favor some were willing to expect, and whose
displeasure all had Reason to be afraid of. Nevertheless it made not such a
progress, but that diverse Men of Note had the Heart and Honesty to oppose it
still; I mean in the Western Churches; for to other Countries it was as yet
perfectly a stranger, whatever some have vainly pretended to the contrary.

Several of Our Writers have so critically observed the variety of Opinions
about the Sacrament in this Age, that I cannot hope to discover any thing New
to Men of such sort of Learning; nor indeed do they need it. For your sake
therefore who may not be so well acquainted with the state of those times, I
shall content my self in giving you a Concise account of it, as a Collector for
the most part, or rather as an Abbreviator of what has been already Noted by
others, whose Books have not been yet answered, that I know of.

Heriger Abbot of Lobes in Germany, who dyed in the beginning of this Twelfth
Century, gathered together many things which had been written by Catholic
Fathers Sigebert. de Script. Excles.
of the body and blood of Christ against Paschasius Ratbertus. Thuanus in his
Epistle Dedicatory to Hen. the Fourth tells him, that Bruno Archbishop of
Treves expelled several Berengarians out of Liege, Antwerp and other places
thereabouts; and that this was Anno 1106. (for so Bishop Usher and Abbertine
say it should be read, because Bruno was not Archbishop there till after Usher
de success and Stat. c. 7. Abbert. de Euchar. p. 959.
the year 1106) Rupertus Abbot of Deutsch in Germany about Anno 1110 is
acknowledged by several Romanists themselves to have been for the mystical
Union I spoke of before, against Transubstantiation and the Corporal Presence;
and the thing is clear out of diverse places in his Writings. Honorius of
Augustodunum about Anno 1120 is charged by Thomas Waldensis (under the
Character of the Author de Officiis) for a Favourer of Berengarius his
Doctrine, and one of Rabanus his Sive gemma animoe ext. in BB. PP.
Bread Eaters. Algerus who Flourisht Anno 1130 (a Man so cried up by the
Romanists, for Writing against Berengarius, and for Transubstantiation) reckons
up, as Prolog. ad Libr. de Sacram.
I Noted before, Six several Opinions about the Sacrament that were common in
his time, besides that which he held himself. And, as I observed too, Zacharias
Chrysopolitanus, who was toward the year 1160. tells us, that there were some,
perhaps many, who then held Berengarius his Opinion, though they blamed him for
his Unscriptural and Uncommon way of expressing himself. Si autem quaeritur,
qualis sit illa conversio: An formalis, an Substantialis, an alterius generis?
Definire non sufficio. P. Lombard. Sententiar. lib 4. did. 11.
Peter Lombard about the same time, having reckoned up various Doctrines about
this matter, and among the rest that against Transubstantiation in particular,
though he himself held the Corporal Presence, yet as to the question about the
Change of the Symbols, he plainly confessed, as Gregory the Seventh had done,
that he could not tell whether it be Substantial, or a change of another Nature.

But that which convinces me more, that the Opposers of the New Opinion were
very numerous and formidable at this time is, because the Court of Rome began
presently after this to use Terrible and Outrageous Methods against them, and
for many years together carried on these Methods with a very quick Hand: Which
as it shows plainly that other Arguments failed them now, and that they had no
security left them but downright Violence, and Oppression; so it shows too what
great Fears they were under, least the Old Opinion should prevail again,
notwithstanding all their endeavors hitherto. Witness their proceedings
against the Albigenses; of whom I may hereafter give you a saithful Account;
but at present it shall be sufficient for me to tell you from some of the
Romanists themselves that they were such a sort of people as were afterward
upon the Resormation called Protestants. All that disclaimed the Corruptions,
or dissented from the Errors of the Church of Rome in those days, were
comprehended Petrus Cisterciensis Monachus, qui de Albigensibus visa
explorataque in historiam retulit, Innocentio tertio Pontifici dicatam,
Hereticos Tolosates, atque aliarum Vrbium and oppidorum, eorumque protectores
communi nomine Albigenses vocari consuevisse ait ab usu loquentium, Marian.
Prefat. ad Lucan. Tudens.
under the Common Name of the Albigenses. The Numbers of them were so vast,
that Fere enim nulla est terra, in qua haec secta non sit. Reinet. cont. Wald.
c. 4.
Reinerus their Persecutor ingenuously confessed, there was hardly any Nation,
wherein this Sect (as he called them) was not. Let us now take a short view of
the proceedings against them.

In the time of Alexander the Third Anno 1163. a Synod met at Tours in France
chiefly against the Emperor Frederick and Victor the Antipope; in which Synod
a Canon was made against the Albigenses, that no Man should dare under the
dreadful pain of an Anathema Can. 4.
to allow them House or Harbor, or have any Commerce with them, or show them
any kind of Humanity. The reason of this severity was grounded on strong
jealousies they had of the dangers that might come from the great growth of
these Albigensis; whose Heresy (as they said in the beginning of that Canon)
had spread like a gangrene from Tolouse and the parts about it, through Gas
coygny and several other Provinces. Anno 1170. a certain Usser de succes. and
stat. p. 240.
Cardinal was sent into the Province of Tolouse to suppress them by force of
Arms. This course failing another Synod in France was held against them. Anno
1176. which Binius calls a Gallican Council indefinitely; but Labbey specifies
the place, calling it Concilium Lumbariense, or a Synod at Lombers, in the
Archbishopric of Tolouse.

In this Age infinite Numbers Quippe in latissimis Galliae, Hispaniae, Italiae,
Germaniaeque Provinciis tam multi hac peste (Publicanorum) infecti esse
dicuntur, ut secundum Prophetam, multiplicate esse super numerum arenae
videbantur. Guil. Novoburg. a clar. Usserio citat. de success. cap. 8. p. 238.
of Christians, in France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and England made Public
profession of the Old Faith against Transubstantiation; tho they were called by
several Names, for several Reasons; as the Albigenses, Catharists, Leonists,
Publicans, Patarens, and diverse Names more, which their Enemies fixed upon them.
But chiefly they abounded in the Southern Parts of France: And seeing Force and
open Violence had hitherto had very little Success against them, at last they
were Quia in Gasconia, Albigesio and partibus Tolosanis and aliis lecis, ita
Hereticorum, quos alii Catharos, alii Patrinos, alii Publicanos, alii aliis
Nominibus vocant invaluit damnata perversitas, ut jam non in occulto, sicut
alibi nequitiam suam exerceant, sed errores suos publicam manifestent, and ad
consensum suum simplices, attrahant and infirmos; eas and defensores little and
receptares Anathema decernimus subjacere. Council. Lateran. Can 27.
Anathematized by Pope Alexander the Third and his party Anno 1179. in the
Lateran Council at Rome. But being neither daunted nor frightened at this
Thunderbolt, one Henricus a Papa Alexandro missus fuit in Gasconiam, ad
delendam hereticorum perfidiam altaris Sacramentum non credentium. Gucl.
Nungiac. -- Qui predicationis verbo militum peditumque copias undicunque
contraxit praefatosque haereticos expugnavit. Verum id frustra. Nam ut sui
compotes facti sunt, se in erroris pristini volutabro revolverunt. Robert.
Altissiordor. citat. ab Usser. ibid p. 244.
Henry, before Abbot of Clairvoux and now a Cardinal, was sent by the Pope into
Gascoigny against them Anno 1181. where he over-powred them indeed by his grear
Army; but to no purpose; for as soon as they were got out of his Clutches, they
openly professed their Faith again. Anno 1182. a great many of these poor people
were burnt in several Parts of France; and applications were made to Hen. the
Second (under pretense of a Vision) that he would do the same thing in England:
But he would not suffer it to be done in his Country, though there were
abundance of that persuasion there, says Tempus vero ne quo haec visio
contigerat, erat tunc quando Publicani comturebantur in quam pluribus locis per
regnum Franciae, quod Rex (Henricus) nullo modo fieri permisit in terra sua,
licet ibi essent perplurimi. Roger. de Hoveden. in fine Anni 1182.
Hoveden.

It is no great honor to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, that when it came
into the world it soon cost Blood; nor could it prevail till the party which
upheld it made its way by Fire and Sword. The truths of Christianity were not
propagated by such barbarous methods; for there is such a natural lovelyness in
Truth, as renders it worthy of all acceptance? and so much the more, for not
standing in need of Sanguinary proceedings. But error is not easily supported
any other way; and it is a sign of a false Doctrine, when it must be forced upon
the conscience by cutting of throats. However the Persecutions that were now,
did this good, that the true Faith was confirmed by New Martyrdomes; and
recovered some of that Luster under butchering Popes, which Christianity had
gained under Nero.

Lucius the Third was now Pope, who in the year 1183 (as Ad abolendum
diversarum haeresum pravitaetem, quae in plerisque mundi partibus modernis
caepit temporibus pullulare, etc -- Imprimis Catharos and Patarenos and eos qui
se Humiliatos vel Pauperes de Lugduno falso nomine mentiuntur, Passaginos,
Josepinos, Arnaldistas, perpetuo decernimus Anathemati subjacere. Lucii 3.
Decret. Labbaei Council. Tom. 10.
L'abbey computes it) issued out another Anathema, for the abolishing of diverse
Heresies (so called) which in those times grew in most parts of the World; and
he particularly mentioned the Catharists, the Patarens, and those that were
called the Humble Men, or the Poor of Lions; that is, the Albigenses, who
stiffly opposed, among other Errors, that of Transubstantiation. One Outward
Advantage which did help to make them so very Numerous and Spreading was the
Protection they found from diverse Princes and Great Men, particularly Raymund
Earl of Tolouse, and Peter King of Aragon, as Nec mirum tam late eam labem
fuisse diffusam, cum Albigensium secta a primo exortu principium vivorum (quae
magna Pernicies est) favore fuerit armata: Tolosatis primi Comitis, deinde
Fuxensis, Biterarum and Convenarum. Accessit Petri Aragoniae regis patrocinium.
Joan. Marian. praefat. ad Lucum. Tudensem. Vide and Council Lavaurese Anno 1214.
Item Math. Paris in Joanne.
Joannes Mariana does confess: And with this agrees the Account given of this
matter by the Ingenuous Thuan Hist. lib. 6. ad An. 1550.
Thuanus. Citat. in C^tal Test. page 1526.
Jacobus de Rebira, the French Kings Secretary, adds, that they were in great
Esteem, above the ordinary Priests, for Wit and Learning that they were
Honored by their very Enemies; that they were freed from common Burdens and
Impositions; and that every ones safety seemed to have been wrapped up in
Theirs.

The growing interest, and great strength, which the Adversaries of
Transubstantiation now had enraged the Court of Rome so, that in the Papacy of
Innocent the Third they were forced to the most extreme, but most dishonorable
shists: And even when they had so much business in their Hands about the
recovering of Palestine from the Turks. The Heresy at Tolouse being so
increased Non enim disceptationibus verborum tantum, verum etiam armis opus
fuit; adeo inoleverat tanta haeresis (apud Tolosani.) Platina in vita
Innocentii 3.
(says Platina) there was need, not of Disputations, but of Arms too. And the
Zealots for Transubstantiatiation had now got a Tool for their turn at Rome;
this Innocent the Third, made Pope Anno 1198. a young Man, about Thirty years
of Age, Hot, Fierce, Imperious, and (as far as I find by his Speeches in the
Lateran) Ignorant enough. This youngster soon laid about him, and raised a long
and bloody War against the Albigenses. Thuanus in his Sixth Book shows
particularly, what outrages his General Simon Montfort committed in several
places of France, Hanging, Beheading, Burning, and making the most horrible
Slaughters wherever he went; throwing into the Flames at Paris several Priests
too, that were of the Albigenses persuasion. The way of dealing with them in
England was, to burn them in the Shoulders or Foreheads with a Red Hot Iron:
And the same Author shows you, how the Pope used the Earl of Tolouse, and the
King of Aragon also. And Binius Binii notae in Council. Lateran.
tells us, out of Matthew Paris, how that the Earldome of Tolouse was given to
Montfort for almost twelve years service against the Albigenses, after the War
against them had been first begun by Pope Innocent: As great a War says
Thuanus, as that was which was raised against the Thuan. Praefat.
Saracens: But, as he ingenuously acknowledges the Result of the War was this,
that great Numbers of the Albigenses were Killed, Routed, Stripped of their
Estates and Dignities, and scattered up and down into several quarters, but not
convinced by these outrageous Courses.

After all which, Anno 1215 (the year before God took this Bloody Pope out of
the World) that Great Council met at the Lateran, wherein the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was decreed in express Terms.

It had been a wonder indeed, if at last one poor Decree could not have been
got for the establishing of it, after so many years had been spent in Arts and
Violence first to form it, and then to bring it to some perfection. Yet I must
desire you to note, that this Decree was the Pope's only, not Venere multa tum
quidem in consultationem, nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte potuit. Platina de
vita Innocent.

3. -- Facto prius ab ipso Papa exhortationis sermon, recitata sunt in pleno
Concilio capitula 70. quae aliis placabilia, aliis videbantur Onerosa. Math.
Par. in Joanne ad Ann. 1215.


the Councils. Platina tells us, that nothing was openly Decreed by this
Council, though many things were proposed to their consideration. And Matthew
Paris assures us, that the Pope having made a Speech to them, Seventy Chapters
or Heads (which now are called the Decrees of that Council) were read before
them, which were acceptable to some, but seemed burdensome to others. It Is
plain, that there are no Acts of this Council extant, which show in the least,
that any of the things proposed were so much as debated; but the Council rose
before they had considered matters, or came to any Solemn Conclusion after a
Synodical manner. The Reasons of it seem to have been, partly because there
were then Wars in Italy (as Platina and others relate) which extremely
frightened that Pope, and partly too, because some of the Council were
dissatisfied as to the Reasonableness of the Popes Proposals (as Matthew Paris
well observed) and it seems not improbable, but that they might be dissatisfied
as to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in particular. I will not be positive
in this, but leave it to be considered by Learned Men: But the ground of my
Conjecture is this, because Sabellicus speaking of this Lateran Council
expressy affirms, that at that very time the pestilent Heresy of the Sunt and
Crucigeri Lateranensi conventu probati supremo Innocentii Anno, qui salutis
fuit humanae duodecies centesimus ac quintus decimus, quum pestilen; esset
Romae Haeresis orta, magnusque ex ea motus extitisset, multi qui tum forte in
urbe erant, cruce signati, in Syram, credo, ituri, aut certe inde reversi,
Innocentii hortatu pestem illam in horas gliscentem naviter extinaeerunt;
quidam Albiensem ab autore, ut reor, eam nuncuparunt Haeresim. Sabellic.
Aenead. 9. lib. 6. p. 736. edit. Basil.
Albigenses (as he terms it) appeared at Rome, and that a great Commotion
happened there upon it, which the Pope was forced to put an End by the help of
the Crucigeri, that is, a sort of Soldiers that had listed themselves under
the Sign of the Cross for an Expedition into the Holy Land. And if it were
thus, as very likely it was, it is no wonder that the Pope and his great Council
should break up in some haste. If you ask, how it might come to pass, that the
Popes Decrees were not publicly opposed while the Council was yet sitting? The
Reason is evident enough. This Innocent was a most Proud, Insolent, Cruel Man:
One that had deposed I know not how many Bishops, that had deprived Otho the
Emperor of the Romans, that had huff'd Henry the Emperor of Constantinople,
that had Excommunicated King John of England; that had arrogantly treated the
Kings of Bohemia, Portugal, Sicily, France and Aragon; that had robbed the Earl
of Tolouse of all his Possessions; that had Barbarously used the Albigenses by
the flashing and burning Zeal of the Crucigeri; and that now, in the time of
the Lateran Council, was strengthened at Rome with Great Numbers of them, ready
to do any mischief that he should command them. And then, how could it be
expected, but that the whole Council would be overawed into silence, supposing
any of them were against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation? Especially if you
consider, that in the Third Head of his Proposals he had Condemned all
Heretics, all that were but suspected of Heresy, all that showed any Humanity
to Heretics; not excepting Princes themselves, over whom he claimed a Power,
and declared his purposes not only to Excommunicate them, but moreover to
absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance, and to give away their
Territories.

By this it appears, what little Reason our Romanists have to pretend the
Authority of this Lateran Council for their beloved Transubstantiation, and how
little they gain by it upon a strict Examination of the matter. After all the
Arts and Toil of so many years to bring this strange conceit into some shape,
and to Cure those Flaws which all discerning and upright Men found in the
formation of it: After such various Methods used to get a Decree for it, and to
obtrude it upon an easy World in times of Ignorance: After so many Hostile and
Barbarous Courses practiced in several Parts of Christendom upon those who saw
the falsehood of it, and would not submit to the Innovation: After so much
Blood shed, and so many Lives taken away in that unjust Cause: The Patrons of
it having got at length a promising opportunity of settling it in this Great
Council at Rome, and under the awe of a most Heady and Insolent Pope, they
providentially mist of their designs at last. In Rome it self many opposed it
with Rage, probably diverse of the Council did not at all like it; to be sure
they rose without confirming it by a Synodical Decree; so that it had no
Authority but the Pope's own, and that Pope's too, who warranted Rebellion and
Treason in Subjects, and made it the great business and Delight of his own Life
during his Papacy.

But Threats would not do the work yet. For Matthew Math. Par. in Hen. 2. ad
An. 1223.
Paris tells us, that Anno 1223 the Albigenses chose one Bartholomaeus their
Antipope, in Bulgary, Croatia, Dalmatia, and those parts about Hungary; where
their Opinion prevailed so, that many Bishops and others agreed with them.
Moreover, that Anno 1234. they had Bishops of their persuasion in Spain, and
that an infinite Number of them was killed in Alemannia in Germany the same
year. Besides, the Writings of Lucus Iudensis about Anno 1240. and of Petrus
Pilichdorfius about Anno 1450. both against the Albigenses, do plainly show,
that notwithstanding the Decree of Innocent the Third, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was still vigorously resisted in very many places of the
World, and even where the Church of Rome carried great Authority. But I must
not forget a memorable Story of Guido Grossus, Archbishop of Narbonne Anno
1268. because it shows, how little He and the Divines at Paris then hearkened to
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, notwithstanding all that had been done by
Pope Nicolas the Second, Gregory the Seventh, and Innocent the Third; and when
you have considered it well, I leave you to judge too by the way, whether the
judgment of the Popes, though in Council, was in those days thought Infallible.

Guido Grossus going to see Pope Clement the Fourth, his Old familiar
acquaintance, and discoursing in his Court with a certain Learned person, could
not forbear declaring his sense about the Eucharist, which was directly
repugnant to Transubstantiation. For his Opinion was that the Body of our Lord
is not essentially in the Eucharist, but only as the thing signified is under
the sign: To which it seems he added, that this was the Celebrated Opinion at
Paris. After Guido's return home, Clemens heard of this, and wrote him a
chiding Letter, wherein he insinuated also, that if he persitted in that
Opinion, he would be in danger of losing his Dignity De Euchar. lib. 3. P. 973.
and Office: This Letter the Learned Albertinus has given us a Copy of out of
a Manuscript in Pope Clement's Register; and the thing is further attested by
Monsieur I Arroque in his History of the Eucharist, lately rendered into
English, and just fallen into my hands, where you may see it at large; though
the principal part of it is, what I have already related. I add out of both;
that though the Archbishop answered the Popes Letter with some Caution and
Fear, yet in his Answer he said enough to clear and justify his own Opinion
against Transubstantiation. For says he, the Body of Christ is so called Four
ways. 1. In respect of Similitude; as the Species of Bread and Wine, and that
improperly 2. It is taken for the Material Flesh of Jesus Christ, which was
taken of the Blessed Virgin: And this signification is proper. 3. For the
Church, in regard of its Mystical Union (with Christ.) 4. For the Spiritual
Flesh of Jesus Christ, which is Meat indeed; And it is said of those who Eat
this Flesh Spiritually, that they do receive the Truth of the Flesh and Blood
of our Savior, which, as it overthrows the Dream of Transubstantiation, so it
is the very Language of the Ancients, Clemens Alexandrinus, S. Jerome, S.
Ambrose, S. Austin, and others, who did distinguish Christ's Natural Body which
was of the Virgin, from that Spiritual Body which is received at the Eucharist;
as you may see plainly in that excellent little Book called the DIALLACTICON,
which God be thanked is now reprinted at London. A Book written as Bishop
Cosins tells us, by Dr. Poinet Bishop of Winchester a little before Bishop
Jewels Apology came out. Cassander and other Divines abroad Extolled it
deservedly. The late Sa. Oxon (if I may rank him among such Company) takes
notice of it; but P. 61.
says withal, I have not the Book by me: And I verily believe it; for had he
ever seen or read that Book, I am apt to think he would hardly have wrote his
own; at least, not that part of it; the force whereof is quite destroyed by the
Diallacticon.

But not to digress further, especially when I am near the End of my business.
Though in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries Transubstantiation was the
common Tenent, yet I cannot find that it past in those times for a certain
Article of Faith determined by the Public Authority of the Church, but as a
probable Opinion only, as they thought then. Those many difficult Consequences
(about Eating, Digesting, Voiding the Sacrament, whether by Men or Beasts, and
the like) which the subtle Schoolmen met with in managing that Opinion, do
plainly show that the thing was not yet cleared beyond all Reason of doubting,
nor settled by any Authority, which might be presumed sufficient to require
their submission. It is well known, that the Famous Doctor of Sorbon Johannes
Parisicnsis near the Vide determinat. Joan. edit. Londin. 1686.
year 1300. though he professed to hold Transubstantiation, yet he held it only
as a current Opinion; he was so far from urging it as an Article of Faith, that
he proposed another way of explaining the real presence, viz. that Mystical
Union of the Sacred Symbols with Christ's person, which Rupertus and others had
spoke of long In praesentia Collegii Magistrorum in Theologia dictum est,
utrumque modum poneudi Corpus Christi esse in altari, tenet pro Opinione
probabili, and approbat utrumque per -- and dicta Sanctorum. Dicit tamen quod
nullus est determinatus per Ecclesiam, and ideo nullum cadere sub fide; and si
aliter dixisset, minus been dixisset, and qui alitur dieunt, minus been dicunt,
and qui determinate assereret alterutrum proecise cadere sub fide, incur reret
sententiam Canonis, vel Anathematis. Censura Facultatis Theologioe, Paris.
before. And when the Doctors of Divinity at Paris had Examined his
determination, they gave this Censure of him at the End of it, that he had done
well in delivering both as probable Opinions, not so determined by the Church
as to be thought either of them an Article of Faith: and (say they) if he had
said otherwise, he would not have said so well; and they who do speak otherwise
speak amiss, and whosoever shall peremptorily assert either Opinion to be
precisely of Faith ought to incur the Sentence of the Canon, or Excommunication.

I shall not need to trouble you with more Observations, how the opposite
Doctrine to Transubstantiation passed on still through a crowd of Adversaries
down to the times of the Reformation, which began presently after Anno 1500.
You find ready at hand, in the Treatise of Transubstantiation I mentioned
before, in Bishop Cosins, Albertine, and l'Arroque (not to speak of any more)
not only the Names of some particular persons, but an account too of Great
Numbers of people in Bohemia, France, England, etc. Who notwithstanding all
Threats and Oppressions persisted still in the True Faith, and transmitted it
down to Posterity. I shall only add, what the Learned Monsieur Alixius (now in
England) has particularly proved in his Preface to the Determination of
Joannes Parisiensis; that though the Doctrine of Transubstantiation prevailed
among the fantastical Schoolmen from time to time, yet they found so many
perplexities in it, as did put all the Wits they had upon the Tenters; the most
sedate and intelligent Men among them owned it only as an Opinion they had
received by Tradition, not as an Article of Faith declared by any Authentic
and Obligatory Decrees of the Church: And being a common Opinion they would not
contradict it; though some of them affirmed, that the Permanency of the
Substance of the Bread and Wine is not impossible, nor contrary to Reason or to
the Authority of the Bible; nay, that it was the most Rational Opinion so that
had they been Popes, they would have defined it. As for the definitions of
Nicolas the Second, and Gregory the Seventh, they could not see how those did
enforce the belief of the Annihilation of the Substances of the Elements; but
of a Substantial Presence only, which they thought might easily be admitted,
though Permanency of the Substance in the Symbols should be believed too. As
for the Decree of Innocent the Third, they laid no great weight upon it,
because it was not the deliberate and Synodical determination of the whole
Council, and I would sain know, whether our present Romanists will insist upon
the Authority of it, seeing it asserts with a Witness the Deposing Power; which
the Gallican Clergy did Anno 1682. Condemn, as Erroneous, and Injurious to
Princes. As for the Council of Constance which Condemned Wicleffe for denying
the Corporal presence and Transubstantiation An. 1415. it was ever thought by
many Romanists themselves to be of questionable Authority, because it Condemned
and Deposed the Pope too. And as touching the Council of Florence Anno 1439.
However the Doctrine of the Sacrament was offered to their consideration; yet
nothing of Transubstantiation was in the least Defined then.

This is the Truth of the Case, as far as I can find upon the strictest
Enquiry. By which it appears, not only what an Innovation the Mysterious Notion
of Transubstantiation is, but also how this Innovation increased and swe;;'d
about 120 years a go, at the Thirteenth Session of the Council of Trent; when
that which before had been the private Opinion of some fancyful Men, was
adopted into the Church as a necessary Article of Faith, that by the
Consecration of the Bread and Wine there is a Conversion of their whole
Substance into the Substance of Christ's Body and Blood, and thereupon they
Define that whosoever should deny either of these Two Things; 1. That the whole
Christ, his Body and Blood together with his Soul and Divinity is truly,
really, and Substantially contained in the Eucharist: Or, Secondly that shall
deny this wonderful Conversion of the whole Substance of Bread into Christ's
Body, and of the whole Substance of Wine into his Blood, the Species only of
Bread and Wine remaining, should be Anathematized. Here were two New Opinions
made Articles of Faith by a strange Synodical Definition: The Corporal
Presence, and Transubstantiation. The First, as I have showed you, was started
by Paschasius Ratbertus in the 9th. Century; the other was introduced in the
Eleventh: Both very Late and Modern Imaginations in Comparison of the True
Faith of the Church which was, by all that I can discover, held without
interruption for about the space of the first 800 years, and is still prosest
by us of the Church of England, and by other Protestant Churches. The Two
Opinions I speak of, were no sooner vended, but they were vigorously Opposed,
as New Errors: And though by Arts and Violence, with the help of Time, they
did spread in some Parts, yet still they were but private Men's Opinions: And
though afterward they came to be Countenanced by some that were in Authority,
yet they were not Definitions agreed upon after a Synodical manner by any
Council of unquestionable Authority. Nay, though they were espoused by some
fierce Popes, and for that sole Reason were maintained by diverse Doctors of the
Church of Rome, contrary to what others believed, yet at the same time those
Doctors reckoned them not (especially that of Transubstantiation) among the
necessary Articles of the Christian Faith. They were made so by the late pack't
Council of Trent; who by so doing necessarily caused irreparable breaches in
the Churches of Christ, and brought a visible Scandal upon Christianity it self
by establishing such nauseous Opinions, as are enough to turn any Men's
Stomachs, that will but hearken to their Senses and Reason.

I know the Council of Trent did deliver this Doctrine, as the Catholic Faith,
which had always been believed by the Church (as they were pleased to say) and
because they said it, the Romanists generally think themselves obliged to
believe it. But the Novelty is Evident; and 'twere no impossible matter to
show, that even since the Council of Trent, several Great Men in the Church of
Rome have not been pleased with it. Mr. Alixius mentions Two besides the now
living Author of the late Learned Treatise of Transubstantiation, viz. Petrus
de Marca, and Barnes a Benedictine, who held that Transubstantiation is not now
an Article of Faith. Alix. ubisupr. page 80.
Nay, to be free with you, the present Romanists are so troubled with such
intricate and inseparable difficulties throughout the whole point, that I am
tempted to believe many of them secretly wish it had been otherwise defined:
But now it is done, they will not Retract for fear of losing the Credit of
Infallibility, which supports all.

Sir, I promised you in the beginning of this Letter to take notice of what
has been said upon this Point in some late Pamphlets; and the Task will be the
less, because the Learned Author of the Veteres Vindicati has been before hand
with me, who have been forced to wait till this Point fell in my way, in that
Historical Account which I undertook in my First Letter. However I will not
make this Swell, but desire your Patience till another time: Perhaps some brisk
Gentleman may afford me some New Work; and then I may Answer all under one.

In the mean time I have a request to you. My Second Letter you know about
Images was quarreled with by one, to whom I gave a Civil Return, without
receiving yet any sort of Reply, that I know of. It Is odds but he will be
Quarrelling with this too, because it bears hard upon a Mighty Point of
Controversy. Therefore if you chance to know him, be pleased to whisper him in
the Ear, that if he will keep close to matter of Fact, and use Genuine Authors,
and forbear Reproachful and Unhandsome Language, and Deal with me like a
Scholar, he shall certainly find me a fair Adversary. But if he shall run out
into things that are impertinent and quite out of the way, you may wish him to
have a care, least some Honest Protestant Footman give him a Breathing. I am,

SIR, Your most Faithful and Obedient Servant.
May 11. 1688.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Ben. Griffin, at the sign of the Griffin in the
Great Old Bailey near Ludgate Hill.
THe History and Antiquities of Rutlandshire collected from the Records,
Ancient Manuscripts, Monuments on the Place, and other Authors, by J. W. Esquire

A Discourse of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, wherein the Faith of the
Catholic Church concerning that Mystery is explained, proved, and vindicated
after an intelligent, catechetical, and easy manner, by Edw. Pelling, Chaplain
to his Grace the Duke of Somerset.

The Regular Christians daily Sacrifice, or a Collection of Prayers chiesly out
of David's Psalms, and the rest of the Common Prayer; to be used by the People
in their private Devotions, on all ordinary and special occasions; with a
particular Office for Sacrament-Days, by Edw. Pelling, Chaplain to his Grace
the D. of Somerset.

A Sermon preached at the Abbey, July 1685. being the Thanksgiving day for his
Majesty's Victory over the Rebels, by Edw. Pelling, Chaplain to his Grace the
D. of Somerset.

A Sermon preached at St. Georges Church at Windsor, Sept. 26. 1685. by Edw.
Pelling Chaplain to his Grace the D. of Somerset. Printed by Order.

The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion, with an answer to Mr. Sclater's
Reasons, and to the Collectioins made by the Author of a Pamphlet, Entitled
Nubes Testium, in a Letter to a Person of Quality. The First Part.

The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion concerning Images, with an Answer to
the Collections made by the Author of the Pamphlet Entitled Nubes Testium, In
a Letter to a Person of Quality. The Second Part.

A Third Letter to a Person of Quality, being a Vindication of the former, In
an Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled a Discourse of the Use of Images. etc.

A Fourth Letter to a Person of Quality; being an Historical Account of the
Doctrine of the Sacrament from the Primitive Times to the Council of Trent,
showing the Novelty of Transubstantiation.

Diallaction Viri Boni and Literati de Veritate, Natura, atque Substantia
Corporis and Sanguinis Christi in Eucharistia.

Georgii Buchanani Scoti Poemata in Tres Parts digesta. Pars Prima Psalmorum
Davidis paraphrasis poetica, Jephtes sive Votum, Tragaedia. Baptistes sive
Calumnia. Pars Secunda, Franciscanus and Fratres. Elegiarum Liber. Sylvarum
Liber. Hendecasyllabon Liber. Iambon Liber. Epigrammatum Libri III.
Miscellaneorum Liber. De Sphoera Mundi Lib. V. Pars Tertia, Euripidis Medea;
Ejusdem Alcestis, utraque Latino carmine reddita. G Buchanani vita ab ipso
scripta biennio ante mortem. Adjecta sunt Paraphrast Psalmorum Argumenta
singulis Psalmis praefixa. Item Collectanea quibus Vocabula and Modi loquendi
tam Poetici quam alia dissiciliores, and minus vulgo obvii, perspicue
explicantur. Etiam diversa Carmiuum Genera Margini adjecta. Opera and Studio N.
Chytraei. His accedunt nunc primum variae lectiones and conjecturae in partem
secundam.

Assize of Bread with sundry good and needful Ordinances for Bakers, Brewers,
Inholders, Victuallers, and Butchers, etc.

The Perfect Major: In French and English. Showing the easiest way of handling
Arms; The Millitary Motions with the Manner how to enter into the Field, and to
form a Battalion. By F. d' Morains, formerly an Officer in the French Army's

The French Bible in large 4o French N. Testmt. in large 4o French N. Test. in
large 8o French Psalms in 24o.
All of them in a Fair large Letter.


