A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor AND COURT of ALDERMEN, At St. Mary le
Bow, on Nov. 5. 1683.

BEING THE Commemoration-Day Of our Deliverance from a Popish Conspiracy.

By Edward Pelling, Chaplain to His Grace the Duke of Somerset.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Abington next the Wonder Tavern in Ludgate Street.
1683.

To the Right Honorable Sir Henry Tulce, Lord Mayor of the City of London, and
to the Honorable Court of Aldermen.
My Lord,
WHen your Lordship and your Brethren were pleased to pitch upon me for your
Preacher on the late Solemn Occasion, I had reason to conclude, that knowing my
Principles and Way, you might expect from me a Discourse like unto the Author,
Blunt and Plain, and (as I hope your Lordship does believe) Loyal and Honest.

And truly had I had no other Tie upon me but Good Manners, that was enough to
oblige me not to defraud your Lordship wholly of your expectations. But I have
this to say more, that by my Experience I have found, that the Delivering of
plain Truths after a plain manner (however some may call it Intemperate Zeal)
is in this Age the most Effectual way of Instructing People, especially the
ordinary sort of Men, who are most apt to run away with mistakes, and who need
the most of our Care and Instructions, because they are the Hands and Tools
which Politic Malcontents employ to Disturb the Peace and Established
Government.

I had therefore a particular regard to the necessities of these, especially in
the Practical part of this Discourse; which I thought necessary to adapt to our
present Circumstances, as a more profitable course than either to enter into
Controversy, or to tell a Story of the Fifth of November.

My Lord, I did hope that your Lordship and the Court would have gratified my
Desires by Excusing me from Publishing these Papers to an Uncharitable and
Censorious World. But since you have been pleased to determine it otherwise, I
Submit to your Pleasure, being ever ready to pay all due Obedience to my
Governors, and particularly to your Lordship, whose Endeavors for the Good of
the Government in Church and State, I beseech God to bless with Successes
suitable to your Zeal for both. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Bounden, and Obedient Servant, Edw. Pelling.

Luke XIX. 42. If thou had known, even Thou, at least in this Thy day, the
things which belong unto thy Peace!
THE Fore-casting of Events, and the Prudent Providing against the Worst, as it
is a Necessary Course for us all to take in the Management of our Private and
Particular Concernments, so it is a most Useful Course in the Governmet of
Public and National Affairs, especially in Lowering Weather and Threatening
Times, when a Nation seems to be brought under an absolute Necessity, either of
being Wise in Time, or of being undone for ever.

It Is plain that this was the Case of Jerusalem, when our Savior Lamented over
her, and was a Mourner at her Funerals beforehand: her Days were numbered out
unto her; her last Hours were spending apace, and She was limited to a certain
Time, which the purpose of a Patient and Just God had fixed her: so that one of
these two things She was bound to Resolve upon, either to bethink her self of
her Follies, while the Sands were yet in her Glass, or to Perish and be
Destroyed without any Remedy or Control.

That Merciful Jesus who came into the World, not to Destroy Men's Lives, but to
Save them, and to Retrieve and Succor that which was Lost, not only told her
her sad Doom, if She persisted still in her wonted course of Obstinacy and
Rebellion (notwithstanding so many Meroies God had showed her, and so many
Deliverances he had wrought for her) but moreover he Courted her with the most
Passionate Expressions of Tenderness and Goodness, that now, at the last, after
that the Patience of God had waited for her so long, she would be True to her
own Interest, and be Merciful to her self: for the Particle ( If) is an
Optative in this place, a note of Desire and Earnest Longing; as if our Blessed
Savior had said, O that thou had known; would to God thou would consider
and do the things which belong unto thy Peace.

These words I have chosen to Discourse of now, because they contain that Use
and Improvement which every Provident Nation should make of the Divine
Goodness; and espceially we of This Nation, who have had such Ample and
Wonderful Experience of the Mercies of God (and particularly in that Signal and
Miraculous Instance of it, which we Commemorate this Day) that one would think,
Louder warnings could not well be given to Any People under Heaven, than what
has been given to Us, To know the things which belong unto our Peace. For
though One end of our Meeting be to Praise and Bless the Keeper of our Israel,
for this Days Astonishing Deliverance of our King, of the whole Family Royal,
of the Three Estates of the Realm, and of our whole Church and Nation, from the
Barbarous Designs of our old good Friends at Rome, with whom Treason and
Villainy is Meritorious; yet this is not the whole, nor indeed the greatest part
of our Business. For, Dangers of Destruction are Indications and Arguments of
men's Demerits; and a Scourge, though it be not Felt, yet is a Monitor from
Heaven that tells us what we shall feel in the end, if we be not Tractable; and
if in Time we be not Disciplined into that Wisdom which is Peaceable and Pure.
So that every Deliverance being but a Summoning of us to our Duty, we are not
only to look Backward upon it, nor barely to Read it as a Story of Gods
Providence; but we are chiefly to look Forward, to the thing that it Points at,
to the Amendment of our Lives, and to the Practice of the things which belong
unto our Peace, while it is yet Our day.

Ingratitude, though it be the Basest and most Odious Sin, yet it is the Great
and Epidemical Guilt of this Nation; that, when no People under Heaven are so
deeply Indebted to Gods Providence as We are, Men nevertheless suffer, if not
the Memory, vet the Sense of his Goodness to slide so easily away from them, as
if they had nothing to do, but still to be trying Conclusions with Heaven, and
to make fresh Experiments of Gods Mercy, how Long, and how Far it is Possible
for it to Last. What have we learnt from this Days Mercy, but to fling
Invectives at the Papists (though, I confess, the greatest Invectives cannot be
too much?) what other use have many made of the King's Restoration, but This
only, to try whether they could Rout him again out of his Kingdom, or
dispatch him quite out of the World? Nay (if I may have Liberty to ask it) what
have they learnt from the Dangers of a late Popish Plot, but to Form a Fanatic
Conspiracy, and to Mock God Solemnly by Studying Treason Themselves after a Day
of Humiliation for the very same Horrid Sin in others? I cannot tell what Use
we shall make of the Late* Deliverance of the King and the whole Kingdom,
which God has wrought for us but Yesterday, as it were: but I am greatly
afraid, that the Sense even of This Deliverance will not stick by us long
neither; especially since some begin already to look upon that as a Sham, which
was one of the greatest Miracles of Mercy, that ever we or our Forefathers
have seen.

Lord! after this Rate what shall we do, and what will become of us in the End?
Little do Men consider, that these Rescuings of us from Perdition, are intended
only to lengthen our Time for Repentance; and it is a general Fault among us,
that while we are striving, who shall be too hard for the other, we do not look
up unto Heaven, where the Righteous God is weighing his Mercies and our Sins.

To Stir Men up therefore to a, Religious and Timely Care of a Matter which is
of such vast Importance and Concernment to our whole Nation, I have pitched
upon these Words of our Savior, which with weeping Eyes he used concerning
Jerusalem in the like Case. And before I take upon more to speak of the things
which belong unto our Peace, as Affairs stand with us in this Juncture; there
are Two Points couched in my Text, which I beg leave to offer to your Serious
Consideration.

1. First, that the most Profligate Nation have Overtures of Happiness, a Day
of Peace given them; so that if they be Undone, the fault is their own, and
their Destruction is of themselves.

There hardly ever was a more Wicked and Profligate People in the World
(especially that Professed Religion and the Knowledge of the True God) than that
People was, which now was within the Walls of Jerusalem; an Ungrateful and
Rebellious Generation: Men that were Addicted to Hypocrysie, to Violence, to
Cruelty, and to all manner of Wickedness, Idolatry only excepted. Men that
Rejected the Prince of Peace, that Resisted the Holy Ghost, that shut their
Eyes against the Truth, and obstinately opposed it, notwithstanding the most
Convincing Arguments which were given on its side, even by Miracles from
Heaven. Men that forsook their own Mercies, and were so Maliciously set against
Him, that brought those Mercies in his hands, that they only studied how they
might now Treat themselves with his Blood at the Passover. Never did any Nation
take a more direct Course to bring themselves to Ruin, than the Jews took at
this time: and yet they had their Day, an Opportunity given them to save
themselves from Destruction, if they would have been Wise in Time.

This was that Time of Visitation which we find mentioned at verse. 44. of this
Chapter. For there is Visitatio Misericordiae as well as Justitiae, a time when
Men are Visited in a way of Mercy, as the Jews were Visited at their
Deliverance out of Egypt, and as we of this Nation have been often Visited with
many stupendous Deliverances from the most imminent Dangers all along from the
Beginning of the Reformation unto this day. And thus Christ Visited Jerusalem
when he Rode unto her in Triumph (the only Triumphal Progress which he took in
his whole Life) he went to her to Heal, and to Save, and to Deliver her from
Destruction. This Lucid Interval and Lightning of Mercy before her Tragical
overthrow, is called the Day of Jerusalem, Her Day, as it was distinguished
from Gods Day, that time of Judgment which followed afterward. Our Savior
himself did thus distinguish between these two times: for speaking of that
Desolation which was coming, how the Jews should be led away Captive into all
Nations, and Jerusalem should be Trodden down of the Gentiles, These (said he)
are the Days of Vengeance, Lu. 21. 22. It was a far different Time from that
which he called here a Time of Visitation: This was a Time of Grace and Mercy:
now he went to Jerusalem with Peace and Pardon in his Hand, if she would not
bid him defiance. As yet the Jews were not utterly lost, but they might have
been happy if they had not been wanting to themselves; because in the Sentence
against them God had reserved to himself a Power of Revocation: his purpose
concerning them, was not Peremptory as yet: for though Ruin and Excision had
been, time after time, denounced against them, yet the Menaces were not
Absolute; but as his Promises to them were on Condition of their Obedience, so
all his Threatenings against them, were on Condition of their Impenitence, if
they Refused to do the things which did belong unto their Peace.

And the Reason of this is grounded upon that Infinite Goodness and most Tender
Compassion, which is an Inseparable Property of the Divine Nature. His Mercy is
over all his Works; and his Providence is watchful over Men's very Lives and
Fortunes to keep them from being lost, and many times too when Men are upon the
very Brink of the Pit, and in the greatest Extremity of Danger, as his
Providence Kept and Saved This Our Church and Nation, even when the Powder and
the Touch-wood was now ready, and but a few Hours before the Intended Blow: God
does not willingly Afflict nor Grieve the Children of Men; and when he
threatens to do it, it is with an Intent to prevent the doing of it, b^
Correcting and Humbling People by the Fears of the Rod. Judgment comes heavily
from him, and with a Holy kind of Reluctance and Regret; and so it is called
his strange Work, and his strange Act, as many Interpreters Understand that
Place in Is. 28. 21.

This Consideration is of very great Use to us, to make us Steady, Upright and
Courageous even in Times that are full of Difficulties and Horrous. The Bowels
of God are ever Yerning toward us; and if we do not Mis-imploy or squander away
those Blessed Oportunities which he gives us, we need not doubt, but his
Providence will Protect and Preserve us, though the World be never so Impatient
and Mad, and on which Hand soever it be that Danger threatens us, whether it
be from the Popish, or from the Protestant Jesuit. But yet (that we may not
presume too much, or be Consident if we be Careless) we must note, that though
Vengance be called a Strange work, yet it is Gods work nevertheless, when he is
forced to it, and when all other Courses are ineffectual. Mercy has the first
turn, but Justice takes the second, when the forbearance and Goodness of God do
not lead Men to Repentance. Go we to Jerusalem for an Instance: She had her Day
indeed, wherein she might have known the things which did belong unto her
Peace: but by the Tenor of our Saviors Mournful Speech she might Collect, that
she should be Irrecoverably Lost and Undone, if she slept or sported her time
away. O that thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day! intimating
that Another day was at hand, and that Gods day would come next, and that a
time of Vengeance would certainly follow the time of her Visitation.

2. Whence I proceed to the Second Point, That when a Froward and Stubborn
Nation do Obstinately refuse to do the things which belong unto their Peace,
they fall at last under an ineluctable Fate, and Ruin themselves by an
inevitable kind of Nec^ssity, when Judgment is Ripe, and Men are Ripe for it,
then the Purpose of God concerning the Destruction of a City or a Kingdom in
general, is a Definite, Peremptory and Unalterable Purpose; so that when Gods
Time of Striking is fully come, there is no possible way to evade, or ward off
the Blow: This is clear from Gods dealing with those People over whom our
Savior Wept now. Though they had a Day, and a long Day too, yet their Light
utterly vanished at the last; so that when Titus came with his Army against
Jerusalem, all her Time of Grace was spent, and her Hour of Darkness and
Desolation began. God would not then be entreated for the Hardened Jews, nor
was it possible by any means to Reverse the Decree that was gone out against
them. Josephus the Historian was at that time in the City; and when he saw the
Blockade about it, and how impossible it was for the City to Escape,
notwithstanding all the various Methods, and the Restless endeavors which the
foolish Jews used, he was plainly, sensible that they fought against God, and
strove against his Irresistible Will; and therefore would have persuaded them
to Resolutions of Surrendering, being fully convinced, that Jerusalem at that
time was under the same unavoidable Necessity of being taken, as it had been
under before, in the time of Nebuchaddonosor and Antiochus.

The Scripture sometimes speaks of Men's filling up their Sins, and of their
filling up the Measure of their Iniquities. For such is the Mercy of God, that
he does not strike upon every (though Just) provocation; but stays to so how
Far, and to what Degree Men will go on in their Impieties in spite of all
Means and Calls to the contrary: and 'till the Cry of Men's Sins be Great and
General, God is not wont to bring a Curse upon a Nation so, as to Bury it in
Ruin. Thus speaking of the Amorites, how they were to be Extirpated, he pointed
to the Time, when it was to be done, viz. in the Fourth Generation, not till
then; for (said he) the Iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full, Genesis 15. 16.
As King Solomon did set Shimei his Bounds, saying, that if he passed over the
Brook Kidron, he should surely dye, 1 Kings 2. 37. So does the great Governor
of the World deal with Evil Men, especially such Men as Shimei was, Persidious
Wretches and Traitors; he gives them their Rope and Tedder, but of such a
length and scantling; and when they come to their Kidrons, the next step they
take is into Destruction. For God cannot but hate all manner of Wickedness,
especially when it is a Trade; and most of all when it is a Long and an Old
Trade. This is enough to wear out the Patience, even of a Merciful God; and
then Men must come to a full reckoning for a Long Indulgence, and so many Acts
of Grace, which they have Abused.

And would to God we should lay this Consideration to Heart, and for the sake
of this Poor Nation, Transmit it into Practice betimes; and not presume too
much upon the Divine Clemency, as if it would never be Night with us, what use
soever we make of our Day of Peace! It Is true; as the Malice and Designs of our
Enemies, so have the kindnesses of our God, been to us, even from the Days of
Old, and ever since the Dayspring from an high, began to Visit us in the
Morning of the Reformation. Those Acts and Struglings under K. Henry the 8th.
could not keep the Truth of Religion from breaking out. Those Commotions in the
Reign of K. Edward the Sixth, were not able to hinder the Perfecting of the
Work which his Father had begun. Those Victims which were off red in the Marian
Persecution, served only to bring down, as it were, God upon the Earth to be
with his Saints and M^rtyrs in the Flam^s. In the Days of Q. Elizabeth, when in
a manner the whole Papal World, at Home and Abroad, formed their Designs, and
put th^mselves in Arms against One Woman, God stood by this Church so, that no
hidden Conspiracies, nor open Force, proved Effective of those Ends which the
Romanists aimed at, with so much Confidence. The Treason of this Day, in the
time of K. James, what did it do else, but Blow up the Interest of the Popish
Cause, and Kindle such a Zeal against that Sanguinary Religion, as Burns yet
in our Breasts, and we hope will be Warm in the Veins of our Posterity to the
Worlds End? Nay, to go on a little farther to the Reign of that Incomparable
Prince, and in the End, Royal Martyr, K. Charles the First; when a Domestic
Enemy undertook the Quarrel of a Foreign one, and Votes, and Ordinances Roared
Louder than Bulls; though a Cromwell was a more Prosperous Devil than a
Catesbie or a Garnet, and the Consistory was a more Mischievous Legion than the
Conclave; yet God was so Merciful to our Sins, that he suffered not this Nation
to be quite eaten up of the Vermin that it bred; but after a long Egyptian
Plague of Lice made us whole and Sound again, if happily we would be taught by
that Severe Judgment, to Sin no more.

These Great and Continual Deliverances it is necessary for me to mention, and
for us All to be thankful for, that we may set forth the Honor of Gods Name,
and the Glory of his Mercy, which from Age to Age he has so abundantly showed
to this our Sion, as if he had said of it, as he did once of Jerusalem, Here
will I dwell, for I have a Delight therein.

But yet, it is a most Impolitick and Dangerous Course for us, to lean still
upon the Goodness of God, if we be not careful to Answer the great Ends of all
his Longanimity and Compassion. For his Spirit mill not always be striving with
Men: there is a Time when he will give overall further Luctations with an
Incorrigible People. And I Pray God we may not be made a fearful Instance to
demonstrate to the World the Truth of this. But if our Consciences are not
Seared, we cannot but be Sensible how near our Ingratitude has lately brought
us again to the Edge of the Praecipice, and to the very Margin of that Gulf,
which would for ever has Swallowed us all up, had not our God after a most
Providential manner, opened our Eyes, and discovered unto us the Depths of
Satan.

Though our Nation has for some time past been troubled, and Giddy with a
Meagram, yet now we may have our Senses at Command; we may clearly discern the
Wolf under the Lamb-Skin; and if we be not wilfully Blind, we have Light
enough to discover those who are Protestants by Profession, but as very
Ruffians and Regicides by Principle, as the Jesuits. For the difference is not
great, whether a Powder Treason be Acted at the Parliamemt-House, or at
Rumbolds: the Principle upon which both Parties Act, is the same; and it seems,
the Reward was to have been alike too; and Statutes and Monuments were to have
been set up in Honor of Thee, as Garnets Picture was set up at Rome with this
Inscription, Father Garnet, Executed at London for the Catholic Faith; that
is, for Treason; which at last, it seems, is made a part of the True Protestant
Faith also.

That our King and his Kingdoms are not made a Consumptive Sacrifice to the
Diabolical Fury of these Abaddons, is a Felicity which we owe only unto the
Unwearied Goodness of God to his Anointed, and to this Church; both which have
hitherto been the Care, as they both are the Blessing of Heaven.

Yet still I say, it is most unsafe for us to hug our selves with Confidences,
if we be not better Husbands of our Time than the Jews were; and if we do not
study to do the things which belong unto our peace, while it is yet called to
day. This I look upon to be the great end of our late Deliverance, to try
whether one Gracious Visitation more will work any good upon us. Though it be
probable, that as God suffered not long since a dreadful Rebellion to go on,
that thereby he might punish the whole Nation; so he may have suffered This
Horrid Conspiracy to go on, that thereby he might punish the Traitors
themselves: yet we must not interpret the Providence of God this way only; but
we ought to look upon the Judgment to have been sent us to Frighten us all into
our wits, and upon this day of Grace to be given us to this end, that God may
make another Experiment of us, whether we will yet learn Wisdom by this one
Miracle of Mercy more. And truly we shall build our Hopes upon no other than a
shadow, if we do not found them upon a Good Conscience; and we may ^latter our
selves as we please; but if we do not heartily set about the main business, and
do the things which belong unto our peace, all the mercies of God to us will
be utterly lost; and, instead of being the Better, we shall be the Worse for
them; and both the Deliverance of this day, and all other our deliverances
since, will turn to a sad Reckoning, and greatly aggravate our Guilt and Misery
in the day of the Lord.

I have now done with the Explication and Application of those Two Points which
are easily gathered out of our Savior's words in my Text. But since I am
called to this Office, I would not be so Rude with this Venerable Auditory, as
to omit any thing which may be thought to be either Proper for Me to add, or
Profitable for this great Assembly to hear.

And because the Subject I am upon is altogether of a Practical nature, I
humbly conceive it to be both a fitting and an useful course for us all, to
consider a little, what those things are which at this time of day do very
nearly belong unto our peace, and which are apt to Direct and Govern our
Practice rightly, in a matter of such Moment and Importance. For my hopes are,
that the Generality of us* being now very sensible both of our manifold Dangers
and Deliverances, are so well disposed to Hearken to those things which really
tend to the Peace and Happiness of our whole Nation, that 'twill be needful for
me but to Propound, and make mention of them only. I must therefore beg a
little more of your Christian Patience, while I offer a few things, which if we
will but duly observe, the Peace we desire will follow of Course, and 'twill be
Impossible for us to be any other than a most Prosperous and Happy Nation.

1. And, first, that we may begin at the Right end; it necessarily belongs
unto our peace, by constant Prayer, and sincere Repentance, and by the diligent
performance of all offices of Religion, and all manner of Piety, to make our
Peace with Heaven in the first place. For that on which the whole interest of a
Nation does solely depend, is This, to engage the God of peace on its side.
Now, as on the one hand, Irreligion and hardness of heart serves to make God an
Enemy, to sight against a Nation (as Josephus said, That the Sins of the Jews
was that which brought in the Romans upon them; and Titus himself professed, That
he came against Jerusalem by a Divine Impulse:) So on the other hand, Men's
careful performing of their duty to God, in its several parts and branches,
does effectually serve to make him a Friend to fight for a Nation: and when
Men's ways please the Lord, be makes even their enemies to be at peace with
them, Prove. 16. 7.

Here then we are to Begin; to make Religion the Business and Employment of our
Lives. For such is the Horrid Atheism of our Age, such are the Profanations of
God's Holy Name, and so common are all sorts of Immorality and Debauchery, that
instead of wondering at any of our dangers, we may rather wonder that our
Calamities are not Greater and More, and that God's Soul is not yet avenged on
such a generation as this.

2. It makes for our Peace, to be Ingenuous, Upright and Sincere in our
Professions of Religion. Alas! What Peace can we hope for from Them, who make a
show of Piety only to Cheat the World, and to serve a Turn? from Them, who go
to Churches for Sanctuary and Refuge only (as St. Austin says the very Pagans
did when Rome was taken by the Goths under King Alaric?) from Them, who use
Religion as an Vmbrello, to keep their Treasons and Villainies in the Dark, and
to keep themselves from the Heat of the Laws? from Them, who are always
observing the Weather-gage and the Tide, and are for steering, not the Best,
but the Safest course? from Them, that can Temper and Lard their Consciences
so, that you may discern for one Layer of Religion, many Layers of Dishonesty?
It Is all one to these, whether there be Peace, or Consusion: Nay, we have some
Reason to mistrust, that these Men are ready to Exchange (I will not say
Christianity for Turcism, but) a Christian Monarch for an Insidel: I am sure
that they, who have of late been so favorable and kind to the Mahumetan
Interest, go upon such Reasons as would make them wish the Turk the same good
success in England (were he at Our doors) which they have already wished him at
the Gates of Vienna. It puts me in mind of what was said once by Cartwright
(that old Zealous Advocate, for a Perfidious and Turbulent Sect) Foulis, Hist.
page 60.
who speaking of compliance with our Church-rites, affirmed, That we ought
rather to consorm our selves in Orders and Ceremonies to the Fashion of the
Turks, than to the Papists. There is, it seems, such a spirit among them, which
runs, ex Traduce, from the Father to the Child, that they are willing to admit
of a Mahumetan Habit, rather than a Christian Ceremony; and so on, for ought we
know, a Bassa rather than a Lord Mayor, a Mufti rather than a Bishop, and a
True-Protestant Grand Seignior rather than a Christian Prince.

3. Next to our Religion to God, it greatly belongs unto our Peace to be very
careful of our Loyalty to God's Anointed. For our Peace being wrapped up in the
welfare of the King, and in the prosperity of his Government, it is our Wisdoms
to be True to Both; and it is a most Absurd, a well as a most wicked course that
some have taken, who would bear us in hand, that to Traduce and Expose Majesty,
is the way to make His Reign, and our own Lives Happy; and that the Diminution
of his Prerogatives is the way to Support him; and that the destruction of his
Life (another Cursed bout at Lopping) is the ready way to preserve Three
Kingdoms. These are abominable Fallacies put upon the Fickle and Injudicious
Populace; and Men are greatly Deceived if they do not believe, that every ones
Interest is lodged in the King's, and that the way to make our selves happy,
is, to make Him happy in the first place. To obey him Humbly, to Honor him
Conscientiously, and to Love him Affectionately and Heartily, this is at once
our Necessary Duty, and our Best Interest: whereas, to cast off that Reverence
which he has a just Right unto, to Mis-construe his Actions, to Deprave his
Counsels, to Suspect his Integrity, to Defame his Person, to render him cheap,
contemptible and odious, and much rather to Conspire against his Life (as some
very Dainty, Tender-Conscience-Christians have done;) This is a Direct course
to tear our Peace, and Government, and All into pieces, and to lay our
Jerusalem waste without the help of a Foreign Enemy, and though the Romans sit
still, and stir not a Foot or a Finger against us.

4. Farthermore, it would be much for our Peace, were we but Candid and Kind in
our Sentiments of all our Superiors in Church and State, and not Factiously
Suspicious of them. For one Devilish strategem which has been used of Late, to
bring us first to Confusion, and so on to Bloodshed and Ruin, has been This,
to Insinuate to the world, that our Governors are a Cabal of Conspiratours
against our Religion, and against our Laws, and whatsoever else is dearer unto
us than the skin upon our Hearts. This is manifestly the design of that
Cried-up Libel, the Growth of Popery. A Treasonable Pamphlet, concluded to have
been written by a London-Cargillite, who in the late Hellish Conspiracy was a
Common Agitatour: one whose Soul and Principles are of the same Complexion with
the Jesuits; and whose Name consists of just so many syllables and letters,
as Regicide and Massacre. We see now for what end that, and other the like
Pestilent Libels were handed about, namely, to do a piece of Journey-work,
first for One Ahitophel, and then for Six, that the King might be destroyed,
that his Friends might be Butchered, and that the Government might be Subverted
(as They hoped) upon some Colorable Pretenses. Now, if people be thus wickedly
persuaded, that our Governors are unfaithful to our Religion and Liberties,
it cannot be expected that our day of Peace should last long, but the whole
Frame of things in Church and State will be in a Tottering condition, and Fears
and Jealousies (which have ever been the Beginning of our sorrows) will be so
strong and epidemical, that at last we shall inherit the portion of Ishmael,
whose hand was against every man, and every man's hand against him.

5. Again, it would very much conduce to our Peace, if Men were effectually
taught to cease from Reproaching all such of us, as study to lead Quiet and
Peaceable Lives in Godliness and Honesty. Herodotus tells us, that the old
Egyptians were wont to call all that were not of their own Nation, Barbarians:
and thence the Greeks learnt to call All that were not of their own Language,
Barbarians. In like manner, it is Customary now with many rash and evil men
among us, to call All that are not of their Faction, Papists; so that let a man
be a true Friend to the interest of the Crown, and to the Government of the
Church, and to the Solemnities of God's Worship, and (though he does all this
pursuant to those Obligations which are laid upon him by the Precepts of
Christianity, and by the Laws of the Land, yet) presently, forsooth, he is
Branded, and Hated, and Marked out against another day (among the Men Worthy)
for a Papist. But I remember, that when Alexander the Great was moved to have
no Allies but the Greeks, and to deal with all other People as Enemies, his
Answer was, that a Better way would be to distinguish between Men and Men by
their Virtues, or their Vices, rather than by their Character and Denomination,
because he had found many Evil and Scurvy men among the Greeks themselves. And
truly it does become Us to take the same Course and Resolution now. Considering
how abominably Lewd and Vicious, Dishonest and Factious many are that pretend
Religion, and pretend to be the great Patriots of it too, we should do well to
take measures of men, not by the Length of their Tongues, but by the Size of
their Practices (which will infallibly show what every man is) and accordingly
in taking the tale of our Protestant Brethren, we should fling Villains and
Base Fellows aside, and discount for them; for if things go on at this rate,
and men of the most Callous and Brawny Consciences be allowed to pass and
shroud themselves under the common Name of Protestants, we must look upon it to
be no other than an Old Trick, to Ruin the Kingdom once again, and to make
Eighty three as Infamous an Era as Forty eight.

6. There is another thing yet which mightily belongs to our Peace, and it is
Proper for me to mention it to You who are the Worthy Magistrates of this
Honorable City, because you are concerned by your Place and Office to help us
to it, and you will be justly Blamed if you do not Endeavor to help us to it,
and it is This, that we may be at Unity among our selves, as Jerusalem was in
King David's time, when she was most Happy. Jerusalem, said he, is built as a
City that is Compact together; for thither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the
Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks to the Name of the Lord.
Psalm. 122. 3, 4. And at the sixth Verse he exhorted them to pray for a
continuance of Jerusalems Peace, O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; as if all
its Prosperity depended upon that admirable Order, Harmony and Unity in
Religion, which was then within its Walls. For nothing does so Naturally tend
to break the Peace first of the Church, and at last of the State, as Schism and
Faction and Division does. It was the very thing which hastened Jerusalems ruin
at last, and which was the direct Instrument of its Fate, when its day of Peace
was spent: So that had not Titus struck a stroke, the Jews themselves by their
Domestic Feuds and Animosities would have made utter havoc of each other; and
the very Romans under the Walls, though they were Enemies, yet being a People
of Manly and Generous minds, could not but Pity the Monstrous Follies of those
Miserable men. And O that we would know, even we, at least in this our day,
this one thing, which so visibly belongs to our Peace! You cannot but discern
where the Seminaries of Sedition and Rebellion do lie, and who are the
Laborers in them. You cannot but know, that all Schismatical Assemblies are of
themselves a Breach of the Peace: And you have reason to believe, that People
are drawn thither, to be taught by degrees how to be Rioters and Traitors under
pretense of Religion. Is the Nation ready to be on a Flame? It is There that
the Fire it Kindled. Is the King and his Government Bespattered? It Is There
that the Dirt is gathered up. Are the Laws Desied, and Disobedience Pleaded
for? It is Thence that Arguments are fetched. Is the Populace tainted with any
Evil Principle? It is Thence that the Sour Leaven comes. Are any Seditious men
to be Nominated for a Public Office, or any Friendly Jobb to be done for the
Good Did Cause? It Is There that Measures are taken, and Instructions given; and
now the Separation is grounded, not upon point of Conscience to teach men to be
Pious and Honest, but upon point of Policy, to uphold and encourage a Party
against the Government, and the Laws. It Is plain, that as the Jesuit and
Presbyterian came into the World much about the same time, so they have been
Kind to each other like Brethren ever since, and both are Sworn Enemies to this
Monarchy and Church. You have seen enough of their Pranks already, and you must
not expect to see more, unless you will stand still and look on, till you see
your selves and the whole Kingdom Undone.

7. To prevent which, it is necessary for you also, by all possible means to
hinder the Spreading of those Lewd and Antimonarchical Doctrines, which for
these Five years past have made the whole Nation to Shake: As, That the King
has not his Authority immediately from God, (which yet was the Apostles
Doctrine) but that the People are the Fountain of all Authority; that He is
Their Trustee, and that they have Reserved to themselves so much of their
Power, that they can call a Prince to an Account, and dispose of his Crown.
These are Principles, which (to give them that Honor which is due for their
Extraction and Kindred) were first Begotten by the Jesuit (the Father of
Ravilliacs) then Nursed up by Buchanan (the Father of Rebels) and at last
Adopted by the Leviathan (the Father of Atheists.) And it is impossible there
should be any Firm Peace or Lasting Safety, either for Prince or Subject in any
Kingdom where these Doctrines prevail, which have been all along Designed and
Maintained to Ruin Kings, and all Hereditary Monarchies. These Principles made
way for the Treason of This Day. And you may observe, that These were the
Principles which Bradshaw, and the rest of That Cursed Association went upon,
when they Arraigned and Murdered the Best Christian Prince that ever was made
of Flesh and Blood. You may read them throughout that Sad Trial, and we may be
sure that They who of Late have borrowed of the Jesuit the Same Principles,
borrowed them for the Same Purpose; and would have acted upon them such another
Tragedy, had not the God of Peace by his Immediate and Special Providence
rescued our Sovereign, and all of us, out of the Claws of those pretending
Protestants, whose Creed is at St. Omers, whose Consciences are in their
Chests, whose Hearts and Souls are in the Field, and whose Honesty is No where.

Honorable and Beloved, I have humbly offered these things to your
Consideration, not only because your Example is such as Influenceth the whole
Nation, but also because your Loyalty is such, that you have given a Noble
Example to all others, and we doubt not, are still ready to follow after the
things which make for Peace. That we now Sit every man under his own Vine, and
under his own Fig Tree, is a Blessing which we owe, next to the Providence of
God, and the Vigilance of the King, to the Wise and Excellent Conduct of those
Loyal and Heroic Spirits in This City, who have ventured so hardly, and have
waded so resolutely through so many Difficulties and Dangers, to Stop the
Torrent, when a Raging Inundation was just breaking in upon us. This is to your
Eternal Honor, and God forbid that ever you should be robbed of any part of it,
by taking any Wrong and Unhappy Measures, and by Suffering your selves to be
Supplanted or Overborn by those who Envy you the Name of the Loyal Citizens of
London, the Restorers of our Peace. For the maintenance of this Great
Character, no more is needful for you, but to add still to your Fidelity
Diligence, and Courage to your Wisdom. How Crafty are the Children of this
World in Laying their Designs? And how Zealous are they in the Management and
Prosecution of their Interest? So it commonly happens, that the Worst Cause is
Best Sollicated. But as this is Folly in our Private Concernments, so in
Public Tranfactions it is a Crime, especially when the Life of a Prince, and
the very Being of a Church, and the Prosperity of a whole Kingdom, are all in
danger. This I speak the rather, because it has been generally observed, that
some Honest Designs, how Prudently soever Laid, have nevertheless Miscarried,
and proved Vnsuccesful, for want of Diligence and Care, and joint Resolution.
In the Name of God let m^ beseech you to carry a most Watchful Eye upon those
who are Enemies to Peace, remembering what a Reproach was brought upon this
Great City by a predominant Faction in the Last Age, which nothing could ever
have Attoned for, but the Faithfulness and Bravery of some Generous and
Right-worthy Citizens in This Age. Your selves have Exposed, both with Shame
and Indignation, the Villainies that were acted here at Common-Halls and
Common-Councils in the former times; and I have sufficient Authority of your
own to observe briefly unto you, some of those Horrid Practices which a
Factious Party then used here, First to Destroy one Prince, and then to Keep
out another. The Late Loyal Act of Common Council has given us to Understand
out of the City-Records, that 'twas here that a Rebellion was promoted in Forty
One: That here great Treasures of Money and Plate were expended in carrying the
Rebellion on in Forty Two: That here New Sums and Forces against the King were
raised in Forty Three: That here Royalists were Punished, and their Estates
taken away in Forty Four: That here a Treasonable Oath and Covenant was
Administered in Forty Five: That here a Thanksgiving was appointed for several
Victories over the King in Forty Six: That here Resolutions were taken to stand
and fall with a Rebellious House of Commons in Forty Seven: That here a
Petition was Voted for Justice upon all Capital Actors in the War, from the
Highest to the Lowest (and but a few Days before the King was Murdered) in
Forty Eight: That here a Petition was drawn for Altering the Laws in Forty
Nine: That here a Solemn Fast was held for the good Success of a Rebel-Army in
Fifty: That here 'twas Resolved to Adventure Lives and Estates against the King
of Scotland in Fifty One: That here a Public Thanksgiving was Celebrated for
the Defeat of the King and his Forces at Worcester in Fifty Two: That here
Cromwell the Usurper was Carest and Treated in Fifty Three: That here Thanks
were given him for his great Care of the Peace in Fifty Four: That here Moneys
were issued out for a Disloyal Militia in Fifty Five and Fifty Six: That here
Subjection to the Usurper was Acknowledged in Fifty Seven: That here his Death
was Condoled, and his Successor Congratulated in Fifty Eight: And that here the
Parliament (so called) the Council of State, and the Officers of the Army were
all Publicly and Splendidly entertained at the Cities Charge in Fifty Nine.
Such a Chargeable and Costly Rebellion was here for Eighteen years together,
that it is no wonder if your Public Bank has been robbed, not of its Treasure
only, but in a manner of the very Bags.

Beloved, I am apt to deal Plainly with All men; and if I deal so with You now,
it is not with any the least Design either to Vpbraid this Honorable Assembly,
or to Reflect upon the Memory of your Loyal and True-Hearted Predecessors; but
that you may see what great Reasons you have for your Best endeavors to follow
the things which make for Peace, and to put an Early stop to the Growth of a
Faction, who when they forsake their Duty, forsake all Modesty and good
Manners, and by ceasing to be Governed become the most Imperious and Heady
Governors, the most Insolent and Outrageous Villains in the World. Every Good
man ought to be very Careful, at least in this our day, that he do not Herd or
Concur with those Spirits, which but the other day (as it were) to shut out all
Arbitrary Power brought it in, and to prevent Popery laid aside all True
Religion, and the Fear of God.

But this Care especially belongs unto You, the Honorable Governors of this
Great Body, and your Timely Zeal for the Interest of the King, of the Church
and of the whole Nation, will not only be Eff^ctual to the Establishment of
such a Peace, as (by the Blessing of God) will be transmitted to Posterity; but
'twill also render your Names Great and Precious, for being the Happy
Instruments to Recover the Ancient Honor of this Renowned City. The Story is
well known of Tylers Formidable Rebellion, who had the Confidence to say (in
the Reign of King Richard the Second) that there should be no Law in England
but what came out of his Mouth. His Conspiracy was designed to destroy the Sea
Slow and Speed in R^^. 2.
King, the Nobles, the Ministers of State, and the whole Body of the Clergy,
saving the Begging Friars, who had nothing to Lose. That Truly Honorable
Person, Sir William Walworth, was the Lord Mayor of London that year; and that
Excellent Man, with the help of some of his Brethren, ventured so Resolutely,
that the Rebellion failed of Success. For being himself in (...) of danger, he
Cried out, Ye good Citizens, help your King that is to be Murdered, and
succor Me your Mayor; or if you will not succor Me, yet leave not your King
destitute: This so animated the Loyal Citizens, that in a very short space Sir
William brought the Traytor's head to the King upon the point of his Sword. To
Reward this great Service, the King gave Honors and Estates to the Mayor, and
his faithful Brethren; and to set a particular Mark of his Kindness upon the
whole City, and to perpetuate the Honor of that day, and the Memory of such
Signal Loyalty, some Historians tell us, that the King ordered the Sword to be
put in the Dexter Canton of the City-Arms.

Here is a Noble Pattern of Fidelity and Fortitude for every Honest Magistrate
to follow in These days; for who is not convinced of the Truth of a Conspiracy
now? Though, God be Blessed, we have not yet the Alarm in our Streets, yet we
have many Tylers that are ready to destroy our Laws, and to cut our Throats,
and many Straws too (if you will forgive the Expression) that are ready to
Stuff our Skins also; but we have our Walworths too; and as our Comfort is,
that we are now Blessed with another Walworth, so our Wishes are, that men of
such Zeal, Conduct, and True Gallantry, may bear the Sword here to the Worlds
end.

When Treasons are Hatched against a most Gracious Prince, and the Common Peace
is in danger, it is Happy that the Sword is in the hands of Such, as will not
turn the point of it toward the bowels of that Authority which gives it.

When Religion is made the Visor of a Faction, it is Happy that the Magistrate
is such, as will not be favorable to those who go to School to the Atheist,
and Truck with the Jesuit and the Devil himself, to make Spoil of the best
Constituted Government in the whole World.

When this poor distressed Church (the Envy of Rome, and the Glory of all
Christendom) is in danger of being torn in pieces by the Lion on This hand, and
the Bear on That, it is Happy for us that the Magistrate is such as will think
himself obliged for Conscience, and for Gods sake, to Rescue the Spouse of
Christ from the Jaws of the One, and from the Paws of the Other.

And things being thus well provided, it is the part of every one of us, to
Study to be Quiet, and to do his own Business, and so in well-doing to commit
our selves into the hands of that good God whose Providence cares for us All.
It is by means of that Good Providence that we are Assembled this day to praise
his Name for our Wonderful Deliverances hitherto, and if we our selves be but
careful to Mind the things which belong unto our Peace, we need not doubt but
the same Providence will deliver us still, though Extremity of danger should
threaten us yet once again. For commonly Gods time of stepping in between Men
and Ruin is then when Dangers are come to that Hedd and Crisis, that without
present help from above there is no Visible way of Escaping. Thus the
Providence of God interposed on This day, when the Bloodthirsty Papists had
laid their Designs so Closely, so Opportunely, and so Luckily, (as They
thought) even beyond their First Hopes, so that within the space of a few hours
the Fire was to be Laid, and the King, the Nobles, and the Flower of the whole
Nation, were all to be blown up, Then, and in that Nick and Critical Juncture,
the Good Providence of God brought to light the hidden Works of Darkness, and
in the Twinkling of an eye delivered his poor Church, that was just Dropping
into a Chaos.

We our Selves have Lately seen Two such other Instances of God's Providence;
Instances, to which perhaps no Late Age, no Modern History can show us a
Parallel. The Stupendous Victory in Germany over the Professed Enemy of the Holy
Jesus, though Men read it as News, yet we may well look upon it as a Signal
Instance of God's wonderful Providence over so many miserable Souls, which were
reduced to that condition, that in all Human probability they could not have
held out against the next assault. In those their Last straights, God himself
made bare his Holy Arm, and stretched it out against the Blasphemous Insidel,
so that almost such another overthrow was seen There, as was in the Camp of the
Blasphemous Sennacherih, when there fell an Hundred Fourscore and Five
Thousand, as you read 2 Kings 19.

To come nearer home, to a Late Miraculous Deliverance wherein we our Selves
are so greatly concerned: The Fire at Newmarket, what was it, but one of the
most Seasonable mercies, that God ever Visited this Poor Nation with? Had not
Flames and Smoke been employed to Drive the Anointed of God home just at that
juncture, and but a very little time before the Instruments of Death were
planted against him (Lord! I tremble but to think of it) the Breath of our
nostrils had been snatched away long ago, and Three Kingdoms would have
presently layn weltring in Blood and Gore. The very Finger of God was plainly
seen in this; and 'twas the immediate Providence of God that has saved us All;
yet so, as by Fire.

This I have mentioned, not only because 'twas necessary for me to take notice
of the Late miraculous Deliverance, without which, God knows, we should not
have had the Happiness of meeting together now, to Commemorate the Deliverance
of this Day; but also because the Consideration thereof is a very Proper and a
very Strong Argument to Encourage us to depend still upon God's good
Providence; and especially if we be mindful of the Main thing, and Labor to do
the things which at this Critical time do belong unto our Peace.

I have no more to add, but my hearty Prayers to God of Order and Peace, that
as he has preserved this Nation from the Ravenage of Popery and Faction
hitherto; so he would Preserve it still, and Pardon all our Shameful and
Monstrous Ingratitude: That he would Bless our Sovereign (that has all along
been as a Signet upon his right Hand) with a Long, Prosperous and Peaceable
Reign over us. That he would Bless and Support our Government which is such a
great Blessing to Us, that no People under Heaven are so Happy as We, if we did
but see and value our own Happiness. That he would Bless our Churhc, which is
under God, our Safeguard and Bullwark against that Foreign Enemy which we are
all afraid of. And that he would Bless us all in turning us all away from our
Iniquities, and by opening our Eyes that we may see the things which belong
unto our Peace, before they be hid from us. All which mercies, God Almighty
grant unto us for Christ Jesus his sake, to whom with the Father and Holy
Ghost, be all Honor, Praise and Adoration.

Amen.
FINIS.

