I^^^^matur.

(...), R.P.D. (...) Land. a (...)

A Practical Discourse CONCERNING God's Love TO MANKIND.

WRITTEN For the Satisfaction of some Scrupulous Persons.

By EDWARD PELLING, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to their Majesty's, and Rector
of Petworth in Sussex.

LONDON,

Printed by W. H. for W. Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1694.

bookplate

An Advertisement TO THE READER.
THough the Doctrine of Gods Decrees, if rightly understood (as those Decrees
are set forth in the Scripture, with equal Conditions, and the most precious
Promises annexed unto them;) though, I say, the right Notion of them be of great
Use, and unspeakable Comfort to such as lead Godly, Righteous and Sober Lives,
yet Mistakes about them are of very dangerous consequence, especially when
those Errors rise so high, as to render the ever Blessed God, a Stern,
Arbitrary, and Cruel Being, that has Consigned the far greatest part of
Mankind to Eternal Torments, merely of his own absolute Purpose and Pleasure.
This naturally serves, not only to discourage People from the Practice of
Virtue and Holiness, and to make them Careless, whether they do well or ill
(which alone is enough to prove the Falsehood of such Opinion) but moreover to
fill their Minds with Horror, and by degrees to cast them into the very Gulf
of Desperation, unless they can screw up their Imaginations to such a lofly
Pitch, as to believe themselves to be absolutely Elected unto Salvation, which
yet is to contradict their own Principles, by pretending to understand a
Decree, which they confess to be Secret.

It is therefore a most Necessary work of Charity, especially where ones
Conscience is burdened with a Cure, to teach People such open, and such
encouraging Truths, as these, That the Lord is Good to All, and his tender
Mercies over all his Works, Psalm. 145. 9. That God is no Respecter of Persons;
but in every Nation, he that fears him and works Righteousness, is accepted
with him, Act. 10. 34, 35. That he is not willing, that any should Perish, but
that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. And that their Labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

Nor are such Instructions ever so seasonable, as when Peoples Minds are disq
uieted and gall d with frightful appr ehensions of God, as if he had put the
generality of the World, under a fatal necessity of Eternal Damnation; and that
too to show his Power, and without Consideration had of their Actual
Enormities. If the Case of so many Millions of Men comparatively Innocent, be
so Miserable and Desperate, such as Reflect upon the many Sins and C mes they
have in the Course of their Lives committed, cannot well choose but be possessed
with such sad and dismal Thoughts, as directly tend to make them sink under the
pressure of them, and to throw away all hopes of Mercy; and what a wretched
Condition such Souls are in, none can tell but those that feel it, nor indeed
are they themselves able to express it sufficiently.

To prevent this intolerable Mischief, is the Design of this following
Discourse; which was occasioned first by a long Paper, that in December last,
came to my Hands from a very Sober, Worthy Person in this Town, though then
unknown to me. The Substance of it in short was this, That He, and diverse
others of the Parish, had somewhere heard such bold Doctrines concerning God's
Decrees, as seemed utterly Repugnant to the Divine Goodness, Mercy,
Righteousness, and Truth: That their Minds were very much discomposed and
troubled upon it, and therefore did earnestly desire me out of tenderness to
their Souls, speedily to Preach upon some Subject, that might ease their Minds,
and give them satisfaction.

Having Read and Considered this serious Letter to me, I could not but hold my
Self Obliged by the Duty of my Place, and in common Charity and Justice to
those, whom the Providence of God has committed to my Care, to do something,
that might tend toward the removing of those Scruples and Anxieties, which I
perceived did disturb and ruffle diverse of them. Such inward discomposures are
of dangerous Consequence, if not duly regarded in time; and though Men who
understand the Business of a Pulpit, know very well, that generally it is no
fit Place for Controversies; yet it must be acknowledged, that special Emergent
Occasions do sometimes make it necessary for us to handle Points which People
doubt of; especially if those doubts become an affliction, and if the Points do
nearly concern the Substantials of Religion; and if the clearing of them makes
way for Plain and Practical things, which we should always have an Eye upon, as
being much better, because more useful, in order to the great ends of
Christianity of which kind is that weighty Point in Hand. For as long as God is
believed to be truly loving unto us all, and Christ is looked upon as a common
and conditional Savior, all thinking Men will find great necessity and
encouragements for them to live Godly, Righteously and Soberly; according to
Christ's Laws: But if instead of this, People think themselves sure of
Salvation; whatever the Quality of their Lives and Actions be, and learn the
Art of relying upon particular absolute Decrees; they must in the Consequence
believe, the Entire Practice of Christian Morality, to be an unnecessary
matter: Talk while you will of the Essential Duties of Religion, God and Man
must stand to their Courtesy for them; because they think there is behind the
Curtain an Absolute and Irresistible Decree, that is on their side, and secures
them from all Danger of Eternal Perdition.

Besides it is Notorious, that among those who have believed the Rigid Doctrine
of Fatality, and could not work themselves into such a favorable and confident
Persuasion of their Safety as others have done; but have Reflected upon their
condition with a Melancholy Eye, as if they were under God's absolute
Displeasure and Sentence: Diverse have Proceeded to final Desperation, and by
their own Hands have fallen most sad Sacrifices to their Opinion; which would
not have proved so mischievous, had it been Rectified in time.

These single Considerations relating to the great Interest of Religion, and to
the Peace and Welfare of People, did very strongly induce me to Answer in some
measure, the repeated importunities I found in the Letter I Speak of.

And yet there was something else in it which did much affect me, though for some
Days, I knew not who was the Author; yet by the general Air of it, I perceived
that the Person who Writ it, had a very Religious Sense and Esteem of God. For
one thing which seemed to disquiet him in a great measure was, how to Reconcile
the Doctrine of the supposed absolute Decrees with the Honor of God;
especially with those glorious Attributes, his-Veracity, Righteousness,
Goodness, etc. which shine so very bright in the Holy Scripture, and in his
Works which render him a Being Transcendently adorable and lovely. This was to
me an Argument of great Piety and goodness of Mind in the Author, accompanied
with a Serious Admiration and Affection toward the Divine Majesty. And when I
came to understand who it was, and what his Circumstances were, I had great
reasons to believe, that the earnest request to me, proceeded from no other
principle, but a Religious and well governed Zeal for God's Glory.

I could not but be exceeding glad to find one of his Age and Condition, to
entertain such worthy Notions of his Creator, and to be so concerned for his
Honor, because the like Instances are not common, especially in some Places;
and after all this, to have slighted a request, which I believed, could come
from nothing, but a Thoughtful Mind, and a True Principle of Piety, would have
been an Omission Inexcusable.

Upon these Motives, I resolved to Compose a little Discourse concerning this
Matter, though one of another Nature was just then under my Hand; and for my
Subject, I pitched upon those Words in St. Joh. 3. 16. a place of Scripture,
which I thought was the more proper to be considered, because the pressing of
that single Text, and the Reasoning out of it at the Famous Synod of Dort, had
such a wonderful Effect upon our Learned Mr. Hales, that it quite changed his
Judgment as to some Opinions, which he carried with him when he went thither,
as that Excellent Person Mr. Farindon assures us, in his Letter prefixed to Mr.
Hales his Golden Remains.

One of my mean Abilities, and ordinary Station, cannot hope to make such Happy
and Useful Impressions, as were so Providentially made upon the Mind of that
great Man. My business lies in a Country Parish, where Nice and Scholastical
disputations would be lost, even among those, who are more Intelligent, and
more Inquisitive into matters of Speculation, than others have Time to be. And
therefore my purpose was, to digest what I had to say, into such a plain Method
and Form, as I conceived might be most for the Edification of People, whose
Education cannot furnish them with Extraordinary and Eminent capacities;
especially as to this sort of Knowledge.

In order to it, I thought it best to omit a great many things, which are
Collaterally incident to this Copious Subject, and of an Abstruse Nature, and
to say no more than what was just Necessary, that I might contract all within
as Narrow a Compass, as 'twas possible for me. And that People might not run
away with Notions only (as many are very apt to do, quite Forgetting, or
over-looking the Principal business) I endeavored to render the whole
Discourse the more Useful, by making it as Practical as the subject Matter
would allow.

And first I did not intend this thing should have gone any further than my own
Pulpit, where I was desired to Satisfy some Scrupulous Persons; and that being
done, I was Satisfied my Self, in having answered my Duty.

But diverse of my Parishioners having requested, that the Discourse might be
made Public, in hopes that it may have the same good Effect upon others,
which, They say it had on Them; I am the more willing to comply, because some
Heady People in these Parts, who are very fond of Rigid Principles, and seem to
value themselves upon them, have (as I am credibly told) scattered abroad many
false Representations of the whole thing.

In short, if what is here done, may be of good Use to any one Person in the
World, I shall count my Labor very well bestowed.

Edw. Pelling.
Petworth, Feb. the 1st. 1693/4.
John III. 16. For God so Loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.
CHAP. I. The Interpretation of our Savior's words, John 3. 16. What is meant
by the World; and what by God's Love to the World.
THESE are our Blessed Savior's own words, delivered in as Express and
Positive a manner, as is possible for any Tongue to speak; and therefore Men
should take all imaginable care, that they do not either Wrest, or Mistake the
true sense of them.

THEY contain Two things which are most observable in them. 1. The great
Principle, or Inward Cause that moved God to send his Son in the Flesh; it was
out of pure Love to the World. 2. The great End which he proposed and designed
thereby; it was, That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting Life.

FOR our more profitable Instruction out of this portion of Scripture, Three
things are necessary to be considered in their order:

First, What is the true meaning of our Savior's words in this place.

Secondly, The Article which they yield us:

Thirdly, And Lastly, What Practical Inferences may be gathered from the whole.

1. FIRST, That we may rightly understand our Savior's meaning, these two
things are to be explained.

1. FIRST, Who are here meant by the World.

2. SECONDLY, In what sense God is said to have loved the World, antecedently
to the coming of Christ, and while the World yet lay in a state of sin and
wickedness.

1. SOME understand, by the World, only a small part of the World; a few
People whom they suppose to have been ordained to Salvation by God's absolute
will, and peremptory pleasure, without any consideration had of their Faith and
Repentance; the little World of the Elect, as those Men are wont to express it.
But this is a very False and Groundless notion; for the word is no where used
in this sense in all the New Testament. It never signifies the Vessels of
Election only, but is always taken in a Bad sense; for the Children of wrath;
for the Evil World, as the expression is, Gal. 1. 4. for the World of the
ungodly, as it is 1 Pet. 2. 5. Usually the word denotes all sinful Men together
in a Lump; and sometimes it means the very worst part of them. So said Christ
to his Disciples, John 15. 18. If the World hate you, ye know that it hated me
before it hated you: there it signifies the malicious Adversaries of the Lord
Jesus and his Religion. And so John 17. 9. I pray not for the World: there it
signifies, Impenitent and Obstinate Infidels. So 1 Co^. 2. 12. We have
received, not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God: there it
signifies Men of a wicked and Ungodly Temper. Again, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in
Christ reconciling the World to himself: there it signifies the Enemies of the
ever blessed Being. Again, 1 John 5. 19. The whole World lies in wickedness:
there it signifies abominable People, whose minds are set upon that which is
evil, and that continually. Again, John 14. 17. Christ says, The World cannot
receive the Spirit of Truth: there it signifies the Oppugners of Christianity.
And again, St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. 32. When we are judged, we are chastened
of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World: there it signifies
the Sons of Perdition. This fearful account cannot possibly be given of God's
Elect; it is utterly inconsistent with the notion and state of all such;
because the Chosen ones of God are those, and only those, who show the truth
and vigor of their Faith, by all holy conversation and godliness. Though they
are in the World, yet in the Scripture-sence, they are not of the World, but
chosen out of the World, as our Savior said of his first Disciples, John 15.
19. And for this reason the World hates them, because they are not of the
World, even as Christ himself was not of the World, John 17. 14. Therefore the
World knows them not, because it knows not God, whose Sons they are, 1
John. 3. 1.

WHEN Men meddle with points of Divinity, and especially with such a Tender and
Weighty Point as this is, touching God's Love to Mankind, they should very
carefully observe what words really mean in the Scripture style, and should
form their Notions of things accordingly; not daring to fix upon the great Rule
of our Faith a construction of their own, and that too quite contrary to the
Sense of the Holy Spirit, as some have taken the Confidence to do; whether out
of Ignorance, or out of Design, or out of Both, God knows. Now, not to urge
any more places of Scripture to this purpose, those already cited are enough to
show, that in the Sacred Dialect, the World is taken commonly in the softer
sense, for Mankind in general; and many times in a severe construction; for
those of them who are in the most desperate condition, the more wretched,
sinful, and provoking part of mankind: but we never find it used to signify a
Peculiar People, Approved of God, Acceptable to him, or so in Favor with him,
as to be elected by him unto Everlasting Glory. And should these places of
Scripture be applied to those who are supposed to be so elected, such
consequences would necessarily follow, as to all Rational and Sober men, would
appear not only very Absurd, but very Impious and Horrible also.

To come close then to the matter in hand: When our Savior said, God so loved
the World, etc. his plain meaning was, that God's sending his only begotten
Son into the World, was an Act of his Love to the whole Race of Adam; to all
men, without any exception; not only to the Jews, but to the sinful Gentiles
also; to all and singular that did, or should live upon the face, of the whole
Earth; nay, an act of Love even to those who are the Ungodliest of the World,
the most Corrupt People, the Greatest Sinners, that are most of all under God's
Wrath and Displeasure.

2. SOME may be ready to enquire here, How the God of Purity can be said to
Love People that are in such a sad and wretched state? why, this is the Second
thing I am to consider; and, before I proceed to the Explication thereof, I
must entreat you to observe, that Love and Anger are not at all Inconsistent.
Love and Hatred indeed are opposite affections; but Love and Displeasure may go
together; and very often there is Kindness, even where there is Indignation. As
frail and infirm Beings as we our selves are, we find in our own Nature a
mixture of these Dispositions; Thus, a Magistrate is angry with a Malefactor,
though at the same time he Pitieth him. A Father is Incensed against an
Undutiful Child, though at the same time he Loves him, and for that reason
Corrects, because he bears a Tender and Entire Affection toward him. One Man
is highly Displeased with another, and reckons him an Enemy, though at the same
time he is Benevolently affected to him, as a Neighbor and a Christian, and is
ready to do him any Charitable Offices, as one for whom the Lord Jesus was
pleased to Die: And if these several Affections thus meet in us, though our
Natures are Vitiated and Corrupt, How can it seem incredible, that at the same
time Displeasure and Love should come from that Divine Being, who is absolutely
Perfect, transcendently Righteous, Infinitely, Necessarily, and Inexhaustibly
Good and Merciful? This being premised, that I may now proceed Distinctly and
Clearly upon this Subject; I must desire you again to observe that there is a
Twofold Love to be considered here; or rather, a Twofold Degree of Love; and
of each of these we find in our selves a daily Sense and Experiment. 1. First,
There is in our Nature, especially when it is smoothed and softened by Religion,
an inclination to do a Man good, considered under the notion of a Man; though
his actions toward us be such, that he deserves not thereby any kindness at
our hands, but rather the contrary. This Divines are wont to call, The Love of
Benevolence; a Love that we bear toward all Mankind for common Humanity sake;
and an affection which the Laws of Christ require us to have even for our
bitterest and most implacable Enemies. How provoking soever their Practices be,
Works of Mercy and Charity are due to their Nature and Persons; so that we must
bless them that curse us, do good to them that hate us, and pray for them that
despitefully use us and persecute us, Matthew. 5. 44. 2. Secondly, We feel in our
Souls an earnest and vehement desire of doing all the Kindest Offices we can
possibly to those that Love us again, and that endeavor to oblige, gratify,
and serve us: a very Great and Tender affection, grounded on their Personal
Qualities, and Merits, over and above that which they call for, on the account
of Common Nature; and this is usually styled, A Love of Friendship, or
Complacency. Now these Two Sorts, or Degrees of Affection, are ascribed unto
God, I mean, abstracting those Passions and Perturbations of Mind, which are
ever incident to us, by reason of the frailty and weakness of our Constitution.
That Particular, and most Intense Love, whereof there is some Analogy and
Resemblance in the Divine Being, he expresses only to those that are very
Dear to him, those that Love him, that Serve him with all their Soul, that Keep
his Commandments, and that acquire that Noble Character of being his Friends;
as Abraham was called the Friend of God, James 2. 23. And the Blessed Jesus
said to his Disciples, Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you,
John 15. 14. Hence it was, that he told them, That he Loved them, and that the
Father himself Loved them, meaning, with a more Peculiar and Ardent Assection:
and he told them this Reason for it too, because they Loved him, and Believed
that he came out from God, John 16. 27. For the same reason St. Paul says,
Ephesians. 5. 25. That Christ Loved the Church; that is, those whose hearts are
purified by Faith, and whose consciences are purged from all dead Works, to
serve the Living God. Those Gracious Dispositions, and moral Perfections,
which, by the operation of the Holy Spirit, are formed in all Honest, Humble,
and Obedient hearts, are the only ground of that Love I now speak of, that
Great and Abundant Kindness which God extends to such as perfect holiness in
the fear of God; because such only are Capable of his Divine and Special
Communications; such only are in a fit condition to Receive them; such only
are meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

BUT yet there is a Love, which God extends unto others also; a Love of
Benevolence; a Sincere, True, and Unfeigned Affection, which he bears even to
the Children of Disobedience, although it be not so Extensive and Unmeasurable
as that he expresses to the Children of Light. He is good, and does good unto
every Man; offers happiness unto the very worst of men; desires them to accept
of his offers; intends to make them happy upon their hearty acceptance; and
does all things on his part, which are necessary and proper for a merciful God,
a Wise and Holy Lawgiver to do for Reasonable and voluntary Agents; so that if
they perish after all, their destruction is of themselves. O that my People had
hearkened unto me! that Israel had walked in my ways, Psalm. 81. 13. Have I any
pleasure at all that the wicked should die, says the Lord God? Ezekiel. 18. 23.
As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked turn from his evil way and live: Turn ye, turn ye, from
your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel, Ezekiel. 33. 11. He will
have all Men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.
4. He is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. These few places of Scripture
speak so positively and plainly, that unless men will have the Front to
Question the Veracity of God (which is one of his Essential Attributes,
necessarily, and naturally included in the Notion of a Deity) they must needs
acknowledge, that God loves all mankind; and every one; though he be the most
Irreligious and Profligate amongst them. He has for all a Love of Benevolence,
whereby he wishes every ones Good, especially his everlasting Happiness. I
shall hereafter show you, how it comes to pass, that God's wishes have not
their due effect: at present my business is to explain the Notion of the Divine
Philanthropy; and to make it evident to such as are Teachable, that more or
less the God of Mercy and Compassion Loves us all, without Partiality or
Discrimination. Though his Affections are of a Scantier Measure, and a Lower
Degree to some, who harden their own hearts, than they are to others, whose
Persuasions and ways please the Lord; yet to all it is a Sincere Affection,
Love Unfeigned, Inexpressible, Unconceivable.

WHEN therefore our Blessed Savior said, God so loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son; his meaning was, that though of Adam's Posterity, some
that held the Truth, held it in Unrighteousness; others had given themselves up
to Lewdness and direct Apostasy; and all were so Corrupt before God, that
Divine Vengeance might justly have passed upon all; yet all their Impieties and
Provocations notwithstanding, God had so great a Love for all, that of his mere
Grace and Goodness he determined to do whatsoever was Needful for, and Becoming
him to act, that he might Reclaim them, and bring them into the ways of
Righteousness and Peace; and for that end gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.

CHAP. II. The Point to be insisted on; ( viz) God's unfeigned Love to all
Mankind. Proved, First, from the Command touching the Universal Promulgation of
the Gospel.
AND now the Point which arises hence, is this, That the Son of God's coming
into the World, was a strong Argument, and an evident Expression of God's
sincere and boundless Affection to all Mankind.

FOR the clearing of this important Article, there are Two things for me to
insist upon.

First, The Amplitude of that Commission which was given the Apostles and their
Successors, for the Promulgation of the Gospel to all the World.

Secondly, The Extensive Merit of our Holy Redeemer's Death.

1. FIRST, The Amplitude of that Commission which was given the Apostles and
their Successors, for the Promulgation of the Gospel. The Directions given them
when the Lord was ready to depart from them, according to St. Matthew's
Account, runs thus, Go ye and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all
things, whatsoever I have Commanded you: And lo I am with you always, even
unto the end of the World, Math. 28. 19, 20. Though by all Nations here may be
meant Primarily all the Tribes of Israel, and Christ's Purpose might be, that
the Apostles should begin their Preaching at Jerusalem, and thence Proceed to
the Jews that were dispersed among the Heathen; yet no Nation under Heaven was
to be Excluded; but from Age to Age, and from one Nation to another the Tidings
of Peace were to be carried over all the Earth, until the Consummation of all
things. Therefore not the Apostles only, but also their Successors for ever
were intended in this Commission, because the Lord's Spiritual Presence and
Assistance was to be not for the Apostles time only, but Perpetual, to the very
End of the World. Which shows the Universality of the Divine Grace, and that
the Gospel was to be Preached every where before the close of all things, that
at the Day of final Account, God may Judge the whole World by Jesus Christ in
Righteousness; according as they have obeyed or disobeyed the Gospel sent unto
them. Hence the Account St. Mark gives is this, Go ye into all the World, and
Preach the Gospel to every Creature, Mark 16. 15. to show, that God's intention
was, that no People, no not in the Heathen part of the World, should be passed
by, But that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be Preached in Christ's
Name, among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, as St. Luke has it, Luke 24.
47. Accordingly the Apostles went forth and Preached every where, says St.
Mark; meaning, to all People and Nations within their reach; because they were
to be Witnesses unto Christ, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in all
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the Earth, says St. Luke Act. 1. 8.
And because God Commanded all Men every where to Repent, says St. Paul, Act.
17. 30. And were it needful for me to Collect Observations to this purpose, out
of the Ancient Writers of the Christian Church, I could show you particularly,
when the Apostles parted Solemnly from one another to Execute their Redeemer's
Commission; how they took their particular Provinces, and went every one into
the Country that was assigned him; and how those Apostolical Persons. who were
engaged in the same weighty Employment; some in the Apostles Days, and many
after, all Traveled into distant places and Territories, that the sound of the
Gospel might go forth into all Lands, and that there might be no People,
Nation, or Language, but the good News of it should be heard among them. Indeed
it was the great End, for which the Miraculous Gift of Tongues was poured out
on the Day of Pentecost, and continued for several Years after; that no means
of instructing People in any Nation might be wanting any where.

NOW whence could all this come, but from the Astonishing and Tender Love of
God, to a miserable and forlorn World; and to every Generation of Men that then
was, or should be to the World's End? And what could be the good God's design
in all this, but that every one should come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and
so be Converted and Live? It was the End of John the Baptist's Preaching, to
give Knowledge of Salvation to his People, for the Remission of their Sins,
through the Tender Mercy of God, whereby the Dayspring from on high visited
them; to give Light to them that sat in Darkness, and the shadow of Death and
to guide their Feet into the Ways of Peace, Luke 1. 78, 79. The same was the
end of our Savior's Preaching, that all People might come unto him, and by him
might have Life; because God sent not his Son into the World, to Condemn the
World; but that the World through him might be Saved, Jo. 3. 17. And the very
same was the end of the Holy Apostles and their Successors Preaching, that they
might Save that which was Lost, and Save all to the uttermost; Because God's
desire was to Bless them, in turning away every one of them from their
Iniquities, Act. 3. 26. And because He Commanded all Men every where to Repent,
Act. 17. 30.

AFTER all this, so expressly and plainly told us in the Holy Scripture, for Men
to say (as some have had the great Confidence to Publish to the World) That God
has Absolutely, and Irrevocably consigned the greater part of Mankind to
Eternal Torments; that he sends his Word to them, that they may be yet more
Deaf; that he sets up a Light before them, that they may be the more Blind;
that he gives them Remedies, that they may refuse to be Healed; that he knocks
at their Hearts, that they may deny him Entrance; and this, that in the end,
they may be all Damned, and rendered Inexcusable. These and many other the like
bold Assertions, do fix such a foul Imputation upon the Divine Being, and are
such an horrible Reproach to his most Glorious Attributes (especially his
Goodness, Holiness, Mercy, Justice and Truth) as I almost Tremble but to think
of, and can never Wonder sufficiently, how it could enter into the Heads and
Hearts of any Christians, to Conceive such Abominable and Blasphemous Notions
of God, Blessed for ever more.

JUSTIN MARTYR tells us of some Princes, who have been so Salvage, that least
Axes and Gibbets should be Idle, they have laid Traps and Snares in Men's Way,
on purpose to sport and divert themselves with their Destruction. And among
diverse base things which have been told of Tiberius the Emperor of Rome, two
barbarous Stories fall here into my Memory. One was, That having a vehement
Desire to hang some Virgins (because the Roman Government had that Honor for
Chastity, that they would not suffer Virgins to die after that Shameful manner)
he Ordered the Common Executioner first to Corrupt and Deflow'r them, that then
he might have them Strangled with a Non-Obstante to the Laws. The other Story
is, That intending to Kill both the Sons of Germanicus, he used all possible
means of Provoking them to Defame him, that he might have some Color and
Pretense for his Villainous Resolution.

MANY such Scandalous Instances there have been of Men, who have so far put off
all Humanity, as to thirst for Blood, and to delight in Acts of Cruelty and
Oppression. But they have been abhorred as so many Botches, and plague Sores
among Mankind: And for Men who are called by the Name of Christ, to represent
that most Perfect Being, the Father of Spirits, and the great Lover of all our
Souls so, as if he used Arts to draw his Poor Creatures into Eternal Perdition,
and then think to excuse it by a fulsome Distinction between God's Secret (as
contrary to one another) and his Revealed Will. This is such Vileness and
Blasphemy, as I must beg all good Peoples Pardon for Offending their Ears by
mentioning it only. Indeed it is said that God gives some a Spirit of Slumber;
Eyes that they should not See, and Ears that they should not Hear. But these,
and the like Expressions, though at the first hearing they sound harsh, yet
they do not relate to any Antecedent Decree or Desire, or Work of God; but are
only Declarative of the Event which sometimes falls out accidentally, by the
just Judgment of God upon Obstinate People, who harden themselves so, that in
the End God gives them up to themselves, so that they become Stupid, Blind and
Deaf. But the Original of this is their own Willful Temper and Sinful Courses;
whereby their Hearts wax gross, and their Ears become dull of Hearing, and
their Eyes they close themselves by repeated Acts of their own; as if they were
afraid, least at any time they should See with their Eyes, and Understand with
their Hearts, and should be Converted and Healed. Such Phrases import the
Perverseness of some Peoples Minds; but nothing of any presumed purpose in God,
that they should be Eternally Miserable: No, far be that from the Righteous
Judge of all the Earth: Let God be True, though all Men are Liars. Where the
Word of God is Preached, and People thereby are called on to Believe and Reform
their Lives, the call on God's part is Serious and Unfeigned; and they that
Disobey it, will be severely Punished at the last, for despising the Riches of
God's Goodness. We are Ambassadors for Christ (says St. Paul) as though God
did Beseech you by Us; We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled to God,
2 Cor. 5. 20. This is the great End of the whole Work of the Ministry, to make
Peace between a wronged and good God, and wretched Men; that they may be
everlastingly Happy in the Fruition of God; and if this End be not
Accomplished, Foolish and untoward People have none to blame but themselves. In
the Parable of the Sower, the Fault was not in the Seeds-man, nor in the Seed,
but in the Stony-ground; it is for want of an Honest and Good Heart, that the
Devil and the World prevent a Crop. In the Parable of the great Supper, the
Epulator was Kind, and the Feast ready, and nothing hindered an Happy Meeting,
but the Foolish Obstinacy of the Guests that were Invited.

BY these common and familiar Representations, our Savior was Pleased (in
Condescension to the weak Capacity of his Hearers) to show the Mysteries of
God's Kingdom; that God is Essentially, and in his Nature Good; and in his
Actions Good, and seeks to do Good to all the Children of Men: And in order
thereunto, sends out his good Word into the whole World, and his Good Spirit
along with it, that all the Earth may be full of Good People, and of his Glory:
That they may be prepared, and fitted to Participate of his Infinite Goodness
and Glory in another Life: And if after all this, any come short of that Glory
of God, and of their own Happyness, that they may have no reason to accuse any,
but their own Perverse and Wicked Selves. This is the real way of leaving all
Men without Excuse: They are not Inexcusable, for not doing things which are
out of their Power; or for being Miserable when they cannot avoid it, for
Impossibilities would excuse all Mankind. But this renders Wicked People
Inexcusable, that Salvation is Tendered them, and means given them of attaining
to it, and they wilfully neglect the things which belong unto their Peace.
This is the Condemnation, That Light is come into the World, and Men love
Darkness rather, because their Deeds are Evil, Joh. 3. 19.

AGAINST all this which has been said, to prove the Universality of God's Love
to Mankind, from the Universality of that Grace, which has been exhibited to
the World, by the Preaching of the Gospel every where, I foresee it may be
Objected,

THAT the Gospel is not yet Published to the whole World.

ARE there not diverse parts of the Earth that are yet Undiscovered? And in
those we know, or have heard of, are there not multitudes of Blind and
Idolatrous poor Wretches, without any Footsteps of Christianity among them? And
if so, how then was the coming of Christ an Argument and Expression of God's
Unfeigned Love to them; and especially to those their Ancestors, who since
Christ's time have Dyed in a State of invincible Infidelity?

TO this I presume to say these four things.

1. FIRST, That it is impossible for Us now, to tell where the Gospel has not
been Preached: And consequently, it is not a certain Principle, that neither
any of the Apostles, nor yet any of their Successors, Published it in those
Countries, which are unknown to us at this distance; or in others which are
known to be addicted still to Heathenish Idolatries and Superstition. How
probable soever Men's Conjectures may be, it is impossible for them in this, as
in other Cases, to prove a Negative.

2. SECONDLY, Nor can we tell but that in those Regions of the World which are
now Infidels, the Christian Faith has been formerly rejected upon the
Preaching of it. Nothing is so contrary to the Persuasions, Customs, and Vices
of Heathens, as the Christian Religion; and therefore it is no Wonder if it
has not been Received by People every where. The Gergesens desired Christ
himself to depart out of their Coasts. He came unto his Own, and his Own
Received him not; and so it is no Wonder, if his Disciples found ill Usage at
the Hands of Strangers. When he sent them out, he foresaw that they would not
find the Sons of Peace every where; and therefore he Commanded them to leave
Obstinate People, and to shake off the Dust of their Feet, as a Testimony
against them. St. Paul told some of the Jews, that they put the Word of God
from them, and Judged themselves unworthy of Eternal Life; And for that Reason
that he would turn to the Gentiles, Acts 13. 46. Nor were all among the
Gentiles disposed to Believe: Though the Apostles had generally better success
among them, than among the Jews; yet among some of those too, they met with
unconquerable Opposition.

3. THIRDLY, Suppose some, whose Office it was to propagate the Faith, were
wanting t o some People; either through Carelessness* or for fear of Death and
Persecution: This does not Argue any want of Love in God, whose Intentions
were, that all Men should come to the knowledge of the Truth; and whose
Commands were, that the Gospel should be Preached to every Creature.

CHAP. III. Proved Secondly, from the Universality of that Redemption, which
was Purchased by our Savior's Death.
HAVING thus Proved the Universal Love of God toward Mankind, from the
Amplitude of that Commission which Christ gave his Apostles, and their
Successors, to Publish the Gospel Universally, I proceed now to a farther
Demonstration of it, from the Consideration of the Extensive Merit of our
Blessed Savior's Death.

AS to this Matter, I think fit to premise these two preliminary Observations.

1. FIRST, That the Doctrine of our Universal Redemption by the Blood of
Christ, is Delivered in the Holy Scripture, in as plain, and as clear Terms, as
could possibly have been used. Supposing the Doctrine were Unquestionably True;
nay, as fully in as few Words as could have been Wished, had Mankind been
Empowr'd to have Penned the Doctrine themselves for their own Satisfaction.

HERE the Lord Jesus himself says, God so Loved the World, that he gave His
only Begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting Life, Joh. 3. 16. And elsewhere it is said, That God will have all
Men to be Saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4. That Christ gave himself a Ransom for all, v. 6.
That He is the Savior of all Men, especially of those that Believe, 1 Timothy 4.
10. That he Tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2. 9. That he was Delivered up for
us All, Romans 8. 32. And that he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for
our Sins only, but also for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2. 2. These
Expressions are Clear and Open to the Sense of every one in the World; nor is
any Article of our Faith, Delivered in Terms that are freer from Ambiguity, or
less liable to doubtful meanings, than these are. The very Being of God, though
the Belief of it be the Foundation of all Religion; yet it is no where more
clearly Taught, nor I think, of set Purpose so often, and so Expressly
Inculcated, as this Principle is. For the Holy Scriptures suppose God's Being;
and though they be full of Declarations and Proofs of God's Attributes, his
Singularity, Omniscience, Immutability, Mercy, Justice, and the like Divine
Perfections; yet his Existence and Being, Considered Abstractedly from his
other Infinite Glories, is no where (to my Remembrance) so Expressly, Openly,
Directly and Frequently Proposed to our Belief, as this Truth is, That he gave
his Son to die for all Men.

2. SECONDLY, It is Observable, That in those Places of Scripture I have now
Cited, this Principle is laid down as the Groundwork, Motive, and Reason of
some Important Duty, wherein all Mankind are concerned. Our Savior's Words,
about God's Love to the World, were intended to Invite and Encourage all People
to come unto Him, and to Believe on Him. In the next place, it is used as a
strong Argument for Supplications Prayers, Intercessions and giving of Thanks
to be made for all Men. Then it is laid down as a sure Ground for our Trusting
in the Living God, notwithstanding all Laboring, and suffering Reproach. Next,
it is mentioned as the great Reason of our Universal Obedience to Christ,
considering the High Dignity of his Person; though in his state of Exinanition,
he was made lower than the Angels, that he might be in a Capacity to taste
Death for every Man. Next, it is proposed as the great Motive for our Patience
and Perseverance, and confident Hope in God, amidst all our Trials in this
World. And then it is used as a very powerful Reason to Encourage us all, to
Amend our Lives in case we have Heinously Sinned; or to depend upon Christ's
Merit and Intercession, for the Pardon of all our Trangressions.

THESE two observable things being thoroughly well considered, are enough to
make all Thoughtful and Teachable Men, afraid of contradicting a Principle so
very clear in itself, and of such vast importance and concernment in its Use.
After these Manifest and Express Declarations over and over, touching the
Universal Extent of the Merit of Christ's Death, to make a Monopoly of it, for
the Benefit of a Jew only; leaving all the Residue of Mankind, under an
absolute inevitable Necessity of Perishing for ever. What is this, but to give
the Holy Scripture the Lie, and to shake the Minds of People in the Practice of
their Duties; nay, to Deterr them from the practice of Religion, by Ruining and
Diging up the very Foundation, which was designedly laid for the Building up of
all Men in Faith and Holiness, and to Support the whole Fabric of Piety and
Virtue.

BUT there are some particular Passages, which serve to Demonstrate and Confirm
the Point in Hand, beyond (one would think) all possibility of Cavil; and
therefore I shall insist upon those, after a more Copious rate, omitting many
others, which if Critically Enumerated, would presently swell into a great Heap.

AND the first shall be the Words of St. John, which indeed I mentioned before,
but have not distinctly considered; where he tells us positively, That Christ
is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for our Sins only, but also for the
Sins of the whole World, 1 Jo. 2. 2. There is no question, but when he says,
Christ is the Propitiation for our Sins, he means his own Sins, and the Sins of
others who Professed Christianity with him. In the first verse, he calls them,
His little Children, which cannot but signify Believers. And if we may pretend
to guess at God's Elect, we have Reason to think, both the Apostle and those he
there Wrote to, to have been of that Blessed Number; and that St. John thought
so too, by the Account he gives of himself, And then truly (says he) our
Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, cap. 1. 3. And
again, I Write unto you little Children, because your Sins are forgiven you for
his Names sake, v. 12. Much more to the same purpose he says afterward, That
they had overcome the Wicked one: That they had known the Father: That the Word
of God did abide in them: That they had an Unction from the Holy one: That they
were the Sons of God: That they had passed from Death to Life. And diverse other
such Characters he gives of them, whereby we may easily perceive that St. John
looked upon them to be in a State of Salvation. And whosoever Reads his
Epistles throughout, will find Reason enough by the strain of them, to believe
that the Divine Apostle, thought his own Salvation very secure: Now in that
speaking in his own Person, and in the Person of other Faithful Christians, he
affirms, Christ to be the Propitiation, not for their Sins only, but also for
the Sins of the whole World: He must be understood to mean the whole World of
Infidels, for there lies the Antithesis. And the whole World being
distinguished into two great Divisions, the Sheep and the Goats, those who are
the Sons of God, and those who are not; and Christ being said to be the
Propitiation for all, we must conclude, that he died for more than are supposed
to be Predestined to Eternal Life; or else I cannot conceive, to what purpose
St. John spoke those Words, or what Truth or Sense they can bear, if he died
for Believers only. To say, he is the Propitiation also for the sins of the
whole World (if it were not so) would have been Superfluous and False; and
therefore this single Text should put it out of Controversy, That he died for
all Mankind: He Paid on his part a Ransom for All; he made on his part an
Atonement for All; so that all were Delivered from a Necessity of Perishing,
all were put anew into a possibility and capacity of being happy for ever. And
if after all this, some will not lay hold on the Blood of Christ, by a free and
lively Faith, nor perform the Terms of a New Covenant of Grace, which was
Sealed by the Blood of Christ, but will trample under foot the Blood of the Son
of God; this is no diminution to its infinite Valor, nor to his Act and
Intention, but an Aggravation of their Guilt, who were put by him into a good
Condition, and might have been Eternally Saved; had they not been wanting on
their own part to themselves, by wilfully neglecting so great Salvation. This
is a Plain, Easy, and Natural Account of St. John's meaning: And to the same
Effect, though in other Words St. Paul tells us, That Christ is the Savior of
all Men, especially of those that Believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. This Assertion could
not be True, nor the Distinction Needful, or to any purpose, were he not the
Savior of them that Believe not. Why should the Apostle come off, with an
especially of those that believe, if Christ did not his part to Save all in
general, the whole Race of Mankind? He might have said, who is the Savior of
the Elect, and no more, if no more had been in Christ's Eye and Heart: His
saying especially, does not Limit, or Restrain the Merits of his Death to
Believers; but only restrains the Application of his Merits to them, through
the fault of others, who make his Blood of no effect to them, by being
Unbelievers. It shows, that they exclude themselves from having that Benefit by
his Death, which he purchased for All, and intended for All, if they would
Believe and Repent: None were passed by, by any absolute Decree of God, or for
want of Affection in the Son of God; he died for every Man with a Sincere
purpose, and upon Condition, that every one would lay hold on his Cross, and
cleanse himself from all Filthiness, by the Blood of Sprinkling. Upon that
Account, he is the Savior of all Men, and the propitiation for the Sins of the
whole World, as to Merit and Intention: But because all do not come unto him
after all, but continue still in a State of Wickedness and Infidelity;
therefore as to Efficacy, he is not so much their Savior, as he is others; to
all intents and purposes, he is a Propitiation and Savior, especially to
Believers.

2. SECONDLY, For the farther Confirmation of this Point, let us hear St. Paul,
1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a Faithful Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the World to Save Sinners. The stress of my Argument
hence lies here, that the Doctrine of our Redemption by Christ, is a most
comfortable Doctrine: Not only a Truth, but a most acceptable Truth: a
Principle that sufficiently recommends it self to every Man, and Deserves to be
Received by every one in the World, for the inestimable Consolation it carries
along with it. Now this necessarily implies, and proves, That Christ came into
the World, to make every Sinner in it, capable of Salvation in a better World,
because this is the only substantial ground of that Comfort I speak of; the
only Principle, whence we can with Reason, gather that Satisfaction, which
makes the Doctrine of our Redemption, worthy to be Accepted by us all. A Man's
Soul had nee^ have all possible satisfaction, touching the Reasonableness of
his Hopes; especially, when he prepares himself for important Offices of
Religion, or is about to Die: Then it stands in need of a solid and sure bottom
to support it, and give it rest; nor do I see any other such grounds for
reasonable satisfaction, and the Comforts of a Man, as this great Truth, That
Christ Died for the good of all Mankind. Though some are ready to flee to God's
Decrees for succor, and to Cherish themselves with a confident persuasion,
that they were Elected to Salvation from Everlasting; yet this is no sure
Foundation to build on: it is unreasonable to take Sanctuary there, and to fly
for Refuge, to the secret Counsels of God's Will. This is the Work of Fancy,
and strong Imagination; and many People may be willing to work themselves into
it, partly out of a principle of spiritual Pride, and partly to quiet an evil
Conscience, and heal some inward sores, which a Vicious Life has made: Nor are
any so ready to run to God's Decrees, as immoral People, whose Sins pursue them
with a great Cry. Alas! it is impossible for any of us, without immediate
Revelation (which is not afforded now) to Read our Names in the Book of
Eternity, or to know Infallibly that they are there; those secret things belong
unto the Lord our God; by us they are Unsearchable, and past finding out, and
therefore we cannot gather any reasonable Comforts that Way.

NOR Indeed does the Revealed Will of God (the Holy Scriptures themselves)
afford us much, without that most acceptable Doctrine, which I am now
defending: For neither in this Book can any of us find our Names Written, no
more than in the Volum of God's Decrees. The Scripture is silent as to the
state of particular Persons, and all the Comfort any single Man can gather from
it, comes by making reasonable conclusions as to himself, out of general
Premises. There are in the Bible many necessary Laws prescribed, and many
excellent promises given to the Faithful, indefinitely and at large, and when a
particular person compares his private state with the common Rule, and upon a
due comparison discovers, that according to his Power, he has sincerely and
honestly observed God's Commands, or does now do so, and resolves steadfastly by
God's Grace to persevere to the end in so doing; he may then very reasonably
Hope, and Cherish himself with an Humble Modest Confidence, that* he shall be
Happy. Yet all this is upon a supposition, that Christ Died for him, for if
Christ be not a propitiation for his Sins, such a Man is lost and utterly
undone, notwithstanding all his performances. And how I pray, can any
particular Man be reasonably assured of that, but by being assured first, That
Christ tasted Death for every Man: This general Truth being believed, That
Christ was a Sacrifice for all Mankind; and for the whole World, it is easy and
necessary for that particular Person to conclude, That Christ was a Sacrifice
even for him; because he is one of Mankind, and a part of the World: But
without this most Acceptable Principle, I cannot see with what Reason and
Comfort he can conclude for himself; the Scripture tells him nothing of that,
as to his own particular, all that he has reasonably to rely on is, That the
Son of God Died for all. Take away this Principle, and farewell all Faith, all
Obedience, all hope and comfort with it; I mean, all solid Reason of Hope and
Comfort: Fancy and Imagination there may be in this Case too; but I speak now
of Rational Convictions and Rational Consolation; all that must depend upon
this bottom and foundation, that Christ came into the World to Die, and offer
himself up for every Child of Man. This makes the Doctrine of our Redemption, a
most Acceptable Doctrine indeed; a most Comfortable Saying, worthy of all Men
to be received; whereas without this Latitude, and as some People are willing
through the pride of their Hearts to understand it, it is so far from being
Acceptable unto all Men, that it seems a very Frightful Doctrine. For if the
Son of God Died not for all Men to the utmost extent, though he had past by but
One in the whole World, and had excluded but One from having any Benefit by the
propitiation upon the Cross; that one Person being not Known nor Mentioned, how
could any one of us all tell, but he was that Person? I might have been fearful
it was my self, another might have been (though with less Reason) as fearful as
I; a third, as fearful too, a fourth, as fearful as the rest; and so on ad
infinitum: For every one in the World might have thought himself equally
concerned to Fear, and consequently to Despair as well as another: Every one
would have been in suspense and perplexity, at least, as People that are forced
to draw Lots for their Lives, not knowing how the chance would fall out, till
the Day of Judgment. To be sure, this Tormenting Doubt, would be incident to
all People of scrupulous Minds, and great numbers of very Pious People are
such; and then what would become of Christianity? Considering the Hereditary
Weakness of our Nature, the many Actual Sins we are Guilty of, and how unworthy
the very best are of eternal Happiness; what Heart or Encouragement would any
one have, to undertake or persevere in Religion; if Christ, by passing any one
by, had put every one thus under Fears and Dangers, of being Cast-aways at
last? This would have served to spoil the whole Work of Redemption, and to have
damped the Faith of all; at least it would have brought on such a Faith, as St.
James speaks of in those most Miserable Spirits, who Believe and Tremble.

I have insisted upon this Argument the longer, to show you of what great
Consequence this Point is, and what weighty Reasons we have to inculcate and
urge the Belief of it: The Interest of Christ's Religion, and the Peace of
every Christian's Mind depends upon it; for which cause, the Catholic Church
of Christ, has maintained it from the Beginning, to encourage all Men in the
Ways of Holiness and Virtue to the last. And for the same cause, our own Church
holds it, and holds it out unto all; Teaching even her young Catechumens to
Believe that Christ has Redeemed every one of them, and all Mankind; to
encourage them to all cheerful Obedience to his Laws, who out of entire
Affection to their Souls, Died for them all; and Teaching all her Children
about the Altar, also to profess in the Prayer of Consecration, that Jesus
Christ made upon the Cross (by his own Oblation of himself once offered) a
Full, Perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice; Oblation and Satisfaction for the Sins
of the whole World; to fill all their Minds at that great Solemnity, with
Faith, and Hope, and Comfort, and modest Assurance of finding Favor and
Acceptance with God, for his most meritorious Blood and Death's Sake.

SO that, it is not out of a Fondness of an Opinion that we Preach this
Doctrine to you, though it be True; but for the sake of a most comfortable
Truth also; a Truth, that you are deeply concerned for your own good to
Believe; a Truth worthy of all Acceptance, because it is a sure and solid
bottom for your minds to rest on, which yet it could not be, if Christ Died not
for every Individual Soul; and therefore when St. Paul said, This is a Faithful
Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance; Or, Worthy of all Men to be Received,
That Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners; he must be understood to
mean all Sinners, every poor Sinful Man and Woman, without Exception.

3. THIRDLY, If all that has been hitherto Spoken, be not yet enough, to prove
the Universality of our Redemption, I appeal in the third place to those two
Apostles, St. Paul and St. Peter, who jointly believed, That the Son of God
Died, even for those that Perish. In Romans 14. Where he disputes against putting
a stumblingblock in another way, he gives this strict caution, Destroy not him
with thy Meat, for whom Christ Died, v. 15. And so, 1 Cor. 8. 11. Where St.
Paul discourses upon the same subject, he argues to the same effect, Through
thy Knowledge, shall the weak Brother Perish, for whom Christ died? You see our
Savior's Love to all mankind is taken notice of, as a powerful Argument, to
excite our Charity to one another; that we should not use any means to Destroy,
whom Christ came to Rescue from Destruction; that we should do our part to save
them, by our Inoffensive and Exemplary Conversation, because Christ did his
part, to save them by his own Death. This plainly shows the Apostles judgment,
that though the Lord Jesus Died for all, yet some of them might, and in
probability will perish notwithstanding; especially if others be so
scandalously Wicked, as to lend them a helping Hand. If there be no fear of
their Damnation, St. Paul's Reasoning would be vain and impertinent, and if
Christ Died not for such as are in a Perishing Condition, St. Paul's Principle
would be False. After all this, shall any dare to say, That Christ Died for the
Elect only? Why, let us observe, what St. Peter says to the like purpose, 2
Pet. 2. 1. There were false Prophets among the People, (of old) even as there
will be false Teachers among you, who will privily bring in Damnable Heresies,
even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
Destruction. These do well deserve the Name of Reprobates and Sons of
Perdition, because they bring upon themselves swift Destruction, by introducing
damnable Heresies, and even denying the Lord; and yet the Scripture says
manifestly and expressly, That the Lord bought them; that is, paid a Ransom, a
price of Redemption for them.

NOW to evade the force of all this, some take the great boldness to tell us,
That Christ bought All men, and died for All men, not Intentionally, but
Sufficiently only, meaning That his Blood and Merits were enough, and
sufficient for All* but He did not intend, that some should have any benefit at
all, by his meritorious Passion. This is an Argument of great depravation of
Nature, that rather than part with beloved Opinions, men will choose to put the
most absurd construction upon the Scripture, and make it speak what they please
in favor of them, though they make it speak contradictions. Christ bought
those that deny him, says the Text: He never intended to buy them (say they)
though he had Blood sufficient, yet he had not the Will; and yet nevertheless,
he was their Redeemer: Which is the same thing, as if they should say, He did
buy them, and He did not; wherein there is a double contradiction, one of the
Holy Scripture, and another of themselves. An Act of Grace done by one
voluntary Agent for another, does necessarily include an Intention, or else it
is not an Act of Grace. When it is said, Joh. 15. 13. Greater Love has no Man
than this, for a Man to lay down his Life for his Friends: Where lies the
greatness of such Love, but in laying down ones Life with an intention to serve
ones Friends? With a design and purpose to help them; nay, with a sincere and
vehement Desire to do them all the Good he can? And in using that Comparison,
our Savior's meaning was to insinuate the singular Greatness of his own Love;
in laying down his Life, not for Friends only, but for Enemies; with a purpose
and design, to do those very Men good, that are Enemies to God, to Him, and to
their own Souls also; that will bring upon themselves swift Destruction. How
can He be said to have bought them, if He laid not down a price for them, with
an intention and purpose to deliver them out of the jaws of the Devil? If an
Agent in Turkey deposite a sum large enough to purchase a Thousand Slaves out
of the Hands of Infidels, but yet intends it for the Benefit of Two only, and
Ransometh but Two, where is his kindness to the rest? Or, how can he be said to
have bought the rest? All that can be said is, That it was in his Power to have
Ransomed All, but he did not; and therefore did it not, because he did not
design to Rescue them. If a Testator gives a Fund sufficient to pay all the
Debts of a Multitude of Prisoners, and yet Limits all his Charity to the Use of
One, and for the Deliverance of One only; where is his Charity to the Common
Goal? The great Numbers that remain still in Durance and Bond, cannot call him
their Redeemer, who had Abilities enough to have Redeemed them, but did not
Discharge them, nor ever had it in his Heart or Thoughts. If a Person of very
plentiful Fortunes, sufficient to Relieve a whole City in time of Famine; shall
bestow all his Kindness upon a small Hospital, leaving the Neighborhood round
about to Starve and Perish; where is his Compassion to them? How did he Relieve
and Succor them? And how Ridiculous would it not be to pretend, that he Fed
all, and Provided for all that were Hungry, because he had enough to have done
it if he would; enough and to spare, and yet would not vouchsafe so many
Perishing Souls, so much as the Crumbs that fell from his Table? To instance in
these plain Cases, is enough to clear the Point under our present
Consideration. The Scripture tells us positively, That Christ Died to give
himself a Ransom for all, and that he bought even those that deny him, and
bring upon themselves swift Destruction: Therefore he intended on his part,
that all the very worst of Men, should be put into a Capacity of receiving
Benefit by his Blood. If this was not his design, nor his Bloodshed to that
purpose, he cannot with Truth be said to have Bought, and Died for them, which
yet the Scripture expressly affirms: A Sufficiency of Merits, is not enough to
denominate him every Man's Redeemer: That Sufficiency must have been given on
his part, and that too with an intent, That it should be a Ransom for every
Man; otherwise we may say, by parity of Reason, that he was the Redeemer also
of the Devils themselves; because there was a Sufficiency as to that too: His
Merits were so Infinite, by reason of the Infinite Dignity of his Person, that
they would have served them too, had God been pleased to accept of the Ransom,
and had Christ intended to lay it down for them. In short, unless we will shake
the very Principles of Piety, and offer direct Violence to Truth and common
Reason, we cannot deny any People room in our Savior's Heart; or shut them out
of his kind purposes and wishes; or think them deprived, by a fatal antecedent
Decree, of the means and hope of Peace: The Opinion is so repugnant to the
Notion of the Divine Goodness and Clemency, and so contrary to the Express Word
of God, and so inconsistent with that great Love of Christ, that abundance of
Grace, that Tenderness of Mercy, those Riches of Goodness, and Bowels of
Compassion, which appeared so gloriously throughout the Work of our Redemption.

4. FOURTHLY, But there is one Text of Scripture more, which I have reserved
for my last Argument, because it carries such a clear light with it, as is
enough to strike any Eyes that are but open to receive it. It is the Principle
supposed by St. Paul, as a Truth acknowledged, and taken for granted by all
Faithful Christians, then 2 Cor. 5 4. we thus judge, That if one died for all,
then were all dead. Where the Apostle's purpose is to show the whole World, how
strictly they were concerned, to make the Lord Jesus a return of the most
Ardent and Operative Affections, from the consideration of that miserable and
lost Condition, whereinto the whole World (without exception) had fallen; and
wherein the whole World must have continued, had not Christ come to offer up
his Soul for them. All were Dead, that is, in a deadly, forlorn, and undone
Condition; all were concluded under Sin. The Medium to prove this Universal
Ruin, is taken from the Universality of the Redemption of the World: All were
Dead, because One Died for All; which shows, that Christ Tasted Death for as
many as were lost, for as many as needed a propitiation to restore them to Life
and Happyness; otherwise the Argument would have been altogether short and
inconclusive, if Christ had made an Atonement for God's Elect only. If one Died
for a few, this indeed would have proved, that those few were in a lost
Condition; but how would it have followed hence, that therefore all were Dead?
Rather it would have followed, that all were not Dead, nor stood in need of a
Redeemer, if one had not Died for the Redemption of all Mankind.

FROM all these premises, the Truth of the point I proposed to consider, will
(I hope) evidently appear to those, whose Minds are not quite Captivated to an
Opinion; that the coming of the Son of God, into the World, was a strong
Argument, and a plain Expression of God's Sincere and boundless Affection to
the Children of Men. Those means which are necessary for Reasonable and
Voluntary Creatures, in order to their Happiness, the Father of Lights, has of
his own good Pleasure and Grace afforded Mankind in such abundant measure, that
if any People Perish, the fault must be in themselves. Christ's descending from
Heaven, was to declare those Truths, which could not be discovered, or made
known, without Divine Revelation. His Clothing himself with Humane Flesh was,
that he might the better Converse with us, and Transact the Office of a
Mediator, and be in a suitable Condition to Die at last for us. His Holy Life
and Heavenly Doctrines, were to direct our Feet into the Ways of Peace, that he
might be, not only the Glory of his People Israel, but a Light to Lighten the
whole Gentile World. His Miracles were to show the greatness of his Person, and
his Divine Authority, that he might be relied on as the sure Hope of all the
ends of the Earth. His Blood that was shed by his most bitter and dolorous
Passion, was to speak far better things than the Blood of Abel, or of all
Abel's Sacrifices. It was the Blood of Atonement to make Peace between an
offended God, and a wicked World; to procure Remission of all Sins that were
past, to deliver Mankind from a necessity of Perishing; and to open the ways of
Mercy, to all that would desire to enter into the Kingdom of God: It was the
Blood of the New Covenant, that was confirmed upon the Cross, to ascertain
People of all God's Promises in it, on condition of Faith, on their Part, and
of Obedience to God's Laws for the future. It was the Blood of Sprinkling, to
cleanse us from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, to Purify unto Christ a
peculiar People, Zealous of good Works. Besides these means of Grace and
Salvation now mentioned, God was pleased of his abundant Mercy, to add diverse
more, after our Lord's Ascension, for the particular Application of his Son's
Merits to the Soul of every Believer; that the Blood of Christ might not be
shed in vain, like water spilt upon the Ground: Great was the Company of
Preachers, whose business was to Publish the Gospel to every Creature, to
proclaim the Terms of the Newcovenant; to show the necessity of repentance for
the complete and actual remission of sins; and to invite all Nations to turn
unto the Lord, to persuade them to seek and fly unto him, and to gather up
those Mercies, which he had purchased for all. And so the descent of the Holy
Ghost was, not only to strengthen the Apostles and their Fellow Laborers, for
the Discharge of their great and most Charitable Office, but to enable all
those to whom they should Preach, to receive with meekness the engrafted Word,
which is able to save their Souls. His Gracious and Kindly Operations, are to
enlighten our understandings, to help our Infirmities, to subdue our wild and
unruly Affections, to confirm our Hopes, to rectify our Wills in such a Moral
Way, as is suitable to voluntary Agents, and to induce our corrupt Natures with
a super natural Principle of Grace, for the performance of those Duties which
God now requires, in such a measure as God will accept of. Thus from the
beginning to the end of God's Economy, there is nothing on his part but Love,
Love Unspeakable, Love Unfeigned; and after all these various and astonishing
expressions of it to us all, for any of us to Revile that most Holy and
Beneficent Being, as the cause of Men's Sins, as the Author of Men's Damnation,
as the hater and destroyer of Men's Souls, by pretended, absolute, and
irresistible Decrees, this is such a complication of Blasphemy, Ingratitude,
and other horrible Wickedness, as would need another Sacrifice, if that already
offered upon the Cross, were not of Infinite Value.

WERE Men possessed with a true Sense of God's Love, and his Works for us,
methinks nothing more would be needful to endear Religion to us, and to engage
us to Piety, Charity, and Holiness of Life: Such a mighty influence would that
Sense have over every one of our Souls, to stir us up to every thing that is
pure, lovely, and good. And in order to it (that I may now proceed to the more
practical part of this Discourse) give me leave to lay before you, these six
following Directions,

First, That you be careful to entertain in your Minds Genuine Apprehensions of
God.

Secondly, That you do not Judge of God's Love by the Event of things.

Thirdly, That you do not measure his purpose (as to things Eternal) by his
present Acts of Providence, in dispensing some special Favors here.

Fourthly, That you do not think Uncharitably of others, upon a presumption,
that you your selves are of the number of God's Elect.

Fifthly, That you diligently perform those things which are necessary, in
order to the final participation of God's Love.

Sixthly and Lastly, That you endeavor to make God all possible returns of
Affection.

CHAP. IV. Six Practical Inferences from this Point. First, That we should have
Genuine Notions of God; and what Notions are such.
First, THAT you be careful to entertain in your Minds, Genuine Apprehensions
of God: That Wise and Virtuous Heathen, Plutarch, in his Book of Superstition
shows, That though the Fancy of an Atheist be a very false and foul
imagination, and an Argument of extreme blindness of Mind; yet such a one is in
a better case than he, who believing the Existence of God, takes him
nevertheless for a Frightful, Hurtful, Tyrannical Cruel and Savage Being: And
he draws a Parallel from himself: I had (said he) much rather People should
Report, that there never was such a Man living as Plutarch, than that Plutarch
was an inconstant and fickle Man, addicted to Anger, Revengeful upon every
slight occasion, moved out of himself by little Provocations, or apt (for
ordinary disrespects) to behave himself like an outrageous and unmerciful
Creature. To imagine there is no God, is to Disbelieve; to conceive hard and
unworthy Notions of God, is to Slander and Reproach him. I call those hard and
unworthy Notions of God, which are unsuitable to the Perfections of so
excellent a Being; so Glorious for the infinite Goodness, Rectitude, and
Beauties of his Nature. He is absolutely perfect in himself; the Supreme,
Chiefest, and purest Good; without the least mixture of any thing that is a
stain to perfection; or a Debasement and Diminution of it: This is Essential to
the Deity, and necessarily included in the Notion of God. And as he is the most
perfect Being in his own Nature, so is he too the cause and spring whence all
those Perfections are derived, which are in any degree remarkable in his
Creatures; especially of those Perfections, whereby all Rational Beings, Angels
and Men, excel the rest; whatever Excellencies are in these, according to the
measure of their Capacities, we must suppose to be in God in the highest
degree; because it is unconceivable how he can communicate that to others,
which he himself has not. Therefore in framing our Idea's of God, we must
abstract and lay aside all Conceptions which include Defect, or any thing that
is a Disparagement to Excellency: Though it be impossible for us, poor Finite
Creatures, to have Adequate Notions of that Infinite Being, or to Understand
and Know him fully as he is; especially while we our selves are in this Mortal
State: Yet this is the best way of raising our Minds to the clearest and truest
Apprehensions of him, by ascribing to him, all that Argues true Excellency and
Perfection; and by separating from our Conceptions of him, whatever serves, or
seems to Degrade, Lower, and Vilify a most perfect Being. And to hit this
matter rightly, we should observe what is Vile in our selves, Defective, and
Reproachful in our own Nature, and be sure to remove and throw away all that
from our Conceptions of God. For though God has given us diverse excellent
Faculties, yet in each of these there is something, that does Deprave, Vitiate,
and is a Blemish to it. In our Understanding there is much Darkness; In our
Wills there is an Averseness to follow Reason, many times, though it be clear;
a crookedness that makes us stand awry, and hold off from that which is Good;
And in the lowest Faculty of the Soul, there are many Passions and Affections,
which most of all Argue Defect in us, and are the greatest Disparagement and
Stain to Humane Nature: Therefore they are called Vices, because they are a
Blemish and Pollution to that Spiritual Being the Soul; and so great a Blemish,
that the foulness of them is discoverable, by the ordinary Light of Nature.
Frowardness, Rage, Malice, Spitefulness, Lying, Insincerity, Cruelty, Crossness
of Temper, Love of Mischief, and the Pleasure some take in Oppressing Hurting,
Ruining, Poor People; and many times too, when there is no other Reason for
such Barbarous Actions, but only the Fierceness and Violence of a Blind
Passion: These are very ugly things, and such as appear very ugly in the Eyes
of Heathens themselves: They Argue great Defect and Corruption in Humane
Nature, and are a Disgrace to it; They are the Efforts of Base Minds, and Signs
of a very Scurvy Temper; Actions that Proceed from very Degenerate Spirits, and
evil Hearts; and such as are hateful to all Men, whose Natures are at all
Refined and Improved. These Qualities therefore being so inconsistent with all
Excellency, and so diametrically opposite to Perfection, we may be sure, they
cannot be in God; nor can any thing like them have room in his Divine and
Super-excellent Nature. To represent that most Glorious Being as one, that from
Eternity disposed of Men's Lots, without any Consideration or Foresight of
their Actions, as one that made Mankind with a steadfast Resolution to Damn the
Generality of them; or at least, took Advantage by one Man's Sin, to consign
the greatest part of his Posterity to Everlasting Torments; To represent him,
as one that seeks to compass his Design, by not only Permitting, but Assisting
Men to Transgress his Holy Laws; as one that bids them Obey, and Swear he
desires they should Obey his Commands, and yet by his Secret Will, would not
have them do it; As one that Denies, when he seems to offer them the Means of
Obeying, refuses to help their Weakness, and yet Punishes them for not
accepting his Help: To represent him as one, that thus colludes and deals
hardly with his Poor Creatures; and all this, that in the end, he may show his
great Power over them, and satisfy his own absolute and irresistible Will, and
to please himself with their Everlasting, Unspeakable Torments; This is to
Degrade God beneath his most perfect Self, to make him equal (if not exceed)
the most Barbarous Tempers; to extinguish his Glory, to throw upon him the very
dregs and filth which the worst Natured Man is capable of; and to destroy those
Divine Attributes, which are the Luster and Excellency of the Deity. God is
Love, says the Apostle; and the Genuine Notion of his Love is, that he is
ready to do his Necessitous Creatures (and especially the Precious Souls of
Men) all the Good they need. The Genuine Notion of his Justice is, that he
evermore Acts Righteously, according to the Rules of Eternal Reason;
Rewarding every Man as his Works are, whether Good or Evil. The Genuine Notion
of his Truth is, that his Words are agreeable with his Purpose and Mind; that
he cannot Lie or Dissemble, because it is Repugnant to the Excellence of his
Nature. The Genuine Notion of his Power is, that he can do whatever does not
involve a Contradiction, nor Argues Evil or Imperfection in the Agent. The
Genuine Notion of his Goodness is, that he is inclined to provide all the means
that are necessary, or becoming him to provide for the Welfare of his whole
Creation, according to the Capacities and Faculties of every part of it. The
Genuine Notion of his Mercy is, that he is Compassionate, Benign, and Patient
toward the most undeserving Men; though by their own Faults they are Sinful,
and Enemies to their own Souls. These are the Glories of his Essence,
Attributes which adorn his Nature, and which show him to be the most Perfect
and Excellent of all Beings. Therefore in forming our Notions and Conceptions
of God, we must be sure to have a constant Eye, and a tender Regard, to these
his adorable Perfections, and Construe his Works with Respect to them;
especially the Works of his Love, which is the Attribute he seems
particularly delighted with himself; and for that Reason it is said, Jam. 2. 13.
That Mercy Rejoices against Judgment: And when God was Pleased to show his
Glory to Moses on Mount Sinai, as he passed by before him, he Proclaimed
himself in this Style, The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious,
Long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth; keeping Mercy for
Thousands, Forgiving Iniquity, and Transgression, and Sin, and that will by no
means clear the Guilty, Exodus 34. 6, 7.

CHAP. V. That we should not Judge of God's Love to us, by accidental Events,
which depend upon our own Choice.
Secondly, HAVING thus, according to this Description, possessed our Minds with
True and Genuine Apprehensions of God, we must be careful, Secondly, That we do
not Judge of his Love toward Mankind, by accidental Events, which depend upon
our own choice. By accidental Events, I mean those Miseries and Punishments of
Men, which befall them by their own foolish wilfulness, besides God's Sincere
Desire, and Primary Intentions. He is not willing that any should Perish, 2
Pet. 3. 9. As I Live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of
the Wicked, Ezekiel. 33. 11. And yet it appears by the last Words of that verse,
That the House of Israel took a ready course to Die, and in Probability many of
them did. Where then lies the Cause of this Miscarriage? why, even at Wicked
Men's own Doors; because either they make no Use at all, or make a very Ill Use
of God's Love toward them. O! Israel Thou have destroyed thy Self, but in Me
is thine Help, says the Holy One of Israel, Hos. 13. 9. This is the plain
Account of the Matter: Help is not wanting on God's part, He gives to all Men
Liberally, Jam. 1. 5. He provideth Means enough to keep us all from
Destruction, if we will set our Hearts to Apply them duly; he is Loving unto
every Man, but every Man is not so Loving to himself as God is. And hence it
comes to pass, that though God's Intentions be equally Benevolent, yet it
happens accidentally, that they have not equal Success, because all do not take
an equal Care to Answer God's Goodness. Some Reject (or Frustrate) the Counsel
of God, Luke 7. 30. Which could not be, if Mercy were not offered, and if God's
Intentions toward them, were not Kind and Real. Some Resist the Holy Ghost,
Act 7. 51. Which could not be, if the Holy Ghost were not there to Operate, and
strive with them. Some Grieve the Good Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30. Which could
not be, if the Comforter were not given them first, to Seal and Mark them, as
Men Purchased with the Blood of Christ, to be his Servants. Some are in danger
of Quenching the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. Which could not be, if the Spirit had
not Kindled some Sparks in them. Some hide their Talents in the Ground, Mat.
25. 25. Which could not be, if a Talent were not first put into their Hands.
Some presently lose out of their Hearts, the Seed of Eternal Life, others will
not suffer it to take deep Root; and others Choke it with the Cares and
Pleasures of this Life, so that it brings no Fruit unto Perfection, Luke 8.
Which could not be, if the Seed had not been Sown: Events in this Case are
different, according as Men's Hearts are either Good or Bad; and according as
their Care and Husbandry is, greater or less; and hence it is, that when all
Men are called to a State of Salvation, some Work it out, and some Neglect it:
One Judas continues the Servant of Christ, and another has the Character of
the Son of Perdition; and Simon Peter Weeps for his own Sins, and Converts his
Brethren from theirs, while Simon the Sorcerer remains in the Gall of
Bitterness, and the Bond of Iniquity. The Reason of this is within Men, because
some are Diligent to continue and grow in the Grace of God; others Frustrate
it, and turn it into Wantonness. It does not become the Wisdom of the great
Legislatour of the World, to Drag People to Heaven against their Wills; or to
force their Obedience to his Laws, by a Power that is Irresistible: For this
would be, to Destroy the Nature of Obedience, which ought to be Hearty,
Cheerful and Free; and it would take away the Reason of Rewards, which
Obedience cannot be capable of, if it be not an Act of Choice; no more than
Machines and Engines deserve a Reward, when they move as they are stirred,
without any inward Principle of their own. God sets before us Life and Death,
Blessing and Cursing, and bids us choose Life, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. He calls upon us
by his Ministers, Word, and Spirit to conform to his Laws; he affords us all
the necessary means of Happiness; he gives us a new Principle, and a
Sufficiency of Spiritual Strength to help our Natural Weaknesses, and to enable
us to become New Creatures, and having shed abroad such abundance of his Love,
he leaves us in our own Power to Employ it. Because we are Rational and
Voluntary Agents, it is fit we should be dealt with in a Moral way, by
Instruction, Arguments, Persuasion, and such other Motives as are consistent
with our Natures; and suitable to Beings, which know the differences between
Good and Evil; and have not only a Power of choosing and refusing, but are
moreover deeply concerned in Point of Duty. and Eternal Interest to choose the
Good, and to refuse the Evil. The Divine Grace serves to Help and Rectify our
Nature, but not to take away our Powers and Faculties of Acting; nor do we
cease to be Men, when we are called to be Christians: Still we are in our own
Hands in a great measure; and still the Proposals are like those formerly made
to Cain, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? And if thou do not
well, Sin lies at the Door, Genesis 4. 7. If any of us fall under a Curse, after
all, as Cain did; or be Banished from God's Presence, as Cain was, it is because
our Hearts are Evil like his; and because we throw off, (as he did) the Love of
God, and of our Brother. If Men become Reprobates, it is because they will be
of Reprobate Minds; for God does not deliver them up to a State of Reprobation,
or to strong Delusions, So that in the end, they are Damned, till they refuse
to receive the Love of the Truth, that they might be Saved, 2 These. 2. 10. Such
Miscarriages ought not to be imputed to the God of Truth, Purity, Mercy and
Compassion, or to him that loved us, and gave himself for us: God forbid. He
intended to Save all to the uttermost, that would come unto God by him; and he
did all that lay on his part to draw all to him; therefore he is the Savior of
all, though all are not actually saved. That they were to blame themselves for,
and none else but themselves; because, nothing was wanting in their Redeemer.
He had been the Savior of the whole World, though none had believed on him,
but his Blessed Mother; because it would have been their own Crime, if others
had not believed on him, as well as she, because they would not have been
gathered unto him, as he himself said of Jerusalem and her Children, when he
would have gathered them as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings. The
Sun is truly said to Enlighten the World, should all Mankind shut their Eyes,
and refuse to behold its Rays, or hide themselves in Holes and Caverns, from
the Heat of them. So did the Son of Righteousness rise upon all; upon the Evil,
and upon the Good; upon the Just, and upon the Unjust: He was Good to all
Mankind, though some hate the Light, and will not come unto the Light, but love
Darkness rather, because their Deeds are Evil, Job. 3. 19. Now this is purely
Accidental, in respect of God's Intentions and Desires; and therefore we may
not judge of God's Love by such Accidents, no more than we allow our selves to
judge of one another Purposes and Wishes, by Events, that are quite beside
them; nay, contrary unto them. An upright Lawgiver consults the Good of the
whole Commonwealth; gives them Rules to be the Measures of their Actions, and
encourages them all with Promises of Rewards upon their Obedience; and if,
notwithstanding all this, some will be so Perverse and Headstrong, as not to be
Governed, but will follow still such irregular Courses, as will bring some to
the Gibbet, and others to the Flames: The Condemnation of such People, is very
Just, because it is from themselves. A tender Physician consults the good of
all his Patients, provides Remedies for them, advises them to make a due Use
of them, and tells them the danger that will attend their wilful neglect;
especially, if the Disease be in its nature Mortal; and, if notwithstanding all
this, a sick Man will fly in the Physicians Face, and throw away that which he
should Receive; his Death is Accidental, and ought not to be charged to his
account, who would have saved him from it. A Conscientious Divine, I am sure,
consults the Eternal good of all that are committed to his Charge; prays for
them, directs them according to the best of his Skill and Power, calls upon
them to be merciful to their own Souls, admonishes and entreats them, thinks no
Service too much for them, seeks to do them good, sincerely wishes their good;
and, if notwithstanding this, they will not hearken, nor mind, but Destroy
themselves after all, by the violence of their wicked Passions, or by their
willful Stupidity; this does not argue any want of affection in Him; it is
besides what the good Man Intends, or Desires; that which he is Grieved and
Afflicted at, the very apprehensions of the Event is sad, and accidental, but
He himself is clear from the Blood of all. No Man questions the Affections of a
Father to the Children of his Bowels; and yet it is common for Children by
their own Folly and Obstinate temper, to Ruin all their Fortunes,
notwithstanding the Cares, Counsels, and Endeavors of their Parent, and
thereby bring down his Gray Hairs with Sorrow to the Grave. Now, if in these
Cases, Intentions ought not to be Measured by Accidents, much less are we to
judge of God's Decrees and Purposes by any Man's Ruin; because, God of his
Goodness does much more for us all, than what we poor Creatures are able to do
for one another; how great soever our mutual Zeal and Affections may be: He
gives Grace, which none of us can give; He bestows his Holy Spirit, which is
not in our power; He strengthens us with Might in the Inner-Man, which is out
of the reach of our Hand; He Prevents, Follows, and Furthers Men with secret
Operations, which are beyond and above our capacities to do; and if
notwithstanding all outward and inward means of Salvation, and notwithstanding
God's wishes to the contrary; some, for whom Christ Died, will go on still in
Error and Sin, till they Destroy themselves finally; this does not argue any
want of Love, or gracious Intentions in God, but is a sad argument, that some
might have been Healed and would not; an act of Perverseness and
Intractability, which in God's day will turn to their greater condemnation.

CHAP. VI. That we must not measure God's Purposes as to things Eternal, by his
present Acts of Providence, in dispensing some special outward Favors in this
Life.
Thirdly, AS we must not judge of God's Love by accidental Events, so neither
must we measure his Purpose as to things Eternal, by his present Acts of
Providence, in dispensing some special outward Favors in this Life. By special
Favors, I understand certain singular Advantages in respect of this World, and
such too, as have some respect to the World to come; in both respects, very
valuable Privileges and Blessings, which some enjoy in a greater, and better
measure than others: And from those, which I may call Temporal Privileges,
though Spiritual Advantages go along with them many times, to conclude that the
rest who enjoy them not in the like degree, are under God's absolute Hatred,
Or, in a State of Damnation, is very Unreasonable and Injurious to God's
Honor. As for instance, whereas the Lord Promised Abraham upon his Obediential
and Exemplary Faith, that he would be a God unto him, and to his Seed after
him, and that he would give them the Land of Canaan for their Possession: God
intended this Promise should be made good, not to Ishmael and his Posterity
(though Ishmael was Abraham's First Born) but to Isaac and his Off spring. In
Isaac shall thy Seed be called, said God to him, Genesis 21. 12. Meaning, that
Isaac and his Descendants should Inherit the Promise. Now this was a special
Favor and Privilege to him and his Issue; especially considering the Spiritual
Blessings which went along with this Earthly one; that to them pertained with
the this Adoption, the Glory (or the Ark of God, and his Glorious Presence in
it) and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and
the Promises of Christ's coming among them, and from them, Romans 9. 4 But though
Isaac and his Seed had these singular Advantages; we must not by any means
conclude hence, that Ishmael had no share at all of God's Love, much less may
we infer, that he was absolutely Rejected of God as a Rebrobate to Eternity.
For as touching a future State, the Scripture is wholly Silent, and therefore
so must we: And though God did not Bless him in this World so greatly and
abundantly, as he Blessed his Brother Isaac; yet I cannot find any reason to
think, but that God Loved him too. For we are told, Genesis 17. That God Commanded
him to be Circumcised; which was the outward Mark of the Divine Favor, the
Token of God's Covenant; and therefore we cannot suppose him to have been quite
shut out of it. Nay, God told Abraham there expressly, v. 20. That as for
Ishmael, he had heard him, and had Blessed him, and would make him Fruitful,
and would Multiply him exceedingly, so that twelve Princes, and a great Nation
should come out of his Loins, though God intended to Establish his more
particular Covenant, and special Favor with Isaac. And as for Ishmael's
Posterity, though they were not Blessed with all those outward peculiar
Privileges, which Isaac's Children enjoyed, yet we find nothing to persuade us,
but that they were allowed to Live in the Land of Canaan with their Kindred, if
they would Profess the Religion, that was Established there. Nay they were in a
Capacity of having their share (though not so great a share) of the Divine
Favor and Goodness; provided they did not turn Idolaters, nor forsake the God
of their Father Abraham, but did Worship him still as Abraham was wont to do,
and as he Commanded his Children, and his Household after him, Genesis 18. 19.

I instance next in Jacob and Esau, whose Case is constantly urged in defense
of those rigid Doctrines, which are so inconsistent with the Notion of God's
Love to the World. The Children being not as yet Born, says St. Paul, nor
having done Good or Evil, it was said unto Rebecca, The Elder shall Serve the
Younger, as is it Written, Jacob have I Loved, but Esau have I Hated, Romans 9.
11, 12, 13. These Words some Interpret as if God hated Esau, if not his
Posterity too, with a perfect hatred; and by an absolute Decree, Eternally
deprived them of all Hopes of enjoying his Favor in this World, and in the
other too: And hence they go on to lay down this Principle, that God hates
some People, merely because he will, and shuts them out of the Kingdom of
Heaven, without any foresight or consideration of their Evil Works. But
whosoever shall with Attention and Impartiality of Mind, consider the Apostles
meaning in that place, will not find the least ground for that Principle, by
what he says of Esau, and that for these two Reasons.

1. FIRST, Because St. Paul does not mean, that God hated Esau, in a Proper,
Positive and Strict Sense; but only, that he did not Love him so much as he did
his Brother Jacob. For the Word Hatred, is often taken Comparatively, for a
lower and lesser degree of affection. As the Wise Man says, He that Spares
his Rod, Hates his Son, Prove. 13. 24. That is, he does not Love him so well as
he who Chasteneth his Son betimes. So when our Savior says, Luke 14. 26. If
any Man come to me, and Hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters; yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be
my Disciple: This saying would be strangely hard, were it to be understood in a
strict Sense; for Christianity does not cancel the Bonds of Nature: To Hate
such near Relations, is an Unnatural and Wicked thing, which we may be sure, is
utterly Forbidden by his Religion, who Commands us to Love even our Enemies.
But our Lord meant, that we must Love Father and Mother, and Life it Self, less
than we love Christ; that our Affections to these, must not compare with those
we are to have for him, who Loved us so as to Dye for us: And therefore St.
Matthew renders it thus; He that Loves Father or Mother more than Me, is not
Worthy of Me; and he that Loves Son or Daughter more than Me, is not Worthy of
me, St. Mat. 10. 37. In this Sense God is said to have hated Esau, meaning in
comparison of the particular kindness he showed unto Jacob: He Loved Jacob
more, he expressed his Goodness to him in a greater Measure, and in an higher
Degree, than he expressed it to Esau, though he was the Elder of the two.

2. SECONDLY, This lower Degree of Love to Esau, was not in reference to a
Future State, but only as to some outward Blessings and Advantages in this
World. And hereof there are two plain Arguments, the one is drawn from St
Paul's own Construction of the matter, (viz.) that the Elder should serve the
Younger; which can be meant of nothing but Temporal Servitude, according to the
Will and Appointment of their Father Isaac, saying to Jacob, Be Lord over thy
Brethren, and let thy Mother's Sons bow down to thee, Genesis 27. 29. The other
Argument is taken from St. Paul's Design and Drift there, which was to show,
that the Jew's had no reason to be Scandalized, because God had now given the
means of Grace to the Gentiles, as well as he had to them: Had bestowed many
Privileges upon the Gentiles, as well as upon them; had Adopted the Gentiles,
as formerly he had Adopted them; nay, had called the Gentiles to be his
peculiar People, and Rejected them, because of their Unbelief; the Apostle
shows, that the Jews had no Reason to Stumble and be Offended at this, for this
was no unjust or unusual Act of the Divine Economy: God did not bind himself
to observe Privileges, or to consider Precedence; witness his dealing with
Ishmael first, his passing them by, and his granting the Land of Canaan to
Isaac, though he was the younger Brother; and witness his dealing also with
Esau, his passing him by too, and his continuing the former grant to Jacob,
though he wa^ the younger Brother likewise. Upon this Account, the Jews should
not depend upon their Primogeniture neither: It was not an Unrighteous thing in
God, to grant now the outward means of Grace, and and Privileges Evangelical to
the Gentiles, and to make the Gentiles his peculiar People to enjoy them in a
high degree, and to take away those singular Prerogatives, and outward
Blessings from the Jews, though they were the Elder People. This is the plain
Account of St. Paul's design and meaning, in the ninth Chapter to the Romans,
and all that can be reasonably gathered thence out of the instance of Esau, is
what I observed before in the instance of Ishmael; namely, that God did not
give him such outward Advantages in this Life, as he gave his Brother Jacob,
but denied him special Favors, for some Reasons best known to himself. And in
all this, there is nothing of God's laying Esau, under the dismal Curse of
Eternal Reprobation: There is not a Word of Esau's Damnation, nor any thing
like it; nor do we meet with any thing (I think) in the Scriptures, sufficient
to make Men conclude, that he was a Damned Person. Indeed the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, calls him a Profane Person, because for one Morsel of
Meat, he Sold his Birth right; to which the Kingly Power, and the Priestly
Office, did in those Days belong. But that single Act is the only great
Wickedness that is Recorded of him, and of that, in all probability he did
Repent too, when he besought his Father, to Repent of giving away the Blessing
from him. However that was, we do not Read, that he ever Apostatized from God,
or that in the whole course of his Life, he deserted the true Religion
Practiced by his Father Isaac, and therefore there is no apparent ground, for
the heavy Sentence which is commonly past upon him by some, who perhaps are
more prodigal of other Men's Souls, than they are careful of their own.

I have insisted the more copiously upon these Famous instances, because the
true account of them, is not vulgarly known; and because, some who should have
understood these things rightly, have quite misapplied them, and have argued
from them to destroy the Belief of God's Love to the World, which is one of
God's great Glories, and the great Hope of all the Ends of the Earth.

AND now, to draw this point to an end; God's dispensing of his special Favors
in this Life (whether they be bestowed upon particular Persons, or on whole
Nations) can be no Token of their Fortunes in another Life, and therefore we
must not Measure God's Love to Mankind by the Proportions or Disproportions of
his Providence in distributing and ordering Affairs here. God has a sincere
Love for the whole Race of Adam, though he be not pleased to give us all here
the same equal Advantages, and in all this, God is Righteous, because it is an
Eternal Rule that we find, Luke 12. 47, 48, That Servant which knew his Lords
Will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be
beaten with many Stripes; but they that know not, and do things worthy of
Stripes, shall be beaten with few Stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given,
of him shall be much required; and to whom Men have committed much, of him they
will ask the more. We must not conclude, that all People are in a Lost
condition, who do not enjoy those singular Blessings which others have;
especially, if they make a due use of the Advantages which God has given them.
For these are things which God has a Power and Right to dispose of according
to his own will and pleasure: And, however he is pleased to dispose of them, he
does no wrong to any. Besides, this World is not the place for Rewards, and if
some fall short, as to these outward Matters here, they are capable of having
an abundant compensation made them in a Future State. But this is not their
case, who once fall under everlasting Condemnation; and therefore Men's Lots in
another World, ought to be determined, not according to Pleasure, but according
to Righteousness. Their sad condition there, is Remediless, and unchangeable,
and the Torments they endure, are not only Simply and Infinitely Evils, but
they are Evils too, which are supposed to be inflicted on them under the notion
of punishments; and therefore they must be in consideration of antecedent
Crimes, Knowingly and Deliberately, and of choice committed; for to Inflict
Eternal Torments upon Men for what they cannot avoid, is Inconsistent with the
Righteousness of God, contrary to Eternal Reason, and utterly Repugnant to the
infinite excellency and perfections of his most Blessed Nature.

CHAP. VII. That we must not judge Uncharitably of other People, upon a
Presumption, that we our Selves, are of the Number of those, who are Elected to
Everlasting Life; and what the Scripture means by the Elect.
Fourthly, CONSIDERING God's Love to the whole World, we must be careful not to
Judge Uncharitably of others, upon a Presumption, that we our selves are of the
Number of those who are Elected to Everlasting Life. Divines usually give us a
Scholastical Distinction, between Election unto Glory, and Election unto Grace.
By Election unto Glory, they mean God's purpose of bringing all those, and only
those unto Eternal Life, who Believe in Christ, and observe his Laws. Now
though the consideration of this be of great Comfort to all who Love the Lord
Jesus in Sincerity, yet the Decree it self (as far as it is known to us) is
General; it is Revealed to us in general Terms; as to particulars, it is
secret: particulars are not to be known; nor can any ordinary Christian be
Infallibly certain, that he is chosen to Everlasting Happiness, till he is gone
out of the World.

WE Read indeed of a Book of Life, wherein Men's Names are said to be Written.
St. John speaks of such a Book he saw in his Vision; the design whereof was, to
represent things to us in a way, which was most adapted and suitable to our
Capacities. The meaning of the Vision as to that, is, that God does infallibly
Know, and at the Day of Judgment will openly Declare, Reveal, and Reward those
who do now Faithfully serve him; of this purpose of God, there is no manner of
Question, and therefore if Men conceive, that we dispute against any such
Decree, they do but beat the Air, and Talk of Matters which they do not
understand. The thing insisted on is this, that none are chosen to Eternal
Happiness, without any consideration of their Faith, and Works, and
perseverance to the end in well doing. And as touching a Man's particular
Election unto Glory, or the Gracious purpose of God toward this or that Person
in particular; this we say, is a Secret, a Decree not to be known, till the
Book of Life comes to be opened, that is, till the Day of Doom comes.
Therefore every one of us must stay our time, nor must any dare to go now upon
fond presumptions of their own; especially so as to condemn or think hardly of
others: I call such partial Conceits, fond Presumptions of Men's own, because,
though many People be strongly persuaded, that they are absolutely and
particularly Ordained unto Life, and cannot miscarry; yet as to this, they
believe without Book, and without sufficient Grounds, because they want the
Authority of Divine Revelation, which is the only sure Groundwork of a right
Faith. It Is Imagination only, and Opinion how strong and violent soever it may
be; and instead of being bottomed upon the Word of God, it may proceed from two
very evil Causes.

1. FIRST, From a Spirit of Pride, which Tempts some to think, their Names
ought to be Written in Heaven, and therefore are soon persuaded to believe,
that they really are so, though for this, they take either their own Word, or
the Opinion of others, whose Persons they have in equal admiration. I heartily
wish, that all such as go upon this imagination, would seriously consider,
whether this be not one prime reason of it, because it is a Notion so very
pleasing and suitable to their own Hearts.

2. SECONDLY, It may proceed too from a Principle of Carnality; for it is an
imagination that is Friendly and Kind to Flesh and Blood: Wherever it
prevails such as are possessed withit, find no necessity for them to mortify
their Lusts, and to be careful of Living Godly, Righteouss, and Sober Lives.
This they call good Morality, but cannot think it of any use to them, because
they suppose themselves sure of their Salvation by God's Absoute Decree; upon
this Account, they and their Vices may dwell very quietly and lovingly
together: They may be Lewd, Dishonest, Unjust, Hypocritical, Malicious,
Revengeful, False, Troublesome, Uncharitable, Proud, and Lovers of the World;
and yet these Vices are (as they think) consistent with their State of Grace,
because they are persuaded that stands firtm, upon the immutable Will of God.
Considering therefore the Vanity and Origical of such Pharisaical conceits, it
is very dangerous for People to give any way to them, and more dangerous to
trust to them after a presumptuous manner, and most of all dangerous to value
themselves upon them; especially so, as to Judge uncharitably of others, as if
they were no better than Reprobates and Castaways. This is a very ill thing,
and that which is far from being a Sign of their particular Election; rather
indeed an Argument of the contrary, because all Uncharitableness, is a direct
Violation of the Law of Christ, by which we shall all of us be Judged in the
Day of God. Since God Loves us all, instead of shutting any out of his Kingdom,
every one should lend his Brother his Hand to help him in.

2dly, FOR secondly there is (as Divines usually speak) an Election unto Grace,
which we have all a Title unto. Election unto Grace is, when People have this
great Blessing and Privilege given them, to Live under the means of Grace; when
they have the Gospel Mysteries Published and Revealed to them; and when they
have the Assistance of the Holy Spirit offered and afforded them so that they
Receive the Truth as it is in Jesus: Whatever Fancies some are apt to entertain
concerning this matter; this is the true Scripture Notion of Election.
Accordingly the Scripture means by the Elect of God, not such as are supposed
to have been from Eternity particularly, and by name designed for Glory; for I
can confidently say it, that the Word is not (in that Sense) any where used in
the whole Scripture, but generally such as now profess true Faith in Christ;
and especially such Eminent Persons among them, as by their Virtuous and Holy
Lives, adorn the Doctrine of God their Savior in all things, and resolve
firmly and faithfully to Persevere unto the end in so doing. The Reason of this
honorable Appellation, is taken from the different Effect, which the Word of
God has upon the Hearts of them that hear it: On some it makes a slight and
superficial Impression, like the Seed cast on the Way side: Others receive it
with Joy, and Believe for a while; but in time of Temptation, immediately fall
away: In others, it takes deeper and better Root; but yet in time, is choked
with the Cares, and Riches, and Pleasures of this Life, so that it brings no
Fruit to Perfection. But others there are (though the fewest in number) that
lay up the Word in Honest and Good Hearts, and that bring forth Fruit
plentifully, and with perseverance in well-doing to their Lives end. Now of all
that Profess Christ's Religion, those who adhere close to it are the best, the
most Eminent and Principal ones; and therefore the Scripture calls them,
after a more peculiar manner, The Elect. Many are called to the knowledge of
the Truth, but few are chosen, says our Savior; or according to the Greek,
the Elect are few; that is, the Faithful and Choice Professors of the Truth,
are few in comparison. So Matt. 24. 22. Our Savior speaking of the great
Tribulation that was to come upon Jerusalem, said, That for the Elects sake,
those Days should be shorined; meaning, that out of Respect and Love to the
true Believers among the Jews, God would shorten the time so, that a remnant
even of the Unbelieving Jews should escape too, though they did not deserve it.
So again, v. 24. Our Lord foretold, that False Christ's would arise, which would
(if it were possible) deceive the very Elect; that is, the most Sincere,
Persevering Christians, to use the Words of our incomparable Paraphrast Dr.
Hammond. And so in diverse other places, where it is said, that God will gather
together his Elect; that he will Avenge his own Elect; that none shall lay any
thing to the Charge of God's Elect; that we must put on (as the Elect of God)
Holy and Beloved Bowels of Mercy; and the like, the Word signifies those, who
are now in a Blessed State of Faith and Holiness; those who Serve, Obey, and
Love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity. Briefly if you search the New Testament
throughout, you will find this Observation true, that generally speaking,
People are called the Elect of God, not in respect of any Antecedent particular
Decree, which is a thing altogether hidden; but in respect of those excellent
Qualities, Virtues, and Perfections, for which some are Eminent and Exemplary
in this present World; and because for their gracious dispositions and
endowments, they are the Choicest, the Best, the most valuable part of Mankind;
a peculiar people, Zealous of good Works. There is no doubt but God knows who
are his, who will continue his, who will be fit and rightly prepared for his
most Glorious, Beatifical Presence. But we have no Revelation concerning of
particulars; and as for the Scripture, which is the standing Revelation we are
to trust unto and to go by, it means by the Elect, Sincere, Sound, Holy, and
Faithful Christians: They are God's Elect, in the Scripture Sense.

AND hence it follows, that none of those People who profess the Faith of
Christ, and Obedience to him, should be Censorious and Uncharitable to others,
who own the Lord Jesus as well as they; and who are (for ought they know) in as
ready, nay by their Humility and Charity, in a readier way to Eternal
Happiness, than such as out of a principle of Pharisaism, and Spiritual Pride,
Judge hardly of their Brethren. Have they been Baptized in the Name of Christ?
So have we: Do they Believe the several Articles of the Christian Faith? So do
we: Do they use the Ordinances of Christ? So do we: Do they pretend Holiness? I
pray God we may all appear Holy in the Day of God; and I wish some be not
grossly mistaken in the Notion of Holiness: for it does not consist in a demure
Look, nor in odd Gestures, nor in dry Opinions, nor in Raptures and Ecstacies,
nor in Niceness, Affectation, or Singularity as to Matters Circumstantial. But
good Morality is a great part of True Holiness, and it does entirely consist in
a Godly, Righteous, and Sober Life: And whether their Holiness or ours be most
substantial, that Day will show, when all our Works shall be tried, and when
God will Judge even the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ.

IN the mean time, People should not talk of their Election and Holiness, so as
to forget Charity. God's great and undeserved Goodness to us all, should Teach
us to be Good, and Kind, and Affectionate to each other. Beloved, if God so
Loved us, we ought also to love one another, says the Apostle 1 John 4. 11.
Some have a strange faculty of Predestinating Themselves to Eternal Happiness,
and of Reprobating others to Eternal Misery. But by all that I have read, and
considered upon this Subject, it is great Ignorance joined together with
Self-love and Factiousness of Spirit, that prevails with some Men to maintain a
Point so opposite to the Love of God, since the Point has been so accurately
Examined, especially in these Later, and more Inquisitive Ages.

INSTEAD of expressing uncharitableness to one another, upon fond presumption
when we are all called by the Great Mercy of God to a State of Savlation; we
should every one of us give diligence, to make our Calling and Election sure,
as the Apostle tells us, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Meaning, that we should make such a good
use of these means of Grace, we have the Privilege and Happiness of enjoying,
that they may be effectual to us, and that we fail not of obtaining the end of
that Faith and Hope, to which we are all called. And the way the Apostle
directs, is Plain and Open: If (says he) ye do these things, ye shall never
fall; that is, if ye do the things he mentions particularly at the 5, 6, and
7, ver. of that Chapter; if ye add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue
Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance, Patience, and to
Patience, Godliness, and to Godliness, Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly
Kindness, Charity: If these things be in you, and abound, ye shall never fall.
You see the Terms of Everlasting Life are conditional; and that it lies on our
part to perform those conditions. Whence it necessarily follows, that whatever
God's Purposes are, there are none on Their side, who are People of Ungodly and
Uncharitable Minds. The Decree is extant, Heb. 12. 14. Without Holiness (that
is, without the entire practice of Religion) no Man shall see the Lord; and
therefore it is very dangerous, to trust to God's Secret Decrees, while Men are
wanting to that which is a manifest Duty. Besides, there is required Habitual
Sanctity, and Purity of Heart, to fit and prepare us for an Heavenly State; to
make us Meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of Saints in Light, Col. 1. 2.
without this gracious disposition of Soul, the Works of Heaven would be utterly
Unsuitable to our Inclinations; and we our selves should be utterly Incapable
of exerting our faculties upon them, with the cheerfulness and pleasure which
is the Life of the Blessed; and the Joys there are of such a Spiritual and
Sublime Nature, that they are altogether inconsistent with Tempers, which are
Earthly, Sensual, Devilish. So that, were there no Decree, to keep Evil-minded
People out of God's Everlasting Kingdom; the very Nature of the Thing would
render it absolutely impossible for them to be Happy in it, because their
Corrupt dispositions are quite Unfit for it; nay, Averse and Contrary to those
things, wherein the Blessedness of Heaven does consist. Therefore, instead of
taking upon us to shut others out, we should have a great care lest we exclude
our selves; by depending upon Decrees on God's part, without Holiness on our
own: Upon such Decrees, as may be said to be of our own making, if we do not
qualify our selves in such a sort as God has commanded us. Men should look
very well at Home, inquire diligently into their true State, Rectify their
Tempers, Mould their Hearts unto a Divine Frame, set their Affections on things
which are Honest, Pure, and Lovely; Resemble God, by being Merciful and Good to
All; and Imprint on their Souls, those Divine Characters, which are a
Similitude of His Perfections, and Glory. This is the ultimate end of God's
Love to us all, that he may make us like unto Himself, in the entire goodness
of our Nature; and that by those means he may render us truly Happy in the
Fruition of Himself: And whatever some giddy-headed People conceive, it is very
high and dangerous Presumption, to leave the whole business of their Salvation
to God; and to throw it all upon God, first to ordain them peremtorily to
Everlasting Happiness, and then to work upon them after an Irresistible manner,
as if they were to be haled and forced to it, though with all their ill
Qualities about them, and notwithstanding their uncharitableness; in
particular, than which nothing can be more Opposite to the Love of God, nor to
the Condition of that Place, which is the Habitation of his Glory.

CHAP. VIII. That our Care must be, to make such a due Use of Gods Love and
Goodness toward us all, as to perform those things which are indispensibly
necessary, in order to the actual Possession of God's Everlasting Kingdom. The
Reason of this, and what the things are, which we are bound to perform.
Fifthly, CONSIDERING therefore, what Qualifications are necessary in Us, to
make our present Calling and Election firm, effectual, and eternally Beneficial
to us, our care must be in the fifth place, to make such a due Use of the
Divine Love, and Goodness toward us all; as to perform those things which are
indispensibly necessary, in order to the actual Possession of God's Everlasting
Kingdom. As yet, the way to it is laid open for us, and we have a Liberty and
Power given us to enter in; but it is upon certain Conditions. We are delivered
from a necessity of Perishing, notwithstanding our many Provocations; we are
made capable of Eternal Life, notwithstanding our former guilt: But yet, diverse
things are required on our part, that we may be actually admitted into a fixed
State of Happiness in Heaven. Though God loved us, and gave his Son to us, to
tender satisfaction in our stead, and by undergoing a Temporary Death himself,
to Rescue us from Everlasting Torments, (in which Services of the Divine
Economy, the World had not any the least Hand; they were acts of pure Grace,
of Mercy undeserved, unthought of by Mankind) yet God being the Sovereign
Governor and Legislator of the Universe, it would have been inconsistent with
his Honor and Greatness, to have given up the Authority of his Laws, which yet
he must have done, had he permitted us to take our own Courses, and to live
according to our own Wills, without any danger. Therefore, that he might at
once provide for our Indemnity, and secure his own Authority also, when Christ
was pleased so freely to undertake the Office of a Mediator; it was Covenanted
between the Father and Him, that upon such and such Conditions, his Obedience,
Death and Intercession, should be perfectly available on our behalf. And, for
the making of those terms good it was Covenanted likewise, that the Holy Spirit
should be given to enable us for the performance of those Duties which were
expected from us; and that such a Measure should be accepted at our Hands, as
we should perform by our sincere endeavors, according to our Capacities and
Power. Hence it was, that Christ brought us Laws from Heaven, to Regulate and
Govern our Actions; that we might not frustrate the Counsel and Love of God
toward us, that we might not at last fail of God's Grace, nor come short of
his Glory; and of that Happiness which the Lord Jesus came into the World to
purchase for us all. The Price is paid; and it was Love unspeakable in Christ
to lay it down, and in his Father to accept it at his Hands for us. But though
the general Purchase be made yet, for the complete Possession of it, we must be
careful to behave our selves so as God requires us, in order to the conveyance
of the Title, to every particular Soul. We must believe steadfastly on the Name
of the Son of God; and to this Faith, we must add sincere Repentance from all
Dead Works; and make it our business to serve God, in true Holiness, and
Righteousness, all the days of our Life. Without these Performances on our
part, Christ will, in the end, profit us nothing, because he is the Author of
Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. They only will have
the Final and Everlasting enjoyment of God's Love to the World. For the Law, by
which the Righteous Judge of all the Earth will proceed, is very plain, Romans 2.
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. He will render to every Man according to his Deeds; to
them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality (God will render) Eternal Life: But unto them that are contentious,
and do not obey the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness (He will render)
Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul that does Evil,
of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; But Glory, and Honor, and Peace, to
every Man that works Good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; for
there is no respect of Persons with God. You see, Men's Eternal Doom, depends
upon the Quality of their Lives and Actions here; as they are either Good or
Evil, so will God reward them with Happiness, or Misery hereafter. And for this
Reason it was, that St. Paul calls God the Savior of all Men, especially of
those that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. He is the Savior of all Men Intentionally;
because, He intended not to Reject any by an Absolute Decree, or to exclude any
from the Hopes and Means of Salvation; but, by the Doctrines and Holy Life of
his Son Jesus Christ, did intend to open and show the way of Peace unto all,
and encouraged all People to follow it to the end; and because too he sent
Christ to offer him satisfaction for the Sins of all Men, to Die for all Men,
and to Merit Eternal Salvation for all, if all would lay hold on his Merits, by
such a lively, operative, and purifying Faith, as is perfected by Charity. In
short, because he has done those things which were becoming and proper for a
Wise and Merciful God to do, for Sinful, and Reasonable Creatures, in order to
their Salvation: He is rightly called the Savior of all Men, Sufficiently,
Meritoriously, Intentionally; and if he be not to all Actually and Effectually
so too, it must proceed from the voluntary Neglect and Crimes of some, who by
their Evil Deeds, hinder themselves from being Actually and Effectually Saved.
To Illustrate this by a plain Similitude (such as it is:) Suppose a great
number of us were Captives, and Bond Slaves, sold (as Slaves were formerly wont
to be Sold) into the Hands of Arbitrary and Merciless Masters: And suppose the
King of his tender Compassion and Goodness toward us, as having been his own
Subjects, should send a valuable Consideration, and Ample Ransom, with a
gracious purpose to Redeem us all without exception, but with a Proviso, and
upon condition of our true Faith and Allegiance to him; though some out of a
strange Love of Slavery, or through Carelessness or Crosness of Temper, or by
some other Miscarriages, might hinder themselves from being Actually Ransomed,
and so throw away their Liberty for ever; yet this could be no disparagement to
the King's Clemency and Goodness: He would deserve the Name of our common
Redeemer nevertheless, the intentional Redeemer of us all; and I doubt not, but
in such a case, we should all think it very Reasonable for us to acknowledge
the Kindness intended for all. To apply this instance, and to use the Scripture
Expressions which relate unto it: We were all once sold under Sin, become the
Servants of Unrighteousness, taken Captives by the Devil, who laid his snares
for all Mankind. But God of his Mercy, sent his Son into the World to recover
us all out of the snare of the Devil; to lead Captivity Captive, to give
himself a Ransom for all, to Redeem us from all Iniquity, to deliver us from
the Bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Children of God;
that being made free from Sin, we might become Servants unto God, and have our
Fruit unto Holiness, and the end Everlasting Life. Nothing can be clearer, than
this is from the Holy Scripture, that God sent his Son into the World to this
end and purpose, and with this most gracious Intention; and for this Reason,
the whole Race of Mankind ought with all Thankfulness of Heart to acknowledge,
and adore him as the Savior of us all. If, notwithstanding all his tenders of
Grace and Mercy, some will be so wanting to their Eternal Interest, as to
continue still in Bondage, and to go on in their Wicked and Ungodly Courses,
till they take their last Fortunes with the Devil and his Angels, from whose
Power and Damnation they might have been delivered: This will be indeed an
aggravation of their own Crimes, and Folly, and a demonstration of the Divine
Justice; but no Diminution at all of God's Love and Goodness, by the various
acts, whereof he shows now his great and unwillingness to have any of us
Perish. And it shows the Reason, why the Apostle said, He is the Savior,
especially of them that Believe, because, though he be loving unto all, yet
these make a special use of his general Love; they walk worthy of their
Vocation by their special Obedience; they order all Actions in special
conformity to his Commands and Laws; and so a special Application of Christ's
Merits is made unto Them, that he becomes Finally, and Effectually, and in the
Event and Issue, the Savior of them only.

It concerns us therefore as much as our Eternal Comforts amount to, to take
great care of our Hearts and Actions; because, whatever Notions some are
willing to please their Fancies with, every ones Final State will be suitable
to the Nature and Condition of his Works. To be Prying into, and to Depend on
God's Secret Counsels, and at the same time to neglect ones own Life, is the
ready way to a more fatal downfall, than His, who walks on, gazing upon the
Stars, and presently breaks his Neck by tumbling down a rugged Precipice. The
Revealed things belong to us; and this is the Revelation, that If we will enter
into Life, we must keep the Commandments, Mat. 19. 17. That in every Nation, he
that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him, Act. 10. 35.
That we must work out our Salvation with fear and Trembling, Phil. 2. 12. That
we must not be conformed to this World, but be transformed by the renewing of
our Minds, Romans 12. 2. That we must cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
the Flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. That we must be Holy in all manner of
Conversation, as He which has called us is Holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15. And that if God
so Loved us, we ought also to Love one another, 1 John 4. 11. These things
being so plain, the great business of our Life should be, to let all empty
Speculations go, and to Study the Practical Part of Religion. For it is not our
Opinions, but solid Piety and Virtue that will carry us out in the day of God.
He has showed thee, O Man, what is good: And what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy God?
Says the Prophet, Mic. 6. 8. And to what purpose has the Grace Grace of God,
which brings Salvation, appeared unto all Men? Why, That denying Ungodliness
and worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this
present World, says the Apostle, Tit. 2. 12. If then we would answer the Love
of God to us, so as to be the better for it indeed, and to reap benefit by it
Everlastingly; this is the true Way, viz. to be led by the Goodness of God unto
Repentance, to bring forth Fruits Meet for Repentance, to Eschew Evil, to
follow Peace and Holiness, to have our Conversation Honest in the World, to do
those things that are Just, and Pure, and Lovely, and of good Report; to serve
God acceptably with Reverence and Godly Fear, to lay aside all Bitterness,
Malice and Hatred; to put on as the Elect of God, Bowels of Mercies, Kindness,
Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, if any Man have a Quarrel against any; and over all to
put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness. These are so many Branches of
the whole Duty of Man; and if ye do these things, whatever Conceits
uncharitable People may have of you, ye shall never fall.

CHAP. IX. That we must make God all possible Returns of love. What love is.
How excellent when it is a Divine Affection. Two things showed; First, How we
may Acquire the love of God. Secondly, How we are to Express it; ( viz) By
Obeying him; by Resembling him; and by desiring the Present, and Future
Fruition of him.
Sixthly, TO dispose our Minds thoroughly for these Religious performances, we
should above all things possess our Hearts with such a Sense of God's Love to
us, as will naturally excite us to return all possible degrees of Love to him.
Love is a most vigorous Affection of the Soul, a Principle of Action, that
Works and Exerts it Self after an Omnipotent manner, as if it resembled that
miraculous Faith, which removes Mountains: It Is an Affection that bears up
against all difficulties, that breaks thorough all Opposition, that spares no
Cost, that begrudgeth nothing, either of Time or Labor, and that engages all
the Faculties of the Soul, in such generous Undertakings as Dull, Selfish, and
Phlegmatic Natures, are hardly capable of opening a Thought to. In short, it
is such a commanding Passion, as brings a Man into Captivity with his own
Consent, and makes him pleasantly and cheerfully a Vassal; witness that single
instance of Love, Jacob who notwithstanding the unworthy Artifices of his Uncle
Laban, looked upon his many Years Servitude, but as a few Days, for the
Affection he bore to his Beloved Rachel, Genesis 29 As this Affection is more and
more Purified, so it rises in its Vigor; and when it comes to be a Divine
Love, placed upon God, and upon the Son of God, it is a most Active Delightful
Principle of Obedience to his Will in all things. It is that which sets the
Blessed Angels upon the Wing, to Execute his Commands with such Pleasure and
Alacrity. The same Divine Principle inspired the Apostles, and other such
Saints of Christ (especially in the B^gining of Christianity) to Do, and to
Suffer all that was possible for Christ's Name; with that Resolution,
Cheerfulness and Zeal, which made them Renowned unto all Ages. The Love of
Christ constrains us, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 14. And to omit other
Instances, I cannot but remember here the Ardent Zeal of that famous imitator
of St. Paul, Ignatius the Martyr, Bishop of Antioch in the Apostolical Age; who
being Condemned to be thrown to the Lions, as he was on his tedious Journey to
Rome, where he was to Suffer, he sent beforehand to the Christians there, an
Epistle, wherein he most Importunately and Passionately desired them, not to
use any means in the World, to prevent his Martyrdom; but rather assist the
earnest Desires he had to Die for the Lord Jesus. He Prayed heartily, that it
might be his Lot, to be torn in pieces by the Wild Beasts, which were provided
for him; and that he might find them Fierce and Ravenous. He professed, that
(rather than fail) he would Court, nay Constrain them to Devour him: He
expressed his Wishes, that he might endure any Torments, the Flames, the Cross
the united Force of Savage Creatures, Manglings, Dilacerations, the dispersing
of his Bones, the chopping of all his Limbs into pieces, the Consumption of his
whole Body, nay all the pains the Devil could bring upon him, so that he might
but enjoy Jesus Christ. He declared that all the Kingdoms of this World, would
do him no good without Martyrdom; and that he had much rather Die for Christ,
and to be with Christ, than be Monarch of the whole Earth; and the true cause
of this his Flaming Zeal was, the great Sense he had of Christ's wonderful
Affection, in Dying for the World; which Commanded from him the return of these
Passionate Affections to God and his Redeemer: (...), (said he) my Love was
Crucified.

I have briefly observed these things to show, that Love is a most powerful
Affection, when it is Sincere, Hearty and Earnest. Of all the Affections of the
Soul, it is that which will not be concealed, or lie idle. There is a vehemence
in the Nature of it, which will break forth, and discover the Delights and
Desires that are within. And therefore to Fit and Temper our Minds duly for
those Performances which God looks for, as a Genuine return on our part, for
his abundant Love to us all; and as necessary means, in order to the Final and
Everlasting Fruition of himself; we must raise our Affections to this hihg and
noble Pitch* to Love the Lord our God With all our Heart, and with all our
Soul, and with all our Mind, Mat. 22. 37. Our Savior there calls it the first
and great Commandment, not only because it is of prime Obligation, but
moreover, because it is the main Genuine spring, whence all Acts of Obedience
to God, do naturally flow.

INDEED Solomon tells us. That the Fear of the Lord, is the beginning of
Wisdom, Prove. 9. 10. And doubtless the consideration of God's Power and
Justice, is a very necessary thing to keep People in Awe, nay the only thing
that is a Check upon those, who would not stick to commit Iniquity with
greediness, and run out into all manner of Excesses, were it not for fear of
God's Judgments in this World, and of Hell Torments in the next. But though
this be a good restraint, and highly needful in its kind, yet it is far from
being so excellent a preservative of Virtue and Religion, as the Love of God
is. For this Fear is in some Men the Effect of an Absurd, Slavish Disposition,
Proceeding purely from Self-Love, and from a Natural Principle of
Self-Preservation; which makes them forbear those Sins for their own sakes
only; which otherwise they would readily Commit, were there no Danger: And as
for those positive Acts of Obedience, to the Divine Commands which they
perform, they proceed too, from the same servise Principle; so that it is at
best, a Forced and Unwilling Obedience, extorted merely to Pacify a terrible
God, that is Armed with Power to Revenge the Contempt of of his most Sacred
Authority: And though there is (and ought to be) in the very Best and most Holy
People, a Fear of God, or a Dread of his Displeasure, and of Eternal
Punishment: A Fear that is well pleasing unto God, and very useful to
themselves; yet in those Pious Hearts, it is attended and mixed with a very
Ardent Love; and so it is an Ingenuous Fear, a Filial Reverence, like that
Awful Regard, which Dutiful and Affectionate Children have for their dear
Parents; at the same time they are afraid of their Displeasure, and Obey; but
Obey with Cheerfulness and Delight. It is Love (that most generous Affection of
the Soul) it is that which makes Fear such a good and kindly Principle of
Action; and the warmer our Love is, the more Extensive, Hearty, and Acceptable
will our Obedience be. Therefore that we may Answer the Love of God to us, by a
cheerful performance of those things, which of his great Mercy and Goodness he
has proposed to our Practice, that thereby he may fit us for true Happiness in
Heaven; To Answer I say this his unspeakable Love to us all, we should use all
possible endeavors, to Inflame our Souls with such a Love toward him again,
as wrought so vigorously in the Saints of Old, who counted not their very Lives
dear to them, So that they might finish their Course with Joy, as St. Paul said
of himself, Act. 20. 24.

In the closing of this whole Subject, which began with the Contemplation of
God's Love, and is now to end with the Consideration of ours: It will be
requisite for me to show these two things,

First, How we may acquire.

Secondly, How we are to Express that Divine Affection, which I now speak of.

2dly, First then, The way to Acquire this Love is, to represent God to our
Minds as the best of all Beings; and that in a two fold Respect.

1. As the most Desirable, Delightful, and Amiable good in his Nature; and,

2. As a Being, that is, most Communicative of Goodness, and Happiness to us.

1st. First, We should represent God to our Minds as the most Amiable Good in
his Nature Some Perfections are very indearing, and Attractive of our
Affections, though we be supposed to be never the better for them. As, that
Perfection of Body, which consists in External Beauty, and Loveliness,
inviteth the Spectators Affection, though the Person so Accomplished is, and is
ever like to be an utter Stranger to him. The Beauties of the Mind are much
more Attractive of a Rational Affection, Wisdom, Truth, Sincerity,
Faithfulness, Gentleness, Meekness, Patience, Righteousness, Mercy, a
Condescending Temper, and whatever comes under the notion of true Goodness;
these are Amiable Virtues, and Dispositions, which we cannot but Love one
another for, though they are in us but in a scanty Measure, and are mixed too
with many Infirmities. Such as they be, they are Derived also: We are beholding
for them to that Supreme and first Cause, who is the Fountain of all
Excellencies; and therefore they must needs be most Amiable in God, because in
Him they are Absolute and Infinite; nor can we conceive any Perfections
Intellectual, or Moral, in the most Excellent Creatures, no not in the Blessed
Angels themselves, but what are transcendently Glorious in the Father of
Spirits, whose Excellencies admit of no boundaries, or Abatement. Therefore to
kindle and maintain in our Hearts, a Rational, Holy and Divine Love, we should
represent God to our Minds under such charming Ideas, as become a Being so
admirably Perfect in himself, so Transcendently, and Gloriously Excellent. We
should Conceive of him, as a Being that knows how to order all things for the
best, and with a strict regard to the good of his whole Creation, and of every
part of it, that is but capable of participating of his Goodness: As a Being
that takes a Particular care of Mankind; and more especially of those Men, who
Study to live in conformity to his Laws; as a Being that is always steady and
constant to his Promises, nor is capable of Lying (a thing so Repugnant to his
most Blessed Nature; that none but the Devil can be the Father of it:) As a
Being that is Righteous in all his ways, that loves Righteousness, and hates
Iniquity, that gives Laws which are Just and Good, that rewards every one
according to his Works, and punishes none but according to Equity and Eternal
Reason. We should Conceive of him as a Being, that is ready to take Compassion
upon all that need it, and are capable of his Mercies; that is, unwilling to
have any of us Lost, that is, slow to Anger, that is, patient toward all, that
is, Merciful, Gracious, Long-suffering, abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping
Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin. In short, we
should Conceive of God as a blessed Being, that loves and cares for our poor
Souls, Infinitely, more than we our selves do. Under these lovely Ideas, God
represents himself in the Holy Scriptures; and to behold him under such
ravishing Conceptions, is an effectual way of raising in us a Rational
affection to him; because one great Branch of Love consists in Esteem; in
that Honor and Admiration which springs from the Excellencies we Discern, or
believe to be in the Object of our Affections.

2. ANOTHER Branch of it is, the placing of our Hearts upon the Object we
highly Admire; the desiring and Seeking after it, and delighting in it, as the
precious and dear thing, wherein we conceive our Happiness to be Lodged. And to
raise our Affections to this noble pitch, we should represent God to our Minds
also as a Being, that is actually Communicative of Goodness and Happiness to
us. Love naturally commands Love again: It Is an Affection of the Soul that
cannot resist any thing which is like it self; but presently closes with the
object, that by suitable expressions of Kindness invites and meets it. Here
then we should consider, how that most perfect and excellent Being has been
before hand with us, what good he has done us, and does do for us daily. The
Life we now live, and are so very tender of, was given us at the first by that
Father of Spirits, and is every Moment supported by his sole Providence which
Feeds and Clothes us, and has Preserved us all along from innumerable Dangers;
from many which Time may have worn out of our Memories; and from more, which we
have not minded, or were so hidden that we could not discover them. Those
Blessings which lie in common to Mankind, every one has had his share of: And
were particular Persons so advertent as to observe God's particular Providence
to them, there is not one in the World but would find himself obliged to make
God particular returns of Thankfulness and Affection. God is so Good to the
meanest and most Ungrateful People, that if every one would but keep by him two
private Registers, one of God's Mercies, and another of his own Actions, the
very sense of God's Goodness to every Man (I mean as to the things of this
Life) could not but warm all our Hearts toward him, especially if we did open
both Registers, and then fairly compare, what we have had, with what we have
deserved.

BUT above all we should consider, what God has done for our Immortal Souls,
by his wise and gracious ordering all things that relate to a Life Eternal.
That State being Everlastingly Unchangeable, when once Men enter into it,
whether it be a State of Blessedness, or Torments, God of his Infinite
Goodness, and most tender Compassion, was pleased to make such ample Provision
for the welfare of us all, that one might think it hardly possible for People
of Probity and Thoughtfulness to miss of a Blessed Eternity. He sent the Son of
his Love to transact the weighty business of a Mediator, that God and Men might
be no longer at a distance. The Lord Jesus did innumerable Miracles, to prove
and confirm his Divine Authority: He declared unto the World the whole Counsel
of God, that nothing of Light might be wanting: He delivered us such Precepts
as are suitable to our own Reason, and such as are Easy and Delightful to
those, who will but Accustom themselves to the observation of them: He has
encouraged us with such Promises, as are enough to Animate us in the greatest
Difficulties, and to carry us undauntedly through all. He submitted to a most
Painful and Reproachful Death, that he might offer up a full, perfect, and
sufficent Oblation, Sacrifice, and Satisfaction for the sins of the whole
World, and that in Virtue of his Death, he might for ever make Intercession for
us. He gave his Holy Spirit to inspire his Apostles, and to assist us all, by
such kindly Operations as are suitable to Creatures, endued with Rational
faculties, to Illuminate our Understandings, to persuade our Wills to purify
our Affections, to strengthen our Hopes, and to Comfort and Cherish us in our
Trials. He wooeth us daily by his Ambassadors, who beseech us in Christ's
stead, that we would be reconciled unto God. He has instituted Ordinances, to
Seal the Mercies of God to every particular Soul, which will use those
Ordinances in a due manner. In short, he has afforded us all the means, which
Reasonable and Immortal Souls stand in need of; and all this for no other end,
but to make us Eternally Happy; happy in the fruition of Himself, who is so
infinitely Happy in his own Perfections and Condition, that he needs not the
Service or Attendance of Men, or of Angels. These things therefore could not
flow from any other Principle, but a Principle of Goodness. And this is the
true genuine Reason of Love; whereas those frightful Ideas, under which some
have misrepresented the most Blessed God, serve to cast a Damp on Men's
Spirits, and to Alienate their Minds and Affections from that Divine and most
Amiable Being. Plutarch in his Book of Superstition, describes those People as
God's Enemies, and their own too, who think hardly of God, and believe him to
be Fierce, False, Mutable, Revengeful, Cruel, Angry upon every light occasion,
Austere, Rigorous and Hurtful. He tells us there, that of all Men, such are in
the very worst condition, that they are Afraid of him, even when they have
Recourse to him; that they Reproach at the same time and Flatter him; that they
Pray to him, and in the same Breath Asperse him; that at once they Fear him,
and Hate him; and that though they go to his Temples to Worship, and to offer
Sacrifices to him, yet this is such a sort of Courtship, wherewith Flatterers
accost Tyrants they Hate, and Curse them in their Hearts, the very time they
seem to Honor them. Plutarch thought all frightful Ideas to be unsuitable to
the Nature of a Deity. God (says he) is the Hope of Virtue, not a Formidable,
Dreadful object. Though Artificers are wont to represent him by Images that
have a terrible Aspect, yet Philosophers will tell you, that God's Majesty is
attended with Goodness, with Benignity, with a kind and careful Providence. And
he was of Pythagoras his Mind (how slightly soever some thought of it) That
wise and Virtuous People are in the best Temper, when they approach unto God,
because their Devotions are mixed with fair Opinions of him, and with sincere
Affections toward him. These, you will think, were great things for an Heathen
to say, and so they were. But we find by constant Experience, that it is natural
for us to Hate those we are Afraid of, and Nature will work after the same
manner, when we have to do with God, if we conceive of him under such scaring
notions, as to believe him to be a Sour, Harsh. Angry, and Tyrannical Being.
Such Qualities are very Hateful; they create Horror and Aversion, but it is
impossible for them to beget any Love; and therefore they must be utterly
incompatible with the Glories and Excellencies of God, whose Mercy is over all
his Works, and who shows his Almighty Power most chiefly, by doing works of
Pity and Compassion, and to entertain such apprehensions of him, as are a
disparagement to his great Goodness, is the ready way to bring us to the
condition of those old Pagans, who Worshipped Evil Doemons, merely for Fear,
lest they should Hurt them.

I deny not, but there may be some Kind and Measure of Love in those, who look
upon God as a stern and rigorous Being, if they can but persuade themselves
into a Belief, that God is so Partial to Their Souls, as to make them his
particular Favorites by a fixed and unconditional Decree. But this degree and
sort of Love, is merely a Passion of the Sensitive Soul, raised by the power of
Fancy; because the Belief of this absolute purpose toward Them, in particular,
wants the Authority of Divine Revelation. Rational Affection, or that Love
toward God which is necessary to make all our performances a reasonable
Service, is quite another thing. It is a fervor of Heart, excited by the
rational Faculty, the Understanding, upon full and clear Conviction of the Mind
out of the Word of God; which Conviction is wrought by the frequent Account we
find in the Holy Scriptures, touching the intrinsic Excellence and Goodness of
God's Nature, and touching his great Love and relative Goodness toward all
Mankind: This is the proper, true Ground of that Divine Love I have spoken of,
and Ardent and Genuine affection of the Heart, which the consideration of God's
Universal Goodness, is apt to kindle in the Soul of every Man, who is not
conscious of any willful and gross Wickedness, which makes him afraid of the
Justice of God.

AS far as Nature could help them, the wiser and more considerate Heathens
attained to the Love of God, by those weak discoveries they had of the Divine
Goodness. There are (says Seneca, de Ira, lib. 2. cap. 27.) Some things which
cannot Hurt, they are so Beneficent and Succouring in their Nature, as the
immortal Gods, which neither will, nor can be Mischievous, because their Nature
is Mild and Gentle. He speaks in the Plural Number, to gratify the Humor of
those Times; but he means, that one Supreme God, whom the more Intelligent
Pagans Worshipped; nay, Worshipped with Affection; as Seneca says elsewhere (
de Benef. lib. 4. cap. 19.) No Man in his right Senses will be horribly afraid
of God, because it is madness to Dread that which is Beneficial, nor can any
Man Love that object, which they Fear after that manner. Accordingly Maximus
Tyrius tells us, That the truly Religious Man is the Friend of God, or one that
loves God, and that he is therefore Happy, because he is a lover of God, (
Dissert. 4.) Such considerable Notions those observing Men had of the Goodness
of God, as naturally produced great Affection to him. And if we Christians, who
have, besides the Book of Nature, the Divine Writings, would but attentively
consider, by what we read in them, what a great lover of Souls that most
Perfect Being is, and what various Methods he has used to save all our Souls
from Perishing Everlastingly, it would be the most Astonishing thing in the
World, if such considerations did not render him the most indearing Object,
since the very Publicans loved those who loved them; nay, since the very Ox
knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Cribb.

2dly, HAVING thus showed the proper way of Acquiring the Love of God; I
proceed now to consider how we are to Express it. And that our Practice as to
this may be Regular; we must note (what indeed is clear to all Men from the
natural Operations of this Affection) that Love excites us powerfully to these
three Things.

1st, To observe the Will. 2dly, To resemble the Temper: And, 3dly, To desire
the Fruition of the Object, we have an Ardent Affection for.
FIRST, True Love makes us observe ones Pleasure, seeing this Affection is made
up of Esteem and Honor in the Judgment, and of Complacency in the Heart, a
ready Compliance of the Will must be the next thing; because, this is only the
Paying of that Deference which we Conceive to be Due; and an Act of Respect,
whereby we are willing and delighted to Oblige. In all Cases it makes us to be
yielding: But when it comes to be a Divine Love, and has the Blessed God for
its Object, it cannot but engage us to Entire and Universal Obedience, because
the Soul has God's Sovereign Authority in its Eye, besides those Beauties and
Excellencies of his Nature, which are so Amiable, and so Powerful in their
Influence: God being the sole Governor of the World, that has a right to give
Laws to our Souls, and a Power to Dispose of them, we are indispenfibly Obliged
to make his Will (when once it is Revealed) the Rule and Measure of our
Actions. And the Necessity of this adds a mighty force to those Inclinations,
which Love alone creates evermore in the Mind, to clasp with his Holy and
Righteous Precepts. Hence it is, that the Scripture interprets Obedience, as
the only Sign and Argument of a Divine Love. I will show Mercy unto Thousands
of them that Love me, and keep my Commandments, says God, Exodus 20. 6. If ye
Love me, keep my Commandments, says Christ, Job. 14. 15. This is the Love of
God, that we keep his Commandments, says the Divine Apostle, 1 John 5. 3.

THIS then is the first way of Expressing our Affections toward God, in return
of his great Love and Goodness to us, and to all Mankind, by Doing all things
he requires of us, with a ready and cheerful Mind. It is not a starched
Gesture, nor a Formal carriage, nor an External Profession, nor a waterish
Look, nor a furious Zeal for dry Opinions; it is not these, or any of these
things, that is the Sign of that Divine Love, which is the Noble Principle of
Religion. For these outward shows may be consistent with the Hatred of God and
Man; and then they are only so many Glosses of Hypocrites, void of that
Rational and Generous Affection, which God's Love calls for. It Is the entire
subjection of the Heart, Operating, and Exerting all its Vigor, by Religious,
Sober, Honest, and Charitable Actions: It Is the subduing our unreasonable
Passions, the denying all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, the cleansing of our
selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, the squaring of our Lives
according to the Laws of God: To this Pliant and Obediential frame of Soul,
that is the true Testimony and Fruit of that Love, which God looks for, and
which is in the Sight of God of so great a Price. We must call upon him daily
with Faithful and Enflamed Spirits; we must apply our Hearts to the Study and
Practice of Religion; we must do Justly, Love Mercy, and walk humbly with our
God; we must be sincere, and without any Guile, and deal truly with all Men, as
in the presence of God; we must Love one another, and Forgive one another, For
he that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has not seen? 1 John 4. 20. In short, to express our Love of God after a right
manner, we must obey him in all things; and that, with enlarged Hearts, with
Filial Reverence, with Ingenuous Dutifulness, with a ready Will, and with such
Alacrity, Cheerfulness, and Pleasure of Mind, as becomes those, for whom God
has been pleased to do so many Miracles of Mercy.

SECONDLY, Another proper Act of Love, is, to Study Imitation. This proceeds
from a Twofold Cause, partly from the great Value we have of, and the great
Complacency we take in the Object of our Affections, which being so Amiable in
our Eye, does naturally Excite us to transform our selves into a Similitude of
it. And partly it proceeds from an innate Desire we all have of being Beloved
again, which being impracticable without an Harmony of Mind and Temper between
both Parties, it is necessary for the one (that Love may be Reciprocal) to suit
himself to the disposition of the other; especially, if that other be a
Superior in Dignity, Excellence, and Perfection. Considering therefore that God
is infinitely the most Excellent, the most Excellent and Perfect of all Beings,
the Love which springs from a Sense of his Perfections, and reaches after a
Plenary Communication of them, must needs Stimulate ones Soul to put on a
Disposition (as far as it is possible) agreeable to the Mind and Spirit of God.

THEREFORE, that we may Rightly and Eminently express our Love to God; we must
by all means endeavor to resemble him, I mean, in all those things that are
Imitable by us. We must be sincere in Heart, as that most Blessed Being is.
According to the capacities and Powers of our Nature, we must be Holy and
Separate from all Moral Impurities, as God is; we must be Patient,
Long-suffering, and slow to Anger, as He is; we must be Treatable and
Reconcilable, notwithstanding all Affronts and Injuries, as he is; we must be
strict Observers of the Eternal Rules of Righteousness and Justice, as He is;
we must be Steaddy and True to all our Promises, as the Faithful God is; we
must be Merciful and Benign, Compassionate and Tenderhearted, Bountiful and
Impartial, Kind and Good to all Men, even to our Enemies, as that Gracious and
Beneficent Being is, who makes his Sun to shine upon the Good and upon the
Evil too, and sends his Rain upon the Just, and upon the Unjust also. Those
Ill-natured People, who are Uncharitable, Rigid, Fierce, Implacable, Austere,
Cruel, Revengeful, and Outrageous, should look upon God's Glories, the
Perfections, and Beauties of his Nature, and should employ their time upon this
great Study, how to be like God, according to those charming Ideas, under which
He is represented unto us in the Holy Scriptures. Thou thoughtest Wickedly,
that I am even such a one as thy self (says God,) but I will reprove thee, and
set before thee, the things that thou have done, Psalm. 50. 21. God will not be
served with our Vices, nor must we be such Fools as to think we love him, by
entitling him to the Filth and Refuse of our Corrupt Nature. Goodness, is so
bright a Beam of the Divine Glory, and so easy to be seen in every part of the
Creation, that Men cannot but discover it by the Eye of Common, Natural Reason.
The old Pagans Admired it, and believed God to be the Best Being; and therefore
Adored him, Prayed to him in all their Straits, and Necessities, and Celebrated
his Praises as well as Nature could teach them: For which Universal Custom
amongst all Mankind, there could not have been any sufficient Reason, had they
not Universally Believed, not only the Existence of a Deity; but moreover, that
the Divine Being is a God of Power, and a God of great Clemency, Benignity, and
Goodness. This was the true Ground of their Religious Offices, and of that
Love, which Nature wrought in their Hearts toward him. And whatever any of us
Christians may talk of our Loving God, all is but Froth and Vanity, Senseless
and Ridiculous Profession, unless we resemble him in Goodness, Be ye Merciful
even as your Father is Merciful, as our Blessed Savior said, Luke 6. 36.

THIRDLY, And Lastly, to express our Love toward God, we must earnestly desire
the Fruition of him. This every one sees to be another natural Act of this
Affection, and the most Vehement Effort of it, to be United to its Object, and
to have it in actual Possession; and the Reason is, because Happiness is
Apprehended to consist in such Enjoyment. Now God being the true Felicity of
the Soul, the only proper Object which the Faculties of the Soul can be
Employed upon with satisfaction, and which can fully Answer all our Desires, it
is impossible to Conceive, how we can truly Love him, especially under the
notion of our Happiness, without Ardent, and Impatient Longings after the
Fruition of him.

THIS being so clear, the next thing we are to Note, is, that there is a
Present, and a Future Fruition of God. The Present Fruition, in respect of
Degree, is very Imperfect, because, we are yet in an Imperfect State; but in
respect of Quality and Kind, is the same with that which is yet to come. For it
consists in Contemplating God according to our Capacities, in Admiring the
Perfections of his infinite Majesty, in setting our Hearts on him, as our
Supreme Good, in feeding our Desires with the Ravishing Ideas of him, in
Delighting* and being highly pleased with the Sense of him, and in such other
Beatifical Acts which are answerable to Rational Appetites. Every Divine Lover
has something of all this in this Present Imperfect State; it is the Fruition
which now Crowns our Affections, that Spiritual Fellowship of Communion with
God, which we enjoy in this Life. To Express therefore our Love to him in this
respect, we should have him always in our Minds, be full of worthy Conceptions
of him, and make the thoughts of his Glorious Essence and Attributes to dwell
in our Hearts daily. We should Exalt him in our Minds above all things, and
make our Souls sensible, that we have none in Heaven but Him, none upon Earth,
to be desired in Comparison of Him. We should take Pleasure in Divine
Contemplations, and endeavor constantly to Satiate our Souls more and more
with Delights of that Nature. We should every day possess our Hearts with such
Affecting Meditations as These:

O God! How Excellent is thy Name! How Radiant is thy Glory! How Adorable are
thy Perfections! How Wonderful are thy Works! How Beautiful are all thy Ways!
How Righteous are thy Actions! How Equal are thy Commands! How Precious and
Sweet are thy Promises! How Infinite is thy Goodness! How Astonishing are thy
Mercies! How Charming is thy Love! How Helpful and Saving is thy Power! How
Tender is thy Pity! How Blessed and Praiseworthy, and Desirable art Thou, O
Thou great Lover of Souls, and Redeemer of the World. To kindle in us! such a
Divine Flame, and to raise our Desires still, touching the Fruition of God, we
should Form our Hearts into a Devout Temper; give our Selves to Prayer, and to
the Love of it daily. Insensate and Careless People, know not the Comforts, the
Pleasures, the Divine Enjoyments, which Transport the Minds of those, who Pray
to God with Stayed, Fervent, and Affectionate Hearts. Certainly what Happiness
there is here below, Men of Holy, Humble and Devout Spirits have it: And that
our Fruitions thereby may be the greater, and the more desirable, we should
evermore be mindful of Public and Solemn Devotion: Chiefly when Two or Three
are gathered together in Christ's Name, then is he in the midst of us, and then
is God with us; then we Enjoy him in a more especial manner and measure; in the
Congregation, in the Assembly of the Saints, in his House of Prayer: There he
scatters his Blessings, there he gives us participations of himself; there he
refreshes us with a portion of those Pleasures, which are at his Right Hand.
And this was the Reason of those Raptures, Wishes, Groans and Longings of the
Holy Psalmist, which upon the like occasions, we should be full of too: My
Heart is fixed, O God, my Heart is fixed: I will Sing and give Praise. Awake up
my Glory, I will go into this Sanctuary, and fall low on my Knees at thy
Footstool. Like as the Heart desires the Waterbrooks, so longs my Soul
after Thee, O God. My Soul is a Thirst for God, yea even for the Living God:
When shall I come to appear before the Presence of God! O How Amiable are thy
Dwellings, O Lord of Hosts! My Soul has a Desire and longing to enter into the
Courts of the Lord; for one Day in thy Courts, is better than a Thousand: I had
rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of
Wickedness.

Now see how passionate that good Man's Love to God was, though for the present
Fruition of him. And if the Gleanings of the Grapes be so desirable, what is
the whole Vintage? I mean, that abundant and Eternal Enjoyment, which is
Reserved for us, till that Day, when we shall have duly transacted all our
Services here, and shall pass from these Houses of Prayer, into that Building
of God, not made with Hands, the Everlasting Habitation of his Glory.

This Future Everlasting Fruition of God ought to be the chief Object of our
Desires, because it is our highest good; and because it is the Ultimate end of
the Divine Economy, and of all our Labors of Love in this World.

It is impossible for us truly and earnestly to Love God, and not to groan
within our Selves, whilst we wait for this last Adoption; the Redemption of
our Bodies, that we may be Clothed upon all over with Immortality, and have
these our vile Bodies changed, and fashioned like unto Christ's own Glorious
Body, that we may be in every Respect, fit to be with that great Lover of our
Souls; and when we see him, may rejoice with him, and with a joy like unto his,
when after all the Ignominy and Torments of the Cross, he had this most
Comfortable Reflection, It is Finished.

PRAYERS.
OLord, who never failest to help and govern them, whom thou do bring up in
thy Steadfast Fear and Love, Keep us, we Beseech Thee, under the Protection of
thy good Providence, and make us to have a perpetual Fear and Love of thy Holy
Name; through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
OGod, who, have prepared for them that Love Thee such good things as pass
Man's Understanding; Pour into our Hearts, such Love toward Thee, that we
loving Thee above all things, may obtain thy Promises, which exceed all that we
can desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, who hate nothing that Thou have made, and do
forgive the Sins of all them that are Penitent: Create and make in us New and
Contrite Hearts, that we Worthily lamenting our Sins, and acknowledging our
Wretchedness; may Obtain of Thee (the God of all Mercy) perfect Remission and
Forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
OAlmighty God, who alone can Order the Unruly Wills and Affections of Sinful
Men; grant unto thy People, that they may Love the thing which thou Command,
and desire that which thou do Promise; that so among the sundry, and manifold
Changes of the World, our Hearts may surely There be fixed where true joys are
to be found, through Jesus Christ Our Lord.

Amen.
GRant We beseech Thee, Almighty God, That like as We do Believe thy only
Begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to have Ascended into the Heavens; So We
may also in Heart and Mind, thither Ascend, and with Him continually dwell, who
lives, and reigns with Thee, and the Holy Ghost, one God, World without End.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books lately Printed for W. Crook.
1. A Practical Discourse upon the Blessed Sacrament, showing the Duties of the
Communicant before, at, and after the Eucharist. Octavo. Price 3s. 6d. 2. A
Practical Discourse upon Prayer, in Octavo, Price Is. 3. A Practical Discourse
upon Charity in its several Branches; and of the Reasonableness and Useful
Nature of this great Christian Virtue. Octavo. Price 3s. These three are also
Bound together, having the Title of Dr. Pelling's Three Practical Discourses.
Vol. 1. Price 6s. together. 4. A Practical Discourse upon Humility, wherein is
shown the Nature, Reasonableness and Usefulness thereof, together with the ways
of Expressing and Increasing of it. Price 2s. 6d. All Written by the Reverend
Dr. Pelling, Author of this Book.

