A General TREATISE OF THE DISEASES OF Maids, Bigbellied Women,
Child-bed-Women, and Widows, TOGETHER With the best Methods of Preventing or
Curing the same.

By J. PECHEY of the College of Physicians in London.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwick, at the Red-Lyon in St. Paul 's Churchyard,
1696.

THE PREFACE
WOMAN of all the Creatures is the Fairest and most Beautiful, kind Nature
having bestowed on her a delicate and fine habit of Body, and designed her only
for an easy Life, and to perform the tender Offices of Love; whereas, she
composed Man of more robust Principles, that he might be able to protect the
Woman, to delve and manure the Earth, and to undergo the other Toils of Life.

But by reason of this Curious Frame, the Fair Sex (as other fine things are)
is subject to many Injuries, for besides the common Calamities, there are many
great and dangerous Diseases peculiar to Women arising from their
Constitutions, monthly Purgations, Pregnancy, Labors and Lying in.

Their Constitution disposes them to Hysteric Diseases, which resemble almost
all the Diseases Mankind is subject to, viz. An Apoplexy, Epilepsie,
Palpitation of the Heart, Coughs, Violent Vomiting, Colic, Stone in the
Kidneys, and many other. Pains and sometimes Swellings in the Jaws, Shoulder
Hands, Thighs and Legs accompany these Diseases. Nor can the Teeth free
themselves from this Disease: but the most cmomon Pain, is the Pain of the
Back. A dejection of Mind also accompanies this Disease continually.

A Suppression or Immoderate Flux of the Courses, causes many disorders in the
Body, so also does their Flowing before their due time, or their staying longer
than they should, and their complication with other Diseases renders the Cure
difficult.

All the time their being with Child, which is a nine Months Sickness, they are
inclined to Nauseousness, Vomiting, to Pains of the Back, Reins, and Hips,
violent Coughs, Swellings of the Legs and Thighs, Piles, and many other
Diseases, and upon some Indispositions of the Body to Miscarriage, which is the
worst and most dangerous of all. When they are in Labor, and when they lie in,
they are encompassed with many difficulties and dangers, viz. an ill position
of the Child, suppression of the Lochia, Floodings, Fevers, after Pains,
Apostemations of the Breasts, and many other Diseases. So that if Nature had
not wisely tacked an Appetite to things necessary, we must conclude, the
Preservation of Individuals and of Species too would not have been near so well
provided for as now it is.

The following Treatise is a Collection from Rodericus a Castro and others,
that have wrote well of Women's Diseases, and I judge it may be serviceable to
Ladies and Gentlewomen, who charitably dispense Physic, and give advice to
their poor Neighbors in the Country, where there is no Physician near; and it
may be also of use to Physicians, Chyrugeons and Midwives, it being a general
Treatise of Women's Diseases and the Methods and Medicines contained in it,
being approved and frequently practiced by the most Renowned Authors of each
Physical Province.

From the Angel and Crown in Basing-Lane, London June the 16th. 1696. John
Pechey.

THE INDEX.
Page. ABscesses 194 Acrocordo 233 Acute Diseases of Women in Childbed 165
After-pains 161 Allantois 84 Amnios 82 Back pains 98 Barrenness 53 Bath-waters
8 Belly-bound 96 Bloody Flux 103 Breasts Cancerated 214 Caesarian Delivery 150
Chaps in the Nipples 173 Childbed Purgations 161 Child dead 148 Choice of a
Nurse 182 Clefts of the Privities 233 Clitoris 61 Conception 73 Condyloma 233
Corion 82 Cough 100 Courses 14, 19, 22, 28, 30, 37, 45, 46, 104 Decoction 99
Delirium 170 Dropsy of the Womb 203 Eggs 69 Emulsion 99 Epilepsie 170
Fallopian Tubes 71 Ficus 233 Flooding 105, 158 Green Sickness 13 Hermophrodites
61 Hill of Venus 59 Hip-Pains 98 Hymen 63 Hysteric Diseases 1 Infant nourished
88 Inflation of the Womb 203 Labor hard 143 Labor contrary to Nature 122 Legs
swelled 100 Liquid Laudanum 12 Looseness 102 Lozenges 115 Madness 170 Melancholy
ibid 245 Milk 173, 179 Miscarriage 107 Mole 75 Myrtle berry Caruncles 64
Navel-string 86 Nymphs 60 Piles 101 Privities 59, 106, 191 Reins pained 98
Scabs of the Privities 233 Secundine retained 155 Sphincter 64 Stone of the
Womb 226 Suckling of a Child 182 Superfaetation 78 Testicles 68 Thymus 233
Tumors from Milk 173 Ulcers corrosive 194 Vomiting 97 Vrachus 87 Urine
difficult 100 Warts 233 Water breaking 121 Whites 52 Womb closed 42 Womb 65
Womb-Cake 80 Woman with Child managed 95 Womb bearing down 106 Womb falling 201
Womb Cancerated 214 Womb Worms 226 Wrinkles in the Belly 188
A General TREATISE OF Women's Diseases.
CHAP. I.
Of the Hysteric Disease.
THIS Disease proceeds from a weakness and confusion of the Spirits, and is not
only very frequent, but also so wonderfully various, that it resembles almost
all Diseases Mankind is subject to: For after hard Labor, or some great
disturbance of the Mind, it occasions an Apoplexy, which ends in a Palsy of
half the Body. Sometimes it produces violent Convulsions very like the
Falling Sickness, and these are commonly called Mother-fits. Sometimes it
possesses the outward part of the head, causing violent pain continually fixed
in one part, which may be covered with the top of the Thumb, and violent
Vomiting accompanies this pain. It also occasions sometimes a great Palpitation
of the Heart, and sometimes the Woman coughs without intermission, but spits up
nothing. Sometimes rushing violently upon the region under the Heart, it causes
violent pain much like the twisting of the Guts, and the Woman Vomits
exceedingly, and casts up a green Matter, and sometimes Matter of an unusual
Color; and often after the Sick have been almost destroyed by the said pain,
and the reachings to Vomit, it is at length carried off by the Jaundice
tincturing the surface of the Body like Saffron. The Sick is much dejected, and
Despair as certainly accompanies this kind of Hysteric Disease, as the Pain and
Vomiting above mentioned. When this Disease falls upon one of the Kidneys, it
plainly represents by the pain it causes there a fit of the Stone; and it is
difficult to distinguish it from the Stone, unless perchance some unlucky
accident disturbing the Woman's mind a little before she was taken ill, shows
that it was an Hysteric Disease. Nor is the Bladder free from this false
Symptom; for it does not only cause pain there, but it also stops the Urin.
Sometimes falling upon the Stomach it causes continual Vomiting, and sometimes
a Looseness when it is settled upon the Guts, but no pain accompanies either of
these Symptoms.

And as this Disease afflicts almost all the inward parts, so sometimes it
seizes all the outward parts, occasioning pain, and sometimes a Swelling in the
Jaws, Shoulders, Hands, Thighs, Legs; but the Swelling of the Legs is plainer
seen than the rest, and contrary to Swellings in the Dropsy, is most in the
Morning; nor being pressed does it leave a pit, and most commonly it swells
only one of the Legs. Nor can the Teeth free themselves from the assaults of
this Disease, tho they are not hollow; and tho there is no apparent Defluction,
that may occasion the pain, yet it is no whit gentler nor shorter nor easier
Cured. But the pain of the Back is most common, which most certainly all feel,
how little soever they are afflicted with this Disease. Moreover this is common
to the foresaid pains, that the place whereon they were, is tender and aches as
if it were soundly beaten, but this tenderness goes off by degrees. And this is
worth observing, that often a notable coldness of the outward parts makes way
for these Symptoms, which for the most part does not go off till the fit ends;
which coldness is almost like that wherewith a Carcass grows stiff, yet the
Pulse is good. Moreover all Hysteric Women complain of a dejection and sinking
of the Spirits, and sometimes laugh excessively, and at other times cry as
much, without any real cause for either. But the most proper and almost
inseparable Symptom, is a Urin as clear as Rock-water. Sometimes ill fumes are
belched up, and sometimes the Wind that comes from the Stomach is sower just
like Vinegar: But their Minds are more affected than their Bodies; for an
incurable Desperation is mixed with the very nature of the Disease.

A day would scarce be sufficient to reckon up all the Symptoms belonging to
this Disease, and I think Demetrius reckn'd pretty right, tho he mistook the
cause of the Disease, when he said, in an Epistle to Hippocrates, that the Womb
was the cause of Six hundred Miseries and of innumerable Calamities. The
external causes of this Disease are either violent motions of the Body, or
which is much oftener, vehement disturbances of the Mind; to these disorders of
the Mind which are usually the occasion of this Disease, is to be added
emptiness of the Stomach by reason of long fasting, inmmoderate Bleeding, a
Vomit or Purge that works too much.

In order to the cure, I order that eight Ounces of Blood be taken from the
right Arm, and that the following Plaster be applied to the Navel.

Take of Galbanum dissolved in Tincture of Castor and strained three Drachms,
of Tacamahaca two Drams, mix them, make a Plaster.

The next Morning let her use the following Pills.

Take of the Pill Coch-major two Scruples, of Castor powdered two Grains, of
Peruvian Balsam four drops, make four Pills; let her take them at five in the
Morning, and sleep after; repeat them twice or thrice, every Morning, or every
other Morning, according to the Woman's strength, and as they work.

Take of the Waters of Black-Cherries, Rhue, and Compound Briony, each three
Ounces; of Castor tied up in a rag, and hanged in the Viol half a Dram; of Fine
Sugar a Sufficient quantity, make a Julep, whereof let her take four or five
Spoonfulls when she is faint, dropping into the first dose, if the fit is
violent, twenty drops of the Spirit of Hartshorn.

After the Purging Pills just described are taken, let her use the following.

Take of the filings of Steel eight Grains, with a sufficient quantity of
extract of Wormwood, make two Pills, let her take them early in the Morning,
and at five in the Afternoon, for Thirty days, drinking upon them a draught of
Wormwood Wine. Or if she like a Bolus better;

Take of the Conserves of Roman Wormwood, and of the yellow peel of Oranges
each one Ounce, of Angelica and Nutmegs candied and of Venice Treacle each half
an Ounce, of candied Ginger two Drachms, make an electuary with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Oranges.

Take of this electuary one Dram and an half, of the filings of Steel well
rubbed eight Grains, make a Bolus with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Oranges, to be taken in the Morning, and at five in the Evening, drinking upon
it a Glass of Wormwood-wine.

Take of choice Myrrh and Galbanum each one Dram and an half, of Castor
fifteen Grains, with a sufficient quantity of Balsam Peru, make twelve Pills of
every Dram; let her take three every Night, and drink upon them three or four
Spoonfuls of Compound Briony Water through the whole course of this process.

But if these Pills move the Body, which sometimes they do in Bodies that are
very easily purged, the following may be used instead of them.

Take of Castor one Dram, of Volatile Salt of Amber half a Dram, with a
sufficient quantity of extract of Rue, make twenty-four small Pills, let her
take three every Night.

But Steel Medicines, which must be noted, occasion sometimes in Women great
disorders both of Body and Mind, and not only on the first days, which is usual
almost in every body, but also all the time they are taken: In this case the
use of Steel must not presently be interrupted, but Laudanum must be given
every night for some time in some Hysteric water that they may the better bear
it.

But when the Symptoms are mild, and it seems the business may be done without
Steel, I think it sufficient to Bleed and to Purge three or four times, and
then to give the altering Hysteric Pills abovementioned morning and evening
for ten days, which method seldom fails, when the Disease is not violent, yea
the Pills alone Bleeding and Purging being omitted, do often a great deal of
good.

But some Women cannot bear Hysteric Medicines, and are much injured thereby,
therefore they must not be given to such.

If the Blood is so very feeble, and the confusion of the Spirits so great,
that Steel ordered to be used according to the method prescribed is not
sufficient to cure the Disease, the Sick must drink Tunbridge-waters or the
like, for they cure Diseases more efectually than any preparation of Iron; but
if in drinking of them any Sickness happen that belongs to Hysteric Symptoms,
the Sick must forbear drinking them a day or two, till that Symptom that
hindered their passage is quite gone. And it is to be noted, that Purging must be
avoided all the time the Woman drinks these waters. But if this Disease does
not yield to Steel-waters, the Sick must go to the Bath, and when she has used
the waters of it three mornings following, the next day let her go into the
Bath, and the day following let her drink them again, and so let her do by
turns for two months, for in these and others of what kind soever they are, the
Patient must persist in the use of them till she is quite well: Venice-treacle
used often and a long time is a great remedy in this Disease. Spanish-wine,
with Gentian, Angelica, Wormwood, Centory, and other strengthening things
infused in it, does a great deal of good, some spoonfuls of it being taken
thrice a day, if the Woman be not thin and of a choleric habit of Body. And
truly a large draught of Spanish-wine taken by it self at bedtime for some
nights has been very beneficial to some Women. Jesuits-powder also wonderfully
comforts and invigorates the Blood and Spirits, a Scruple of it being taken
morning and evening for some weeks.

But if the Remedies abovementioned don't well agree, which often happens in
thin and choleric Constitutions, then a Milk-dyet may be used, for some Women
(which one would wonder at at first) that have been a long while afflicted with
Hysteric Diseases, and could be relieved no other way, have been recovered by
Dieting themselves for some time only with Milk; and especially those that
Labor with an Hysteric Cholick, which cannot be appeased by any thing but
Opiates, to which repeated Women are much accustomed, the pains returning as
soon as the virtue of the Opiate fades. But riding on Horse back or in a Coach
every day for a long while is the best remedy.

This is the general way of Curing this Disease, which is applied to the
original cause, namely, the weak constitution of the Blood, and so is to be
used only when the Fit is off, therefore as often as the Fit comes joined with
any one of the foresaid Symptoms, if the Disease be such or so great an one
that it will not bear a Truce till it may be cured by Medicines that strengthen
the Blood and Spirits, we must presently make use of Hysteric Medicines, which
by their strong and offensive smell, recall the disorderly and deserting
Spirits to their proper Stations; whether they are taken inwardly or smelt to,
or outwardly applied, such are Assa-faetida, Galbanum, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac,
and lastly whatever has a very ungrateful and offensive smell.

In the next place you must take notice, that if some intolerable pain
accompanied the fit, or violent Vomiting, or a Looseness, then besides the
Hysterics abovementioned, Laudanum is to be used, which is only able to
restrain these Symptoms. But in quieting the pains which Vomiting occasion we
must take great care that they are not mitigated either by Laudanum or any
other Opiat before due evacuations have been made, unless they exceed almost
all humane patience. Therefore in lusty Women and such as abound with Blood a
Vein must be opened, and the Body purged, especially if they have been lately
seized with the fit. But if weak Women and those of a quite contrary
Constitution labor with such a fit and pain, and have been afflicted with it
not long ago, it will be sufficient to cleanse their Stomachs with a gallon of
Posset drink taken in and ejected by Vomiting, and then to give a large Dose of
Venice-Treacle, and a few spoonfuls of some Spirituous Liquor, that is pleasing
to the taste, with a few drops of Liquid Laudanum, to be taken presently after.
But if the Sick has Vomited a great while, and there is danger lest by a
further provocation by Vomits the Spirits should be put into a rage, and the
Sick too much weakened, in this case you must give Laudanum without delay, and
such a Dose that is sufficient to vanquish it.

But here two things are to be chiefly noted, first that when you have once
begun to use Laudanum after due and necessary evacuations, it must be taken in
the same Dose, and must be often repeated till the Symptom is quite conquered:
only such a space must be betwixt each Dose, that we may know what the former
has done, before we give another: and then when we treat the Disease with
Laudanum, we must do nothing else, and nothing must be evacuated, for the
gentlest Glister of milk and sugar is sufficient to spoil whatever has been
repaired by the Laudanum, and to occasion a return of the Vomiting and pain.
But though the Pains above mentioned are apt to overcome the virtue of the
Laudanum, yet violent Vomiting indicats the largest Dose of it, and that it
should be very often repeated, for by reason of the Vomiting, the Laudanum is
cast up before it can do any good, unless it be given afresh after every time
the Sick Vomits, and chiefly in a solid form, and if it be given in a liquor
the quantity must be so small that it must but just wet the Stomach, so that by
reason of the small quantity of the matter it cannot be cast up, for instance,
some drops of Liquid Laudanum in one spoonful of strong Cinnamon Water, or the
like; and the Sick must be admonished to keep her self quiet presently after
taking the Laudanum, and that she keep her Head as much as is possible
immovable, for the smallest motion of the Head provokes Vomiting more than any
thing else; and when the Vomiting ceases, and is as it were tamed, it is
expedient to give a Dose of Laudanum morning and evening to prevent a relapse,
which also ought to be observed after a Looseness, or Hysteric pains.

And because frequent mention has been made of Liquid Laudanum in this Chapter,
and it is much used in other Diseases Women are subject to, I will here set
down the best way of making it.

Take of Spanish-wine one pint, of Opium two ounces, of Saffron one ounce, of
the Powders of Cinnamon and Cloves each one Dram; let them be infused
together in a Bath for two or three days, till the liquor comes to the
consistence of a thin Syrup; strain it and keep it for use. The Dose is sixteen
or twenty Drops, to be taken in a small draught of Beer, or in some
distilled-water.

CHAP. II.
Of the Green Sickness.
THE Green Sickness is an ill habit of the Body proceeding from Obstructions,
it is accompanied most commonly with a beating of the Heart, difficulty of
breathing, and a longing for absurd things, and an unfitness for motion, and
other Symtoms; the Face and whole Body are pale, and sometimes of a leaden and
green color, there is an inflation, and as it were a swelling upon the
Eyelids; the Legs also swell, especially about the Ankles; there is a heavy
and often a lasting pain of the Head, the Pulse is quick, the Sick are drowsy,
and have an aversion for wholesome food; lastly, the Disease increasing and the
Obstructions being multiplied, a suppression of the Courses at length follows,
which shows the Disease is confirmed.

This Disease most commonly is not dangerous, but if it be neglected too much,
it occasions great Diseases, as hard Swellings, a Dropsy, and other grievous
Diseases, which at length kill the Patient.

When the Disease is small and chiefly arises from Obstructions of the veins of
the Womb, it is easily cured by Marriage in young Virgins. Those that have had
this Disease a long while are either Barren, or bring forth Children that are
Sickly and short lived.

The Cure is to be performed by the same Method and Medicines proposed in the
foregoing Chapter for the cure of the Hysteric Diseases.

CHAP. III.
Of Women that never had their Courses.
THE flux of the Courses is an undoubted sign that a Woman is mature, yet there
are some Women that never had them, though they have had conversation with their
Husbands, and some of them have had Children, and others not; some of them have
enjoyed good health, and others have been sickly: the cause of this defect is
in general twofold, the first is common to the whole Body, namely, because a
Woman is fleshy, laborious, and her parts are so disposed that every Member
takes up and expels what is convenient for it, so that there is no room for a
menstruous purgation, these are of a hot Constitution and such as are termed
Virago's, they are of a brown Color, of a compact Body, and their Loins and
Buttocks are large, so are the Breasts and Shoulders, they have a great voice,
are strong and hairy, and this Constitution though it be the reason that Women
are in health, yet it is contrary to their Sex, and the Course of Nature; and
therefore to be accounted vicious. But other Women are sickly upon this account.

If this Disease proceed from an hot Intemperies of the Womb, it may be known
by a great pain in the part, and by the heat of the whole Belly: a dry
Imtemperies may be known by long Fevers going before, and a thin habit of Body,
but in time they grow Gross and Cachectical by reason of the want of this
evacuation. If it proceed from an ill Formation, there are swellings of the
Belly, pain and a weight.

If it arise from a hot Intemperies, as it does most commonly, it must be Cured
by four kinds of Remedies, first by cooling Diet, they must eat Chicken, Veal,
or the Broth wherein has been boiled cooling Herbs, as Endive, Sorrel,
Lettice, Spinach, and the like; Oranges are also good, and roasted Apples, and
stewed Prunes; their Drink must be small Beer; their Sleep and Exercise must be
moderate; for violent Exercise and frequent walking are plainly injurious, and
so are disturbances of the Mind. Secondly they must Bleed twice or thrice a
Year in the Foot, and for some days they must take such things as are proper to
qualify the hot and bilious Humors, as the waters and syrups of Purslain,
Succory Endive, Violets, and the like, and let them be Purged with the
following Medicines.

Take of the best Rhubarb two Scruples, infuse it a whole night in four ounces
of Endive water, strain it in the morning, and add to it an ounce of Manna, or
of the pulp of Cassia, and an ounce of syrup of Roses solutive.

Thirdly, let them use such things as leisurely attemperate the heat of the
Humors and Part; as Conserve of Roses, or of Violets, with Endive-water, or a
Ptisan before Meals, or Goats-milk in the morning with the flowers of Violets
and Borrage: But the use of Cooling Apozems is much praised in this Case.

Take of cleansed Barley three pugils, of the Roots of Borrage and Succory, each
Ounce, of the leaves of Burrage, Succory, Endive, Fumitory and Sorrel, each one
Handful, of the Cordial Flowers, and of the Cold Seeds, each one Pugil, of
Anniseeds one Dram, of Prunes Twelve, of Raisons one Ounce; Boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water to one Pint and an Half; to the strained Liquor
add a sufficient quantity of Sugar, make a clear Apozem, aromatize it with a
Dram of the Species of the three Sanders. But if you intend to have it Purge
a little, add toward the latter end the Leaves of Senna, and of the Pulp of
Tamarinds, each one Ounce, and after it is boiled, three Ounces of Syrup of
Roses solutive, or of Succory with Rhubarb*

Fourthly, Topics must be applied to the lower part of the Belly.

Take of Oil of sweet Almonds (washed with the Waters of Barley, Gourds, and
Roses, each a like quantity) one Dram of Hens-fat, Butter, and Goats-milk,
each half an Ounce, of the Juice of Gourds, Endive or Violets, each six
Drachms, with Wax make a Liniment, Ointment or Plaster, as the Woman likes
best. But it will do most good, if the Part be Fomented before with a Decoction
of Lettice, Violets, Marshmallows, Fumitory, Mallows, and the like; and to
open the Passages, add the Leaves of Maidenhair, Mercury and Mugwort* a Bath
may be also made of these.

Night Glisters also wonderfully Cool the Womb and the whole Body.

Take of Chicken-broath altered with the foresaid Herbs six Ounces, of the Oil
of Sweet-almonds and Violets, each two Ounces, of Suggar one Ounce, Yolks of
Eggs two, mingle them, let it be retained, if she can all the Night; and when
the Heat is very much, stuff the Chicken for this Decoction with Conserve of
Roses.

If the Disease proceed from Dryness, it must be Cured with moistning Meats of
good Nourishment, and with Drinks; and the Woman must walk often, but not so
much as to tire her self, and Frictions must be used above the region of the
Womb, that the parts may be dilated so that the menstruous Blood may be allured
to the Womb. Baths are also proper, and Ointments made of mucilages of the
Seeds of Psyllium and Quinces and the like; and Glysters also do good.

Take of the Decoction of Marshmallows, Mallows, and Violets six Ounces, of
fresh Butter three Ounces, mingle them, make a Glyster.

But all Evacuations must be avoided, for they increase the Dryness.

If the Disease proceeds from an ill Formation, Medicines are most commonly
unprofitable; and therefore you must endeavor to lessen the Blood, if it
abound, or to divert it another way; therefore you must Bleed three or four
times a Year in the Arm, or in the Foot, if Blood seem to abound in the Womb.
But if the strength of the Woman cannot bear Bleeding, then she must use a thin
Diet, and frequent Exercise, and Frictions all over the Body, especially early
in the Morning, for so the Blood may be turned from the Inner Parts to the
Outward, and part of it discussed. Baths moderately hot are also good, and
these things may be sufficient for Married Women, which by conversation with
their Husbands are somewhat discharged; but they will not be sufficient for
Maids and Widows; and therefore it will be necessary to provoke the Hemorrhoids
or to open Issues. But if the Disease proceed from obstinate Obstructions, it
must be treated as is proposed in the Chapter of the Suppression of the Courses.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Courses breaking out by places not Natural.
THE Menstruous Flux happens to break out by contrary ways, upon two accounts;
for either Nature providing for the safety of the Woman's Body, when she knows
there is any Impediment in the Womb, and the Veins of it, that hinder the Blood
from passing, seeks another passage, whereby she may be unburthened, and the
health of the Woman preserved; or forgetting the Natural passages, she either
accustoms her self to another, or wandering about, she sometimes uses this
passage, sometimes that; for in some the menstruous Blood is discharged by the
Mouth, in others through the Nostrils, by the Eyes and Bloody Tears, by the
Dugs and Piles, also by the Fingers and Urine, and sometimes by a Redness in
one of the Cheeks, and if there be an Impediment in the Womb, that hinders the
passage of the Blood that way, it is better it should flow these ways than not
at all, for so says Hippocrates, Menstruis deficientibus sanguinem e naribus
erumpere bonum est.

The cause of this Disease is most commonly some violent Passion of the Mind,
or some great disturbance happening when the Courses are near flowing; it comes
also from Obstructions of the Womb, or by reason of violent Pains, and great
Diseases of the upper Parts, also from the weakness of them, when the Womb and
lower Parts are strong; for the weak Parts always receive what the stronger put
upon them. It also comes from some external Cause, as by drinking cold Water
unseasonably, or by washing the Feet and Legs unseasonably, or by the use of
Vinegar, when the Courses are near.

The Scope of the Cure is Twofold, the First is the Evacuation of the Blood
abounding, the other is the Recalling of it to the lower Parts, which is
chiefly done by Cooling the upper Parts, and by Heating, Moistning, and
Opening, the lower Parts; but both may be well answered by Bleeding in the Foot
three or four days before the Blood flows, and by applying Cupping-glasses to
the Thighs Legs and Hips, sometimes Dry, but most commonly with Scarification,
and also by provoking the Hemorrhoids, by Frictions, by Walking, by hot Baths
natural or artificial; by Fomentations made of opening Herbs, by Unctions,
Pessaries, and uterine Glisters. But see more of this in the Chapter of
Suppression of the Courses. The two following Remedies are peculiarly proper
for this Disease, viz. Bleeding in the Foot for several Months at the times we
have mentioned, and the Bath-waters wherein the Woman must be Bathed early in
the Morning, and must continue a while in them; but this must be noted, that
the Waters must not reach above the region of the Liver, and in the mean while
the upper Parts must be ^anned.

CHAP. V.
Of the Courses coming before their due time, and of staying longer than they
should.
IN many Women the Courses flow before their accustomed time, and sometimes
they stay longer than they should; and this anticipation and delay are
sometimes orderly and sometimes disorderly. The Causes are either the Vice of
the Womb, as the ill Figure of it, or a Solution of the Continuum, and
sometimes a hurt on some other account; as a Vicious humor that irritates
before the time, by reason of plenty of Blood, or the thinness or sharpness of
it; the quantity of humors occasioning it may be known by the dullness of the
Body, by the sanguine habit of the Woman, by a sedentary and idle Life, by
excess in eating and drinking, or by some other Evacuation stopped or lessened.
The Acrimony of the Blood may be known by the Heat, Erosion, and Pain in the
Excretion, or by the Vicious habit of the Woman's Body, and the course of her
Life foregoing, or by the Diet she was wont to use, and the like. But if it
come leasurely, and without pain, the retentive faculty is weak; it may also be
occasioned by a blow or fall.

If it proceed by reason of the Looseness, and fault of the retentive faculty,
it must be strengthened by proper Remedies; if it come from a plenitude, it
must be remedied by a sparing Diet and moderate Exercise, and by taking away so
much Blood as is agreeable to the strength in the middle of the Month, or a
little before the Courses flow. Frictions also in the Arms, and in all the
upper parts of the Body are proper; the Woman must abstain from Wine, and all
Strong Water, and instead of them Chalybeats must be used; and if these things
do not do the business, she must be blooded in the Arm; but if it proceed from
the Acrimony of the Humors, she must eat freely Meat of good nourishment, and
must exercise a little, and such Medicines must be used as attemperate the
humors, and she must be purged, and Uterine Glisters must be injected made of
two Ounces of Oil of Violets, and four Ounces of the Decoction of Mallows; but
care must be taken that the Courses be not quite stopped, because it is
dangerous. Lastly, if a blow, a fall, or difficult labor occasion this
disease, the following Cataplasm must be applied to the Womb and Neighboring
parts.

Take of the Powders of Dragons-blood, Frankincense, Mastich, and of the
greater Comfry, each two Drams, with a sufficient quantity of Turpentine make a
Cataplasm.

If the Woman be of a hot Constitution, apply the following Plaster.

Take of the Powders of Roses, Myrtles, and Balaustins, and Mastich, each one
Drahom, of fine Flour one Ounce, with the Whites of Eggs make a Plaster.

The Courses stay beyond their time by reason of age, when they are about to go
away, or by a vice of the whole Body or of the womb: If it proceed on the
account of age, you must only endeavor to prevent those inconveniences which
are wont to follow, especially the Gout, and a pain in the Hip, which may be
done by a spare Diet, much exercise, and by bleeding yearly, till Nature has
been accustomed to the want of the menstruous Purgation: But if it proceed from
a Vice of the whole Body, it must be treated as a suppression of the Courses.
If it proceed from a peculiar disorder of the Womb, it requires a peculiar
Cure, and is a Symptom of the kind of the vitiated action of Excretion, either
because it is hindered by the ill Formation, or a gross Humor that Obstructs.
The Causes therefore are these three, which are contrary to the anticipation of
the Courses, viz. the weakness of the Faculty, the fault of the Humors, and
the dullness of the Sense. The impotence of the Faculty is occasioned by the
frigidity, or moisture of the Temperament, or by the depraved Figure of the
Instrument; the Humor is faulty upon the account of its thickness, siccity and
clamminess: The Sense is rendered dull most commonly by moisture abounding. The
weak Faculty by reason of Frigidity, is known by the Woman's perceiving a weight
and disturbance after the time of the coming of her Courses is past. The fault
of the Instrument may be known by what went before, as by hard labor, a
tumor, cicatrix, leaping or a fall, whereby the Womb, or a part subservient to
it is displaced, or the figure of it deformed. The fault of the Humor may be
known by those things that are evacuated by the Blood, as if it be whitish it
may be seen, if it be gross and clammy, a sedentary life, and a gross and
flegmatic Diet went before; the Woman is of a soft, pale and leaden habit of
body, and is fat; and by the Bloods flowing slowly, and by the long continuance
of the Courses sometimes, and by their ending in a slime. If when they stay a
long time before they come, the Woman does not perceive any disturbance in the
Womb and neighboring Parts, the Sense is dull. If the Disease arise from a
thick and clammy Humor, as it does most commonly, it must be cured according
to Galen, with three sorts of Remedies; First, by a thin and heating Diet, by
moderate exercise, and frictions of the Legs: Secondly, by attenuating and
heating Potions made of opening Roots of Calaminth, Fennel, Saxifrage, Burnet,
Hysop, and the like, Saffron and Cinnamon being added to them, and the Cure
must be begun presently after the Purgation of the Courses. Let the Woman take
every Morning five or six Ounces of the following Apozem.

Take of the Roots of Smallage, Fennel, and Parsley, each two Ounces, of the
Leaves of Feverfew, Cat-mint, Pennyroyal, Maidenhair, each one Handful and an
Half, of the Seeds of Anise and Fennel, each one Dram and an Half; boil them
in a sufficient quantity of Water to a Quart; in the strained Liquor dissolve
of the Syrups of Mugwort and Maidenhair, each three Ounces; the Syrup of
Hysop, or of the Five Opening Roots made without Vinegar is also very good,
being mixed with the Waters of Fennel, Cat-mint, Pennyroyal, and Parsley, and
other things may be used which are mentioned in the Chapter of the Suppression
of the Courses. 3dly, She must be Purged with Agarick Trochiscated, or with the
Pill of Mastick, Or,

Take of the Pills of Agarick, and Aloephargin, each two Scruples, with the
Syrup of Mugwort; make four Pills.

Fourthly, Those things which draw the the Blood downwards must be used, as
bleeding in the Foot three or four days before the accustomed time of the
Courses; these things being done, the Legs and lower Belly must be fomented
with a decoction of Fenugreek, Camomile, Dill, Melilot, Fennel, Parsley, Daucus.
And while she is bathing let her take one of the Tablets called Diacalaminth;
afterward let the Parts be fumed with Spices, and use Frictions and Ligatures
to the Legs, and let Cupping-glasses be applied to the Claves of the Legs
without scarification; and if the Courses do not yet flow, let the Woman be
purged every third day with four or five of the Pills mentioned before. Let the
lower Belly be anointed with the Oils of Capers, White Lillies, Dill, Cinnamon,
and Saffron, and let Uterine Glisters be injected made of four Ounces of the
Decoction of Pennyroyal, Horse-mint, Thym, and Cresses, with two Ounces of Oil
of Rue, or of Dill, which wonderfully rouse the dull sense of the Womb.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Courses corrupted, or suppurated.
THE Courses may be corrupted four several ways; First from drawing a putrid
quality from the whole Body: Secondly, from the mixture of some putrid humor
in the passages: Thirdly, by a long suppression: Fourthly, from an intemperies
in the Womb, or from an abundance of putrid humors contained in and about it,
and are colored and disordered according to the nature of the humors; they
are White, Pale, Livid, Green, Black, Skinny, Fibrous, Membranous, Windy,
Fetid, and they have Sand and Worms in them.

The Cure is in a manner the same which is proposed for the Cure of the Whites;
for an exact course of Diet being ordered, the Woman must be purged with
Agarick trochiscated, or with the Pill of Mastich, if a Phlegmatic humor
abounds; if a bilious humor be the cause, let her be purged with Rhubarb, as

Take of the best Rhubarb, four Scruples, of yellow Myrobalans one Dram and
an Half, infuse them a Night in three Ounces of Succory Water; to the strained
Liquor add of Syrup of Roses Solutive, and of Manna, each one Ounce.

If Melancholy Humors abound,

Take of Senna one Ounce, of the Seeds of Annise one Dram, infuse them in
four Ounces of Fumitory-water; to the strained Liquor add of Pulp of Cassia,
and of Syrup of Roses Solutive, each one Ounce.

If the Courses are suppurated, such things must be used now and then, as
evacute a dust and Choleric humors, which may be easily prepared with
Agarick, Rhubarb, and Senna; and sometimes Glisters must be used, and moderate
exercise, which purge the Body and Womb; and if the Stomach abounding with
Phlegm be the cause, a Vomit used by Intervals is proper, that what is daily
heapt up there may be purged off before it enters the Veins.

Thirdly, Such things must be used as are able to eradicate the Disease, and if
the Humors are cold and gross, sudorifics must be used, as a Decoction of
Sarsaparilla, Guiac, China, and the like. But if Choler or Melancholy be the
cause, bathing is most proper; but gentle Frictions and Pessaries are proper
for both, and anoint the Belly with the Oil of Sweet Almonds, or with the Oil
of Violets, which are also to be put up the Womb. But if these things do no
good, an Issue must be made in one or both the Arms, which is of excellent use.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Complication of the Courses with other Diseases.
THere is scarce any thing that does disturb Physicians more, and which makes
them err so much, as the complication of the Courses with Diseases; and this
happens chiefly six ways. First, When a Disease happens just when the Courses
are about to come. Secondly, If by reason of the invasion of a Disease, the
Courses come before their due time. Thirdly, If the time of the Courses and of
the Disease are complicated, so that they come together. Fourthly, If the
Courses being suppressed, delayed or lessened, a Disease comes upon them upon
an other account. Fifthly, If by reason of a Disease pre-existing, a
suppression or delay of the Courses is the cause of the increase of the Disease
and its Symptoms. Sixthly, If when there is a Disease, the Courses flow.

If therefore the Courses are just about to flow, when the Disease is
beginning, or in the process of it, we must consider whether the Disease be one
of those, which is occasioned by the Womb, in which case if the Disease
requires bleeding without any delay, we must draw it from the foot, that it may
be let out by a convenient way, that the Womb may be evacuated, and the cause
expelled. But if the Disease arises from the whole Body, or from some principal
member of it; that Vein of the Arm (most affirm) must be opened, which chiefly
respects the part affected: but this opinion, if it be generally received,
seems to me injurious, and we ought rather to distinguish concerning the number
of the days, the acuteness of the Disease, and the plenitude of the Body; for
if the Disease be not acute, Blood ought to be drawn from the Foot, and
especially, if the Woman be within three or four days of her Courses, and in
this case she ought to be blooded in the Foot, although the Disease be acute,
and this both reason and experience confirms; for Nature is to be evacuated
that way she tends, if it be a convenient place; for if the Woman be blooded in
the upper parts, we often see that she becomes delirious, and that watchings,
sleepy Diseases, difficulty of Breathing, and at length Death it self follow.
But if there be eight days, or thereabouts, before the time of the Courses, and
there is a great plenitude, and the Woman cannot be so sufficiently evacuated
by the Foot, as the Disease requires, then all agree that she must be blooded
in the Arm, especially if the Disease be acute; but purging Medicines, Vomits,
and Sudorisicks must be deferred till the Courses are over, or you must use
those that are very gentle, lest Nature should be hindered, or diverted; for if
so, the Blood may be unseasonably detained, or may rush upon some principal
part, or increase the Disease. But if it happen that the Woman's Courses are
procrastinated, it is lawful to Purge; for sometimes we see that Purging brings
the Courses. If the Disease be Chronical, it is best to Purge eight days after
the Courses are gone off.

But if the Courses come before their due time in Diseases, which is the second
way of complication, nothing in curing Women's Diseases is so difficult and
dangerous, especially at the beginning of the Disease, before universal
Remedies have been given; for at other times if we do nothing, there is the
less perplexity; but if at the beginning you Bleed or Purge, you hinder the
menstruous Purgation, and if you do neither, the Disease increases. Those
things that are proper for the Disease, stop the Courses; and if they flow,
they do not relieve the Disease, because they are then Symptomatical; for such
an evacuation, is almost always pernicious at the beginning of the Disease, for
Nature at that time seldom promotes any useful evacuation; wherefore we must
diligently consider what good or hurt comes from it, and from what cause the
anticipation of the Courses in Diseases proceeds; for in the beginning and in
the increase, as we said, it is full of danger, but in the state and
declination, the cruption of the Courses, if they flow easily, is wont to be
advantageous, by reason of the fitness of the Season for evacuation, if it be
not complicated with some other evacuations of Nature. The Anticipation of the
Courses proceeds from many causes: but from whatever cause it come, if there be
a plenitude, the Cure must be begun by bleeding in the Foot. But if the Courses
flow at their accustomed time, and happen to come at the beginning of the
Disease, you must first wait on Nature, and if after twelve hours the Flux is
not, or is not like to be sufficient, you must bleed in the Foot, to complete
the natural evacuation of the Woman; and moreover, you must take away so much
Blood, as the Disease requires, for we must respect Custom and the Disease too,
and this may be understood of violent Diseases; yet it is chiefly to be used in
small ones; and therefore that they should not grow to be violent, you must
encourage the Courses by all means, by Ligatures, Frictions, Suppositories,
Glisters, and other things, which are sufficient to provoke the parts near the
Womb; and if the Disease arise from a cold cause, you must give such Medicines
as promote the Courses, and also respect the Disease: But if a Purge be
necessary, you must defer it till the Courses are over, lest the Blood being
moved and disturbed thereby, greater mischief should be occasioned.

But if the Disease be one of the greatest, as a Quinsey, Frensy, Plurisie, or
an acute Fever, you must first bleed in the Foot, afterward the same day, you
must bleed in the Arm; but in the mean while you must apply Ligatures to the
Legs whilst the Blood flows, and this is good Practice; for the Indication of
the most violent Disease is always to be respected before that Indication which
is taken from the Courses, and in the same manner you must proceed in the other
Seasons of the Disease, wherein you ought to defer Purging, Vomiting and Sweat,
if the Disease requires them, till the Courses are gone off; for the Indication
of the Courses is greater than the Indications of these helps, unless a Sanies
flow beyond the appointed time, which is not to be accounted at that time to
proceed from fullness, and in this case, an Indication for purging being urgent,
you may Purge.

The Fourth Case was, when upon the Courses stopped a Disease came. In this case
we must first consider whether the Courses are but now stopped, or whether they
have been stopped a long while; and moreover, whether the Disease proceeds from
this suppression; for if it arise from hence, you must without doubt bleed in
the Foot first, nor must we Purge, Vomit, or Sweat before; and afterward in
the Arm, if the Disease require it, especially if it be four days past the
accustomed time of the Courses. But if the suppression be new, and the Disease
not urgent, before you use other means, you must expect a while the flowing of
the Courses, especially if you do not understand rightly the nature of the
Disease; for it is more secure, the Courses being stopped to bleed in the Foot
than to Purge, Vomit, or Sweat. But if notwithstanding bleeding in the Foot,
the Courses flow but slowly, you ought to give such Medicines as move them; and
it will be proper to give them before they begin, if you suspect that Nature
will not do the business thoroughly her self.

But if the Courses delay, and the Disease grows worse thereby, most affirm
that the Cure must be begun by those helps, which the Disease and its Cause
require, without respect to bleeding in the Foot. But I am not of the same
Opinion; for in slight Diseases, and in such as will bear a Truce, experience
has taught me that it is best to bleed in the Foot; for the indication from the
Courses stopped is more to be minded than a small Disease, and therefore they
ought to be provoked, first by Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, Frictions, and
Medicines, and afterward you must provide for the Disease: But if the Disease
be violent, as a Quinsie, Pleurisy, or the like; then certainly those Remedies
must be given which the Disease requires, without consideration of the Veins of
the Foot.

But when the Courses should come at the time of the Disease, and are stopped, by
reason of the Disease and its Cause, without doubt we ought to bleed in the
Foot, and to take away so much Blood, as the plenitude of the Womb requires, or
till the Courses flow, and if there be occasion we may Purge gently, and not
divert the Course of Nature. Lastly, if when the Disease is present, the
Courses flow by drops before their time, you must proceed as in the second Case
concerning the Anticipation of the Courses in Diseases: Or, if it happen at
their due time, you must treat them as in the third Case when the Courses
happen with the Seasons of the Disease; only the dropping of the Courses
signifies a greater oppression of Nature, and therefore requires larger
bleeding.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Courses coming difficulty, and with violent Symptoms.
THis Disease is like a Dysury or adifficulty of Urine, for it is accompanied
with Pain and a great disturbance, the Symptoms often come before the Courses,
and sometimes with the Courses; the Blood comes by drops and is attended with
violent Pain. This Symptom comes upon an Obstruction of the Courses, sometimes
upon Solution of the Continuum, an Ulcer, Erosion, and painful disorders in the
neighboring parts, The Courses, as was said before, come sometimes drop by
drop, and sometimes plentifully; sometimes by intervals, and sometimes
continually; sometimes orderly, and sometimes disorderly.

It is most commonly occasioned by the same Causes from whence a suppression of
the Courses proceeds, but gentler; for there is not a total Suppression, but an
unequal Obstruction of the Vessels of the Womb, by reason of thick clotted, and
feculent blood, which stretches the Vessels, and Nature violently endeavouing
to Evacuate it, a gross wind arises, which distending the Vessels, and the
neighboring parts, occasions the violent pain, which continues until the
clods are ejected. Sometimes the Blood flows plentifully, yet the Courses are
counted difficult and lessened; because tho a great quantity is evacuated, yet
it is not answerable to the plenitude. The second Cause is an Ulcer, or some
preternatural Tumor in the Womb or neighboring parts, which are provoked and
hurt by the commotion of the Blood. The third is the acrimony of the Humors.
This Disease is known by a pain in the Head, a pain in the Stomach,
Restlesness, pains in the Loins, and of the lower Belly, just like the pains of
Childbearing, coming with the Courses, or eight days before. There is often
also fainting and convulsions, and a palpitation of the Heart; and by these you
may know, that the Blood is clotted or thick, and a small swelling is sometimes
perceived in one or both of the Groins, by reason of clotted Blood contained in
it; and just before the evacuation of the clotted Blood, the pain is most
violent, and at the same time if wind be joined with it, it breaks from the
Womb or backwards with a noise, and there are wandering pains about the Loins
and Hips. If an Ulcer be the cause, Sanies or Pus is mixed with the Blood, and
the Courses flow always with a fixed pain. This Disease afflicts Virgins and
those that are Barren. The Cure is twofold, the first respects the Cause, the
second the mitigating the Pain. If it proceed from feculent gross and clotted
Blood, a thin Diet and moderate Exercise must be ordered, and Medicines that
cause Revulsion and Evacuation, must be used. Blood therefore must be drawn
from the Arm if there be a great quantity of it, but if the quantity be small,
from the Foot; and the clotted Blood that cannot be evacuated, must be drawn
out by Cupping-glasses applied to the Thighs and Legs with Scarification, and
by Ligatures upon the Legs, and the Humor may be turned by applying Leeches to
the Fundament if the pain continue after the Courses are stopped, but they must
not be used before.

Secondly, Evacuation must be used with this distinction, when feculent and
grumous Blood is the cause, you must Bleed; when an Ulcer, Wind, or an Acrid
Matter, you must Purge most.

Thirdly, The Passages must be Relaxed and Opened, and the Pain mitigated;
wherefore, if the matter be thick, slatulent, feculent, or clammy; a Dram of
Venice Treacle, or of Mithridate must be taken at Bedtime in three Ounces of
Balm-water; and Baths must be provided, and Lotions for the Legs made of a
Decoction of Marshmallows, of the Seeds of Flax, Fenugreek, Dill, Rhue, and
Mugwort, and the Feet must be bathed in it hot a while, and the vapors must be
received, and a Sponge dipped in it must be applied to the Privities, and the
lower Belly must be Fomented afterward with Flannel dipped in Wine and Oil of
Roses, or with a Bladder half full of warm Oil; but it will be better to anoint
the Navel, and the region below it with Oil of Saffron, of White-lillies, the
Seeds of Flax, of Capers, of Yolks of Eggs, or of sweet Almonds, among which or
with one of them must be dissolved a Dram of Treacle, a Pessary dipped in the
same is also is of great use; or the foresaid Parts may be anointed with
Hens-fat and Butter; or with Butter and some of the foresaid Oils. The
following Ointment is also very proper.

Take of the juice of Angelica one Dram, of Oils of Capers and of
White-lilies, each one Ounce and an half, of White Wind half an Ounce, with Wax
make an Ointment.

The following Cataplasm is also very good.

Take of common Oil, of sweet Wine, and fresh Butter, each two Ounces, of Bran
three Ounces; boil them gently, apply them hot and repeat them frequently.

But if acrid and eroding Matter be the cause you must use gentle Ointments,
and Fomentation of warm Water, or Purslain and Lettice Water with Emulsions of
the cold Seeds; and the Parts must be anointed with the Oils of sweet Almonds,
of Violets and of Roses.

If the Disease proceeds from an Ulcer, you must endeavor the Cure of it, and
you must mitigate the Pain by injecting uterine Glisters made of four Ounces of
warm Water; and if the heat be very much, the Water must be sweetened with
Sugar, and you must add one Dram of the white Troches of Rhasis. Or, the
Glister may be made with three Ounces of Allum-water, which is of excellent
use; or with so much Barly-water with an Ounce of Syrup of Roses; or with
Milk-water with Sugar; or with an Ounce and an half of Milk it self, with the
like quantity of a Decoction of the Leaves and Seeds of Plaintain, to which may
be added half an Ounce of the emulsion of the cold Seeds; and if the Pain and
Heat is very violent, inject two Ounces of the Decoction of Henbane, or white
Poppies. But if these things will not do the business, some Opium must be mixed
with the Decoction before mentioned. Lastly, if other remedies will not do the
business, an Issue must be opened in the Leg.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Closure of the Womb.
VIrgins laboring under this Disease are said to be Imperforate. This closure
is wont to be in three places, viz. in the mouth of the Womb, in the neck of
it, and in the Privities. It is occasioned either in the first Formation when a
Membrance covers the Orifice of the Womb, or its Neck, or by a Wound, or Ulcer
preceding, which growing together stops the Neck of the Womb, or joins the
Lips, or it is occasioned by Humors, or a Compression.

If the Closure be in the Privities, it may be easily known, but if it be in
the Neck, or Orifice of the Womb, it is not found out till the Courses begin to
flow, or till Women are Married; for at the time of the menstruous Purgation,
Pains and Gripes are perceived in the region of the Womb at certain times, with
a sense of weight, yet no Flux follows. Moreover, you may guess at it, if the
Maid be of good habit of Body not Cachetical, and without Obstruction, the
Disease continuing the Womb swells, so that Virgins seem to be with Child, and
sometimes the whole Body, which looks livid: But if the Neck of the Womb be
closed, it may be known in the first Copualtion, because it cannot admit the
Virile Member. Lastly, if the Orifice of the Womb be shut, it is difficultly
known, but it may be found out by the hand of a Skilful Midwife.

As to the prognostic, if the Closure be in the Orifice of the Privities, it
is easily Cured by a small Section: But if it be in the inner Parts, the Cure
is much more difficult.

When a Membrane shuts the passage, it is easily Cured, but when the Closure is
from fleshy Matter, as it happens after Ulcers, then the Cure is much more
difficult.

The Closure of the inner Orifice of the Womb is Incurable, for Chirurgcial
Instruments cannot work upon it.

If the Closure of the Womb be contracted from the Birth, it must be opened by
simple Section; but if it takes its rise from an Ulcer, as it often happens in
the French Pox; we must consider, whether it be an Excrescence of Flesh that
does not wholly stop the passage; and whether it quite stops For if it be only
an Excrescence, we must endeavor (convenient Evacuations going before) first
to hinder the increase of the Flesh by drying and discussing Medicines, and
afterward we must lessen the Flesh by Medicines made of Frankincense,
Birthwort, the Bark of Frankincense, Roses, Balaustins, Mastick, Myrrh, Aloes,
and the like; and if these things are not sufficient, we must use burnt Allom,
Unguentum, Aegyptiacum, and the like; or the Flesh may be cut off by that
Instrument that is used for extirpating a Polipus. But if the Neck of the Womb
be wholly shut, we must endeavor to renew the Ulcer, and to take off the
superfluous Flesh by the foresaid Medicines, or it must be cut.

If a Tumor shut the passage of the Womb, it must be removed by proper
Remedies.

If it be occasioned by a Compression of the Neck of the Womb, that which
causes the Compression must be removed, namely, a Stone in the Bladder, a
Tumor of the right Gut, or the like.

When the passage is too narrow, it most commonly proceeds from hardness and
dryness; and therefore you must use moistning, emollient, and relaxing things;
as half Baths, Fomentations, Liniments, and Pessaries; and so the part being
relaxed, you must put a leaden Pipe, or white Wax fitted for the purpose,
moistened with Butter, or some emollient Oil, and she must always wear it, or
at least a-nights; and adays; let a Pessary made of Cotton be used anointed
with Ointment Marshmallows, or the like.

CHAP. X.
Of Suppression of the Courses
THere is said to be a Suppression of the Courses, when in Women of a mature
Age, that neither give suck nor are with Child, the Evacuation of Blood by the
Womb, which is Naturally wont to be Monthly, flows seldom, or sparingly, or is
wholly stopped.

Because this Suppression proceeds from Natural and Preternatural Causes, the
signs of both shall be distinctly proposed, lest the Practitioner should be
deceived by Women being with Child by Illegitimate Coition, and so rashly
prescribe Medicines to provoke the Courses.

First therefore, Women with Child most commonly retain their Natural Color,
and others do not.

Secondly, the Symptoms which do happen to Women with Child at the beginning,
abate Daily, but on the contrary in Suppression of the Courses, the longer they
are stopped, so much the more the Symptoms are increased.

Thirdly, In Women with Child after the third Month, the motion and situation
of the Child may be sensibly perceived by laying the hand on the Belly. But in
others the Swelling is not at all hard, nor is it always contained within the
Limits of the Womb.

Fourthly, If the inward Mouth of the Womb be touched by a Skilful Midwife, she
will find it not exactly closed, as it is in Women with Child; but rather hard,
contracted, and somewhat painful.

Fifthly, Women with Child are most commonly cheerful; but on the contrary in a
Suppression, they are most commonly sorrowful and sad.

A Suppression of the Courses is very dangerous, and many desperate Diseases
arise from it.

The Cure of this Disease must be varied according to the variety of the
Causes, and first, if it proceed from too great a quantity of Blood, bleeding
must be ordered in the Arm, and a large quantity of Blood must be taken away;
afterward it must be drawn downwards by opening the lower Veins about the time
the Woman used to have her Courses before she was ill.

If by reason of want of Blood the Courses stop, as after long Fevers, after
great Evacuations, and when the Body is much wasted, you must not endeavor to
provoke the Courses till the Body is replenished, and a sufficient quantity of
Blood is bred, which being done they generally flow of their own accord; but if
it happens that Nature forforgets her Office, she must be roused up by opening
the lower Veins, and by Medicines proposed in the Chapter of Hysteric
Diseases: But the quantity of Blood must be moderate, lest the strength should
be dejected, and the Sick should fall into a Consumption. yet it must be
carefully noted, that every wasting of the Body does not show a want of Blood,
but only that which succeeds great Evacuations, and the like. For sometimes it
happens that the Courses being suppressed and detained in the Veins, occasion
an ill quality, whereby the Blood is rendered unfit to nourish the Parts, upon
which account the Body wastes, tho the Veins are full of Blood, in which Case
large bleeding is required.

As to the suppression of the Courses which happens by a preposterous motion of
the Blood, when it is evacuated by bleeding at Nose, by Vomiting, Spitting, or
Hemorrhoids, and other parts, the Cure of it is performed by repelling the
Blood from the parts through which it flows contrary to Nature, and by drawing
it back to the passage of the Womb. The first is performed when the Blood
rushes out of the upper parts, by washing the Arms, Head, and Face, with cold
Water, and by forbearing the exercise of those parts, especially singing and
speaking aloud. The second is performed by opening the lower Veins, three or
Four days before the Blood breaks out, and by Cuping-Glasses applied to the
Thighs and Legs sometimes with, sometimes without Scarification, by provoking
the Hemorrhoids, by Running, by Walking, Fomentations, and Baths made of
opening Herbs; but the Bath water is especially commended, and the Sick must
bath in them often a good while after Meals, but the water must not rise above
the Navel, and at the same time the upper parts be cooled by fanning them.

If the Blood flow by the Hemorrhoids, the Cure is very difficult; for if you
use things to draw downwards, they bring them also to the Fundament, and if you
use astringent things to it, they by nearness of the parts, repel what should
be brought to the Womb; so that the only way of Cure is to apply such things to
the Womb as may allure the Blood thither, after you have used such things as
draw the Blood downwards.

CHAP. XI.
Of an Immoderate Flux of the Courses.
AN immoderate Flux of the Courses comes either in Childbed, or at other
times, as to the first that afflicts Women most on the first day after a
difficult Labor, and is accompanied with a long train of Hysteric Symptoms;
and as it happens only on the first days so usually does not last long, for if
a thickning diet be ordered, it soon abates: The following Drink may be also
used.

Take of Plantain water and Red wine, each one Pint, boil them till a third
part be consumed, sweeten it with a sufficient quantity of white Sugar, and let
her take half a pint twice or thrice a day, and in the mean while the following
Medicine tied up in a rag, may be often held to her Nose.

Take of Galbanum and Assa foetida each two Drams, of Castor one Dram and half,
of Volatile Salt of Amber half a Dram, mingle them: Or instead of it, Spirit of
Sal ammoniac may be used.

But as to the Flux which happens out of Childbed, you must bleed in the Arm,
and eight Ounces of Blood must be taken away, the next Morning the following
Purge must be given.

Take of Tamarinds half an Ounce, of Sena two Drams, of Rubarb one Dram and an
half, infuse them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain water, in three Ounces
of the strained Liquor, disolve of Manna, and Syrup of Roses solutive each, an
Ounce, make a Purging Potion, which is to be repeated every third day for
twice. Every Night at bedtime through the whole course of the Disease give an
Ounce of Diacodium mixed with two Ounces of Black Cherry water.

Take of the Conserve of dried Roses two Ounces, of the Troches of Lemnian
Earth a Dram and an half, of Pomgranate peel and of red Coral prepared each two
Scruples, of Blood Stone, Dragons Blood, and Bole-armenic each two Scruples,
with a sufficient quantity of Simple Syrup of Coral, make an Electuary, whereof
let her take the quantity of a large Nutmeg in the Morning, and at five in the
Afternoon, drinking upon it six Spoonfuls of the following Julip.

Take of the waters of Oakbuds and of Plantain each three Ounces, of Cinnamon
water hordeated and of Syrup of dried Roses each one Ounce, of Spirit of
Vitriol a sufficient quantity to make it pleasantly acid.

Take of the Leaves of Plantain and Nettles each a sufficient quantity, beat
them together in a Marble Mortar, and press out the juice, clarify it, and
give six Spoonfuls of it cold three or four times in a day; after the first
Purge apply the following Plaster to the region of the Loins.

Take of the Plasters of Diapalma and ad herniam each equal parts, mix them and
spread them on Leather.

A cooling and thickening Diet must be ordered, only it may be proper to allow
once or twice a day a small glass of Claret to recover the strength.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Whites.
THis obstinate and lasting Disease may be cured by bleeding once, and by
Purging with two Scruples of Pill Coch-Major four times, and by the following
strengthening Medicines.

Take of Venice Treacle one Ounce and an half, of the Conserve of the Yellow
Peel of Oranges one Ounce, of Diascordium half an Ounce, of Ginger candied, and
Nutmegs candied each three Drams, of compound Powder of Crabs eyes one Dram and
an half, of the outward Peel of Pomgranats, of the roots of Spanish Angelica,
and of the troches of Lemnian Earth each one Dram, of Bole-Armenic two
Scruples, of Gun-arabic half a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
dried Roses make an Electuary, whereof let her take the quantity of a large
Nutmeg in the Morning, and at five in the Afternoon, and at Night, drinking
upon it six Spoonfuls of the following infusion.

Take of the roots of Elecampane, Masterwort, Angelica, and Gentian, each half
an Ounce, of the Leaves of Roman Wormwood, white Horehound, the lesser Centory
and Calaminth each one handful, of Juniper Berries one Ounce, cut them small,
and infuse them in five pints of Canary Wine, let them stand in infusion, and
strain them only as you use them.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Barrenness.
BArrenness proceeds from many causes, but they may be reduced to four Heads,
according to the four Natural Operations which are required to perfect
Conception. The first is that the Woman in Copulation receive the Man's seed:
Secondly, that it is retained a due time: Thirdly, that it is nourished in the
Womb: Fourthly, that the Woman afford due Matter for the forming and necessary
increase of the Embroy; and hence four impediments of Conception arise.

First, The Reception of the Seed is hindered by many causes, as immature Age,
when by reason of the narrowness of the Genital passages the Woman cannot admit
the Man's Yard, or at least not without great pain, which makes her dislike
Copulation; and Old Age has the same effect; for in elderly Virgins the Genital
parts for want of use, are rendr'd so strait, that they cannot easily receive
the virile Member, and such as are lame, or have their Limbs distorted, or
their Hips depressed, can scarce lie in such a posture as is necessary for a
fit Reception of the Seed; too much fat also stops the passages, and makes the
Copulation incommodious: And lastly, a cold intemperies of the Womb makes the
Woman dull, so that she scarce injoys any pleasure in Copulation, or is so
flowly moved, that the inward Orifice of the Womb does not open seasonably to
receive the Man's Seed. The Passions of the Mind also are a great hinderance,
especially hatred between Man and Wife, whereby the Woman having an aversion
for such pleasure does not supply Spirits sufficient to make the Genital parts
turgent at the time of Copulation; nor does the Womb kindly meet the Seed, and
draw it into its Cavity, from whence and from mixture of both the Seeds,
Conception arises.

The Reception of the Seed may be also hindered by Swellings, Ulcers,
Obstructions, Narrowness or Distorsions of the Genital parts, or of the
Neighboring parts, or by a stone in the Bladder or the like.

Conception may be also hindered by reason the Seed is not retained upon the
account of too great moisture of the Womb, namely when its filled with many
excrementitious humors, whereby being rendered too laxe it cannot be
contracted, as it ought to retain the Seed received, but this chiefly happens
by reason of miscarriage or hard labor, whereby the Fibers of the Womb and its
inner Orifice are torn, but the Whites are the most common cause of Barrenness.

Conception is also hindered when the Seed is not sufficiently nourished in the
Womb, as when the Intemperies of the Womb is so very cold, that it extinguishes
the Seed, or so hot as that it dissipates it, or over-moist or dry.

The Age fit for Conception is from fourteen to fifty, and therefore those
Women that are younger or older do not conceive, by reason of a defect of Seed
and menstruous Blood, yet it must be confessed, that some Women have conceived
who never had their Courses.

A disproportion betwixt the Man's and Woman's Seed is also the occasion of
Barrenness, tho there is no sensible defect in either, and it happens sometimes
that the same Man has Children by another Woman, and the same Woman Children by
another Man, when together they were Childless. It comes to pass sometimes that
after a Woman has conversed ten or more Years with her Husband, and has not
conceived, afterward she has had Children, the cause whereof is the change of
her Constitution by time.

Having made frequent mention of Women's Seed, I must here acquaint you that
many Learned Physicians and Anatomists deny that Women have any Seed, for some
Women send forth no humor as is called Seed, and yet they are Fruitful enough,
yea some after they have begun to emit such an humor, tho indeed they took
great pleasure in Copulation, yet grew less fruitful than before. It Is also
said by some that a seminal Air or Vapor arising from the Man's Seed, and not
the Seed it self causes Conception; but passing by Controversies and nice
Speculations, I according to my way of Writing, set down such Methods and
Medicines as are approved of for the Cure of this Disease.

And First, the narrowness of the genital parts by reason of youth, in progress
of time will grow large enough, and therefore there is no need of any other
Cure, but in the mean while Copulation must be forbid, for by the too early use
of it, the natural constitution of the parts is disordered, but if it proceed
from small stature or age, it is incurable.

Over-fatness may be corrected by a spare and proper Diet, and by convenient
evacuations.

If Barrenness proceeds from a disorderly Diet, as from excessive eating or
drinking, the Woman must be reduced to a regular course of Life.

Such as are robust and of a manly Constitution must by all means be reduced to
a womanly state; that they may become fit for generation, they must forbear
strong Meats and Labor, and the Courses must be forced, and by Bleeding and
Purging and the like, the habit of the Body must be rendered cold and moist.

But the most frequent cause of Barrenness is a cold and moist disposition of
the whole Body and of the Womb, which the Whites often accompany, and for the
cure in this case, the Whites must be cured by the method prescribed in the
Chapter of the Whites, and the following things must be ordered, which are
peculiarly proper.

And First the phlegmatic humors must be evacuated by Medicines that purge
Sweat and force Urine, and revulsion must be made by Issues in the Arms, Neck
and Legs, and the principal parts must be strengthened by Treacle, Mithridate,
Confection of Alkermes and the like.

Afterward such things must be used as are proper by a specific quality to
strengthen the Womb and to help Conception.

Take of the roots of Eringo and Satyrion candied each one Ounce, of green
Ginger candied half an Ounce, of Hazel Nuts, Pine Nuts, and Pistachies each six
Drams, one Nutmeg candied, of the Seed of Rocket and Cresses each two Drams, of
the ashes of a Bulls Pisle, of the Reins of Scinks and of the raspings of Ivory
each one Dram, of confection of Alkermes three Drams, of Diambra and sweet
Diamoch each one Ounce and an half, of Ambergriese half a Dram, with the Syrup
of candied Citrons, make an Electuary, let her take the quantity of a Nutmeg at
bedtime, drinking upon it a glass of good Wine.

Some count the Secundine of a Woman dried and powderd very effectual, one
Dram of it being taken.

The Seeds of Bishops weed are also much commended.

Many good Authors affirm, that if a Woman drink six Ounces of the juice of
Garden Sage with a little Salt, the fourth day of her Menstruous Purgation, and
a quarter of an hour after has Conversation with her Husband, she will
infallibly conceive. And by the use of this remedy Aetius says, the Egyptian
Women became fruitful after a great Plague.

It Is said many have conceived when their having Children has bin despaired of,
by thrusting up far in the Privities Garlic heated with Oil of Spike, and wrapped
in a fine rag, for it powerfully forces the Courses, and cleanses and delights
the Womb.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Parts of Women that serve for Generation.
THE Parts serving for Generation in Women may be divided into the Privities,
the Womb, the Testicles, and the Vessels that prepare and carry. That part is
called the Privities which appears at first sight without dissection, it
reaches from the lower part of the Os Pubis, within an Inch of the Fundament;
it is less and closer in Maids, than in those that have born Children. It has
two Lips, which toward the Pubes grows thicker, and meeting upon the middle of
the Os Pubis makes that rising that is called the Hill of Venus; its outward
substance is Skin covered with Hair, as the Lips are, which begin to grow in
this place about the age of Fourteen; the inner substance of the Hill of Venus
chiefly consists of Fat, which makes it bunch up, which in Copulation hinders
the bones of the Pubes of the Man and Woman to hit one against another, which
would by causing pain abate the Venereal pleasure. A Muscle springing from the
sphincter of the Fundament lies under this Fat. Its Office is to straighten the
Orifice of the Sheath. The Nymphs and the Clitoris appear when the Lips are
drawn a little aside: The Nymphs stand next the Urine, as it spouts out from
the Bladder, and keeps the Lips from being wet; they are placed on each side,
just within the Lips, they are two fleshy and soft Productions beginning at the
upper part of the Privities, where they make that wrinkled membranous
Production, which clothes the Clitoris like a Foreskin: They are in shape and
color like the Thrils that hang under a Cocks Throat, they have a red
substance partly Fleshy, partly Membranous; within Soft and Spongy, composed
loosly of small Membranes and Vessels, so that they are very easily distended
by the influx of the Animal Spirits and Arterial Blood. They are larger in
grown Maids than in Young, and grow larger upon the use of Venery, and after
the Bearing of Children; their use is to defend the inner Parts, and to cover
the passage of the Urine, and a good part of the Orifice of the Sheath in the
upper part of the Privity. Betwixt the Nymphs is placed the Clitoris; it
answers to a Man's Yard, in shape, situation, substance, erection, and differs
from it only in length and bigness. Those that are called Hermophrodites have
it so long and big, as to be able to Converse with Women in the manner of Men.
They are not of two Sexs as is commonly reported, only their Stones are placed
in the Lips of the Privities, and their Clitoris is preternaturally extended:
But in most it does not appear unless the Lips are drawn aside: It is a little,
long and round Body, it lies under the fat of the hill of Venus, and puffs up
in Venery, and straightening the Orifice of the Sheath makes it embrace the
Virile Member the more closely: Its outward end is like the Glans of a Men's
Yard, and as the Glans in Men is the seat of the greatest pleasure in
Copulation; so is this in Women: There is as it were a hole in it, tho indeed
there is really no such thing, most of it is covered with a thin Membrane from
the Conjunction of the Nymphs: It has two pair of Muscles, the upper are round
and spring from the bones of the Hip; these by straitening the roots of the
Nervous Bodies, that arise on each side from the bunching of the Os Ischium
detain the Blood and Spirits in them, and so erect the Clitoris, even as those
in Men do the Virile Member; the other rise from the Sphincter of the
Fundament, and these serve to straiten and narrow the Orifice of the Sheath: It
has Veins, and Arteries, and Nerves, which are somewhat large. In some Eastern
Countries the Clitoris is wont to be so large, that for its deformity, and the
hindrance it causes in Copulation, they used to cut it quite out, or to sear
it, to hinder its growth.

The Sheath is so called because it receives the Virile Member like a sheath,
it is soft and loose, uneven and wrinkly, of a nervous but somewhat spongy
Substance, which is puffed up in Copulation to embrace the Yard the better: Its
about seven fingers breadth long, and as wide as the strait Gut; but the length
and width differ in respect of Age, and as the Woman is more or less provoked
to Copulation: The wrinkles are much more numerous and close in Virgins, than
in those that have Born many Children, and in Whores that use frequent
Copulation, and in Women that have had the Whites a long while.

It has very many Arteries and Veins, some whereof inosculate one with another,
and others not. By the Arteries that open into it, the Courses sometimes flow
in Women with Child, that are full of Blood. These Vessels bring plenty of
Blood to it in Copulation, which by heating and puffing up the Sheath increases
the pleasure, and hinders the Man's Seed from cooling, before it is conveyed to
the Womb. All along the Sheath there are abundance of Pores, from whence a thin
Humor always flows, especially in Copulation, and increases the pleasure of
the Woman, and is that which is supposed to be her Seed. Near its outer end,
under the Nymphs, in its upper part, it receives the Neck of the Bladder. In
Virgins its passage is so narrow, that at their first Conversation with a Man,
they have commonly more pain than pleasure, by reason of the extension of it by
the Virile Member, which breaks some small Vessels, from whence Blood issues.

The Hymen is a thin nervous Membrane, interwoven with fleshy Fibers, and
endowed with many little Arteries, and Veins, behind the insertion of the Neck
of the Bladder, with a hole in the midst, that will admit the top of ones
little finger, whereby the Courses flow, it is also called the Girdle of
Chastity. But it is broken and bleeds at the first Copulation, and never closes
again. But though a Man when he finds these signs of Virginity, may certainly
conclude he has Married a Maid; yet if they are wanting, it does not
necessarily follow that Virginity is wanting; for the Hymen may be corroded by
sharp Humors flowing through it with the Courses, and from other Causes; or,
if a Maid be so indiscreet as to become a Bride while her Courses flow, or
within a Day after, then the Hymen and the wrinkled Membrane of the Sheath are
so relaxed, that the Virile Member may enter without any obstruction, and so
give suspicion of Unchastity, when there is really no occasion for it.
Sometimes in old Maids the Hymen is so strong that it cannot be penetrated
without difficulty; and in some it is naturally quite closed up, and so their
Courses are stopped, which much endangers their Life; if it be not opened with a
Chirurgical Instrument.

The Myrtle-berry Caruncles lie close to the Hymen, the largest of 'em is
uppermost, standing just at the Mouth of the passage of the Urine, which it
shuts after making water; opposite to this at the bottom of the Sheath there is
another, and in each side one. But of these, there is only the first in Maids,
the other three being made by the broken Hymen. These three when the Sheath is
extended disappear in Labor, and cannot be seen till the Sheath is contracted
to its natural straitness.

The Sheath near its outer Orifice, has a Sphincter Muscle about three fingers
broad that contracts it as the case requires; and therefore Men and Women need
not doubt but that their Genitals will be proportionable, for the Sheath is so
artificially made, that it can suit with every Penis.

The Womb is seated in the lowest part of the Belly, betwixt the Bladder and
straight Gut, its hindmost part is loose, that it may be extended as the Child
increases, but its sides are tied fast by two pair of Ligaments. Its substance
is whitish, nervous, and compact in Virgins, but a little spongy and soft in
Women with Child. It has two Membranes, the outer is strong and double arising
from the Peritoneum, the inner being proper is Fibrous and more Porous. Betwixt
these Membranes, there is a certain fleshy and fibrous contexture, which in
Women with Child, together with the said Membranes, imbibes so much of the
nutritious Humors, that then flow thither, that the more the Child increases,
the more fleshy, fibrous, and thick does the Womb grow, so that in the last
months it is an inch thick, and some times two fingers breadth, though it be
extended to so much greater compass, than it has when a Woman is not with
Child, and yet within three weeks after Delivery it is as thin as before, and
contracts so wonderfully, that it may be held in ones hand. In Virgins it is
about two fingers breadth broad, and three long; in those that have Copulated,
it is a little bigger, it is like a Pear, only a little flattish above and
below, but in Women with Child it becomes more round. In Maids its cavity is so
small, that it will hardly contain a large Hazel-nut; it is divided be a Line
that goes length-ways, much like that in a Man's Cod. Its Arteries spring
partly from the Spermatick and Hypogastrick; they run along the Womb, bending
and winding, that they may be extended without danger of breaking, when the
Womb is stretched with the Child. The monthly Courses flow by these Arteries in
greatest quantity into the Womb it self: But in less quantity by the Branches
that open into the Neck of the Womb, and a small quantity of the Courses come
out of the Sheath. It is much disputed what is the reason of the Courses,
whether they flow by reason of too great quantity of Blood, or whether at set
times; there is also a fermentation of the Blood, which opens the orifices of
the Arteries: But it is most probable that it proceeds from a fermentation at
appointed times, for if a Woman feeds high and so breeds much Blood, the
Courses flow never the sooner, though perhaps they may be in a greater quantity;
and if she use the greatest abstinence and spareness of Diet, they will not be
the longer before they come, so that when through such effervency the Blood
flows plentifully into the Vessels of the Womb, and the Veins of the Womb are
not able to carry it all back again by Circulation, it flows out of the
extremities of the Arteries so long, till the too great quantity of the Blood
is lessened, and the fermentation ceases, which it does usually after three or
four days. The Courses seldom flow in Women with Child, and the wanting of them
is their first item of having Conceived.

The Veins spring from the Preparantes, and from the Epigastrick, the Nerves
from the greatest plexus of the mesentery of the Intercostal Pair, and from the
lowest plexus of the same, and also from the Nerves of the Os Sacrum, and the
same run also to the Testes or Ovaria. These plexus of Nerves are chiefly
affected in Hysteric Fits, and are Convulsive, and often happen when the Womb
is not at all in fault; and the Ball that seems to rise from the bottom of the
Belly in these Fits, and to beat strongly about the Navel, which is usually
supposed to be the rising of the Womb, is nothing but a Convulsion of these
Nerves; for some Men are troubled with the same Symptom.

The use of the Womb is to receive into its capacity the principals of the
formation of the Fetus, to afford it nourishment, and to preserve it from
injuries, and at length to expel it.

The neck of the Womb seems to be a part of the Fundus, only it is much more
narrower, for its cavity is no wider in Virgins than a small Quill, and in
Women with Child its inner orifice does either quite close its sides together,
or is daubed up with a slimy yellowish Humor, so that nothing then can enter
into the Womb. It has the same Membranes, and the same Vessels with the Womb.

Women's Testicles differ much from Men's, their situation is within the Body, on
each side two fingers breadth from the bottom of the Womb, to the sides whereof
they are knit by a strong Ligament; they are flat on the sides, in their lower
part oval; their Superficies is more rugged and unequal, than in those of Men,
they differ in bigness, according to Age; in those newly come to Maturity, they
are about half as big as those of Men, but in such as are in Years, they are
less and harder, though they sometimes grow preternaturally to a vast bigness,
for several Quarts of Liquor has been found contained in them, in a Dropsy of
the Womb; they have but one Membrane that encompasses them round; but on their
upper side where the preparing Vessels enter them, they are about half way
involved in another Membrane that accompanies those Vessels, and springs from
the Peritoneum; when this cover is removed, their substance appears whitish,
but is wholly different from Men's Testicles; for Men's are composed of Seminary
Vessels, which being continued to one another are twenty or thirty Else long,
if they could be drawn out at length without breaking; but Women's do
principally consist of a great many Membranes and small Fibers, loosly united
to one another; among which there are several little Bladders full of clear
water; the liquor contained in those Bladders has been always supposed by the
followers of Hippocrates and Galen, to be Seed stored up in them; but Dr.
Harvey and many Learned Physicians and Anatomists suppose these little Bladders
to contain nothing of Seed, but that they are truly Eggs, analogous to those of
Fowl and other Creatures, and that the Testicles so called are not truly so,
nor have any such Office as those of Men, but are indeed an Ovarium, wherein
those Eggs are nourished by the sanguinary Vessels dispersed through them, and
from whence one or more, as they are fecundated by the Man's Seed, separate,
and are conveyed into the Womb by the Tubae Falopianae: If you boil these Eggs
their Liquor will have the same color, taste, and consistency with the white of
Birds Eggs, and they do not want shells, because they are sufficiently defended
by the Womb. These Eggs in Women are commonly about the number of twenty in
each Testicle, whereof some are far less than others.

The Spermatick Vessels are of two sorts; Arteries and Veins; the Arteries are
two as in Men. They spring from the great Artery a little below the Emulgents
(very rarely either of them from the Emulgent it self) and pass down toward
the Testes, not by such a direct course as in Men, but with much twirling and
winding among the Veins, with which they have no inosculation, as has been
generally said. But for all their Winding, when they are stretched out to their
full length, they are not so long as those of Men. The Veins are two, arising
as in Men, the right from the Trunk of the Cava, a little below the Emulgent,
and the left from the Emulgent it self, but they are much shorter than in Men;
both the Arteries and Veins as they pass down are covered with one common Coat
from the Peritoneum, and near the Testes they are divided into two Branches,
the upper whereof is implanted into the Testicle by a Triple-root, and the
other is subdivided below the Testes into three twigs, one of which goes to the
bottom of the Womb, another to the Tuba and round ligament, the third creeping
by the side of the Womb, under its common Membrane ends in its Neck, where it
is Woven with the Hypogastrick Vessels like a net. By this way it is that the
Courses sometimes flow in Women with Child, for the first Months, and not out
of the inner Cavity of the Womb.

The use of these Spermatick Vessels is not to Minister to the Generation of
Seed, according to the Ancient Doctrine, but to the Nutrition of the Eggs in
the Ovaria or Testes, according to the new, and to the nourishment of the
Fetus, and of the solid parts, and the expurgation of the Courses.

The carrying Vessels that go straight from the Testes to the bottom of the
Womb, and were supposed to emit the Seed from the Stones into the bottom of the
Womb, are accounted by de Graef only Ligaments of the Testicles to keep them in
their place; for they come not to the Inner Cavity of the Womb. The Fallopian
Tubes are very slender and narrow Ducts, nervous and white, arising from the
horns or sides of the Womb, and at a little distance from it they become
larger, and twist like the tendrel of a Vine, till nearer their end, where
ceasing their winding they turn very large, and seem membranous and fleshy,
which end is very much torn and jagged like rent Cloths, and has a large
Foramen, which lies closed, because those jaggs fall together, but it being
opened, they are like the utmost Orifice of a Brass Trumpet. These Tubes,
according to Dr. Harvey, are the same in Women, that the horns of the Womb
are in other creatures, for they answer to those both in situation, connection,
amplitude, perforation, likeness, and also Office. The capacity of these Ducts
varies very much; for in the beginning, as it goes out of the Womb, it only
admits a Bristle, but in its progress, where it is largest, it will receive
ones little finger; but in the outmost extremity, where it is divided into
jaggs, it is but about a quarter so wide. They are very uncertain also in their
length, for from four or five they sometimes increase to eight or nine fingers
breadth long. Their use is in a fruitful Copulation to grant a passage to a
more subtle part of the Masculine Seed, or to a Seminal Air toward the Testes
to bedew the Eggs contained in them, which Eggs, one or more being by that
means fecundated, and dropping off from the Testes, are received by the
extremity of the Tubes, and carried along the inner Cavity to the Womb. But it
may be objected that the narrowness of the Tubes are not fit for such a use;
yet ^e that considers the straitness of the inner Orifice of the Womb, both in
Maids and in Women with Child, and yet observes it to dilate so much upon
occasion, as to make way for the Birth of a Child, cannot wonder that to serve
a necessary end of Nature, the small duct of the Tubes, should be so far
widened, as to allow passage to an Egg, seeing its proportion to their duct is
many times less, than of the Child to the usual largness of the said Orifice.

CHAP. XV.
Of Conception.
COnception is nothing else but an action of the Womb, whereby the prolifie
Seeds of the Man and Woman are there received and retained, that an Infant may
be engendered, and formed out of it. There are two sorts of Conception, the one
true, according to Nature, to which succeeds the Generation of the Infant in
the Womb; the other false, as a false Conception, Mole, or any other strange
Matter.

It is not absolutely necessary, that the Man's Seed should be received, and
retained entire; for a small quantity of it may be sufficient, nay a mere steam
of it, to impregnat.

Conception may be known by the more than ordinary delight in the act, and some
few Months after, the Woman perceives a small pain about her Navel, and some
little Commotions in the bottom of her belly. The inward Orifice of the Womb is
exactly closed, she longs for strange things, she is often troubled with
Nauseating and Vomiting, her Courses are stopped, the Navel starts, her Nipples
are very obscure or dark colored, with a yellowish circle round about, her
eyes are dejected and hollow, the Whites of them dull and troubled, her Blood,
when she has Conceived some time, is always bad; the Belly is flat: Yet it must
be acknowledged that some of these signs are also to be found upon an
Obstruction of the Courses in Virgins; wherefore judgment upon Conception must
not be too positive, especially, when the Woman is upon trial for her life, for
some upon having their Courses have been judged not with Child, and yet after
Execution have been found to be so.

The Infant moves it self manifestly about the forth Month, sooner or later as
the Woman is strong or weak. Some Women feel it from the second, others about
the third Month, and some before that time. At the beginning, the first motions
are very small, but grow greater proportionably, as the Infant grows bigger and
stronger.

CHAP. XVI.
Of a Mole.
A Mole is deformed and useless Flesh contained in the Womb, and is occasioned
by the corrupted Seed of the Man and Woman, for it is never generated without
the use of Copulation; it is covered with a Membrane and sticks to the Womb,
the longer it is retained in the Womb the harder it grows, and is more
difficultly expelled: Most commonly there is but one, yet sometimes more; when
it is ejected in the second Month it is called a false Conception.

It Is difficult to distinguish a Mole, from being with Child, for the Courses
are stopped, the Belly grows big by degrees, and the Breasts are increased. But
the first sign of it is a leaden color in the Face, the Belly is harder and
sorer than when a Woman is with Child, and it is very troublesome and painful
to go with, and it falls on whatsoever side she turns; there is a great
weariness in her Legs and Thighs, she finds a great heaviness at the bottom of
her Belly, and her Urin is obstructed; but it may be certainly known, if no
motion be felt after four or five Months, or when her Reckoning is out. Some
have a Mole two or three Years, and sometimes much longer.

As to the Cure, I shall speak only of that part of it which may be performed
by Medicines, for if it stick much to the bottom of the Womb, or is very large,
it will scarce be expelled unless a Chyrurgeon extract it.

Give the Woman a Spoonful of Syrup of Mugwort Morning and Evening for three
days following, either by it self or mixed with an Ounce of Penny-royal-water;
afterward Purge her every other day, or every third day with the fetid Pill,
two Scruples or a Dram may be taken at a time early in the Morning, and let her
sleep if she can till they begin to work; let her be purged in this manner five
times.

Things that loosen must be also applied frequently to the Womb to open the
passages likewise to the Belly, Groins, Loins, and Hips, with Spunges and
Flannels; the following Fomentation is of excellent use.

Take of the leaves of Marshmallows and Mallows each one handful, of the roots
of round and long Birthwort each one handful, of the leaves of Mugwort,
Mercury, Feverfew, Sage, Hysop and Calaminth each half an handful, of the Seeds
of Flax, Marshmallows, Fenugreek, Anise, Lovage, each half an Ounce, of the
Flowers of Camomile, Melilote, Rosemary, Broom, Mugwort, each one Pugil, of
Bran one Pugil; hoyl them in a sufficient quantity of Water to five quarts; add
of Oil of Olives half a pint, of the Oils of Camomile and sweet Almonds each
four Ounces, of the Oil of Lillies two Ounces; foment the parts as above
directed, and afterward anoint them with Ointment of Marshmallows.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Superfoetation.
THere is a great dispute whether a Woman, who has two or more Children at
once, conceived of them at one or several coitions: Some will have this to be
superfoetation; but there are signs whereby we may know the difference, whether
both Children were begotten at once, or successively one after another.
Supefoetation, according to Hippocrates, is a reiterated Conception, when a
Woman being already with Child conceives again the second time. That which
makes many believe, that there can be no Superfoetation is, because as soon as
a Woman has Conceived, her Womb closes, and is exactly firm, so that the Seed
of the Man, absolutely necessary to Conception, finding no place nor entry,
cannot, as they say, be received, nor contained in it: But it may be answered,
that though the Womb be usually exactly shut and close, when a Woman has
Conceived, yet it may be sometimes opened to let pass some ferous slimy
Excrements, or especially when a Woman is much delighted in the act of
Copulation. But this second Conception is very rare; for we must not imagine,
that when a Woman brings forth two or more Children at once, there is a
Superfoetation; because they are almost always begot in the same act, by the
reception of abundance of Seed into the Womb.

When a Woman brings forth one or more Children at a Birth, begotten at once,
which are usually called Twins, it is known by their being both almost of an
equal bigness and thickness, and by having but one common afterbirth, not
separated one from the other, but by their Membranes: But if there are several
Children, and a Superfoetation, they will not have a common burden, nor will
they be of an equal bigness.

To conclude, Of a hundred Women that have Twins, ninety of them have but one
burden common to them both, which is a certain sign they had no Superfoetation.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Womb-Cake, of the Membranes involving the Child, and of the Humors
contained in them, of the umbilical Vessels, of the parts of a Child that
differ from those of the adult.
THE Womb-Cake, otherwise called the Womb-Liver, for the likeness of substance,
is soft, and has innumerable Fibers and small Vessels; it is two Fingers
breadth, thick in its middle, but thinner near the edges, and a quarter of a
Yard over from one side to the other, when the Infant is near the Birth; on
that side next the Foetus, it is smooth and something hollowish, like
Navelwort, and is knit to the Chorion; but on that next the Womb, it is very
unequal, having a great many bunchings, whereby it sticks fast to the Womb.
When there is but one Child in the Womb, it is but one; but if there be Twins
there are two Womb-Cakes, and a particular rope of Umbilical Vessels is
inserted into each from each Child; it grows not out of the Womb originally,
but its first rudiments appear like a woolly substance on the outside of the
outer Membrane that invests the Embrio called Chorion, about the eighth or
ninth Week, upon which in a short while a red fleshly and soft substance grows,
but unequally and a little in knobs, and then it presently thereby sticks to
the Womb, and is very conspicuous about the twelfth or thirteenth Week, till
now the Infant is increased and nourished wholly by the apposition of the
Cristalline or albugineous liquor, wherein it swims loose in the inner
Membrane, called Amnios, having no Umbilical Vessels, whereby to receive any
thing from the Womb-Cake. But when it grows bigger, and begins to want
nourishment, the extremities of the Umbilical Vessels begin to grow out of the
Navel by little and little, and are extended toward the Womb-cake, that they
may draw out of it a more nourishing juice, and carry it to the Infant, as
Plants do from the Earth by their roots. It has Vessels from the Womb and from
the Chorion; the former are of four kinds, Arteries, Veins, Nerves, and
Lympheducts; all which though they be very large, and visible in the Womb, and
also where the Womb-Cake is joined to it, yet they send the smallest Capilaries
to the Womb it self. Those that come from the Chorion are Arteries and Veins.
The Arteries and Veins that come from the Womb, spring from the Hypogastricks,
and also that branch of the Supermaticks that is incerted into the bottom of
the Womb; those that come from the Chorion are the Umbilical Vessels of the
Infant. The Womb-Cake after it is joined to the Womb, sticks most firmly to it
for the first Months, as unripe Fruit does to the Tree, but as the Infant
becomes bigger and riper, and nearer to the Birth, by so much the more easily
will it part from the Womb, and at length it falls out of the Womb, and makes
part of the Afterbirth.

Next to the Womb-Cake follow the two Membranes, viz. Chorion the outer, and
Amnios the inner, wherein the Child is wrapped: Betwixt these two after the Child
is perfectly formed, there is a third, viz. Allantois. The Chorion is pretty
thick, smooth on the inside, but without somewhat unequal and rough, and in
that part of it which sticks to the Womb-cake, and by it to the Womb, it has
very many Vessels which spring from the Womb it self and the Umbilical Vessels.
Twins are both enclosed in one Chorion, but have each a particular Amnios; it
invests the Egg orriginally, which Egg being brought to the Womb, and becoming
a Conception, this Membrane imbibes the moisture that bedews the Womb
plentifully at that time. This Liquor that it imbibes, is thought to be the
Nutritious Juice that ouzes out of the Capilary Orifices of the Hypogastrick
and Spermatick Arteries, and is of the same nature with that which afterward is
separated in the Womb-cake, and carried to the Infant by the Umbilical Vein;
and with that also which abounds in the Amnios even till the Birth.

The Amnios is the inmost Membrane that immediately contains the Child; it is
not knit to the Chorion in any place save where the Umbilical Vessels pass
through them both into the Womb-cake; it is very thin, soft, smooth, and
pellucid, and encompasses the Infant very loosly, it has Vessels from the same
Origins as the Chorion. From a limpid Liquor contained in this Membrane, the
first lineaments of the Embrio are drawn. But because this Liquor is so very
little, there sweats through this Membrane presently part of that Nutritious
Albugineous Humor that is contained in the Chorion, which it had imbibed out
of the Womb, and by the addition of this Humor to the undiscernible Rudiments
of the Embrio, it receives its increase. But though the Amnios have its
additional Nutricious Liquor at first only by Transudation, yet when the
Umbilical Vessels, and the Womb-cakes are formed, it receives it after another
manner, for then being separated from the Mothers Arteries by the Placenta, and
imbibed by the Umbilical Veins of the Infant passes directly to its Heart, from
whence being driven a great part of it down the Aorta, it is sent forth again
by the Umbilical Arteries, out of whose Capillaries dispersed plentifully
through the Amnios, it issues into its cavity. A third Membrane which invests
the whole Infant is the Allantoides; it has the same Figure as the Chorion and
Amnios, betwixt which it is placed in their whole circumference. Now, though it
must be supposed that this as well as the other two is originally in the Egg,
yet there is no appearance of it, till after the Umbilical Vessels and the
Womb-cake are formed, and the albugineous Liquor ceases to be imbibed by the
Chorion out of the Uterus; but as soon as the Infant begins to be nourished by
the Umbilical Vessels, and the Urachus is permeable, then presently this
Membrane begins to show it self, containing a very thin Liquor, which is the
Urine of the Infant brought into it by the Urachus, and wherewith it is filled
daily more and more till the Birth: It may be known from the Chorion and Amnios
by this, that they have numerous Vessels dispersed through them; but this has
not the least visible Vein or Artery; it is very hard to separate the Chorion
from it, but toward the Birth it becomes so turgid with Urine, that the Amnios
which immediately contains the Infant, swims (...) Liquor that it contains is
the Urine (...) brought hither by the (...) soon as the Infant is perfect
(...), its Kidneys must needs perform (...) Office of separating the Serum from
the Blood, for otherwise it would be affected with an Ansarca; I say, the Serum
is separated in the Kidneys, and glides down from thence into the Bladder,
wherein there is a pretty large quantity when the Infant is five or six months
old: Now it flows not out of the Bladder by its orifice, because at that time
the Sphincter is too contracted and narrow, and if it should pass that way, it
would mix with the nourishing juice wherein the Infant swims in the Amnios, and
wherewith by taking it in by its mouth, it is partly nourished, and so would
defile and corrupt it. Nature therefore has provided it another passage by the
Urachus inserted into the bottom of the Bladder, which tho it grows solid like
a Ligament after the Child is Born, as the umbilical Vein does, yet while the
Infant is in the Womb, it is open and conveighs the Urine into the Allantoides,
that is placed betwixt the Chorion and Amnios, where it is collected and
preserved till the Birth.

The Naval-string is membraneous, wreathed, and unequal, and arises from the
Navel; it reaches to the Womb-cake; it is about half an Ell long, and a finger
thick, The Vessels contained in this string, and covered with the common coat
called Funiculus are four, one Vein, two Arteries, and the Urachus; the Vein is
larger than the Aretries, and arises from the Liver of the Infant at the trunk
of the Vena porta, and from thence passing out of the Navel it runs along the
Funiculus to the Womb-cake, into which it is implanted by innumerable Roots;
but before it reaches it, it sends some little twigs into the Amnios. The
umbilical Vein serves for conveying to the Infant the nutricious juice
separated in the Womb-cake from the Mothers Arteries; but together with this
juice returns so much of the Arterial blood, that comes from the Infant, as is
not spent upon the nourishment of the Womb-cake, or of the Chorion and Amnios.

In the Funiculus are included also two Arteries, which are not both of them
together so big as the Vein; they spring out of the inner Iliacal branches of
the great Artery, and passing by the sides of the Bladder, they rise up to the
Navel, out of which they are conducted to the Womb-cake, in the same common
cover with the Vein and Urachus wherewith they are twined and wreathed like a
Rope. Spirituous blood is driven from the Infant by the beating of its Heart to
the Womb-cake, and the Membranes, for nourishment, from which, what Blood
remains circulates back again to the umbilical Vein together with nutricious
juice, imbibed afresh by its Capillaries dispersed in the Womb-cake. But
besides Arterial Blood, there flows out of the Navel by them part of the
Nutricious juice, that was imported by the umbilical Vein, I say flows out by
these Arteries, which by their branches, that are dispersed through the Amnios,
discharge it by their little mouths into it. The fourth Umbilical Vessel is the
Urachus, or Urinary Vessel, it is a small, membranous, round Pipe endued with a
straight cavity arising from the bottom of the Bladder up to the Navel; out of
which it passes along within the common cover and opens into the Allantoides.
These four Vessels, as has been said above, have one common cover, which also
keeps each of them from touching the other; it is called Funiculus; it is
membranous, round and hollow, indifferent thick, consisting of a double coat,
the inner from the Peritoneum, and the outer from the Paniculus carnosus. It
has several knots, which Dr. Wharton thinks are little Glands, through which
the nutricious juice distills out of the capacity of the Funiculus into the
cavity of the Amnios.

Midwives guess by their number how many more Children the Mother shall have,
but without reason. When the Infant is Born, its Navel-rope is wont to be tied
about one or two fingers breadth from the Navel, with a strong Thread cast
about it several times, and then about two or three fingers breadth beyond the
Ligature to be cut off; what is not cut off is suffered to remain till it drop
off of its own accord.

As to the way how the Infant is nourished there has been great Disputes, some
affirm by Blood only, and that received by the Umbilical Vein, others by Chile
only received in by the Mouth; but indeed according to the different degrees of
Perfection, that an Egg passes from Conception to an Infant ready for the
Birth, it is nourished variously. For, First, As soon as an Egg Impregnated
descends into the Womb, it presently imbibes through its outer Membrane some of
that albugineous Liquor, that at this time plentifully bedews the internal
Superfices of the Womb, so that as soon as the first Lineaments of an Embryo
begin to be drawn, out of that Humor contained in the Amnios, they presently
receive increase by the apposition of the said Liquor filtrated out of the
Chorion through the Amnios into its cavity; and this same Liquor, that thus
increases the first rudiments of the Embryo, Dr. Harvey calls Coliquamentum.
But when the parts of the Embryo begin to be a little more perfect, and the
Chorion becomes so dense, that not any more of the said Liquor is imbibed by
it, the Umbilical Vessels begin to be formed, and to extend to the side of the
Amnios which they penetrate, and both the Vein and Arteries pass also through
the Allantois and Chorion, and are implanted into the Womb-Cake, that at this
time, first gathering upon the Chorion joins it to the Womb; and now the
Hypogastrick and Spermatick Arteries, that before cast the nutricious Juice
into the cavity of the Womb, open by the orifices into the Womb-cake, where
they deposite the said juice, which is absorded by the Umbilical Vein, and by
it conveyed, first to the Liver, then to the Heart of the Infant, where the
thinner and the more spirituous part of it is turned into Blood; but the more
gross and earthy part of it descending by the Aorta enters the Umbilical
Arteries, and by those branches of them, that run through the Amnios, is
discharged into its cavity.

The grosser nutricious Juice being deposited by the Umbilical Arteries in the
Amnios, as soon as the Mouth, Gullet, and Stomach, and the like are formed so
perfectly, that the Foetus can swallow, it sucks in some of the said Juice,
which descending into the Stomach and Intestines, is received by the Lacteal
Veins, as in grown Persons. The Infant therefore is nourished three several
ways, but only by one Humor: First, by apposition of it, while it is yet an
imperfect Embrio, and has not the Umbilical Vessels formed: But after these are
perfected, it then receives the same nutricious Juice by the Umbilical Vein,
the more Spirituous and thin part whereof it changes into Blood, and sends
forth the grosser part by the Umbilical Artery into the Amnios, which the
Infant sucks in at its Mouth, and undergoing a new Concoction in its stomach,
is received out of the Intestines by the Lacteal Veins, as is done after the
birth.

A Child in the Womb differs from an adult Person in many parts, the parts are
less, the color of the whole reddish, the Bones soft, and many of them gristly
and flexible in the Head: There are several differences: First, the Head, in
respect to the proportion of the rest of the Body, is bigger, the Crown is not
covered with Bone, but only with a Membrane; the Bone of the Forehead is
divided, as also of the under Jaw, and the Os Cuneiforme is divided into four.
The Bone of the hinder part of the Head is distinguished into three, four or
five Bones. The Brain is softer, and more fluid, and the Nerves very soft. The
Bones that serve the Sense of Hearing are wonderfully hard and big; the Teeth
lie hid in the little holes of the Jaw Bone; the Dugs swell, and out of them in
Infants new born, whether Male or Female, a serous Milk issues forth sometimes
of its own accord, and sometimes with a gentle pressure: The Vertebrae of the
Back want their spinous processes, and each of them made of three distinct
Bones: The Heart is remarkably big, and its Auriculae large: There are two
Unions of the greater Vessels, that are not conspicuous in grown Persons:
First, the Foramen ovale, by which there is a passage open, out of the Cava
into the Vein of the Lungs, just as each of them are opening, the first into
the right Ventricle, and the latter into the left Ventricle of the Heart, and
this Foramen, just as it opens into the Vein of the Lungs has a Valve that
hinders any thing from returning out of the said Vein into the Foramen:
Secondly, the Arterial Channel, which two fingers breadth from the Basis of the
Heart joins the Artery of the Lungs to the Aorta; it has a pretty lage Cavity,
and ascends a little obliquely from the said Artery to the Aorta, into which it
conveys the Blood, that was driven into the Artery of the Lungs, out of the
right Ventricle of the Heart, so that it never comes into the left Ventricle,
as the Blood that is sent out of the left Venticle into the Aorta never came in
the right, except a little that is returned from the nutrition of the Lungs,
but past immediately into it out of the Vena Cava by the Foramen ovale, so that
the Blood passes not through both the Ventricles, as it does after the Child is
born. You may know whether Infants killed by Whores, and which they commonly
affirm were still-born, were really so or no, by putting the Lungs of the
Infant in Water; for if they were still-born the Lungs will sink, if alive, so
as to breath never so little while, they will swim. The Gland Thymus is very
large, and consists as it were of three Glands; the Umbilical Vessels go out of
the Abdomen; the Stomach is narrower, but pretty full of a whitish liquor: The
Caul is scarce visible, the Guts are seventimes longer than the Body; the
Excrements in the small Guts are phlegmatic and yellow, but in the thick
somewhat hard and blackish, sometimes greenish; the Caecum is larger than
usual, and often filled with Faeces: the Liver is very large, and extends it
self into the left side, and covers all the upper part of the Stomach, it has a
passage, which is not in grown Persons, called the Veiny Channel, which arising
out of the Sinus of the Porta, carries the greatest part of what is brought by
the Umbilical Vein directly, and in a full stream into the Cava above the
Liver: But this passage presently closes, as soon as the Infant is born, and
turns to a ligament, as does the Urachus and the two Umbilical Arteries. The
Spleen is small; the Gallbladder is full of yellow or green Choler; the
Sweetbread is very large and white; the Kidneys are bigger and unequal in
their Superficies; the Renes Succenturiati are exceeding large; the Ureters are
wide, and the Bladder stretched with Urine; in Females the Womb is depressed,
the Tubes long, and the Testes very large; the little Bones of the VVrists and
Instep are gristly, and not firmly joined together.

Its Knees are drawn up to the Belly, its Legs bending backwards, its Feet
across, and its Hands lifted up to its head, one of which it holds to the
Temple or Ear, the other to the Cheek, where there are white spots on the Skin,
as if it had been rubbed upon; the Backbone turns round, the Head hanging down
toward its Knees, its Face commonly toward the Mothers Back; but near the
birth, sometimes a Week or two before, it alters its situation, and tumbles
down with its Head to the Neck of the Womb, and its Feet upwards; then the
Womb also settles downwards, and its Orifice relaxes, and opens; and the
Infant moving up and down tears the Membrans wherein it is included, and the
waters flowing into the Sheath; but sometimes the Membranes come forth whole;
at the same time the neighboring parts are loosened and become fit for
distension, and the Bones near are so much relaxed in their Joints, that they
make way for the Infant, and the motion of it so much disturbs the Womb, that
the Fibers of it and the Muscles of the Belly contract altogether to expel it.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Management of a Woman with Child.
THE Woman ought to be kept in a good moderate and clear Air, and she must Eat
what she likes best, and be sure not to Fast too long; only she must observe
not to eat too much at a time; and to comfort the Stomach, which is always weak
in this condition, she may Drink a little Wine, or for want of it strong Beer
at Meals. As to Sleep, a Woman with Child requires more sleep than she does at
other times. As to Exercise and Rest, she must order her self according to the
different times; for at the beginning she ought to keep her self quiet, and not
to use Copulation: Riding on Horseback, or in a Wagon, or indeed in a Coach
is not safe at any time of her being with Child, especially when she is near
her time, for such Exercises often cause Miscarriage. But she may Walk gently,
or be carried in a Chair. She must not carry or lift heavy Burdens, or lift up
her Arms too high, and therefore ought not to dress her own Head. Let her
Exercise be gentle walking in low-heel'd Shoes; but she had better Rest too
much than Exercise too much, for more hard Labors are occasioned by violent
Exercise than by any other thing. Moreover, it is convenient that the Woman
should abstain from Copulation the last two months, for the Body is very much
moved, and the Belly compressed in the action, which causes the Child to take a
wrong posture.

If the Belly be bound, as it is often at this time, Prunes stewed, or Veal
Broth may be often used, or the following Glister may be used.

Boil an Handful of Mallow Leaves, in three quarters of a Pint of Milk, let the
Milk just boil up, add to it two Ounces of brown Sugar, and a little fresh
Butter, strain it for use.

She must moderate her Passions, and great care must be taken that she be not
Frighted, and that Melancholy News be not suddenly told her, but you must
endeavor to keep her as cheerful as possibly you can, the sudden surprises of
joy must be also avoided, for excesses on either hand are prejudicial. The
Clothes of a Woman with Child should sit easy, for any immoderate pressure is
apt to make the Child deformed, and hurts the Breasts, and very often causes
miscarriage. Unnecessary Bleeding must be avoided, so must all strong Purges
but if Purging is requisite, only such things as Purge gently must be used, as
Cassia, Rubarb, and Manna. The Cassia is best sucked out of the Canes, the
Rubarb may be chewed, and an Ounce and a half or two Ounces of Manna may be
dissolved in Posset Drink, and used upon occasion in the Morning.

Vomiting often afflicts Women with Child, but if it be moderate and at the
beginning and without great straining it is beneficial; if it continues longer
than the third or fourth Month it ought to be remedied; in order to which let
the Woman use good food, and a little at a time, and let her use with her meat
the juice of Oranges, she may eat now and then Broth mixed with the yolk of an
Egg, for it is very nourishing and of easy digestion, and after meals let her
eat a little Marmalade of Quinces, and she may drink a Glass of Claret; she
must forbear fat meat and Sauces, and sweet and sugared Sauces. But if the
Vomiting continues notwithstanding this regular Diet till the Woman is above
half gone, she must take the following Purge.

Take of Tamarinds half an Ounce, of Sena one Dram, of Rubarb one Dram and an
half, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, in three Ounces of the
strained Liquor dissolve an Ounce of Manna, and an Ounce of Syrup of Succory
with Rubarb; make a purging potion to be taken in the Morning. It may be
repeated once or oftener upon occasion.

And it may be proper for the Woman in the Winter time to were a Lambskin or
the like upon her Stomach and Belly.

If pains of the Back, Reins and Hips are violent, the Woman must be blooded,
and take at bedtime sixteen drops of the Liquid Laudanum mentioned at the
latter end of the Chapter of Hysteric Diseases in a glass of Canary Wine, or in
any thing else she likes, and she must keep her Bed till the pain abates; if
the pain is continual, the Belly must be supported with a Swaith fitted for the
purpose.

If after the third or fourth Month the Breasts are very painful, it is
convenient the Woman should bleed in the Arm, if she be full of blood, and use
a Diet that is moderately cooling and nourishing; but if the pain comes at the
beginning, we ought to leave the whole business to nature, only the Woman must
have a care that she receives no blows on those parts, nor must she be strait
laced, for fear the Breasts should impostumate.

If incontinence or difficulty of Urin be occasioned by the weight and bigness
of the Belly, the Woman may remedy it, and ease her self, if when she would
make water, she lift up with both her hands the bottom of her Belly, or she may
wear a large Swaith fitted for this use, to bear up the Belly, but the best way
is to keep her in Bed.

If a sharpness of Urin causes an Inflammation on the Neck of the Bladder, it
may be appeased by a regular cooling Diet, and emulsions of the cold Seeds used
Morning and Evening.

Take of blanched Almonds number twelve, of the four greater cold Seeds each
one Dram and an half, of the Seeds of Lettice and white Poppies each half a
Dram, beat them in a Marble Mortar, and pour on them gently three quarters of a
pint of Poppy Water, make an emulsion for two doses, add one Ounce of Syrup of
Violets and half a Dram of Sal Prunella.

If the Inflammation and Sharpness of Urine be not removed by the things
abovementioned, a little Blood may be taken from the Arm, and the neck of the
Bladder may be bathed with the following Decoction, with Flannels dipped in it
and pressed out.

Take of the roots of Marshmallows one Ounce, of the Leaves of Mallows,
Marshmallows, Pellitory, and Violets, each one handful, of the Flowers of
Melilote one handful, of the Seeds of Flax and Fenugreek each two Drams, boil
them in a sufficient quantity of Water to a pint and half.

But if the Woman notwithstanding she observes these directions cannot make
water, it must be drawn out with a Catheter by an Artist.

If the Woman be troubled with a violent Cough she must be blooded in the Arm
at any time of her being with Child, for this is apt to occasion miscarriage,
and all salted and spiced meat and sharp things must be forborne. She may now
and then use juice of Liquorish, Sugar Candy, and Syrup of Violets, and if the
Body be bound a Glister of Milk and Sugar may be injected. The following Syrup
is very proper in this case.

Take half a pint of Claret Wine, one Dram of Cinnamon, half a Dozen Cloves,
and four Ounces of Sugar, burn the Wine, and boil it to the consistence of a
Syrup, whereof let the Woman take three spoonfuls at Bedtime.

The Woman must go loose in her Clothes, and if the Rheum be very thin, and the
Cough tickles much, Sixteen drops of the Liquid Laudanum mentioned in the
Chapter of Hysteric Diseases must be now and then taken at bedtime in some
liquor she uses to drink.

If the Legs and Thighs swell and are painful, they must be swaithed with a
Swaith three or four Fingers broad, beginning to swaith from the bottom; but in
this case it is best for the Woman to be kept in Bed; if there be signs of
fullness of blood, she must be blooded in the Arm.

If the big bellied Woman be troubled with the Piles, and abound with Blood,
she must be blooded in the Arm, and if her Body is Costive, the emollient
Glyster mentioned above must be used, and afterward to ease the Pain they must
be anointed often with Populean Ointment mixed with a few Grains of Opium: For
instance,

Take of Populean Ointment one Dram, of Opium five Grains, beat them well
together in a Mortar, and anoint the Piles with it twice or thrice a day.

But if the Inflammation and the swelling are much, you must apply Leeches to
the part affected, and let her keep her Bed.

If the Piles bleed of themselves immoderately (for if the Flux be moderate at
this time the Woman being full of Blood she may be relieved thereby) a cooling
and thickening course of Diet must be ordered, as three parts of Fountain
water, and one of Milk boiled together and drank cold, roasted Apples,
Barly-broths, and the like, also thickning and cooling Juleps and Emulsions.

Take of the Waters of Plantain and Cinnamon hordeated each four Ounces, of
distilled Vinegar half an Ounce, of True-bole and Dragons-blood each half a
Dram, of the Liquid Laudanum mentioned in the Chapter of Hysteric Fits thirty
drops, of Syrup of Myrtles one Ounce and an half, mix them and make a Julep,
let her take four or five Spoonfuls every night at Bedtime.

Take of the four greater cold Seeds, each one Dram and an half, of sweet
Almonds number four, of the Seeds of white Poppies two Drams, Plantain Water
eight Ounces, of red Poppy Water four Ounces, of Cinnamon Water hordeated one
Ounce and an half, make an Emulsion, to which add three Drams of pearled Sugar,
and half an Ounce of the Juice of Cevil Orange, mingle them, let her take four
Ounces thrice a day.

Bleeding in the Arm is also proper in this case to turn the Flux.

If a looseness comes upon a Woman with Child, and continues above five days,
she must use Food of easy digestion and little at a time, and let her Drink be
Claret Wine mixed with Water, wherein Iron has been quenched, and now and then
Milk boiled with thrice the quantity of Water, or the white Decoction made in
the following manner.

Take of Calcined Hartshorn powdered two Ounces, of Fountain water two quarts,
boil it till half is consumed, strain it gently through a linen rag, and add
to it three Ounces of Syrup of Quinces.

And before Meals she may eat a little Marmalade of Quinces. But note, that
before she uses these astringents, it will be convenient to purge off the ill
humors with the following Potion.

Take of Rubarb one Dram and a half, of Sena two Drams, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water, to three Ounces of strained Liquor, add one Ounce
of Syrup of Succory with Rubarb, and two Drams of Cinnamon Water. Let it be
taken in the Morning.

But if the Looseness turn to the Bloody Flux, the case is very dangerous, and
therefore after the use of the purging Potion above mentioned, if the Woman has
strength enough to bear it, you must immediately give sixteen drops of the
Liquid Laudanum so often mentioned in this Treatise, in two or three Spoonfuls
of Cinnamon Water hordeated or the like, which must be repeated every night at
bedtime, and in the Morning too, if the Flux continue violent, and to keep up
the strength four or five Spoonfuls of the following Julep may be taken often.

Take of the Waters of Black-cherries and Strawberries each four Ounces, of
Epidemic water and Compound Scordium-water, and of Cinnamon Water hordeated
each one Ounce, of Pearls prepared one Dram and an half, of Chrystaline Sugar a
Sufficient quantity, make a Julep.

The VVomans Drink in this case must be the Milk water, or the white Decoction
above described, and when she is very weak, she may take for her ordinary
Drink, a quart of Fountain water boiled with half a pint of Sack; and she may
eat sometimes Panada, and sometimes Broth made of lean Mutton, and she must be
kept in Bed: Moreover a Glister made of half a pint of Cows Milk, and an Ounce
and an half of Venice-treacle must be injected daily.

If the Woman has her Courses after the fourth or fifth Month of her being
with Child (for some Women have them till the Fifth Month, without any manner
of prejudice to themselves or their Children) you must endeavor to stop them
then, and before too if you suppose they slow by reason of the heat and
acrimony of the Blood, or the weakness of the Vessels, and not from an
abundance of Blood, which may be known by her having her Courses much when she
was not with Child.

To stop this Flux, the Woman must be kept in bed, and forbear all things that
may heat the Blood, especially anger; she must use a strengthening and cooling
Diet, feeding on Meat that breeds good blood and thickens it, as Broths made of
Poultry, Necks of Mutton, Knuckles of Veal, wherein may be boiled cooling
Herbs; she may eat new laid Eggs, Gellies, Rice-milk, Barly-broth, and the
like, and Iron must be quenched in her Beer, and she must forbear Copulation,
and the Belly must be bathed about the region of the Womb with Tent, wherein
Pomegranate-peel, Provence Roses and Cinnamon has been boiled.

But if the Woman be taken with Flooding, the case is extremely hazardous, and
if it continues violent, she must be delivered without delay, for otherwise
death will necessarily follow: Yet it is to be noted, that it must not be done
presently as soon as the Flux is perceived, because some small Floodings have
been sometimes suppressed by keeping quiet in bed, by bleeding in the Arm, and
the use of Remedies above mentioned: If therefore the Blood flows, but in a
small quantity, and continues but a little while, she must not be delivered;
but if it flows in so great abundance that she falls into Convulsions and
Faintings, the Operation must not be deferred, whether she has pains and throws
or not.

And because in Floodings, weakness and faintings ever follow, we must
endeavor to preserve that little strength the Woman has left, and to increase
it if possible, that so she may be able to bear the Operation; to which purpose
there ought to be given her from time to time good strengthening Broths,
Gellies, and a little good Wine, she must always smell to Vinegar, and have a
warm toast dipped in Wine and Cinnamon applied to the region of her heart, which
do her more good than solid Food, and to prevent the Blood from flooding in
great abundance before she can be delivered, a Vein in her Arm may be opened to
turn the course of it, and Napkins dipped in Water and Vinegar may be applied
all along her Reins.

If the Woman be troubled with a bearing down of the Womb, her best way is to
keep in Bed; but if she cannot conveniently do so, she must wear a broad Swaith
to keep up her Belly; but if the bearing down proceeds from humors that relax
the Ligaments of the Womb, she must be kept to a drying Diet, her Food being
rather roasted than boiled, and must refrain from Copulation and must not be
strait Laced.

If the lips of the Privities are much swelled, by reason of watery humors
falling upon them, you must scarifie with a Lancet all along the Lips, that the
humors may distill out, and you must foment the Parts with the following
Decoction.

Take of the leaves of Bays, Sage, Rosemary, and of the Flowers of Camomile
each one handful, boil them in a Sufficient quantity of Fountain water; to a
pint and half of the strained Liquor, add a quarter of a pint of Brandy, and
bath the parts affected often with a Sponge dipped in the hot Liquor.

CHAP. XX.
Of Miscarriage.
TO prevent Miscarriage, all indispositions of the Body which are wont to
occasion it must be removed, as fullness of Blood, ill humors, and peculiar
Diseases of the Womb, as Swellings, Ulcers and the like.

Fullness of Blood opens the Veins of the Womb, or Strangles the Infant, and
therefore the Woman must be Blooded, and so much Blood must be taken away, as
will sufficiently discharge nature.

If an ill habit of body and ill humors are the cause of Miscarriage, the
Woman must be frequently purged, and a small quantity of Blood may be taken
away, and betwixt the Purges, such things must be used as correct the
indisposition of the Bowels, and the sharpness of the humors, and the humors
must be thickened if they are too thin. And if Phlegmatic humors abound, they
must be carried off by Sweats and such things as force Urin: Issues in the Arms
and Thighs are also very proper to prevent Miscarriage, whatever ill humors
abound in the body.

The peculiar Diseases of the Womb, as over great Moisture, Swellings, Ulcers,
and such like, must be cured by their proper Remedies: And first, if Moisture
abound, let the Woman be purged with two Scruples of the Pill Coch-major twice
a week, and when she does not Purge, let her drink Morning and Evening of the
following Decoction.

Take of the roots of Sarsaparilla four Ounces, of China two Ounces, of white
and red Sanders each half an Ounce, of the rasping of Hartshorn and Ivory each
three Drams, infuse them, and boil them in eight pints of Fountain water till
half is consumed; add a quarter of pound of Raisins of the Sun, and if the
Woman be of a Phlegmatic constitution, instead of China, add two Ounces of
Guiacum rasped. Let her drink half a pint Morning and Evening.

Take of Franckincense, Myrrh, Mastich, Storax, Calamite, Gum of Juniper,
Ladanum, each one Ounce, with a sufficient quantity of Turpentine make Troches,
and let one or more of them be cast on live Coals, and let the fume be received
into the Privities through a Funnel.

If a Swelling be the cause, you must make application according to the nature
of the humor, and the time and other Circumstances of the swelling; if it be
hot and made by fluxion, which may be known by the pain and suddenness of the
swelling, as also by the Tension and Pulsation, and by being accompanied with a
Fever, Bleeding must be used in the first place, and the Woman must be
frequently purged with the purging Potion mentioned in the foregoing Chapter,
made of Tamarinds, Sena, Manna, and the like, and after Evacuations you must
apply cooling and repelling things to the Reins and the lower part of the
Belly, as Oil of Roses washed in Vinegar and the like, and the following
Decoction may be injected into the Womb.

Take of the leaves of Plantain, Water Lillies, Nightshade, and Endive each
one handful, of red Roses two Pugils, boil them in three pints of Fountain
water till a pint is consumed, add to it of Oil of Myrtles one Ounce, of
Vinegar half an Ounce.

But note you must not use cooling and repelling things too long, lest the
Tumor be hardened thereby and turn to a Scirrhus, and therefore soon after the
beginning of the Swelling, emollient and resolving things must be mixed with
Repellents, Mallows, Marshmallows, Mugwort, Fenugreek, Camomile and Melilote;
and if the pain be violent, you must inject into the Womb Goat or Sheeps milk,
with Opium and Saffron each three or four Grains, to which may be added a
little Rose Water.

But if the swelling cannot be resolved and tends to Suppuration, it must be
furthered by the application of the following Pultis.

Take of the roots of Marshmallows, of the Flowers of Camomile and Melilote, of
the Seeds of Flax and Fenugreek each one Ounce, of fat Figs number eight, boil
them to the consistence of a Pultis, then add the yolks of four Eggs, of
Saffron half a Scruple, of Oil of Lillies and fresh butter each one Ounce, make
a Cataplasm.

If the Swelling be made by congestion, it is slow and without pain, and
generally cold, and the matter of it is either thin and serous, or thick and
phlegmatic and apt to grow hard. In this case Steel Medicines used as directed
in the Chapter of Hysteric Diseases do good, but purging must go before: Issues
in the Legs are also proper, and emollient and resolving Medicines must be
applied outwardly in the following manner.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows and Lillies each two Ounces, of the leaves
of Mallows, Violets, Marshmallows, and Bearsbreech each one handful, of the
Seeds of Flax and Fenugreek each one Ounce, of the leaves of Mugwort and
Calamint half a handful, of the Flowers of Camomile and Melilote each one
Pugil, boil them in three pints of Fountain water till a third be consumed, and
foment the region of the Pubes and Groin with a Sponge dipped in it and pressed
out: Of the same Decoction the dose of the Simples being increased, a bath may
be made, which is very effectual in this case, and more powerful than the
Fomentation* Glisters also and Injections may be made of the same Decoction,
and frequently used, whereunto may be added the Oils of Lillies, Camomile, and
sweet Almonds.

But these Medicines must be used with great caution, lest the swelling should
degenerate into a Cancer, and indeed it is to no purpose to use Medicines when
the Swelling is without pain and of a stony nature.

But if an Ulcer be the cause, the cure of it must be performed by stopping the
Fluxion of the humors, and by cleansing and conglutinating the Ulcer; and
first if the Body abound with Blood, or if the Ulcer be accompanied with an
Inflammation, a Vein must be opened in the Arm, and Bleeding must be repeated
as often as there is danger of a new Fluxion, especially at the times of the
Courses, to lessen them, for they are wont to increase the matter of the Ulcer,
and to promote the Flux of other humors to the Womb. Purging is also very
necessary to cleanse the Body from ill humors, but it ought to consist of
gentle Catharticks, as of Sena, Rhubarb, Tamarinds, Myrobolans and the like, or
the Purging Potion of Tamarinds may be used but if the Woman Vomits easily she
may take the following Vomit or the like.

Take of Vinum benedictum six Drams, of the Water of Carduus Benedictus one
Ounce, of Oxymel of squills half an Ounce, mingle them, make a Vomit, let it be
taken about four in the afternoon, and she must drink a large draught of Posset
Drink after every time she Vomits.

The days the Sick does not Purge, a Vulnerary Decoction must be used a long
while in the following manner.

Take of the leaves of Agrimony, Knot-grass, Burnet, and Plantine, each one
handful, of the roots of China three Drams, of Coriander one Dram, of Raisins
half an Ounce, of red Sanders one Scruple, boil them in Chicken broth, strain
it, let the Sick drink it Morning and Evening.

If there be a Fever, and if a great quantity of matter be evacuated, Whey is
very proper, half a pint or more being taken in a Morning with a little Honey
of Roses, and if there is an Hectic Fever and the Body begins to wast, Asses
milk must be taken with Sugar of Roses for a whole Month.

Turpentine washed in some proper water for the Womb, as in Mugwort or Feverfew
water, or in some water proper for the Ulcer, as Plantain or Rose water, and
taken with Sugar of Roses cleanses and heals the Ulcer.

To cleanse dry and heal the Ulcer various injections are proposed, but they
must not be used till the Inflammation is taken off, and till the pain is
quieted, and therefore upon account of the Inflammation an Emulsion of the cold
Seeds, or the Whey of Goats Milk, or Milk it self may be injected first, and if
necessity requires, a Decoction of Poppy heads and tops of Mallows may be
injected. Some Practitioners say, the Sick may be much relieved by injecting
frequently warm water, and when the heat and pain is quieted, we may use such
things as cleanse, beginning with the gentle, and proceeding gradually to the
stronger. The gentle are Whey with Sugar, a Decoction of Barley with Sugar, or
Honey of Roses, but Simple Hydromel cleanses most. But if the Ulcer be very
sordid, the following Decoction may be used.

Take of the roots of Gentian, Rhaponticum, Zedoary, and round Birthwort each
one Ounce, of White Wind three pints, boil them to the consumption of a third
part; in the strained Liquor dissolve half a pound of Sugar, and keep it for
use; a little Vnguentum Aegyptiacum may be added to it if there be occasion to
cleanse more.

If the Ulcer be deep, the fume mentioned above may be used; when the Ulcer is
very obstinate, Cinnabar must be added, which is of excellent use.

If these Diseases happen when a Woman is with Child, the difficulty is
greater, because bigbellied Women cannot so easily bear all kind of remedies,
yet lest being destitute of all help they should remain in extreme danger of
Miscarriage and Death, some kind of Remedies are to be used; therefore if she
be too full of Blood, she must have a Vein opened, tho she be with Child,
especially in the first Month, and so twice or thrice if need be, but much
Blood must not be taken away at a time. And when there is abundanee of ill
humors, gentle purging must be used and repeated, especially in the middle
Months, and in the mean while those astringent and strengthening* Medicines
must be used all the time the Woman is with Child, that are proper to hinder
Miscarriage.

Take of Kermes Berries and Tormentil roots each three Ounces, of Mastich one
Dram and an half, make a Powder, whereof give now and then half a Dram, or as
much as will lie on the point of a knife, or let her take every Morning some
grains of Mastich: Or

Take of conserve of Roses two Ounces, of Citron Peel Candied six Drams, of
Myrobolans candied, of the Pulp of Dates each half an Ounce, of Coral prepared,
Pearl prepared, and shavings of Hartshorn each one Dram, with Syrup of Quinces
make an Electuary, of which let the Woman take often the quantity of a Nutmeg.

The following Lozenges are very good for they strengthen, and by little and
little free the Body from Excrements, tho they do not sensibly purge sometimes.

Take of Mace, of the three Sorts of Sanders, Rubarb, Sena, Coral, Pearl, each
one Scruple, of Sugar dissolved in Rose Water four Ounces, make all into
Lozenges weighing three Drams apeece; let her take one twice a Week by it self,
or dissolved in a little Broth.

The following Plaster may be applied to the Reins.

Take of the Plaster ad Herniam and de Minio each equal parts, spread it on
Leather, and apply it to the small of the Back.

But Plasters must not be worn long together, lest they should cause an heat of
Urin, and the Stone in the Kidneys.

In the use of these things, the Woman must keep her self as quiet as possibly
she can, both in Body and Mind, and must abstain from Copulation.

But if notwithstanding the Medicines aforesaid, by reason of the Vehemence of
the cause, whether it be outward or inward, the Sick be ready to miscarry, we
must do the best we can with the following remedies, and in the first place so
soon as Pains and Throws shall be perceived in the lower part of the Belly, and
in the Loins, we must endeavor to allay them both by Medicines taken inwardly
and outwardly applied according to the variety of the Causes, and if Crudities
and Wind are the cause, as they are most usually when the cause is within, a
Powder must be given made of Aromaticum Rosatum and Coriander Seeds, and we may
give of the Imperial Water if Phlegm and Wind abound.

At the same time let Carminative Medicines be applied below the Navel of the
Patient, such are Bags of Anise Seeds, Fennel Seeds, Fenugreek Seeds, Flowers
of Camomile, Elder, Rosemary and Stechas, mixed together, or a Rose Cake fried
in a Pan with rich Canary, and sprinkled with Powder of Nutmegs and Coriander
Seeds, or the Gaul of a Wether new killed or his Lungs laid on warm. If by
these means the pains cease not, let a Glister be injected made of Wine and
Oil, wherein two Drams of Philonium Romanum may be dissolved, or Narcoticks may
be given inwardly in a small quantity to allay the Violence of the humors and
wind, as we are wont to do in pains of the Colic. But if Blood begins to come
away, Frictions and painful Ligatures of the upper parts must be used to turn
the course of the Blood, and if the Woman be full of Blood, it will not be
amiss to take some Blood from her, especially before it begins to low, but it
must be taken away at several times a little at once.

And if the Flux of Blood continues we must proceed to an astringent and
thickening Diet and Medicines, as mentioned above. Astringent Fomentations may
be also used outwardly made of Pomgranate-peels, Cypress Nuts, Acorn Cups,
Balaustines, and the like, boiled in Smiths water and Red wine: Or a little bag
full of Red Roses and Balaustines may be boiled in Red Wine and applied hot to
the Woman's Belly: And the Plaster above mentioned may be used. It is believed,
that the two following Medicines will certainly retain the Child in the Womb if
they be used before it is torn from the Vessels of the Womb.

Take of leaves of Gold, Number twelve, of Spodium one Dram, the Cocks treading
of three Eggs not addle, mix all very well till the Gold be broken into small
pieces, afterward dissolve them in a draught of White Wine, and give it three
Mornings following.

At the same time let the following Cataplasm be applied.

Take of Male Frankincense powdered two Ounces, the whites of five Eggs, let
them be stirred together over hot Coals, add Turpentine to make them stick,
then spread them upon Tow, and lay them upon her Navel as hot as she can
possibly endure them twice a day Morning and Evening on the three days
aforesaid.

CHAP. XXI.
The Signs that precede a Natural and Unnatural Delivery.
THE signs preceding a natural Labor a few days before, are sinking down of
the Belly, which hinders a Woman at that time in walking as easy as she used
to do, and thence flows from the Womb slimy humors, appointed by nature to
moisten and smoothen the passage, that its inward Orifice may the more easily
be dilated, when it is necessary, which beginning to open a little at that time
suffers that slime to flow away.

The signs accompanying present Labor are, great pains about the Region of the
Reins and Loins, which coming and redoubling by intervals, answer in the bottom
of the Belly with reiterated Throws, the Face is red and inflamed, because the
Blood is much heated by the continual endeavors of the Woman to bring forth
the Child, as also because that during these strong Throws, her respiration is
ever intercepted, for which reason much Blood has recourse to the Face, her
Privy Parts are swelled, because the Infants head often thrusts, and causes the
Neighboring Parts to distend outward; upon which account they appear swelled
in this manner; she is often subject to vomiting, which makes many believe, who
know not the cause of it, that the Women are for this reason in danger: But it
is generally the sign of a speedy delivery, because the good pains are then
excited and redoubled every moment, until the business is finished.

When the Birth is very near, Women are troubled with an universal trembling,
and chiefly of the Legs and Thighs, with the heat of the whole Body and
Humors, which then flow from the Womb, and they are often discolored with
Blood, which with the signs above mentioned is an infallible sign of the
nearness of the Birth. This the Women usually call shows, and if one then puts
up their Finger into the Neck of the Womb, they will find the inner Orifice
dilated, at the opening whereof, the Membranes of the Infant containing the
Waters present themselves, and are strongly forced downwards with every pain
the Woman has, at which time one may perceive them to resist the Finger, more
or less as the pains are stronger or weaker. These Membranes with the Waters in
them, when gathered (that is, when they are advanced before the head of the
Child, which makes the Midwives call it the gathering of the Waters) presenting
themselves at this inward Orifice, do then resemble very well to the touch of
the Finger, abortive Eggs which have yet no shell, but are only covered with a
simple Membrane. After this the pains redoubling continually, the Membranes are
broken by the strong impulse of the Waters, which incontinently flow away, and
then the head of the Child is easily felt naked, and presented at the opening
of the inward Orifice of the Womb: now all these or the greatest part of them
meeting together, at what time soever of a VVomans going with Child it be,
whether at the full time or no, one may be assured she will soon be delivered:
But great care must be taken not to hasten her Labor before the necessity of
it be known by these signs; for that would but torment the Woman and Child in
vain, and put them both in danger of their lives:

Labor contrary to nature is when the Child comes in an ill Figure and
Situation, as when it presents any otherwise than the Head first; as also when
the Waters flow away a long time before it is born; also when the After-burthen
comes first. The Labor is also grievous when accompanied with a Fever, or any
other considerable Disease which may destroy the Child in the Womb; also when
pains are small and come slow with long intervals and little profit, upon which
account the Woman is extremely tired; but the wrong posture of the Infant is
most commonly the cause of difficult Labor. As soon as it is known that the
Woman is certainly in labor by the signs above mentioned, then must all things
necessary to comfort the Woman in her Labor be got ready, and the better to
help her, care must be taken that she be not strait laced; a pretty strong
Glister may be given her, or more than one, if there be occasion, which must be
done at the beginning, before the Child be too forwards, for afterward it is
very difficult for her to receive them* in the mean while all things necessary
for her Labor should be put in order, as well for the Woman as the Child; her
Midwifes Stool, or rather a Pallet-bed girted placed close by the Fire, if the
Season require it; the Pallet ought to be so placed, as to be turned round
about when there is occasion, the better to help the Woman. If the Woman be
full of Blood, it may be convenient to Bleed her a little, for by this means
her Breasts being disingaged, and her Respiration free, she will have more
strength to bear down her pains, which may be done without danger, because the
Child being about that time ready to be born, has no more need of the Mothers
Blood for its nourishment, which has been often practiced with good success.
Besides, this Evacuation often hinders her having a Fever after delivery, and
to preserve her strength, it will be convenient to give her some good Gelly
Broaths, new laid Eggs, or some Spoonfuls of burnt Wine from time to time, or a
Toast dipped in Wine, avoiding solid Food. Above all she must be persuaded to
hold out her pains, bearing them down as much as she can, at the instant when
they take her. The Midwife must from time to time touch the inward Orifice with
her Finger, to know whether the Waters are ready to break, and whether the
Birth will follow soon after; she must also anoint all the bearing place with
emollient Oils, Hogs grease or fresh Butter, if she perceive it can hardly be
dilated; and all the while she must be near her Woman to observe her gestures
diligently, her complaints and pains; for so she may guess pretty well how the
Labor advances, without being obliged to touch her Body so often. The Woman
may by intervals rest her self on the Bed to refresh her self, but not too
long, especially if she be a little short thick Woman, for they have always
worst Labors, if they lie much on their Beds in their Travail, especially of
their first Children, than when they are prevailed with to walk about the
Chamber; (but they must be supported under the Arms, if it be necessary) for by
this means the weight of the Child causes the inward Orifice to dilate sooner
than in Bed. When the Waters of the Child are ready and gathered, the Midwife
ought to let them break of themselves, for the breaking of them before the
Infant be wholly in the passage prolongs the Labor; for by the too hasty
breaking of these Waters, which ought to help the Child to slide forth with
greater ease, he remains dry, which hinders afterward the Pains and Throws, so
that they cannot be so effectual in excluding the Child, as otherwise they
would have been: It is therefore better to let them break of themselves, and
then the Midwife may easily find the Child bare by the part which first
presents, and so judge certainly whether it comes right, that is with the Head,
which she will find hard, big, round, and equal; but if it be any other part,
she will perceive something unequal and rugged, and hard or soft, more or less
according to the parts; immediately let her dispatch to deliver her Woman, if
she be not already, and assist the Birth, which ordinarily happens soon after,
if natural, in the following manner.

After the Waters be broke of themselves, as abovesaid, let the Woman be
presently placed on the Palate provided for her to this purpose, near the
Fire, or she may, if she like it better, be delivered in her ordinary Bed; for
all Women are not accustomed to be delivered in the same posture, some will be
delivered on their Knees, others standing, leaning with their elbows on a
Pillow, upon a Table, or the side of a Bed, and others lying upon a Quilt in
the midst of the Chamber. But the best and surest way of Delivery is in Bed, to
avoid the inconvenience and trouble of being carried thither afterward, in
which case it ought to be Furnished rather with a Quilt than a Feather-bed,
having upon it Linen and Clothes in many folds, with other necessaries to be
changed upon occasion, that the Woman may not be incommoded afterward with the
Blood, Waters, and other filth, which is voided in Labor. The Bed must be so
made, that the Woman being ready to be delivered, should lie on her back upon
it, with her Head and Breast a little raised, so as that she be neither lying
nor setting; for in this manner she breaths best, and will have more strength
to help her pains, than if she sunk down into her Bed; being in this posture
she must spread her Thighs abroad, folding her Legs a little toward her
Buttocks, somewhat raised by a small Pillow underneath, and her Feet must be
staid against some firm thing; moreover let her hold some Bystanders with her
Hands, that she may the better stay her self during her pains. Being thus
placed near the side of her Bed, with her Midwife by to help upon occasion, she
must take courage, and further her pains the best she can, bearing them down,
when they take her, which she may do by holding her Breath, and forcing her
self all she can, just as when she goes to stool. In the mean while the Midwife
must comfort her, and persuade her to endure her Labor bravely, and put her in
hopes of a speedy delivery. The Midwife, with her Hand anointed with Oil or
fresh Butter, may gently dilate the inward Orifice of the Womb, putting her
Fingers ends into its entry, and stretching them one from another, and
thrusting by little and little the sides of the Orifice toward the hinder part
of the Child's Head, anointing these parts also with fresh Butter. When the
Infants Head begins to advance to the inward Orifice, it is commonly said it is
crowned, and when it is come so far, that the extremity begins to appear
manifestly without the privy Parts, it is then said that the Child is in the
passage, and the Woman in Travail imagins, tho it is no such thing, that her
Midwife hurts her with her Fingers, finding her self as it were scratched, and
pricked with Pins in those parts, by reason of the violent distension, which
the bigness of the Child's Head causes there.

When things are in this posture, the Midwife must seat her self conveniently
to receive the Child, which will soon come, and with her Fingers ends, her
Nails being close paired, endeavor to thrust, as abovesaid, this crowning of
the Womb, back off over the Head of the Child; and as soon as it is advanced as
far as the Ears, or thereabouts, she may take hold of the two Sides with her
two Hands, that when a good pain comes, she may quickly draw forth the Child,
taking care that the Navel-string be not then entangled about the Neck, or any
other part, lest thereby the After-burthen be pulled with violence, and
possibly the Womb also, whereunto it is fastened, and so cause Flooding, or
else break the string, whereby the Woman may come to be more difficultly
delivered. It must also be observed, that the Head be not drawn forth straight,
but shaking it a little from one side to the other, that the Shoulders may
sooner and easier take place, immediately after it is past, which must be done
without losing any time, lest the Head being past, the Child be stopped there by
the largeness of the Shoulders, and be in danger of being suffocated in the
passage: But as soon as the head is born, if there be need, the Midwife may
slide in her Finger under the Armpits, and the rest of the Body will follow
without any difficulty. As soon as the Midwife has in this manner drawn forth
the Child, she must put it on one side, lest the Blood and Waters, which follow
immediately after should choke it; afterward let her be very careful to examine
that there be no more Children in the Womb, which she may know, if putting her
hand up the entry, she finds there another Water gathering. If it be so, she
must have a care not to go about to fetch the After-burthen, till the Woman be
delivered of all her Children; wherefore the first string must be cut, being
first tied with a Thread three or four double, and the other end must be
fastened with a string to the Woman's Thigh.

As soon as the Child is born, before the Navel-string is tied or cut, the
Woman must be freed of the After-burthen. To perform this, the Midwife having
taken the string must wind it once or twice about one or two of her Fingers of
her left hand joined together, the better to hold it, wherewith she may then
draw it moderately, and with the right Hand, she may only take a single hold of
it above the left near the Privities, drawing likewise with that very gently,
resting the Forefinger of the same Hand extended, and stretched forth along
the string toward the entry of the Sheath, always observing to draw it from
the side, where the burden cleaves least. Above all things care must be taken,
that it be not drawn forth with too much violence, lest by breaking the string,
you are obliged to put the whole Hand into the Womb to deliver the Woman, or
the Womb be drawn down forth with it; also by drawing it out with too much
violence, a great flooding may thereby happen. To facilitate the expulsion, the
Woman may blow strongly into her Hands shut, or she may put her Finger into her
Throat, as if she would provoke Vomiting, or she may strive as if she were
going to stool, bearing always down, and holding her breath. When all these
circumstances have been observed, if you meet with difficulty, you may, if need
be, after that you know on which side the Afterbirth is situated, command an
experienced Nurse-keeper to press the Belly lightly with the flat of her Hand,
directing it gently downwards by way of Friction; above all being careful not
to do it too violently; but if all this be in vain, then must the Hand be
directed into the Womb to loosen and separate it.

As soon as the Woman is delivered of both Child and Burden, it must then be
considered whether there be all, and care had, that not the least part of it
remain behind, not so much as the skirts or clods of Blood, which ought all to
be brought away with the first; for otherwise, being retained, they cause great
pains. When the Woman has two Children, you must not fetch the Burden, as was
said before, till both the Children are born, and then it may be done without
danger, shaking and drawing it always gently sometimes by one string, sometimes
by the other, and sometimes by both together, and so by turns till all is come.
When the Infant comes right and naturally, the Woman is brought to Bed, and
delivered with little help, for which the meanest Midwifes are capable, and
oft-times for want of them, a simple Nursekeeper may supply the place. But when
it is a wrong Labor there is a great Mystery belongs to it; for then the skill
and prudence of a Surgeon is for the most part requisite.

Immediately after the Woman is delivered, and the Burden come away, care must
be taken that the loosening of it be not followed with a Flooding; if it be
not, a soft closure must be immediately applied to the Womb, five or six times
double, to prevent the cold Air entering in and stopping the Vessels, whereby
the Womb should cleanse by degrees when the Womb is so closed: If the Woman
was not delivered upon her ordinary Bed, let her presently be carried into it
by some strong Body or more if there be need, rather than to let her walk
thither; which Bed must be ready warmed and prepared, as is requisite for the
cleansings. But if she were delivered on it, which is best and safest to
prevent the danger and trouble of carrying her to it, then all the soul Linen
and other things put there for receiving the Blood, Waters, and other filth,
which comes away in Labor, must be removed, and she must be placed
conveniently in it for her ease and rest, which she much wants to recover her
of the Pains and Labor she endured in Travail, she must be placed with her
Head and Body a little raised for to breath the freer, and to cleanse the
better, especially of that Blood which then comes away, that so it may not
clod, which being retained causes very great pains. All this will happen if
they have not liberty to come freely by this convenient Situation, in which she
must put down her Legs and Thighs close together having a small Pillow for her
greater ease, if she desire it under her Hams, upon which they may rest a
little. Being so put to Bed, let her lie neither on one side nor the other, but
just on the middle of her Back, that so the Womb may repossess its natural and
proper place.

It is an ordinary custom to give the Woman, as soon as she is delivered, two
Ounces of Oil of Sweet Almonds, and as much Syrup of Maidenhair, which is good
to sweeten and temper the inside of the Throat, which was heated, and hoarse by
her continual cries, and holding her breath, to bear down her Throws during her
Labor; it is also good to prevent the Grips; but this Potion goes so much
against the Stomachs of some Women, that being forced to take it with an
aversion, it may do them more hurt than good; therefore let none have it, but
those that desire it and have no aversion for it: But good Broth taken after
she is a little settled may be more beneficial.

Having thus accommodated her, and provided for her Belly, Breasts, and lower
parts, leave her to rest and sleep if she can, making no noise, the
Bed-Curtains being close drawn, and the Doors and Windows of her Chamber shut,
that so seeing no light, she may the sooner fall asleep.

As soon as the Bed is cleansed from the foul Linen and other impurities of
the Labor, and the Woman therein placed, let there be outwardly applied all
over the bottom of her Belly and Privities, the following anodyne Pultiss made
of two Ounces of sweet Almonds with two or three new laid Eggs yolks and
whites, stirring them together in an earthen Pipkin over hot Embers till it
comes to the consistence of a Pultiss, which being spread upon Cloth, must be
applied to those parts indifferently warm, having first taken away the Closures
which were put to her, presently after her Delivery, and likewise such clods of
Blood as were there left. This is a very fit Remedy to appease the Pains which
Women commonly suffer in those Parts, by reason of the violence then endured by
the Infants Birth; it must lie on five or six hours, and then be renewed a
second time, if there be occasion. Afterward make a Decoction of Barley,
Linseed, and Chervil, or with Marshmallows and Violet Leaves, adding to a Pint
of it an Ounce of Honey of Roses, wherewith, being lukewarm, Foment three or
four times a day, for the first five or six days of Childbed, the bearing
place, cleansing it very well from the Clods of Blood and other Excrements
which are there emptied. Some Persons only use for this purpose lukewarm Milk,
and many Women only Barly-water. Great care must be taken at the beginning that
no stopping thing be given to hinder the cleansings, but when ten or twelve
Days are past, and she has cleansed sufficiently, Remedies may then be used to
fortify the Parts, for which purpose a Decoction is very proper made of
Province Roses, Leaves and Roots of Plantain and Smiths water, and when she has
sufficiently and fully done Cleansing, which is usually after the eighteenth or
twentieth Day, there may be made for those that desire it, a very strong
astringent Lotion to fortify and settle those parts which have been much
relaxed, as well by the great extension they received, as by the Humors,
wherewith they have been so long time soaked; this Remedy may be composed with
an Ounce and an half of Pomgranat Peel, an Ounce of Cypress Nuts, half an Ounce
of Accorns, an Ounce of sealed Earth, an Handful of Provence Roses, and two
Drachms of Roch-allom, all which being infused in a Quart and half a Pint of
strong Red-wine, or that it may not be too sharp, some Smiths water may be
mixed with the Wine, afterward boil it to a Quart, then strain it, squeezing
it strongly; and with this Decoction Foment the inferior parts Night and
Morning to strengthen and confirm them. But they will never be reduced to the
same state they were in, before the Woman had Children. A small Plaster of
Galbanum, with a little Civit in the middle may be also applied to the Woman's
Navel. As for Swaiths they need not be used the first Day, or at least very
loosly, especially if there has been hard Labor, because the least compression
of the Woman's Belly, which is then very sore, as the Womb also is, proves a
great inconvenience to her; wherefore let her not be swaithed until the second
Day, and that very gently at the beginning. The use of Swaiths and of a good
large square Bolster over the whole Belly may be continued the first seven or
eight Days to keep it a little steady; but they must be taken off and removed
often to anoint the Woman's Belly all over, if it be sore, and if she has
After-Pains, with Oils of sweet Almonds and St. John's Wort mixed together,
which may be done every Day. But after that time they may be degrees begin to
swaith her straiter, to contract and gather together the parts which are
greatly extended, during her going with Child, which may be then safely done,
because the Womb by these former cleansings is so diminished, that it cannot be
too much compressed by the Swaiths.

Proper Remedies may be applied to the Breasts to drive back the Milk, if the
Woman will not be a Nurse; but if she intends to be a Nurse, it will be
sufficient to keep her Breasts very close, and well covered with gentle and
soft Clothes to keep them warm, and to prevent the curdling of the Milk; and if
there be danger of too much Milk being carried thither, anoint the Breasts with
Oil of Roses and a little Vinegar beat together, and put upon them some fine
Linen dipped in it, observing that if the Woman do Suckle the Child, she give
not the Breast the same day she is brought to Bed, because then all her Humors
are extremely moved with the pains and agitation of the Labor; therefore let
her defer it at least till the next day; and it would be yet better to stay
four or five days or longer, to the end the fury of the Milk, and the abundance
of the Humors, which flow to the Breast at the beginning, may be spent, in
which time another Woman may give it Suck.

Although a Woman be naturally Delivered, yet notwithstanding she must observe
a good Diet, to prevent many ill accidents which may happen to her during her
Childbed, at the beginning whereof she must be directed in her Meat and Drink
almost in the same manner as if she had a Fever, that so it may be prevented,
in as much as she is then very subject to it; for this reason she must be
regular in her Diet, especially the three or four first Days, in which time she
must be nourished only with good Broaths, new-laid Eggs, and Gellies, without
using at the beginning more solid Meats: but when the great abundance of her
Milk is a little past, she may with more safety eat a little Broth at Dinner,
or a small piece of boiled Chicken, or Mutton; afterward, if no accident
happens, she may be degrees be nourished more plentifully, provided that it be
a third part less than she was accustomed to take in her perfect health, and
that her Food be of good and easy Digestion; as for her Drink, let it be a
Ptisan made of Liquorish, Figs, and Anniseeds, boiled in Water: She may also,
if she be not Feverish, drink a little white Wine well mixed with Water, but
not till after the fifth or sixth Day. But it is to be noted that laborious
Women of a strong Constitution require a more plentiful feeding; yet
notwithstanding, if they do not change the quality, they must at least retrench
the quantity of their ordinary Food.

The Childbed Woman must likewise keep her self very quiet in her Bed lying on
her Back, with her Head raised, and not turning often from side to side; that
so the Womb may be the better settled in its first Situation: She must free her
self at that time from all care of Business, let her talk as little as may be,
and that with a low Voice, and let no ill News be brought to her, which may
affect her, because all these things do cause so great a commotion of the
Humors, that Nature not being able to overcome them, cannot make the necessary
Evacuation of them, which has been the Death of many. The Woman ought always to
keep her Body open with Glisters, taking one once in two Days, which not only
evacuate the gross Excrements, but also by drawing downwards cause her to
Cleanse the better. When she has observed this Rule a Fortnight or three Weeks,
which is very near the time of having Cleansed sufficiently, that those Parts
may be thoroughly cleansed before she goes abroad, and begin upon a new Score,
let her take a gentle Purge of Senna, Cassia, and Syrup of Cichory, with
Rubarb, which is good to Purge the Stomach and Bowels of those ill Humors
Nature could not evacuate by the Womb: This Purge may be repeated upon occasion.

Women in their first Labors have many times bruises and rents of the outward
parts of the Womb, and they must never be neglected, lest they degenerate into
malignant Ulcers; for the heat and moisture of these Parts, besides the filth
which continually flows thence, easily contributes to it, if convenient
Remedies be not timely applied; wherefore as soon as the Woman is laid, if
there be only simple contusions and excoriations, apply a Pultiss made of yolks
and whites of new-laid Eggs and Oil of Roses seethed a little over warm Embers,
continually stirring till it be mixed, and then spread it upon a fine Cloth,
and apply it very warm for five or six Hours, when being taken away, lay some
fine Rags dipped in Oil of St. John's Wort on each side the bearing place, and
renew them twice or thrice a Day. Foment these parts with Barly-water and Honey
of Roses to cleanse them from the Excrements which pass, and when the Woman
makes water, let them be defended with fine Rags to hinder the Urine from
causing pain and smarting. Sometimes the bruises are so great, that the
Bearing-place is inflamed, and a very considerable abscess follows, in which
Case it must be opened just below the Swelling in the most convenient place;
and after the Matter is evacuated, a detersive Decoction must be injected into
the Cavity, made of Barly-water and Oil of Roses, to which Spirit of Wine may
be added, if there be any danger of Corruption, and afterward the Ulcer must
be Dressed according to Art.

Sometimes it happens that the Perineum is so rent, that the Privities and the
Fundament is all in one; in this case, having cleansed the Womb from such
Excrements as may be there with Red-wine, let the Rent be strongly stitched
together with three or four stiches, or more, according to the length of the
separation, taking at each stich good hold of the Flesh, that so it may not
break out, and then dress it with Linimentum Arcaei, or the like; claping a
Plaster on, and some Linen above to prevent, as much as may be, the falling
of the Urine, and other Excrements upon it, because the acrimony of them would
make it smart, and cause Pain; and that these parts may close together with
more ease, let the Woman keep her Thighs close together, without the least
spreading until the Cure be perfected: but if afterward she happens to be with
Child, she will be obliged to prevent the like mischief to anoint those parts
with Emollient Oils, and Ointments, and when she is in Labor, she must forbear
helping her. Throws too strongly at once, but leave Nature to perform it by
degrees, together with the help of a Midwife well Instructed in her Art; for
usually when these parts have been once rent, it is very difficult to prevent
the like in the following Travail, because the Scar there made does straighten
the parts yet more; wherefore it were to be wished for greater security against
the like accidents, that the Woman should have no more Children.

CHAP. XXII.
Of hard Labor.
MAny Causes may be assigned that occasion hard Labor, as the natural weakness
of the Mothers Body, or her Age, she being too Young or too Old; or it may be
occasioned by Diseases that she had with her big Belly, leanness or too much
dryness of the Body, or Fat compressing the passages of the Womb, the ill
conformation of the Bones encompassing the Womb, as in those that are Lame, may
also occasion it; Wind swelling the Bowels, a Stone or Preternatural Tumor in
the Bladder that presses the Womb may be the occasion; so may the ill
constitution of the Lungs, or of the parts serving respiration, for the holding
of the Breath conduces much to the Exclusion of the Child. Various Diseases of
the Womb may also render the Delivery difficult, as swellings, Ulcers,
Obstructions, and the like. The hard Labor is occasioned by the Child, when by
reason it is Dead, or Putrified, or any way Diseased it cannot confer any thing
to its own exclusion; also when the Body or Head is too large, or when there
are more than one; so Twins most commonly cause hard Labor, or the ill
situation of the Child is the cause, or when the Hands or the Feet offer first,
or when one Hand or one Foot comes out first, or when it is doubled, or when
the Membranes break too soon, so that the Water flows out and leaves the
Orifice of the Womb dry at the time of Exclusion, or when the Membranes are
too thick, so that they cannot be easily broken by the Child.

Cold and dry Air and a North Wind are very injurious to Women in Labor,
because they bind the Body and drive the Blood and Spirits to the inner parts,
and they are very injurious to the Child coming from so warm a place. And hot
Weather dissipates the Spirits, and weakens the Child. Crude Nourishment and
such as is difficultly concocted and binds taken in a great quantity before
Labors renders it difficult, the Stomach being weakened, and the common
passages contracted, which ought to be open in this Case. Drowsiness hinders
the action of the Mother. The unseasonable motion of the Woman much retards
the Delivery, as when she refuses upon occasion to stand, walk, lie, or sit, or
slings her self about unadvisedly so that the Child cannot be Born the right
way, being turned preposterously by the restlesness of the Mother. Urine in the
Bladder, or Excrements in the right Gut, or the Piles when they are much
swelled hinder Natures endeavors, by narrowing the Neck of the Womb. Fear,
Sorrow, Anger make the Labor difficult. A Blow, a Fall, or a Wound, may also
much obstruct the Labor. Want of good assistance to lift the Woman up just at
the time of Delivery, and an Ignorant Midwife who orders the Woman to endeavor
an expulsion, and to stop her breath when the ligaments of the Fetus stick
firmly to the Womb, so that the Woman is tired before the time of her Delivery.

In hard Labor Women commonly give a Spoonful or two of Cinamon-water, or
Cinnamon powdered with a little Saffron, or half a Dram of Confection of
Alkermes in Broth, or half a Scruple of Saffron alone in some Broth, or every
hour a lit-VVine.

If these things are not sufficient the following may be used which have been
frequently found very effectual.

Take of Dittany of Creet, and both the Birthworts, and of Troaches of Mirrh
each half a Scruple, of Saffron and Cinnamon each Twelve Grains, of confection
of Alkermes half a Dram, of Cinnamon Water half an Ounce, of
Orange-flower-water, and of Mugwort-water each one Ounce, make a Potion. Oil of
Amber and of Cinnamon, and extract of Saffron are very effectual in a small
quantity, namely five Grains of extract of Saffron, four or five drops of Oil
of Cinnamon, twelve or fifteen drops of Oil of Amber in Wine, Broth or some
other Liquor; and let the Woman take Sneesing Powder for it hastens delivery.

The Midwife must frequently anoint the Womb with the Oils of Lilies or of
Sweet Almonds, and the Belly must be fomented with a Decoction of the Roots of
Marshmallows and Lilies, of the Leaves of Mallows, Violets, Mugwort, of the
Seeds of Fenugreek and Flax, of the Flowers of Camomile and Melilote. Sharp
Glisters must be also injected to stimulate the Womb, and to carry off the
Excrements. Anoint the Navel with Oil of Amber.

If the Child begins to come forth preposterously, as with one Arm or Foot, the
Midwife must thrust them back, and turn the Child right, which may be done by
placing the Woman on her Back upon a Bed with her Head low and Feet high.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of a dead Child.
WHEN the Child is dead the motion of it ceases, which either the Woman felt
before in the Womb, or the Midwife with her Hand; a sense of weight with pain
afflicts the Belly, and the Child falls like a Stone from side to side; the
Belly feels cold, the Eyes are Hollow, the Face and Lips pale, the extreme
parts cold and livid, the Breasts flaccid, and at length the Child putrefying,
stinking matter Flows from the Womb, and an ill and strong smell exhales from
the Woman's Body, and her Breath stinks. If the Secundine be excluded first, it
is a certain sign that the Child is dead.

The whole cure consists in the exclusion or extraction of the Child.

Take of the Leaves of Savine dried, of the roots of round Birthwort, of the
Troches of Myrrh and of Castor each one Dram, of Cinnamon half a Dram, of
Saffron one Scruple, mingle them make a Powder, whereof let her take one Dram
in Savine Water.

Foment the Pubes, Privities, and Perineum, with an Emollient Decoction made of
the Leaves of Mallows, and Marshmallows, and the like and let a Pessary be put
up the Privities.

Take of the Roots of round Birthwort, Orris, Black Hellebore, of Coloquintida
and Myrrh each one Dram, of Galbanum and Opopanax each half a Dram, with Ox
Gall, make a Pessary.

If after having tried Medicines a long while, the Child cannot be ejected, it
must be extracted by a Surgeon, either with Instruments, or with the Hand alone.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Caesarian Delivery.
THE Caesarian Delivery is a dextrous extraction of a Living or Dead Child from
the Mothers Womb, which cannot be other ways excluded, and that without
endangering the Life of both, or of either, and without spoiling the Faculty of
conceiving; and by this Art the first Scipio Africanus of the Romans was cut
out of his Mothers Womb, and therefore was called Caesar. This Caesarian
Section is thought to be necessary, when the Mother and the Child are so weak,
that they cannot be preserved any other way. The use of it is twofold, one,
that a living Child may be extracted; the other, that the Mother may be
preserved alive; and though it is very hazardous, yet in a desperate case it is
better to do something than nothing; especially when a confederacy is like to
be broken by the death of a Wife; or when a Family is like to be extinguished;
or some Kingdom or Principality is like to be lost. In this manner we find in
the Annals of Spain, the King of Navar was preserved; for his Mother being
wounded in the Belly by the Saracens, as she was Hunting, a Noble Man coming to
her help, saw the Child put its hand out of the Wound, and drew it forth, and
educated it privately; and afterward, when the Nobility was contending about
the Election of a Prince, he brought out the young King, and so the
Controversy ended.

The causes which require this operation are, a too great Child, or Twins, or
more that endeavor to be born together; or if a fleshy Mole join to the Child,
the ill posture of it, and if it cannot be reduced to a better, either by its
own help, or the help of others; or because it is dead, or so much swelled by a
Disease, that the Natural passage is too narrow: But in this case, it is best
to take it away peece-meal. The causes on the Mothers part are the narrowness
of the passages, either naturally, by reason she is too young, or too old; or
because the Womb is shut, either by a Cicatrix or a Callous. Moreover many
tumors in the Womb, or the Mouth of it may be the cause: In these cases, tho
it be very dangerous, yet it is very necessary to use Section, and the
operation may be happily performed, as may appear by several Experiments to him
that reads Rousel.

But before you enter upon this Operation, you must consider, whether the Child
can be Extracted any other way that is safer and easier. You must moreover
consider whether there are Signs of Death, and if so, you must not enter upon
the Operation, lest the Woman's Death be laid upon the Section, and your
rashness: But when you have througly weighed all things, if the Woman be of a
strong Nature, tho by reason of the Labor she is weak, you may venture upon
the Operation.

Most Authors would have it made on the left side of the Belly, because it is
more free from the Liver; but I, says Mauriceau, think it will be better and
more skilfully made just in the middle of the Belly between the two right
Muscles: because in this place there is only the coverings, and the white line
to cut. To dispatch then with more ease and speed, the Chyrugeon having placed
the Woman so, that the Belly may be a little raised; let him take a good sharp
incision Knife, very sharp on one side, with which he must quickly make an
Incision, just in the middle of the Belly between the two right Muscles unto
the Peritoneum, of the length and extent of the Womb, or thereabouts; after
that he must only pierce the Peritoneum with the point of his Knife, to make an
Orifice for one or two of the Fingers of his left hand, into which he must
immediately thrust them to cut it, lifting it up with them, and conducting the
Instrument for fear of pricking the Guts, in proportion to the first incision
of the coverings, which having done, the Womb will soon appear, into which he
must make an Incision in the same manner, as he did in the Peritoneum, being
careful not to thrust his Instrument at once too far in; having then so opened
the Womb, he must likewise make an incision in the Infants Membranes; taking
care not to wound it with the Instrument, and then he will soon see it, and
must immediately take it out of the burden, which he must nimbly separate from
the bottom of the Womb, and finding it to be yet living, let him praise God
for having so blessed and prospered his Operation. But the Children so
delivered are usually so weak, if not quite dead, as it often happens, that it
is hard to know, whether it is alive or dead; yet one may be confident the
Child is living, if by touching the Navel-string, the Umbilical Arteries are
perceived to move, as also the Heart, by laying the Hand on the Breast, and if
it prove so, means must be used to fetch it to it self, by spouting some Wine
into the Nose and Mouth, and by warming it, until it begins to stir of it self.

But it is to be noted, that Mauriceau much disapproves this cruel Operation,
and says it ought not to be performed until the Woman is dead, for that the
Woman always dies in the operation, or presently after.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Secundine retained.
IN a natural Birth the Secundine is usually excluded presently after the
Child; and when it is not, the Life of the Woman is much endangered. It is
retained by the too great thickness of the Coats, the swelling of them, and by
an afflux of Humors occasioned by hard Labor; also by the strutting of the
Mouth of the Womb after the exclusion of the Child. The External Causes are,
Coldness of the Air, whereby the Secundine is repelled, and the Orifice of the
Womb shut. Certain perfumes, whereby the Womb is allured upwards, violent
passions of the Mind, as Fear, and sudden Frights, the perverseness of the
Woman, who will not abide in such a posture, or use such endeavors as are
requisite, the weight of the Child, whereby the Navel is broken, the
Afterbirth remaining within, the unskilfulness of the Midwife who cuts the
Vessels of the Navel too soon, or does not hold them in her Left Hand as she
ought, for if she let them go, they are drawn back into the Womb, and are hid
there with the Secundine.

It is easy to know when the Secundine is retained in the Womb, but sometimes
a piece of it is separated and remains in the Womb, which is not so easily
perceived, yet it may be known, because the Womb after Delivery endeavors to
eject something; but tho its endeavors are but small, a sense of heat and pain
is perceived in the Womb, and after a few days a cadaverous smell exhales from
the Womb. The retention of the Secundine is very dangerous, and if it continues
some days, an acute Fever, Nauseousness, Faintings, difficulty of Breathing,
Coldness of the extreme Parts, Convulsive Fits, and at length Death follows.

The Secundine retained, is expelled by the same remedies, which are proposed
for a dead Child, to which may be added some Specificks delivered by Authors.
Rulandus says, he has given with success thirty drops of Oil of Juniper. Some
order the Woman to bite an Onion three or four times and to swallow the Juice,
and presently after to drink a small draught of Wine. The Juice of green Lovage
drank in Rhenish-wine is also commended. Sneesing is also good; but the best
way is to have it drawn out by a skilful Chyrurgeon, before the Inflammation is
increased. If the Secundine cannot be ejected by any means, but sticks firmly
to the Womb, and putrifies there, Suppuraratives must be injected; to this
purpose Basilicon may be dissolved in the following Decoction.

Take of the Leaves of Mallows with the roots three handfuls, of the roots of
both the Birthworts each six Drams, of Flax Seeds and Fenugreek Seeds each half
an Ounce, of Violets one handful, of the Flowers of Camomile, and the lesser
Centory each half an handful, make a Decoction in Water mingled with Oil, if
you would have it suppurate much, but to cleanse add a little Vngentum
Aegyptiacum.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Flooding of a Woman new laid.
FLooding is a more dangerous accident than any other which may happen to a
Woman newly laid, and which dispatches her so soon, if it be in a great
quantity, that there is not often time to prevent it; wherefore in this case
convenient Remedies must be speedily applied to stop it; to which purpose it is
fit to consider what causes the Flooding, and if it be a false Conception, a
piece of the burden or clodded Blood remaining behind, all diligence must be
used to fetch them away, or to cause a speedy expulsion of them. But if when
nothing remains behind in the Womb, the Blood notwithstanding continues to
flow, you must Blood in the Arm to make diversion, and let her Body be laid
flat, and not raised, that so the Blood may not be sent down to the lower
Parts. Let her keep her self very quiet, and not turn from side to side; the
upper part of her Belly must not be Swathed or Bolstered, and her Chamber must
be kept a little cool, and the Coverings of the Bed must not be many, that so
the Flooding may not be promoted by the heat.

But if notwithstanding all this the Blood flows continually, the last remedies
must be tried, which is to lay the Woman upon fresh Straw, with a single Cloth
on it, and no Quilt, that so her Reins may not be heated, applying along her
Loins Clothes wet in cold Vinegar and Water, unless it be Winter, and then it
must be a little warmed; and to the end her strength may be preserved, which is
extremely wasted, let her take every half Hour a little good strong Broth with
a few Spoonfuls of Gelly, and between whiles the Yolk of a new laid Egg; but
too much Food must not be given at a time, because her Stomach cannot digest
it. Her Drink must be Red Wine with a little Water wherein Iron has been
quenched; and if there is the least appearance of Excrements contained in the
Guts, make no Scruple to give a Glister to evacuate them. But if
notwithstanding the Blood continues Flooding, then the Woman will often have
Fainting Fits, and be in great danger of losing her Life, because we cannot
apply in those places the Remedies fit to stop the opening of the Vessels as we
can in another.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of a Suppression of the Childbed Purgations, and After-pains.
THE Suppression of the Lochia is one of the worst Symptoms that can befall a
Woman in Childbed, especially if they happen to be totally and suddenly stopped
the first three or four days, which is the time they should come down
plentifully.

To bring the Lochia well down, let the Woman avoid Passion, and all
disturbances of the Mind, which may stop them; let her lie in Bed with her Head
and Breast a little raised, keeping her self quiet, that so the Humors may be
carried downwards by their natural tendency. Let her observe a good Diet,
somewhat hot and moist, and apply an Hysteric Plaster to her Navel.

Take of the Conserves of Roman Wormwood and Rue each one Ounce, of the Troches
of Myrrh two Drams, of Castor, English Saffron, Volatile Salt of Ammoniac, and
of Assa fetida, each half a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of
the five opening Roots, make an Electuary. Let her take the quantity of a Large
Nutmeg every third Hour, drinking upon it three or four Spoonfuls of the
following mixture.

Take of the Water of Penny royal and Balm each three Ounces, of Compound
Briony water two Ounces, of Syrup of Mugwort three Ounces and an half, of
Saffron two Drams, of Castor tied up in a rag and hanged in a Glass one
Scruple, mingle them.

If these things are used presently upon the Suppression, they generally take
it off* but if they have been used so long that all the quantity is taken, and
the Lochia are still stopped, in this case we may use Laudanum for once, but it
is best to mix it with Hesterick things: For instance, take sixteen drops of
Liquid Laudanum in a Spoonful of Compound Briony, or Water. But it must be
carfully noted, that if after having once taken it, the business is not done,
Opium must not be repeated again, but having waited a while, to see what it
will do, we must return again to Emmenagoges mixed with Hystericks, and
afterward we must inject a Glister; but what was said before of Opium, is to
be taken notice of in respect of Glisters, for unless the first bring down the
Lochia, nothing is to be hoped for from more.

These things therefore being done, it is safest and the duty of a prudent
Physician to wait and see what time will do, for if the Woman live over the
twentieth day, she will be in a manner out of danger, and then she will be able
to bear such a method as is proper and effectual enough to force the Lochia.

If the After-pains are more than usual, you must Swath the Woman's Belly
gently, that it may subside, and not move hither and thither, as it often
happens after delivery, upon so sudden an evacuation, and then give three
Ounces of Oil of Almonds fresh drawn, mixed with one Ounce and an half of Syrup
of Violets.

And Glisters may be injected made of Milk and Sugar, and yolks of Eggs, and
the Belly must be anointed with the Oil of Dill, or of Rue, or of Jasmine. A
Fomentation may be also made of a Decoction of Mugwort, Feverfew, Baulm, of the
Leaves of Bays, and Calaminth, of the Seeds of Daucus, Cummin, and Carraways,
of the Flowers of Camomile and Wall-flower, made in Water and White Wind, or in
Milk. It is also proper to cover the Belly with a Sheeps-skin, fresh flead off,
and applied hot. The following Powder taken presently after delivery preserves
the Woman from Pain in a wonderful manner; and some think if the Woman takes it
in her first lying in, she will never be troubled with these Pains.

Take of Comfry dried one Dram, of the Kirnels of Peach stones, and of Nutmegs,
each two Scruples, of Amber half a Dram, of Ambergrise half a Scruple, make a
Powder, whereof let her take a Dram with Whitewine, and if there be a Fever
with Broth.

If the Woman after delivery be troubled with a pain in the Groin, it may be
taken off by applying a Plaster of Galbanum and Assafetida to the Navel, in the
middle whereof some Grains of Musk must be placed.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of acute Diseases of Women in Childbed.
A Putrid Fever seises Childbed Women at various Seasons, and upon several
occasions, sometimes presently after delivery, especially if it has been
difficult and hard, sometimes on the first, sometimes on the second, third, or
fourth day, but the later it begins, the better it goes off.

It begins and proceeds most commonly in the following manner, after a previous
indisposition, the Fever begins most commonly with a shaking and shivering,
which Heat presently follows, and after that Sweat, the first or second day
fits of Heat and Cold succeed one another, and then all the Blood being
inflamed, the Lochia if they were not suppressed before, flow but little, or
quite stop; if the Disease be acute, and of quick motion, it comes to its
height the third or fourth day; the Heat is violent, and the Thirst very much,
the Pulse vehement and quick, watchings obstinate, there is a great
restlessness, that the sick tumble from one side of the Bed to the other
continually; the Urin is thick and red, and there are many other grievous
Symptoms; when the Fever is in its state, no Crisis is to be expected, for I
never saw this Disease go off by a critical Sweat.

The acute Diseases of Women in Childbed are sometimes accompanied with a
Quinsie, Plurisie, Peripneumonia, Bloody Flux, Smallpox, and the like; of
these a Quinsie, Plurisie, and Peripneumonia, by reason of the great Smilitude
of the Cause, and Analogy of the Cure, may be considered together; presently at
their first beginning we must endeavor that the Blood fixed any where, and
beginning to be extravasated be restored to Circulation, lest an Imposthume
should be occasioned; wherefore internal remedies which free the Blood from
Coagulation must be used, of which sort are Diaphoreticks abounding with
Volatile Salt, as Spirit of Hartshorn, of Soot, and Urine, also Testaceous and
Bezoartick Powders, Lapis Prunella, Decoctions and a Julep made of Vegetables
that force Urine and the Courses, with all which must be mixed such things as
have been found by experience to be proper for Uterine Diseases. Moreover
discutient Medicines, which disperse the matter impacted, such are Liniments,
Fomentations, and Cataplasms, must be carefully applied to the parts affected;
in the mean while the violent Motion and immoderate effervescence must be
driven far from thence, and the filth must be driven as much as is possible
downwards; to this end Frictions, Ligatures, Epispasticks, and if there be
occasion, Cupping Glasses, must be applied about the Legs and Feet. If the
Disease be very violent Bleeding is indicated, and unless there be a Plethora
in the whole Body, and the Inflammation be very acute in the part affected, it
were be best to open a Vein in the Foot, or to apply Leeches to the
Hemorrhoidal Veins; but if necessity urge, we may bleed in the Arm, and
afterward, if it can be admitted, in the Foot; but you must take notice, that
Bleeding must be cautiously used in these Cases, for unless it does good, which
I have seldom found, the Sick is in a worse condition, being rendered weaker
thereby.

The Bloody Flux is very often deadly, and so much the rather, because such
things as qualify the Blood, and that moderately bind, are indicated; but the
Flux of the Lochia forbids them, wherefore in this case till she has been well
Purged by a long Flux of the Lochia, the fierceness of the Symptoms must at
present be only appeased.

The Indications in the Smallpox are not only contrary to those above
described, but also to one another; for the Flux of the Lochia must be
moderately restrained; but in the mean while the efflorescence of the Blood,
and gentle Sweating must be continued, wherefore such things as are of an
Alexipharmic and Astringent Nature must be boiled in their Broths, as the Roots
of Tormentil and Bistort; and in this case the Woman must not eat Flesh, or the
Broths of it, nor must she rise, but be kept as quiet as is possible, and the
whole business must be left in a manner to God and Nature*

All Women in Childbed have an inbred Venom, and they ought to be careful of
it, and to avoid it as much as the greatest Malignity; wherefore they ought to
use an exact course of Diet, whereby the impurities of the Blood and Humors
may be purged in Childbed without the danger of a Fever, and that the
disorders of the Womb may be healed, and their strength weakened by delivery may
be restored, to which end three things are to be minded, first an exact course
of Diet must be ordered, viz. That they be fed for a Week at least with
Water Gruel, sometimes made with Beer, sometimes made with Water mixed with
White Wind, or with Panada, and other things of easy Digestion: Secondly, They
must take great care that they do not catch cold, whereby the Pores and the
Lochia may be stopped; wherefore let them continue in Bed at least till the tenth
day: Thirdly, The Lochia must be gently provoked; to this end Midwives when
after hard Labor, there is danger of the stoppage of the Lochia, give Sperma
Ceti, Irish Slates powdered, or White Wind Tinctured with Saffron, and they
make the Gruel with Water and White Wind, wherein as also in Posset Drink they
boil Marygold Flowers, the Leaves of Pennyroyal, or Mugwort.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Melancholy, Madness, Delirium, and Epilepsie of Women in Childbed.
THese Diseases happen in Childbed, for want of a sufficient evacuation, by
reason of the fault of the Blood, the Suppression of it, or too great an
Evacuation; or by Fevers, an ill Vapor rushing upon the Brain, whereof
Lusitanus mentions an observation of a very Beautiful Lady, that presently
after delivery fell Melancholy, and was mad for a Month, but by the use of a
few Medicines recovered her Senses; and I, says Rodericus a Castro, have often
cured a Dutch Merchants Wife who was frequently distracted after delivery.
These Diseases are thus distinguished, Melancholy is a Delirium without a
Fever, occasioned by a Melancholy humor possessing the Seat of the Mind.
Madness is more outrageous, and a hot Intemperies is the occasion of it;
whereas Melancholy proceeds from a cold Intemperies: An Epilepsie is a
Convulsion of all the parts of the Body, not perpetual, but by intervals, with
a depravation of Sense and Jugdment. Lastly, a Delirium is an alienation of the
Mind, and proceeds most commonly from a bilious Fever, and therefore is not a
Disease, but a Symptom.

These are the general Indications; if these Diseases proceed from an immoderat
Flux, it must be stopped, the strength must be kept up, and the cold and dry
Intemperies must be corrected. If they proceed from a Suppression of the
Childbed Purgations, they must be forced; if they are occasioned by a fault in
the Blood, they must be treated as the Melancholy of Virgins and Widows.

The most Grievous Symptom of these Diseases are obstinate Watching; in this
case apply often to the Temples the following Oxyrrhodine.

Take of the Waters of Roses and Plantain, each four Ounces, of Oil of Roses,
three Ounces, of Vinegar of Roses one Ounce, the Powder of Red Sanders, one
Dram, mingle them, apply it in a Rag, or Populeon Ointment mixed with
Ointment of Roses, three Grains of Opium, and one Scruple of Saffron; or a live
Pigeon cut in two may be applied hot to the Head. And if these things do not
do, one Dram of Philonium may be given in Lettice Water and a little Wine at
Bedtime. Note that in an Epilepsie the Oxyrrhodine above mentioned is not so
proper, because it cools the Head too much, and in Melancholy such things must
be added to it as moisten more.

CHAP. XXX.
Of driving away the Milk, of Tumors from Milk, of want of Milk, and of Chaps
of the Nipples.
IF the Milk flow too freely into the Breasts, a Thin and Spare Diet must be
ordered, and the Breasts must be often sucked to prevent the Inflammation of
them, and the immoderate effervescence of the Blood; and if it be not thought
convenient that the Woman should give suck* it is customary on the first or
third day of Lying in, to apply over the Breasts moderately astringent
Cerecloths, or the Populean Ointment, and Galens cooling Cerate equally mixed,
and spread on Linen; some use Linen dipped in Lukewarm Verjuice, wherein a
little Allom has bin dissolved, that so it may be more astringent; but great
care must be taken in the application and change of these things, that the
Woman catch not the least cold, as also that no Inflammation or Impostume be
caused, instead of driving back the Milk: Wherefore things are to be applied
according to the variety of the case.

But the best way to drive away the Milk is the causing an ample Evacuation of
the Lochia, which is much furthered by keeping the Belly open with Glisters.

Milk is the occasion of many tumors of diverse kinds: The differences may be
thus enumerated; if the Ferment of the Breast be over active, it separates the
Milk with too great violence, causing thereby an over Fermentation in the part,
which usually produces a Tumor called a Phlegmon, if the Serum be hot, or
partakes much of Blood; otherwise it raises a Tumor called an Oedema; or if the
matter be disposed to Coagulate, the Kings Evil: And these are the most
frequent Species of Tumors generally reputed to arise from Milk, and either of
them may degenerate into a Scirrhus, and that Scirrhus into a Cancer. The Signs
are Visible; if the first happen, there are all the Symptoms of a Phlegmon,
Heat, Redness, Tension, Pulsation, and the like; if the Second, large
distension with pain, but no heat; if the Kings Evil, then hard Kernels are
easily felt.

Swellings made by the over eagerness of the milky Ferment go easily off, if no
other Symptom attend them. Sucking and drawing the Breast for the most part
discharges the Milk, as fast as it can be generated, and then all goes off
well. But if the Fermentation produce any disorder in the Blood, there is more
or less danger according to the quality of the Tumor produced, viz. A Phlegmon
is apt to occasion a Fever, Oedematous Tumors are apt to grow Ulcers, and
sometimes Scrophulous, and Scirrhous, and require a long time for their Cure.
Because it frequently happens to Women in Childbed, that their Breasts do
swell extraordinarly by reason of abundance of Milk, which flows into them, and
occasions Inflammations, Impostumations, and the like; therefore their Diet
ought to be slender, and of such a quality as may less dispose the Humors to
ferment, as Water Gruel, Panado, and the like. But if the Inflammation be not
violent, or the Patient weak, Chicken Broth may be allowed with Wood Sorrel,
Purslain, Lettice boiled in it, or a boiled Chicken, a Potched Egg, and such
sort of Meats of easy digestion. The Medicines proper to diminish the Milk,
are Lettice, Purslain, Endive, Succory, Smallage, and the like, the Seeds of
wild Rue, Cummin, Basil powdered and given to the quantity of one Dram daily in
Broth, will dry up the Milk, as Authors write.

The Milk is usually drawn out of the Breasts by the Infants sucking them: But
if the Child be so weak, it cannot suck, or does not discharge them enough,
some body else must do it, or young Whelps may suck them, or the Mother may
draw her own Breasts her self by an Instrument sold for that purpose.

The swelling made by the Milk is restrained by the application of Nightshade,
Lettice, Plantain, Vine-tops, Bramble-buds, Horse-tail, and the like, or with
the Oil of Myrtles and Vinegar.

It may be discussed by the application of Mints, Catmints, Rue, the Seeds of
Fenugreek, Cummin, Fennel, and the like, or dried up by applying Clothes dipped
in Lime water, or a Solution of Sacharum Saturni in the Water of Frogs Spawn;
during which time fine Tow may be sprinkled with Ceruss, and applied to the
Armpits: But these things must be only used at the beginning of the Fluxion.

But if the Inflammation be gone too far toward Suppuration, then it must be
promoted with Suppuratives, and opened by Incision or a Caustic.

Where the swelling has been hard, and not inflamed, use the following Cerat.

Take of the tops of Wormwood powdered two Drams, of the Seeds of Fenugreek and
Fennel, each one Ounce and an half, of the Juice of Henbane and Hemlock, each
three Ounces, of Ointment of Marshmallows two Ounces, of Ducks Fat, and Goose
Grease, each one Ounce, of Deers Suet two Ounces, of Liquid Storax half an
Ounce, with a sufficient quantity of Wax, make a Cerat.

Hemlock boiled in Wine, and beaten up with Hogs Lard resolves the hardness of
the Breasts. Green Mints, or Chickweed are common applications, and of good
use, either alone or mixed with other Medicines, in all the hard Swellings of
the Breast occasioned by Milk. All Plasters applied to the Breasts must have a
hole sniped in them for the Nipples, lest they be fretted by them, especially
that the Milk may be drawn forth whilst the Medicines lie on.

But it is best to prevent such Swellings at the beginning by procuring an
ample and large Evacuation of the Lochia. For the Chaps and Excoriations of the
Niples, Rags dipped in Plantain-water may be applied, or the Ointment called
Diapompholigos may be used: But great care must be taken that nothing be
applied to disgust the Child; wherefore some only use Honey of Roses: But if
the Excoriation and Pain be much, the Woman must forbear giving the Child suck.

If the Child has wholly sucked off the Nipples, the Milk then must be quite
dried away, that so the Ulcers which remain may be the sooner healed.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of want of Milk.
THE cause of want of Milk is a Vice of the Blood, the weakness of the Body, or
of the Child, the smallness of the Breasts, the narrowness of the Vessels, any
immoderate Evacuation by another part, as by the Mouth, by the Courses, by the
Nostrils, or by the Hemorrhoids, by immoderate Cold, ill Diet, Fasting, great
Labor, or Sorrow.

The whole Cure in a manner consists in Diet. If therefore it be occasioned for
want of Blood, or by a dry Intemperies, from whence it chiefly proceeds, it
must be cured by a hot and moist Diet, and the Air must be moist and moderately
warm. Sleep is better than immoderate Watching. The Bread must be Wheaten and
well fermented. Goats or Sheeps Milk boiled with Yolks of Eggs, and sweetened is
good; so is Rice boild with Milk and Honey, Potched Eggs, Chicken Broth,
Mutton or Veal Broth, or Broth of Phesants, or the Flesh of them with a Sauce
made of Rocket and Honey; the Udders of Animals are also good. Of Fishes, a
Trout, Mullet, a Salmon, Soles, Place, Pikes, and the like are good; and for
the second Course, Sweet Almonds, Raisins of the Sun, Pistaches, Pine Nuts,
Rocket, Parsnips roasted under the Embers, or prepared with Honey. Diascorides
and Avicenna commend Fennel and Smalage; Lettice is also good, so are Cabbage,
Wild Thime, Leeks, Rocket, Fennel. Let her drink be sweet Wine, or White Wind,
or Barley water with the Seeds of Fennel, or Ale; wherein if you boil Butter,
Sugar, and Bread, you will Scarce find a better Diet for this purpose. The German
Women use this for their Meat and Drink almost all the time they give suck. All
things that are acid, acrid, bitter and very hot must be avoided. But if this
defect proceed from heat or choler, you must use cooling things, and the Body
must be purged according to the Nature of the Humor: But if the Blood be
Phlegmatic, and the Vessels obstructed, you must open the Obstructions and
attenuate the Blood; therefore you must give hot things, as Smallage, Dill,
Pennyroyal with Wine: But you must be careful not to give things that are too
hot; for they dry up the Milk. And as those things which Moderately provoke the
Courses breed Milk, so those that violently force them lessen it.

Blood is never to be drawn, nor are strong Purges to be used: But if it be
necessary to use Purging by reason of the fault of the Humors, the Nurse must
take four days before such things as increase the Milk, and such Medicines must
be given as increase the Milk. As

Take of thee Seeds of Fennel, of Leeks, and Rocket, each two Drams, of Mace
one Dram, of the Leaves of Mallows half a handful, boil them in Chicken Broth,
and let her take six Ounces of the Broth, and wash* the Breasts with the
Broth.

But if the want of Milk proceeds from the smallness of the Breasts, foment
them with a Decoction of Fenugreek, and Camomile made in Wine, or with hot Beer
and Butter. But if these things do not good, you must choose another Nurse; but
you must try all things first, for change of Milk is very injurious to the
Child.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of a Woman suckling her own Children, and of choosing a Nurse.
THE Mothers Milk is fittest for the Child, because it is most agreeable to it
Nature: Besides the Mother will be more vigilant and careful than a hired
Nurse; for none can love, the Child so well as the own Mother, who upon the
account of her affection is unwearied in the attending of the Child, and thinks
she never does enough for it, and is presently awaked by its crying; whereas
mercenary Nurses often overlay Children and suffocate them. Moreover the Body,
and the disposition of the Mind are more framed by the Milk and Nourishment,
than by the nature of the Seed; and as you often observe that the Child is
purged when the Nurse is Purged; so the Body and Humors are in a manner the
same with hers, as Trees partake of the nature of the Soil they are planted in.
Besides, it is the duty of a Mother to nurse her own Child; for those that do
not are but half Mothers, and to be sure cannot love them so well as those that
do. Upon this account a Roman Youth of the Family of the Gracchi, returning
Rich and Victorious from the Wars, being met by his Mother and his Nurse, gave
his Mother a Silver Ring, and his Nurse a Gold Chain; whereat his Mother being
offended; You, said he, nourished me only Nine Months in the Womb, and then
rejected me, this Woman received me into her Arms, and suckled me two Years,
and taught me to be orderly. The Water nourishes what is bred in the Water, and
the Earth nourishes what is bred in the Earth: Nor is there any Beast so cruel,
as not to nourish its young ones. Tigers, Lions, and Vipers take care of their
young ones, and only Man makes Foundlings of his: Oh! incredible and execrable
Villainy, what can be more cruel, than to expose a tender Infant that implores
his Mothers help, as soon as possibly she can get rid of it? But God in his
Providence often punishes their Inhumanity; for their Milk often curdles in
their Breast, and occasions dreadful pains, so that those Breasts, which were
denied their Children are forced to be sucked by Puppies; nor is this all, for
their Breasts are often Inflamed and Suppurated, and must be cut with Knives,
or burnt with red hot Irons, or becoming Cancerous, the rotten Flesh drops from
them piecemeal. But some will object in their excuse, that they are either too
young or too weak, yet without doubt if they are able to Conceive, they may
Suckle too; for God never gave them Breasts full of Milk to no purpose. But if
they have not Milk enough, which is the only real excuse, a Nurse must be
chosen, who ought to be of an age betwixt twenty and thirty; she ought to be of
a strong Constitution, well Colored, not too Fat, nor too Lean; she must not
have rotten Teeth, nor a stinking Breath, nor be affected with Scabs, Ulcers,
the French Pox, Gout, Consumption, or any other Disease. Thirdly, Her Manners
are to be considered; for the Child sucks them in with the Milk; whereof the
Nurse ought to be good tempered; she must not be subject to violent Passions,
nor wholly without Passion, nor of a weak Judgment; she must not be squint
eyed, lest the Child should be so; she must be Chaste, and not have Conversation
with her Husband, lest her Courses should flow, or the Blood be disturbed, and
consequently the Milk; or be with Child, whereby the Milk would be lessened,
and become vicious: but some think that the Courses flowing moderately does not
vitiate the Milk, but rather cleanses the rest of the Blood. Fourthly, we must
consider the time from Delivery; for she must not give suck too near Delivery,
nor too long from the time of it. She must not give suck until she be free of
the Childbed Purgations; the time most approved of, is from the Second Month
to the Sixth, and she should have Nursed a Child before. Fifthly, The Breasts
are to be considered, which ought to be moderately full, not loose and hanging
down; but solid and firm, of a moderate bigness and hardness, and the Veins of
them should look blew, and dispersed into many streams, moderately elevated,
that they may contain the more Milk; for if they are dense, and the Milk is
bound up in them, and as it were suffocated, the Child can scarce draw it, and
so either takes a distaste, or if it suck on, the Nose is flattened by the
pressure. Sixthly, The Paps must not be so short as that the Child cannot take
hold of them with his Lips, nor so long and thick, as to fill the Infants
Mouth, so that it cannot readily use its Tongue to suck or swallow. Seventhly,
The nature of the Milk must be considered, which, besides the clearness and
sweetness of it, which are the first requisits, must be also sweet-sented, not
too thick nor too thin, which may be tried by dipping a hair in the Milk,
hanging it up, if the Milk slide off, it is naught, but if it compass the whole
hair it is good. Eighthly, choose a Nurse which was last delivered of a Male
child. Ninethly, Such an one as is not wont to miscarry. Tenthly, She must not
be with Child. The Nurse so described on the first days she begins to suckle
must use a simple Diet, lest too much Milk should overwhelm the tender Infant.
Afterward let her have good Meats: She must not Drink excessively, she must
abstain from Wine, and from salt, sharp, and a stringent Meats, and Leeks,
Onions, Garlic, Rocket and Spices. She must avoid all perturbations of Mind,
and Copulation; let her moderately exercise her Arms and upper Parts. Lastly,
Her Diet must be such, as the Nature and Constitution of the Infant requires;
if the Child be of a hot Constitution, she must use a cooling Diet; but if the
Infant be of a cold Constitution, a little Wine and Spices must be allowed, and
stronger exercise, and if the Nurse be not well, she must be purged, and Diet
must be ordered according to the faults of the Milk, and the disorders of the
Child. The Nurse must be always cheerful, and laughing, and singing with the
Child. She must keep it clean. She must speak distinctly. She must assist the
Child in sucking by pressing gently her Breasts; but she must not let the Child
suck too much at once.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Wrinkles in the Belly and Breasts after Delivery.
WHen the Child in the Womb grows big, it stretches the Belly, or maks it chap,
so that after Delivery Wrinkles remain in the Belly, and her Breasts grow small
after the Milk goes away for the same reason. The Chaps may be prevented, if
after the fourth Month of being with Child, a Linen cloth dipped in the Oil of
sweet Almonds be applied to the Belly. The Wrinkles left after Delivery may be
taken off by two sorts of Remedies.

First therefore, If the Woman's Month be not out, apply to the Belly the
following Ointment.

Take of Sperma Ceti two Drams, of Oil of Sweet Almonds, and St. John's Wort,
each one Ounce and an half, of Goats Suet one Ounce, of new Wax a sufficient
quantity, make an Ointment.

Secondly, After the Woman's lying in, such things may be used as gently bind,
and render the Belly solid and firm.

Take of the distilled Water of Mallows, and Marsh-mallow, each one Quart, of
Rose Water a Pint and half, two Lemons* peeled and sliced, of unripe Sloes one
Pound; infuse them together two days, and then distill them in a Glass Alembick
with a gentle fire, and bath the Woman's Belly with it. But the following makes
the Belly more solid.

Take of Figs one Pound, of the Meal of Barley and Beans, each half an Ounce,
of the Meal of Rice two Ounces, of Galls, and Cypress Nuts, each one Dram, of
Mastich, and Myrrh, each one Dram and half, of the Seeds of Fennel one Dram;
boil them all in Smiths Water till they are a little thick, then apply them to
the Belly; or after bathing with a Decoction of the foresaid things: apply the
following Pultiss to the Belly.

Take of the Meal of Beans, Rice, Acorns and Almonds, each two Ounces, of
Bricks powdered one Ounce, of Bole-armenick two Drams, of Dragons Blood one
Dram, of Cypress Nuts half an Ounce, of Kermes three Drams, of Galls half an
Ounce, of Oil of Myrtles six Ounces, of the Waters of Medlars, and Sloes, each
one Pint, of Rose Water one Pint and an half; boil them to the consistence of a
Pultiss, apply it to the Belly.

It also makes the Breasts solid. But lest the Breast and Bowels should be
offended by its frigidity and binding quality, add of Mastick two Drams, of
Nutmegs three Drams, of Florentine Orris half an Ounce. Myrrh mixed with these,
the Decoction of it, or used any other way renders the Belly smooth and firm,
and the Breasts hard compact and small, and narrows the Privities, and is
accounted a great secret in this case.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of straitning the Privities after Delivery.
AFter Delivery the Privities are lax; and hence Barreness, and a falling of
the Womb are sometimes occasioned. The Cure is performed by two sorts of
Remedies.

First, if the Privities are too moist, such things must be used as dry; the
following Uterine Glister is very proper.

Take of Galls number four, of Spodium two Spoonfuls, powder them very fine,
and add Six Ounces of Stiptic-wine; afterward put up the following Pessary.

Take of the Bark of the Pine two Drams, Allom one Dram, of Cyprus one Pugil,
boil them in Wine to the consistence of a Pultiss, apply them often with a rag:
Or infuse Galls in Rainwater eight days, and with soft Wool sprinkled with
Sulphur, and dipped in this Water and dried without pressing, make a Pessary.

But Secondly, And chiefly you must use Astringents, Foment the Genitals with
the Water or Decoction of Acorns, unripe Sloes, and of Horse-tail; or Foment
the Parts with Allom-water, or with Stiptic-Wine, that is, red and rough Wine
boiled with Galls, Leaves of Myrtles, Red Roses, Pomgranet-peel Balaustines,
and Cypress Nuts: Or,

Take of Cypress Nuts and Galls, each one Pound, of Roch-allom, and the filings
of Iron prepared in Vinegar, each half a Pound, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of the Waters of Galls, which Tanners use, and Foment the Parts often
with it.

The following Water is counted excellent.

Take of Galls, and of Cypress Nuts, each half a Pound, of Allom six Drams,
Bolearmonick half a Pound, of the Meal of Acorns, and of old Beans, each half a
Pound, the Whites of twelve Eggs, of Powder of Brick one Pound; let them be all
finely powdered, and infuse them three Days in Smiths Water, or in a decoction
of Sloes, Medlars, or Horse-tail, with half a Pint of Rose Vinegar; then
Distill them in a cold Still with a gentle Fire; add to the Water that comes
off, of the Powders of Mastick, Myrrh, and Dragons Blood, each two Drams. Set
the water in the Sun in the Summer for ten days, this straitens the Privities,
smoothens the Belly, and makes the Breasts solid.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Abscesses and Corrosive Ulcers arising from Distempers of the Womb in
Childbed.
THE Womb is sometimes terribly affected in Childbed, and produces Fevers of
very Malignant and Venomous Natures, which soon cause Phlegmons, and worse
Tumors, in the Womb it self, and sometimes in other parts of the Body, there
being none of them on which the Uterine Ferment has not an influence. The
Exhorbitances or Degenerations of that, whether from an hurt in Labor, from
part of the Afterbirth left behind, from cold taken, or the Lochia stopped, soon
produce such Virulent Distempers in the Blood as make it cast out a Tumor,
either upon the part it self, or else outwardly upon the Muscles of the Body,
where when they light, they prove corrosive, sometimes eating out the Flesh in
which they lodge, which falls off in whole pieces, without that change of
color in the Skin, which is in Gangreens, so that sometimes the Bone it self
is laid bare by them.

The Causes are hard Labor, the Womb hurt, or part of the Secundine left
behind; Cold taken in Childbed, and a predisposition in the Humors, by reason
of their peccancy in quantity or quality.

The Prognostic may be taken from the largness, or other qualifications of the
Abscess, and the Symptoms that happen to the Body thereupon. If the Tumor
happens only from some little disturbance in the Womb of a Person otherwise of
a good habit of Body, the cure is hopeful. If part of the Afterbirth be
retained, there is no hope's of Cure till that be removed, nay if it stay so
long, as to induce Putrefaction of the part, it will be too late then to remove
it.

If the Body be of an ill Habit, the Tumors are apt to Degenerate into very
Venomous and Malignant Abscesses, which if they do not suddenly kill, do at
least produce ill conditoned Ulcers, hard of Cure, and for the most part mortal
in the long course of the Disease.

In the Cure of these Abscesses, you are to inform your self how the Womb is
disturbed, and appease that; and if any part of the Afterbirth be left behind,
to endeavor the bringing that away, and by good Sudorificks, Cordials and the
like, to expel the Venom, and fortify the Spirits against the Malignity that
is thereby contracted, and to attemperate the heat, and the Acrimony by Julips
and Emulsions.

The Swellings arising from these require to be treated in their beginning with
moderate Repellents and Discutients afterward, according as the Matter
prepredominates, make way for its discharge.

A young Woman after Childbed was seized with a great Pain and Swelling in her
Groin, with a Fever. Bleeding and Lenient Purgatives to Evacuate the Humors
were prescribed, also Cordial Juleps, and the like, to attemperate the Heat,
and fortify the Spirits; and Moderate Repellents mixed with Discutients in
Fomentations, and Plasters with Bandage were used, which dispersed the Humor in
the Thigh, and restored that part to its former temper: But in the mean time
the Tumor increased in the Groin, and was suppurated after the manner of a
Bubo; it was opened, and a detersion was endeavored; but the Sinus reaching
down the Twist, the Matter could not be discharged without laying it more open,
as in Sinous Ulcers, by which method it was cured.

A Gentlewoman in Childbed was seized with a Fever, and the Ninth Day
complained of a pain in her Foot. Discutients were prescribed, together with
things proper for the Fever to breath out the impacted Matter in her Foot; but
the pain increasing, the upper part of the Foot from the Instep to the Toes
were Oedematous; but from the inside of the Ancle to the middle of the Sole of
her Foot inflamed, and seeming to apostumate. The ill consequences of an
Apostumation in that part amongst the Tendons and Bones, and where the Skin is
usually so hard and tough, that our strongest Causticks could difficultly
penetrate, being feared; It was resolved to endeavor the restraint of the
Influx, and so to dry up the Humor affecting the part; to which purpose was
applied the following Plaster.

Take of Barley Meal Six Ounces, of Flax Seeds powdered Six Drams, of the
Flowers of Camomile and Elder, each three Drams, of the Flowers of Red Roses
and Balaustins, each one Ounce; these with the addition of Honey of Roses and
Oil of Myrtles were boiled to the consistence of a Plaster in red Wine, and at
Bedtime an Anodyne Draught was given to cause rest.

The next Morning the Patient was somewhat relieved, and when the Dressings
were taken off, the Tumor and Inflammation seemed less. This way of dressing
was continued with Compress and Bandage, and the Humor was in few Days dried
up, and the Foot seemed well; but there appeared again a Swelling on the Foot,
and Apostumated in the Sole of the Foot in three several places, which were
opened with a Caustic, to prevent the increase of the Matter, and the Eschars
were divided to give a vent, and they were dressed with Basilicon and the
Plaster as before, and the flowing of the Matter was endeavored to be hindered
daily by Compress and Bandage; but the Position of the Foot gave way, and it
sunk lower, so that there was a necessity of applying another Caustic, which
proved effectual to the Discharge of it; so that the upper Orifices healed, but
this last Eschar separated slowly, and left the great Tendon bare; the
Separation was furthered by the use of Oil of Turpentine with Basilicon applied
warm, and the Tendon was incarnated with a Sarcotick composed of a mixture of
Powder of Orris, Myrrh, Sarcocoll, and Mercury precipitate, with Honey of Roses
and Turpentine, and the Ulcer was cicatrized with the Epuloticks. After it was
cicatrized the Sole of her Foot was so relaxed and tender, that upon setting it
on the Ground it became very much subject to a pituitous Swelling: But by the
use of a Fomentation and a laced Stocking, the weak parts were strengthened, and
she was cured.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the Falling of the Womb.
FOR the Cure of this Disease, regard must be had to two things; the first is
to reduce the Womb to its natural place; the second is to strengthen and to
keep it there.

If the Womb be quite out or turned, the Woman must first of all render her
Urine, and a Glister must be given to Evacuate the gross Excrements that are in
the right Gut, that so the Reduction may be the easier performed: Then place
her on her Back with her Hips raised a little higher than her Head, and then
foment all that is fallen out, with a little Wine and Water lukewarm, and with
a soft Rag put it into its proper place, thrusting it back not all at once, but
wagging it by little and little from side to side. In case this be too painful,
because it is already too big and swelled, anoint it with Oil of Almonds, for
the more easy reduction of it; but wipe often the Oil, as soon as it is reduced.
But if it cannot be put up by reason of the great Inflammation and Tumor, there
is great danger that it will gangrene.

As to the second part of the Cure, which consists in the retention of the Womb
in its place, and the strengthening of it, let the Woman keep her self in Bed
upon her Back having her Hips a little raised, her Legs crossed, and her Thighs
joined together to prevent the falling of it out again. But the best way is to
put up a Pessary into the Neck of the Womb to keep it firm.

Take of Oak Bark two Ounces, boil it in two Quarts of Fountain Water, add at
the latter end an Ounce of Pomgranat-peel bruised, Red Roses, Pomgranat
Flowers, each two handfuls, and then add half a Pint of Redwine; strain it, and
bath the part affected with Flannels dipped in it in the Morning two hours before
the Woman rises, and at night when she is in Bed; continue it till the Symptom
is quite gone.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of a Dropsy and Inflation of the Womb.
THE Inflation and Dropsy are confounded by almost all Authors; but they are
to be distinguished; for there is a certain Inflation of the Womb which ought
not to be called a Dropsy, Viz. When the Womb is Inflated, and stretched
suddenly by Wind rushing in; upon which account a violent Pain is occasioned;
this often happens in Hysteric Diseases. Wherefore a Dropsy of the Womb is
twofold, one from Wind, which is like a Tympany; another from a watery Humor,
which is like a Dropsy of the Belly.

As to the Diagnostick of these Diseases, many things are to be enquired into.

First, How they may be distinguished from an universal Dropsy.

Secondly, How the Species of it may be known, viz. Whether it proceeds from
Wind, Water, or Phlegm*

Thirdly, If it arise primarily from the Womb, or be occasioned by the fault of
some other part.

Fourthly, Whether the peccant Matter be contained in the Cavity of the Womb,
or within the Membranes of it, or in Bladders.

Fifthly, How it may be distinguished from other Tumors of the Womb.

Sixthly, How it may be distinguished from being with Child.

Seventhly, How it may be distinguished from a Mola.

First, It is distinguished from an universal Dropsy, for that in a Dropsy of
the Womb, the Tumor possesses more the bottom of the Womb, and there is not so
soon a paleness and wasting of the whole Body, as in an universal Dropsy.
Besides, in a Dropsy of the Womb, the thirst and dryness of the Tongue is not
considerable, and Wind breaks out by intervals, or a little Water flows out,
which manifestly show, that Wind or Water is contained in the Womb.

Secondly, The Species of Dropsies in the Womb are thus distinguished, if it be
occasioned by Wind, the bottom of the Belly sounds being struck; there are
pricking pains in the Belly, which sometimes run through the Diaphragm,
Stomach, Loins, Navel, and other parts, and sometimes the Wind does evidently
break through the Neck of the Womb; the Disease grows worse upon eating and
drinking, and they often belch, and are better after it; they sometimes
perceive a pain in the Region of the Hypogaster, so that they cannot bear an
Hand laid on it; these signs are also in an Inflation of the Womb; but there is
this difference, for an Inflation is but for a small space, and a Dropsy from
Wind continues much longer.

But if a Dropsy of the Womb is occasioned by Water, that Region appears soft
and flaccid, for Wind causes a tension; there is a greater weight in the part,
and a sound as it were of Water floating, and Water sometimes drops from the
part. And if it proceed from Phlegm, there is a greater softness and flaccidity
of the part, which daily increases, and afflicts the neighboring parts with
oedematous Swellings.

Thirdly, If there be signs of the whole Bodies being ill affected, as by long
or acute Fevers, by immoderate Hemorrhagies, by weakness of the Stomach,
swelling of the Liver or Spleen, or by other obstinate Diseases of those parts,
by which the Dropsy of the Womb began, and increased with them; there is good
reason to conjecture that the Matter of the Dropsy is received in those parts;
but if when the whole Body is well, such a Tumor happens, and succeeds
particular Diseases of the Womb, as hard Labor, suppression of the Courses, or
too large an Evacuation of them, or Ulcers and Tumors, we may guess that the
Dropsy of the Womb proceeds from them.

Fourthly, The Matter which is contained in the cavity of the Womb causes a
much greater Tumor than when it is contained within the Membranes.

Fifthly, a Dropsy of the Womb may be distinguished from Tumors that proceed
from a Phlegmon, or an Erysipelas, because in these there is a Fever and Pain
upon the least touching; it may be distinguished from the Scirrhous, or
Cancerous Tumor by the hardness that resists the Finger.

Sixthly, When a Woman is with Child, the Tumor is not equal and depressed,
but thrusts it self out above the Navel; and when a Woman is with Child, after
some Months she is most commonly better; but the longer a Dropsy lasts, the
worse it grows, and the motion of the Child is plainly to be felt after the
third or fourth Month; yet in a Dropsy that arises from Wind, a palpitation
may be sometimes perceived in the Womb, and when a Woman is with Child, the
Breasts swell, but in a Dropsy they wax small.

Seventhly, In a Mole there is a weight felt in the Body, which is not
perceived in a Dropsy of the Womb, and when the Sick lies on either side, a
weight is perceived, as if a Stone rolled thither. Moreover, in a Mole there
are violent Fluxes of the Courses by intervals, namely, every third or fourth
Month, which does not happen in a Dropsy of the Womb; and lastly, in a Mole
the Breasts swell, and have Milk in them sometimes, but there is no such thing
in a Dropsy.

As to the Prognostics, a Simple Inflation of the Womb is not dangerous, but
if it continue long, it may turn to a Dropsy.

If Wind or Water is contained in the cavity of the Womb it is easier cured
than when it is included in the Membranes, or in Bladders.

This Disease is cured much the same way as a Dropsy or Green Sickness is; but
some things peculiar to this Disease must be added: If the Disease be new, and
occasioned by an Obstruction of the Courses, and if there be a fullness of
Blood, Bleeding may be proper, otherwise it is injurious; but Purging is always
necessary, and must be often repeated, and after sufficient Purging,
Aperitives, Diuretics, and such things as move the Courses must be used, to
which may be added the following.

Take the Roots of Smallage, and Madder, each half an Ounce, of the Leaves of
Savin, Feverfew, and Pennyroyal, each one Pugil, of the Seeds of Daucus, one
Dram, boil them in the Broaths of young Pigeons, and let her take it strained
in the Morning for many Days. But before she takes the Broth, let her swallow
one of the following Pills,

Take of the best Castor, Myrrh and Madder, each half a Dram, of Saffron one
Scruple, with the Juice of Lemons, make nine Pills; after the use of which
Medicine, violent Exercise must be used, that thereby the Excrements bred in
the Bowels, and in the habit of the Body may be dissipated, and also all that
which is contained in the Womb, the Skins being broken by the violence of the
Exercise, and if the Woman Vomit easily, it will be proper to Vomit her twice a
Week. The following Bolus is very effectual to discuss the Humor contained in
the Womb.

Take of Mineral Borax, half a Dram, of Saffron half a Scruple, with the Juice
of Savin, make a Bolus, to be taken twice a Week.

Sudorificks are also very proper; in the mean while the heat of the Stomach
must be strengthened by things taken inwardly, and outwardly applied. The Womb
must also be strengthened by proper Topical Medicines: First by Fomentations
and Baths made of a Decoction of the Roots of Briony, and wild Cucumber, of the
Leaves of Dwarf Elder, Mercury Elder, Wild-marjoram, Calaminth, Wormwood, Rue,
Sage, Marjoram, Thym, Bays, Pennyroyal, Mugwort, of the Seeds of Broom,
Daucus, Cummin, Anise, Fennel, of the Berries of Laurel and Juniper, of the
Flowers of Camomile, Melilot, Rosemary, of which may be made Bags to be boiled
in Wine.

But that the forementioned Fomentation may succeed the better, you must apply
it before and behind, and the Sick ought to Sweat, if she can, in the Bed or in
a Bath.

In a windy Dropsy dry Fomentations are more beneficial, with Bags made of
Grommel, Salt, Cummin and Bran, torrified in a Drying Pan, and sprinkled with
Wine.

After the Fomentation, anoint the lower Belly with the Oils of Nard, Dill,
Rue, Wormwood, Southern-wood, and if they are Chimically prepared they will be
the more effectual.

After the Anointing the Belly, apply the Plaster of Lawrel-berries, or a
Pultiss made of Cows-dung, Sheeps-dung, of the Seeds of Smallage, Parsley, and
Cummin boiled in Honey. Glisters must be frequently injected, made of a
Decoction of Wormwood, Wild-marjoram, Pennyroyal, Rue, Centaury, and the like;
or of the Oils of Rue, Nutmeg, Dill, and Whitewine, or in Malago Sack, wherein
must be dissolved Benedictum Laxativum, Diaphenicon, Hiera diacolocinthidos,
Turpentine, Confection of the Lawrelberries, Honey of Rosemary, and the like.
Injections for the Womb may be prepared in the following manner to evacuate the
Humors contained in it.

Take of the Roots of Asara-bacca, three Drams, of the Leaves of Pennyroyal,
and Calaminth, each half an handful, of Savin, one Scruple, of Mechoacan, one
Dram, of the Seeds of Anise and Cummin, each half a Dram, boil them and strain
them, and in six Ounces of the Liquor, dissolve of Oils of Orris and Elder,
each one Ounce; make an Injection.

For the same purpose Pessaries may be made thus.

Take of Coloquintida and Mechoacan; each one Dram, of Nitre, half a Scruple,
with a sufficient quantity of boiled Honey; make a Pessary. or,

Take of Elaterium, half a Dram, of Figs bruised a sufficient quantity.

When the Inflation proceeds from Wind a Fume from Nutmegs is very good, and is
commended by Solinander in these words, A Woman in Childbed by exposing her
self to the Air too soon, fell into intolerable Pains, nor could be relieved by
any means, at length an Old and Skilful Midwife was called, she ordered three
Nutmegs to be grossly beaten, which she put into a Chaffing-dish with live
Coals, and placed the Chaffing-dish so, that the Fume of the Nutmegs by the
help of a Funnel inverted, passed into the VVomans Privities, and she received
the same Fume into her Mouth and Nostrils after the same manner, and as soon as
the Fumes had Penetrated, the Woman cried out presently she must go to Stool,
and as soon as she had so spoken a great noise was heard like the shooting of a
Gun, and the Woman was Cured in the same moment; and being encouraged by this
Success, I used it, says he, often in like Case, and it succeeded well.

A Cupping-glass with much Flame applied to the Navel wonderfully discusses
Wind: But when the Disease is Humoural, Issues in the Legs evacuate by degrees
the filth of the Womb. The Bath waters used inwardly and outwardly are also
very good, if the Body be not very hot. Amatus Lusitanus commends the Water or
Decoction of Camomile Flowers to ease the Pain of the Womb: In this Case he
orders four or five Ounces of it to be given at a time.

Lastly, if the Inflation happens after Delivery, there is no need of any other
Cleansing, than what is done by the Womb: But if it does not proceed well, it
must be helped with Pessaries, and Cupping-glasses applied to the Thighs, and
with other Remedies described for the Suppression of the Courses: And if there
be VVind, the Fume of Nutmegs above proposed are very proper.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of a Cancer of the Breast and Womb.
A Cancer is the name of a Tumor arising as it is thought from an adust, or
atrabilious Humor. It is round, unequally hard, and if not inflamed, of a
Livid or Brown Color with exquisite pricking Pain, the Veins appear turgid in
the Skin upon the surface of the Tumor.

The remote cause of this Tumor is either a fault in the original Constitution
of the Body, or an acquired one, as by a Bruise, or the like; or by an error in
Diet.

The differences of Cancers are many; some are with Ulceration, others not;
some are loose and moveable, and so hard that they have knocked one against
another like Peebles; some are fixed to the Bones, and some lie superficially;
other differences may be taken from the Humor to which they owe their
Original. If the Matter be not very Corrosive, their growth is slow, and they
are not very painful. These are called the milder sort, and some of them
affecting the Breast have been palliated a long time with easy remedies.

A Lady labored many Years of an ulcerated Cancer, it eat deep into the left
Breast, and was fixed to the Ribs, but not with much pain; in progress of time
the Lips inverted, and united as it were, and lay covered with a crusty Scab,
the Humor in the mean while spent it self upon the Nerves and caused a Species
of the Palsy in some parts of her Body, and the Gout in others. She lived
long, and in her latter Age tolerably healthful; this is to be judged a
Scirrhous Cancer, yet by ill management, or by an increase of acrimony, this
and such like frequently terminate in raging Cancers, and torment the Patient
with exquisite darting pains; an instance or two whereof I shall set down, to
make the Young Practitioner more cautious in undertaking the Cure of them.

A Woman had a painful hard Swelling in one of the Glands of her Breast; she
was advised to forbear the use of all Cataplasms and Plasters that might heat
her Breast, and to dress it with Valentia Stramonij, but she was otherwise
persuaded, and thereby increased her Misery. About half a Year after she had a
stinking sordid Ulcer with lips turned out, and the Breasts fixed to the Ribs,
with a hard unequal Swelling reaching to the Clavicle and side of the Neck,
Apostumated in some parts and Ulcerated in others, from the pectoral Muscle it
crept up to the Shoulder, and affected the Armpits, and by the compression of
the Vessels the upper part of the Arm Swelled Scirrhous, from the Elbow
downwards it was Oedematous to the Fingers ends, she made use of many Eminent
Physicians and Chyrurgeons in the City, but dyed miserably.

There is also a sort of Bleeding Cancers, which become such either from the
eruption of some Vessel, which makes the vent often at the Nipple or some other
Pin-hole, the Breast remaining whole, or else from the spreading of infinite
capillary Vessels in a Fungus, which in ulcerated Cancers is not rare. These do
very much spend the Strength of the Patient, so that she soon Dies exhausted
and tabid.

Of all the Diseases which afflict Mankind, the Cancer is the most grievous and
rebellious, and is generally Incureable by reason of its corrosive and
malignant venom fermenting in the Humors, which so far as we can find, yields
neither to Purging, Bleeding, Repellents, Discutients, Suppuratives, nor any
other Medicine, inward or outward. Those which lie superficially under the Skin
may be attempted by the Chyrurgeon's Hand, or if they rise from an External
Cause, as a Bruise, or the like, tho they lie deeper they may be cut off or
otherwise extirpated: But those that arise from a corrosive quality in the
Humors, though they may be cut off, or otherwise extirpated, yet the success
is most doubtful.

The Cure of a Cancer in general consists in these Intentions,

First, in the Generation of good Blood.

Secondly, In Correcting and Evacuaating the Atrabilious Humors in the Body.

Thirdly, In preventing the Growth of the Tumor, and disposing it to
Discussion.

We endeavor to perform the First intention by an exact regulation of Diet*
and way of Living, advising to abstain from such sharp, salt, and gross Meats*
as may dispose the Blood to acrimony* and order such as are Cooling and
Moistning, of easy Digestion and of good Nourishment.

The Second intention is to prepare and purge all the acrimonious Humors; and
if there be a Plethora, or a Suppression of the Hemorrhoids, or Courses, a Vein
may be opened and a Glister given, and the Humors may be also evacuated by a
convenient Purge. as

Take of the three Cordial Flowers, one Handful, of Sena three Drams, of Dodder
of Thym, two Drams, infuse them in Whey, and strain it, add an Ounce of the
Purging Syrup of Apples, and six Drams of Manna; mingle them.

Traumatick Decoction are also usually prescribed.

Take of the Roots and Leaves of Avens, of the greater Celandine, of Burnet,
Groundsel, Gentian, Plantain, each one Handful, boil them in two parts of Water
and one of Wine to the quantity of three Pints, sweeten it with Sugar, and let
a Pint be drunk thrice aday*

The following Electuary is also reckoned very good.

Take of the Powders of Frogs and Snails prepared, each half an Ounce, of the
Powder of River Crabs, one Ounce, of the Bone of a Stags Heart, one Dram, of
Citron Peel Candied, one Ounce, of the Conserve of Borrage and Wood Sorrel,
each two Ounces, of the Syrup of the juice of Citron and of Gilly-flowers, a
sufficient quantity, make an Electuary. Take the quantity of a Chestnut, Morning
and Evening.

Emulsions, Distilled Milks, and Opiates are also very proper to attemperate
the Acrimony and to ease the Pains.

The Third intention is to restrain the growth of the Tumor, and to discuss it
moderately. Whilst the Humors are are evacuating, we apply Repellents, and
afterward we add Discutients; the Repellents ought to be of the milder sort,
lest they render the Humors too gross and unfit for resolution, as Lettice,
Purstain, Plantain, Navel-wort, Nightshade and Housleek: Lentils boiled in
Vinegar, also Clay tempered with Vinegar.

The Medicines ready Compounded are the White Ointment, Nutritum Populeon of
Tutty and of burnt Lead, and Lead it self.

All the Ointments prescribed, must be beaten up in a Leaden Mortar. Thin
milled Lead is usually worn in this Case; so are Plates of Gold. Oil of Frogs
is commended, and is made by Baking them with Butter in their Mouths. Frogs
Spawn Water is proper to be used in Summer, Clothes being dipped in it and
applied, but they must be shifted as often as they dry. But in the Winter the
following Cerat is better.

Take of a green Frog, three Drams, of the Powder of River Crabs burnt, half an
Ounce, of Lytharge of Gold, two Ounces, of burnt Lead and Tutty prepared, each
two Drams, of Cerus, six Drams, of the Juice of Nightshade and Plantain, each
six Ounces, of Vinegar, two Ounces, of Oil of Frogs, and of Populeon Ointment,
each three Ounces, of the Suet of a Calf, four Ounces, of Wax a sufficient
quantity, make a Cerat. Or,

Take of the Seeds of White Poppy, one Ounce, of the Seeds of Henbane, half an
Ounce, of Opium, one Dram, of Gum Arabic, half an Ounce, powder them, and with
the Oils of Roses and Myrtles, each three Ounces, of Wax a sufficient quantity,
make a Cerat.

This is proper in case of Pain, in the extremity whereof you may double the
quantity of Opium, or in such Cases you may Foment the Tumor with a Decoction
of Poppy Heads, Flowers of Roses, and tops of Mellilot, and apply the following
Ointment.

Take of Old Treacle, one Ounce, of the Juice of River Crabs half an Ounce, of
the Juice of Lettice, and of Oil of Roses, each one Ounce and an half, of the
Yolks of Eggs roasted under the Embers number two, of Camphor, half a Dram,
beat them in a Leaden Mortar*

The Discutients are Ceterach, Agrimony, Ducksmeat, Scabious, Thorn-apple, the
Juice of Coriander, Frogs, Snails, River Crabs, Raisins of the Sun stoned and
beaten, with Rue and Garden Nightshade made into a Pultits are proper to
resolve them.

Many such Medicines are designed to this purpose, Cancers requiring variety of
Applications.

If notwithstanding all your Endeavors, the Tumor increases, and is like to
ulcerate, you may do well to forewarn the Patient of the danger, and if it be
loose, propose the extirpation of it, propose it to them, lest afterward they
desire it when it is too late. But to undergo this Operation Successfully, the
Patient ought to be of a strong Constitution, and of a pretty good habit of
Body, and not in declining Age, when the Courses are ceased. It were also to be
wished that the Cancer took its original from some Accident or Bruise, and the
like; and the Operation ought to be performed in the Spring or Autumn of the
Year.

For a Cancer of the Womb Topics must be applied, which moderately Bind and
Cool.

Take of Oil of Myrtles and of Roses, each two Ounces, of the Juice of
Nightshade, and of Housleek, each one Ounce, beat them all in a Leaden Mortar
with a Leaden Pestle till they grow black, then add of Lytharge and of Ceruss
washed in Scabious water, each three Ounces, of Tutty prepared two Drams, of
Camphir, ten Grains, make a Liniment, wherewith Anoint the Part three or four
times a day.

The following is said to be better, and with it the Tumors of the Paps, which
are counted Cancerous may be Cured.

Take of the Oil of Yolks of Eggs, two Ounces, of the Juice of Nightshade and
Speedwel, or of Housleek, each half an Ounce, of crude Mercury two Drams, stir
them about in a Leaden Mortar with a Leaden Pestle, till they acquire the
consistence of a Liniment.

The foresaid Liniments are to be applied to the Womb with a long Tent, or with
a Wax Candle wrapped round with a Rag: But Injections may be much easier used.

Take of Barley water, half a Pint, of the waters of Nightshade and Plantain,
each two Ounces, of the water of speedwel one Ounce, of the white Troches of
Rhasis, two Drams, of Sacharum Saturni one Dram, make an Injection.

If the Pain be very violent add to four Oounces of the Injection, one Ounce of
Syrup of Poppies. If the Cancer be Ulcerated, the Dose of the Mercury to be
added to the foresaid Liniment must be increased, and the Ashes of River Crabs
may be conveniently added.

But all these things are not sometimes sufficient to appease the violent Pain,
which sometimes will not suffer the Sick to sleep or rest, so that we are
forced sometimes to use Narcoticks, and indeed, they are not injurious in this
Disease.

I knew a Woman, that was affected with a Cancer in her Breast, who took every
Night for four Months, two or three Grains of Laudanum, and was much relieved
thereby.

If much Blood flow from a Cancer ulcerated, as it often happens; inject into
the Womb the Juice of Plantain with a little Frankincense.

Lastly, Seeing a perfect Cure cannot be expected, whether the Cancer be
ulcerated or not, we must endeavor to hinder the breaking of it, and the
increase of it, when it is broken, and in both we must qualify the violence of
the Pain by such things as evacuate the whole Body, and by other Remedies which
alter and evacuate the melancholy Humor, and hinder its growth, as by Bleeding
in the Arm, the Hemorrhodial Veins, in the Foot, by the use of Potions,
Apozems, Juleps, Broth, Milk, Whey, Mineral Waters, and the like, which are
commonly prescribed; but Purging must more especially be repeated.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Worms, and of the Stone of the Womb.
THough many are of the Opinion that Worms are Generated only in the
Intestines, yet it is manifest by Experience, and the Testimony of Learned Men,
that they are Bred in many other parts of the Body, as in putrid Ulcers in the
Teeth, in the Ears, in the Reins, and in the Bladder, though rarely, by reason of
the acrimony and saltness of the Urine. In the Womb also Worms are sometimes
generated, though it be rare, because the passages of it are so open that they
will not suffer the Humors, though they are gross and crude, to continue there
so long as to generate Worms. They are most commonly Ascarides, and they are
most commonly in the Privities, or in the Neck of the Womb, they are very like
those that are in the right Gut, perhaps they creep thither from the Anus.

The material cause of Worms, is a cold phlegmatic and crude Humor, which is
apt to putrify.

When there are Worms in the Womb, the whole Body is restless and uneasy, the
Mouth of the Womb is always moist, the Women are thin and weak, and sometimes
the Worms are expelled with the Courses, and sometimes they may be seen, the
Lips of the Privities being opened. Women so afflicted sleep disturbedly, and
often wake in a fright, they have disorderly Fevers, and all other Symptoms
which appear in Worms of the Intestines.

As to the Cure, we must endeavor to hinder the generation of them, and to
kill them when they are generated; this may be done by three sorts of Remedies.

First, By a thin hot and drying Diet, by acid and bitter Meats, yet they must
consist of good Nourishment, and be easily concocted, and that are free from
all crudity; the flesh of Chickens, of Hens, of small Mountain Birds, and the
Broth of them with the juice of a Lemon are good: Among Fruits Oranges,
Cappares, Olives with Vinegar: Among Herbs, Endive, Sow-thistle, and Groundsel:
Let her Drink be a Decoction of Cinnamon, Rubarb, the Seeds of Purslain, the
Roots of China, Scorzonera, or Sarsaparilla. All Meats of Milk, Fish, and
whatever generates Phlegmatic Humors must be avoided, and full Feeding, and a
disorderly course of Diet.

Secondly, Those things must be used which Concoct, and Purge off Phlegmatic
Humors; as Syrup of Wormwood, Succory, Succory with Rhubarb, of the acid juice
of Citron with the waters of the same Herbs, or of Grass, Purslain, and Sorrel,
and the Phlegm must be constantly Purged off with Pills of Mastick, of Agarick,
or the like.

Thirdly, Such things must be used as kill Worms, and uterine Glisters to that
purpose must be injected made of a Decoction of Wormwood, Southernwood, and
Centaury with Allom. Or,

Take of Mint, Calaminth, Pennyroyal, each one Handful, boil them till the
third part of the Water is consumed, mingle Honey with it and inject it. Or

Take of the Decoction of Lupins six Ounces, of Aloes three Drams, of Honey one
Ounce, which may be injected also with the like quantity of Decoction of
Mercury and Wormwood; or the following Pessary may be used.

Take of Bulls Gall, one Dram and an half, of the Powder of Lupins, two Drams,
of Oil of Wormwood, two Ounces, of good White Wind, half an Ounce, mingle them,
and dip the Cotton for the Pessary in it.

At the same time apply to the Region of the Womb the following Ointment.

Take of the Leaves of Wormwood, Costmary, and Calaminth, each one Handful, of
Peach Leaves half an Handful; boil them in the sharpest Vinegar, or in Wine for
the Womb, to the strained Liquor, add of Aloes and Agarick, each half an Ounce,
of Coloquitida three Drams, of Oil of bitter Almonds, and of Bulls Gall, each a
sufficient quantity, with a little Wax, or without it, make an Ointment. You
may also make a Cataplasm of the same Herbs boiled and bruised with the Meal of
Lupins, Oil of Wormwood, and Ox Gall, and the Pill of Aloes, or of Hiera, must
be taken often, a Scruple at a time.

That the Stones grow in every part of the Body, Galen testifies, as in the
Bladder, Reins, Liver, Intestines, Lungs; and therefore it is no strange thing
if they should be generated also in the Womb, as Aetius writes: but they are
not altogether like the Stones of the Bladder, nor are they loose, for if so
they could not continue in the Womb; but they grow to the Tunicks of the neck
of the Womb. The causes of them are the same, as of the Stone in the Bladder,
namely, gross and viscid Humors. The signs of them are a dull pain in the
Womb, and the Courses are inordinate, and a Finger being put up the Anus, the
Stone may be selt. But if the Stone be in the neck of the Womb, the pain is
great, and affects the neighboring parts, and the Womb, and the Woman can not
sit without pain.

As to the Cure, an emollient and lubricating course of Diet must be used, and
the gross and viscid Humors must be Purged off: But the chief part of the Cure
is to be performed by extracting the Stone, but first the parts must be quieted
by an emollient Glister made of a Decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Fenugreek, of the Seeds of Flax, and a great deal of Oil of Roses and of
Lillies to make the Manual operation the easier, which must be performed in the
following manner.

The Woman's Thighs being spread, the Surgeon must thrust up two of the
Fingers of his Left Hand, and with his Right he must press the upper part of
her Belly to force the Stone out, and this may be the easier done, if the Stone
be in the Neck of the Womb, but if it be in the Womb it self, the Operation
will be more difficultly performed: But if the stone grow to the mouth or neck
of the Womb, and cannot be extirpated this way, it must be cut out, the Woman
being rightly placed, and the parts dilated with a Speculum Matricis, which
being done, those things must be injected into the Womb which cure Ulcers,
first, Astringents, and such things as stop Blood, and afterward drying
things, and an exact Course of Diet must be ordered, and the Woman must be
Purged twice in a Year, lest the Stone should grow again.

The Cure of the Stone in the Bladder in Women is to be managed much in the
manner as in Men, but it seldomer happens, and is easier Cured, because the
passage of the Urine is larger, and shorter, and straighter in Women. But if it
happen, and must be extracted, the Surgeon must put two of the Fingers of
his Left Hand, (the Woman being placed as above directed) into the Privities,
and with his Right he must press the Bladder, and force the Stone to the neck
of it, so as to make it pass the Muscle that shuts the neck of the Bladder, and
then a little above the wings of the Privities, at which place the Stone occurs
he must cut, so that the Stone may be extracted with a pair of Forceps. Lastly,
the Ulcer must be Cured by Astringent, and Incarnating Medicines.

CHAP. XL.
Of a Condyloma, of the Hemorrhoids, Warts, Thymus, Acrocordo, and a Ficus, and
of Scabs of the Privities, and of Chaps, and Clefts of the same.
A Condyloma is a Tubercle arising from an Inflammation, and resembles the
Knucles when the Hand is shut. It is cured by four kind of Remedies, First by
Diet and Purging Medicines that respect the antecedent cause; Secondly, By
drying and repelling Topics, if the Callus be newly bred, as by Baths and
Vapors of a Decoction of Vervain, of the Leaves of Brambles, of Acacia,
Ivy-leaves, to which must be added, by reason of the Pain, Camomile Flowers;
and if the Condyloma be Inflamed such things must be used as mitigate the pain,
as the following decoction.

Take of the leaves of Melilot, Mallows, and Marshmallows, each half an
handful, of the Seeds of Flax and Fenugreek, each three Drams, of the Flowers
of Camomile two Pugils, boil them, and to a Pint of the Decoction, add two
Ounces of Roses, inject it by a Syringe; or warm Milk may be so injected. If
the Condyloma being old is grown hard, and does not yield to the foresaid
Medicines, Aetius commends as a wonderful remedy Mineral Misy mixed with
Turpentine; or instead of it Roman Vitriol, a Dram of the Troches of Steel
reduced to powder, and mixed with the Oils of Roses and Wax, and made into an
Ointment with half an Ounce of the Juice of Mullein is also very good. The
following is also much commended.

Take of Tuty thrice burnt and washed, of Ceruss washed, of the Froth of Silver
washed, each two Drams, of the Yolks of two roasted Eggs, Wax, Soap and Oil of
Roses, each two Ounces; make an Ointment.

But if these things do no Good, it must be cut off, and if there be many of
them, they must be burnt off, and the Ulcer must be regularly cured: but
cutting or burning in these parts is dangerous and must not therefore be used
unless there be an absolute necessity.

If there be Hemorrhoids, they are either in the Mouth or Neck of the Womb, or
in the Womb it self, or in the Privities; they are as diverse as those in the
Anus, they are either blind or open; they are with or without Inflammation;
they differ also upon their bigness, Number and Figure; they are occasioned by
Chaps, and by a Condyloma, but chiefly by gross and feculent Humors falling
upon the Veins of the Womb, or by an inordinate defluxion of Menstruous Blood
into those Veins. This Disease may be known by a weight in those Parts, and
Women so affected are weak and subject to Spontaneous Lassitude: But if the
Hemorrhoids of the Womb, or Anus flow moderately, they cure and prevent many
Diseases, and the unseasonable stopage of them occasions the Falling Sickness,
and many other Diseases. They are cured as the Piles of the Anus.

There are four sorts of Warts of the Womb and Privities.

The First are Acrocordones, which hang as by a Thread.

Secondly, Thymus which is a rough and oblong Tumor, and without pain, if it
be gentle and white, or redish; but if it be Malignant it is livid and painful.

Thirdly, Ficus or Mariscae, which differ from a Thymus only in bigness.

The Fourth is Clavus, which is a hard white and round prominence like the
Heads of Corns. These Tumors in general are of a Scirrhous nature, and come by
immoderate Copulation, and are sometimes Malignant, by reason of the
French Pox. The gentle are known by their white or redish color, and by the
absence of pain, the Malignant by their hardness, leaden color and pain.

They are Cured by four sorts of Remedies.

First, By a Diet that is not apt to breed gross Humors, and by Catharticks to
Purge such Humors off, and by Sweats, if they are obstinate.

Secondly, By discussing Medicines, which are most proper for the Thymus and
Clavus as by dried Sage, with fat Figs, or Old-shoes burnt and powdered and
mixed with Wine and applied: But the Soles of Shoes and a dried Gourd powdered
by themselves, and afterward mixed and applied with Wine to Warts do very
well, or you may take of Rue and Pennyroyal, each equal parts; let them be
burnt and powdered; the Bark of Frankincense, the Leaves of Basil Wine and
Vinegar, Shoomakers Ink, boil them in the Water that drops out of a Vine cut;
moisten the part with this Decoction; this is reckoned an excellent Medicine.

Prick with a Needle the Eye of a Goat newly killed, and anoint daily the part
with the Liquor that flows from it, and within Six Days, as Aetius writes;
Myrmecies will be extirpated, which consist of broad Roots, and they itch.

Thirdly, Things that burn and eat are proper for Myrmecies and Acrocordos, as
the juice of wild Cucumber with Salt, or the like: But corroding things must
not continue long upon the part, for when they have been applied an hour or
thereabout, the part must be washed twice or thrice with Astringent Wine; and
the Neighboring parts must be defended by an Ointment made with Bolearmenick,
sealed Earth, Rose Water and Vinegar.

Fourthly, If they may be cut off, they ought to be so, but some bind the root
of these with a Horse-hair; and straighten it daily till they fall off.

In the Privities and Mouth of the Womb, especially in such Women, as have the
French Pox, Pustles arise; they often itch; they are occasioned by the
abundance, and grossness of a bilious and adust Humor, or by the French Pox,
they may be easily seen by a Speculum Matricis. They are to be cured by four
sorts of Remedies.

First, By Meats of good juice, and by abstaining from all acrid, acid and salt
things.

Secondly, By Universal Evacuations, as by Bleeding and Purging, and such
things, as attemperate the Humor must be used, as Syrup of Borrage, Violets,
Fumitory and Succory, and the like. Decoctions of Sarsa, or of Guiacum with
Sweating are also very proper, and Purges and Sudorificks must be often
repeated.

Thirdly, Topics must be applied, and if the Pustles are gentle bathing is
proper, and afterward wash the part with hot Wine and Nitre.

For Pustles and Scabs the following Ointment of has bin found very successful.

Take of the Roots Elecampane, Burnet and sharp pointed Dock, each three
Ounces, of Fumitory Water Six Ounces, of the sharpest Vinegar, or of the best
Wine, for Diseases of the Womb, two Ounces; having bruised the roots well,
infuse them a day and a night, then boil them, and press them strongly; to the
strained Liquor add half a pound of Turpentine, of Oil of Roses three Ounces,
of Wax half an Ounce, boil them again to the Consumption of half, and add of
Sulphur one Ounce and an half, of Cerus five Ounces, of Roch-allom half an
Ounce, of Sal Gemma two drams, of Oil of Eggs, six Drams, mix them by beating
of them well together, then wash the whole Composition in Fumitory Water.

But if the Pustles are Malignant, and Obstinate, you must use stronger
Desiccatives, which correct the Venom of the Pustles, and at the same time you
must use sudorific decoctions.

Take of Plantain and Rose Water each four Ounces, of Sal Gemma, Nitre, and
Allom, each two Drams, of Sublimate one Dram and an half, boil them till a
third part is consumed; to the strained Liquor, add of Verde-greese one
Scruple; after you have used this two or three days, you must forbear a while,
and use gentler things, and return again to the use of it, till the Pustles are
quite taken off.

This moreover must be added, which is of excellent use, having first bathed
with a decoction of Fumitory, Lupins, Beans, and a little Salt.

Take of the Roots of Elecampane cut small four Ounces, boil them well in a
sufficient quantity of Water with a little Vinegar or Wine, then beat them in a
Mortar and Pulp them through a Sieve, and add of fresh Lard three Ounces, of
Juice of ground Elder, and of Fumitory, each one Ounce and an half, of
Quicksilver extinguished in fasting Spittle, or in the Yolk of an Egg, half an
Ounce, of Ceruss and Lytharge, each one Ounce, of Brimstone one Dram and an
half, stir them about for an hour, and mix the Powders by degrees.

But because Pustles continue sometimes a long while, you must make an Issue in
the Leg, before they are quite dried up.

Clefts and Chaps are sometimes in the Mouth of the Womb, as in the Anus,
Hands, Lips, and Nipples, by reason of violent Cold, a North Wind, and the
like; they are small, long and narrow Ulcers, sometimes deep, and sometimes
only superficial; they are also ocasioned by hard labor, by Acrid and
Corroding Humors, or by a great dryness in the Womb.

They are to be cured by five sorts of Remedies; by a moistening and
smoothening Diet, avoiding such things as are acrid, and stop the Belly;
therefore let the Woman eat Chicken, Mutton, Veal, and Broaths made of Succory,
Bugloss, Burrage, Spinach, and the like; let her Drink be rather Beer than
Wine, she must avoid Cheese and Spices, Violent Exercise, and Copulation: And
if Acrid humors be the cause, she must be blooded, if there be a plenitude;
afterward she must be Purged with Cassia, Manna, and the like, and the Humors
must be attemperated with the Syrups of Succory, Roses, Violets, Borrage,
Fumitory, and with the Waters of the same Herbs. If they are occasioned by hard
labor, and Bleed, the Blood must be stopped by the following Uterine Glister.

Take of the leaves of Plantain one handful, of Roses four Pugils, boil them
in a sufficient quantity of Water till half is consumed. To six Ounces of the
strained Liquor add of the Powders of Dragons Blood, Bole armenick, Myrrh,
Frankincense, Birthwort, each half a Dram.

If the Chaps are dry, hot, and itch, the part must be Fomented with things
that moisten, as the following Decoction.

Take of the flesh of Frogs, Snails, and River Crabs, each two Drams, of Barley
two Pugils, of Mallows and Ducks meat, each one handful, of Flax Seeds one
Ounce, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, and let six Ounces be
injected in the manner of a Vterine Glister, and anoint the part affected with
the Ointment of Ceruse with Camphor; and if the pain and heat be much, anoint
it with the following Ointment.

Take of the Populeon Ointment one Ounce, of Camphor two Scruples, of Ceruss
washed in Rose Water one Scruple, and the white of one Egg, mingle them.

Oil of Flax hot is also good for Chaps of the Anus and Womb, so is Pomatum;
Oil of the Yolks of Eggs, or of Flax Seeds stirred about in a Leaden Mortar is
also proper, and if they are occasioned by dryness, Barley boiled in Water in
Linen Baggs, and applied for nine days are very beneficial. But if the Chaps
are malignant, apply the following.

Take of good Aqua vitae one point, of Sublimate powdered one Scruple, of
Verdegrease half a Scruple, the Whites of three Eggs, stir them well together,
and anoint the part every other day, and apply over a Plaster of Diachylon.

CHAP. XLI.
Of the Melancholy of Virgins and Widows.
MElancholy befalls Virgins, Widows, and Barren Women, oftener than other
Women; there are two Causes of it.

First, the Nature of a Woman which is tender, and the Mind easily dejected.

Secondly, Gross Blood.

The signs of it are a Pulsation about the Back, which is a Symptom almost
perpetual in Women so affected; the Skin is sometime squalid, wrinkley and
rough, especially in the Arms, Knees and joints of the Fingers; much
Cogitation, Suspicion, Shame-facedness, Dejection of Mind, disturbed Sleep,
frightful Dreams, a preposterous Judgment; the Breast is often very Hot and
has a Pulsation in it, and when the Vapor rises upwards, there is a
Palpitation of the Heart, or Fainting; there is a rising in the Throat, as in
Mother-fits, the Belly is most commonly Bound, they are Thirsty, and subject to
Watchings, to Despair, and to Weeping and Sorrow, and sometimes the
Melancholy is so high, as that they grow almost Distracted, and are ready to
make away with themselves.

There are three Degrees of this Disease, according to which the Danger is more
or less, and the Cure is to be varied accordingly.

The First, Is when the Signs are small.

The Second, when the Disease has lasted a long while, and has disordered the
VVomans Mind so, as that she is continually Sorrowful and Sad.

The Third, Is when the Woman, is so overcome with it, that she will not
speak, nor give any answers, and this is near to Madness.

The First Degree of this may be removed by a sparing Diet, by Exercise, and by
variety of pleasant Company, and if she be not Married, she must be Blooded in
the Arm every third or fourth Month, in the middle of the Month: But if she be
most Melancholy at the time of her Courses, she must be Blooded in the Foot two
or three days before or after them.

But if the Disease be in the Second Degree, the Curative Indications are
principally four.

The First, to hinder the Congestion of the Blood in the Womb, by such things
as force the Courses.

The Second, is to expel the Melancholy that is heapt up.

The Third, Is to discuss the VVind.

The Fourth, To provide for the Head, Heart, Womb, and the whole Body.

It is to be Cured therefore by five sorts of Remedies.

First, By a moistning Diet, as let the Dinner be of a boiled Chicken, with the
Roots of Fennel, Parsley, red Vetches, and Saffron: And the Supper of new-laid
Eggs, roasted, and stewed Prunes, or Borrage prepared with Almond-milk, by
reason of Watchings, wherewith they are much troubled; or a Ptisan with a
little Anniseeds and Cinnamon, to expel the Wind. Let the Drink be Rhenish or
VVhite-wine with Borrage flowers in it, midling Beer medicated with Elecampane
or Balm, or water boiled with the Herb Maidenhair, with the Roots of
Scorzonera, Lemon Peel, and Citronseeds. If the Belly be bound, use the
following Glister.

Take of the Roots of Fennel and Parsley, each one Ounce, of the Leaves of
Mallows, one Handful, of Polypody of the Oak, one Ounce, of the Seeds of
Bastard Saffron, Flax, and Fenugreek, each one Dram, boil them to a Pint, to
the strained Liquor add of the Oils of Dill, Camomile, Violets, and of
Brown-Sugar, each one Ounce, of Diacatholicon, half an Ounce.

Secondly, Evacuations must be used, and if there be a plenitude, Bleeding must
be ordered, and purging Medicines frequently; but the Humor must be first
prepared by the following Medicines, or the like.

Take of Syrups of Borrage, of Apples, and of Epithymum, each one Ounce, of the
waters of Borrage and Balm, each two Ounces, mingle them, and when the Woman
has used this six or eight Days, let her take every other Week one Dram of the
Pills of Aloes, of Mastick, or of Agarick; or rather because the Pills dry and
heat, let her take three or four times in a Year a Bolus made with an Ounce of
the pulp of Cassia, and two Drams of the Powder of Sena: The following Syrup is
much commended.

Take of the waters of Borrage, Succory and Hops, each ten Ounces, of the juice
of Borrage clarified eight Ounces, of the juice of fragrant Apples, six Ounces,
of the Leaves of Sena three Ounces, of the Cordial Flowers, each one Pugil, of
the Roots of Scorzonera cut small, or of Angelica, two Ounces, boil them over a
gentle Fire till the twentieth part is consumed; to the strained Liquor add of
choice Rubarb, and of Agarick trothiscated, each four Drams and an half; after
it has boiled gently, strain it out, and add of the powder of the Stone called
Lazulus prepared, and tied up in a rag two Drams, of Sugar a sufficient
quantity, make a Syrup of a moderate consistence: The Dose is three or four
Ounces.

The following Medicine is much commended.

Take of the Leaves of Spleen-wort, Pennyroyal, Maidenhair, Thym, Fumitory,
Borrage, Mugwort, and Agrimony, each half an Handful, of the Roots of Succory,
Endive, Smallage, Angelica, Fennel, Asparagus, and Eringo, each one Ounce, of
the flowers of Borrage, Stechas, Rosemary, Violets, each one Pugil and an half,
of Epithymum, and of the leaves of Sena, each half an Ounce, of Doronicum, of
the Seeds of Anise, Fenel, Basil, and Citron, each two Drams and an half, of
Cinnamon half an Ounce, of all the Sanders, each half a Dram, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water to a Quart; at the end add of the Bark of the Root
of black Hellibore, and of choice Rubarb, each four Scruples, of the stone
called Lazulus tied up in a rag, one Dram, of sweet smelling Flag, of Zedoary,
and of the Seeds of Peony decortiated, each half a Scruple, strain it, and with
a sufficient quantity of white Sugar make a clear Potion; aromatize it with one
Dram of Diamosh. The Dose is five or six Ounces.

But if these things do no good, four Grains of Stybium prepared may be safely
given; but it is best to begin with two Grains. But some in a desperate
Melancholy have not feared to give three four or five Grains of Vigo's
precipitate with an Ounce of good Wine, or in Conserve of Roses.

Thirdly things that discuss Wind must be used, and the following Glister must
be frequently injected.

Take of the Roots of Fennel, and Parsley, each one Ounce, of the Seeds of
bastard Saffron, Anise, Flax, and Fenugreek, each one Dram, of the Leaves of
Mallows, one Handful, of Polypody of the Oak, half an Handful, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water to a Pint; add of the Oils of Camomile, and Dill,
each one Ounce, and an half, of Lenitive Electuary, and of brown Sugar, each
one Ounce; make a Glister.

And it is convenient to anoint the Spleen with the following Liniment.

Take of the Decoction of Tamarisck, Capers, and Spleen-wort, each two Ounces,
of Oil of Capers, and Lillies, each one Dram, of Treacle and Mithridate, each
two Drams, with a sufficient quantity of Wax make an Ointment.

Fourthly, Such things must be used as cause Sleep, whereof there is so great
want in this Disease, that this Symptom often takes up the whole Cure; it
happens by reason of the siccity of the Brain, and therefore things that
moisten are to be used. To this purpose, the Feet and Legs are wont to be
washed with a Decoction of Mallows, Roses, Camomile, Violets, and the Flowers
of Lettice, and sometimes Henbane, and the heads of whith Poppies are added to
it, and the Head is to be Embrocated in the following manner.

Take of the foresaid Decoction a Quart, of the Oils of Poppies, and Roses,
each three Ounces, mingle them, and pour them gently being warm upon the Head;
but the Hair must be first shaved off. Afterward apply to the Head a Rag dipped
in the Oils of Roses and Camomile, or of Poppies, if the Watchings be very
great, or in Woman's or Goats Milk, and if these things are not sufficient,
anoint the Nostrils with Populeon Ointment; or take of Ointment of Roses one
Ounce, of Opium four Grains, mingle them, and anoint the Nostrils, the Temples,
and the Palms of the Hands, and the Soles of the Feet, and the Pulse, and let
her take inwardly the following Emulsion.

Take of Sweet Almonds blanched four Ounces, of the Seeds of Melons, and
Gouras, each one Ounce, of the Seeds of Lettice, and Poppies, each two Drams,
beat them in a Marble Mortar, and pour upon them a Pint of Barley water, and a
little Rose water, sweeten it with Sugar and make an Emulsion; let it be taken
just after Supper, and at Bedtime give the following Anodyne.

Take of Cowslip water, two Ounces, of Diacodium, one Ounce.

Lastly, such things must be used, as strengthen the Brain and Heart, apply the
following Epithem to the region of the Heart.

Take of the waters of Balm, Orange flowers, and Borrage, each three Ounces, of
good White Wind, two Ounces, of the Juice of fragrant Apples, one Ounces and an
half, of the Powders of Diamosck, Diambra, of the Bark of Citron, each half a
Dram, mingle them; or anoint the region of the Heart with the Ointment of
Flowers of Oranges, and let her Eat now and then Citron* Bark Candied, or the
Roots of Bugloss, or Scorzonera Candied.

But if the Disease be so high, that the Woman is plainly Delirious, which is
the third Degree of this Disease; the same Remedies in a manner must be used,
only the most effectual must be chosen, and care must be taken, that a cold and
dry Intemperies be not contracted, and therefore less Blood must be taken away,
and she must be Purged strongly with a Dram of the Pill De Lapide Lazuli, or
with the like quantity of the following.

Take of Epithymum, six Ounces, of Agarick, four Drams, of the Bark of black
Hellebore, one Dram and an half, of the species of simple Hiera, four Drams,
with Honey of Roses make a Mass. But the following Electuary is better.

Take of the Stone called Lazulus, one Dram, of the Leaves of Sena, one Dram
and an half, of the best Agarick two Drams, of the Syrup of Purslain, or of the
Juice of Fumitory or of Hops, three Ounces, of Conserve of Roses or of Violets,
one Ounce, mingle them; let her take an Ounce once a Week.

And the Body must be moistened by all means, by Baths and the like; wherewith,
and with a moistning Diet Galen cured Melancholy, and such things must be used
as provoke the Courses; but if they will not flow, the application of Leeches
to the Hemorrhoids is very proper, because Hippocrates and Galen say that
Melancholy Blood is drawn by these Veins; they may be opened two ways; by
rubbing the Fundament with a course Cloth, and by Leeehes, which must be of a
moderate bigness, and they must be taken from a clear and running Water, they
must not be green, pale, nor hairy; but reddish, and after they are taken they
must be pressed, that they may Vomit up the Venom, if they have any; then they
must be kept in a Glass full of clear Water sweetened with Sugar, and the Water
must be changed once a Week. When they are to be applied, you must Foment the
part with a Decoction of Camomile, Mallows, Mullein, and the like; then rub it,
that the Mouth of the Veins may appear, and to each of them apply a Leech; if
they will not stick, anoint the place with Chickens Blood, or the like; and
whilst they are sucking, let a hot Decoction of Camomile, Dill, Roses, and
Mallows be put under them, that the vapor of it may comfort them. A sufficient
quantity of Blood being drawn, they generally fall off of themselves; if they
do not, pinch them by the Tails, or sprinkle upon their Mouths Ashes, Salt, or
Aloes. If the Blood slow too long, apply Rags dipped in stiptick Wine, or the
white of an Egg with some astringent Powder.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Henry Bonwike, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
COllections of Acute Diseases, in five parts: 1. Of the Small Pox, and
Measles. 2. Of the Plague and Pestilential Fevers. 3. Of Continual Fevers. 4.
Of Agues, a Pleuresie, Peripneumonia, Quinsie, and the Cholera Morbus. 5. And
Lastly, Of the Bloody Flux, Miscarriage, of Acute Diseases of Women with Child,
a Rheumatism, Bleeding at Nose, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and several other Diseases.
in 8o

A Collection of Chronical Diseases, viz. The Cholick, the Bilious Cholick,
Hysteric Diseases, the Gout, and the Bloody Urine from the Stone in the
Kidneys. 8o.

Promptuarium Praxeos Medicae; Seu methodus medendi, praescriptis
Celeberrimorum Medicorum Londinensium Concinnata. Et in Ordinem Alphabeticum
Digesta. 12o.

The Complete Herbal of Physical Plants. Containing all such English and
Foreign Herbs, Shrubs and Trees, as are used in Physic and Surgery; And to the
Virtues of those that are now in use, is added one Receipt, or more of some
Learned Physician. The Doses, or Quantities of such as are prescribed by the
London Physicians, and others, are proportioned. Also Directions for making
Compound Waters, Syrups, Simple and Compound, Electuaries, Pills, Powders, and
other sorts of Medicines. Moreover the Gums, Balsams, Oils, Juices, and the
like, which are sold by Apothecaries and Druggists, are added to this Herbal;
and their Virtues and Uses are fully described. 8o

The Storehouse of Physical Practice: Being a General Treatise of the Causes
and Signs, of all Diseases afflicting Human Bodies. Together with the shortest,
plainest and safest way of curing them, by Method, Medicine and Diet: To which
is added for the Benefit of Young Practisers, several Choice Forms of Medicines
used by the London Physicians. 8o

These Five by the Author of this Treatise.
Pains afflicting Human Bodies: Their various Difference, Causes, Parts
affected, signals of Danger, or Safety; showing the Tendency, of Chronick and
Acute Diseases, for a seasonable prevention of fatal Events. With a Tract of
Issues and Setons. By E. Manwaring, M. D. 8o

The Complete Chyrugeon; or the whole Art of Chyrurgery explained, by way of
Questions and Answers. Containing an exact account, of its Principles, and
several parts; Viz. Of the Bones, Muscles Tumors, Ulcers, and Wounds Simple
and Complicated, or those by Gunshot; as also of Venereal Diseases, the
Scurvey, Fractures, Luxations, and all sorts of Chyrurgical Operations;
together with their proper Bandages and Dressings. Whereto is added a
Chyrurgical Dispensatory; showing the manner, how to prepare all such Medicines
as are most necessary for a Chyrurgeon; and particularly the Mercurial
Panacaea. Written in French by M. Le Clerc, Physician in Ordinary, and Privy
Counselor to the French King. Faithfully Translated into English. 12o

Pia Desideria, or Divine Addresses. In three Parts. 1. Sighs of the Penitent
Soul. 2. Desires of the Religious Soul. 3. Ecstasies of the Enamored Soul.
Illustrated with 47 Cuts. Written in Latin by Herm. Hugo; Englished by Edm.
Arwaker. 8o

The Art of Catechizing, or the Complete Catechist: In four Parts. 1. The
Church Catechism resolved into Easy Questions. 2. An Exposition of it, in a
continued, full, and Plain Discourse. 3. The Church Catechism resolved into
Scripture Proofs. 4. The Whole Duty of Man reduced into Questions. Fitted for
the meanest capacities, the Weakest Memories, the Plainest Teachers, and the
most uninstructed Learners. 12o

Country Conversations: Being an Account of some Discourses that happened in a
Visit to the Country last Summer, on Diverse Subjects, chiefly of the Modern
Comidies, of Drinking, of Translated Verse, of Painting and Painters, of Poets
and Poetry. 8o

The Christians Manual. In two Parts. 1. The Catechumen: or an account given by
the Young Person of his Knowledge in Religion, before his admission to the
Lords Supper; as a Ground Work for his Right understanding the Sacrament. 2. An
Introduction to the Sacrament: Or a short, safe and plain way to the Communion
Table; being an Instruction for the Worthy Receiving the Lords Supper. To which
is added the Communicants Assistant; being Devotions to that purpose: fitted to
be used before, at, and after the Receiving the Blessed Sacrament. Collected
for, and Familiarly addressed to every particular Communicant. By L. Addison,
D. D. Dean of Litchfield. 12o

Letters of Religion and Virtue to several Gentlemen and Ladies; to excite
Piety and Devotion; with some short Reflections on Diverse Subjects. 12o

A Practical Discourse of the Sin against the Holy Ghost: Showing plainly. 1.
What it is. 2. How any Person may certainly know, whether he has been Guilty of
it. Designed to bring Encouragement to the Faithful Penitent; Tranquillity of
mind to the Obedient; Joys to them that love; and the Returning Sinner from
Desparation. 8o

A Discourse Proving from Scripture and Reason that the life of Man is not
Limited by any Absolute Decree of God. By the Author of the Duty of Man. 8o

The Best Gnide to Devotion; being short Prayers, Meditations and Thanksgivings
taken out of Scripture and fitted to all occasions. 24o

Advertisement.
EXcellent Purging Pills, prepared by the Author, are to be sold, by Mr. Henry
Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. They cure the Scurvey, the
most reigning Disease of this Kingdom; they Purge the Head, Breast, Stomach and
Reins, and Cleanse the Blood; and are a very proper Purge for those that cannot
confine themselves when they want Purging, but are forced to go abroad about
their Business. The Price of each Box is One Shilling Six Pence, with
Directions for use.

FINIS.

