A Practical Discourse UPON HUMILITY. Wherein is shown, The Nature,
Reasonableness, and Usefulness thereof. Together With the Ways of Expressing
and Increasing it.

By EDWARD PELLING, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's, and Rector
of Petworth in Sussex.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple-Barr,
1694.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1 CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Humility. 5 CHAP. II. The
Loveliness of Humility. 16 CHAP. III. The Reasonableness of Humility. 23 CHAP.
IV. The Usefulness of Humility, in respect of the Peace of Mind it brings. 40
CHAP. V. The Usefulness of Humility, in respect of our Proficiency in Virtue.
63 CHAP. VI. The Usefulness of Humility, in respect of the many Evils it
preserves us from. 79 CHAP. VII. The Suitableness of Humility to the Mind of
Christ. 93 CHAP. VIII. How Humility is to be expressed, as by serving the
Honor of God. 112 CHAP. IX. How Humility is to be expressed, by not making our
own Esteem the End of our Actions. 134 CHAP. X. How Humility is to be
expressed, by acknowledging our Faults. 144 CHAP. XI. How Humility is to be
expressed by doing all good Offices, though seemingly mean, and by submission to
our Superiors. 151 CHAP. XII. How Humility is to be expressed, by being
contented with such things as we have. 166 CHAP. XIII. How Humility is to be
expressed, by keeping an Even Temper in a State of Prosperity. 179 The
Conclusion. 189
THE INTRODUCTION.
I AM now entering upon the Consideration of a Virtue, which is in a manner
proper and peculiar to the Christian Religion: It Is called Humility, or
Lowliness of Heart. A Virtue to which even the wisest of the old Pagans were
for the most part strangers: For, though they discoursed well against Pride,
and of the Unreasonableness and Folly of it; yet were they to seek, as to the
Notion and Nature, and especially as to the Practice of Humility. In fact they
were generally Proud; only some of them were more addicted to that Vice, than
others were: As 'twas said of Diogenes, when he went into Plato's fine House,
and with rudeness and insolence trod upon his rich Carpets; That he trampled
upon Plato' s Pride, and yet himself was much the proudest of the two. These
Men spoke many good things of Sobriety, Modesty, and moderation of Mind; and of
the government of Men's Desires; which may be applied to this Virtue by way of
accommodation; but I do not find that they hit rightly upon this most amiable
perfection, Humility. So far from it, that they used those words in a bad
Sense, which both in the Greek and Latin Languages signify an humble Heart:
They meant by those expressions, an abject Mind, weakness and littleness of
Spirit, Pusillanimity; a servile, slavish and cowardly Disposition; a
degenerous and mean Temper; a low, sordid Spirit that sinks presently, when a
Man meets with any Calamity or Disappointment; a pitiful, sneaking Mind, that
upon any Discouragements makes a Man to Apostatize from himself; to fall from
his Constancy, and behave himself after such a poor manner, as unbecommeth a
wise Man. These are wrong Notions of Humility; and those Philosophers expressed
their Notions by words that are too good for them; but the reason was, because
they did not well understand the Virtue it self; and, perhaps, were not very
willing to understand it; because they themselves were guilty of an epidemical
Vice to which it stands in direct opposition. The Lord Jesus, who brought Life
and Immortality to light, did in his own Person give the World a most lively
Idea of Humility; and has made the Practice of it the distinguishing Mark of
his own true Disciples: So that he is none of his, who has not, as he had, an
humble Mind: He may be a Philosopher, but he cannot be a Christian. To this
purpose some learned Critics have observed out of that place, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
where the Apostle bids us to be clothed with humility, that the Greek word
(which we render clothed) signifies a servile Habit, a short little Garment,
white but very course, that the meanest Servants were formerly wont to wear
about their Shoulders, as a particular token of their poor and low Condition; a
mark of their Servitude, like a Badge or a Livery, to distinguish them from
others. Thus the Allusion is very elegant, and the Sense plain, viz. That
Humility is the peculiar Note of Christ's Servants; a far better Ornament than
a Philosopher's Pall, under which a fastidious Mind was wont to lurk; the true
Livery of a Christian indeed; the Badge of those that belong to the Lord Jesus,
how despicable soever it may appear to the Men of this World; the
distinguishing Mark of such as serve him, who took upon himself the form of a
Servant; and came into the World, not to be ministered unto, but to minister
even his Heart Blood for the Life of the World.

In discoursing upon this admirable Christian Virtue, I shall observe my former
plain Method; and consider with what brevity I can conveniently, these Three
things as General Heads of the following Discourse.

I. Wherein the true Nature of Humility does consist. II. What Motives and
Arguments there are to enforce the Practice of it. III. After what Manner and
Way we are to express it.
A Practical Discourse UPON HUMILITY.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Humility.
FIRST as touching the true Nature of Humility. It is, in short, a modest and
slender Opinion of a Man's own self, whatever his Endowments or his
Circumstances are. An Opinion, I say; first, because the proper Seat of
Humility is in the Mind. A lowly Heart, an humble Soul; that is the thing which
God values. He looks not, as we poor Creatures do, at things outward: He
judges not of Men according to appearance; by dejected Countenances; by
lugubrious Looks; by a fordid or homely Dress; no, nor by those semblances of
Humility which some express, when they call themselves the greatest of Sinners,
the vilest People, and by a great many other hard Names, which they will not
endure their Neighbor to give them. For all these exterior semblances and
shows of Humility may very easily consist with a conceited and proud Mind. A
Lucifer may be hid under such disguises. All this may be nothing but a sort of
Ostentation; an art of gaining Esteem and Applause; the effect of Pride, and a
means of serving the Ends of it; the professions and formalities of profligate
Hypocrites. The hidden Man of the Heart is the true Ornament: Humility is that
of the Spirit, the casting down of imaginations, and of every high thing that
exalts it self against God, and the bringing into captivity every thought to
the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Pride is properly an elation of the
Mind, an high and lofty Conceit; the Sin of the Devil, and the Original Cause
of those Mischiefs which have made the World miserable, since the Devil
infected our first Parents with the Disease: And the office of this Virtue,
Humility, is to cure and clear all our Minds from the Contagion; to bring us by
Methods of Revulsion to a right Opinion of our own selves; and to lay us low in
our own Thoughts, under a due sense of what we really are.

THIS Opinion of our selves therefore must be, Secondly, very modest and
slender: For it must needs be very mean, if it be a due estimation of our
selves; no more than what is just and proportionable to our true value; exactly
according to our intrinsic worth, as we shall see hereafter, when we come to
consider what little reason any Man in the World has to be proud. I say,
through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think
of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly according
as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith, Romans 12. 13. Nothing
hinders but that a Man may esteem himself; provided, that his thoughts be fair
and equal; that he esteem himself just as he is, and just as he has of his
own. The sin is when he rates himself above his real Dignity; when he
overvalueth his Deserts; when he thinks more, and higher, and greater things of
himself than he ought. For so every proud Man does: He inhaunceth his own
Price: He raises himself beyond the true Standard: His Pride and Vanity, his
Folly and Sin lie in his overweening Conceit; in pretending to Excellencies
which he has not, and to higher things than he really deserves: In belying
himself after a most hateful manner: In fansying and boasting himself to be
some Body; in giving out, and setting himself off, like Simon the Sorcerer, to
be some great thing, when he is nothing at all; nay, when he is worse than
nothing, a miserable foolish and very wicked thing of a Man; much the more
foolish for being Proud; and much the more miserable and wicked for being like
the Devil. I say therefore to every Man among you, not to think of himself more
highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly; that is, according to the
measures of Humility; to think so as to be modest; not to set up any airy and
high-flown Conceits, but to furl their Sails, to contract their Thoughts, and
to shrink them within their due limits and scantling.

(...), says St. Chrysostom; the Apostle here calls Humility by the name of
Sobriety: And he gives us the Etymology of the word too, to show that proud Men
have quite lost their sober Senses, if ever they had any. They are no longer
Men of sound Understandings and Judgment, but things beside themselves; mere
toys and fantastical Creatures, with their Heads all puffed up, as if they had
nothing in them but Bladders and Bubbles. There are diverse overweening
Conceits, which plainly argue all proud People to be carried away with Wind and
Vapors; either, that the things they value themselves upon came not altogether
from God; but chiefly, if not solely, from themselves, and are the effects of
their own Wit and Industry: or, if from God, yet that they were bestowed as a
just Reward of their singular Merits and Dignity: That their Portion is much
greater than other Men's: That they know much better than others what to do with
their Acquisitions: That in all, or in most respects, they are more excellent
than their Neighbors, and that hardly any thing can be too much for them, if
they can but get it. And what is all this but wild Imagination? Pride without
any bottom? Folly which they themselves could not but be ashamed of, did they
seriously and soberly consider, from what Hand every Man of us receives his
All; and for what purposes; that all of us are but Stewards in our several
Places and Vocations: And that the things committed to our Trust, are no other
than Debts and Burdens; things we owe, and things we are accountable for; and
things which Men of reason will think as improper for them to value themselves
upon, as it is to be proud of Encumbrances or Poverty.

THEREFORE, to bring our hearts down to a true level, we must be very careful
to banish out of our Minds all undue and flattering Opinions of our own worth,
and to reduce our selves to David's temper, Psalm. 131. Lord, I am not
highminded: I have no proud looks: I do not exercise my self in great matters,
which are too high for me; but I refrain my Soul and keep it low; like as a
Child that is weaned from his Mother; yea, my Soul is even as a weaned Child.
Which puts me in mind of the method our blessed Savior used with his
Disciples, when they disputed among themselves, which of them should be the
greatest. Some of them would have been his chief Favorites, the principal
Officers in that glorious Kingdom, upon Earth, which they expected he would one
day set up. To cure this their ambitious Humor, he took up a little Child in
his Arms, and proposed the Child to them as an emblem of Humility; with this
solemn declaration, that very nearly concerns us all, Except ye be converted,
and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 18. 3, 4. Men die (says Seneca) in a worse condition than they were born
in; because Nature did not bring us out of the Womb with that Pride, and
Vanity, and Ambition of mind, which afterward becomes the reproach of Manhood,
and of our riper Years. Though indeed the seeds of these Vices be in us
naturally, yet it is our own fault that they grow up with us; and the design of
Christ's Religion is, to bring our Souls to an Infant state of Innocence and
Humility, that we may go out of the World as well (at least) as we came into
it; Children the second time; Children as to all Malice, as to all guile, as to
all airy and bloating conceits of our own excellencies. We can never be truly
humble as we should, and as we must be, in order to our entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven, till we leave exalting of our selves above measure. Pride,
we may be sure will keep us out of God's Presence, because it would not suffer
Angels themselves to stay in it. Their original Sin consisted, in admiring
excessively the eminent Perfections of their Nature, and the Glory of their
State. Hence followed a state of Envy at the more eminent Condition of those
Orders of Angels that were placed above them: This grew into direct Hostility
against them, and against God himself, the Maker and Disposer of them all. This
Hostility increased into open Apostasy; and all ended by God's just Judgment
in their final and eternal Damnation, and so of Glorious Angels they became
Hellish Devils.

SINCE which time, their sole business has been to propagate their Envy and
Malice, and Apostasy from the Father of us all; and so to involve Mankind
under the same Condemnation: But their chief Artifice, and that which by their
own sad Experience they have found to be the surest way, is to accelerate our
ruin by propagating their Pride; that is, loftiness of Opinion, and
haughtiness of Heart, the first Sin that ever was in Heaven; and the first Sin
those Devils brought upon the Earth. So they made our first Parents believe,
that they should be as Gods, knowing good and evil, Genesis 3. 5. And the same Sin
which cost those Angels their Celestial Paradise, did presently cost our
Parents and Us the Earthly one. Ambition and self-conceit began the War between
God and his Creatures: It was made the first Example of God's Vengeance, and
it is that which God will pursue with Vengeance to all Eternity. He resists
the proud, but gives grace to the humble, James 4. 6. This then is true
Humility, and Wisdom also, not to think our selves to be better or greater than
we are, but to rate our selves according to our just value; which cannot but be
very low, if we would but inquire into our selves impartially. But this is one
great fault, and the cause of a great many more, that every Man is apt to
overlook himself, while he prieth narrowly into the state of others: Whereas,
did we duly apply our Hearts to find out and understand our own Condition, our
Follies, and Demerits, the mere Vanity of Pride would in a little time make the
Sin a ridicule, and dethrone its dominion, by exposing it to contempt and
scorn. Its credit and prevalency proceeds from our neglects at home, because we
are such strangers to our own selves; with whom we should have the closest, and
might have the safest intimacy. We still take it for granted, That we really
are, what we willingly believe our selves to be. Either we look not into our
state at all, or else take a very transient and false view; passing over the
discovery of those flaws and humbling Idea's, which should have been the
principal Object; and perhaps fearing too, lest upon a strict Examination we
should see something to be ashamed of. By this means we scarcely judge so much
as by appearance; but bring our selves into a mistaken Reputation with our own
over-credulous Hearts; and go on in the Error, till we are past making
Righteous Judgment, and are quite out of the reach of Self-condemnation.

OUR first care therefore must be, to have as perfect a knowledge as we can of
our selves, what we are indeed, and what we deserve upon a true estimate: For
till the Account be just which we take, it will be impossible for us to be
delivered from that opiniatry, and conceitedness of Mind, which is as different
a thing from true Humility, as that Pharisee was from the poor Publican, Luke
18. His Prayer was all Heraldry, and Ostentation, while the other standing at a
distance would not so much as lift up his Eyes to Heaven, but smote upon his
Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner: This man, says our Savior,
went down to his house justified, rather than the other: For every one that
exalts himself, shall be abased; and he that humbles himself, shall be
exalted, verse 14.

2. HAVING thus briefly showed wherein the Nature of Humility does consist,
viz. In a modest and slender Opinion of ones own self; I proceed now, according
to the Method proposed, to consider the Motives which render this great
Christian Virtue practical, and the Arguments which serve to enforce the
practice of it.

WHERE diverse things will fall under our Meditations; which I shall endeavor
to put together into a little room; but must not wholly omit any of them:
BecausE the Virtue I now treat of, is of such necessary and great Concernment,
that there is no fear of saying too much; hardly indeed a possibility of saying
enough, to recommend it to our Hearts.

CHAP. II. The Loveliness of Humility.
1. THE Native Beauty and Loveliness of this Virtue; perhaps above the Rivalry
of any other. This is one great reproach and infamy to Pride, That neither God
nor Man can endure it. Seven things God hates after a more particular manner;
as Solomon tells us, Prove. 6. A lying tongue; hands that shed innocent blood; a
heart that devises wicked imaginations; feet that be swift in running to
mischief; a false witness that speaks lies; him that sows discord among
brethren: But chiefly, and in the first place a proud Look, or haughty Eyes.
And one main reason is, because wherever Discord is sown, it is this meddling
Vice that finds the Seed, prepares the Soil, and has an Eye upon the Harvest.
Only by pride comes contention, Prove. 13. 10. It Is the only prolifick, natural
Mother, which is continually in travail with that Evil, which is so hateful to
the God of Love and Peace. For these base Effects, and for the natural
turpitude of the Vice it self, it is of all others the most hateful to Mankind
also: So that though in many cases People generally love communion and society
in Sin; yet in this they abhor it; for proud Wretches are detested by all; and
most of all by those who are as proud as they; till the emulation rises like
that between Caesar and Pompey; the one could not endure a Superior, nor the
other an Equal. All this while Humility carries irresistible Charms with it.
It is a most graceful Virtue, that wins the Esteem and Affections of every
beholder; not excepting the haughty Person himself. As it is the most
Christian, so it is the most becoming Virtue to set any one off; and we may
deservedly give it the same Character (at least) which St. Peter gives of a
meek and quiet spirit; an ornament of great price, 1 Pet. 3. 4. An humble
Spirit, naturally quickens us to those Actions which affect Men with Pleasure:
It does not things that are harsh or disobliging: It is not capricious, or
scornful: It lies not upon the catch: It makes not unjust or severe
constructions: It is not an Enemy to Charity or Friendship, nor to any the most
homely Offices that are good: It is no disturber of another's Peace: It is not
void of Tenderness, or Compassion: It needs no Lure, but the Love of God and
Man to make it stoop: It resents not every Peccadillo, nor magnifies
Infirmities beyond their due measure; much less does it falsify for Reputation
or Interest sake: It is not rough, nor is it wont to threaten, or oppress, or
to scare People after an insolent manner, like that weak and haughty Prince,
Rehoboam, 1 Kings 12. where we see a remarkable instance of a proud Temper, and
such an account of the End and Folly of it, as, I think, is hardly to be
paralleled in the whole Scripture; unless it be the Story of Nebuchadnezzar's
being turned out among the Beasts. Rehoboam coming young to the Throne of his
Father Solomon, all Israel besought him, in some measure, to ease them of their
former Burdens: And his wisest and honestest Counselors advised him to treat
the People after a kind, gentle, and respectful manner, as the only sure way of
preserving their Affections. If, said they, thou will be a servant unto this
people this day, and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to
them, then they will be thy servants for ever. But this method pleased not
Rehoboam: He was willing rather to hearken to those raw Counselors, who
knowing his rough and imperious Disposition, advised him according to his own
Mind; though it was to the ruin of his Greatness. So he used the People with
Contempt and Menaces, frightning them with an arrogant Answer, That his little
finger should be thicker (or heavier) than his father's loins; that he would
add to their yoke; and that whereas his Father had chastised them with Whips,
he himself would chastise them with Scorpions. And what did this turn to in the
end? Why, the People could not bear his Pride and Insolence, and threatenings of
Oppression. It presently alienated their Minds; and that of course brought on
an open defection from him. What portion, said they, have we in David? Neither
have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents, O Israel: now see to
thine own house, David. And so Israel departed unto their tents, and rebelled,
all but the Tribe of Judah, against the House of David, and set up Jeroboam, a
King of their own. I will not dispute here about the Justice or Injustice of
this act of theirs. The Proceedings were Natural enough (which is all I would
observe from the Story) because nothing does more naturally and powerfully tend
to sour Men's Minds, to alienate their Affections, and to estrange their
Hearts, than Pride does.

ON the other hand; every Body loves an humble Person, because Humility is
naturally amiable; and the more amiable, because it is attended with many such
other Graces, as win and endear the Hearts of all Mankind, with a power that is
uncontrollable, and attractive, like the faculty of a Magnet. Where true
Humility is, there is Meekness, Charity, Candor, Affability, Courtesy,
Gentleness, a serene Brow, kind Intreatings, and the like; nor is it possible
but such graceful Endowments must meet with kind entertainment, and be beloved
every where.

WHEN Agesilaus of Lacedaemon, who was so esteemed for his great Wisdom, was
desired to give his Opinion how a Man should do to get all Peoples Love; he
told Socrates, That the surest way would be, to speak well, and to do better.
And this is one part of an humble Man's business; to give others the kindest
Characters he is able, and to do them all the Good he can: And such offices,
offices of Love, return into his own Bosom; he receives himself, as a Reward of
them, a certain retaliation of good Nature; like the skilful Apothecary that
prepares for others precious Ointments and Aromaticks, which in the very
preparing perfume and enrich his own Shop.

BEFORE Honor is Humility, says Solomon, Prove. 15. 33. Humility is the
certain; ready way to it. Though a good Name be far from being his Aim or End,
yet it will be an humble Man's Lot, whether he will or no; and, notwithstanding
his own Desires, or Endeavors to the contrary, he becomes Popular for the best
reasons. For all Mankind desire to be well used: It is a Principle never to be
rooted out of humane Nature; and when they find these their innocent Appetites
answered, they cannot but love and honor the Hand that deals so well with
them: It is as Natural as it is to detest the thick and heavy Finger that holds
out nothing but Whips and Scorpions, as Rehoboam's did.

WERE there then nothing else to be considered, the Rules of Wisdom and
Prudence are strong Arguments to every Man to be of an humble Mind; because it
carries with it such a Ruling Power, as is beyond all the Grandeur in the
World; which may keep People in some little awe, and that for a little time,
but cannot command their Affections. There is indeed an outward state, that is
necessary to preserve Order and Government in the World; an external Greatness
and Splendour, suitable to that high Rank and Quality wherein it pleases God to
place some far above others. Nor is this inconsistent with Lowliness of Mind:
For the more and greater God's Blessings are, the deeper should the sense of
them be; and, God be thanked, many times is; so that few, if any, are of more
humble Minds, than some whom the Divine Providence has dignified with the
highest Honors. In the midst of Pomp they can consider what infirm Pedestals
they stand on; nor are they so easily rifled of their Virtues, as those whose
sordid Birth, and illiberal Education, exposes them the more to the Devils
Snares. Few such, God knows, keep the Humility of Job, after they are once
raised from the Dunghill. But where ever this Grace grows, whether in the more
barren, or in the richest Soil, it is always lovely to the Eye; and the more
Beautiful, because it resembles him, who is styled, the Lily of the Valley,
Cant. 2. 1. We should all learn of him, who was lowly in Heart; who gained as
many Admirers by his Humility, as by his other Miracles; and whose Example is a
sufficient Comment upon his Directions, That to sit down in the lowest Room is
the best for us, the ready way to be advanced higher, and to have worship in
the presence of all, Luke 14. 10.

CHAP. III. The Reasonableness of Humility.
2. I CONFESS this is comparatively a very low Consideration; because we must
not seek for Honor of Men, no more than the Lord Jesus did; nor may we make
use of Virtue, (especially the Virtue of Humility) as an Art for it. Let us
therefore in the Second place consider the great Reasonableness of this Matter;
which will not only invite, but oblige us to the Practice of it.

NOW here we should consider, whence we came, what we are, and what we have,

FIRST we should reflect upon our Originals; because People are apt to be
ashamed of their base beginnings; like the haughty Simon in Lucian, who being
advanced to Honors, from a very mean, obscure Condition, pulled down the
Cottage which had been the place of his Nativity, that Passengers might not
point to it and say, Here was Great Simon born. The Son of God, by dignifying a
Manger, has indeed taken away all such shame from us: But yet he left us
enough, when he said, Before Abraham was I am.

THE Father of the Faithful was once nothing. And the production of every one
of us, was out of nothing. The Being we have, we are beholding for it to the
Power of God, who of his own Pleasure raised us out of Inanity, that our whole
Life might be a state of Lowliness, the better to dispose us for entire
Obedience, Submission, and Resignation of our Selves to his Divine Will.

The Flesh we consist of, and pamper so, what is it but next to nothing? A
Structure of Clay and Rottenness, a Lump provided for Worms; an heap of
Corruption, that yields nothing but a noisome Atmosphere, which we are fain to
correct with Spices and Odours, that Industry gathers out of the Fields, and
are brought us from far by long and chargeable Adventures?

AS vile and despicable things as we are, the God of Power vouchsafes to
support us: We daily depend on him; and by his Law all his Creatures, are
forced to lend us their helping hands, each doing its part for us, according to
its Kind and Capacities, and all at the same time upbraiding us with our
dependant and beggarly Condition. The Heavens bestow their Light upon us, and
put us in mind of that great Obscurity, which wrapped us up in our Mother's
Wombs. The Earth under our Feet, however we trample upon it, does the kind
office to afford us, first our Nursery, and at last our Lodging. The thin Air
we breathe in, how soon do we drop to the Ground, like untimely Fruit, when it
is shut out of our Nostrils? The Waters help to quench our thirst, as it helps
the wild Asses, and other Beasts of the Field, Psalm 104. 11. Poor Animals and
Vegetables of infinite sorts, are fain to be the Proveditors and Guardians of
our Life. Our Nakedness is hid by the contribution of dumb Creatures, whose
Backs we are necessitated to strip, that we may cover our own; and all this for
the preservation of that Body, which in its best state is subject to variety of
Diseases: And which, when Death and Rottenness has seized upon it; we our
selves cannot endure the very sight of. Every Creature is God's Almoner, to
relieve and succor us whilst we live in this World: And when we are going out
of it, we have nothing to depend on, but his infinite Mercies, in whom we now
live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17. 28.

LORD! what is Man? That poor, wretched, contemptible thing, Man? What is Man,
that he should swell and be bloated with a proud Opinion of himself, who can
never retire into his own true self, till, like a Snail that creeps into its
Shell, he humbles himself in Dust and Ashes?

DUST we are; and to Dust shall we all return, like the Beasts that perish.
And, as for that nobler part of us, the Soul; though it be a Ray of Divinity, a
Spirit endued with the Powers and Faculties of an Angel; yet, upon due
reflectons, it will find more and greater Reasons for Humility, that may be
drawn from within it self, than it sees by viewing its poor and frail
habitation.

THERE are in every one of us two Prime Faculties, which are connatural to the
Soul: A Faculty of knowing and reasoning, which is called the Understanding;
and a Faculty of Acting, a Power of Choosing or Refusing, which is called the
Will: And each of these Powers does minister to us many humbling Considerations.

1. FIRST: For the Intellectual Faculty, or Understanding. Though Knowledge be a
very excellent Endowment, that which People generally covet with greediness,
and are too apt to value themselves upon; yet in much wisdom is much grief; and
he that increases knowledge, increases sorrow, says Solomon, Eccl. 1. 18.
And yet, God was pleased of his Bounty, to give Him an extraordinary Portion;
exceeding much understanding and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is
on the sea-shoar: His wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the
east-country, and all the wisdom of Egypt: For he was wiser than all men, says
the Scripture, 1 King. 4. It is not without great toil and trouble of Mind that
we get the Knowledge we have at last; and even that is very little;
considerable, only because it costeth us dear; nothing indeed, in comparison of
that infinite number of things Natural, Moral, and Divine, which we are
ignorant of. The further we search, the further still we are to seek, and the
more sensible of our great wants. And that which we pretend to be Masters of,
is rather conjecture than certainty, unless it be bottomed upon Divine
Revelation. Nor are our few Notions without a mixture of Mistakes, and a great
many Doubts and Difficulties, which disquiet the Mind, because we are not able
to resolve them. So that after many Years study and travel, we come just thus
far, to know enough to make us very humble.

2. AS for the other Faculty of the Soul, which is the Principle of Action; we
find there so much Guilt, as we cannot be sufficiently humbled for all the days
of our Life. For, it is the Will that commits Sins; it is this Faculty that
chooses and consents to a sinful Action, and that makes it our Crime. The
Understanding dictates and proposes the thing; but still it is in the Power of
the Will, whether to do it, or no: And the more the Will consents to the Sin,
the more sinful it is always. No Man can be forced to do any evil thing against
his Will, if he be obstinate. There may be Allurements, and strong Temptations,
but there can be no Compulsion. All Consent and Compliance is from within; and
for that reason wicked People are justly liable to Punishment, because they
choose to do that, which they might avoid: They transgress without cause, as the
Expression is, Psalm 25. 3. Now, how can any Man think of his Sins, and be
proud? Especially since Pride is the most accumulative Sin of all, and deserves
Hell the more, because it is after a peculiar manner the very Devil's Sin? It Is
strange that any one should value himself for being in a state of Damnation:
And yet that is the state every wicked Man is in, without true Repentance, or
Reformation of Life; Sins acted against an infinite Being, must needs be of
infinite demerit; and, consequently, obnoxious to infinite Punishment. Because
there is a God, there must be an Hell too, for God to punish wicked People in
everlastingly: And is it possible for us to be truly sensible of this, and at
the same time not to be cast down under the Sense of our sad Deservings; and of
that most miserable Condition, which nothing can save us from but the mere
Mercy of God? Such Reflections as these, could not choose but be very humbling,
if vain Men would not think it beneath their Spirits to admit and entertain
them. It is both the Folly and Wickedness of haughty People, that they banish
from them Thoughts of this Nature, and mind only trifles and things imaginary;
quite over-looking those Crimes, which (if attentively considered) would make
them abhor themselves, and repent in dust and ashes, as Job spoke, Job 42. 6.
People who really believe that they deserve eternal Damnation, and that without
God's infinite Clemency they shall receive it, can hardly be so very
inconsistent with themselves, as to swell with a vain Conceit of any other
Merits. An evil Conscience, and a true Sense of Guilt, is enough to lay the
loftiest Spirits low. And this is one reason for which Pride is concluded, by
all considerate Men, to be such a foolish Vice; Because haughty People value
themselves upon things which are not valuable, not considering what they justly
deserve; but throwing aside many melancholy. Thoughts, which are in truth most
proper and fit for Criminals. The only thing worth our esteem is Virtue; or,
that gracious disposition of Soul, whereby the righteous is (indeed) more
excellent than his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. Those Moral Habits which are apt to
cleanse us from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, have an intrinsic Dignity
in them. For they are noble Perfections of our Nature, and such resemblances of
the Divine Being, as are in the sight of God himself of great price, 1 Pet. 3.
4. But yet even these excellent Endowments are arguments for our Humility;
because they are not the Productions of Nature, but the Fruits and Effects of
the Holy Spirit's Operation. It is by his free and gracious Energy, that we are
made the Children of Grace, and are transformed in the renewing of our Minds.
Without Christ's assistance, by the Holy Spirit, we can do nothing, John 15. 5.
It is he that works in us, both to will, and to do of his own good pleasure,
Phil. 2. 13. Upon this account our Spiritual Graces are reasons for our
Thankfulness; but not for our Pride; because we stand indebted to the mere
Goodness and Bounty of God for them. Who makes thee to differ from another?
(says the Apostle,) or what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou
did receive it, why do thou glory, as though thou had not received it? 1
Cor. 4. 7. Debtors are not wont to be proud of the Obligations and Bonds they
are forced to lie under. Poverty carries such shame with it, as serves to
debase Men, when hardly any thing else will. And though God gives to all men
liberally and upbraideth not, Jam. 1. 5. yet the Sense of our necessitous and
miserable condition by Nature, and of our dependence upon God for the mending
of our Fortunes, is a very powerful Motive to humble all of us; especially
before that infinite Being, to whose Bounty and Goodness we owe all that we
have, and all that we are.

THE ancient Moralists. among the Heathen thought it a Fundamental Principle of
all Virtue, for a Man to know and understand himself rightly. I am sure it is
the Principle and Source of this Virtue, Humility. For there is very little (if
any thing) in us, or about us, but what teaches us to despise our selves: And
it is for want of due and just reflection, that People are great in their own
Eyes. I know that in me, (that is in my flesh) there dwells no good thing,
says St. Paul, in the Person of an unregenerate Man, Romans 7. 18. There is
indeed a vile Body, a sinful Soul, a corrupt Mind, a vain Imagination: There is
a weak, mortal, necessitous Nature: There is foolishness, and wretchedness in
great variety: There is enough and abundance of such things, for him to boast
of, if it be worth his boasting, (such glorying would be in One's shame.) And,
as for those blessed Principles of Virtue, which by the sweet and kindly
insinuations of Christ's Spirit, the Soul of every regenerate Person is endowed
with; they are so many borrowed Talents, for which the holiest Man living
stands beholding to our great Creditor, the Lord of all. And though we ought to
rejoice, that God is pleased to communicate his Riches to us, yet considering
that they are precarious Loans, for the obtaining whereof our chief business
was to beg, and receive with all Humility; we have as little reason to be proud
of them, as a servile Steward has of a Trust for which he must give a strict
Account.

IF the things I have mentioned serve to keep us from all Assumings, the
Consideration of those outward Matters, which the Scripture calls the things,
and the fashion of the world, must needs help to take down our Minds the more
still. For, though the Children of this World are wont to mind these things most,
and are apt to be elated most of all by them, yet there is hardly a plainer
Argument than this is, of the great Weakness of humane Nature, and of the Folly
it is subject to; that Men are so swollen in their Minds, because their
temporal Fortunes are bulky, because they are Richer and Greater than others: I
mean, as some count Riches and Greatness, who speak the Dialect of the World,
and consider not what it is to be Rich and Great indeed. Alas! these external
Matters are of a very mean, trifling, and contemptible Nature, phantasm and
color only; like the Feathers of the Athenian Bird, which help to give it
face, but do not make it better, or weightier than a Bird of a plainer Plume.
Besides, riches (says Solomon) certainly make themselves wings, they flee away
as an Eagle toward heaven, Prove. 23. 5. And this they do by the just Judgment
of God in Heaven; because Men set their Eyes on that which is not, and set
others at naught for that which is but vanity. When they forget God and
themselves after this manner, it is a very Righteous thing for the Judge of all
the Earth, to humble them, by making the Nest that was set on high empty; and
by leaving it to the mercy of the Fire; or, of the Extortioner, which in effect
is the same thing. Thirdly, though these external Fortunes stay with us, and we
with them, yet it is most unreasonable for our Hearts to be lifted up by the
enjoyment of them, because they are far from being an argument of God's Love to
any. No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before them, says
Solomon, Eccl. 9. 1. That is, none can certainly tell by his present worldy
Condition, whether he be in God's Favor or no. For, says Solomon, verse 2.
All things come alike to all; there is one event to the righteous, and to the
wicked; to the good, and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner;
and he that swears, as he that fears an oath. Which words yield us thus
much; That, since this wretched World is not a place for us to receive our
Rewards, generally Men share alike, and without discrimination, in the Fortunes
of the World. The Divine Providence scatters them promiscuously, and with an
indifferent Hand; which plainly shows, that in God's Account they are such very
inconsiderable things, that it is no matter how, or upon whom they are thrown
away. But, Fourthly, if any thing may be concluded from the affluence of these
poor temporal Enjoyments, it is rather a sad argument of the great Danger the
Men of this World are in, than a signification of God's Love to them. For all
Mankind being God's Creatures, and having for that reason some sort of Title
and Right to his Providence, God is pleased to distribute the Glories and
Felicities here below, as he sends his Rain and Sunshine, upon the evil as
well as upon the good. Nay, because evil Men can have no share of the
Felicities of a future state, God does usually give them a more liberal
allowance of That which they count the great Happiness of This. And hereby God
shows the great Justice of his Providence, in making some sort of equality in
his Distributions, such an equality as the Nature of the thing admits of;
because all Men by this means take their respective turns in the several states
of Happiness and Misery; they have their respective shares, suitable to their
respective Conditions and Capacities. Wicked Wretches have their turn served in
this present state; their Cup is filled here, such a Cup as it is; and they
must thank hemselves that there is not a better laid up in store for them. They
have their portion in this life, says David, Psalm 17. 14. So in our Savior's
Parable of the rich Man, in Luke 16. Abraham told that glorious Epicure,
represented there to be in Hell; Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime
receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus (his) evil things, verse 25.
But observe what follows; Now Lazarus is comforted, and thou art tormented. It
was but just, that both the one and the other should have his Portion; and,
since it is so ominous to receive a large Portion in this World, certainly none
have greater reason to be humble than they, whose bellies God fills here with
his hid treasures, as the expression is, Psalm 17. 14. Such Treasures as vain
Wretches bury here in their Bowels, and in the Earth. But, lastly, the
indifferent distribution of these outward temporal matters, is a very strong
argument of a future Judgment, which will be according to the Rules of exact
righteousness. Because in the present Administration of Affairs, the greatest
Lot many times falls to evil doers; and the Men of this World run away with the
greatest share of its Wealth, Pleasure and Honors; it is very rational to
conclude, That there will be a day for an afterreckoning, when all things shall
be adjusted, and all Manking shall receive according to what they have done,
whether it be good or evil. Then, we may be sure, there will be no respect of
Persons; no distinction between rich and poor, between high and low; for all
must stand upon the same level, and the only difference will be between the
just and unjust. And what a terrible warning is this to the greatest Men on
Earth, not to be high minded, but to fear; because their neglecting those
opportunities they have of doing Good is more heinous, their Ingratitude much
more scandalous, their evil Actions more visible, their Examples more
influential, their Injustice more hurtful, their Yokes more heavy, their
Oppressions more intolerable; and, consequently their Guilt, Condemnation and
Torment will be much greater, than we may suppose those to be capable of
incurring, who pass through the World in a manner desticute and naked, as they
dropd into it. Of all People in the World, none have greater reason to be
humble, than they who are in danger; nor are any in such a dangerous condition,
as flourishing Wretches; such as David speak of, Psalm 73. I was (says he)
grieved at the foolish, when I saw them in such prosperity; for they are in no
peril of death; but are lusty and strong. They come in no misfortune, like
others; nor are they plagued, like other men. And this is the cause that they
are so holden with Pride, and overwhelmed with Cruelty. Their eyes swell with
fatness; and they do even what they lust. Lo, these are the ungodly; these
prosper in the world, and these have riches in possession. 'Twere impossible
for such Men thus to swell in their Prosperity, did they sadly consider David's
observation, (which we see verified every day,) O! how suddenly do they
consume, perish, and come to a fearful end, verse 18. Haman hanged after all
his Greatness and Insolence, Esther 7. The presuming Fool snatched away while
he was building his capacious Barns, to stow up his many years Wealth in, Luke
12. The rich Man, I spoke of before, cast out of his Purple and fine Linen into
Hell torments, Luke 16. Herod smitten suddenly on his Throne, and in his Royal
Apparel, Acts 12. These, and infinite Instances more, show what Dangers the
loftiest Men are surrounded with, and what slippery Ground they stand on, how
great soever their Presumptions are, that they shall never be moved.

AND, if the common danger of ruin in this World, be a reason to humble the
haughtiest Spirits, the most assuming and confident Minds, certainly the
prospect of a final Judgment, and an irrevocable doom to everlasting and
infinite Misery, must (if duly entertained) cast such a damp upon the vain
Thoughts of Men, as is enough to stain the pride of all glory, as the Prophet
speaks, Isaiah 23. 9.

CHAP. IV. The Usefulness of Humility, in respect of the Peace of Mind it
brings.
THE Reasonableness of Humility being thus considered, the next thing that
falls under our Meditations, and serves to make it practical, is the great
Usefulness of this Virtue, during our passage through this vain, deceitful
World. Now there are many great Advantages which attend the sincere and
constant Practice of this Virtue: And more especially these Three:

I. AN humble Mind brings that inward Peace and Satisfaction, which is so much
desired by all wise Men. II. IT mightily promotes Ones Progress and Perfection
in Virtue. III. IT is an excellent Preservative from many great Evils and
Inconveniences, which commonly happen in this our Militant State.
1. FIRST, An humble Mind brings that inward Peace and Satisfaction, which is
so much desired by all wise Men. This tranquillity of Soul is indeed the most
desirable thing we are capable of on this side Heaven; for it is the great
Happiness of this Life; the Happiness whereunto the Practice of Religion
tends; the Happiness that is a fore-taste of the Comforts above; a Specimen
of that everlasting Rest, which is reserved for all that love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity. This is so plain, that we need not the help of any Philosophy to
prove it. Now, of those Virtues which are instrumental and operative in order
to this Happiness, Humility is one of the chiefest; because it it sets the
Heart upon a Basis, where it rests quietly; safe and free from those
impetuous Passions, which work violently upon proud Spirits; like a Tempest
that breaks the Cedars of Lebanon, but flies over the low Ground, without doing
any hurt, or making much noise. There are several things which are apt to
discompose and ruffle Men's Minds in this frail, mortal Condition: And from all
these an humble Heart is a great security.

AS, First, The guilt of Sin. This is a thing that carries a very quick Sense
with it, which naturally and deservedly disquiets Criminals; nor is any thing
so painful as an evil Conscience, when once it begins to rage. Humility will
preserve you from this guilt; and, by consequence, from the torment that would
attend it, if you will but learn to submit your selves to God, to his Laws, and
Pleasure in all things, as the due Consideration of your own Meanness must
needs incline you to do. An humble Heart is not apt to be lifted up against its
Maker, nor to resist and disobey his Commands; because it is conscious of God's
Greatness, Power, and Authority over us all; and, of that infinite Distance
which is between his Glorious Majesty and us poor Creatures, who are Worms,
Earth, Vanity, nothing in comparison. Obedience does naturally spring from such
lowly Thoughts; and so that Peace and Comfort which is the Fruit of Obedience,
must spring in the Mind too. In short, it is that Spiritual Refreshment and
Ease, which our Blessed Savior has promised to his followers, and
particularly to such as follow the Example of his great Humility; Learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls,
Matthew. II. 29.

2. ANOTHER thing that is wont to discompose Men's Minds, is a Sense of
Disrespect; we are too ready (God knows) to entertain very kind Thoughts of our
own selves; and to expect that others should think as we do, and should show
that deference, which we fancy to be due from abroad, because we are fond of
making the first payment of it at home. When vain Men find themselves
disappointed, Lord! What pain and anguish are they in presently! Impatient and
dejected, like Haman, who was so mortified by failing of one Ceremony, as if
all his Enjoyments lay at Mordecai's Feet. This is one great reproach of Pride,
That it is always ready with a Rack, for those who never think themselves high
enough: Nor are any so crucified as they who are most in love with this Tyrant
Vice.

EVERY thing that looks like contempt, is a nail that creates fresh Torture in
them: Whereas a Spirit of Humility delivers one from pains of this Nature;
because such a Man considers whose face it was that was spit upon, before he
endured the Cross; and if the Son of God was so patient under the greatest
indignities, certainly a poor sinful Man has reason when the right Cheek is
used Contumeliously, to turn the left also, though the disgrace be never so
provoking. But in this case an humble Person finds not sufficient cause of
disturbance, because he is supposed to be despicable in his own Eyes; and if he
thinks his Eyes do not deceive him, how is it a provocation that he is so in
the Eyes of others too? Their agreement in the same opinion is matter not of
trouble, but of complacency rather, because each Party believes his opinion to
be right. If to expose thee, People proclaim some of thy faults, do not stand
upon thy defense (says Epictetus) as if they did thee wrong; but say only,
they are ignorant People; for if they knew all thy faults, they would not have
mentioned these alone. By such a modest turn of the hand it is easy to wipe off
the foulest Spittle, before it sinks into the breast. And besides, the Humble
Man considers what Mouth it came from: For, Applause from some Men's lips may be
construed as a Libel; and many times we may well be jealous, as Socrates was
wont to be, that he had done something amiss, when he was respected and
commended by ill Men: The despitefulness of such brings this great comfort with
it, That there is no present danger of that woe, which we have reason to be
afraid of, when all Men speak well of us, Luc. 6. 26.

FURTHER yet; Whoever the Men, whatever the Disrespect be, and what impressions
soever it makes, it sits the easier upon an Humble Man's mind, because he takes
it as a means of making him the more Humble still: For lowly hearts are apt to
mistrust, that they are never lowly enough; and therefore, when any thing
happens, which helps to abase them, whether it be deserved or no, it is not
unwelcome, because it is of very good use, and may have been ministered by the
hand of God for the good Man's particular advantage. Thus David took it when
Shimei cursed him, and threw stones at him: So let him Curse, said the King,
because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David, 2 Samuel 16. 10. And when we
make such a Religious construction of Affronts and Contumelies, as things
intended for our good; and such a Religious use of them, as to be bettered and
made more Humble by them, they must needs lose that Acrimony and Gall which is
so very distastful and grievous to proud Men who want the Divine Art of
altering the Waters of Marah, so as to destroy their bitterness.

3. A third thing that too often disquiets Men's minds, is the great Prosperity
of others as to their outward Fortunes; because in the distribution of these
Temporal Blessings, the Divine Providence does not observe the Rules of exact
Equality: People whose condition is much lower than their Neighbors, look upon
those above them with an evil Eye, grow impatient, fretful, and querulous,
because (forsooth) the same liberal and open hand is not extended unto
themselves. Such greedy and reaching desires can never be without great
vexation of Spirit, especially when Industry and Ambition have made many
unsuccessful attempts to get higher. In which case, nothing certainly can be
such a speedy and effectual relief to the Soul to give it. Peace and Rest, as
true Humility. The first thought that is naturally incident to an Humble Man,
is, That as all Right is in God, the great and sole Proprietary, who has an
indisputable Power to do what he pleases with his own, Matthew. 20. 15. So the
greatest Title we can pretend to, is that of Usufructuaries; Tenants at Will in
every respect (though in this case the Tenure be for Lives too, as precarious a
Tenure as the other) and for such entire dependants to be envious at the Divine
economy, is the most impious unthankfulness, when we have all of us as little
reason to murmur, as we have capacity to Pay, or power to Demand. Again, as we
depend upon God for all that we have, so we must acknowledge, that whatsoever
that be, is more than we deserve. And this humble consideration that God is our
absolute Soverign, but not our Debtor, is another strong reason for us to
acquiesce, and be content with our Portion; because, though it be not as great
as other Men's, yet it is enough to make us not only satisfied, but thankful.
Lord, said Jacob, I am not worthy of the least of all the Mercies, which thou
have showed unto thy Servant: With my Staff I Passed over Jordan, and now I am
become two bands, Genesis 32. 10.

THIRDLY, Humility teaches us to consider, that whatsoever our Condition is,
it is that which is best and fittest for us. Of this, indeed, we our selves are
not competent Judges, because our Understandings are as weak as our Desires are
unreasonable; and were our Fortunes in our own hands, our partiality and
ignorance would make us the very worst Carvers of them; God knows best what we
most need; and that alone is proper, which he sees to be necessary and
convenient: And therefore the mere Light of Nature directed Socrates when he
prayed, to implore the Divine Goodness in general terms, leaving it to God to
choose for him, how, and when, and what to bestow upon him; believing it to be a
Man's safest course to submit always to the Wisdom and Determinations of God.
But you will say, Was not David envious at the Prosperity of the wicked? Yes;
he tells us himself that he was so, and that in his discontented, sullen
humor, he muttered, as if he had cleansed his Heart in vain, and had washed
his Hands in Innocence, (to no purpose;) but he tells us too, that in all this
he behaved himself very foolishly, and like a beast, Psalm 73. 22. The truth
is, this is one of the most affecting Cases, when we see those whom we take to
be very ill Men, to thrive at a mighty rate, and to grow great and powerful in
the World. Nevertheless, Humility teaches us in all Cases, not to take Example
by any, so as to be Uncharitable or Irreligious. The humble Man's Rule is that,
Phil. 2. 3. In lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better than themselves.
I know the Apostle's meaning to be, That we should behave our selves to others,
as if they were better, whether they be really so, or not. Such a Judgment of
the Mind is not always required; and, if sometimes we think it impossible too,
for the humblest Person in the World, to think all others better, it is yet
inconsistent with Humility to judge them worse; for God alone is the searcher
of the Heart: That is in too close a Repository for One's next Neighbor to
penetrate into; and therefore to make wrong judgment of others, is too facil a
thing, even for good Men, who are apt to take false estimates of themselves,
with whom they should be far better acquainted. Such humble Thoughts as these
do naturally prompt Men, evermore to make very charitable Judgments; and,
consequently, to rest satisfied in their Minds, when the Divine Providence does
multiply and heap up the good things of this life upon the Heads of others. But
to put the Case at the very worst; Suppose the Men, thus judged and censured,
to be wicked indeed, (I mean, wicked in the strict Scripturesence; guilty of
great, scandalous, presumptuous Sins:) This is, in truth, an Argument for our
Prayers, and charitable Admonitions; but not for Envy; nor are any People in
the World more to be pitied than such.

4. BY this short Account it appears, what an useful Virtue Humility is, to rid
our Minds of all foolish impatience, and to compose them into a serene and calm
state, how invidious soever the Condition and Circumstances of others may be.
Let us consider now, Fourthly, the Advantage it brings an humble Man, how
perplexed soever his own Condition is. There are many cross, calamitous
Accidents in this life, which we cannot digest under any one General Head so
well as under the common name of Afflictions; so called, because they give very
painful blows to the Hearts of such People, as are not in some good measure
improved and perfected by the Discipline of Religion. And these Afflictions are
of two sorts; some that are actually felt; and others that we fear: Both are
dolorous; for though present Afflictions yield the quickest sense, yet many
times future ones create the most melancholy pain; nay, the bare apprehension
and prospect of them, when at some distance usually makes longer and deeper
impressions upon Men's Minds, than when they are engaged and wrestling with them
in a direct Conflict. In each of these Cases, Humility affords the best
Auxiliaries; so that how lowly and subdued soever One's Heart is, he can lift
up his Head in the day of distress. First, As to present Afflictions: There are
these Four Considerations, which naturally serve to make every humble Christian
very easy (if not cheerful) in his own Mind.

1. THAT though second Causes be the immediate instruments of Affliction, yet
the Hand of God does so order, govern and direct them, that we are still under
his management in all Conditions. And since it is so, what can so well become a
lowly Mind, as that modest resignation which old Eli expressed, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Do thou well to be angry?
As the great Governor of the World was pleased to argue with Jonah, when he was
in his sullen fits; first, because Nineveh was not destroyed, and then because
his friendly Gourd was smitten with a Worm, Jonah 4. By which mild
Expostulation God shows, that whether he spares, or destroys, still it is our
Duty to acquiesce in his Divine Pleasure; and that it is the foolishness of
man, which makes his heart fret against the Lord, as Solomon observes, Prove.
19. 3. Secondly, Whether God afflicts Men by the Hands of others, or with his
own Hands, and by his immediate Providence, it must be acknowledged, that the
Judge of all the Earth does still do Right. Considering the scandalous
Provocations which are given by some, the heinous, though secret Crimes which
are acted by others, the Faults which the best are guilty of, and the
Corruption of Heart which is in all, none can reasonably expect to steal out of
this World without a Rod upon his Back; or, at least without some Thorn or
other in his Flesh: (You know, a Sword was to pierce through the Soul of the
blessed Virgin her self, Luke 2. 35.) The humble will consider this; and the
due Consideration of it must needs stop his Mouth, and quiet his Mind, in
reference to God's Proceedings, because he cannot but be sensible, that his
Sufferings are the consequent of his Offenses, and that too which falls so
very. short of them, that if we will put both into the Scales, and then judge
by weight, the burden that is in one Scale, how heavy so ever it may seem, is
really very light, hardly any thing in comparison of those Demerits which by a
vast preponderation bear and keep down the other. Humility directs us in all
Cases to reflect not so much upon our Grievances, as our Guilt: And, if People
in Affliction would take this safe and prudent course, there would be no room
nor reason for any sorrow of Heart, besides that which works Repentance unto
Salvation. Wherefore does a living man complain? a man for the punishment of
his sins? says Jeremy, Lam. 3. 39. Thirdly, In visiting Men's Offenses with a
Rod, God does not act purely as a Judge, but rather with the Wisdom and
Tenderness of a Father; either to keep his Children still within the limits of
their Duty, or to reclaim them from their Aberrations. Outward Ease is
naturally apt to corrupt good Manners, as fullness and idleness is apt to
vitiate the Blood, and to ruin One's whole Constitution. Therefore, to
exercise the Soul, and thereby to preserve it in the right state, God does
commonly use such a measure of severity, as he knows we stand in need of; and
when a Man makes an application of this to himself, after an humble manner, he
cannot but be satisfied with the Apostle's argument, Heb. 12. 9, 20. If we have
had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall
we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? For
they verily, for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for
our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. For this gracious
purpose sake, they who are conscious to themselves of their Deserts and Wants
(as all humble Persons are) cannot but possess their Souls in Patience under
the Hand that corrects; and with Thankfulness too, for stripes which are thus
profitable and advantageous to them; not only hearing the Rod, as the Prophet
speaks, Micah 3. 9. but kissing it also, because there is Honey on the end of
it, as there was on the top of Jonathan's Rod, 1 Samuel 14. Fourthly, and lastly,
St. Paul gives this Character of Temptation, (meaning Affliction) that it is
cammon to man, 1 Cor. 10. 13. And considering that it is a general Lot, the
humble in Soul will sit down quiet, and well contented to have a share: For
how, (says he) am I better than my neighbors? Indeed, it is no comfort to good
Nature, to see others in misery; yet every Man's Grief is much the less, when
Discipline is administered impartially; and of all others, the humble Man's
satisfaction is the greatest, when comparing his Sins and his Sufferings with
other Men's, he finds so vast a disproportion; as if God were particularly
merciful to him, in visiting more, and (as he thinks) more heinous Offenses,
with fewer and less-afflicting Stripes. It is one great cause of Murmurs and
Impatience, that we look at the Prosperity, not at the Misfortunes of other
People; at least, that we do not lay them equally to Heart: Their glittering
Condition strikes the tenderest Side, and there makes the deepest impressions.
The sense of their Afflictions goes off with an easy, and too often with a
pleasant slide; especially where Nature is too hard for Religion. But were our
Humility commensurate to St. Paul's, when he owned himself less than the least
of all Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8. nay, the chiefest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. 'Twere
impossible for us to be very uneasy under our Affictions, could we be able to
give in such a large Register of them, as he gives of his own, 2 Cor. II. In
the midst of which we find him still rejoicing. In short, he that is vile and
worthless in his own estimate, cannot but learn in what state soever he is,
therewith to be content; unless he will be so false to himself, as to condemn
his own Opinion, and reverse his own Judgment. Which sufficiently demonstrates,
what an inestimable Blessing Humility is to the Soul, amidst all the various
and troublesome encumbrances of this Life. At once it polisheth our Nature, and
refreshes us with Delights; that is, it does us all the Good that we are
capable of enjoying in a mortal state. There is such an indissoluble Union
between this Virtue and Felicity, that it is impossible for a Man to be truly
Humble, but he must, in spite of Fortune, be very Happy too.

2. I told you before, That of all Afflictions, those which we pretend to
discern aloof off, do many times affect the Mind with the greatest Anguish: And
at the close of this Consideration, touching that Peace and Comfort wherewith
Humility endues the Heart, it will be necessary to observe, how advantageous
this Virtue is, when a Calamity threatens and looks terrible at a distance. In
this Case there are three things especially which Humility suggesteth to our
Minds, for the ease and satisfaction of them.

1. FIRST, Our whole dependence being upon the Care of that infinite Being, who
is the Governor and Disposer of all things, we may be sure, that nothing can
befall us contrary unto, or without his Pleasure: So that though we are little,
contemptible things of our selves, yet considering whose Creatures we are, and
whose Hands we are in, it is our Duty in all ominous Circumstances to commit
our selves to God, with such resignation and recumbency as becomes the
Condition of poor, shiftless Beings, that are left entirely to him, and hang
every minute upon his Providence.

2. SECONDLY, God being infinitely Wise, Governing and Ordering every part of
the Universe with constant Respect to the Whole, it is our Wisdom to acquiesce
in our Lots, as God shall please to dispense them, and to make his blessed Will
our Choice; in regard that we our selves are so very short-sighted and partial,
that we are not fit to be our own chusers, because we do not know what we
should, but crave only for what we would have.

3. THIRDLY, However Events prove, it is not out of our power to make an Honest
and Religious use of them; and then all things shall work together for good to
them that love God, Romans 8. 28. These humble Considerations must needs minister
great Rest and Comfort to One's Soul, though future Contingencies carry with them
a terrible aspect; and thereby the reasonableness and excellence of our Duty
appears, of taking no anxious, carking Thoughts about to morrow. Because God
prefideth over all, many things which we presage, do not happen (Clouds usually
drop before they advance over our heads) and how can the humble Man answer it
to his own mind, to crucify himself beforehand, for that which, for ought he
knows, may never come to to pass? Because God is infinitely Wise and Good, who
can tell certainly what is within the Cloud? Or, whether many Blessings may not
fall down together with the Storm? It is inconsistent with Humility to pry into
God's Counsels after a distrustful manner; and, consequently, to perplex One's
Heart with a grievous apprehension of accidents, which perhaps may be for his
great advantage: Or, say it be a real Calamity that is coming, it is an humble
Man's part to leave God to his own time, and to wait God's leisure, without
going forward to meet an Evil, which he is bound to be patient under, but not
to anticipate. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, said the humble
Jesus, Matthew. 6. 34.

TO enforce the practice of Christianity as to this particular, I cannot but
observe what Religious Principles some Heathen Moralists went on, who placed
Happiness in the study and exercise of Virtue, because it is the only thing
which blesses a Man's Soul with Satisfaction and Tranquillity. By the Light of
Nature they discovered three great Truths, which they proved too, and urged the
belief of them, as absolutely necessary to a Man's Happiness.

1. THAT there is a God; or, (as they themselves mean) a Sovereign,
Incorporeal, Intellectual Being, that is Uncompounded, Independent,
Self-existent, Self-moving; the most Absolute and Perfect Good, the Supreme and
first Cause of all things.

2. SECONDLY, That as God exactly knows all the things he has made, and has
a Power over all, so he takes care of the whole Universe, and the several
parts of it, the meanest Creatures not excepted.

3. THIRDLY, That God does not only inspect the World, but does moreover
administer and govern all Affairs, according to the strict Rules of Goodness
and Righteousness. From which Principles those wise Philosophers concluded,
That as it is our Duty to honor and worship God, so we must set our selves to
Obey him, to submit to his Determinations, to follow his Conduct with
cheerfulness, to be well-pleased with what he does, as being the Result of his
Divine Wisdom and Providence. If you do no dispose your Minds thus, your Lives
(say they) will be not only Irreligious, but full of Sadness and Misery too:
Whereas, if you resign your Wills to God's, and be contented with Events, as
God shall please to order them, you will be happy. Therefore Socrates was wont
to say, If God will have it thus, then thus let it be. And Epictetus his Prayer
was, Lead me, O God, according to thy Will, and I will readily obey, and submit
to thy Providence. For (says Arrian) every good Man who believes there is a
Deity and a Providence, will submit his own Mind to God's Pleasure, the
Governor of the Universe, as good Citizens submit to the Laws of the City they
live in. Concerning all this see Epictetus, cap. 38, 77, 79. Arrian on Epictet.
lib. 1. c. 12. and especially Simplicius his Comments 38. per totum.


THESE were great Notions for Heathens to entertain; such a complexure of good
Divinity and Morality together, as one would think were the Sense of a
Christian. And the result of the whole matter is this; That as all the
Happiness of this Life is lodged in Virtue; so this Virtue of Humility does
contribute toward it after a more especial manner, and in a singular degree;
because it resigneth up the Soul to God's Wisdom and Pleasure in all
Conditions; so that in all afflicting Circumstances, whether actually felt, or
apprehended only, the truly humble Person possesses his Soul in Patience, and
is blessed with Tranquillity in as great measures, as a frail Nature is capable
of receiving. Such as are so proud, that they care not for the Almighty, and
think themselves too big for his Rod, in times of trial and distress, aggravate
the smart from without, by being their own tormentors within, and the most
inhumane tormentors, because the Pains they inflict are hardly curable, and
seldom intermitting. Every odd chance is magnified into a great Affliction; and
every Affliction gnaws and eats, as if it were an affront to their singular
Merits, and an argument of Injustice and Partiality in the Divine Providence.
And thus the Spirits of such vain Wretches breed Worms, which like those
engendered in a dead Carcass, never leave till they have devoured their Parent;
and all at last produce the Worm which dies not.

CHAP. V. The Usefulness of Humility, in respect of our Proficiency in Virtue.
HITHERTO I have considered the Usefulness of Humility, in respect of that
Contentment and Serenity of Mind, which is the blessed Fruit of it. Let us
proceed now to the next thing, and observe how instrumental it is, in order to
our Progress and Perfection in Virtue: Now there are very many ways, whereby it
helps to promote this inestimable Advantage: But it will be sufficient for me
to take notice of these Four ways following.

1. FIRST, By obliging us to rest in the Authority of Divine Revelation. This
is the Foundation of our Faith and Hopes, and of those Religious Endeavors, we
are encouraged to use, that we may receive the end of them: All is bottomed on
this Principle, That the things we believe and look for, are certain, because
God has revealed them; and it is Humility that concurs with right Reason to
settle our Souls upon this Principle, how dark and doubtful soever some things
may seem to humane Apprehensions. The daily Sense which all humble Men have of
the weakness and fallaciousness of their own Understandings, is sufficient to
convince them, that Carnal Reason is not to be trusted Universally, and with
Confidence in things pertaining unto God; and that it is our Wisdom as well as
Duty, to take God's Word for all, however the Word spoken may sound in our
Ears. This is a great Fault in some pretenders to Reason, that they will not
allow us to believe Doctrines, unless they appear rational as to all the Parts
and Modes of those Matters which are proposed to our Belief; and unless they
captivate our Faith, by suiting with our Capacities, and by carrying with them
a plain Evidence, How those things can be. This proceeds from Spiritual Pride,
and Self-conceit, and is the ready way to make Reason not an Assistant, but an
Idol, for the Holy Bible to be offered up unto. Humble Men will tell you, That
many things in Religion are and ought to be covered with a Veil; that it is not
Modesty to pry without Light, or without Leave, or beyond the reach of our
finite Faculties; that Mysteries ought to be let alone, and suffered to remain
Mysteries; that secret things belong unto the Lord our God; and that those
things which are revealed, belong unto us, and to our children for ever, Deuteronomy.
29. 29. And thus our Faith will be infallible and unshaken, our Hope firm, and
our progress in a course of Religion will be steady, which otherwise may be
fatally interrupted by our turning aside into mazes and labyrinths, with a
design to discover things, which God in his Wisdom has purposely hid from us.

2. THAT in this course of Religion we may not travel with a Tympany, full of
hopes that will at last deceive, and make us ashamed; we are taught, that
besides a modest Faith, universal Obedience to the Divine Will is necessarily
required; and this is another improvement that comes by an humble Mind; it
disposes the Soul to perfect Holiness in the fear of God; and not only to rely
upon the Veracity, but to have an Eye also to the Authority of God; that
transcendent Authority which is stamped upon his Laws. Considering that he is
our Supreme, Absolute, and only Wise Legislator; that we were all made for his
Glory; that we have no urgent business in the World, but to glorify him; that
he is glorified in our Happiness, and that his Laws are intended to fit and
prepare us for it; what other Thoughts can an humble Mind suggest, but that it
is at once our Duty and our Interest to serve God in true Holiness and
Righteousness before him all the days of our lives? Such lowly Thoughts are apt
to be seconded with suitable Resolutions; and thence proceed those various acts
of Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety, which are answerable to the Commands
of the Lord and Savior of the World. For which reason the Ancients in their
Encomiums of Humility, frequently style it, The Foundation, the Original, the
Root, the Mother of all Virtue, and the great Preserver of it: Because a
submiss disposition of Soul is naturally pliant, and never more obediential
than when the Pleasure and Will of God is to be done. The adoring Sense of the
glorious Nature, Attributes, and Works of God, on the Contemplation whereof the
humble Man's Mind is fixed; the apprehension of his infinite Greatness and
Majesty; the thoughts of his Absolute Power and Authority over all; the amazing
and profound Consideration of his free Goodness and Love, especially in
Redeeming our miserable Souls from eternal Ruin, and in bestowing on us such
Spiritual and Divine Blessings, as are Arguments of our Adoption, the
Preparatives and Earnest of a most blessed future Estate: These things carry
such a charming Power over a meek and lowly Heart, as is productive of the most
cheerful and affectionate Obedience to the Mind and Pleasure of God in all
things.

3. THIRDLY, As Humility fits us for an entire and hearty compliance with God's
Commands; so it possesses us with a genuine sense of our own Defects and
Wants; which is another way whereby it helps our progress and perfection in
Virtue. For this is necessary to all manner of Improvements, that we see first
wherein we are defective. That Observation of Seneca, That many might be very
wise in time, but that they foolishly think themselves wise enough already,
will hold true in all Cases: Men might easily be better Artists, better
Scholars, better Christians than they are, if a false Opinion of their
Accomplishments did not supersede their Industry. And this is apparently the
mischievous effect of Pride, That it shuts a Man (as it were) out of himself;
makes him incapable of finding out that blind side, and ugly temper, which
requires help, but admits of none for want of discovery. And the reason is,
because such Men take not a clear and fair view; they overlook those manifold
faults which deserve their Eye, and contemplate only those glittering Objects
which dazzle it. Hence it comes to pass, that a great many flaws within them
escape their observation; and they are no Proficients, because they are not
properly Teachers, but Admirers of themselves, only; lifted up with the Vanity
and Confidence of those our Savior pointed to who trusted in themselves, that
they were righteous, and despised others, Luke 18. 9. That humble Apostle who
confessed his Sins to the whole World, and proclaimed himself the chiefest of
Sinners, counted all things but loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ Jesus: And though he spoke as if he were blameless, as touching
Righteousness which was by the Law, yet he threw aside all that Righteousness
of his own; not conceiving that he had already attained, or was already
perfect, but following after, (stretching and straining hard, like those that
contended of old in the famous Agonistical Combats) forgetting those things
which were behind, he reached forth unto those things which were before,
pressing toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 3. As many as are perfectly humble, will be thus minded; thus
zealous to run and to finish their course well. Because they are conscious of
their former Miscarriages, of their present Infirmities, Defects, Unworthiness,
Encumbrances, and natural proneness to Slip and Fall; they know the better what
Care to take, what Temptations they are to avoid, what Weights they are to lay
aside, what aids of Grace they are to pray for, and what Supplies are most
necessary for them. They are always jealous over themselves with Godly
Jealousy; still fearing lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve, through his
Subtilty, so their Minds should be corrupted from the Simplicity that is in
Christ. They think their Sins can never be mortified enough, nor their Hearts
be clean enough, nor their Repentance fruitful enough, nor their Devotion
ardent enough, nor their Charity great enough, nor any other acts of Religion
worthy enough of his gracious Acceptance, who loved them, and gave himself for
them. These are so far from being Discouragements, that they are great Motives
to a course of Proficiency. For though, when we have done all, we must
acknowledge our selves unprofitable Servants, and come short of our Duty, though
our Minds and Endeavors be sincere; yet considering, that not so much as a Cup
of cold Water loses its Reward, and considering the great Goodness of the Lord
Jesus, who is pleased with what we are able to do, (as he said of that Woman
who anointed his Head, Mark 14. She has wrought a good work on me: She has
done what she could; considering this, I say) the meanest Performances must
afford such a comfortable Prospect, as will invite the humble to proceed from
Virtue to Virtue, while all the Pomp of proud Men, with their stiff Necks and
inflexible Hearts, serves only to alienate their Minds from Religion by
degrees, till they come to that high pitch of Insolence which David speaks of,
Psalm 10. 4. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek
after God: God is not in all his thoughts.

4. FOUR THLY, An humble Mind helps Men on in their Christian Progress, by
preparing and inclining them to use the means of Holiness.

THE means of Holiness I now speak of, are Prayer, Sacraments, and Instruction.

1. FIRST, For Prayer: It is a great Instrument of Grace. If any of you lack
wisdom (says St. James) let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally
and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, James 1. 5. And this may be one
reason, why the same Apostle tells us, Chap. 4. 6. God gives grace to the
humble; that is, more Grace, greater measures of Divine Assistance, than he
gives to others; because they are of a more devout Spirit, more ready for any
opportunities of Praying, more constant, and fervent, and importunate at their
Devotion. The want of this pious Disposition proceeds, not more from an
earthly, heavy Temper, than from a secret Principle of Pride; from a fastidious
Mind in People, which makes Religion hang so loose about them, that every puff
of Wind carries it away? It Is a sign they have contemptuous Thoughts of God,
who make so slight of his Service, as if to honor him, to worship him, and to
bow down before him, were a precarious matter. To fold our Arms in a soft Bed,
when we should be prostrate in our Closets; to rove about, when the Church
wants us; or, to be busy about many things at home, when we should repair to
the Congregation, and take a share with those who choose the better part: This
looks as if we thought Almighty God beholding to us for our Service. And so, an
indifferent sort of carriage in the House of God, when we meet together for
Prayer, a wandering Eye, impertinent Talk, a stiff Knee, an irreverent Gesture:
This looks as if we counted our bare attendance in the Church, Civility and
Favor rather than Obedience: I am sure it is not suitable to the Temper of
those humble Souls, who reckon no Ground too vile, no Posture too lowly, no
Thoughts too awful, no Adoration too profound in the Presence of that Great
God, who searches the very heart and reins. And how can it be expected, that
People who thus bear themselves on high, should make any good improvements in
Religion? Or, that they should perfect Holiness in the fear of God, who despise
even the outward Beauty of it? How can it be expected, that they should receive
the Influences of Grace, who shut their Bosoms (as it were) against them? That
they should be trusted with a Divine Treasure, who carry themselves as if they
were rich enough, and had need of nothing? Or, that they should be blessed with
the Dew of Heaven, who are insolently supine, as if they had the Fortune of
Gideon's Fleece, to be full of Water, whilst the neighboring Ground was dry.
So proud People count others in comparison; and yet those humble Hearts that
are a thirst for God, and cry unto him like the parched Land, are more
receptive of Distillations from above, and much the more fruitful by them. God
hears their Cries; and, as a return of their Prayers, refreshes them with
increments of his Grace and Goodness; so that they proceed from Strength to
Strength, from Virtue to Virtue, from one degree of Grace unto another.

2. SECONDLY, As an humble Mind prompts Men to be diligent and devout at their
Prayers, so it inclines them to communicate often at the Altar; which is
another means of Holiness. Because this Sacrament was of our blessed Savior's
own appointment, and that too a little before he humbled himself (even to the
Death of the Cross;) because he was pleased to institute it for a standing
Memorial of his great Love to Mankind, in dying for all: And because he said,
(pointing to the Cup) Do this, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of
me. The Christian Church has in all times held this Solemnity in the greatest
Esteem and Veneration, as being a Christian Ordinance in the strictest Sense,
and after a more peculiar manner; and such was the Humility of Christians (in
the ancient Times especially,) that for fear they should not celebrate it often
enough, they did it daily. And certainly, were our Humility as deep as theirs,
our Obedience and Zeal as to this, would bear an equal proportion; as none
would think themselves to be above Ordinances, or without need of Ordinances,
so as to slight this; so very few would hardly once omit it, being such a
Sacred and Solemn part of Christ's Religion, especially considering how
mightily the use of it promotes our Progress and Perfection in Virtue. Here we
renew our Baptismal Vows: Here we repeat all acts of Mortification and
Repentance: Here we exercise our Faith and Hope with the greatest vigor: Here
we enliven and extend our Charity to all Mankind: Here we are taken up with the
Contemplation and Adorations of God: Here we exert all those Spiritual Graces,
which God gives us upon our devout Prayers. So that were this Ordinance
religiously and constantly used, according to the Original design and purpose
of our Savior, nothing could conduce more to our present and future Happiness,
than this blessed Mystery, so perfective it is of all manner of Virtue. The
lowly in Heart cannot but think themselves obliged to be frequent Attendants at
the Lord's-Table; what neglects, what contempt soever Men of unsubdued Spirits
may be guilty of, People of an humble and truly Christian Disposition, make a
Conscience of this their Duty, and are afraid of violating such an express,
such a plain Command; especial of living in the habitual and scandalous
violation of it. They consider the infinite Love of the Lord Jesus, who gave
himself for them; how equal it is, to express here their Thankfulness to him;
how pleasant, as well as frail the Duty is, and what infinite difference there
is between This Cup, and that which our blessed Savior drank of for us in his
Agony, and upon the Cross. They think of those Blessings which reward the Piety
of every devout Soul, and are sensible of their want of them. They impatiently
desire the Pardon of all their Sins, and that Supply of Grace, wherewith the
Holy Spirit refreshes the Hearts of all Worthy Communicants. And when the
Solemnity is transacted, their daily care is to order their whole Conversation
so, that they may not have received the Grace of God in vain. These are genuine
Fruits of Humility; and they all show, how effectually this single Virtue
serves to carry on the great Ends and Purposes of Christianity.

3. THE Third thing I mentioned as a means of Holiness, is Instruction. For,
how sincere so ever our Hearts may be, our Understandings are subject to so
many Mistakes and Errors, that good Guides are very necessary to inform us;
though some think they do not need them at all. This is no other than Pride of
Heart; nor do any stand in such great need of skilful and honest Guides, as
those who think they are able enough to guide themselves. See thou a man wise
in his own conceit? There is more hope of a fool than of him, says Solomon,
Prove. 26. 12. Such a Man hearkeneth to himself; and being in the hands of such
a weak and flattering Tutor, no good Proficiency can be expected from him: He
will ever be crooked, because he grows, leaning every minute on the left-side.
It Is hardly possible ever to set such an unlucky piece of a Man right, without
such a Miracle as in our Savior's time cured the Blind and the Lame. His
Knowledge and Perfection, are so great in his own Eyes, that the pretending to
rectify Faults is interpreted, either as Ignorance that is inexcusable,
because he is known no better; or, as Malice and ill Nature, for endeavoring
to fix a dark part there, which he thought splendid; which way so ever it be
taken, the proud Man thinks himself disgraced; he is therefore affronted,
because he is above Reproof or Advice: And thus the means of making him better
and wiser are quite frustrated. Therefore for our Progress and Perfection in a
Christian course, it is a most necessary Rule, which St. Paul gives us all to
go by; Let none think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but think
soberly. An humble Mind is tractable and docil; for the very Notion of Humility
includes a mean and slender Opinion of One's own self, and considering those
Commands, that in honor we should prefer one another, Romans 12. 10. and esteem
each other better than our selves, Phil. 1. 3. Nothing can be more agreeable to
a Spirit of true Humility, than to hearken to those, whose Place and Office it
is, by God's appointment, to direct and inform us, especially when the Holy
Scripture is their Rule; and to submit to all those means of Proficiency for
which the Scriptures themselves were written, whether it be Doctrine. or
Reproof, or Correction, or Instruction in Righteousness; that the good Man may
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works. Let the righteous smite
me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent
oil, which shall not break my head, says the holy Psalmist, Psalm 141. 5.

THE result of this whole Consideration is, That if Men expect ever to make
Improvements, so as to be wise unto Salvation, it is absolutely necessary for
them to mould their Hearts into an humble, soft, and ductile temper: To cast
out that scornful, disdaining Spirit, that sets up it self against God; to lay
aside all that selfconceit, which every where hinders the advancement of true
Religion; and to entertain such modest Opinions of their own Abilities and
Endowments, as are suitable to the condition of poor, shortsighted, infirm
Creatures, that without Light and Help from better Hands, and especially from
God's, could never arrive to a true state of perfect Happiness. In our travels
toward it, nothing can be of greater use to us, than an humble, plaint, and
manageable Disposition.

CHAP. VI. The Usefulness of Humility, in respect of the many Evils it
preserves us from.
THE next thing to be considered is, what an excellent Preservative a Spirit of
Humility is, from diverse Evils and Inconveniences, which are apt for want of
it, to fall out and gall us in this our Christian Progress. These Evils and
Inconveniences are hardly to be numbered: But yet I conceive, an humble Spirit
helps (at least, in a very considerable measure) to preserve us from them all,
by these following means.

I. BY governing and moderating our inordinate Desires. II. BY guarding us from
diverse hurtful Sins, which pride of Heart leads People unto. III. BY teaching
us to make good use of the Dispensations of Providence.
1. FIRST, By governing and moderating our inordinate Desires. There is hardly
a worse Plague, than a craving and greedy Appetite after the things that are in
the World; which St. John distinguishes into three sorts, 1 John 2. 16. The
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; that is,
Pleasure, Profit, and Honor. An inordinate desire of these things, does not
only come from an evil Principle, but also is of very evil Consequence; because
it cannot be answered. Such a Stomach is always craving; and the Wretch that
condemns himself to the slavish office of feeding it, cannot with all his
drudgeries satisfy it; for, instead of being filled, it stretches daily. From
these boundless Desires proceed a world of moral Evils, which torment Mankind,
and disorder the state of humane Affairs, as Envy, Murmurings,
Uncharitableness, Strife, and innumerable sorts of Injustice and Oppression: Of
all which, none are more apt to be guilty than proud Men, who enlarge their
desires as hell, and as death, that cannot be satisfied, as the Prophet tells
us, Hab. 2. 5. Indeed this does necessarily follow; for those inordinate
Cravings being both bred and cherished by the vast Opinion Men have of their
own deserts, they must needs think themselves very hardly used by God himself;
and, consequently, grudge, and grow impatient, troublesome, and vexatious, if
their Merits be not rewarded according to that estimate which they themselves
take of them. Nor is such a Reward possible to be given; because whatever their
Condition is, still there is something or other in it, which answers not
expectations. Moderate Prosperity can bear no manner of proportion to the
unmeasurable Opinion and Appetite of a proud Person; and therefore it cannot
possibly satisfy him, because the Enjoyments he has, fall so very short of
what he thinks he should have. And if God be pleased to heap up the things of
this World upon him in great abundance, neither does this please the vain
Wretch so as to satisfy him to the full, because the opinion of his Merits
still swells, as his Fortunes grow. His singular Acquisitions he takes as some
Reward of his singular Deservings; and as an argument and sign of something
more behind which he should, and is to have yet; till the Ambition resembles
Alexander's the Great, who could not be satisfied without getting the whole
World, nor indeed with it: Though he had overrun so great a part of it, yet he
cried for madness that there were no more Worlds for him to Conquer. Now, every
one may (...) what Mischiefs come from such wicked Tempers, and the World has
e^y day too great reason to lament them. They pla^y show, That to be of an
humble ^ind, is not only a very necessary (...), but an excellent Blessing too;
that which keeps One from many hurtful Exorbitances, and makes him incapable of
annoying, of being a grievance to himself and others: Having a mean Opinion of
his own Worth, he is therefore contented with his outward Fortunes, because he
thinks them greater than he deserves: He is satisfied with what is needful, and
that is but little in comparison, because Nature requires not much, unless
Vanity creates an Appetite after many things, which might better be spared,
because they are over-charging. And though a Man's particular Condition and state
of Life does call for more than what is just proportionable to the necessities
of Nature, yet the most chargeable stations are a^ded with much Excess; and
many Expenses should be retrenched, which are merely thrown away upon Luxury
and ^utter. Many great Incon^niencies and Evils might easily be avoided, would
Men but suffer their impertinent Ambition to shrink, and their Minds to be
governed by a Spirit of Humility. And, after all, the Laws of it require us,
whatever our outward Qualities and Circumstances are, to repose our Cares in
God's Bosom, where all humble Men think them so safely lodged, that there can
be no room in their own Breasts for those tumultuous Desires, which set the
World in an uproar: Without acting against their own friendly Principle, they
cannot but rest in Christ's Promise, that all these things shall be added unto
them, Matthew. 6. 33. that is, all the necessary things of this Life; and to vex
the World and our selves about more, is only to be mad to no purpose.

2. SECONDLY, Besides the Advantage an humble Mind yields us by governing and
regulating our Desires, there is this additional Happiness by it, That it
guards us from many hurtful Sins which Pride of Heart leads People to. This is
such a fruitful, teeming Vice, that there are not many Sins but what are nearly
related to it* Envy, Wrath, Contentiousness, Singularity, Intractability,
Vainglory, Avarice, Censoriousness, Affectation of Power, and diverse other
Vices, are either the immediate Issue, or the Kindred of This, and all are set
on work to support it. Any one may see how fatally it operates in undermining
and ruining the common Comforts of humane Life, together with the Peace and
Interests of all Societies, whether they be Civil or Sacred. It is Pride of
Heart that denies Obedience, that disjoynts Families, that oppresses and
tyrannizes over a Neighborhood, that disturbs Kingdoms, that divides Churches,
that levies Wars, that forms and maintains heterodox Opinions, that violates
Order, and (as a ready way to all manner of Mischief) that stops Men's Ears
against honest and faithful Counsels, because they are in their own Thoughts
wiser and better than others, and count it a diminution to be directed. Did
Humility take its due place under our Roofs, these various Evils would soon be
removed; Hagar and her Issue would be quite cast out of Doors, or at least,
secured from giving disturbance. The first work of Humility is to mould our
Hearts into an obsequious, pliable and pacifick Temper. With the lowly is
wisdom, says Solomon, Prove. 11. 2. He means that Wisdom which is from above,
which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy, as St. James describes it,
James 3. 17. The truth is, were nothing else to be considered, but the present
welfare of Societies, an humble Disposition is of such vast use for the
procuring and preserving of it, that if we might suppose a Community to consist
of the wisest Men that ever were in the World, and that they were to find out
and agree amongst themselves upon some one thing that should be most
advantageous for the Whole, they could not pitch upon any thing more
Beneficial, more conducing to every One's Good, than the universal Practice of
this admirable Virtue, which is the subject of this Discourse: It disposes Men
of all Degrees and Ranks, whether Superiors, Inferiors, or Equals, to behave
themselves so in their respective Stations, that Mankind could not choose but be
very happy even in this Life, were this single Virtue sincerely practiced by
all, as it should be: It disposes all Governors to condescend to those of low
estate, Romans 12. 16. To show themselves in all things patterns of good works,
Tit. 2. 7. To be Ministers and Servants to the rest, even as the Son of Man
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Matthew. 20. 27, 28. It disposes
such as are to be governed, whether in Church or State, to be subject to the
higher Powers, Romans 13. 1. To be subject to Principalities; to obey
Magistrates, Tit. 3. 1. To submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Deputies that are
sent by him, for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that
do well, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. It disposes People that stand upon the same Level,
and are of the same Degree, to be kindly affectioned one to another in
brotherly love, in honor preferring one another, Romans 12. 10. Not to do any
thing through ^rife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, each to esteem
other better than themselves, Phil. 2. 3. To be at peace among themselves, to
warn them that are unruly, to comfort the feeble-minded, to support the weak,
to be patient toward all men, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13, 14. In short, the Office of
Humility is to cast out of us the very Offal of humane Nature, to cure us of
all imperious, surly and perverse Humors, to sooth and soften our Tempers, to
animate us with a condescending, complaisant and gentle Spirit; to make us
tractable and easy, candid and sweet, benign and truly gracious, as it becomes
those whose mutual Necessities require them to stoop to each other, to relieve
each other, to bear with each others infirmities. And what a happy World would
it be, were we all thus minded! Those Vices which annoy and infest Mankind,
would hardly be so much as heard of; to be sure the mischievous Effects of them
would not be felt so as to disorder all Affairs, and to throw People into such
fits of Rage and Distraction, as if the World were nothing but a great Hospital
of Lunaticks.

3. A Spirit of true Humility would be a Sovereign Cure of th^se many Evils
which the foolish Pride of Men naturally brings upon us. And if it shall please
God, for particular Reasons, to suffer at any time some untoward Accidents to
happen, ^ich are not immediately and directly of our own ^sing, an Humble Mind
will help us to make such a wholesome use of them, as to turn that into good
Discipline, which to fa^dious and intractable Tempers is a very p^ ^re; which
is the last Argument of the great usefulness of this Virtue. Among these
Accidents, we may reckon Domestic Misfortunes, disappointments of
Expectations, Miscarriages in Friendship, loss of Liberty, decay or want of
Fortunes, and the like, contingent Pressures, which to Men of unsubdu'd Minds
are things very heavy and grievous to be born. But Plutarch has rightly
observed, That as Bees gather Honey out of the driest and prickliest Herb, so
Good Men may draw something that is proper and beneficial for them out of the
sharpest Misfortunes: There are no trials, but what will yield a kindly
extract, where Art and Industry undertakes Improvements: And if Men would apply
their minds to this Divine sort of Chemistry, they might at once sublimate
their Natures, and their Delights too, though it be by Fire ('it is a Proverbial
expression, which St. Paul uses, denoting some Difficulty, 1 Cor. 3. 15.) It
may be hard perhaps at the first, but Time and Assuefaction will help all Men
to draw good out of any Evil: Nor are any so well prepared for it, as Men of
humble minds; because idivers things will sink into their thoughts, which the
Hearts of others are too big and too hard for: As, That no Man ought to be
master of the World, or of his own Fortunes; but that we should rather make our
minds pliant and suitable to our Condition, whatever that is. If it be
Retirement we are confined to, the best way is to turn it into an opportunity
for Speculation; as, Socrates Philosophiz'd in Prison, and Plato betook himself
to close Studies, when he had fallen under the hatred of Dionysius; And thus
Knowledge and Wisdom might be the Extract of such misfortunes. Again, the
World, for great Reasons is subjected to variety of Chances, as Consort does
consist of great diversity of Notes, which yet serve altogether to make
Harmony, though some by themselves are flat and unpleasant: And why (faith the
Humble Man) should the course of things be altered for our sakes, when our
Betters before us have had their turns too, and when constant Experience shows
us, that every thing is sickle and liable to changes, and that the World is no
other than a Scene, that for a time pleases, but soon deceives the Eye; and the
consequent of this Meditation is, That we should set our Affections on things
above.

AGAIN, notwithstanding this diversity and uncertainty of Affairs, if People
would but make just Comparisons, they might easily find, that the measure of
their Wants bears no proportion to the greatness of their Enjoyments. But this
is a great fault, That they overlook many Blessings which are under their Eye,
and turn their Thoughts loose and fugitive after some little thing that is
lost; Like Children (says Plutarch) who, when a single Toy is taken from them,
cry and roar for that, neglecting all other things, which may be of greater
value. It Is pity that Men should outlive the Innocence of Childhood, and
retain its Follies: If they were governed by a Spirit of true Humility, they
would make such a Religious use of those Wants which they count great
Mischances, as to be thankful to God, that they are not greater nor more.

FURTHER yet; suppose One's Misfortunes to be great indeed, an humble Mind will
direct him to consider whether other Men's do not equal, and perhaps exceed
them: Few indeed take such an estimate of them, because they do not create such
an acute and home-pain, as the little Thorn which is in One's own Flesh. But we
see Afflictions are every where; and since they are common to all Mankind,
Humility teaches us to take it for our Comfort, that we are not singular; and,
instead of Murmuring, to express our Gratitude by Works of Charity and
Compassion to our Neighbors: This is to make a good use of God's
Dispensations; and to all this we are directed by an humble Mind.

AND yet, lastly, there is one thing more, which I should not forget or omit;
and it is, That we should set our Affections on things above, not on these
earthly matters. I have often thought on the Philosopher's Notion, That the
readiest way to be rich is, not to enlarge One's Estate, but to limit and
pinion the Desires: And this is the ready way to be happy also, to keep our
Minds from roving, and to confine them to the things which are at home before
us. When Misfortunes disquiet us, the great fault is within our selves, because
we want much of the Stoic, as well as of the Christian, and place Felicity,
not in the Practice of Virtue, but in outward foreign Acquisitions. And this is
the reason that we are so troubled about them, and dejected when we miss them;
whereas we should rather apply our Minds to that one thing necessary, which is
always ready at hand, and never to be taken away without our own consent.

HUMILITY prompts us to improve our Spiritual State by the Dispensations of God
in every mortifying Condition; to grow Wiser or Better by them, to become the
more Meek, the more Patient, the more Devout, the more mindful of our whole
Duty to God and Man.

AND if we be careful to answer the Ends of the Divine Providence to us after
this humble manner, though the things which the World thirsts after fall to a
low ebb, we shall have Waters enough within our own Cisterns to refresh our
Souls, till we get to those Rivers of Pleasure, which are at God's Right Hand
for evermore.

CHAP. VII. The Suitableness of Humility to the Mind of Christ.
HAVING considered the great Usefulness of this Virtue in several Respects, as
a very powerful Argument to enforce the Practice of it, I should now put an end
to that part of this Discourse, but that there remains behind yet one
Consideration more, which ought to be the most affecting and moving, because it
is to be drawn from the great Exemplar of all Holiness, the Lord Jesus; whose
own Humility is a Pattern which he seems to have singled out from the rest of
his Virtues, for the more peculiar imitation of his Disciples. Lest the
Grandees of the World, the Mighty and the Noble, should account this Virtue an
unmanly Habit, and look upon it with a disdaining Eye, as a thing infinitely
beneath them, the Son of God was pleased to Dignifie it with a singular Honor,
and to make it Glorious by inrobing himself with it, and by expressing his own
great Esteem of it to the very last.

THESE three things show the stupendous Nature of his Humility: 1. His
wonderful Incarnation. 2. His outward Condition of Life. 3. His dying upon the
Cross.

1. FIRST, His wonderful Incarnation. In the Second Chapter of St. Paul's
Epistle to the Philippians, where the Apostle does with such Earnestness and
Zeal conjure us to be humble-minded, he makes use of Christ's own Example, as
the most operative and irresistible Argument; because antecedent to his
Conception in the Holy Virgin's Womb, he was a Divine Person, actually having
the Divine Essence, really subsisting in the Divine Nature, full of the Divine
Majesty, and of all the Glories which are Essential to the Deity. In him dwelt
all the fullness of the Godhead Bodily, (that is, truly, really, and
substantially) as St. Paul speaks, Col. 2. 9. This is the meaning of those
words, Phil. 2. 6. Christ being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, (meaning, by Identity of Nature.) Notwithstanding which most
glorious State, he emptied himself, taking the form of a Servant, being made in
the likeness of Men; for that is the literal exact rendering of the words, Verse
7. This was most astonishing Humility! Deity and Manhood are things so vastly
distant, and the Distance between the Perfections of the one, and the
Infirmities of the other is so infinite, that the Son of God's Condescension in
taking humane Nature upon him, is impossible to be expressed, or comprehended.
God's being manifested in the Flesh, is one of those Mysteries which Angels
themselves desire to look into; stooping and bowing down, to pry into it, as
the Greek word signifies, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Where the Apostle alludes to the golden
Cherubims upon the Ark, which hovered with their wings over the Mercyseat, with
their faces one toward another, Exodus 37. 9. When the Power of the Highest over
shadowed the Virgin, so that God became Incarnate, a humane Body was prepared
him, that he might be in a fit state to transact the Mediator's Office, which
he had undertaken between his Father and Mankind. This was indeed a necessary
part of the Divine Economy, to bring about the great Ends of the New Covenant.
But yet the Son of God's submitting to the vile condition of Humanity, is his
subjecting himself thereby to the natural Weaknesses, Wants and Passions of
humane Flesh, was a far greater act of Humility than when he humbled himself to
Death; which yet the Apostle reflected on with such Admiration, Phil. 2. For a
Man to die, is the consequent of Nature; and whatever the death is, it is no
such wonder, as for God to be made Flesh. This was such a reconciling of
Extremes, as could not be brought about, but by stepping down to the very
lowest degree of Exinanition and Abasement.

2. AGREEABLE hereunto was the subsequent Condition of his Life, from the Womb
to the Grave: All along so humble in every Respect, that the World might easily
see his Intentions were, to banish all Pride out of the World, and to show what
a despicable thing humane Glory is in the account of God, whose own Glory
consists in the adorable Perfections of his Nature. To be entitled to such mean
Parentage, to take up with such poor Fortunes, to be born in the Stable of an
Inn, to be wrapped in the coursest Fashion, to be laid in a Manager; to appear
in such an abject, despicable Condition, and to make it One's choice too, few
(if any) of Adam's Race would stoop to this, were their Lots at their own
disposal; and yet this was the Condition which the most blessed Son of God
designedly took upon himself. Eight Days after his Nativity he submitted to
Circumcision, which was an argument of Men's Hereditary Pollutions, as well as
the Seal of God's Covenant, with the Jews: And by humbling, himself to the
bloody stroke of the Knife, he showed, that though he was perfectly Innocent, yet
he took on him the guilt of our Sins, as well as the shame (I had almost said
the scandal) of the extremest Poverty. St. Luke tells us, that he was subject
to his Parents, Luke 2. 5. And the Tradition is very Ancient, that as he grew
up, he wrought together with his reputed, Father in his Manual Occupation, though
he could have fed his Mother and him by Miracles; but he did no Miracle till he
was thirty Years old, and then those Works were for the Confirmation of his
Doctrines, and to prove his Divine Authority: And after Joseph's death (which,
it is thought, was a considerable time before he began to Preach) it is believed
that he used the Trade alone for his own and his Mother's support; making Yokes
and Ploughs, (says Justin Martyr) for which reason he was afterward called,
not only the Carpenter's Son, but the Carpenter, Mark 6. 3. As he was first
revealed to Shepherds, so his Retinue afterward consisted of Fishermen, and
such like humble People, whose Meanness the better fitted them to be Examples
of what he said in his Sermon on the Mount, Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 5. 3. Indeed the Labors of his Hands
ceased as soon as he entered on his Ministerial Office: Then he lived by the
Hands of others; which manner of living, though it was grounded upon an eternal
Principle of Justice, because the workman is worthy of his meat, as he said
himself, Matthew. 10. 10. yet in him it was an expression of great Humility,
because he took all Ministrations to him as things precarious, even from the
hands of those who confessed him to be the Son of God, the Lord of all: And at
the same time when his Necessities required him to make use of Money, that he
might for ever disgrace all inordinate love of it, he thought that vile Person
the properest to carry the Bag, who was a Thief and a Traitor. His whole Life
was a constant state of Poverty, having not (of his own) where to lay his Head,
after it was lifted up out of the Manger; nor was that poor resting place his
own neither. His patient bearing Aspersions and Reproach (the usual consequents
of a needy Condition) was a further argument still of the great Humility of his
Heart. High Stomachs are apt to be stimulated to that degree by one sharp
treatment, that sometimes nothing can allay, but a glut of Revenge; life it
self falls a sacrifice for it; and a little detraction is too often made the
Price of Blood. When the Lord Jesus was reviled, he did not at all revile
again, 1 Pet. 2. 23. but endured beforehand Crucifixion in his Name: A Glutton
and a Wine-bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, a Samaritan, a
Daemoniack, an Instrument of Beelzebub, a Perverter of the Nation: These and
the like Calumnies were Prefatory to that spightful Libel on the Cross, This is
the King of the Jews; and yet he bore all these Reproaches with the same
Humility and Evenness of Mind, wherewith he bore the solemn pompous Mockery of
the Reed and Purple Robe; formalities intended, not to inaugurate, but to
mortify him. It Is true, these (though very great) Indignities, did neither wound
his Flesh, nor hurt his Skin; and so in that respect were more tolerable than
the Buffettings, the Scourgings, the Coronary Thorns, which were a part of the
Epilogue. This was such a strange Form for the Son of God to take upon him,
that Pilate himself, though he knew nothing of his Divinity, showed him to the
People as an amazing Spectacle, Behold the Man, said he, John 19. 5. His
submitting to such shameful Scourgings and Dilacerations exceeded his stooping
down to the Basin of Water, to wash his Disciples Feet, before he was
apprehended: And yet that was an act of Humility, which our Savior himself
intended, as an Eminent Example for the very greatest in his Church to follow;
that they should do as he did unto them; because the servant is not greater
than his Lord; neither he that is sent, greater than he that sent him, John 13.
15, 16.

AND yet Thirdly, There is one thing behind still, which was more than this;
and that was his preparing a Lavatory for the whole World, by pouring out not
Water only, but Blood too, and that upon the Cross. St. Paul mentions this as
the most signal and stupendous Act of Humility, that he submitted even to
Crucifixion; which was not only the most Cruel, but the most Opprobrious kind
of Punishment.

AMONG the Jews a particular Malediction went along with Suspension, though the
Criminal did not expire and die by it, but was exposed upon a Gibbet, after he
had suffered death some other way. For the Law of God gave them no Authority to
take any Man's Life by this sort of Punishment. It only empowered them, after
they had stoned or strangled a Malefactor, to hang his breathless Body up for
shame and example sake; and that Ignominy was inflicted only upon Blasphemers,
Idolaters, and the like. It was a sign that such Criminals were under a
particular Curse; for he that is hanged, is accursed of God, says the
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 21. 23. This his Suspension was not the cause, but the sign of
his being accursed, a token of the Malediction, an argument that he was
detested by the God of Purity; that he was looked upon as one not fit to tread
upon the Earth, and therefore was hanged up in the Air, lest he should defile
the Land; and thence was to be thrown under Ground, in all haste, the very same
day, as an abominable Creature, that deserved presently to be removed out of
the Peoples view. If a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be put
to death, and thou hang him on a tree, his body shall not remain all night upon
the tree, but thou shall in any wise bury him that day; so the Law runs, Deuteronomy.
21. 22, 23. And some learned Jews tell us, That even the Tree on which such a
Malefactor was exposed, was to be buried with him; and so the Stone wherewith
he had been stoned, or the Sword wherewith he had been cut off, or the Napkin
wherewith he had been strangled, all was to be put into the Earth with him; and
all this to show, what a vile and abominable thing he was in the account of
God. Now by this the wonderful Humility of the Lord Jesus appears, that he was
pleased to submit to that reproach and shame which was due to those, and to
those only, who were particularly cursed. Had the Ignominy been all his
Suffering; had he not undergone the Pains, the Torments, the Death of the
cursed Tree, his condescending to take up the Opprobrious part was without
Parallel, and beyond all possibility of Example, considering the Innocence of
his whole Life, the Dignity and Greatness of his Person, and his own voluntary
susception of the most Infamous Punishment.

AND yet this is an additional Circumstance, That it was the Ignominy of the
Cross; which was a Roman Instrument of Death and Shame, distinct and different
from those that were ordinarily in use among God's People; nay, an Instrument
which had a peculiar Ignominy belonging to it. The Law of God equally reached
all Men that were obnoxious to the Penalty: The Sanhedrim had a Power of
bringing them all indifferently under the Malediction of the Gibbet: But among
the Romans Crucifixion was a servile Punishment (as 'twas often called) a
reproachful Death appointed for the most foeculent part of Mankind, chiefly for
Slaves, and more especially for such of them as ran away from the service of
their Lords, or plotted their Lord's ruin, or privily carried Information
against them to the Magistrate. Fugitives, Traitors, Sycophants, and such
infamous, abject Villains, were wont to be executed upon Crosses, as Dog; too
sometimes were. Very rarely did any Free man of Rome suffer after that manner,
unless he was found to be a Robber, an assassine, or a Forger of Deeds. In
short, it was such a base, disgraceful Punishment, that the first Christian
Emperor Constantine the Great, took away the further use of it, because the
Savior of the World had suffered the shame of it in his Person. Lord! what a
low step of Condescension was This? That He, who was in the form of God,
clothed with Majesty and Honor from everlasting: That He, who thought it no
Robbery to be equal with God (it was a Dignity which he had a Natural Right
unto) that He should not only conceal this his Greatness, and appear in the
shape and fashion of a Man, but should moreover take on him the form of a
Servant, the most contemptible Man, and at last submit to the Punishment of the
vilest and most proffigate Slave! No Wonder can exceed or come near this;
unless it be, that sinful wretched Man should be proud, when God himself was
pleased to be thus humble.

ONE would think, that if haughty People would but reflect with one Eye upon
their own state, and with the other behold the most Holy Jesus, they could not
but be abashed to find so absurd a dissimilitude; themselves glittering like so
many Morning-Stars, with a borrowed Light; and the Sun of Righteousness wading
in an Eclipse all along from his first Rising to his Bed. 'Twere strange, if
shame did not cover their Faces at last; if a Comparison so very unequal were
not enough to baffle a foolish Vice; if this alone were ot of sufficient force,
not only to supplant its Credit and Interest in the World, but to put it out of
countenance also. As there never was any Sorrow, so never was there any
Humility like his, for Quality and for Degree too: Nor indeed is any such
proportion expected of us; though according to humane Reasoning, our Measure, as
to this, ought (if possible) to exceed. The Son of God could not but know his
own Dignity and Excellencies: He could not but be conscious of the infinite
Glories of his Divine Nature, and of the Perfections of his Humanity too, by
means of its Hypostatical Union with the Deity. Upon this account, had he set
himself out, according to his true, intrinsic Worth, all the Splendour in the
World had been infinitely short of his just Due. But his Business here was not
to appear as the Son of God, but to act as a Mediator, as our Substitute and
Proxy. Accordingly, as he put on our course Clothing, so from the Manger to the
Cross he wrapped himself up in such a mean Disguise, as was suitable to the
great Design upon which he came out of his Father's Bosom. When he said to his
Disciples, I am lowly in heart, he spoke as the Son of Man, that was not to
make a pompous show of the Glory he had from everlasting, but was to live in an
obscure Condition, to end his Life with Contumely and Disgrace, and throughout
the whole course of his Exinanition, was to act and suffer below his Great
Self, beneath his Dignity. In all this he was a charming Pattern to his
Followers, that we should learn of him to step low, and to walk in that lowly
manner, which, though it was beneath him, is very fit for us; answerable to
things of our low size, very suitable to Creatures, whose first Principles are
Dust and Clay, and whose fall would have sunk us lower by far than into our
original Earth, had not the Son of God humbled himself so, as to come down from
Heaven, and to descend into Hell too for us. In him, Humility was a
Degradation; in us, it is a standing upon our own proper and due Level: Which
makes the Example carry the greater force, because it proposes to us, not any
sort of Condescension, strictly and rightly so called (much less such
Condescension as was in the Lord of Life and Glory) but such lowliness of Heart
as is proportionable to our true Quality and Deserts; and, consequently,
agreeable to the Laws of Justice.

I told you before, That Humility consists in a fair and equal Opinion of One's
own self, according to his exact Rate and intrinsic Value: And such an Opinion
must needs be very mean and low, because if we take a true estimate of what we
really have, and of what we really are, we cannot find in our selves any thing
considerable, setting our Demerits and Guilt aside; to be sure, nothing
considerable enough to out weigh, or balance that Guilt. So that every touch of
Pride is so far the exalting of One's self above measure, which is therefore
the more Criminal, because it is a direct Affront to the Savior of the World,
whose unfathomable Humility was intended for an everlasting Law, to exact of
Mankind the profoundest Submissions, since he, the Son of God, was pleased to
set so great a Price upon the Duty, by becoming a Precedent to us in his own
most Sacred Person.

AND now, what shall we say more to encourage or oblige us to the Practice of
it? A Virtue so graceful in its own Nature, so desirable for it self; a Virtue
that is justified upon so many Principles of common Reason; a Virtue so adapted
to our great Necessities; a Virtue so instrumental toward our greatest Good; a
Virtue so productive of all interior Peace and Complacency, so necessary and
useful for our growth in Grace, such a security and defense against the
Malignity of outward Accidents: Lastly, a Virtue so Divine and Honorable for
its near Relation to the only begotten of God, the Author and Finisher of our
Faith: This so excellent a Perfection carries with it such present Rewards, as
are not to be exceeded but by the actual Possession of that most blessed State
which is as yet in futurity: The truth is, Humility of Mind is a very proper
Preparative for it. The Lord Jesus, who came down from Heaven, knew best what
Virtues and Dispositions of Soul are necessary for us, in order to our happy
being there. He has not given us so many Precepts in vain, nor are his Commands
only to try and exercise our Obedience. Nay, the Duties he exacts of us are not
purely Conditions neither, things fixed by the mere Pleasure of God, without
which we shall not be happy. We cannot be truly happy without them; without
them our Nature is not capable of the Felicities which are above. They are
therefore both necessary Conditions, and suitable Qualifications too; proper,
genuine and kindly Preparations to fit and dispose us for a Heavenly state: And
of these noble Qualifications, an humble Temper is one; it has a direct and
natural Tendency to fit us for that Place, where there has been no room since
Lucifer's Apostasy (nor ever will be again) for Lucifer's Vice, the damned
Original of Strife, Passion, and Disobedience.

A lowly Heart is fixed and ready for the Works in Heaven, to admire and adore
the Father of Spirits, and to fall down prostrate before him; to glorify him
in the blessed Choir of Angels; to bless him for our being written in the
Lamb's Book of Life; to praise him for being counted worthy of the least degree
of Glory; to rejoice that others have their share of it also; to triumph for
being found at the Feet of God's Saints, as Ignatius the Martyr wished he might
be found in Christ's Kingdom at the Feet of St. Paul; to join with all the
Spirits of just Men made Perfect, in a Life of everlasting Harmony; to live on
to everlasting Ages in the ravishing Entertainments of a serene and delightful
World, in a fixed and unchangeable state of Rest and Peace, of Order and
Obedience, of Joy and Love, continually accompanied with Hallelujah's and
Hosannah's, and the profoundest Adorations: These will be our Works in Heaven
when it shall please God to bring us thither, and we endeavor our selves to
go. And all these Works Humility of Mind does naturally serve to fit and
dispose us for: Which shows, that we cannot take a more Religious and Prudent
course now, than to work our stiff and stubborn Hearts into an humble Temper,
and to apply them to the constant exercise of those things which help at once
both to express and to increase it. For as all Habits are acquired by the daily
repetition of single acts, so are they confirmed and increased by it.

THIS, as well as other Virtues, grows by degrees, by our using our selves to
the familiar Practice of it. The more we exercise acts of Humility, and the
more frequent those acts are, the more humble do our Minds become: He that is
lowly, will thereby be the more lowly still; due Expressions are both the Signs
of an humble Disposition, and the Instrumental Causes of its Increment. For
which reason I shall not enlarge this Discourse, by directing you, under a
distinct particular Head, to the proper means of Humility (though it would be a
very Practical Method) but for the greater brevity, shall choose rather to
proceed to that which I proposed as the Third and last General, viz. To show
after what manner we are to express this great Christian Virtue; which, I
presume, will serve instead of all, as arguments and tokens of Humility, and as
means of it likewise.

CHAP. VIII. How Humility is to be expressed, as by serving the Honor of God.
1. NOW the first and noblest Expression of a lowly Heart is, to apply it self
to those things which are for the Honor of God. If it be the part of all
humble Men, in honor, to prefer one another, Romans 12. 10. certainly nothing
can be so necessary and proper for them, as to seek God's Honor, to do the
things that are for God's Honor, and to prefer God's Honor before and above
all. This is a most genuine act of Humility, because we are infinitely below
him; derive all from him, and depend every minute upon him; as the Supreme
Author of our being, the sole Arbiter and Disposer of our Fortunes. Upon this
account, to do the things which are for his Honor is very natural to an humble
Soul, possessed with a sense of his Glory and Excellencies, of his Dominion and
Authority over all, and of the inexhaustible Riches of his Goodness and Love to
Mankind. And as this is an argument of Humility, so it is a good means to
amplify and improve it. For the more we are concerned for God's Honor, and
the more we intend it, the more we must needs think on him, and the more
sensible still we must needs be of the reasons of this our Duty toward him.

HE is hereby the more before our Eyes; his Perfections hereby appear every day
to us the more Glorious; the vast distance between his infinite Majesty, and us
poor contemptible Creatures, begets in us still the greater Reverence; his
Power strikes us with the more piercing awe; the Consideration of his
All Sufficiency abounds the more; and the sense we have of his Mercy,
Kindness and Truth increases daily. In short, the more we entertain our Souls
with Contemplations of God's Greatness, the more we find our selves obliged to
honor him; and the more we study to do that, the lower are our Souls apt to
sink under the due apprehension of our own meanness. Now, for the better
exercising our selves as to this matter, we must note, That there are diverse
ways of serving God's Honor; at present I shall mention only these Five.

I. BY ascribing unto God all the Good we have. II. BY making him such humble
Returns, as may in some measure testify our Obligations to him. III. BY
devoting our selves to his Worship. IV. BY giving our selves up to his
Disposal. V. BY depending upon him, and trusting to him, in reference to all
Events: And by every one of these ways of serving God's Honor, must we express
our Humility.
1. BY ascribing unto God all the Good we have. There is no such Child of a
Man, as he who becomes his own flatterer; who is so full of himself, as if he
were the Maker and Master of his own Fortunes. And yet the Folly would be the
more pardonable, were it attended with the Innocence of a Child. But in this
there is a mixture of Sacrilege with Vanity, because such Parasites rob God of
his Glory, to bestow it at home. This is the ridiculous Sin of assuming
Spirits, That they engross the Honor that should be returned to the Divine
Being; they sacrifice to their own nets, and burn incense to their own drags,
as the expression is, Hab. 1. 16. That is, give themselves the praise of all,
either as the sole, rightful Proprietors, or, at least, as Partners and Sharers
with God. Is not this great Babylon that I have built, for the house of the
kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? said that
haughty Prince, Dan. 4. 30. Answerable to which is the echo you may hear from
every proud Heart: Are not these the Perfections that I have wrought? Are not
these the Excellencies that I have deserved? Are not these the Rewards that I
have purchased? Nay, is not that the Heaven too, which I have merited and
bought? When this Vice grows so rank in the Mind, so high and strong, it is a
plain argument, that the Soil is very bad, and that good Husbandry has been
wanting, since the evil One sowed the Tare. An humble Heart is necessarily
productive of all self-denial: It Is the most indisposed, most unapt thing in
the World to exalt it self, and especially to magnify it self against the
Lord, as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 48. 26. Because it is in him that we live,
and move, and have our beings, Acts 17. 28. Because the whole disposing of the
Lot is of the Lord, however it be cast into the Lap, Prove. 16. 33. Because
every good gift, and every perfect, is from above, and comes down from the
Father of lights, James 1. 17. Because we all live (the very best and greatest
of us) upon God's Providence, and stand indebted to his Goodness for all that
we enjoy, and for all that we hope for; it is a most natural act of an humble
Soul, to ascribe all we have, and all we expect to have, to him whose Mercy is
over all his Works. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give
the praise, for thy mercy, and for thy truth sake, said the Psalmist, 115. 1.
By the Grace of God I am what I am, says St. Paul. And again, Not I, but the
Grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. And again, By Grace are ye
saved, through Faith, and yet not of your selves; it is the gift of God: Not of
works, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. These are very humbling
Reflections, that we are Debtors to God's Goodness, for all our Enjoyments; for
those Advantages which are most valuable and excellent. And this affords us a
sure Rule to go by; on every occasion to give God the Praise and Glory of all.
Whatever those things be, which are ready to puff vain People up; whether they
be natural Endowments of the Body or the Mind: Whether they be accidental
Acquisitions, such as a plentiful Fortune, worldly Greatness, popular Esteem,
and the like: Or, whether they be moral Accomplishments and Perfections,
whereby we become wiser and better than other Men: Still to look up to God as
our Creditor and Benefactor, and with religious Bashfulness and Modesty to
slide away from all danger of self-assuming, to beat off every Temptation, and
every rising of the Heart toward it. Indeed it would be well for us, to cover
and conceal these things from our own view: But if we find that too hard a Task
(as sometimes it is) to blind and cozen our Eyes by such an honest Artifice, we
should remember, That the Office of every humble Man is to look, not so much on
his own things, as on the things of others, Phil. 2. 4. that is, others that
excel us. To compare our selves, not with our selves, or with those behind us,
but with such as outdo and outstrip us; and when we turn our Eyes homeward,
to look upon the black Feet, as well as upon the gaudy Plumes; this would be a
proper way to make us sink into a just proportion, and to destroy all that
Loftiness, which at every turn is apt to shoot out of the Mind on a sudden,
like Jonah's Gourd; which was stiff and shady for the time, but the less
valuable, because subject to be smitten with a little Worm. Any just Reflection
is enough to spoil and ruin that high Conceit, which vain Persons entertain of
their Accomplishments and Perfections; because many times they are but
imaginary; and when they are real, the Honor must be given where it is due;
namely, to that Supreme Being, who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not, says the Apostle, James 1. 5. It Is no reproach to receive at God's Hands:
The only thing wherewith Men are upbraided is, That they arrogate to themselves
the Blessings they receive, as if their own Hands had created them. Therefore
to express your Humility, and at the same time to increase it, keep your Minds
full of God; make him the Theme for your Meditations, that he may be the Object
of your Fear and Love: Let the sense of his Goodness abide, and dwell with you
continually. Consider what you are, by whose Grace and Bounty you are so; and
what you have, which you did not receive; and in all your actions be sure to
manifest the great sense you have of his Divine Providence, of whose Mercy
alone it is, that you are not worse than nothing. This is to honor God after
an humble manner, and to express your Humility indeed; to exalt him in your
Hearts, and him only; to cast down all Imaginations, and every high Thought
before him; to make his Name and his Praise Glorious in that Temple of his,
which the Devil would have you desecrate, by setting up an Idol in God's room.

2. SECONDLY, Another way of serving God's Honor, and consequently, of
expressing the lowliness of your Hearts is, to make him such humble Returns, as
may in some measure testify your Obligations to him Where there is a true and
thorough sense of that, the next natural Thought will be that Divine Enquiry of
David's, What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me?
Psalm 116. 12. Considering that we derive all from him, and owe all to him, it
is highly reasonable for us to make such Retributions, as are arguments and
significations of his Dominion and Goodness over all, and of our daily
Dependence upon him. This was the Ground and Original of those Sacred Rites and
Solemnities, which thinking Men in all Ages of the World found themselves
obliged to use, by the Laws of Natural, as well as Revealed Religion. The
rearing of Altars, the offering of Sacrifices, the building of Temples, the
paying of Vows, the hallowing of Times, the setting apart of Lands, the
presenting of First Fruits, the sanctifying of Persons, the use of Musical
Instruments, and all those great and costly Solemnities which were thought most
suitable to the Divine Majesty, and most proper to set forth the Honor of it;
they were all instituted out of a just Sense, and in humble Acknowledgment of
God's Absolute Right and Sovereignty over all. They were the best outward
Returns poor Creatures could make him, for his inexhaustible Goodness to
Mankind; and as the Sense of it increased upon the promulgation of the Gospel,
so the Zeal of lowly Hearts increased with it. Their only Ambition was, who
should do most for God's Honor; and who should erect the noblest Monuments of
Pious and Thankful Minds. From Age to Age Humility was sedulously working;
till, first in the Church of Rome, and then in other Churches, sacrilegious
Hands laid hold on some of God's Propriety, to maintain Voluptuousness and
Pride, and threw away a great deal, even of the Shewbread of the Sanctuary
among Dogs.

IT would be in vain in this degenerate Age to tell Men, what they should do,
as to things of this Nature. But, God's Honor is to be served still; nor are
we any more excused from Offices of Gratitude and profound Respect, than our
Forefathers were. There are eternal Laws of Reason, which oblige us to render
all possible Acknowledgments to the Great Maker, Governor and Disposer of all
things; nor is any thing more becoming Men of humble Minds and Tempers. His
great Name is still to be had in Honor; his Day to be kept Holy unto him; his
Word to be reverenced and obeyed; the Seals of his Covenant with us to be used
so, as may be most for his Glory; his House to be frequented as the House of
Prayer; and his Service there to be performed with that Gravity and Decorum,
with that Order and Solemnity, with that Fervor and Zeal, with that Devotion
and Presence of Mind, as becomes People that appear in the Presence of that
infinite Being who is to judge us at the last Day, and to Reward us all
according to our Works. Had we all right Notions of God, and did we daily
consider what worthless, necessitous Beings our selves are; that wait upon God,
as the meanest Animals do, that he may give us our Meat in due season; that are
troubled presently, when God hides his Face; that die and return to our Dust,
when God takes away our Breath: Were nothing but this to be considered, the
Power of common natural Conscience would be enough to humble us into a
readiness of making such retributions of Gratitude, as I have now mentioned.

3. AND the same Power of Conscience would bring us daily upon our Knees, and
lay us prostrate on the Earth, to adore him, to praise him for the Glory of his
Majesty, to implore his great Compassion, and to give him Thanks for the
constant Operations of his Mercy; which is the third way of serving his Honor.
By these acts of Worship we declare our belief, that God is a superexcellent
Being; of such Perfections in his Nature, as render him an Object most worthy
of all Adorations: By these acts we confess, that he hearkens to all our
Addresses; that he is able to answer all our Wants; that he is ready to receive
our Invocations, and to fulfill our Desires; and that our concerns are entirely
in his Hand, and at his Disposal. The sense we have of his Omniscience, Power,
Goodness, Wisdom, and Providence over all, gives life and breath to our
Supplications; and therefore he says himself, whosoever offers me thanks and
praise, he honors me, Psalm 50. 23. Now, none are so kindly conditioned for
all this, as People of lowly Hearts; because they are most possessed with the
admiration of God's Excellencies; most apprehensive of his All Sufficiency;
most sensible of their own Defects and Indigencies; most apt to betake
themselves to him, and to run under his Wings for Shelter and Protection. This
therefore being so natural to humble Spirits, we cannot better express this
great Virtue, than by addicting our Souls to the Love of God's Worship; by
giving our Minds to it, by making it as Solemn as we can, by such external acts
of Reverence as are the ordinary significations of a lowly Disposition; and
exemplary too in their Consequence, that others may thereby learn how to
glorify God, as well as we. A careless and supine behavior, as if the
worshipping of God were an indifferent, nay, a trifling matter, a sleepy Eye,
an inflexible Body, and such like anomalous, odd Figures which some People
make, are as unsuitable in a Christian Oratory, as changing of Money was in the
Temple; and for this reason ought to be cast out, because instead of expressing
a slender and low Opinion of One's own self, they rather argue Men to have very
mean and contemptuous Thoughts of God. O come, says David, let us worship, and
fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Due Notions of an Omnipotent
Creator; a due remembrance of the Dust, out of which we were formed, and into
which we shall return; and due Consideration of the Hand which has kept us
from dropping into it as yet: These and the like humble Thoughts are enough to
strike us down into the most reverent and lowly Prostrations.

IT IS true, there is a voluntary Humility which carries an ill Character with
it, Col. 2. 18. But this is impertinently objected against the use of these
external acts in the Worship of God, because it is joined there with the
worshipping of Angels. Such voluntary Humility is indeed criminal, when People
address themselves to Angels, as the Ethnicks did to Demons, as to Mediators
and Intercessors for them to the Supreme Being, and out of a great awe and fear
of approaching immediately unto God himself. This Humility is culpable: But
this makes nothing against those outward acts of Religious Adorations, which
are directed to the Creator of all things. For such acts are not properly
voluntary; they are God's due, to which he has an indefeisable Right by having
created the Body; and for that reason it is Idolatry to give them to a
Creature, because it is the giving away of God's Honor and Right; a Right
founded upon an Original Law, which Adam and his whole Family brought into the
World with them.

TO argue therefore against such solemn acts of Worship, from such weak
Topics, betrays great affectation of Mind, a love of singularity and
stubbornness; like that quarrelsome Temper that is in some, who lie still upon
the catch, and want only an opportunity of starting a pretense. A Mind that is
truly humble, truly conscious and sensible of the vileness of such a miserable,
sinful Creature as Man is, cannot use a more genuine Method of expressing its
Sense of this vileness, than by those Reverent Gestures, in the Solemnities of
God's Worship, which would be suitable, significative, and justifiable, were
they not commanded.

4. BESIDES these ways of expressing our lowliness, there is yet a Fourth, viz.
By giving our selves up to God's disposal. Resignation is an inseparable
Property of an humble Soul; nor is it ever so becoming and agreeable, as when
we absolutely resign our selves up into the Hands of God. This is greatly to
honor him; because it is a manifestation of those Divine Attributes, wherein
his Glory does consist. It is a confession that he is a Being of uncontrollable
Power, not bounded or governed, but by the Perfections of his own most blessed
Nature: That he has an absolute Dominion and Authority over us, as over his
own; and that he can exercise his Power when, and as he pleases: That he is
just in all his Proceedings, acting always according to the Equal Laws of his
own Eternal and Infallible Reason. That he is most perfectly Wise in ordering
all things according to the Counsel of his Will; and so transcendently Good,
that he disposes Affairs in this World, in such a manner as is best, and in
such a way as is most safe and proper to lead us into another World, where
alone there is unmixed Happiness, and that Happiness everlasting. These are the
Religious Sentiments of every humble Man that is rightly instructed: And upon
these sound Principles, he believes it his safest, and most necessary course,
to throw himself at God's Feet, and under God's Hand, neither thwarting nor
opposing his Will, nor murmuring at his Providence, but submitting universally
to his Commands and Economy. For all such stubbornness, and strivings, such
repinings, and disobedience, and reluctancies proceed from Hearts that are
lifted up and swell against their Maker; whose Wisdom, Truth, and Goodness they
call in question, and in opposition to whose Pleasure they set up their own
Lusts and Passions; the sturdy Vices of those aspiring Angels, who once made a
War in Heaven, which ended presently in a total defection from the Father of
Spirits. Therefore, that we may express and increase that Humility of Heart,
which the Savior of Mankind has with such earnestness recommended to us all,
that he may stock and people Heaven with New Colonies, we must submit our
selves unto God in all things.

FIRST, By resigning up our Understanding, where he proposes matters to our
belief. The only Enquiry to be made as to this is, Whether God has revealed
and declared those matters? If that be once out of dispute, we must acquiesce
in the Revelation. How remote soever the things to be believed are from the
reach of our finite Reason, and how seemingly impossible soever they may
appear, we must receive them upon the Credit of God's Veracity, because he
cannot Lie; it is inconsistent with the Perfections of his Glorious Nature, to
be capable of deceiving, or being deceived. Humane Reason is neither fixed, nor
large enough to be the Standard of all Truth; nor can we avoid the guilt of a
thousand Errors, if we take nothing, but what holds just even measure with our
finite Capacities. Let the Point be never so disputable to our own thinking,
this must decide the Doubt, God has said it, and required us to believe it,
therefore it must be true.

SECONDLY, We must resign our Wills up, where God requires our Obedience.
Because his Commands cannot but be Righteous, Good, and Holy, as his Nature is,
they bring with them necessary Obligations; nor must our sensual Inclinations
carry it against God's Law, how strongly soever the Biass that is in our own
Nature may be drawing of us away from the Rule. In this case we must deny our
selves, renounce our Animal Satisfactions, and follow the Will of the God of
Purity, though all our Interest and Pleasures lie at stake. For, though God has
obliged himself to provide Necessaries for us, yet he is not concerned to
humor us: Nor is it our business to cram our Purses, or to gorge our wanton
Appetites, with the Honors and Luxuries they crave for, but to serve God; to
seek the kingdom of God, and his Righteousness. Whatever he says unto you, do
it; as the Holy Virgin directed the Servants at the Wedding, when she pointed
to Jesus, John 2. 5.

THIRDLY, We must submit unto God, by resigning up our Persons and Fortunes
also to his Pleasure, when his Providence shall call for that expression of
Humility; let our present Circumstances be never so mortifying. We must not
think of ever returning into a Paradise here below; or, that the Lands we are
driven out into will lose their fertility of Thorn and Thistles. The Sins we
act, do help to renew and aggravate the primordial Curse; and as long as we go
upon such prickly Ground, no wonder if we are made, for the most part, to
smart, and sometimes to bleed also. Yet God, who brings Good out of Evil,
has made this our way to the Celestial Eden; and a Thorn in the Flesh serves
to accelerate our course thither. We may be sure God intends it to quicken us;
and we should the rather be contented with his ordering of us, because he is
the only Wise Being, that knows what we most need, and what is most proper
for us. Our Understandings at the best are very shortsighted (all humble Men
must needs think so) and our Desires lean so aukardly, toward an infinity of
things which would hurt us, that were we to be chusers for our selves, we
should repent of nothing sooner than of our own options. It Is an happy thing,
that we are all under God's Government and Care; and we may be sure, that as
long as by patient continuance in well-doing we seek for Glory, Honor, and
Immortality in another World, he chooses those things for us, which our
Necessities most require; and in the Faith of that we should evermore submit to
his Wisdom, and learn, in what state soever we are, therewith to be content, as
that humble-minded Apostle was, Phil. 4. 10.

5. HAVING proceeded thus far on the first Point, of expressing our Humility by
serving God's Honor, there is but one Direction more for me to offer, before I
quit this Consideration: And it is, That we depend upon him and trust to him,
in reference to all Events. This is an honoring of God for the same Reasons,
and upon the same Grounds I mentioned before; because by acts of this Nature we
manifest our belief of his Omniscience, Wisdom, Goodness, and the like glorious
Perfections, which are the prop and stay of all our Hopes. By virtue hereof
every humble Man finds it his best Wisdom, to cast all his Care on him, who
cares for us all, and to commit himself to him in well-doing, 1 Pet. 4. 19.
For were such Men left purely to their own Conduct and Forecast, they could not
but act with tremulous Motions, with many Doubts and Fears, with mistrustful
Thoughts, and misgiving Minds, because they are so conscious of their manifold
Weaknesses and Imperfections. It is therefore very safe and suitable for Men of
lowly Hearts, to leave all future contingencies to the Great Governor of the
World; with such confidence as is consistent with Humility; and with a modest
assurance, that all things shall work together for their Good. I confess it is
scarcely possible, especially for the more thinking and sagacious sort of Men,
to be utterly unmoved, unconcerned in their Minds at the prospect of Affairs,
when they appear, though at some distance, with a melancholy Countenance,
louring, dolesome Weather, which affects the Sense with the appearance of a
Storm, must needs make some impressions upon the most Religious Minds. But this
is possible for us, and this we should be very careful of, in all ominous and
threatening Circumstances, to act without fretting at the Dispensations of God's
Providence, without despondency, without those anxious and inordinate
Solicitudes which undisciplined, and unsubdued Spirits are subject unto.
Because there is an Almighty, All-sufficient God that presideth over the
Universe; that observes all the Parts of it, and all Motions in it; that holds
his Hand over the whole Series of Affairs; that foresees all Contingencies, and
whatsoever is likely to happen; that governs and directs every thing so as may
be best for his own Glory, and for the Good of the whole World; that takes a
more particular Care of good Men; that is with them in all their Troubles, how
great and how many soever their Troubles be; that orders their Afflictions as
is most for their Advantage: Upon these Principles which are so clear and
certain, we should, with all lowliness of Heart, compose our selves into such a
state of acquiescence and satisfaction, in respect of all Events; as, to live
still in Hope (a firm and immovable Hope) of seeing the Goodness of God, who
gives us all things richly to enjoy: To submit to his Providence; to cherish
our Souls with the continual belief and consideration of it; to be deeply
afraid of nothing before us, but a bottomless Pit; to rely upon God's Mercy in
doing the Works of our Callings. In a word, we should humbly wait God's
leisure, to give us either those very things we desire, at his own time, and in
his own way; or (which he never fails to give) other Blessings, which he
sees far more profitable and necessary for us.

CHAP. IX. How Humility is to be expressed, by not making our own Esteem the
End of our Actions.
2. HAVING thus provided for the Honor of God; we must in the Second place,
beware of making our own Reputation the principal End of our Actions.

THIS is utterly inconsistent with an humble Mind, and with the Laws of our
Religion: The only difficulty is, How to reconcile it with that of Solomon,
Prove. 22. 1. A good Name is rather to be chosen than great Riches. But this
difficulty is inconsiderable, if we distinguish, between a Good, and a Great
Name; and between making it our ultimate Design, to feed a vain glorious
Humor, and valuing it only as a means in order to an End which is truly
Honorable.

FOR the clearing of this Matter we must observe, That a Good Name is that
Esteem which arises from Actions that are Praiseworthy: Virtue is very
laudable Justice, Meekness, Charity, Sobriety, and the like, are things which
we honor all Men for; nor is any one well esteemed without them. By
dis-regarding these Virtues Men supplant their own Design; and ruin their
Reputation even when they think to raise it. But of all Virtues, Humility
yields a most rich Perfume, and that which is better than precious ointment,
Eccles. 7. 1. To condescend to Men of low Estate, and to inferior Offices, is
a thing which carries its own Praise with it; and this is well called, an
honest Reputation. Now such a Name as this we are allowed to have, because it
is the necessary Result of good Actions, especially when we have to do with
People who have a due regard for Virtue and Religion. Nay, considering how
useful it is toward the setting forth of God's Glory, we are obliged also to
seek it in some measure. For hereby we are the more able to do good in our
Generation; to instruct, to admonish, to show People their Duty, and their true
way to everlasting Happiness. The good things they see in such Directors, and
the good Opinion they have of them, serves t^ ^ake their Admonitions and
Examples the more operative: Whereas nothing is more Natural, than to discredit
and abhor those whose improbity has rendered them deservedly infamous; when
their Names cast a very ill savor, and especially when the Stench is very
strong and stale too, every wise Man will be jealous of them; at least, afraid
and shy of listening to their Counsels. Hence it is, that we are commanded to
think on those things which are of good report, Phil. 4. 8. Because an honest
Fame is so necessary to make us serviceable to God, and useful to the World in
our respective Callings. And hence it was, that such care was taken in the
first Ages of Christianity, of intrusting those with Sacred Employments who
were Men of honest report, Acts 6. 3. Men of good Report among them that were
(as yet) without the Church, 1 Timothy 3. 7. That the uprightness of their Lives,
and the honesty of their Reputation might help to bring unbelievers into it,
and be a means of promoting and carrying on the great Ends of Religion. Upon
this account, it is not only an unrighteous act in it self, but an injury to
the Church too, and great Impiety toward God himself, to defame others, and
especially those whom God has set apart to serve him in any Public Station:
To reproach and rifle them of their good Names, has a direct and immediate
tendency to eclipse the Glory of God, which never shines more than when the
Hearts of People are brought in Obedience to the Truth. And for the same
reasons every innocent Person is bound in Conscience to defend, as well as to
seek, his honest Reputation, by all fair and justifiable Methods; because it is
a matter of such moment in its Consequences. A clear Example whereof we have in
St. Paul, when some endeavored by false and unjust Accusations to render his
Labors in the Church at Corinth unsuccessful; though he was so humble as to
confess the Crimes of his former Life, with this modest Hyperbole, that he was
the chiefest of sinners; yet, when the Honor of God, and the Good of Men's
Souls came to be concerned in his Reputation, that he might continue an
Instrument of advancing both, you see by 2 Cor. 11, and 12th. Chapters, how
zealous he was to redeem his Authority, by clearing himself from those foul
Aspersions; though he was constrained to do it by magnifying himself, contrary to
his usual Custom, and against his own Mind: Indeed, he there calls his
boasting, Folly; and himself, a Fool for it; not that the thing deserved that
hard Character (his Circumstances at that time considered) but, either because
he thought his Adversaries would count it Vanity; or, because it looked like
Vanity, and in Fact would have been so, had not great and necessary Reasons
extorted from him such Gloryings, and Commendations of himself.

THIS shows, That the Laws of Humility allow, and the Laws of Charity require
every one, who is conscious of his Innocence, to vindicate and rescue his
honest Fame, when it has the hard fate, to suffer and bleed under the cruel
Mercies of unreasonable Men. The truth is Wounds of this kind are so deep and
maiming, that common Nature is enough to justify our endeavors to cleanse and
heal them; provided, that Revenge have no hand in the Operation, to retort the
Blows, and that the Methods used be only sanatory.

BUT, though a fair Esteem be valuable, yet we must be careful of two things:

1. THAT we desire no greater share of it, than what will enable us to be
serviceable to God and Men, in our respective Callings. There is (as was
observed) much difference between a good and a great Name. This we must beware
of seeking, or of being pleased with; because it proceeds from Vanity, and
helps still to increase it; like Thirst in a Dropsy, which springs from the
Disease, and feeds it too, by being gratified it self: A return, which in that
case should not be made to such a Parent. A desire of being called every where
Rabbi, Rabbi, is as inconsistent with an humble Mind, as the Ambition of a
troublesome Prince, that would enlarge his Dominions, and carry his Glories to
the ends of the Earth; when his greatest Honor should be to do good at home in
his own Country. An honest ordinary Repute, arising from the conscionable
performance of our Duty, within the limits of a private Station, is far more
suitable to a Christian Temper, than all the Luster and Fame that is acquired
by high reaching, and rather than be guilty of such vain Affectation, we should
covet the Solaces of a quiet Obscurity, and imitate Saul when he modestly ran
among the stuff, to hide his Head from the splendid burden of a Crown, 1 Samuel
10. 22.

2. IT IS true; a good Name is apt to grow up to an unexpected pitch; and never
more, than when we think by condescentions to lower it, and make it shrink;
therefore we must be very careful, Secondly, that it be not the End we aim at,
be it greater or less: This is properly vain glory; when a Man has a strong
and greedy Appetite after popular Applause, as a thing very desirable: Nor is
any thing more contrary to a Spirit of Humility, than a vain glorious Humor,
an Ambition of appearing Great in the World, and of being thought worthy of all
Deference and Esteem. I receive not honor from men, said the humble Jesus,
John 5. 41. And they who make this the Scope and End of their Actions, deserve
not the Character of his Disciples. Such as have a mean and slender Opinion of
themselves, must needs be contented (at least) if others have the same Opinion
of them too: He that wants this Disposition of Soul, is not humble indeed,
but only seems to be so; like the Pharisees of old, who went about with
lugubrious and dejected Countenances, as if they were the humblest Men in the
World; yet all this was nothing but Art, and Affectation of Popularity. If they
fasted, they disfigured their Faces, that they might appear unto Men to fast.
Oh! What mortified Saints were they! If they gave Alms, the Trumpet presently
sounded, to gather People to a show, that they might have glory of Men, Matthew.
6.

THEREFORE that there may be room enough for Christ in your Hearts, be sure to
cast out the Pharisee, neither looking after humane Praise, nor valuing it any
more than a slight puff of Air, which to day may yield a flavor, and to morrow
noisomeness. Whether it be through honor, or dishonor, seek the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness: Let this be your business and design, to please
God, and to do your Duty, whatever be the result of it, whether the favors, or
the frowns of Men. Be careful to do the things which are honorable and
praiseworthy; and if a fair Name follows, regard it only as a Perquisite that
falls in by the bye. And accordingly make use of it, as an accident dropped
into your Hands, for your better assistance and encouragement in the
prosecution of Pious and Charitable Purposes. This is indeed the only good
reason we have, to desire to be well esteemed, and well spoken of, that thereby
we may be the better able to do good in the World, and that God may be the more
glorified by us.

A laudable Character is a mighty advantage and help in order to these noble
Ends; for thereby our Principles pass among Men with the fairer Credit; our
Counsels carry the greater Authority, and our Reprehensions make the deeper
impressions upon the Minds of People who have a good Opinion of us: And by
these means the designs of Religion are the better, and the sooner answered.
Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of
God, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Unto this end Humility prompts us to direct
all our Actions; and when Men make their own glory either a Substitute instead
of God's, or a Competitor with it, it is an ill sign of such a Spirit, as did
once set up against the Majesty of Heaven; but met with such a fatal turn, as
presently drew on the Chains of Darkness: An everlasting warning to us not to
aspire, not to seek our own Greatness; not to move in any Sphere, but by humble
ways of subserviency, for fear of Giddiness and ruin. Self-exaltation, which
unbecame Angels, and was so sinful in them, is far more intolerable in such
Worms as we are. God knows, the brightest of us is but a Gloe-worm; and the
Rule before us is this, Let your light so shine before Men, that they may see
your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. If the little
Luster about us does not serve to direct others in the Paths of Righteousness
and Peace, 't were better suppressed; like the old Vestal Fires at Rome, which
(as some tell us) burned well enough, as long as they were kept under Ground,
and free from Air. Ostentation is pernicious, not only to the Soul, but to it
self. To be seen of Men, and to make that our Aim, is the ready way to lose our
Credit while we pretend to seek it; and to get nothing at last, but the Name of
vain Persons: And so we miss the Mark, by making our own selves the End. And
the truth is, 't is pity but it should be so. The Vice I now speak of is so
foolish, that it ought to carry a Rod to punish it self with.

CHAP. X. How Humility is to be expressed by acknowledging our Faults.
3. BUT to forbear courting our own Praise, is not all we are to do to express
our Humility. It is, Thirdly, the office of every humble Man, to own and
acknowledge his Faults. Though it be a modest Virtue, yet it is not so bashful as
to be ashamed of confessing Miscarriages, where the guilt is real. The reason
of this lies in the Nature of Humility; which being a mean and low Opinion of
One's self, makes the humble Person apt to look continually upon the viler
part, and to make that known, which he discovers there. It was the true cause
of St. Paul's repeated Confessions: The conscience of his guilt would not
permit him to conceal his Crimes; but moved him upon all occasions to tell the
World, how he had persecuted the Church of Christ; and wasted it; and to
declare himself the chief of Sinners. It was the Rule in those days, and that
which Christians most readily observed, Confess your faults one to another,
James 5. 16. This filled the Church with as many humble accusers of themselves,
as there were Penitents and Converts; they confessed and showed their Deeds, as
it is said of those at Ephesus, Acts 19. 18. St. Austin's Books of Retractations
and Confessions do plainly show us, what a lowly Spirit prevailed in his time.
There needed then no other Remonstrances, but what extravagant or deceived Men
drew up against themselves: And we of this Age might have hopes of bringing the
Tempers of People into some Conformity to the Primitive Rule and Practice,
could we persuade Men once to be sensible wherein they do amiss. But, alas!
Christianity (instead of Pride) is fallen to such a low ebb, that many will not
endure to be told their Faults; but Advice is interpreted as Disgrace, and
Reproof as Scandal. The reason of this is latent within; because such Men are
swollen with so great a Conceit of themselves, as if they were in an impeccable
and infallible state. Hence it is, that they love Flatterers, and very few, if
any, but Flatterers, because they are first their own Parasites. The Vice in
their Breasts is in confederacy with that at the Elbow; and both combine to
abuse them with Courtship, which they are willing to take, not as Complement,
but Justice. It Is, indeed, a reproach to humane Nature, that any Man can be so
degenerate, as to practice the base and wicked Arts of Adulation. Yet, in the
observation of all Men, nothing is more common, especially where some sordid
Ends may be served by it. Plutarch in his excellent Book concerning the
difference between a Flatterer and a Friend, tells us, That when Dionysius the
Tyrant was in a fit of studying Philosophy, his Palace was crowded with
Geometricians, that filled it with Dust, to draw Schemes and Figures in: But as
soon as the fit was over, and Dionysius betook himself again to Luxury, all on
a sudden they that were about him left their Philosophy too, and turned
Drunkards. As that great Moralist observes, Flatterers will adapt and suit
themselves to any Humor; especially if they be serious Parasites, which are
the most dangerous of all. They will cherish, and comply with the very Vices of
Men, and obsequiously follow them in their own way, though ruin be at the end of
it. But the original Sin, the fatal cause of all this, is in proud and weak Men
that love to be flattered. They hold out a Bait to the Sycophant, who to keep
himself from being lean, will be sure to make use of it; nor has every one the
bold Probity, to venture the worst by telling Men their Faults; the hazard they
run in such a case is too apparent. Plutarch tells us again, but in another
place, of Philoxenus the Poet, That being commanded by Dionysius to correct a
Tragedy which he had composed, because he disliked it from the beginning to the
end, and obliterated the dull stuff, was presently condemned to the Quarries.
Proud Men will not endure to be thought to have done amiss, or to be in an
Error. How plain soever it be, it is a very hard matter to convince them, and
the hardest of all to extort a Confession from them. There is a deceivableness
in their Temper; an odd propension to be soothed into the belief of any
Misrepresentations, especially of themselves; a Disposition like that which God
so complained of in the Jews, Jer. 5. 30, 31. A wonderful and horrible thing is
committed in the land: The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule
by their means, and my people love to have it so. The Question that follows
there is very pertinent; and what will ye do in the end thereof? For when once
Men arrive to such a pitch of stupid Vanity, there is very little hope of them;
because the means of Reforming them are quite frustrated; Advice and
Reprehension (the ordinary means of making People wiser and better) are utterly
lost, perhaps scarcely offered, because such deceived Persons scorn to think
there is any need of them; and hereby it comes to pass, that many Vices, which
should be weeded out, thrive daily, and become Luxuriant. But where the Spirit
of God has wrought an Heart to a right humble Mould and Frame, there the
Inclination is quite the other way; a proneness to think or to believe the
worst of One's self. And because the humble Man's great business is, to search
into himself, to understand and find out himself, he is not easily abused with
false Notions. There is a Conscience within, which deals freely and plainly
with him; too severe a Judge to be bribed with smooth Insinuations and words of
Oil, as the expression is, Psalm 55. 22. Hence it is, that none is so sensible
of his Miscarriages, as he; none so ready to confess them; because his Eye
being still over his flaws and defects, what he sees amiss in himself, he
thinks it but just and equal to acknowledge: This is no more than what is
agreeable unto Truth. My sin, says David, is ever before me, Psalm 51. 3. And
again; I will acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine unrighteousness have I not
hid, Psalm 32. 5. And to the same purpose I observed before of St. Paul, That
he proclaimed his Offenses, as it were, from the Housetop: As he kept a
faithful Register of them, so he took hold of every opportunity, to open and
spread it before the Eyes of all Men.

THESE were true Arguments and Expressions of Humility; and noble Examples for
us all to follow, for the exercising and increasing in us this great Christian
Virtue. Have you been guilty of any direct Impiety toward God? Why, with the
lowest Prostrations confess the Sin unto him, implore his Mercy. Was it an act
of Violence? An act of Oppression? An act of Injustice, in any sort, or to any
degree? Why, though Men commonly count it a Shame and a Dishonor, yet it is a
kind of Modesty, which of all things does most become the Forehead of a
Christian, to own the Wrong, and to make Amends, or (at least) to ask Pardon
for it. In these and the like cases we should not suffer Pride to get the upper
hand of us; or, to make us so hardy, as to persist, to carry a stiff Neck, to
justify or palliate those things, which the Laws of Religion require us to
expose. Sins of this nature affect the Conscience with too great a guilt to be
smothered; God and Man should know it; and, rather than any humble Zacchaeus
will hide his Injustice, he will first climb up into a Sycamore-Tree, and then
venture into a press, that he may make Proclamation, Behold, Lord, the, half of
my goods I give to the poor; and if I have wronged any man by false accusation,
I restore him four fold, Luke 19. 8.

CHAP. XI. How Humility is to be expressed by doing all good Offices, though
seemingly mean, and by submission to our Superiors.
4. THIS excellent Disposition of Soul will prepare us to give a Fourth
expression of Humility, viz. By doing all the good Offices we can, how mean and
inferior soever they may seem to Men of haughty Eyes. To succor the poor
Fatherless; to comfort the forlorn Widow; to stretch out the Hand to the needy;
to lend it to the Blind; to sympathize and pray by a sick Bed; to minister in
Prisons and Lazaretto's; to treat Enemies courteously; to show Respect to the
most Vulgar, the most unfortunate part of Mankind: These and the like acts of
deference are looked upon with a disdainful Eye by supercilious Men, who think
themselves privileged from such trivial Offices, by the quality of their
Character, or the loftiness of their Station. And yet the Lord Jesus stooped
down to the washing his Disciples Feet; nay, those very Feet that were now
running swiftly to shed his Blood; which astonishing Example shows, that the
most lowly Ministrations are far from beneath us, who stand indebted to each
other in the Bond of one common Nature, and are allied by the Contract of a
common Guilt too. If he, the most Blessed and Glorious Son of God, came not to
be ministered unto, but to minister; Good God! What Offices can be servile
enough for Wretches, whose base Extraction, and much baser Crimes render us
unworthy to be called, either Sons, or Servants? Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate, says the Apostle, Romans 12. 16. He calls that
Condescension, which in strictness of Speech might be called Due Retribution;
an intercourse of Justice, which ought to pass between Man and Man, considering
that we all stand upon the same Ground, equally involved in the same
Necessities, mutually indebted by reciprocal Obligations, and distinguished
only by the Pageantry of the World, which gilds one Mushrome, while another is
past by, and a third struck down. All consist of the same stuff; of the Earth,
Earthy: And though some be fairer and larger than the rest, yet the lesser may
have more intrinsic value, if in such things there be any value at all. In
lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves, says St. Paul,
Phil. 2. 3. That is, in their actions toward them, show others that deference
and respect, and minister to them so, as if they were better; as indeed they
may be, in some respect or other, whatever the proudest think. All have not the
same gifts; at least they have not the same proportion and measure the most
contemptible Man has, wherein he does excel, even as the Foot has Abilities,
which the Eye wants. Therefore that command, Romans 12. 10. That in honor we
should prefer one another, is bottomed upon great reason; because in every one
there is something which is preferrable; to be sure an humble Man will find, in
those of the lowest Rank, this or that which deserves preference.

AND from this Fountain all acts of Charity, Goodness, and Condescension do
naturally flow; because how mean soever the Offices may appear and seem to be,
a lowly Heart will think them a sort of Debt, which he is obliged to pay those,
who upon some account or other, and for some Faculties and Endowments, excel
him, and are much his Betters. It is the Nature of Humility, to take from it
self, and to bestow that Respect and Esteem it parts with, any where rather
than at home: And if we would all be once persuaded to apply our Minds to the
hearty love and practice of this single Virtue, what admirable effects would it
not produce? The most ordinary works of Love would not be grudged. The meanest
of our fellow Creatures would be within every One's reach, and under every
One's care. We should soon learn to be so Affable, Gentle, Courteous, Friendly,
Charitable, Compassionate, and Assistant unto all (especially to all of the
Household of Faith) that a more effectual course could not be taken to make our
own and other Men's Lives happy, and to mend the condition of this World, where
we see daily such Vicissitudes and Misfortunes. If Humanity constrains us to
lift up an Ass, or an Ox out of the Pit; I am sure humble Minds would not
permit us to let any of those for whom Christ died, to lie long in a lost or a
fallen condition.

5. NEXT to this Expression of Humility, a Fifth will naturally follow; which
is, to behave our selves after a submissive and dutiful manner to those, whom
God has set over us in Church and State. For, if it be a necessary act of
Humility, to do kind and respectful Offices to all our equals, it must be much
more necessary to pay Honor and Deference to such as are exalted into a state
of Superiority and Power. Therefore St. Peter links these two things, Obedience
and Humility, together, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Likewise ye younger, submit your selves
unto the elder; yea, all of you be subject one to another; and be clothed with
Humility. As there are in Heaven several Degrees of Glory, several States of
Saints, and several Orders of Angels, so has God constituted on Earth
different Ranks of Men, in condescension to the Necessities of the World, where
the Interests of Societies cannot possibly be preserved without Government and
Laws; and, consequently, without the subjection of those who are in a state of
Subordination. Such People cannot express the Humility of their Hearts more
successfully and directly for the Public Good, than by an entire Compliance
with things established, where the Constitution is not repugnant to Laws
Divine. For it is Pride that is the great Troubler of the World, the common Pest
and Grievance, the domineering, surly, restless Vice that disturbs the Peace of
Mankind, and breaks that Order and Unity on which the Safety and Welfare of all
Communities does depend. That overweening Conceit which Men have of their own
Worth, believing themselves to be wiser, and better, and more deserving than
others, does naturally make them ambitious of Ruling, and impatient of being
Ruled; and whatever the Pretenses and Accessories may be, it is the Affectation
of Superiority and Power that is the Principal Cause of those disorders, which
render the Lives of People Miserable, and turn the Condition of Affairs into a
State of War. O that I were made Judge in the land, said Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. 4.
His design was upon the Throne, and the Artifices he used to steal the Peoples
Hearts, were nothing but ways of stepping up into it. His Promises, that he
would do them Justice; and his Popularity, in putting forth his Hand to such as
did him Obeisance, his embracing and kissing them: All this sawning Address was
to serve his own Ambition, and nothing but a Preamble to his setting up his
Standard in Hebron. Seldom is the Civil Peace disturbed, but Ambition blows the
Trumpet, to gather Malcontents, of the same Temper with their Leaders; and
when the Passions of an united Multitude are fired by one common Principle, the
Prospect is as terrible to the State, as that was to the Roman Army, when
Hannibal forced in upon them two thousand Oxen, with combustible matter flaming
upon their Heads. Pride is the great Incendiary, that heady and disobedient
Principle; and the Yoke being shaken off, Confusion and Anarchy, and infinite
variety of Mischief must follow of course.

THE same Spirit of Disobedience, which raises Commotions in the State,
operates in the Church too; and there indeed more fatally, because animated
with a great (though mistaken) Zeal for Religion, and Lucifer there transforms
himself into an Angel of Light. Diotrephes loved to have the preeminence, 3
John 9. and this Ambition of Mind made him so hardy as to oppose the Authority
of St. John. Simon Magus, the first that corrupted the Christian Faith, did it
for fear of losing or lessening the Esteem he had while he was yet a Sorcerer.
He gave out, that himself was some great one, and deceived People into a
belief, That he was the great power of God, Acts 8. 9, 10. To preserve his
Credit he would have bought the Gift of Miracles; and, seeing it was not to be
sold for Money, to support his great Name he turned Apostate, and the
Ringleader of Apostates; opposing and exalting himself above all that was
called God, or that was Worshipped; so that as God he sat in the Temple of
God, pretending himself that he was God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. In aftertimes assuming
Spirits became Heretics, that they might be in the Head of a Sect, and build
themselves Monuments, though upon the Ruins of God's Sanctuary. And in our own
days the same Spirit still works in the Hearts of the Children of
Disobedience, who set up Fancy against Truth, private Reason against Divine
Revelation, and separate Parties against Government and Order. The bottom of
all this, is Pride; because Men swollen with that Disease, think it beneath
them to be dictated unto; would be thought more Knowing, and more Holy than
others; and love singularity, because it makes Men always talked of, and
sometimes venerated. And though for all this some Arguments are pretended, yet
the Disputation is maintained not so much for Truth, as for Victory. Pertinacy
will still hold, what Singularity before invented; and such as coin new
Opinions, will be sure for their Credit sake to make them as current as they
can, to justify the stamp they once set upon them. By this means poor
credulous People are abused with false Notions, which by degrees make an
impress upon their Minds, not only of the Falsehood, but of the Vice too from
which the Error came; so that in a short time Spiritual Pride grows Popular,
and ends in Schism; which instead of curing the Humor, inflames it, and
canonizeth a Sin which God threw out of Heaven to be damned eternally.

THEREFORE we cannot give a plainer and better Expression of our Humility, than
by rendering Honor and Subjection to whom it is due; and to the utmost extent,
which the Laws of God will admit of. I am far from pleading for an implicit
Faith; a blind Obedience that will necessarily bring us in danger of the Ditch,
if we should trust barely (as some are taught to do) to the Conduct of our
Leaders. At all times we should be careful of these Four things.

1. FIRST, Not to start Opinions out of a Principle of Opposition to our
Superiors. For it is an ill sign, when People have an itch in their Ears to
hear their Governors hardly spoken of, and an itch in their Hearts to
contradict and thwart them. This can proceed from nothing but from Opiniatry,
and a strong Presumption in them, that they are fit to be Dictators; and it
looks as if they had a mind to raise themselves a Name by treading upon
Authority; a thing which we are not to Trample on, but Reverence.

2. SECONDLY, In those Points which are of a doubtful Nature, we should pay
great Respect and Deference to the Judgment of the Church we belong to. For
every humble Man must think it much easier for one or two to be deceived, than
for a thousand; especially when it is the Office of so many to inquire more
particularly after Truth, and their Abilities are more probable to find it out.
They must be very strong Reasons that can warrant Men to depart from a received
Opinion: Yet it is not always, Reason, but for the most part Affectation that
gives the encouragement; a desire of being taken notice of, by stepping out of
the way from the rest, who think it more advisable and safe to follow the
beaten Path. For Men to distinguish themselves by Singularity, and to set up
Private Judgment against Public Definitions, is to tell the World, that they
have more Sense and Understanding than others, and that their own Conceits are
better Standards of Truth, than any that can be found in the Sanctuary. In
short, where some particular Persons differ in their Sense from the Church in
general, private Sentiments should be managed with all possible Modesty. These
Opinions are not to be judged of by the Poll, because Error is too often
Popular; yet considering, how great an hand Pride is apt to have in all
Disputes, and how much easier it is for private Men to be mistaken, than to
retract, we should evermore observe that Law of Humility which the Apostle has
laid before us, Romans 14. 22. Have thou Faith? Have it to thy self before God:
That is, whatever a Man's Persuasion be as to things Disputable, he ought to
keep it so private by himself, as not to make it an occasion of Disturbance or
Offense.

3. THIRDLY, When Authority requires things that are Innocent in their own
Nature, we should express our Humility by complying with those Commands. In
this case too it is Pride that makes Head against Order; a stiff Sinew in the
Neck, that hinders Men from stooping to that which Laws Divine and Humane have
made their Duty. Humility teaches us to be Pliant and Peaceable; to be
Tractable, Yielding and Obsequious: And, I think, as to this we need no plainer
Directions than what our most humble Lord gave his first Disciples, Matthew. 23.
2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat; and therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do. The Rulers he spoke of, were for the
most part very wicked Men, and scandalous Hypocrites; which was the Ground of
the following Caution, Do not ye after their works, for they say and do not.
And yet considering that in their Authority they succeeded Moses, who had his
Authority immediately of God, they were to be obeyed in all Commands that were
lawful. This Rule is applicable to all Cases now, where things which are not
really Sinful are imposed by those who have the Government of us. They sit in
Christ's Seat; they derive their Authority from Christ, as he did his from his
Father; and for that reason their Innocent Directions are to be observed,
whatever their Personal Condition, or Quality of Life may be: And therefore
when you are directed by such as sit in the Seat of the scornful, to hold off,
and to disobey; if the matters enjoined be not evidently repugnant to the Will
of God, you may be sure that the Interdict is not from Christ, and that it is
only humor, or stubbornness, or some such evil thing, that gives the casting
Voice against Authority.

4. FOURTHLY, There are some set over us, whose Address to us we may not so
well call Mandatory, as Instructive. Though the Authority they are vested with be
after an especial manner Divine, yet it must be administered in an humble way,
and they that have it must be Examples of Humility, as the Son of God himself
was, who gives them this Authority. See what he said to his Apostles, Matthew.
20. 25, 26, 27. Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over
them; and they that are great, exercise authority upon them. But it shall not
be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant. And
yet, such Servants as they be, they must be submitted to in their
Ministrations; for so our Lord says elsewhere; He that hears you, hears
me: And he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me, Luke 10. 16. Contempts of this nature do not only
reflect upon God, but are grounded too upon contumelious Notions of him, and
proceed from Hearts that swell and are lifted up against him. The Probationary
Atheist begins with efforts at the Pulpit, and goes on by degrees to a perfect
hatred of God, and of Religion, and of the Ministers of Christ for God and
Religion sake. It Is the Spirit of Lucifer that works at the bottom; a secret
Principle of Aversion and Enmity to all that is Good and Holy. Therefore to
express our Humility as we should, we must obey them that have the Rule over
us, and submit our selves to those that watch for our Souls, Heb. 13. 17. Which
St. Paul calls in another place, knowing them which labor among us, and are
over us in the Lord, and admonish us; and this, for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 12, 13. Because it is God's Work they are about, God's Business they are
upon; and so, the Obedience paid them in the discharge of their Office, is
carried on to God, and terminates in God, for whose sake it is that the humble
Person has a regard to one as vile, or viler than himself. This is an argument
of a lowly Heart, and the proper, ready way to make it more lowly still; to
receive the Doctrines they deliver us from the Mouth of God; to lay up in our
Minds the things spoken; to set our Souls upon the Consideration of them; to
give ear to Instruction; to lay hold on every opportunity of being instructed;
to follow wholesome Directions; to take even Reproofs with meekness, with an
aptitude and willingness to be reformed; and for all this, to have continually
prepared and open Hearts.

CHAP. XII. How Humility is to be expressed, by being contented with such
things as we have.
6. BECAUSE I am desirous to draw this whole Discourse to a full Point, I shall
take notice but of two Expressions more of Humility, which are as Considerable
and Necessary as the rest. And that which comes next to my Hand is in Heb. 13.
5. That we be content with such things as we have. Covetousness, which the
Apostle there cautioneth us against, is inconsistent with a Spirit of Humility,
because it is always attended with a distrust of God's Providence, and with a
secret averseness to submit to his Will; and is very usually too a subservient
Vice to Pride; a Slave and Drudge to toil for the support of it. It is the
taking away, or detaining of what is not One's own; or, an inordinate desire of
that which he has no right unto. And the great reason why Men reach out their
Hands to wrest Naboth's Vineyard out of his, and are greedy of laying Field to
Field, and do such other acts of Oppression, as are contrary to the Laws of
Religion and Nature; the reason I say, of this Injustice is, because Men intend
thereby to lift up themselves the higher in the World; they rob, and cozen, and
overreach in order to their Advancement; and that they may be the more
conspicuous, by standing upon an heap; though Wrath and Vengeance be under it, to
blow up all at last. Men of humble Minds had rather stand on low Ground, to be
hid in a Multitude; for since the Lord Jesus was pleased to be numbered with
Transgressors, a poor sinful Man need not care what his Lot is, and among whom
he chances to be reckoned. Whatever his Station be, it is better than he
deserves. This one humble Reflection should be enough to persuade us, in what
condition soever we are, therewith to be content. But besides this, there is in
every humble Soul an aptitude to consider, that God is the Sovereign Rector of
the Universe; that no part of it is out of the reach of his Eye, or out of the
verge of his Providence; that he always acts according to the Laws of his own
infinite Reason, and as it is best for his Creatures; that he assigns to
every Man his Lot and Place; that he is the only competent Judge to determine,
what is proper for every Man, and what a Man himself is fittest for; that he
takes a due Care of every one, and provideth such things for him, as are most
suitable to his Quality and Calling; and that such as seek him shall want no
manner of thing that is good, Psalm 34. 10. These Principles are deeply rooted
in all lowly Hearts, that are rightly prepared to submit to the Will, and to
depend upon the Promises of God; and the genuine Product of them is this, that
it is our best course to commit our selves to God's Disposal, and to be
satisfied with his Providence and Determinations: I am sure this is infinitely
more Becoming and Advantageous, than to be always Repining and Craving, as
those humoursome People are, who by taking false Measures of themselves think,
whatever is done for them, to fall short of their Merits; and grudge if they be
not satisfied, when by stretching their Desires continually, they render
themselves incapable of being filled. Therefore to express our Humility, we
must carefully learn these three things.

1. TO have as mean an Opinion of the World, as we have of our own selves. The
reason why Men covet the things of this Life with such Greediness and Ambition
is, because they think Happiness to consist in Riches and Greatness, and those
to be the happiest Persons, who have the largest share of them. Now this is a
most gross mistake, an argument of a childish and little Mind. For such outward
Enjoyments are for the most part instruments of Sin; and then they are the most
unfortunate Men, that carry such edged Tools in their Hands. The greater they
be, the more able they are to do themselves and others mischief, and the more
ready many times to do it. Vanity, Luxury, and a lewd Life, are too often the
sad Consequents of a plentiful Fortune; and when the loss comes to be felt
which such expensive Vices bring, Injustice and Rapine commonly follows next,
and Reprisals are forced from defenseless Innocence. Do not rich men oppress
you, and draw you before the judgment-seats? says the Apostle, James 2. 6. If
Men have the Grace, to make a better use of God's Blessings, yet the enjoyment
of them yields no more real Comfort, than what People of an Inferior Class are
blessed with, who have Air, and Food, and Cloths, and Rest, as well as the most
Prosperous. There may be in a Palace more Splendor and Gaiety; but this
affords no more solid Felicity, than Moonshine does warmth. In this respect
the humble Cottage may have much the advantage, where the sleep of a Laboring
man is sweet, says Solomon, Eccles. 5. 12. whether he eat little or much, he
eats with an appetite that needs not the studies of an Epicure, or the Arts
of Apicius. And the drinking his own sweat is a preparative for more delightful
Refreshments, than the nicest Creatures can pretend to, who abuse the Fruit,
without taking any share of the Works of the Vineyard. Those Pleasures which
Humane Nature universally thirsts after, run commonly in low Channels; the
despised part of Mankind go away with them; to be sure with as great a portion
of them, as the most craving men can have; and it is in vain to look for
Happiness any where below, but in the exercise of Virtue; particularly this.
Virtue, Contentedness of Mind; without that, and for want of that alone, Haman
himself was unhappy amidst all his Honors; all availed him nothing, because he
was so discontented to see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the King's Gate, Esth.
5. 13.

2. HAVING possessed our Minds with low Thoughts of the World, we must, in the
next place, show our Humility, by being satisfied with things necessary. My
meaning is not, that we must desire no more, than what is just enough to
support Nature. For there are many things which One's Vocation, Quality, and
Condition of Life calls for, besides what Nature requires for its
maintenance. The Necessities of Princes, and great Men, are more and greater,
than what ordinary People can pretend. And so it is throughout all inferior
Ranks and Orders of Men; according as their Families and Charges are, and
according as their Degree and Condition is, wherein the Providence of God has
placed them, so are their Necessities; these rise or sink in proportion to the
other. The short of the matter then is this, That when God has made competent
Provision for us, answerable to our Condition, suitable to that Place, Degree,
and Station, wherein he has been pleased to dispose of us, we should command
our Desires, and keep them from running out, and from roving abroad after
things superfluous. If superfluities fall into our Hands of themselves, we are
to dispense them where they are needful, and as it is most for the Glory of
God, and for the good of our Brethren. But our Appetites must not be so
inordinate, as to crave for more than what we want our selves; and when those
Necessities are answered, we should be satisfied and thankful. It Is Pride that
makes Men unsatiable; because they think they never have as much as they
deserve: And this is its condemnation, That it quarrels with God for that he
does not humor us, and for not gratifying our Lusts, though he liberally
supplies our real Wants. It is a very true Observation, That none are so
querulous, so greedy, so reaching after more, as those to whom God has been
very open-handed, and who have most reason to give Thanks, instead of
Complaining; like squeamish Stomachs, that nauseate the wholesome Provision
which is before them in abundance, and long for Rareties which are out of the
way: A plain sign, not of Want, but a Surfeit; and of a Disease within which
needs a Physician rather than a Purveyor. Humble Men are glad of that which is
within their reach; and make themselves Happy in the enjoyment of it, because
they take it as a Doal that God sees to be fittest for them, though it be not a
Benjamin's Mess, nor the miraculous Portion of Quails and Manna. A competency
is best; and few can think they want that, if they be not so partial, as to
make their own unreasonable Appetites, Judges in the case: An upright
Conscience will tell them, that they have at hand what is for their Necessity,
and for their Delights too. Indeed God does not rain down his Blessings upon
some, as he does upon others; but the reason is, because great Plenty would not
be so good for them: The Soil in some places is so odd, that much watering
would produce little but a crop of Nettles; things that would bring smart and
hurt. Such is the Temper of some Men's Hearts, that were they as Great and
Powerful as they could wish, there could be no tolerable living near them, and
very slender hopes of their own living well in another World; so apt are many
to make an ill use of the Riches of God's Mercy. It Is therefore an act of his
Wisdom and Goodness, to keep those low, whose exaltation would be fatal: But as
for the necessary Accommodations of Life, he provides those for all; and gives
them opportunity and means of gathering every day as much as will serve their
turn, if they be not such sluggards, as to need the Ant for a Monitor. It Is not
Nature, but Luxury, that complains for not being fed; and the Mother of that is
Pride; which is like the Horse-Leach we read of, Prove. 30. Whose two Daughters
(that is, the two Forks of its Tongue) are always craving, Give, give; sucking
on, till the sanguine Creature drops down through abundance, but not through
satiety. Our real Necessities are not hard to be answered, if we would confine
our fugitive Desires, and suffer our selves to be in a Paradise, by being
contented with what may be daily brought to our Doors, by the Blessing of God
upon our honest Industry. Food and Cloths no Body needs want; and that is as
much as the very greatest can have; and more than they carry into another World
with them: And why should not every lowly Heart be pleased to have the same
Portion; in having the Belly and the Back provided for as well, though not with
the Vanity of sumptuous and gorgeous Furniture? That plain and humble Man, the
Father of the Twelve Tribes, as he was Journying toward Haran, was an Emblem
to all that travel toward the Land of everlasting Rest. He passed on with a
poor Staff in his Hand; and at Bethel he took of the Stones he found there, and
put them for his Pillows, and lay down upon them to sleep: And in the morning,
he set them up for a Pillar, and pouring Oil upon the top of it, he vowed a
Vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go,
and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on; so that I come again to
my Father's house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God: And this stone,
which I have set for a pillar, shall be God's house; and of all that thou shall
give me, will I surely give the tenth unto thee, Genesis 28. Here was Gratitude,
Simplicity, and Religion, mixed with the Modesty of a truly humble Mind; the
thing he asked for, was Bread and Raiment: And considering what an Improvement
Christianity is of Nature, this single Example renders St. Paul's Exhortation
the more binding, 1 Timothy 6. 8. Having food and raiment, let us therewith be
content.

3. IN order thereunto we should learn yet a Third thing; namely, not to make
envious Comparisons between our own Condition, and the state of those who are
Superior to us. This is a great cause of Men's Dissatisfactions and Murmurings,
not that themselves want, but because others have a more liberal allowance. The
Original of this, is Pride, which makes Men look a-squint upon those above
them, wishing themselves in their Place, or at least in a collateral Line with
them; and thinking it hard measure, that their Station and Fortunes are not
greater; and all this upon a vain supposition of their own, that they are as
deserving as the best. This is to direct Providence, and to set up against it;
than which nothing can be more inconsistent with a Spirit of Humility. For they
who have a mean Opinion of themselves, must needs think they are well used, if
they have any room assigned them by the Almighty, though it be the lowermost
Seat; and are obliged to acquiesce in his Determination, because we are not our
own chusers, and the least expression of Favor from God, is not Debt, but
Kindness and Grace. We should be careful therefore to take our Lot as it falls;
and to look upon it, not as Partiality but Wisdom in him, when he keeps down
one, and sets up another. He is the only competent Judge of what is fittest
to be done; and the reasons of his Providence are always Great, though we cannot
peep through the Veil to see them at every turn.

IN all his Proceedings he has a regard to the Beauty, Order, and Stability of
his whole Creation, and to the Good of every part. And as this infers a
necessity of constituting different States and Conditions amongst Mankind, that
one may be subservient to another, and that all may be subservient to his
Glory; so it requires us with all Humility to be contented with that Place and
Condition, which God in his Wisdom thinks to be most proper for us. This is the
true way of husbanding God's Dispensations so, that we may be happy under them,
how obscure soever our Sphere, and how slender soever our Fortunes are, if
compared with theirs, whose Pomp some have the Vanity and the ill Nature to
grumble at.

FELICITY does not reside only in stately Mansions; nor indeed can it have
access to them, unless a lowly Heart be ready there to give it entertainment.
It has its abode with Contentedness, wherever that dwells, though within a
little Door, under a low Roof, with plain Diet, and in an homely Dress. It is a
contented Mind that makes one happy indeed; and so, every one may be happy at
home, if he will. It Is but bounding his extravagant Ambition, and being
satisfied with his daily Bread, and the thing is presently done. And this an
humble Heart teaches us to do; because the Bread we have is of God's giving.
We pray for it daily, or, at least, we should; and because it is God's Hand
that reaches it unto us, we should bless him over it: And when we receive it
with Thankfulness, and Comfort, and pleasure of Mind, a dinner of Herbs is much
better Fare, than the stalled Ox, that is sacrificed to the Lusts of the
voluptuous and proud Wretch.

CHAP. XIII. How Humility is to be expressed, by keeping an Even Temper in a
State of Prosperity.
7. THE last Expression of Humility which I shall mention, has more peculiar
reference to those whom God has blessed with a flourishing Condition. Humility
is God's way to Honor; and to sit down in the lowest Room is to be capable of
Advancement at God's Hands, who exalts them of low degree, as the humble
Mother of our Lord said, Luke 1. 52. And when God is pleased to do this, we
should express our Humility, by keeping an Even Temper in a prosperous State.
To show how well-pleased God is, when People diligently follow the Works of
their lawful, though it be a mean Calling; the first two Kings that were set
successively upon the Throne of Israel, were advanced, by God's own Directions
to that great Dignity from ordinary Employments; Saul, as he was seeking his
Father's Asses; and David, as he was feeding his Father's Sheep. Which is an
argument, that poor Beginnings are not any slurr; it is vanity and
superciliousness, that is both the Crime and the Infamy, which too frequently
follow a state of Exaltation. 'Twas the Vice which cost Saul his Credit, Crown,
and Life. By what we read of him, before his advancement he deserved the
Character of a modest and humble Person: But Promotion, which makes a great
Man, too often spoileth a good one; especially when he is mounted high, not by
gradual ascents, but by a quick and unexpected lift. It presently turned Readiness
Head; so that first he usurped Samuel's Office; then acted against God's own
express Command, in sparing the Amalekites; then grew sour, sullen, envious,
spightful, false, and outrageous, (which I suppose is meant by the evil Spirit
from the Lord, that troubled him, 1 Samuel 16.) And at last departed from God, to
consult a Pythoniss: So that, as things fell out accidentally, through the
Foollishness and Corruption of his own Heart, it had been better for Saul to
have remained still among the Asses. Indeed this Instance with all its
Circumstances is singular. But yet it is no uncommon thing to observe, That it
is a very hard matter for some to bear up against their own Prosperity; and
that the danger of their being lost is the same with what a little Pinnace is
in, when driven impetuously with too great sail in the Head; especially if it
wants Balast. This abuse of Prosperity proceeds from a threefold cause.

1. FIRST, From a degeneracy and sordidness of Disposition; which, whether it
be purely Natural, or Accidental, and for want of liberal, ingenuous Education,
we need not dispute. Every days Experience shows, That none are so heady and
assuming as those of base Originals; Trifles made lately of an ugly sort of
Clay, which no Art can bring to a due Temper, nor any thing Reduce, but a
stroke from the Potter's Hand that formed them. The Personage, whom good
Breeding and Quality makes Illustrious, distinguishes himself from the dirty
Swain by his kind, courteous, and endearing Behavior. Though his Fortunes grow,
his Mind is kept pruned and hindered from running out into those Luxuriances and
Inequalities, which, without due care, all are subject to; especially such
whose Root is in a Dunghill. That Archbishop of Mentz (Willegis) whose Father
was a poor Carpenter, did a very becoming act in hanging his House with
representations of Saws and Axes; that he might be sure, not to forget whence
he had been hewn; and might preserve himself the better from being elated by
his surprising Dignity. Men should be very watchful over themselves when their
Fortunes swell, lest their Hearts swell with them. For then is the great
Danger; and then the Honor and the Virtue appears to admiration, when they
govern themselves with such a strict Hand, as to be always of a Piece; the same
condescending Men, as when Obscurity and Wants made them crouch; equally as
obliging, as when they stood in need, and courted those whom a Principle of
Vanity would be apt, without great care to make them afterward despise.

2. THIS unevenness of Temper, and shameful Disparity between the Man and
himself, proceeds, Secondly, from palpable Imprudence. It Is a sign of a weak
Head, when a Vertigo takes it upon the top of an Hill: There is some Defect
within, in the Intellectual as well as Moral Faculties; something is wanting,
which should poise the Mind, and keep it steady, when our Condition grows and
rises to a considerable pitch. To think we can be so high, as to be above all,
and out of the reach of all, is a very foolish Imagination; for we are ever in
danger of one another, and always stand in need of one another; and one time or
other the loftiest find it so: And such inequalities of Temper, as Grate in a
prosperous Condition, as they are more discernible and offensive, so they
expose vain People the more, first to Envy, and then to Ruin at the next fair
opportunity. For the state of this World ever was, and ever will be mutable;
the Ground we stand upon is very slippery; nor are any more commonly tripp'd
up, than those that think they have sure footing. Pride goes before
destruction; and an haughty spirit before a fall, says Solomon, Prove. 16. 18.
His own Father had found much of this, after his advancement to the Throne; he
said in his Prosperity, he should never be removed; God, as he thought, had of
his Goodness made his Hill so strong, Psalm 30. 6. But he shows us himself in
the very next words, what a vain and weak Conceit this was: Thou did turn thy
face from me, and I was troubled. Nothing is more usual than to see such
Vicissitudes and Turns in the World; and many times Fortune is most persidious
to those, who take occasion by its Liberality to be false to others, and to
deceive themselves too with vain and foolish Confidences of their own. Such
Cheats fall fatally, and the more fatally for having been so; and commonly
where they tumble, they lie unpitied. These things wise and thinking Men will
consider in time, while the Blessings of God are in their Hands, and will carry
them with such Evenness, and Caution, and true Generosity of Mind, that all
good People may have reason to wish, they may never drop out of Hands that use
them so well.

3. BUT after all, this unevenness of Temper I now speak of, proceeds not so
much from some foulness and imperfections in Nature, as from a wicked Abuse of
God's Grace, which is given Men to rectify what is amiss in them. There is in
it a mighty touch of the Devil, who once set up against the most blessed God,
because he found himself a very glorious Creature. It is from such a Spirit,
that the greater and higher Men are in their outward Estate, the prouder too
they are in their Minds. They take their Acquisitions, not as Gifts and Boons,
but as Rewards, and as Payments in part of a great Debt. This must needs be the
secret Principle such elated People go upon; that all they have is a due; and
but a pittance neither, in comparison of what they ought to have, and are very
fit for. Hence it is, that their Pride increases with their Enjoyments. They
conclude, that their singular Advantages are only in Consideration of their
singular Deserts; retributions of Providence; and as these are larger and
larger, so is the Admiration of themselves greater and greater still: And then
it is no wonder, if Men who are possessed with such lofty Notions, look down
Disdainfully upon all below them; because they take measures of themselves and
others by Events, and Providential Successes. They look upon these as clear
Arguments and Determinations on their behalf, because they believe that God
sideth with them, and allots them the upper-hand, by reason that he too thinks
them to be really better than their Neighbors. Now these are very dangerous
Conceits, because they are bottomed upon Lucifer's Sin, and evidently lead
proud Men to the very same Fate. Therefore we cannot give better or plainer
Expressions of our Humility than by keeping our Minds down, and by doing such
acts as argue them to be still in a subdued Condition, however it shall please
God to exalt us. A state of Greatness adds a vast Luster to this Virtue; or,
rather creates a Luster in it, which makes it the more Admirable and Exemplary.
It is then most Charming, when we cloth our selves with it in defiance of all
Prosperity: Nor was Solomon in all his Glory arrayed like one such little one.
For this I appeal to the common Sense of Mankind, whose daily Observations show
us, That there is no such glorious Ornament as Humility; especially when it
keeps its former place in the midst of flourishing Circumstances; when no
Advancement can be powerful enough, to transport Men to an indecent Distance;
nor to bring with it a techy Temper, or a supercilious Look; nor to make them
forsake those kind Offices, which they were ready for in a low Station.

THE more becoming and admirable this Virtue is, the greater care is required
of us to preserve and keep it in all Conditions; but more particularly in a
prosperous State, when the World smiles upon us, and fallacious Fortune
attempts by Caresses and Flatteries to steal away our humble Hearts from us.
Then we should use the greater Caution, because the danger of losing our selves
is then just at hand. It Is no hard or uncommon thing, for People to carry
themselves in an humble manner while their Condition is low. The difficulty is,
how to act with the same Mien when Honors and Riches increase. In such cases
Peoples Minds are naturally apt to be puffed up, especially those who are of
small Value, People of little Sense, and of less Goodness. It Is very usual for
such, when their Affairs begin to glitter, to be full of selfadmiration, and to
be carried away with Vanity. Nay, some are so weak, as to think it proper for
them to affect State; though it sits very aukwardly, and ill upon them; is very
unsuitable to such little things; and makes them as ridiculous, as Trappings of
Gold do a Mule, or an Ass. If therefore our Fortunes grow, we must be sure to
set the stricter Watch over our own Minds; we must presently provide against
all danger of a Flatus within, that may make our Brains giddy; and beware of
every thing that may tempt us to put on a scornful Brow, or an imperious
Temper. Indeed, the more God is pleased to multiply his Blessings upon us, the
more humble we should be. And this I take to be the safe, infallible Rule to go
by in such a case, still to lower our own Minds within, the more God exalts us
without: For fear we should not be able to poise Affairs so, as to keep the
Scales even enough, to make our Hearts the Over-balance to cast the one Scale,
by sinking and being deprest, as these our external Acquisitions rise in the
other. To be the more Self-denying for living Great; to be the more Charitable,
Beneficent, and Openhanded for being Wealthy; to be the more Cautious and
Tender, for being Powerful; to be the more Devout and Holy, for being
Prosperous; to be the more Innocent and Just, for having a plentiful Measure of
God's Goodness; to be the more Condescending, for being High; to be the more
Affable, Courteous, Obliging, Meek, Peaceable, and Easy to be entreated, for
having the more Advantages, the more Abilities and Opportunities of doing those
things which are Praiseworthy: These indeed are truly Noble Expressions of a
lowly Heart.

The CONCLUSION.
HAVING now dispatched those things which in the beginning of this Discourse I
promised to consider, I shall conclude all with an humble Address to my
Readers, to do their part in making such a Christian Use of what has been
said, as may be for their own real Good: The great End which I had at first in
my Eye, and that which should be the rather answered, because it is of the
quickest dispatch, as well as of very near concern. To write Discourses is not
so easy, as to make a good Use of them, if Men would apply the Zeal of Honest
and Religious Hearts to do it: Which, methinks should not be wanting where they
are sure beforehand of this Advantage, that their labor shall not be in vain.
Necessary indeed it is; absolutely necessary in order to our everlasting
Happiness in another World. For we must not be so foolish as to think, that God
will drag us to Heaven against our Wills; or, that he will give us a Portion of
Bliss there, if we be indisposed and unprepared for it. The Practice of
Religion and Virtue serves to make us meet and fit for what we are to do among
Saints and Angels: And this particular Virtue I have been treating of, is a
principal Disposition of Soul, that we must carry thither with us. Besides, no
other Virtue is or can be more necessary to make us happy in some measure here.
There is such a close connection of This to diverse other Virtues, and of all, to
Happiness, that our Duty is in the very Practice of it a Reward; nor is it
possible for us to be miserable, no not in this Life, but by our acting
Hostilities against our selves; and such Hostilities too, as none but Fools
would desire to gain a Victory by, because it is a Conquest over our own
Felicities. This Virtue, for instance, Humility, brings with it a kind of
Heaven upon Earth: It is attended with such Faith in God, with such Submission
to his Will, and with such Dependence upon his Truth, Mercy, Power, and
Goodness, that a composed and happy State of Mind must needs attend it too; so
that by trampling upon this Virtue, People do really destroy their own
Comforts; and whatever proud Men think, they have no such Enemy, as the Satan
in their Breasts. Hence it is, that Humility is so often extolled, so often
commanded, so often encouraged by various Promises throughout the Scripture;
because God sees it to be so infinitely Instrumental to our own Good.

THIS renders the Consideration the more melancholy and lamentable, that a
Virtue which would be a common Blessing, is so great a Rarety. For, if we take
a strict view of those Evils, which imbitter Men's Lives, and ruin the Peace in
Church and State, which would make them happy, we shall find, that they all or
mostly proceed from an epidemical Principle of Pride, which gives those sturdy
Vices both birth and maintenance. When Hagar had the Insolence to despise her
Mistress, no wonder that the Egyptian brought forth a wild Ishmael, whose Hand
was against every Man, Genesis 16. 12. Such a troublesome offspring naturally
descends from an imperious Parent: And it is such another Original that those
outrageous Sins come from, which infest us to this day, both within our own
Walls, and abroad in the World. A too great and overgrown Conceit of One's
self, does by a Physical Influence dispose him to think it very hard to be
advised, harder to be commanded, and the most intolerable diminution to obey.
Hence proceed Discontents, Murmurings, Impatience, Headiness, desires of
Innovation, contempt of our Superiors, reviling of Magistrates, affectation of
Power, and diverse other Wickednesses, which prepare Men to cast off the Yoke,
and to bring on innumerable sorts of Rapine and Oppression, which are always
the certain Consequents of avowed Disobedience.

WERE a Spirit of Humility suffered to prevail in the World, it would soon
bring with it such a composed, peaceable, and harmonious state of Affairs, as
would make Private People, and Public Societies as happy, as they could wish
to be on this side Eternity: And when a Virtue that is so excellent, is yet so
scarce, it shows us to our shame what great Fools Men are; and what stupidity
there is in some Natures, which can endure to be laughed at for being fond of a
Vice, which was Lucifer's Crime, and is now propagated on Earth only to be our
common Plague.

BUT having spoke already of the unreasonableness and hurtfulness of Pride, I
shall not draw you back to Meditations we have past from long ago, but close
all by desiring you to look forward, to the end of it. There are two things yet
to come, that will stain the Pride of all Glory, as the Prophet speaks, Isa.
23. 9. I mean, Death, and Judgment. These will give the last stroke to all our
Follies; and the prospect of them is enough to lay our Minds prostrate, if our
Pride be not like Alexander's, whose Triumphs exalted him into the silliest
Fancy, That he was immortal.

1. O Death! How bitter art thou to a Man that sits at Ease in his
Possessions? And so it must needs be to every vain Man that sets himself in
too rich a Chair of State. Though for that reason such People think of nothing
seldomer, than of dropping into the Grave, yet it is appointed unto all men,
once to die, Heb. 9. 27. And when that Messenger comes to execute its
Commissian, no Riches can Bribe it off, no Grandeur can keep it at a Distance,
nor can any Arguments persuade to use Respect. It will strike all with an
impartial Hand, lay all of us down in our primordial Dust, and there give
Prince and Peasant an equal Portion. There no discrimination is made between
High and Low, when once all are laid down. The haughty Head, the long Arm, the
thick and heavy Finger, has there the very same fate, with the Hand that once
hung down, and with the feeble Knee; nor does the Worm make any difference,
between the pampered Flesh, and that which was wont to be covered with
Sackcloth. These are mortifying Meditations; and such as have a direct
tendency to humble us all, would we daily consider, whither we are going; what
a state we shall all fall into at last; and how we shall be hudled together in
one common heap of Dust. Men generally stoop in their old Age: Nature thereby
shows them, that they should daily look down toward the Hole, that will
shortly receive them, and that every day draws them, as it were, by a Magnetic
faculty more and more toward it. And the oftener we think of this, the apter
our Minds will be to bow down too; nothing being so powerful for the pulling
down of vain Imaginations, as the remembrance and sense of our Mortality. For
which reason I have now imitated the Custom of the old Persians, who at their
splendid Entertainments were wont to serve up a Death's Head for the last
Course, to put one another in mind, what they were to come to after all their
Jollities. If this was thought so useful a thing by Ethnicks, who looked not
beyond the Grave; at least had not those Eyes which have been given Us by him
who cured the Blind; 'twere strange, if we should not be much more powerfully
wrought upon, who have a farther and clearer Prospect; I mean, of a Judgment,
which begins presently upon our Dissolution.

IT is no great matter what becomes here of our Bodies: They do but go home to
their Parent. The Dust returns to the earth as it was; and the Spirit returns
unto God who gave it, Eccles. 12. 7. To receive its Sentence at God's Hand,
according to all it has done in the Body. The Author of the Book of Wisdom,
would have us consider beforehand, what the End will be, when the Accounts of
our Sins (and more particularly, of our Assumings) come to be cast up. What
then will the pride of men profit them? And what good will their riches, with
all their vaunting, do them? Wisd. 5. 8. The sin which at first was with such
fury thrown out of Heaven, we may be sure will never find any readmission
thither. And therefore it everlastingly concerns us, to cast it away from us in
time, because it affects the Soul with a cursed Incapacity of ever appearing in
the presence of the humble Jesus, to Reign with him, after all its
Imperiousness on Earth. A wicked Soul is utterly incapable of this, by reason
that its Inclinations and Dispositions are utterly inconsistent with that
State, which is the Portion of just Men now made Perfect. The ba^e passing of
Souls out of this World into the next, cannot possibly be enough to change
their Temper. Death indeed gives them an outlet, into such Places as are
suitable and proper for them; but it does not make an entire alteration of
their Faculties and Habits; it is no such Refiner, as to cleanse what was
polluted; Repentance, and Faith in the Blood of Christ must do that before we
go hence, or else it will never be done. He that is unjust, will be unjust
still; and he that is filthy, will be filthy still; and he that is righteous,
will be righteous still; and he that is holy, will be holy still, Revel. 22.
11. Those Dispositions and Qualities which Souls have at Death, they carry with
them into another World, and keep with them for ever: And so we may add, That
he which is proud, will be proud still; and therefore cannot be fit for any
Place, but where that Vice is punished, nor for any Company but the Devil and
his Angels, that were first guilty of it. How light soever Men make of their
evil Tempers, the end of them must be miserable; they have a necessary and
direct tendency toward it; nor is there any way of preventing it, but by being
new Creatures here: It is by acquiring new Natures, new Dispositions, new
Qualities and Habits, which may make us meet to be partakers of the inheritance
of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. Of those Qualities, an humble Temper is
one, and indeed one of the chiefest: And therefore the Promise of a present and
future Rest is made more especially to this Virtue, Matthew. 11. 29. Learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest to your souls. Which
God of his Mercy grant unto us all for the sake of that great Exemplar of
Holiness and Humility, Jesus Christ. Amen.

Almighty and Everlasting God, who of thy tender Love toward Mankind, have
sent thy Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, to take upon him our Flesh, and to
suffer Death upon the Cross, that all Mankind should follow the Example of his
great Humility; mercifully grant, that we may both follow the Example of his
Patience, and also be made Partakers of his Resurrection, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
FINIS.

