A SERMON Preached upon September the 9th, 1683. BEING A Thanksgiving-Day For a
Late DELIVERANCE From a Fanatick-Conspiracy.

By Edw. Pelling, Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Somerset.

Printed in his own Defense.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Abington next the Wonder Tavern in Ludgate Street.
1683.

To His Grace Charles Duke of Somerset, Marquess and Earl of Hertford, Viscount
Beauchamp, Baron Seymour of Trowbridge, Lord Lieutenant of the East Riding in
Yorkshire, and of the County of Somerset.
May it please Your Grace,
AFter so many Honorable Titles (some due to you by Inheritance, some given
you by your Prince his Favor, All Your own, besides that of Your Virtue and
Loyalty, which is Your greatest Character) it might justly be expected, that
some Considerable thing (something more than an Ordinary Sermon) should be
presented to Your Noble Patronage: and I have only this to say in my Excuse,
that it comes from the hands of him, who has nothing Great enough to lay at
Your Feet. My Lord, I am bound to tell You, that the reason of Publishing these
Papers, is my own Vindication; some Passages therein being so misrepresented,
as if I had made several Rude and Unjust Reflections; from which nothing can
clear me, but the submitting of the whole Sermon to Public Censure.

And now, My Lord, I cannot blame that Necessity, which obliges me at once to
do my self Right, and to express my Duty to Your Grace, whom I am bound to
Honor particularly, not only for the sake of the same Loyal Principles, but
also in the Bond of Natural Affection, which is no more than a Just and
Necessary Homage from me.

I most humbly beg Your Favorable acceptance of this my Duty, beseeching God
to Bless Your Grace, and Your Noble Consort, with a long Continuance of the
Dearest Love, with a Noble Train of a most Prosperous Issue, and with all the
Blessings of This world and a Better: it is the Hearty desire, my Lord, of

Your Graces most Dutiful, and Affectionate Servant and Chaplain, Edw. Pelling.
Sept. 13. 1683.
Psalm. XXXIV. 19. Many are the afflictions of the Righteous: but the Lord
delivers him out of them all.
THE Special Providence of God is seen in nothing more, than in watching over
Princes, in preserving Them and their Kingdoms, and in supporting their
Government and just Authority. For the Hearts of Men are Naturally so impatient
of Subjection, and so greedy of Power; their particular Interests are so
Divided, their Designs are so Various, their Passions are so Violent, their
Principles are so Different, their Minds are so set upon Villainy and Mischief,
(and what through Ambition, or Covetousness, or Discontent) their Spirits are
so Restless, that it is by a daily Miracle that Princes live, and that their
Thrones stand; and 'twould be impossible for them to be safe one moment, did
not the immediate hand of God (of whom alone they hold their Crowns) shelter
and protect their Persons, and overruled the Madness of Turbulent and
Bloodthirsty People.

Perhaps no Prince living ever had such ample Experience of this, as King David
had; unless we will except our own Dread Sovereign, whose case comes nearest to
a Parallel. David's Title to the Crown was unquestionable, for it was set upon
his Head by the direct appointment of God himself: His Government was equal and
easy: His Heart was of a Tender and Compassionate Temper, he was ready to
Forget the greatest Wrongs, and not only to Forgive, but also to express
Kindnesses to the greatest Criminals; insomuch that Joab had the Confidence, in
the heat of his Passion to tell him, That he loved his Enemies more than his
Friends, and, by so doing, shamed the Faces of all his Servants, 2 Samuel 19.

All this notwithstanding, though David was a man according to Gods own Heart,
(a Character which God himself gave of him) yet the poor Prince found Troubles
on every side. First he was persecuted by Saul, and anon forced to a
Controversy with Readiness House. One while he was in danger from Enemies Abroad,
and another while from disaffected men at Home. Now he was Conspired against
by Absalom, which afflicted him the more, because the Rebel was his Son. This
Conspiracy was fomented by that Oracle of Treason, Ahitophel, that afterward
Saddled his Ass, and Ran for it, and ended his Life miserably through
Discontent. Then he was railed at by Shimei, that Dog, (as Abishai rightly
called him) the Sire of all that Litter which are continually yelping at the
Lords Anointed. Nor was this all; for after all this, Sheba and his
Fellow-Traytors raised a formidable Insurrection against him, being frustrated
of their Expectations at the Kings Return. For David had been in Exile, being
forced to flee from his Rebellious Subjects, and upon his happy Restoration
some Israelites were enraged, that they had not that Interest at Court which
they hoped for; and hereupon they were vexed that the King was come home, and
so an Alarm was sounded, Every man to his Tents, O Israel, 2 Samuel 20.

Had not the Divine Providence been David's Shield and Salvation, that
Excellent Prince had been utterly Ruined by this Army of Troubles, which
continually followed him at the Heels. But God was his support and stay; and
though there was Plot upon Plot, and Rebellion after Rebellion, yet he trusted
still to the Righteousness of his Cause, and to the Promise of God, That he
would cloth all his Enemies with shame, and that upon his own Head his Crown
shall flourish. This was his Hope and Confidence, and this Hope made him not
ashamed.

David Commemorates with Thankfulness throughout this his Book of Psalms, the
Singular Mercy of God to him and to his People. And from that constant
experience which He and They had of Gods unwearied Goodness, he draws this
Conclusion, for the Comfort of all Righteous Princes which should come after;
that though God may, and many times does, for great Ends and Reasons, suffer
them and their good Subjects to be Evil-intreated for a time; yet he will not
only be with them in their Troubles, but also will (sooner or later) give them
a fair Exit out of all their Distress: Many are the afflictions of the
Righteous; but the Lord delivers him out of them all.

I shall not, for the further clearing of this matter, speak more of David's
Troubles and Deliverances; for our own late Deliverance, which we thankfully
Commemorate this day, is a plain Comment upon my Text. A Deliverance, which the
very immediate hand of God has wrought for us, as we shall see anon. A
Deliverance of a Righteous Church, of a Righteous Prince, and of all his
Righteous Subjects throughout the Nation. A Deliverance, which if we consider
the Nature of it, is one of the most Signal; if the Manner of it, is one of the
most Surprising; and if we consider our own former Ingratitude, one of the most
Unpresidented Deliverances, that ever was wrought for a People.

But before I speak of the particular Branches of this Deliverance, it is
necessary for me to say something of the Reality of those Dangers which we are
in some measure delivered from; because there are some, who have gained such a
perfect Mastery of their Consciences, that they can believe even a Cheat that
serves their Turn, and Dis-believe even a Miracle that wounds their Interest.

Now Discerning Men have seen for several years last past, that our King and
Government both were in eminent danger; because those very Artifices being
employed again, which served effectually to destroy the Father, we had all the
reason to believe that they were intended to destroy the Son too; it being
impossible, but the same Means used in the same manner, must tend to the
accomplishment of the same Ends. When it was taught for Doctrine, that the King
is a King by Law, and it past so currently for the Protestant-Faith, that the
Clown has as much Title to his Cottage, as the King has to his Throne, it was
manifest enough then, that a Mine was preparing to blow the King up, and that
nothing was wanting, but a convenient time to spring it. When the Kings Actions
were so maliciously mis-interpreted, when his Designs were still looked upon to
be Insincere, when his Counselors were brandded for Popish Conspirators, when
His Majesty himself was represented to the People, as one that was not to be
Trusted; and when endeavors were used to reduce him to the mean Condition of
an Orphan and a Beggar; what could we make of all this, but a Devilish
Stratagem, either to make him once again an Exile abroad, or to spoil him of
all his Crowns at home, and to leave him no more, than what they left his
Father, the Crown of Martyrdom? When so many Seditious Libels appeared every
week in the World; now a Vox Patriae, then a Vox Populi; now an Appeal, then an
Advice to the Country; now a Treasonable Postscript, (by a True Protestant,)
and then a whole Treasonable Doleman (by a True Jesuit); now the Advance, and
then the Growth of Popery; now a Plato, and then a Julian Redivivus: In a word,
when we were Plagued with as many Mischievous Pamphelts here, as there were
almost Locusts in Egypt, what could any Reasonable man believe, but that Ruin
and Desolation would be at the end of all? When Faction grew more sturdy and
insolent, since the Discovery of the Popish Plot, than they were before, as if
they scorned to take Quarter, and believed that one day it would be at their
own pleasure whether they would give any; we might well imagine, that they
thoroughly knew what Designs were laid, and what Foundation and Bottom they stood
upon, and hoped in a short time to give us Battle, not upon the Level, but upon
the Highest ground. When we have had such Non-conformists-Pleas, instead of
their Repentance; and when they combined together to maintain that Liberty as
their Right and Due, which before they crouched for as a thing Precarious, we
might easily see what those Affronts of Authority did mean, that now at the
last push, they would not give over, but for their Party-sake, and to serve the
Interest of the Common Cause against the King and Church, they were resolved to
Labor hard in their respective Seminaries of Rebellion, and never be tempted
from their New England Colonies by force of Argument. Briefly; when for many
years we have seen perpetual Endeavors used to pull down that admirable Frame
of Government which is by Law settled among us in Church and State; and when
they who call themselves The True Protestants have employed all their Wit,
Power, and Malice to make Majesty Odious, to expose his Ministers to public
Scorn and Hatred, to Reproach and Threaten all his Friends, to poison the World
with Rebellious Principles, to bespatter the purest Church in the whole
Christian World, to Revile her whole Government, Discipline, and Service, to
Traduce her Clergy of every Rank and Order, and to stir up the Fury of an
Vngovernable Populace against them; it was too too manifest, that they intended
the utter Destruction of our Laws and Establishments, and to bring about their
Villainous Ends by some the most violent Methods, either by Assassinating his
Majesty, (which some looked upon as the shortest Course,) or by a General and
formed Rebellion (which others conceived to be the most Generous and Heroic
way.)

These Rogueries were so plain, that all men had Reason to mistrust, and some
had the Confidence to say, That while we were in pursuit of the Jesuit, an
unsuspected Enemy would come behind us, and reward us with Joab's Compliment
under the fifth Rib. And so it proved in the Issue; for while we were afraid of
one Enemy, we were in danger of another. Here was truly a Wheel within a Wheel;
and while the Papist was at his work, the True Protestant (so called) kicked
him by, and took his place. That light which a few saw then through a Crevise,
every man may now behold clearly; for now the Window is open, and the
Conspiracy, which we feared, is as plain as the Sun. We need no further proof
hereof, than what has been given us by the Conspirators themselves. For, if to
be Felo de se, be an Argument of Guilt, we have had too sad an Argument of that
kind. If to fly from Justice be the Indication of an Evil Conscience, there are
many that Undeniably argue themselves to be Criminals. If the Voluntary
Confessions of Confederates be Testimony sufficient, here is the most Pregnant
and Unquestionable Evidence that ever was given, by some at the very point of
Death, and by all before the face of the World; against whom nothing can be
Objected but this, (which yet is no Objection at all) that what they wickedly
Consented and were Privy to, they Honestly Discovered, and some of them too
when there was no Hope of saving either Life, or so much as an Hair by it. And
as for those very few (scarce enough to makeup a Number) who have taken an
Improsperous and Impossible Course, to Conceal or Palliate their Crimes, we may
truly say, That, by their Tacit Confessions, and Open Contradictions, and
Artificial Shifts, they have (and perhaps beyond the rest) Confirmed the Credit
of this Horrid Conspiracy, when they intended to Stifle or Weaken it. For by
extenuating and mincing matters, they force all Men to conclude, that there was
some Great thing in hand, which needed the utmost of their Art and Skill. And
indeed they seem Agreed with us upon the main point; only their Language is
different from ours; for what they call Disorders, that the Law and We call
Treason. Now this is no Denial of the Matter, but only a different way of
expressing it; and I am apt to think, that had the Conspiracy taken its
intended Effect, these Men would have Extenuated and Minced it after the same
manner; and they who now call Rebellion, Stirs; and Resistance, Innocence;
would then have lessened the Plot so, that Cutting of Throats would have been
counted only a Scotch-way of Trimming, and the Destruction of Princes, to be no
more but a Perfecting the History of the Reformation.

But Blessed be God, that the Counsels of Achitophel, and the Designs of Sheba,
and the Persidiousness of a Judas, are all hitherto Ineffectual. Though we have
been Troubled, and Afflicted, and in extremity of Dangers on every side, yet he
has not suffered us to be tempted above what we are able, but with the
temptation has now made a way for us to escape, and in a great measure has
delivered the Righteous out of their distress.

For (to speak now particularly of this Deliverance) he has, first, delivered
a Righteous Church; Righteous in her Cause; Righteous in her Principles; and
Righteous in her Ways. When the Villainous Practices of some Romanists were
Detected, and set the whole Nation in such a Rage, we had reason to expect,
that every Englishman professing the Protestant Religion, would have lent an
helping Hand to preserve that Church, which the common Enemy did thrust at with
so much Malice and Fury. A Church, which has rolled in Blood, for her Faith
and Loyalty. A Church which has sent into Heaven such Colonies of Confessors
and Martyrs for the Truth. A Church, which has constantly maintained her own
Cause, and the common cause of all Reformed Churches. A Church which has
stocked all Christendom with Learning, and has obliged even Foreigners to be
her Advocates. A Church, which has laid the Holy Scriptures so open, and has
instructed her Children so in all Literature, Divine and Humane, that every the
meanest Idiot may be able to give a good account of his Faith and Hope. In a
word; a Church which in all her Conflicts has been so Victorious and
successful, that it is generally acknowleg'd by us, that she is the only
Substantial Bulwark against Popery. I say, we did justly expect, that when this
Church was so Beset by Enemies from abroad, she might be sure to find none but
Friends at home. And how did the matter go at last? Why, instead of Preserving
her, these Apollyons marked her out for Destruction. Every Law which was made
for her Support, was to be Repealed. Every Kennel was to be opened, and every
Ravenous and Bloodthirsty Sect was to be let loose against her. The whole Body
of her Honest and True-hearted Clergy were to be Routed or Sacrificed: Her
Government was to be pulled down; her Discipline was to be taken away; her way
of Worship was to be abolished, and God alone knows whether any Form of
Worship at all was to be set up in its room. Her Church-doors were to be set
wider open, tolet in Godly Traitors, Sanctified Hypocrites, Religious Atheists,
and Protestant Turks. Her Lands were to be Escheated to our Sovereign Lords,
the People; to pay all the Charges of the Plot, to reward every Mercenary and
Forsworn Sycophant, and to mend the Fortunes of every Beggarly Dependant upon
the Plot-Office. All her Dutiful Children were branded for Papists, and by a
strange kind of Comprehension were to Communicate in the same Fate with the
Papists; and if it were once given out, that the King was killed by the
Papists, (though Protestants did it) All of us without Discrimination were to
be Assassinated in our Houses, or in the Streets, because we were all concluded
Papists. They would in all haste have Revenged the Kings Death upon us all, not
so much because the King was killed, as because he Lived so long, and We would
not help to Kill him. Thus the poor Church of England was to be rewarded at
last for all her Faith, for all her Integrity, for all her Merits and Care of
Souls, and even for her daily Prayers for her Enemies and Persecutors. Cursed
be their Anger, for it was fierce, and their Wrath, for it was cruel; and
except the Lord himself had been on our side, when they rose up against us,
they had swallowed us up quick, when their Wrath was so kindled against us. But
Blessed be the Lord who has not given us over as a prey unto their Teeth. Our
Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken,
and we are as yet delivered.

2. Together with this Deliverance wrought for our Righteous Church, God has
wrought a Deliverance for our Righteous Prince too. We little dreamt that this
King was to be Murdered also; and that too, when the Blood of Charles the First
cried yet for Vengeance; and within a few years after Charles the Second was
Restored to us by a Miracle, being risen as it were from the Dead, and received
by us with all Public and Triumphant Hosanna's and Acclamations. Who could
imagine that after so many Frotestations and Professions of Sorrow for former
Miscarriages, after so many Vows of Loyalty and Hearty Obedience for the
future, after so many Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy repeated over the whole
Nation, after such Acts of Indemnity granted even to Monsters of Rebels, after
such Profuseness of Royal Bounty, whereby Villains were enriched, and grew fat;
after so many Expressions of Goodness, Tenderness, and Clemency, enough to
soften any Devils but Fanatics; after such pretended Fears, lest his Majesty
should be destroyed by the Papists, after so many Professions of the most
sollicitous care for the Preservation of his Sacred Life, after so many
Specious Addresses said to be presented by his most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects,
and after so many formal Petitions to the King, that he would be careful of his
own Person: I say, who could imagine that after all this, any such Men should
be found among us, as would time after time Conspire to Murder his Majesty in
his Coach, and as if all his Favors had been Injuries, to make Reprisals upon
his Life? But I remember what a Character Josephus gives of the Pharisees,
(those great Pretenders to Religion of old) that they were a Bold and Arrogant
Sect; that would not Antiq. l. 17. cap. 3.
Swear Allegiance unto Caesar; but were inveterate Enemies to Kings, and would
not stick upon occasion to make Attempts upon Kings, and do them Mischief. And
may not this be the Character of the Sectaries among us? Truly, it may be
questioned whether there be any difference between them in their Morals; but
this, That the Pharisees in that Nation were Jewish Fanatics, and the
Fanatics in this Nation are Christian Jews. Did not the Pharisees continually
way-lay the Son of God to Stone him? Why, even so did some of these Conspire to
way-lay the Anointed of God to Assassinate him; as if in every Age the Good Old
Cause (so called) must be Consecrated by shedding a Princes Blood.

Azorius the Jesuit, endeavoring to prove the Lawfulness of Deposing Kings,
urges several Presidents for it, and among other Examples which he mentions,
he says, That it was a common Practice in Scotland. The very same Argument is
used by Buchanan the Scotch Presbyterian; I could reckon up (says he) Twelve
of our Kings, or more, who have been either thrust into Prison, or forced into
Banishment, or to Death. Truly it is a fine Credit for that Nation! But
according to the course which some have taken here, they were like to lay a
Ground for Such Another Account in this Nation, by their Barbarous and Bloody
dealings with our Kings, from Father to Son: The consideration whereof is
enough to enrage the Spirits of every English Subject, that has the Conscience
of a Christian, or but the Heart and Face of a Man.

And now we clearly see the meaning of those late Mysteries, which some among
us were not able, or not willing to look into before. The People were told,
that the Crown is at their disposal, and that Princes may be Deposed. Our King
was Libelled as a Favourer of Popery, and was brought into a Plot against
himself. 'Twas insinuated boldly, that he would use his Power after an
Arbitrary manner; and that all our Liberties and Properties were in Danger.
'Twas said, that the Government was abused, and that there was no hope of
Redress, the King being guided by Evil Counselors. All the most wicked Arts of
40 and 41, were used again, to Blacken Majesty, and to render a most Excellent
Prince Contemptible, and Vile, and Odius to his Subjects; and at last his very
Guards were complained of as a great Grievance to the Nation, and as Mercenary
Forces that were raised to advance Arbitrary Power, and still kept up to the
great Amazement and Terror of all the good People of the Land (they are the
words of a Treasonable and Cursed Association.) Now, what was the meaning of
these, and an hundred Devices more, but to alienate the Hearts of the Kings
Subjects from him, to make the whole Nation Discontented, and to bring his
Majesty to such a Naked and Defenseless Condition, that nothing should be
wanting but a few hands to take him off? which among so many Old Rebels,
Cromwellians, and Army Officers, that lately swarmed about the City of London,
was no very hard matter to find.

But that Good God, who caused a Star at Noon to light our Prince into the
World; who has all along covered his Head in the day of Battle, who preserved
him in the Belly of an Oak, as he preserved his Servant David in a Cave; who
defended him abroad from all the Dangers that attend a Twelve years Banishment;
who at last bowed the Hearts of his People, as he did the Hearts of David's
Subjects, and by a new Miracle brought him home, without shedding of one drop
of Blood; who has ever since supported him against the strivings of Unthankful
and Violent Men; and who has kept him safe from the Practices of Popish
Jesuits; that Good God has delivered him from the Inhumane Designs, and Bloody
Attempts of these Protestant Jesuits also: And methinks if men would but
seriously consider, how the Providence of God has been particularly concerned
for the King all along, from his Birth even to this day, it should be enough to
turn the Hearts of all his Enemies, and prevail with them to Love his
Government and him, who has continually been, and still is, the very care of
Heaven. I have heard of a Jew that was Converted to our Christian Faith, by
considering the wonderful manner of his Majestics most happy Restoration: For
he presently concluded, that the King and his People were very dear unto God,
who had wrought such a Miracle for both. And truly it will be matter of great
Admiration, if for the future there be any Republicans, or Anti-Royalists among
us, since the God of Heaven has seemed thus to Attest and to Assert the
Authority of the King, and the Righteousness of his Cause, by working so many
Deliverances for him: This late Deliverance especially, which nothing but Gods
own Hand could work for him: As if the Almighty did intend by a continued and
long Series of Mercies to him, to make up to us all those Losses which the
Three Kingdoms sustained, by the loss of that Incomparable Prince and Royal
Martyr, of whom the World was not worthy.

3. I am sure every Upright and Loyal man has all the reason in the World to
be truly thankful for, and to keep alive the memory of this wonderful
Deliverance. For, Thirdly, This Deliverance was wrought for us all, for you,
and for me, and for every Faithful and Righteous Subject throughout the Land,
and, which is more, for our Hopeful Posterity too, and for the Children that
are yet unborn. Had the Conspiracy succeeded, Lord! I tremble to think, what
Confusion, what Violence, what Massacres must have presently followed; and what
Seas of Blood we had been drowned in by this time. For these were not the
desperate Designs of a few; the business was laid very broad, (as one of the
Conspirators did confess in his Letter to the Secretary of State.) And it
seems, by the Confession of another of them, that in and about the City of
London above ten thousand men were ready to rise at the holding up of one Man's
finger, and that these were to be multiplied in the space of twenty four hours
into five times the number; besides an infinite Army of Rebels that were to be
raised up and down in all Quarters, by the several Agitators in every Country.
And what could have come of this, but Plunders, Rapine, Murders, Outrages, an
unheard of Slaughter, and an Universal deluge of Blood over the whole Nation?
The Loyal Nobility, the True-hearted Magistracy, the Faithful Clergy, the
Honest Gentry, all were marked out as Sheep appointed for Destruction. Peers,
Prelates, Judges, every rank of Men, from him that sits at the
Council Table, to him that tradeth in his Shop, or labors at the Plough, all
were to be under the same unavoidable necessity, either of sacrificing their
Lives, or of prostituting their Consciences to those Barbarous Villains, whose
very Mercies are as cruel as the Grave, however their Consciences are pretended
to be so very Nice, Delicate, and Tender.

It Is no New thing to be observed, that some who cannot rise up to all the
heights of Conformity, (as the Northern Phrase is,) can yet strain a point upon
occasion, and rise up to all the heights of Rebellion and Barbarity. And had
not God so marvellously interposed, these Squeamish-Conscience-Traytors would
have showed us the Truth of this, to our great Sorrow and Cost, and beyond the
Experience of the former Age.

For, it is a Mistake, if we think that their facino^us Designs were levelled
only at his Majesty and his Royal Brother (though that was a most flagitious
and barbarous Wickedness). No; the very Foundations of the Earth were to be
moved; the whole Form of Government in Church and State was to be new modeled,
if they could but agree upon the Project. To be sure, Monarchy and Episcopacy
(the two great Pillars of all our Happiness and Safety) were to be utterly
pulled down, never to be set up more, without a Miracle, which they, who had
not God in all their Thoughts, nor any true Notion of a Deity, did not think it
worth their while, or consideration to Forecast. Where the Traitors of the
Late Times were Defective and Overseen, there these Rebels would have been very
Circumspect and Wary; so that they would have left us no tolerable Hopes of
ever seeing the Royal Family, and our Ancient, Legal Government, restored
again. And what infinite Havoc and Destruction would not this have cost? For
had these men prevailed (which was not possible for them without the Expense of
many thousands of Lives, besides the sacred Life of Him who is an whole Kingdom
unto Us: but had their Villainy prospered) they could not have been secure long,
if but a Remnant was left of such as are faithful Friends to the Crown and
Church. So that they could not propose to themselves any other probable ways of
settling themselves in that Power they longed for, but by the utter Ruin of
Loyalty, and by a total destruction of every Honest Family, from the Father to
the Child, in all parts of the Nation. And what then would the sum of all have
been? why, I will give it you in the words of a zealous Writer in the Late Dr.
Ga^den, (...).
Times: We should have left us a Kingdom without a King, Government without
Authority, Magistrates without Power, People without Laws, a Body without an
Head, Sheep without a Shepherd, Christians without Christ, Churches without
Ministers, or Ministers without maintenance, and a Nation without Faith; and
let me add too, a Land without any Peace, Armies without any end, Oppressions
without any Mercy, Protestants without any Religion, and an Associated Heard of
the most Savage and Unclean Beasts, without any God.

That this is not our present Condition, we must ascribe it wholly to the great
Goodness of God, whose Mercies and Compassions never fail. And (that we may now
make some use of this whole matter,)

1. The Consideration both of our Dangers and of our Deliverance serves,
First, To Justify the Zeal of those, who for these several years have given
the World warning of the Dangers we were in, and have vigorously appeared for
the interest of the King and the Church. Though the generality of Men have been
strangely Blinded and Misled, by the Artifices of those who made use of Men's
Fears of Popery, to promote their own Fanatic and Republican Interests; yet
there were many who would not be wrought upon to bow down their Knees to Baal,
nor suffer themselves to be cheated of their Consciences, but told men plainly,
That Factious and Antimonarchical Designs were carrying on, and that Ruin
would be at the end of all, if they did not take heed in time. For how could it
otherwise be (without the help of Gods special Providence) but that men would
fall into the same Pit again, when they drove on so furiously in the very same
Broad ways which led us to Destruction before? Yet these Faithful and
Plain-dealing (not to say Prophetic) Monitors, were then either laughed at for
a sort of rash and impolitick Fools, or stigmatized for Men of Hot Heads, for
talking so much of Forty One, and of an Intemperate Zeal for Arbitrary Power
and Popery. And in this respect, the honest Clergy, some in the Country, diverse
about the City of London, have suffered in a very great measure, being
oftentimes pubickly and in Print, exposed to the Fury of a mad Rabble, not only
as weak and undiscerning men, but also as direct Betrayers of the Nations
Liberties and Religion. But there is a time when Wisdom will be justified of
her Children; and now all well-meaning (nay, even the moderate) men (so called)
must own, that there was too great cause for us to act and say as we did. Did
not the Faction every day grow, not in numbers only, but in insolence too,
beyond all Comparison? And when they had so much Strength, Malice, and
Authority on their side, what did they want but our Pulpits? Had the Alarm been
but given there, the Sword had been presently drawn, and such another Rebellion
had followed, as was once proclaimed with a Curse ye Meroz, and was Sanctified
in so many Churches as the Cause and Quarrel of God. Indeed, I cannot vouch for
every Pulpit; especially since it is Discovered, that Three famous
Nonconforming Preachers have baen zealous Promoters of this Horrid Conspiracy;
and time must show us how many more of them have been holding forth the Armatum
Evangelium, the same Gospel of War which was once before covered with Buff, and
sprinkled with the Blood of a Scotch-Covenant; but it is very suspicious that
more than an Ecclesiastical Council of six have been beating the Drum; though,
God be blessed, it was only a dead sound in a Corner, and the generality of Men
have hitherto been out of the hearing of the Beat.

2. I have not said this for the Honest Clergy of our Church (for I except a
Judas and a Julian) out of any Principle of Vanity, or with a Design to
insinuate, that we are any more than mean and poor Instruments in the hand of
God. No; it is the great Bishop of the Church and of our Souls, the Lord of
Glory and Power, to whom we owe this, and all other our wonderful Deliverances
to, and who with his own right hand, and with his holy arm has gotten himself
the Victory. And therefore, Secondly, The sense of this Deliverance should make
such a deep Impression upon all our Hearts, as will bring us to a through
Repentance from all dead Works, and to an Universal Obedience to his Heavenly
Will. And this, not only as the best Expression of Thankfulness for this Mercy
hitherto, but also as the best and only means to incline the Divine Goodness
still to perfect that good work which he has of himself begun among us. Lord!
how near were we to Destruction? Upon the very brink and edge of it; so that
(to all Humane appearance) had his Sacred Majesty staid at New Market but two
days longer, of necessity we must have been all Buried before now in a Common
Ruin. Blessed be God (the God that does wondrous things) that he has given us
this one opportunity more, to praise his Name, and to declare the Works that he
does even for the unthankful children of men. But this is not all our Business,
to offer up unto him the Sacrifices of our Mouth, and the Calves of our Lips:
for unless we be careful to direct our Lives, and to order our Conversation as
it becomes Saints, we shall come very short of our Duty, and for ought I know,
may still come short of our Deliverance. Remember what Samuel said to those
willful and ungrateful People, 1 Samuel 12. 25. If ye shall still do wickedly, ye
shall be consumed, both ye and your King. We all pretend great Honor and
Affections for his Majesty, and a most tender care for his Safety and
Preservation: Why, I will tell you a short and a ready way, how he may be safe
and happy, and continue a long Blessing to us and to our Children: Let us that
are his Subjects make it the business of our Life, truly to Fear and Obey God,
and the thing is certainly and soon done. But it is dangerous for men to dally
with the Divine Patience, and still to be trying Conclusions, whether God will
preserve them on still, notwithstanding their great and high Provocations; and
it was the very thing, which made him at last utterly weary of his ancient
People, the Jews. Though he had not dealt so with any Nation, and though he had
born them all along from the Belly, as the Prophets Expression is, Isa. 46. 3.
yet in the end he threw them out of his Arms, because they sinned yet still,
and hardened their Hearts, notwithstanding so many Deliverances all along. That
this may not be our sad case, let every one who professes himself a Loyal and
Good Subject, apply himself heartily to the necessary business of Repentance,
and turn from the Evil of his ways, especially that Evil way which he is most
addicted to; and then we need not fear the most malicious and wicked Practices
of those, who have basely gone off from the Kings side (if ever they were
really on it) and have gone off too with all sorts of Debauchery and Immorality
along with them. Read and consider well that Declaration of God himself, Jer.
18. 7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: if that Nation
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will repent of the Evil
that I thought to do unto them.

3. And it is necessary too (which is the Third Use to be made of this
Deliverance) that men Repent of their Follies, that they have been so credulous
and easy in taking the Words, and trusting to the Principles, and abetting
(though inadvertently) the Practices of these Conspirators; and to beware of
the like Follies for the Future. Those Principles which have been sent so thick
abroad of late, that the King holds not his Crown Jure Divino, but is the
Commonwealths Trustee and Delegate, that he is accountable to his People, that
all his Rights are founded upon Humane Laws; that he is a Coordinate State,
and that the Supreme or Sovereign Power is lodged in the People; whither did
these Doctrines tend, but to the Deposition and Destruction of his Majesty? You
may observe, they were the Principles which Bradshaw went upon at the King's
Trial. The manifest obstructing the course of Justice, notwithstanding full and
pregnant Evidence; the protecting of the basest Fellows, and the greatest
Criminals, who had nothing to recommend them but this, that they were factious
and dishonest; the taking of Oaths, not in the sense of the Law, but according
to every man's Private Construction; the justifying of the most
InfamousVillains; and the zealous endeavors which have been used, both to
Rescue Traitors from the Law, and to cleanse their Reputation, after they were
condemned for the foulest Malefactors; whither did all this tend, but to
embolden Conspirators, and to encourage them with Securities from all manner of
Penalty, if they had but the Character of True-Protestants? The subborning of
Wretches to say and unsay, to speak by roat, and to Tell every thing but Truth;
the supporting of Perjury as a Trade, far more profitable than any Old English
Manufacture; and the stitching up of every Hole, which any Common Idiot could
see in an improbable Story; what did this tend to, but to keep a great stock of
Oaths in bank, to swear the King himself out of his Honor and his Life? The
Charge and Sweat which thousands have wasted, to put the most disaffected
Persons into Places and Offices of great Trust, and Power; what did this tend
to, but to make Resistance and Rebellion look fair with the Face of Authority?
The Aspersing of the Government, the Calumniating of his Majesty, and all
Subordinate Magistrates, and Loyal Ministers of State; the frightning of men
with such a noise of Popery, when so many had exchanged all Religion for
Atheism; the Outcries against Tyranny, when the Licentiousness of those very
men argued that common Justice could not be done, no, not for the King himself.
What did all this tend to, but to subvert the Fundamental Constitutions both in
Church and State? The Dispersing of Libels, the countenancing of the most
Seditious Pamphlets, that came from the rudest and filthiest hands; the scaring
of men (if it had been possible) from speaking Reason, Justice, or Truth; and
the practicing of every thing that served for the diminution of all that is
Good, Great, and Noble; what did all this tend to, but to help Evil-minded men
by Degrees and Inches to get to the Kings Throne, that they might Assassinate
his Person with a full thrust, and then leave it to the prejudiced and
ill-affected World to make their Apology?

One would have thought it impossible, that Discerning men should not be able
to look to the end of these things, (nor so much as to guess at the Conclusion
by the Premises) without putting an Honest and Experienced Observator to the
pains of drawing out the whole Scheme of the Villainy. But so it was, that great
Multitudes of men (some of whom I am persuaded were not guilty of Black
Intentions) were led away with the common Error, and upon false presumptions
that nothing was at the bottom, but a true Design for the Interest and
Stability of Religion; the stale pretense that turned the Nation into an
Aceldama once before. It Is high time therefore for such to be sorry to see how
greatly they were befooled, and to consider with themselves how far they may
have Contributed (though unwittingly) to the carrying o^ a Design so Horrid and
Barbarous without a Parallel; and by their just Indignation for what is past,
and highest Zeal for the future, to endeavor if it be possible) to make the
King and the Church Reparation for those Intolerable Mischiefs, which
Blood-thirsty Trayters would (perhaps) never have Attempted upon the Confidence
of a mere Fanatic Interest.

4. Once more, and I have done. The Singular and Abundant Goodness of God to us
in this Instance of his Providence, teaches us to cast all our Care upon the
same Providence still, and to commit our selves to him in well-doing. In the
very height of These Times it was our Hope, that God would open a way, which we
did not foresee, or so much as think of, and lead us out of our dangers and
difficulties, if we did but study to act like true Christians; and that his
Providence would not leave nor forsake us. And now we see that our Hopes are
made good to us; for God has saved us after a Miraculous manner, by two
strange, and sudden, and astonishing acts of his Providence. First, By his
Providence at New Market: For when the King was there, and some of the Traitors
were now preparing their Forces and Instruments of Death, and they thought
themselves Cock sure; they dreamt as little as we, that a dreadful Fire would
happen there, to force Gods Anointed home in all haste, and but a few hours
before his Bloody Enemies were to be gathered and planted in Ambuscade. This
was Gods doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes. And then, some considerable
time after his Majesty's return, he himself not mistrusting what narrow dangers
he had escaped; the Conspiracy going on still vigorously, to destroy him in
some other place; when the Devilish Design was fixed, the Providence of God was
seen the second time, by forcing a Discovery of the Plot, and by touching with
his Finger the Conscience of one of the Accomplices to the very quick. As he
has honestly and ingenuously Confessed, it was nothing but a restless Conscience
that brought him to it, and that through the dangers of Death too. I was
troubled in my Mind, (says he) I had See the Trial of Walc^t.
no Peace, no Satisfaction, no Content, I did not mind my Business, nor could I
take Rest; and that was the moving cause that I discovered the Conspiracy, and
no other. This was manifestly the work of God, for the deliverance of Prince
and People, to make a man's Sin his cruel Lictor, and intolerable Plague, and
as he had already prevented the greatest Evil, so to draw Good (and we hope a
perpetual Good) out of it at the last.

I have no more to add, but that we give all diligence Religiously and Honestly
to perform our duty to God, to his Anointed, and to all Mankind, and in so
doing to look up to the hills from whence all our help comes, and to trust in
God for our deliverance from those dangers which are yet before us; casting all
our care on him, who thus continually cares for us; and who has hitherto
delivered us, and (if we do not offend him by wicked and ungrateful Courses)
will deliver us yet still. Though the Troubles of the righteous be many, yet
the Lord delivers him out of all. To that Merciful, Watchful, and Everblessed
God, be all Honor, Glory, and Thanksgiving for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

