Imprimatur; Atque imprimi forte necesse est, ut qui occasionem Schismatis hinc
illinc quaerunt, se sciant nec hinc habere (nisi de ignorantia sua aut malitia)
quod querantur.

Ex Aedib. Lambethan. April. 4. 1664. M. Frank S. T. P. R. in Christ. Pat. ac
Dom. Archiepisc. Cantuar. a Sacris Dom.

EASTER not Mis-timed.

A LETTER Written Out of the Country to a Friend IN LONDON Concerning
EASTER DAY.

CR


LONDON, Printed for Timothy Garthwait at the King's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1664.

SIR,
YOur Letter tells me, that you have met with very many men that say, We ought
to keep Easter, this year, upon APRIL 3. though all our English Almanack-makers
have placed it upon APRIL 10. Yet you cannot be of that opinion, because it
seems unlikely that All our makers of Almanacks could be deceived in a thing of
that nature, or that they would conspire to miss-lead the whole Nation, without
any advantage to themselves. You therefore desire to know my mind concerning
this Controversy, and that so fully and clearly expressed, as that it may
enable you to escape undeceived by their seeming Reasons.

To satisfy your desire; In the first place, I answer, that, In England, for
this year 1664, Easter ought to be kept upon the tenth of April. And that,
because no other day is designed by those old Rules which hitherto England has
always followed: and our Superiors have not yet substituted New Rules,
commanding us to use them in the place of the Old ones. Witness the Book of
Common Prayer printed in Folio at London 1662: Wherein the second Page, before
the beginning of Morning-Prayer, has A Table to find Easter for ever. Which
Table had been often printed in the former Common-Prayer-Books; and by being
reprinted, in the Edition of 1662, did sufficiently show that the Church of
England had made no alteration for the time of celebrating Easter. That Tables
title promises to show Easter for ever, only in opposition to the Table of
Moveable Feasts in the foregoing Page, which teaches to find Easter for
forty years only: so that after the year 1700, it will be almost useless. Yet
that Table of forty years will always afford forty examples of Easter found by
the following Table and by the Precept under it. If, for exercise, you seek all
those forty Easters by the lesser Table, you shall find no other days then
those that are set down in the greater Table, in the column whose title is
Easter Day. The aforesaid Book of Common Prayer has two other old
Touch-stones, by which the forty years Table may be tried; and (whatsoever
others tell you) the forty Easters of that Table will endure all those three
trials: and no difference will be found in them, if the Examiner have as much
skill or sagacity, as that Book requires in those that look after higher
rules, and will not be content with the lowest and easiest sort of Precepts.
The forty years Table is fitted for mean understandings: But if men will
question the truth of that Table, or the firmness of the grounds of its
calculation, let them not blame that Book, because, for the satisfaction of
their curiosity, it has not other rules delivered in words sollicitously
weighed and considered, lest ought should be superfluous, deficient or
ambiguous. If the High way be open, straight, plain, firm and safe; they that
will run out of it, should not blame the Surveyors, if all the declivities and
brinks of Rivers be not fenced with Guardefous.

To come nearer to your Controversy. All the English Almanacks place Easter
upon April the tenth, this year. The Book of Common Prayer, in its forty years
Table, tells you that in 1664. Easter Day is April the tenth; yet some of your
acquaintance say, We ought to keep it sooner. How much sooner? Ten days (say
some, who know no difference between fixed and moveable Feasts) France keeps
Christmas ten days before us in England, therefore it keeps Easter so too.
But if you meet with any such, tell them, That if the French keep Easter ten
days before us, they must keep it on a Thursday. The difference of Old and New
Style was introduced by skipping over ten days of the Month of October 1582;
but keeping the names of the Weekdayes unchanged. And therefore both Styles
[calling the same day Sunday, and keeping Easter upon Sunday] must needs differ
a just number of weeks, or not at all. Of the fourscore Easters kept since
1583, Weeks Easters. 0 36 1 26 4 5 5 13 Sum 80 36 differed not at all; 26
Roman Easters were a week before Ours, 5 were 4 weeks before ours, and 13 were
5 weeks before those that were observed in England: as shall be particularly
shown hereafter, if need be. In all Roman Catholic Countries, except Valesia,
Easterday will be kept upon their April 13., which we call Apr. 3, and so a
week before us, this year 1664. But in the rest of Christendom, Holland and
Zealand excepted, this year, the tenth of April will be observed for an
Easter Day, even in the remotest parts of Asia and Africa. Because they, as
well as we, find Easter Day by the Rules which were generally received by all
Christians Eleven hundred and thirty two years ago, and were observed by all
Christians ever since, till the year of our Lord 1583: when, in obedience to a
Bull of Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, many Countries celebrated Easter, a
fortnight sooner then the rest of Christendom. And ever since that year they
have followed new Rules for the finding of Easter Day. Which Rules, 773 years
hence, will give them an Easter Day six weeks before Ours: but, till then, none
more then five weeks before us, as it was in 1663.

But I need not speak any more of that Calendar, and its new Rules, at this
time; although you tell me that diverse Roman Catholics and Priests are eager
pleaders for the third of April. I perceive that they pretend not to prove
their Assertion, by saying It is so in the Roman Calendar; For they know, that
Calendar is not yet publicly received in England. But they say It must be so;
because in the Common Prayer Book printed 1662 there is this Rule, Easter Day
is always the first Sunday after the first full Moon, which happens next after
the one and twentieth day of March. But, say they, this year, that full Moon is
on the one and thirtieth of March [a Thursday;] after which, the first Sunday
is the third of April; the second Sunday is the tenth of April. Therefore,
according to this Rule, not April the tenth, but April the third must be
Easter Day. This were a sufficient demonstration, if the words full Moon had
the same meaning in both places. But the FULL MOON meant in the Rule, this
year, is no other then the fourth of April: Which being Monday, the first
Sunday after it must needs be April 10, which, therefore, by this Rule, shall
be Easter. If the Priests you write of, make difficulty to admit such full
Moons, pray them to search their Grandfathers Libraries, till they have found
the Mass Book which was printed by Kingston and Sutton, in Quarto, at London,
in 1555, which was the second year of Queen Mary. The Title of the Book is,
Missale ad usum Ecclesiae Sarisburiensis. The Title of the second page is,
Extracta ex compoto. ( computo they would have said.) It contains no such Table
of moveable Feasts readily calculated, as our Liturgies are wont to have; but
in stead of it, there are Rules for finding the Dominical Letters, the
Leap-years, the Moveable-Feasts, the New Moons and Easter. Easter Day is there
found by New or Full Moons, with these directions, Carmina docentia per
novilunia invenire Pascha.
Post regum festa, quaere novilunia trina
Post dominica tertia, Pascha sacrum celebra.
Aliud. Post veris Aequinoctium Quaere plenilunium:
Et Dominica proxima sacrum celebra Pascha
Non verius invenies, Si mill legas codices.


The New Moon meant in those verses is not such as our Almanacks now profess to
give us, namely the hour and minute of the true Conjunction of the Sun and
Moon. But it is only the day of the Moons mean Conjunction, as it was above
1300 years ago; and is there found, merely by taking the day against which the
proposed years Golden Number stands in the margin of each month. For that
Computist knew well enough that that day would be four days after the New Moon
of his own time; and therefore bids us begin at the day so found, and tell up
wards a syllable to each day, saying In Coelis est hic; The syllable hic will
fall four days above your Golden Number, and there show you the day of New Moon
for your time.

The full Moons meant in the same Verses are not so much as precise days of
mean opposition of Sun and Moon, but are to be found in this plain manner. To
the day of that ancient New Moon found by the Golden Number, add 13: So have
you the 14th day of that Ecclesiastical Cyclic month; Which day Victorius (who
flourished 1200 years ago) did call the Full Moon, and a great many others,
after him, called it so.

If you have not that Missale, you may try its rules in any other Book that
has the golden numbers set in the margin of each month, like that Missal; (as
if 3 stand against the first of March, and 13 against the last of December.)
Such were Henry the Eight's Bible printed 1540; Edward the Sixth's
Common Prayer Book, printed 1552; (for that of 1549 had no manner of direction
to find moveable Feasts) Orarium seu libellus precationum, published by Queen
Elizabeth, 1560. I cannot tell you when the Golden numbers were first put up 4
days higher, to save men the labor of using In coelis est hic. I find them so
high in the Common prayer Book printed at Edinburg 1637; as also in the great
Church-Bible printed at London 1640. But in the Common prayer Book printed in
follo 1662, those Golden numbers are restored to the places which they had in
King Henry's Bible, King Edward's Liturgy, Queen Mary's Missal, and Queen
Elizabeth's Orarium, except some few faults. But you will find no Rubric to
tell you to what end they were set there. I will therefore here tell you some
use of them.

The Golden Number of any year, set to some day between March 7 and April 6,
shows that day to be the Ecclesiastical beginning of that year. For when the
Emperor Constantine had set an end to the cruel persecutions of the
Christians, and had called that great Council of Bishops to Nicaea in Bithynia;
They (abhorring those outrageous quarrels, and shameful disagreements which had
been among Christians concerning the time of keeping Easter) did decree that
thenceforth All Christians should, in remembrance of our Saviors Resurrection,
celebrate Easter upon the first Sunday after the fourteenth day of the first
month: because the holy Scriptures bear witness, that our Lord did arise upon
the first Sunday after the Jews Passover: And that their Passover Lamb was to
be killed and eaten on the fourteenth day of the first month; which months were
Lunar, and always began with the New Moons. The Astronomical spring, that is,
the Vernal Aequinoctial, fell always before the middle of their first month
Nisan. (For, the month, whose middle fell before the Vernal Equinox, they
accounted the last month of the preceding year) But because this Decree would
be ill observed, if all men were left to their little skill in the courses of
the Sun and Moon, the Fathers of that Council referred the whole business to
the Church of Alexandria; wherein at that time were more and better
Astronomers, than in any other part of the world. Yet the rest of Christendom
grew weary of depending upon Alexandria, and yearly expecting Letters from
thence, to tell them when they were to begin their Lent, and to celebrate
Easter. Which Letters often mis-carrying, men grew impatient, and offered at
several rules to enable men to find Easter day according to the Nicene Decree,
without the help of Alexandria. But none had the hap to be generally liked,
till one Dionysius Exiguus, in the time of the Emperor Justinian, fitted them
with a Cycle of 532. years, which received universal approbation, and in short
time, was every where received; and is in use in England at this day.

The grounds of this Cycle are these. March 21. was then accounted the day of
the Vernal Equinox. If this be the earliest fourteenth day of the month, then
March 8. must be the earliest New Moon that can be admitted for a First month,
or a beginner of the Ecclesiastical year. The next years First month will begin
March 27. and so forth in this order, March. Ap. March. March. March. Ap. March
Ap. March. March. 8. 27. 16. 4. 23. 12. 31. 20. 9. 28. 17. 5. 25. 14. 2. 22.
11. 30. 19. and then March 8. again as at the first; The Moons returning after
19. years, as the Greeks had been taught long before they were Christians.

I have not now time to tell you why these 19. several beginnings of the First
month were not reckoned in this Order; for they accounted that year, the first
of the Cycle, whose New Moon fell upon March 23. so that March the 8. begins
the 16. year; and accordingly, in March and April, the New Edition of the
Liturgy in Folio has a Red 16. standing against March 8. and 17. against March
27. etc. Whence it is easy to draw such a Table as this, Golden Number. 16. 5.
13. 2. 10. 18. 7. 16. 4. 12. 1. 9. 17. 6. 14. 3. 11. 19. 8 First day Mar. 8. 9.
11. 12. 14. 16. 17. 19. 20. 22. 23. 25. 27. 28. 30. 31 Ap. 2. 4. 5 14. day Mar.
21. 22. 24. 25. 27. 29. 30. Ap. 1. 2. 4. 5. 7. 9. 10. 12. 13 15. 17. 18 And
thus we have found the 19. Easter limits. Terminus Paschalis, says Scaliger,
est quarta decima Luna mensis Paschalis Christiani seculo Constantini Magni. It
is so called, because, as November 26. is always the limit for Advent, upon
which day Advent Sunday never falls, but as soon after as may be; so every year
has a different limit for Easter, upon which limit Easter must not be kept,
though it be Sunday; but on the first Sunday after the limit. As this year
1664. the Golden Number is 12. and therefore by the foregoing Table, this years
Easter limit is April 4. which being Monday, the next Sunday after must needs
be April 10. And that must be Easter day this year 1664. If you would seek it
by the Table which teaches to find Easter for ever, you must enter it with the
Golden number 12. and the Sunday letter B (for the other letter C shows not
Sunday after Matthias day) you will find April 10. as before.

So that the Easter day of 1664. is found to be the tenth of April by all the
four ways of finding, taught in the Common Prayer Book; namely, The Red numbers
in the Calendar; The Rule next after the end of the Calendar; The Table for
forty years; And the Table to find Easter for ever.

If you doubt of the sense or truth of what I have here hastily written, let
your next Letter tell me what it is you stick at, I shall endeavor to remove
it, as being

Sir Your, etc.


