THE Good Old Way OR, A DISCOURSE Offered to all True-hearted PROTESTANTS
Concerning the ANCIENT WAY OF THE CHURCH, And the CONFORMITY of the Church of
England THEREUNTO: As to its Government, Manner of Worship, Rites and Customs.

By Edward Pelling, Rector of S. Martin Ludgate; and Chaplain to his Grace the
Duke of Somerset.

Jer. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for
the Old paths, where the Good Way is, and walk therein.

(...), Con. Nic. London, Printed for Jonathan Edwin at the Sign of the three
Roses in Ludgate Street, 1680.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God HENRY Lord Bishop of London, one of the
Lords of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
I Am obliged to offer to your Lordship these following Papers, which will the
rather need a good Patron (such as your Lordship) because the Times are
Censorious, and many mis-guided people are ready to clamor against a man that
shall adventure (though out of pure Charity) to direct them contrary to their
own minds. Maximus Tyrius observed long ago, that Man is (...), Such a morose,
querulous and Squeamish stomach't thing, that he will cry out at whatsoever
crosses his Humor, whether it be wrong or Right. I do not doubt, but it may
be my Lot to receive such Returns from some; and, as to mine own particular, I
do not care if it be, especially since Clamouring is again become a Mode. I am
sure, the Design of this little piece is Honest; for it aims at Peace and
unity, which in these uncertain and tottering times is the only Expedient to
secure the interest of our Religion against a Foreign Enemy.

Many even of different persuasions in other things, are agreed in this. But
the great question is, what are the beast Means for the compassing of so
Excellent an End? And some (to use their own Expression) are for setting the
Church doors wider open: meaning, that they would have some of our Usages and
Constitutions thrown aside, because they are not fit for their Tooth, unless it
be to bite at. But were this thing fairly Practicable, I believe 'twould be as
ineffectual in its issue, as it is unreasonable in it self. For how impossible
is it, to satisfy Desires that are still craving? we could never yet tell (nor
can they themselves) what will really stint them; only some have told us in
general Terms, that they would have every thing down, which is not of Primitive
use; of which they themselves must be judges too: So that if they will please
to conclude against the whole frame of our Discipline and Government, away it
must, or else they will not be satisfied.

Concessions hitherto have been so far from being Advantageous to the Church,
that (like General Indulgences) they have only made ungrateful Spirits the more
Bold and Insolent, so that they hope at last to get into the Saddle. Those five
Reverend Divines, who were fain to lay their Noddles together to give birth to
Smectymnuus, among other Huge Reasons for the Abolishing of our Liturgy, urged
this for one, because, forsooth, it had already undergone some Alterations. As
for instance; whereas in King Edward the Sixth's time, days of Abstinence were
called Fish-days, afterward that word was altered, and Fasting days was put in
its room. From which Mighty Argument those great Logicians and Magisterial
Divines did strongly conclude, that the whole Service Book might be laid aside.
Find the Consequence He that can; but sad and long Experience has showed us,
what advantage designing and insatiable Men will take of every little thing, to
make it a Precedent, and to plead for more still, that after the removal of
this pin and that, and so on, the whole Fabric may at last tumble upon our
heads.

Would to God this design was not on foot now, But however some endeavor to
stop our Mouths, yet we have Eyes as well as They, and there is too great
Reason to conclude, that many (that is to say, some Atheists, some Jesuited
persons, and some whose low Fortunes and Interest (together with their Malice)
engage them to be Factious) do directly level their aim at the Ruin of our
Established Church.

We are so charitable as to hope, that many of our Dissenters are better
conditioned. But as in the late Troubles, the Rebellion went further than the
first Raisers of it did intend (for they hoped to force the King to buckle to
their Terms, when others behind them did resolve to force Him, and Monarchy, to
the Grave) so we have grounds to believe, that now while one party desires an
accommodation in some matters, others make use of their Help and Assistance,
with an intent to overthrow all.

This unadvised concurrence of our over zealous Brethren in this Juncture,
though it be of most evil consequence, yet is the more to be pitied, because
they imprudently strive against their own securities. For it is evident to any
indifferent Eye, that the great Rampire against the Church of Rome, is the
Church of England; whose Doctrines are a certain Antidote against poisonous
Principles from abroad, and whose Government and Discipline do tend of
themselves to Order and Unity at home.

Yet certainly it is want of Judgment and clear insight into the Nature of our
Establishments, which has made some so passionately to oppose them; because
they will not give themselves the leisure to read and consider those Books
which all along, have been written in defense of them, by learned and good Men,
who saw of what vast use they were to the interest of the Protestant Cause. And
though I may not expect, that my little pains will be taken notice of (much
less, prove successful) when the labors of so many great men have been lost;
yet I had some reasons to induce me to discourse purposely of the Antiquity of
our usages; the rather, because a wrong and groundless notion runs about, that
all our Constitutions were Originally borrowed of the Romanists; so that
whosoever now is a strict Conformist, is looked upon by the heady rabble to be
Popishly affected, and stands fair to be knocked down, when opportunity shall
serve (which is the main thing wanting.)

Not to dissemble with your Lordship, I did not long ago, discourse upon this
Theme in the Pulpit. And finding the subject so acceptable (and in a manner a
new thing, even) to intelligent and sober persons, I had some strong
invitations to publish those short Collections, which I had then made. But
knowing the Niceness of the subject, and the Capricious humor of some men who
lie upon the Catch, I found it necessary to take all into pieces, and to throw
aside some things, and to add many more, and more largely; so that my task was
like the mending and altering of an old House, which is many times so
troublesome and chargeable, that a new one may be built at a cheaper rate.

And now, my Lord, I hope the world will not condemn me for entitling this
(though inconsiderable) Piece to your Patronage. Every Creature would lay its
young in a secure place; and so would I, mine. And though that be enough to
excuse me (in point of prudence) for seeking the best shelter, yet my
obligations to your Lorship, do moreover require me (in point of Duty) to
express my Gratitude in some little measure; though I confess, it is much more
easy to contract a new debt to your Lordship, then to make any tolerable
acknowledgement of an old one.

That God would preserve your Lordship in honor and safety, and make your great
cares and endeavors successful to the good of this poor Church (that is, to
your Lordships own hearts desire) as it ought to be the Prayer of every honest
and sincere Protestant, so it is especially of him, who is

Particularly bound to your Lordship in all Observance and Duty, EDWARD PELLING.
October. 13th. 1679.
The General Contents,
Page THe Occasion and Scope of this discourse. 1. Reasons for observing the
Old Way, 8. -- and Objections answered. 17. Advantages to be gotten by
observing the Old Way. 22. The Conformity of the Church of England to the Old
Way, -- showed, in its Government. 26. The Antiquity of Episcopacy in the
Primitive Time, -- cleared and vindicated. 27. The Government of Episcopacy in
the Apostles Times. 33. Objections against it, removed. 41. The Conformity of
our Church in her way of Worship, -- the Antiquity of Set Forms in General, 49.
-- among the Jews, 50. -- among the Old Christians, 54. -- and in the Apostles
days. 62. The Antiquity of the English Liturgy in particular, 73. -- and of its
parts. 74. The Antiquity of our Rites and Customs, 88. -- of the Cross, etc.
89. Mischiefs occasioned by forsaking the Old Way. 102. -- It has hindered the
Gospel, 103. -- bred Schisms, 105. -- occasioned Atheism. 106. -- served the
Interest of Papists, 108. Innovators poisoned with Jesuitical Principles, 111.
-- and Acted by Jesuits in their Practices. 122. The Conclusion. 127.

The Good Old Way: OR, A Discourse offered to the Consideration of all
True-hearted Protestants, etc.
SInce these fresh Confusions and Distractions have broke in upon us, by
occasion whereof this our poor Nation (like a distempered Body) is all on a
Ferment, several bad humors striving to be predominant, and all conspiring to
stifle that which is indeed the life and safety of the whole; I have often
thought upon the dangerous condition which the Jews were in under the Reign of
good Josiah, and upon that excellent Advice which was given them for the
prevention of their Ruin. Now thus it was.

For many years backward there had been an unhappy division and breach among
the Offspring of Jacob; the Nation was divided into two Bodies, the People
became two distinct Houses, and the Twelve Tribes that came peaceably together
out of Egypt, were now broken into two great Parties, and so srael was against
Judah, Throne against Throne, and Altar against Altar.

This Rent began under Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who was the Head of the Ten
Tribes, and caused them to revolt from Rehoboam the Son of Solomon. During
which unhappy Breach neither party Prospered; yet Israel, that made the Breach
first, prosper'd least, and was undone first. Of twenty Kings that reigned over
Israel successively, there was scarce one, (I think we may say not so much as
one) that served God with an upright and sincere heart; and of these Hoshea was
the last, in whose days Israel for their Transgressions were captivated and
brought in subjection to a foreign Power.

Now what was done to the House of Israel, was threatened to be done also to the
House of Judah, because that unnatural Breach had occasioned the growth of
Idolatry throughout the whole Land. Lo, (said God) I will call all the families
of the Kingdoms of the North, and they shall come, and they shall set every one
his throne at the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, etc. Jer. 1. 15, 16. To
prevent which great evil if it were possible, good Jostah sets himself
withal his heart to reform Religion, and to set the Worship of God to rights.
He burns all the vessels of Baal, pulls down the Idolatrous Priests,
breaks inpieces the Idol which was in the Temple, defiles Tophet, and the
like Acts he did, as we read at large in 2 Kings 23. And God was so well
pleased with the King's Zele, even when the Reformation of Religion was in his
intention and purpose only, that he promised him, that because his Heart was
tender, and he humbled himself before him, the evils threatened should not
befall Jerusalem in his days; Thou shall be gathered into thy grave in peace,
says the Lord to his Anointed, and thine eyes shall not see the evil which I
will bring upon this place, 2 Kings 22. 20. Thus far God was gracious to the
People of Judah, that for good Josiah's sake he determined to defer (at least)
their destruction for a time; the King's Life was yet between them and ruin; as
long as Josiah should live no alteration was to be, but things should go with
them after a tolerable good sort: but when once their King should be taken
away, they were then to expect nothing but Desolation and a Curse, unless they
did repent themselves seriously and in time, according to Josiah's Example.

It was at this time that the Prophet Jeremy was inspired and sent by Almighty
God to tell all the People their Transgressions, and to call them to
repentance, and to acquaint them before hand with their certain doom, if they
continued in obstinacy and hardness. Return (says he) ye backsliding children;
and if ye will return and put away your abominations, then shall you not remove
(out of the Land.) Circumcise your selves therefore to the Lord, and take away
the foreskin of your hearts, ye men of Judah: wash your hearts from wickedness
thar ye may be saved. Be instructed, O Jerusalem, lest the Soul of God depart
from thee, lest he make thee desolate, a land not inhabited. These and such as
these were the general Lectures which Jeremy preached in the ears of the
people. But then he goes on to give them more particular Directions; he shows
them the steps of their Forefathers; he bids them tread as the Saints and
Servants of God did tread in the days of old; he requires them to lay aside
their love of Novelty and newfangled Devices, and to go hand in hand (all of
them unanimously and together) in that ancient way which did lead men to
Heaven, when Religion was in its purity. Nothing but this could prevent
Jerusalem's Downfall, and the whole Nation's ruin; for all those bypath,
which their Fancies had hitherto found out or made, did lead only unto
Mischief and Destruction; there was no way of setting things to rights, or of
giving them security, but to return to that sound, good and holy Religion,
which had been established in the beginning: Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in
the ways, and see and ask for the old paths, where the good way is, and walk
therein.

Which words were spoken to the Jews by way of special direction; but they were
left to the Church of God for perpetual use, and may be very profitable to us
for particular application; especially when the Judgments of God threaten us,
and two great Clouds hang over us, each laden with thunder, and each ready to
discharge it self upon our heads. And when the days of our Peace seem to be
numbered; when for the divisions among us great are the thoughts of heart, and
those Divisions have hastened that evil which our other sins have deserved:
Then surely if ever is the time for us also to stand in our ways, and see
whether it is that we are going, or to ask for the old paths, before we take a
further step, and fall into perdition. For all our present Calamities are come
upon us, by reason that men have forsaken the old and the good way, (as I shall
show anon) those private Avenues and unbeaten Paths, which the Singularity of
some fond people has sought out, have served only to shelter a sort of
Hedg-birds and Banditi, to make a spoil of us and of them also. And therefore
before we enter irrevocably into Ruin, before we see this once glorious Church
to fall, being betrayed by those who have been nursed up in her Bosom, and have
eaten of her Bread; before we preach her Funerals, and lament at her Obsequies,
while others laugh and sing, Ah, Ah, so would we have it. If we have the least
sense of any thing that is honorable, wise, or just, we cannot but look back
upon our Declensions, and be grieved for our Folly, and at last enquire after
the old, good, and safe way, that we may find rest for our Souls, before
Trouble comes upon our Loins, or the Harrow upon our Backs.

So that I shall take occasion to discourse of this matter with immediate
respect unto our selves; and in these times of degeneracy and danger, when
things are in an unsettled condition with us, and Religion is off the hooks, or
at least turns upon a very uncertain hinge; I shall direct my Brethren as
Jeremy did the Jews, to the days of old, as the best (and perhaps the only)
Expedient to gain sure Footing. And in the prosecution of this matter I shall
show, 1. What a reasonable, just, and safe Proposal this is, that we should ask
and seek for the old paths, and walk constantly therein, notwithstanding their
desires of Alteration and Novelty, who are given to changes. 2. What an useful
and advantageous thing it would be unto us, if we would but be so wise as to
walk unanimously according to this Rule. 3. And how mischievous and hurtful the
Practices of those have been and are, who have declined from this good way, who
have left the old paths, to walk in Paths of their own tracing out.

1. That this is a reasonable, just, and safe Proposal, that we should ask for
the old paths, and walk uniformly and constantly therein, notwithstanding their
desires of Alteration and Novelty; who are given to changes. Antiquity is that
which most people are fond of, for it gives a mavelous Credit to all manner
of Constitutions, and no Nations were ever yet so rude and barbarous, but that
they have held those things to be of most venerable and sacred use, which have
been of the most primitive and ancient Institution. We see it in all Humane
Societies, that they gain a mighty esteem from the Date of their Foundation;
the further they go to derive their Original, the more Fame and Veneration they
acquire, and then most of all when their Original is like the Head of Nilus,
that cannot be discovered. We see it in all Humane Laws, that the longer they
hold the deeper root they take, till at last they become fundamental and
immovable. We see it in all Human Customs, that when Antiquity has worn them
into Prescriptions, they are like the Laws of the Medes and Persians,
unalterable: that you were as good stemm a Torrent, as strive against a very
silly Custom, which has been handed down to men from their Forefathers. Now
since Religion is derived from him who is the Ancient of days, since it is of
the most Divine Descent, and the most perfect Constitution; it is strange if
Religious Ordinances and Customs should not have at least the same Advantages,
which all things in the world besides have, that is, become the more lovely and
venerable for being ancient. It is strange that men should most affect
Singularity there, where they have the least plea and reason to be singular.

Before I proceed, it is necessary for me to lay down these three Cautions
following, to prevent uncharitable mistakes.

1. That I do not take upon me to defend the Validity of all Church Traditions
at large, or to maintain the Sufficiency thereof to determine all Controversies
concerning Faith or Manners. Every man knows to how many just Exceptions that
Pretense is liable; and I do not intend to do the Church of England that great
disservice, as to say or intimate, that in these distracted times of ours it
would be enough for us to have recourse unto former Ages, and to stick to that
which we find practiced then. No, our Establishments do not stand upon the
Practice of the Church alone; there is a superior Rule of Scripture to which
they are agreeable all of them, at least none are contradictory: and therefore
we do not look upon the Sense and Practice of Primitive Times as the sole or
the main thing to be regarded.

2. Nor do I intend to urge the Authority of Antiquity, as if every particular
thing were to be observed religiously by us, which we find to have been
instituted by the Apostles, or to have been observed in the Ages following. For
several Rites were grounded in the beginning of Christianity upon certain
special Reasons; which Reasons failing and ceasing in after times, those Rites
too have been thought fit to be laid aside. Such was the Anointing of the sick
with oil, which S. James required, chap. 5. ver. 14. and such were the Agapae
or Love Feasts mentioned by S. Jude ver. 12. and such was the Veiling of women
in public Assemblies, which S. Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 11. 6. and such was the
Abstinence from things strangled and from blood, which was enjoined by the
first Council at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 29. And some other things there were very
anciently observed in the Church, which yet this and other Reformed Churches
saw reason to abolish or discontinue, as being useless now, or unsuitable to
our Times. It Is not my purpose therefore out See the Preface to our Liturgy, Of
Ceremonies, why some are abolished, etc.
of a fond regard unto Antiquity to oblige men to revive those Customs, though
never so ancient, which the wisdom of our Forefathers thought convenient to
bury.

3. Much less would I persuade the World to have any the least Veneration for
Antiquity in opposition to Christianity; if any thing can be found among us,
that is either in genere fidei untrue, or in genere morum unlawful. For Custom
(though never so gray headed) cannot be any Prescription in Bar of Truth, Cypr.
ep. 73, 74.
and without Truth it is nothing else but an inveterate Error. But (God be
blessed) this reaches not to the prejudice of the Church of England; because
as nothing can be found in our Doctrine which is really false, so nothing can
be found in our Discipline which is really and in the nature of the thing evil.
Instead of those many whiffling Pretensions, which peevish and ignorant men
have used against our Government, our Rites, and our Way of Worship, if they
could show us but one Masculine Reason to prove our Establishments to be
contrary to God's Word, the Debate would soon be at an end, and we would give
up our Cause, and our Lives also as well as our Livings to please them. But
this Advantage we have, that many great and famous Divines in the Reformed
Churches abroad, who have searched into our Constitutions with more
Impartiality, that is, with better Eyes, and Judgments, and Spirits, than our
own Brethren, could never yet discover any thing in them that is repugnant to
the Scriptures. In former Ages Bucer, and Peter Martyr, and Zanchius, and
Melanchthon, and several excellent Writers more have delivered their Sense much
in favor of our side. Nay the Learned Calvin himself, though he was
constrained by the necessities of Times to erect a New Discipline at Geneva,
yet was he far from condemning the way of this Church. In an Epistle to the
Duke of Somerset he did acknowledge, that God had made him an especial
Instrument of restoring purum and sincerum suum cultum in regno Angliae, his
pure and sincere Worship in the Kingdom of England; and he severely condemned
those Seditious and Brainsick People, (for so he called them) who under color
of the Gospel would have brought in Disorder and Confusion. In an Epistle to
those Englishmen at Frankfurt who would have altered our Settlements, he
intimates, that there was no manifest Impiety in them, and therefore advised
them not to be stiff and capricious above measure. And in an Epistle to
Bullinger he does confess, that he himself persuaded Bishop Hooper to
Conformity. And in this last Age the great H. Grotius, who for Learning and
Moderation Grot. ep. ad Gedeon. a Boe^sel.
was the Phoenix almost of his time, looked upon the way of the Church of
England with admiration, as that which came nearest to the Primitive
Simplicity. And among the present Dissenters, if such as are more sober and
judicious than the rest, would but please to speak out, they must needs do us
right too, and confess, that however some of our Usages are not pointvise just
as they would have them, and suitable to their humors, (and who can tell what
will or can be so?) yet none of them are indeed naturally and intrinsecally
unlawful. Nay, it is much to be suspected, that those wayward and hot Spirits
among us, who are professed Patrons of Separation, would not find much fault
neither, if their former Declamations against our way were but forgotten, and
their Books burnt, and their Interest and Credit in the world were but secure;
at least, if their own Hands had but been concerned in settling this way. They
would have been well pleased, could they but have said, Lo, this is the Bethel
that we have built. But because this beautiful Fabric was erected by other
Hands, now nothing will serve their turn unless it be said, Lo, this is the
Babel that we have helped to pull down.

The sum is this, that though the Plea of Antiquity be not sufficient to
justify those Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which either tend not to
Edification, or are used after a Superstitious manner and to Superstitious
ends, or are bad and sinful in themselves; yet if the Constitutions be such as
have been originally occasioned by some Scripture-hints and intimations; if
they be such as are retained and used for some solid, lasting, and perpetual
Reasons; if they be such as serve to Decency in God's Worship; to Order, Peace,
and Unity among Christians; and if they be such too, as are not offensive,
scandalous, or evil in their own nature; then (I say) the Plea and Suffrage of
Antiquity does add that gloss and advantage unto them, that they ought not to
be laid aside for men's Humour's sake, but should be esteemed venerable, safe,
and worthy of all acceptance. Now this we conceive to be our Case in every
particular: and therefore supposing the usefulness, reasonableness, and
lawfulness of our Constitutions, (which many Learned Divines have abundantly
proved) if it be further made to appear, (and I shall endeavor to show it in
the Process of this Discourse) that these our Constitutions were observed in
the Ancient Church of Christ, and that this was the old path wherein Millions
of blessed Saints walked, while Religion continued fresh and fair within its
Enclosure, then more will not be needful to convince any rational, serious, and
sober man, that this is a good as well as old way, wherein we also may and
ought to walk, notwithstanding the Pretenses of those who love to walk
irregularly and by themselves.

1. For it is to be considered, that if there be any safe and good way,
certainly it must be found among the Ancient Christians; and the Stream of
Religion must needs be still purer and purer, the nearer we come to the
Fountain Ex ipso ordine manifestatur, id esse Dominicum and verum quod sit
prius traditum; id autem extraneum and falsum quod sit posterius immissum.
Tertul. de Praescript. adv. Haeret.
Head. I speak now of things concerning the Government and Discipline of the
Church. And questionless those things could not but be in a very good posture
in the first Ages, when the Minds of Christians were full of Simplicity, when
their Quando Domini nostri adhuc calebat cruor, and fervebat recens in
credentibus fides. Hieron. ep. ad Demetriad.
Spirits were holy, their Designs honest, and their Factions few, and their
Interests united. When the Blood of Christ was yet warm in their hearts, and
their Faith was so fresh and sprightly, that they chose to die, rather than
they would depart from the Rule that had been fixed by the Apostles. When
Persecutions were so rife, that Christians had other things to do, than to
study or think of Innovations in Religion: and let me add also, when they had
such an account as was clear and certain, (in comparison of that which later
Ages have had) touching the Original and Institution of things which came so
lately to their hands. We indeed cannot certainly tell what were Apostolical
Traditions, but such as we find in Scripture, because we want many good
Records, which were written in the early days of Christianity. Nay, in S.
Jerome's time they were posed to tell certainly what Vnaquaeque Provincia
abundet in sensu suo; and praecepta majorum leges Apostolicas arbitretur.
Hieron. ad Lucian
Rites were of Apostolical Appointment: and they did generally call the Customs
of the Church, and the Injunctions of their Ancestors, by the name of
Apostolical Traditions. But yet it is reasonable to believe, that Christians of
the second and third Century, who gave diligence to search into, and had means
to find out, the Original of many Ecclesiastical Observations, were able to
give a very fair and satisfactory account, what had been transmitted to them
from the Apostles, and what not. For some of them conversed with the Apostles
themselves, (or with some of them) as Polycarp, Ignatius, and S. Clement of
Rome. Others again (as Irenaeus and Justin Martyr) were acquainted with
Apostolical men. And others were so near to these, (as Clemens of Alexandria,
Origin, Tertullian, Cyril, etc.) that it was not very hard for them to know,
whether the Ordinances and Customs then used in the Church did owe their birth
to the first Preachers of Religion, or whether they were postnate to the Age of
the Apostles. Do not we know by the Acts and Monuments of former times, what
the Governors of our Church did and appointed in the beginning of the
Reformation under King Henry the Eighth? Why, it is very probable then, that
what the Apostles did and instituted at the Planting of Religion under Nero,
Vespasian, and Domitian, might be easily known to those Fathers of the Church
who lived and flourished, some ten, some thirty years after them, and others
onward to an hundred, (or say two hundred) years successively. So that if it
shall hereafter appear, that the outward Frame of Religion, which is
established in the present Church of England, was the very same Model for the
most part which was used anciently in other Churches in the days of those
primitive Writers and the very Model which they professed to have received from
Christ's immediate Successors; then I cannot imagine what just reason any man
can have against the asking for, and the walking in a way, so ancient, so
laudable, and so safe. If he will not grant, that our Establishments were
instituted by the holy Apostles, (which yet in probability is true, that they
were appointed by them as things useful, decent, and convenient, though not as
necessary in every particular) he must needs grant that they were appointed by
due Authority, that is, by Apostolical Persons, and so may claim veneration and
observance at our hands. Besides, it is to be considered, that not to the
Apostles only, but to their lawful Successors also, was that Promise of our
blessed Savior made, that he would be with them always, even unto the end of
the world, Matthew. 28. 20. and that other Promise, that he would send his Spirit
to guide them into all truth, John 16. 13. Now though that Promise requires
certain conditions of us, and extends it self chiefly to the necessaria fidei,
matters of faith, and necessary matters too; yet it is altogether improbable,
that Christ and his Spirit should take so little care of his Church in
reference to its Polity and Discipline, as to forsake her in the very next age,
or to leave her to be abused by the Fancies of Dreamers, and to be imposed upon
by men of foolish and degenerous Spirits, and to be defaced and spoiled of her
pristine Beauty by the frothy Conceptions of men of corrupt minds. I pray,
whither went the Spirit of Christ from the old Christians to speak unto us,
after the space of Fifteen hundred years? How came he to suspend his Influences
from those who lived Saints and died Martyrs, and at last came to breathe
afresh into dry bones, and to restore Religion which had been lost in a long
interval of Time and succession of Ages? Can any but Franticks conceive, that
the Church was never pure till an hundred years ago? Or that for so many
Centuries she needed to be swept, and yet a Besom could never be found till the
DIsciplinarian started up and made one, and swept at such a rate, that with us
Order, Decency, and Religion were quite flung out of doors; and Hypocrisy and
Oppression were set up in its room?

2. Zanchius professed, that he had rather drink old Wine than Vorst. ad Theolog.
Heidelb. in Epist. Ecclesiasticis.
new; meaning, that he preferred the Sense of the Ancients above that of Modern
Divines, in all Points not determined in Scripture. He said like a wise man;
and 'twould be much for the Peace of Christendom, if all Christians would
resolve in matters of Opinion to follow the Judgment, and in matters of
Discipline to observe the Practice, of the ancient Church. But some Palats are
for new Wine only, not because it is so good, (for the old is better) but
because it is new. And I am not likely to persuade such to conform to the
Establishments of our Church by this Argument, because they are ancient
Establishments. Yet I would beseech them to consider, in the second place, that
the way we plead for, is not only an old, but a good way also. We must not
think, that the Contrivers of our Constitutions and Usages were so many Fools,
how low soever they may lie in the esteem of men who have less Wisdom and worse
Manners, and value a little Serpentine Craft above the Dove's Innocence. A
Church being gathered, it was impossible that without Laws that Society should
hold together, or answer the ends of its Foundation; and therefore Government
was necessary; and of all sorts of Government that by Bishops was thought most
convenient and fitting, because presumed to be the best Defensative against
Faction, Schism, and Disorder; and the Experience of all Ages has found it to
be so. Again, since the Church is a Collection of men learned and unlearned,
who are set apart to worship God, and do hold their Title unto Christ by their
Faith in him, it was judged very expedient, that Set Forms of Public Prayer
should be prescribed, both as a Repository of wholesome and sound Doctrines, and
likewise as a Provision for the necessities of the ignorant, and moreover as a
Preservative of Order, Unity, and Peace among Christians. Lastly, considering
that the Worship of God is to be celebrated with solemn Decency and Comeliness,
suitable in some degree to the Greatness of that Majesty which is to be adored,
certain outward Rites and Ceremonies were appointed, as good means to conduct 1
Cor. 14. 40.
men to a sense of Religion, and to the exercise of Godliness, and to create
and stir up the Devotion of the Mind, and the Reverence of the Heart. For by
the Judgment and Practice of the whole World it does appear, that an external
Solemnity and Observance of Circumstances (such as Habits, Ornaments, Gestures,
etc.) do bring a mighty respect to all secular Transactions, and the Grandeur
of Princes Courts, of Courts of Judicature, and of Civil Corporations, is much
upheld, and Government becomes venerable by the use of Rites and Ceremonies,
though little in their own nature. In like manner, the use of Ceremonies in the
Service of God, and in all Sacred Transactions, does make a great impression on
men's Minds, it commands Reverence, (which is the security of Religion) and
conveyeth through our senses into our hearts an awful regard of what we are
about; and as apparel upon our bodies serves to maintain the vital heat
within, so do these outward Appendages help to preserve the very heart of
Religion, which consists in true Piety and Devotion.

This is enough to show the wisdom of those who first chalked out unto us this
old way, for which we now plead. And before men cry out against this way, they
should do well to consider, whether they can direct us to a better. But our
Dissenters could never yet do this. They could pull down our Government, and
throw out our Liturgy, (which yet was quite contrary to their Solemn
Declaration;) they could abolish our Declarat. of April 9. 1642.
Ceremonies, and destroy our Discipline, (and any Child or Dunce can spoil a
Model, which none but an Artist can set together.) But though they had the
confidence to mar things, yet they had not amongst them all the wit to mend
them. Government, which sat easy upon the Shoulders of unprejudiced people
before, became an intolerable burden to all by their pretended Reformation.
Though at first the World was in love with their new Trangum, yet 'twas soon
weary of it; and in a little time threw it away with scorn and indignation.
What a grave decorum was there in all Churches before? and what intolerabiles
ineptiae, Fooleries and Ridicules succeeded them? Were not the Houses of God
turned into Theaters? Was not Religion turned into a Comedy? And were not all
sacred Offices brought into contempt, so that men abhorred the offering of the
Lord? Why, it is strange that those men, who in a fit of good nature are so kind
as to pity the weakness of their Forefathers; and are so silly as to be puffed
up with a windy conceit of their own knowledge; will not be so modest and just
as to allow the Ancient Assertors and Props of Christianity the due Credit of
having been wise men; it is strange (I say) since these Starters aside from the
old Paths never altered those Establishments which our Fathers left us, but
still they altered them for the worse. What a thin, pitiful, and impertinent
business was the Directory in comparison of our Service Book? And yet that was
the only thing that was like a Platform, and that did not very well please
themselves. And since His Majesty's Restoration a new Liturgy was offered to
the World for a Trial of Skill, and yet it would not pass; the Contrivers of it
could not satisfy either us or their own Party by it. And if you will go back
to former times, you will find that they were Bunglers from the beginning. To
which purpose the story is observable, which the Learned and Excellent Dr.
Hammond relates of those four Classes View of the new Directory.
of Reformers in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, who had set themselves up in
this Kingdom. These had made complaint to the Lord Burleigh against our
Liturgy, and entertained hopes of obtaining his Favor in that business about
the Year 1585. He demanded of them whether they desired the taking away of all
Liturgy? They answered, No. He then required them to make a better, such as
they should desire to have settled instead of this. The first Classis did
accordingly frame a new one, (which I suppose was that Book of Common Prayers
mentioned by Bishop Bancroft, but it was) according Bang. Pos. B. 3. c. 10.
to the Geneva Form. But this the second Classis disliked and altered in 600
particulars. That again had the fate to be quarreled by the third Classis; and
what the third resolved on, by the fourth. And the dissenting of those
Brethren, as the division of Tongues at Babel, was a fair means to keep that
Tower then from advancing any higher. Thus he. Now certainly that outward Frame
and Constitution of Religion was very wisely contrived, which Clubs of peevish
and restless Spirits have been pecking at for these hundred years together, and
yet are at a loss how to raise any tolerable good Fabric upon the ruins of the
old one. And then I appeal to any indifferent person, whether it be not the
safest course for men to walk in that way, which (taking it from one end to the
other, and in the main) is so good conditioned, that either you need not or
cannot mend it.

3. And yet, besides what has been said already, there is a third very
considerable Argument, to show what great Reason we have to stick to our
Establishments; and it is this, that our Way is not only Ancient (in respect
of it self) and incomparably useful (in respect of its ends) but is also that
which was generally used by all Professors of Christianity in the beginning.
Had our Government and Discipline been Local, and set up in this Church of
England alone, there might have been some room for an Impeachment of
Singularity. But you shall see, that the Way which is settled among us, was for
the most part the great and common Road which all Saints and Martyrs observed
of old; so that we do not only plead Prescription, but we plead it from the
joint consent of all Christendom; and our Constitutions carry as great
Countenance and Authority, as the Catholic Church can give them. Scarcely shall
you find any ancient Records of either the Asiatic, or African, or European
Churches, but we can fetch Testimonies out of them touching the universal use
of most of our Establishments, if not all. And can we reasonably think, that a
Platform so received all Christendom over without contradiction, and handed
down unto us from the Practice of all Natious, so separated by distances of
place, and so divided by differences of language, could be an Imposture or
Corruption? Is it not rather to be presumed, (as a thing probable and likely at
least) that it came originally from the hands of those, who first planted
Christianity in the several Quarters of the World? It is a Rule in Tertullian,
that -- quod Tert. de Praescr. adv. Haret.
apud multos unum invenitur, non est erratum, sed traditum; That Religion which
did so consent with it self up and down in so many places, was derived from the
Apostles or Apostolic men, who scattered themselves into all Nations, and
resolved to teach people but one general Way. To say, that the beginning of
many Usages in the Church is unknown, is a plain confession of their Antiquity,
and just ground for a suspicion, that they bear Date with the first Publishing
of Christianity. To say that every one of our Customs was at first the fancy of
some private person, which by continuance and contagion, came at length to be a
public Rite, seems to be as groundless an Assertion as the former. For the
Devisor of that Custom was either an Heretic or a Catholic. First then, suppose
he was a known deceiver; suppose he had fair opportunities of going into all
parts, and great ability of speaking all Languages, and a strong design of
corrupting the Simplicity of Religion, yet it is impossible that so many wise
and watchful Fathers of the Church could sleep all that time, and suffer every
Province and Country to be overrun with Superstition and Innovation in a
trice? Consider seriously but this one following Instance: Montanus was a very
early Impostor, (for Tertullian at last became a Proselyte to his Party.) This
man pretended to have been inspired, and professed greater Sanctity of Life
than other men, insomuch that his Adherents called all sober and regular
Christians by the name of Psychici, that is, Animal or Carnal Gospellers. He
condemned all second Marriages, and would have Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3.
enacted Laws of Fasting, and endeavored to introduce a Custom of observing
more Lents than one Hieron. Epist. ad Marcel.
in a year. The Christians at that time were very severe in their times and
manner of Abstinence, and were ready enough to comply with any usual, though
never so austere kinds of Discipline. But yet when Montanus went about to
impose upon them, his attempting an Innovation gave such an Alarm to the
Bishops, that the Church rose up against him as one man, and condemned him for
an Heretic; though (if Tertullian -- Non quod aliquam fidei aut spei regulam
evertant, (scil. Montanus and Maximilla) sed quod plane doceant saepius
jejunare quam nubere. Tert. adv. Psychicos.
may be believed) he did not Innovate in any matters pertaining unto the Faith.
Now when we consider this single Instance, can we be so unreasonable as to
imagine, that a Government which was set up every where, was a newfangled
device? Or that a Discipline which was received every where, was a private
Invention, and of a Seducer too? Or that Forms and Rituals which were used
every where, were Brats begotten by some doting Head and superstitious Brain,
and then thrown into the Bosom, and forced into the Embraces of every Church in
the World? 2. Well, to mend the matter a little, suppose this Author of these
Customs to have been a Person of Note and Eminence in the Church; yet we are
much mistaken if we think, that the Governors of the Church were such tame,
easy, and flexible men, as to receive and admit of new Customs upon the
Recommendation of a single or private Person, though of unquestionable
Integrity, for they refused Offers made them by whole Churches. For instance:
The difference about the keeping of Easter is as famous as it was old. The
Churches of Asia observed it on the day of the Jews Passover, on whatsoever day
of the week that happened. The Western Churches observed upon the day when our
Lord rose from the dead. This Variety of Observation was from the beginning,
(if there be any truth in Ecclesiastical History) and in a little time it begat
a Controversy, first between two Bishops, Anicetus of Rome, and Polycarpus of
Smyrna, S. John's Disciple. The matter was debated between them, but neither
could Polycarpus persuade Anicetus to recede from his Custom, nor could
Anicetus persuade Polycarpus to recede from his. So they parted good Friends.
Almost thirty years after, this Controversy Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 23,
24.
was revived between whole Churches, in the time of Polycrates Bishop of
Ephesus, and Victor of Rome. Several Provincial Synods were summoned to
consider of the matter; and on each hand Tradition was urged. The Western
Churches insisted upon a Tradition which they had received from some of the
Apostles; the Churches of Asia pleaded a Tradition which they had received from
S. John, (who it is likely recommended that Custom to them to gratify the
Jews:) And perhaps the Plea on both sides was good. But so stiff they were on
each hand, that no Arguments could prevail with either Party to relinquish
their old Custom, and to take up the other; so that Victor in a great heat
would have cut off tot and tantas Ecclesias Dei, so many and such eminent
Churches of God, from his Communion, had not the great Prelate of Lions,
Irenaeus, stood in the gap, and reprehended Victor for his rashness. Now he
that shall seriously consider this story with all its Circumstances, cannot
with reason believe, that the Ancient Churches were easy to be imposed upon,
or to be corrupted with Superstition, when they stood out so resolutely against
an innocent Tradition. Much less is it credible, that a few Persons, though of
Repute and Dignity, could possibly leven all Churches in Christendom with their
private Inventions. And therefore when we consider, how all Churches of old did
conspire, as in the same Faith, so in the same Government, in the same
Ministrations, and generally in the same Rites too (and those now in use with
us here,) we must needs be startled in our thoughts, and be posed to conceive,
how these things could arise all at once of themselves, without any hand (like
so many Mushromes that start out of the Earth in a Night,) or how they could be
disseminated by any Private hand. Rather it seems reasonable to impute them
to the Special Providence of God, and to the Institution of the first Ministers
of Religion, who probably did recommend these usages, as things useful or
convenient, though they did not Ordain, or Impose them as things simply and
universally Necessary.

I do not pretend peremptorily to derive all our Customs from Apostolical
Practice; although there are such fair evidences of the Antiquity of many of
them, that we might strongly argue that point, if the Ancient Christians may be
allowed (what is allowed Jews and Heathens) to be good Witnesses of matters of
Fact. But my purpose is to prove, that our present Establishments in the Church
of England, are of a very Venerable date; and for that Reason, to contend, that
they ought not to give place to Novelties, as if they were of no moment; or to
be kicked down, as if they are Despicable. So that if better Arguments may be
setch'd from Antiquity on their behalf, than can be brought against them, I
have obtained my Ends; and in order to that, I urge the General, as well as
Ancient usage of them: For certainly one Church ought to have regard to the
Constitutions of other (and especially the Ancient) Catholic Churches, or else
St. Paul's Argument is trifling in 1 Cor. 11. 16. where condemning the covering
of Men's Heads, and the uncovering of Women's in Religious Assemblies, he
confronts the Practice, by urging the custom observed in all Places besides
Corinth, We have no such custom, neither the Churches of God: And in St. Paul's
Judgment that was enough to determine the Controversy.

Two things may be objected against what has been spoken. First, That the
Christian Churches were universally deceived in the Primitive Times, and that
in two Instances. 1. They all believed, that after the World was 6000 years
old, there would be a general Resurrection of the Dead, and then that Christ
would Reign on Earth a thousand Years. Secondly, It was an universal custom, to
give the Sacrament of the Lords Supper even to Infants, after they were
Baptized. And if all the Anolent Churches were actually cheated in two things,
it is probable, that they were in more also; at least, nothing can be brought
from the General Practice of those Churches, to make their Customs venerable.

In Answer to the former Instance, I have three things to offer briefly: 1.
That it was not matter of Fact or Discipline, but matter of Opinion only, in
which the World might be more easily abused; because, points of Doctrine are not
obvious to the Senses, and are more hard to be retained in the Memories of men,
than things of Custom and Discipline. And therefore Tradition is not allowed to
be a safe Record of things concerning the Faith, but the Scriptures only. 2.
That this Persuasion was not derived from the Apostles, but came Originally
from some Jews, converted to Christianity, who were mixed up and down in the
Churches of Christ. For such an old Tradition we read of, called the Tradition
of the House of Rabbi Elias, that the World should continue 6000 Years, and
then, that the Everlasting Sabbath should begin. Which Fancy continuing in the
Minds of most Christian Jews, Papias, and other Christians, came by degrees to
imbibe it, by conversing with those of the Circumcision, who were dispersed all
Christendom over. 3. And yet, thirdly, this was no universal Doctrine, by your
favor. For Eusebius says, that Many Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. in fine.
Ecclesiastical persons were abused with this Error. And Justin Martyr tells
us, that though he himself, and many others were of that Opinion, yet there
were many others, men of pure and pious Judgments, who did not think so. And
show me, if you can, any such in those days, that were against the received
(...). Justin. Dial. cum Tryph.
Government and Discipline of the Church.

In Answer to the latter Instance, we have reason to affirm, that the giving of
the Communion to Baptized Infants, was not an universal custom in the Primitive
Times, whatever some Learned men have suggested to the contrary. Such indeed
was the exuberant Piety of those Ages, that they would not fail in any thing
which seemed to be a Duty and a security of their hopes; and some did run away
with a misconstruction of those words of our Savior in Joh. 6. 53. But suppose
that this was an usual Custom in some particular Churches, it is not fair that
one single Exception (if yet it be an Exception) should void a whole Rule; and
all that we can gather from it is, that all their Customs were not of
Apostolical Institution: nor do we say they were; only Iurge, that where their
Customs were universal in the first Ages, there is a fair probability that they
came from good hands, and a sufficient Argument for us to walk in a way which
was so universally old. But lastly, in answer to both these Objections it is
clear, that as well the former Opinion, as this Custom, met in time with
public contradiction; for the one was disowned, and the other was laid aside
in following Ages; and so the Instances do not reach us, whose Establishments
have passed all along without condemnation or censure, (nay with accessions and
advantage) till of late some indiscreet men resolved to run far enough from the
Church of Rome, ran themselves out of their wits and five senses, and
forgetting the Golden Mean took too quick a step out of Superstition into
Confusion, and now are in a fair way to run round again out of Confusion into
Superstition.

2. I hope that our Plea of Antiquity in defense of our Constitutions stands
yet fair, notwithstanding this first Pretense. The next is, that even in the
Apostles days the mystery of iniquity was working, as S. Paul witnesses 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. For they who are not Friends to the way of the Church of England,
do generally (but wrongfully) understand by that Mystery of Iniquity, a Spirit
of Tyranny and Superstition even in the bowels of Christ's Spouse, that was
then setting up for Antichrist, and laying the Foundations of Prelacy, and a
ceremonious, pompous way of Worship, and whatsoever else men will please to say.

For the voiding of this Pretense, 1. We do aknowledge, that there was a sort
of men in S. Paul's days, (and the less wonder if there are such now) that were
like Moles, blind and busy Creatures, working under ground, restless and
mischievous, notwithstanding their soft, delicate, and smooth Skin. But then,
secondly, we do utterly deny (and it is a marvel that any man of Learning should
have the confidence to affirm) that these were true Christians, living in the
communion of the Church, and under the guidance and government of the Holy
Apostles. No; they were the Sectaries of those times, whom S. Paul means by
the Mystery of Iniquity, a company of close Villains, whose lewd designs were
hid in the dark, and whose abominable Practices were kept private under a
Curtain, and within the Walls of their Conventicles: for it is a shame even to
speak of those things which were done of them in secret, Ephesians. 5. 12. The
Apostles do point plainly unto these Miscreants throughout all their Epistles.
S. Paul gives them the Character of false Prophets, deceitful Workers,
transforming themselves into the 2 Cor. 11. 13. Phil. 3. 2. Col. 2. 18. 1 Timothy
6. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Apostles of Christ. -- dogs, evil workers, the Concision, that all good people
should beware of. -- men vainly puffed up by their fleshly minds, and not
holding the head. -- pretending knowledge falsely so called. -- lovers of their
own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
(or Make-bates) incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God,
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. S. Peter calls 2
Pet. 2. 3, 10.
them false teachers, that through covetousness with feigned words made
merchandise of people: despisers of government, presumptuous, self-willed, that
were not afraid to speak evil of dignities, etc. S. Jude Jude 4, 8, 9, 16
describes them as men crept in unawares, ungodly men, turning the grace of God
into lasciviousness, filthy dreamers, that despised dominion, and spoke evil of
dignities, and of those things which they knew not, murmurers, complainers,
etc. Any man may perceive, that those were the followers of Simon Magus, the
Gnostics, whom the Holy Writers did thus lash, and expose to the World; men
who called themselves Christians, and went under the Name; (...). Just. Mart.
yet by their notorious and unparalleled wickedness brought a reproach upon
Religion, and caused the Name of Christ to be blasphemed by the Gentiles. But
the Apostles have taken most particular notice of their separation from the
Church of Christ. These are they (says S. Paul) which creep into houses, and
lead captive silly women laden with sins, 2 Timothy 3. 6. They went out from us,
but were not of us, says S. John, 1 John 2. 19. These be they who separate
themselves, says S. Jude, ver. 19. which have forsaken the right way, says S.
Peter, and are gone astray, following the 2 Pet. 2. 15.
way of Balaam. By which plain Testimonies it does appear, that the
Schismatics of that Age are they which S. Paul meant by the Mystery of
Iniquity: the high-flown, stubborn, seditious, and contentious Gnostics, they
that forsook the Regular Assemblies, that spurned at Government; they that were
set against the Hierarchy, and lifted up their unholy Claws to pull down the
Constitutions of the Church. These were that Mystery of Iniquity which was then
working and factoring for Antichrist. And what is this to the true Church? For
there was no evil then working within the Church; there was no preparing of
Materials for the Kingdom of the Devil within the Church; there was no Idolatry
in the Mint, nor Superstition upon the Anvil, within the Church; but indeed
without there was hard working, sweating and toiling; so that after the death
of the Apostles many Errors were scattered by these Preachers of Hegesippus in
Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 32.
Knowledge, falsely so called, who counterfeited themselves Christians, and
lurked among those who were Christians in truth and reality. But shall we be
unjust and wicked like the Pagans, reviling the whole ancient Church for the
sake of these old villainous Sectaries? Shall our Ecclesiastical Constitutions
be depraved, by reason of the Schismatical and Diabolical Practices of the
Gnostics? If Samaria does transgress, there is no reason that Judah should
suffer for it, unless she be a Confederate. Now it would be to the purpose, if
it could be proved, that the Gnostics, that Mystery of Iniquity, were the
founders of our Prelacy, or the Authors of our Discipline and Ceremonies. But
it is obvious, that they were the first (though not the last) the hated and
opposed Episcopal Authority, and that they used quite different and most
monstrous Rites in their filthy Assemblies; and as soon it may be proved, that
their and our Faith is the same: whereas it is known, that they denied the
Reality of Christ's Incarnation and Passion, (and for that reason came not to
the Christian Communion;) and that their Creed was a confused Mess of Heathen
Mythology concerning S. Ignat. ep ad. Smyr. 1 Timothy 1. 4.
Aeones and Genealogies of Gods, which afterward Valentinus the Heretic
digested into some kind of Form.

Briefly then; If the way Established in this Church of England be the old
Christian way; if it be so excellently contrived, that no other Constitution
can be better (or, so well) framed to answer the ends of Christianity; if it be
that way, which for the greatest (if not in every) part thereof, is that which
was universally observed for very many Centuries, all along, from the Pure and
Primitive Times of Christiantiy; then have we reason to believe, that it was
originally laid out, not by the Invention of a Private Person or two, or by the
Confederacy of crafty Impostors, but by the wisdom of just and competent
Authority, whose business it was to set things in order in the 1 Cor. 11. 34.
Churches of Christ: To be sure, we have then great Reason to ask for this old
Path, where the good Way is, and to walk therein, notwithstanding the desires
and endeavors of those, which are given to changes. And thus the first thing
is dispatched, which I propounded to discourse of.

2. The second Consideration now follows, that it would be a thing greatly
useful and advantageous unto us (as well as just in it self) if we would but
unanimously agree to walk steddily in this Good old way.

And truly, many excellent ends there are, to which the Practice of this thing
would be highly serviceable.

1. As first; it would put that Luster and Beauty upon Religion, which by our
Distractions and Innovations is manifestly, and in an high degree defaced; it
would restore it to that Decorum and Order, which made it venerable and lovely
in the days of Old. Among other things which St. Paul rejoiced to see in the
Collossians, this was one, that he beheld their Order, Col. 2. 9. For this very
much helps to bring Religion into Request, and extorteth a Confession from
its very Enemies, that of a truth God is in them that do profess it; whereas
Confusion and Disorders in a Church, either for want of a sixth Rule, or by the
neglect of it, does but expose Religion to Reproach, and its Professors to
Scorn. If there come in (into irregular Congregations) those that are
unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say, that ye are mad? As the Apostle
speaks pertinently to my purpose. 1 Cor. 14. 23.

2. To walk together in the good Old Path, would be an excellent means, as to
put an Outward Gloss upon Religion, so also to recover that Inward Life of it,
which consists in Charity, and brotherly Love. Scarcely is any thing so much
wanting among us as Charity, though the Holy Ghost does up and down command us
to be rooted and grounded, to walk and to be knit together, to abound and
continue in, and to provoke one another unto Love. Men's forsaking of the good
Old Way, has been the Occasion and Rise of all that uncharitableness, which is
the Monstrous Sin, and the Characteristical note of this Age, when instead of
being Lambs and Doves, some count it a piece of Religion, to be worse than
wolves and Vultures, ready to devour one another. For in the Primitive Times,
when Christians could dispute well, and live better, the very Heathens could
not but observe with Admiration, how they loved one another. Men have ceased to
be our Friends, since they refused to go the usual way with us into the House
of God, and parted from us into different and by-roads: And that ill-natured
Sect, which first divided from us, is justly rewarded with Ishmaels doom, Genesis
16. 12. That his hand is against every man, and every man's hand against him.
And, as far as I can see, things are likely to go on still at this rate, 'till
men will be so kind to themselves, and so just to us, as to quit those Novel
courses, and uncouth paths, in which Pride and Singularity, and a Spirit of
Contradiction (together with base respects to their Secular Interest) have
caused them to wander hitherto.

3. A thing which is the more desirable (especially, at this juncture and nick
of time) because, thirdly, it would infinitely serve to the general Quiet and
Safety of us All. It would unite our Interests, as well as our Affections;
'twould compose our Minds, and our Affairs too; 'twould not only make us live
together with one mind in an House; but, moreover it would establish our House,
and make it strong, and firm, and safe, over our Heads. For, it is not every
difference in Opinion, that exposes a Church, or a Nation to danger; but it is
fighting and quarrelling about the Main way that ruins all. We know, that among
the Turks, there are several Sects and Parties, and different persuasions, and
yet the Ottoman Empire holds (though it be a most Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Policy,) and the Interest of Mahomet is carried on (though it be a most
palpable and fulsome Imposture,) because, though they jangle in matters of
lesser moment, yet they are true to their Common Interest, and agree in the
Main, and closely adhere to their general Model of Government, Religion, and
Worship. In like manner, among the Romanists themselves (who boast so much of
the Unity of their Church) there are many very Considerable Divisions, and
more, perhaps, than there are among Us, and those as hotly maintained; and yet
Herod and Pilate know how to agree against Christ; the Scotists and Thomists,
the Molinists and Jansenists, the Dominicans and Jesuits, and the rest, are
wise enough to hang together under the Laws of their Church; they go quietly,
and hand in hand in the main way; they conspire in one Common Form; they are
tite to their Government, and keep close to their Rubricks and Establishments;
and as long as the Pope can but keep things in this Channel, either by the
Terrors of the Inquisition, or by other Politic Arts, he knows that his, and
his Churches Interest is safe, and he needs not make use of his pretended
Infallibility to determine those points which are controverted. I wish that we
would learn so much wit of the Adversaries of True Religion, as not to fall out
there, where the safety of us all is concerned; but walk together like Friends,
in that plain way, which the Ancient Church has beaten out before us, and the
Laws of our Land have fenced in; for differences in matters of Speculation, and
points disputable, could not hurt us, or lay us open to danger, if some among
us were but True to our Common Interest; if they would but stick to our
Establishments, which are the Rampires, and Bullwarks of the Church; if they
would but be as zealous for Christ, as the Turk is for Mahomet; or, as the
Jesuit is for Him, whom some suppose to be Antichrist. Nothing in all
Probability can give us Rest to our Souls, and Security to our Nation, and
Prosperity to our Religion, but this one thing, to seek after the good Old Way:
Men may please themselves with Fancies, and try many fruitless Conclusions, and
make experiments of this, and of that Expedient, but the World will see in the
end that nothing but the observing of the Old Path will put us into a good
posture.

4. But yet, fourthly, there is one huge Advantage more, which the performance
of this matter would bring unto us, and that indeed which I shall chiefly
insist on, and it is this; That it would justify our whole Cause before all
the World, and cut off all just occasion from those, who wrongfully upbraid us
all for Innovators, and under that pretense trepan many a Soul. Where (say
they) was your Religion before Luther? Now the Dissenter is not able to answer
this Question truly, thoroughly, or to satisfaction; because a great part of his
Religion was no where in the world, no not in Luther's days; and so the
Romanists have a continual and unanswerable Objection to fling in his teeth.
But the Church of England, as it is established, has a fair and full Plea,
that her whole Religion was long before Popery; that it was in the world in the
days of the Apostles; that it was in the Liturgies of the primitive Churches;
that it is to be seen still in the Tomes of the Greek and Latin Fathers: nay,
she can justify her Cause out of those very Writers in communion with the
Roman Church, both before and since the time of Luther, whose Books they (like
dishonest men) have corrected, purged, and mangled by the Expurgatory Indices,
lest they should tell tales.

I do not intend now to vindicate the Doctrine of our Church in this respect;
for that is not so much to my present purpose, and our Faith has been by
others abundantly proved, to be exactly consonant to the Sense of Scripture,
and to the Faith of all Orthodox Christians in the purest and best Ages; and by
this we are ready to stand or fall, let the Papist bark at us till his Tongue
and his Heart aketh.

But my purpose is to justify the Government and Discipline of our Church to
be the same which was used in Christian Churches from the beginning; and that
against a sort of men among our selves who accuse us of Superstition, as the
Papists do accuse us of Schism, though God be blessed we are guilty of neither.
We tell our Dissenting Brethren, that our way, which they have forsaken, is
indeed the old Path; we affirm our Government to have been Primitive and
Apostolical; and we say too, that our Discipline, Rites, and way of Worship is
the same generally which was established in the first and best times; and this
I shall endeavor now to prove in some measure by instancing in particulars,
that men who desire satisfaction herein may see, that the Frame of our Religion
is de facto very ancient; and that on that account (besides many others) it
ought to be upheld and maintained, (which is the thing I have already argued
for;) and withal, that our Charge of Innovation would be unjust and
ridiculous, did we but unanimously resolve to tread in this Path: our Brethren
then would be free from guilt as well as our selves.

1. The first thing to be spoken to is our Form of Government, I mean our
Episcopacy, the thing that is such an Eyesore to Papists, Atheists, and
Schismatics. It is clear, that for 1500 years it was the only kind of
Government in the Church. And whatever some Learned men have pretended, I
believe you can scarcely instance in any ancient Churches, perfectly and
completely formed, that were not under the care and government of Bishops, (in
our present Sense of the word;) Bishops presiding over them either in person,
or by their Authority. Those great Luminaries of the Church, to whom the World
has been and is so much beholding, the Austins, Cyprians, Chrysostoms, Basils,
Cyrils, Gregory's, and Ambroses, were famous and renowned Prelates, some of
them Metropolitanes, some Patriarchs, all of them Bishops. Those Fathers of the
third Century after the Apostles, (as Theodoret, Jerome, and others) who thought
the Names of Bishop and Presbyter to be indifferently and promiscuously used in
the Scripture, did not mean to impair the just honor and dignity of Bishops;
for they acknowledged, that though the Names were in common, yet the Office,
Power, and Orders, were distinct, (especially as to some things, as that of
Ordination;) and they all taught, that even in the Apostles times, or at least
before S. John's death, there were three several Degrees of Ministers in the
Church; and Tert. de Bapt. Orig. hom. 7. in Jer. and in Mat. tract. 24. Clem.
Alex. de Gnost.
that as Presbyters were superior to Deacons, so Bishops were superior to
both. Those Writers of the second Century after the Apostles, as Tertullian,
Origin, and (if you will reckon him) Clemens Alexandrinus, do make express
mention of three ranks of Clergymen in their days, viz. Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons; and of these, the Bishops to have been in chief. Lastly; though it
is supposed, that the Testimonies of Antiquity touching the Constitution of the
Church, be most of all wanting in that Age, which was the very next to the Holy
Apostles, yet by the plain and pregnant evidences out of Ireneus, Iren. lib. 3.
c. 3. Hegesip. in Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. c. 22. Id. de Dionys. c. 23.
Clem. Romans Ep. ad Cor.
Hegesippus, Dionysius of Corinth, Clement of Rome, and out of those Canons
which go under the Name of the Apostles, (many whereof were framed and observed
in that Age) it does appear to any considerate and indifferent person, that
certain particular Men called Bishops were in those early days of Christianity
entrusted with the Superintendency and Authority over whole Churches. But above
all, the Epistles of Ignatius, a Contemporary of the Apostles themselves, yield
us so many and such strong Arguments of this matter, that they who have been
Schismatics from the Catholic Church in this particular of Government, have
used all their Art and Skill to decry those Epistles, as spurious and
fictitious, though the late Reverend Dr. Hammond, and the present Bishop of
Chester, have labored Dissertationes vindiciae.
with so much Learning and Success to prove those Epistles to be the genuine
issue of St. Ignatius, that they have said enough to lay this whole
Controversy asleep, unless Men will expect that an Angel from Heaven shall
Preach to us to bury our Disputes, as well as Summon us with the sound of a
Trumpet, to come out of our Graves. Briefly; the most ancient Ecclesiastical
writers, where they reckon up the Orders of those who were entrusted with the
work of the Ministry, do so carefully distinguish between Bishops as the first
Order, and Presbyters as the second, that the most Learned of that Party, who
are no good friends to Episcopal Government, have been forced to confess, that
Episcopacy was the only Government of the Church in the most Primitive times,
that is, in the very next Age to the Apostles; but that Age they do except; and
we shall see the Practice of that Age too anon.

In the mean time it may be Objected, that Antiquity is an incompetent witness
to prove, that Episcopacy was the settled form of Government in the first Ages;
and that upon these three accounts. 1. Because we have no clear and particular
account of the uniformity of Episcopal Government in all Apostolical
Plantations; so that for ought we know it might vary in some places. But this
is a fallacious way of arguing, because a Negative is not to be proved from the
silence of Antiquity, as to the constitution of some parts of Christendom.
Though we have no exact Records of what St. Thomas did in Parthia, or St.
Andrew in Scythia, or some other Apostles in their respective (...), Dioceses
and Jurisdictions, yet it does not follow, that they either did, or might set
up another form of Government, different from that in other Churches. When by
the joint-Testimony of the first writers, and their followers, we find, that
Episcopal Chairs were set up in all the Western parts of Asia, and in sundry
other Countries, Provinces, and Cities; when Ireneus, who was Polycarp's
Disciple, and but one remove from the Apostles, tells us Hier. in Catal. Iren.
lib. 3. c. 3.
plainly and peremptorily, that Bishops were instituted by the Apostles, and
that he was able to enumerate (but that he should be too prolix) Omnium
Ecclesiarum Successiones, those (Bishops) who succeeded the Apostles in all
Churches: and when St. Clement, who was St. Paul's fellow laborer, tells us
expressly, that Phil. 4. 3. Clem. Ep. p. 54.
the Apostles preaching through Countries and Cities, ordained the first Fruits
of them to be Bishops and Deacons, for those who should afterward believe; we
have no reason to doubt, but that Episcopal Government was erected every where,
though by the iniquity of times some Records of particular Churches are lost
unto us, which were extant in former Ages. They who argue from the defect of
Testimonies, that another Government there might be, would do well to show us
from Testimonies extant that another Government there was.

2. It may be pretended, that Antiquity is no competent witness of Episcopal
Government settled in the first Ages, because those Testimonies we have, do not
give us a particular Catalogue of those Bishops who succeeded the Apostles. And
to this purpose is urged that of Eusebius, that it is not easy to Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 4.
tell, what, or who they were, that were appointed to feed the Church, setting
aside those whom we pick out of the writings of St. Paul. Now to this
Allegation there are four things in Answer. 1. That Eusebius speaks only of the
Bishops in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia. 2. That he declared
it not altogether impossible, but somewhat hard (meaning, for him, who was at
some considerable distance from the first Age) to give account of the Apostles
Successors in all those Churches. 3. That the difficulty was, not as to the
Succession it self, but as to the particular Names of the succeeding Bishops
(for so Ruffinus his Interpreter did understand Quorum nomina non est facile
explicare per singulos.
it.) 4. But all this is nothing to our present purpose; because Eusebius could
not readily tell all the Names of the Bishops which had been before him, it
does not follow, that there had been no such thing as a settled Episcopacy. For
who can reasonably expect, that there should be an exact Register of the Names
of all the Bishops in the World? Though in the Age next to the Apostles we find
Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, and Polycarp of Smyrna, and Onesimus of Ephesus,
and Dama of Magnesia, and Polybius at Trallis, and Papias of Hierapolis, and
Melito of Sardis, and Symeon (the Son of Cleophas) of Jerusalem, and Palmeas of
Amastris, and Thraseas of Eumenia, and Sagaris of Laodicea, yet it is not to be
wondered at, if we meet not with the Names of many more, who presided over other
Churches in those parts of Asia; and yet it is easy to gather from Polycrates
his Epistle to Victor Bishop of Rome, that all the Asiatic Eusebius. Eccles, Hist.
l. 5. c. 24.
Churches were under the Government of Episcopacy. Again, though in the same
Age we find Pothinus to have been Bishop of Lions, and Clement of Rome, and
Denis the Areopagite of Athens, and another Denis of Corinth, who mentions
Philippus Bishop of Gortina, and Pinytus Bishop of Gnossus; I say, though the
Names of these and other Primitive Bishops in the very next Century to the
Apostles, do still stand upon good Record, yet it is not modest, ingenuous, or
reasonable, for any Man to require us, either to nominate every one of the
Apostles Successors in all parts of the World, or to lay down our pretensions
of a settled Episcopacy in the Ages next to them; especially since Ireneus has
told us, that he was able (though Iren. ubi supra. Idem affirmat Tertullianus,
de Praesc. Adv. Her.
we are not) to reckon up the Bishops who succeeded the Apostles in all the
Churches. Were there no exact List of the former Prelates of England, yet I
hope it would not follow, that these Churches have not been all along under the
Government of Episcopacy. It will trouble the best Antiquary to tell us all the
old Bishops among the ancient Britains and Scots; and yet we know, that they
had Bishops before the Saxons came in hither (which was about Anno 450) and
many Ages before the Bishops of Rome, claimed any Jurisdiction in this Island.

3. But then supposing a Succession of Bishops in the Apostolical Churches,
nevertheless it is Objected, Thirdly, that Antiquity is no sufficient witness
of a settled Episcopacy in the first Ages, because the Ancients speak
ambiguously and doubtfully of those Bishops, calling them sometimes Presbyters;
so that we have no certain account, whether those Men were superior to
Presbyters in Order, Power, and Authority; or whether they were above them only
in a Degree of Honor, like the Chairmen in Assemblies, or like the Archontes
at Athens, and the Ephori at Sparta, who had an equal power, but gave a
deference of Honor and Dignity to one above the rest. Now, I cannot but
wonder, that Men should invent doubts where there are none: for nothing is more
clear, then that the Bishops thus succeeding the Apostles, had a Superiority of
Power over the rest of the Clergy, not only to ordain, but also to judge and
censure them, without any Authority given them by a Bench of Presbyters, though
not always without their Aid and Advice. For the removing of this third Scruple
then, these five things are to be noted. 1. That in many of the writers of the
first and second Age after Apostles, we find a plain distinction between
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, as three distinct Orders. 2. That in not one
of these writers can we find, that this Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters
was thought then (what ever was imagined in aftertimes) to be founded on any
act, vote, or consent of the Church, as bestowing this Power upon them. 3. But
on the contrary, that the care of all Ecclesiastical Can. Ap. 39.
matters was acknowledged then to belong to the Bishops; that Presbyters were
charged to obey the Bishops in all things, and to do nothing without them, or
contrary to their Sentence, is plain and evident out of Ignatius, and other
writers of that Age: and all this was grounded upon the Sacredness and
Superiority of their Power, which they all owned to have been derived to them
(not from the Presbytery, but) from God and Christ, by Divine appointment and
institution, and through the hands of the Apostles, who left them for their
Successors, -- Suum ipsorum locum Magisterii tradentes -- (as Ireneus said)
delivering to Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
them their own Office, Power, and Authority. 4. Therefore, whereas it is
alleged, that a Father or two of that Age, do sometimes comprehend Bishops
under the general Name of Presbyters, it is granted, that the Prelates were so
humble and modest, as upon occasion to style themselves Presbyters, thereby
giving a deference of Honor to those as were such only. But yet they looked
upon the Offices to be distinct; and says St. Clemens, Ep. ad Cor. page 57.
the Apostles foreseeing that a contention would arise about the Name of
Episcopacy, for that reason they appointed the Orders aforesaid, and divided
their parts and Offices among them (meaning, to the Bishop his Office, and to
the Presbyter his) that they being dead, other fit Men might succeed them in
their Ministry, Office, or Apostolic function. Now, how all this can consist
with that novel pretense, that Presbyters had an equal Power with Bishops, and
that Bishops had only an Honorary Dignity above Presbyters, seems to me to be
altogether unimaginable. 5. But fifthly, to put all out of doubt, we are
beholding to a very Learned Prelate of our Church for Two useful and choice
Vindic. Epist. Ignat. p. 2. c. 13.
Observations, which we may well take upon his Credit. First, that no writer of
that Age next to the Apostles did so promiscuously use the Names of Bishop and
Presbyter, as to give the Name of Bishop to one who was only a Presbyter of the
second Order. Though Bishops were sometimes called Presbyters (the greater
Office including the less) yet that a bare Presbyter was ever then called a
Bishop, is not to be proved by any one instance out of the Monuments of those
times. Secondly, that no writer of that Age did ever give the Name of Presbyter
to a Bishop, when he reckoned up the Degrees and Orders of Churchmen, and where
he spoke of some single Minister then living. So that, as you shall never find
a Presbyer called Bishop, so you shall rarely find Bishops called Presbyters;
and where they are so, the writer mentions things in a lump, not counting up
the Degrees orderly, nor speaking of one single person of his time. With these
two positive Assertions I shall rest, 'till I see some body to have either the
confidence to contradict, or the Learning to confute them.

By what has been briefly said, it may appear to any unprejudiced person, that
in the earliest and first times, when Christianity was but green in the World,
the Churches were under the Government of Bishops. We find innumerable
instances of it in those Churches planted by St. Paul, St. Peter, St. John, and
other Apostles: We find in undoubted Monuments of the best Antiquity, the very
Names mentioned of several Primitive Bishops, who presided over some
Apostolical Churches, and a certain Succession avowed of other Bishops, in
other Churches, whose particular Names do not occur: We find, that these
Bishops were then looked upon, as a distinct Order from the rest of the Clergy,
sometimes called Bishops in contra-distinction to Presbyters, and always owned
as Superior unto them, not by any Ecclesiastical consent or grant for the
avoiding of confusion only, but by an Antecedent Charter, derived to them from
the Apostles. All which do abundantly satisfy me of the Truth of that
declaration of the Church of England, that it is evident to all Men diligently
reading Holy Scripture, and Pref. to the form of making or ordaining Bishops,
etc.
ancient Authors, that from the Apostles time, there have been these Orders of
Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. And in that our
Church mentions the reading of Holy Scripture it is clear that in her account
she takes in the very times of the Apostles, and means, that from the
Scripture it may be proved, that Episcopacy was erected while the Apostles were
living.

Which shall give me warrant to take one step more backward from the Age next
to the Apostles, to the Apostolical Age it self, and to affirm, that even then,
there was such a Sacred Order of men, as we now call properly, strictly, and by
way of eminence and distinction, Bishops. Now, that we meet with the Name,
frequently in our Translation, and oftener in the Original, is altogether out of
doubt. The grand Question is about the thing, whether in those days, the
Office, Power, and Order of a Bishop was distinct from, and in any respect
superior unto the Office, Power, and Order of a Presbyter? And though the
Sense and Practice of the succeeding Age, be enough to make us morally certain,
that it was so (because it cannot be reasonably supposed, that men so harassed
by Persecution, so zealous for Truth and Honesty, and so careful to observe the
Apostles orders (even in the least things) could or would conspire together to
make an universal defection from so main a part of Christianity, as the
Government of the Church is;) yet setting aside that consideration, to me it
seems obvious and certain, that Christ, the great Bishop of our Souls,
erected an Episcopal Power, and that the Apostles continued and propagated it
(I mean still a Power, above that belonging to Presbyters;) This I shall
endeavor briefly to show; 1. By making good the Affirmative; and then,
Secondly, By clearing up those difficulties which are usually brought from
Scripture to prove the Negative.

1. For probation of Episcopacy, we begin with the Ordination of the Twelve
Apostles, which evidently differed from the Mission of the Seventy two
Disciples, in whom it is conceived, that the Office and Power of Presbyters was
founded. Now the Twelve Apostles were indeed Bishops, though they were not
clenched to any particular Sees and Chairs, which the necessities of those
times would not give way to. For the clearing of this, it is observable, that
the Mission of the Twelve Apostles (as to their own Persons) was extraordinary,
and that which none could pretend to in following Ages; because they were sent
immediately by Christ himself, and had a common jurisdiction and care over all
the Churches that should be, and were endowed with a Power of working Miracles,
to confirm the Truth of their Doctrine: But then their Authority and Charge (as
to their Function) was an ordinary, and standing Power, that was not to dye
with them, nor to cease (as Miracles did) after a little interval, but such as
was to be transmitted to others from time to time, and so to continue to the
Worlds end. Now, if it does appear, First, that the Twelve had a Superior
power over Presbyters; Secondly, that this Power was to be imparted and
communicated to their Successors for ever; Thirdly, that this was no other than
the Ordinary Episcopal Power: Then this will suffice to show, that the Twelve
Apostles were truly and indeed Bishops, in their ordinary capacity; and
consequently, that Episcopal Power was erected in their Time. First, then, That
the Twelve Apostles had a Superior power over Presbyters, appears not only
from the Extent of their Commission, which compared with that given to the
Seventy two Disciples, was much larger, (for as the Father sent Joh. 20. 21.
Christ, so Christ, sent them, with full power to Teach and Govern the Church,
according to God's Will, and to ordain Successors, and in all respects, to
execute that power, which he was invested with, and had delegated unto them:)
but moreover it is clear from the Exercise of this their Authority; for they
ordained Deacons, Act. 6. They Ordained Matthias, and took Act. 1.
him into the number of Apostles, who before was one of the Seventy two, (as
Eusebius tells us twice;) they made Decrees, Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 1.
and sent them abroad to be observed in all Churches, Act. 16. They had power
of Censure and Jurisdiction (every single Apostle had) over inferior
Presbyters; for St. John threatened ambitious Diotrephes, that when he came, he
would remember his deeds; meaning, that he would correct him with the Rod of 3 John
his Apostolical Power: And so were Hymen^us and Alexander delivered unto
Satan, by St. Paul, after that he was ordained an Apostle. This is enough to
show the Superiority of the Apostles 1 Timothy 1. 20.
power. 2. Again; This power of theirs was no Temporary thing, that was to
vanish with their breath, but that which was to be communicated to others, to
be transmitted unto Posterity, and to hold as long as there should be need of
it, that is, as long as the World should hold. For so the promise of Christ
runs, Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of Matt. 28. 20.
the World. Here our Lord did engage, not to be with their Persons alone (for
they were to dye within a short time,) but to be with their Successors too;
that is, to assist their Function for ever. (And truly, had not Christ assisted
it marvellously, it would have fallen e're now, since it has been so lustily
beav'd at, especially in these last Ages.) It Is plain, that our Savior
intended, that the Apostles power should continue to the Worlds end; I mean,
their Ordinary power, which was for the Regiment of the Church. For, their
Extraordinary power, of speaking all Languages, and working Miracles (which was
for the Planting of the Church) was not to last long, but to cease after a
while: So that it was their ordinary and standing power, to Administer
Sacraments, to Preach, to Govern, to Ordain, and to exercise the power of the
Keys, this was that which was to hold, to be delivered and banded down from
Generation to Generation. Now, if there be any truth in that Promise of Christ,
this Apostolic Power and Office does last, and still continue, and is even at
this hour in the World. 3. Thirdly then, this Power we speak of is really that
which we now call Episcopacy. The Apostles Function, is part of it in Deacons,
more of it in Presbyters, and all of it in Bishops; there the whole Ordinary
power centers, and is united. The Twelve were called (as their immediate
Successors were many times also called) Apostles, in respect of their Mission
and Authority from Christ; but in respect of their Office and Inspection over
Christ's Church, they were indeed Bishops. They were the first possessors of
Episcopacy; and the Bishops now are their Successors to the Apostolate. It Is
plain that they themselves, and the Church following them, understood them to
be no more than Bishops, in their ordinary capacity. For, as on the one hand,
many Bishops, besides the first Twelve, were called Apostles (so, Timothy,
Titus, V. Bovii Scholia in constit. Apost. And Dr. Hammonds Praef. to St. James.
Clement, and abundance more, had the Title given them, which is the ground of
that conjecture of Albaspinaeus, and others; that the Canones and
Constitutiones Apostolorum, were the Canons and Constitutions -- virorum
Apostolicorum, or of these Secundary Apostles) so on the other hand, the
Primary, or Twelve Apostles were looked upon to have been Bishops. I am sure,
when St. Peter moved, that one should be chosen to succeed (...). Act. 1. 20.
in the Apostolate of Judas, he looked upon it as a Succession into his
Bishopric, or Episcopal Office; that was (...) the part of Apostleship, which
each of the Twelve had, namely, a Function and Power Episcopal. And accordingly
were the Epiph. lib. 1. cont. Carpocr.
Ancients wont to style the Apostles, Bishops. So Epiphanius says of Peter and
Paul, that they were Apostles (in respect of their Mission) and Bishops (in
respect of their charge:) And St. Cyprian bids Deacons to remember, that our
Lord chose Apostles, Cypr. ep. 65. ad Rogatianum.
id est, Episcopos and Praepositos, that is, Bishops and Governors; and tells
them moreover, that the Apostles ordained Deacons to be Ministers to the
Church, and to them, in the discharge of their Episcopal Office, Episcopatus
sui and Ecclesiae ministros. And St. Austin is positive, that when our Lord
laid his hands Quaest. in vet. and Nov. Test. q. 97.
upon the Apostles, ordinavit eos Episcopos, he ordained them Bishops. Besides
many more Testimonies to this purpose, which are ready at hand, and which yet I
omit, because this was evidently the Sense of the Ancients; because they
frequently affirm, that Bishops are the Apostles successors, that they hold
their Place, and are of their Degree, and come after them in their Office and
Function; and the like; which they would not have said, had they not judged the
Apostles themselves to have been (I mean, in their ordinary capacity) no more,
and no less than Bishops.

2. Which thing had it been well heeded, might have prevented some Learned
Tracts, which have been written against the Divine Right of Episcopacy. For, to
determine, that Christ ordained not Episcopacy, seems to me to be an
Affirmation, that He ordained not Apostles; for they were invested with that
Episcopal power, which, God be blessed, has continued in the Church hitherto,
notwithstanding all the gainsayings of Core. Now this consideration leads us
on to the next; viz. That as the Apostles received this power themselves, so it
is proveable out of their Writings, that they imparted it to others, and
invested them with their Apostolic, or Episcopal Authority. To show this, I
shall make choice of three special Instances, and they are these. 1. First,
though the Scripture does not expressly and totidem verbis tell us, that St.
James was Bishop of V. Grot. in ep. Ja.
Jerusalem, yet that he was so, we are as certain as the most Ancient Records
can make us. And indeed St. Luke in his History of the Apostles Acts, does
yield us such fair probabilities of this thing, that the Testimonies of
succeeding times seem to be unquestionably True. For in Act. 21. 18. we read,
that when St. Paul was returned from his Circuit to Jerusalem, the next day, he
and his company went in unto James, and all the Elders were present. Now
certainly, James would not have been named distinctly and by himself, had he
not had a pre-eminence over the College of Elders that were assembled with him.
St. Luke singles him out, as the Person to whom St. Paul did after a particular
manner address himself; though all the Elders were there present, yet they went
in unto James; intimating plainly, that he was the President over that
venerable Society. And to confirm this, it is likewise observable what is
related of this St. James, at the famous Convention at Jerusalem, Act. 15. The
occasion of that Synod, was a Controversy, about the Necessity and Use of
Circumcision, and great disputes there were about it at the Council. But at
last, when Peter, and the rest, had given their Opinions of the matter, St.
James determins it, and puts an end to the debate by his decisive Sentence,
(...) -- I determine, Judge, and give Sentence says he, verse. 19. and in his
Judgment and Determination all did acquiesce. This is a plain Argument, that
St. James was then Bishop of Jerusalem. For otherwise, why did St. Paul so
particularly apply himself to St. James? and why did the other Apostles (and
even Peter himself) rest in the Determination of St. James? Nay, why should St.
James take upon him to decide the Controversy? For it is certain, that this
James was not one of the Twelve Apostles. All do agree, that he had been a
Disciple; and some think, he was our Lords Cousin; others, do conceive, that he
was our Lords Brother in Law, the Son of Joseph; by his former Wife. He is
called, by way of distinction, James the Just: And if he was not Bishop of
Jerusalem, how is it imaginable, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 1.
that he should have had at those meetings of the Apostles, such Eminence,
Precedence, and Authority? The Truth is, Eusebius tells, that the Apostles
declined the Honor of being in the Chair, and See of Jerusalem, and gave it
unto this James, as for other Reasons, so for this, Because he was our Saviors
near Relation; and so he took the Government of the Church with the Apostles,
says Eusebius; which (...).
some do understand, as if he was only taken into the number of the Apostles,
(having been a bare Disciple before;) but this is a palpable mistake, touching
the sense of Eusebius; for, says he, this James the Just, was made, (...)
Bishop of Jerusalem; and a World of Testimonies more there are to confirm it.
Secondly, my next instance is in Timothy, who was ordained by St. Paul himself,
the Presbytery concurring, as Approvers of his Ordination. That he was an
Apostolical Prelate, we have the Joint Testimonies of all the Primitive
Authors, which speak of him; some affirming him to have been Metropolitan of
Asia, and all confessing him to have been Bishop of Ephesus. Out of those two
Epistles, which St. Paul sent him, it appears, that he himself constituted and
sixth him at Ephesus, requiring him (...) to abide and settle there, 1 Timothy 1.
3. Ephesus was the place of his Residence, unless, happily the necessities of
the Church did oblige him to consult St. Paul, (for himself was young) or the
necessities of St. Paul required his attendance; (for he was his Convert.) 2.
We find, that he was to restrain Preachers within the boundaries of c. 1. -- 3.
Truth, and to charge some, that they should teach no other c. 2. -- 1. 2. --
10. 11.
Doctrine. He was to order the public Service of God, and to take care, that
decency and a grave decorum might be in Christian Assemblies. He was to see,
that such as would be Bishops and Deacons, should be rightly qualified, c. 3.
-- 2.
and himself to keep up his Authority, by being an Example of Believers. He was
to allot a double Portion (of c. 4. -- 12.
maintenance) to Elders, that Ruled well (under him) and c. 5. -- 17.
labored in the Word. He was to take cognizance of the -- 19.
irregularities of Presbyters; but with this caution, that he should not
receive an Accusation against an Elder, but before two or three Witnesses: And
such as sinned, he was to Rebuke before all. He was to hold Ordinations, but
with -- 20.
this Proviso, That he should lay bands suddenly on no man, -- 22.
Briefly, St. Paul gave him a plenitude of that power, which he had himself:
And, if to Model Churches, to prescribe Rules, to confer holy O deus, to
command, examine, judge, and reprehend O fenders Openly, (and even Presbyters
themselves) I say, if these are parts of Episcopal Power, then was Timothy a
Bishop indeed: And I should be loath to see half that Charter given to a single
Presbyter, as is here given to Timothy, by this Great Apostle. 3. The third
instance to show, that the Apostles settled the Episcopal form of Government, is
Titus, whom Antiquity acknowledges to have been Metropolitan of Crete, (an
Island, consistng of an hundred Cities) and to have been entrusted with the
power of Modelling and Governing of all the Churches there. That St. Paul left
him there, is clear from his own words; and Tit. 1. 5.
questionless, his design was, that Titus should remain and continue there,
unless summoned away upon some Emergency, and for a Time only; and even then
St. Paul promised to send either Artemas, or Tychicus, to be his Vicar and
Procurator c. 3. -- 12.
in his absence. Now, that Titus was indeed a Bishop, superior in Authority to
Presbyters, and invested with a Superintendency and Power over all his Clergy,
does plainly appear, from the Authority he had both to Ordain and to Judge of
so many Bishops, as St. Chrysostom declares he had. For this cause Chrysostom.
Hom. in Tit. 1.
it was, that when the Apostle himself could not stay in Crete, to put every
thing into due Order, but was obliged to be gone, he left Titus behind him, to
set in order the things that Tit. 1. 5, 11. etc. 2. 10.
were wanting, (and unsettled at S. Paul's departure;) to ordain Bishops, and
to dispose of them into Cities, (into every City one;) to provide against the
heterodox Preaching of Deceivers, to stop their mouths, to silence them, and to
rebuke them sharply, and to admonish Heretics once and again, and then to
excommunicate them upon their Contumacy. This was Titus his Office; and this
was plainly the Exercise of Episcopal Power and Jurisdiction. And to confirm
this further two things are observable: First, that this Authority was given to
Titus alone, not to a College of Presbyters, (which it is presumable S. Paul
appointed before his going away) but to Titus singly; for this cause left I
thee in Crete that thou should set things in order, that thou should
ordain, etc. This argues a supreme and a sole Superintendency and Authority in
Titus. Secondly, that there was a necessity for S. Paul's committing this
Authority unto him; for otherwise the things that were wanting could not be set
in order, nor could Ordinations or Censures be there: for this cause left I
thee in Crete. Which is a manifest Argument, that the Presbyters in Crete had
no power either to ordain, or to excommunicate, or to do such acts of
Jurisdiction; for then why was Titus left to those purposes? And yet we see S.
Paul left him, and for this cause left him; so that unless we will offer
violence to the Sense of Scripture, we must confess that Titus was left and
fixed at Crete, as Bishop and Metropolitan of the whole Island.

To these three Apostolical Bishops I might add many more, Constable. Apost. l. 7.
c. (...).
whose Names we meet with in Ecclesiastical Writers, either occasionally and
scatteringly mentioned, (as in Irenaeus, Eusebius, and diverse others;) or more
orderly collected, (as in the Book of Constitutions commonly called
Apostolical.) But because the truth of this depends upon the Credit of Church
History, (which yet we have no reason to question) I shall forbear further
Instances, having already (and I hope sufficiently) showed out of Scripture,
that the Order and Authority of Bishops was in being (...) in the Apostles
days, and from them continued and transmitted to succeeding Ages.

2. Having done then with the Proof of the Affirmative, I proceed next with
what brevity I can, to answer that grand Argument, usually brought to make good
the Negative, viz. that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter are indifferently and
promiscuously used in the Apostolical Writings, as if only one Order of men
were meant by them. As for instance, in Tit. 1. 2, 5. Paul tells Titus, that he
left him in Crete, as for other reasons, so for this, that he should Ordain
Elders (or Presbyters) in every City. Then ver. 6. he lays down the
Qualifications of these Elders; and (as a reason for it) he says ver. 7. for a
Bishop must be blameless, etc. Here a Bishop and a Presbyter seem to be, not
two distinct Orders, but one and the same; and so some say, that by a Presbyter
is here meant a Bishop; and others affirm, that by a Bishop is here meant a
Presbyter, and hence are willing to conclude, that in the Apostles time they
were not thought to be two distinct Offices, but Bishop and Presbyter to be
one, both in Name, Order, and Authority: and so Prelacy must fall to the
ground, without any help from Scripture.

For the removing of this Difficulty three things are to be observed: 1. That
Aerius the Heretic was the first that ever found out, or insisted on, this
Community and Identity of Names; for the Writers before him (in the first and
second Age after the Apostles) did not discourse at this rate, could not
discover such a promiscuous use of the words. 2. The Catholic Writers after
Aerius, who thought as he did, that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter were
common in the Apostles days; did not yet think, as that Heretic did affirm,
that the Office and Order were ever the same. No; they held, that though
Bishops were sometimes called Presbyters, and Presbyters Bishops, yet Bishops
were a rank of Ministers above Presbyters both in Degree and Authority, even in
the Age of the Apostles. 3. But then there is one Observation more, for which I
must thank a very Learned Prelate of our Church, viz. that notwithstanding
Vindic. Epist. Ignat. p. 184.
this Construction and late Pretense of the Promiscuous use of the words, yet
it does not appear, that the Scripture gives the Titles of Bishop and Presbyter
indifferently and promiscuously to those of both Orders. There is no necessity
for us to admit of a community of Names, because those places which seem to
infer this Community may be fairly understood, though we do appropriate the
name of Bishop to a Bishop, and the name of Presbyter to a Presbyter. This will
appear from a particular view of the several Texts; which if we can understand
without being obliged to confound Names, then farewell that grand Principle,
which the Classical Divines have taken for granted, and which is the main and
sole Argument to prove a parity and equality of power among all Church
Officers, above the Degree of Deacons. One famous place alleged is Acts 20.
17. there S. Paul sends to Ephesus, and calls the Elders (or Presbyters) of the
Church to him at Miletus; and then he says ver. 28. Take heed unto your
selves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost has made you (...)
overseers, or (as it should be rendered) Bishops. Here (say they) the Names of
Presbyters and Bishops is given to the same men, and so the Office and Power of
these men was the same. But I pray, my Masters, why so? What necessity is there
for this positive Assertion? Were none with S. Paul at this time but
Presbyters? Yes, Irenaeus, who lived near the Apostles time, will tell you,
Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 14.
that S. Paul called together both Bishops and Presbyters. Were none there but
the Clergy of the City of Ephesus? Yes, the same ancient Writer tells you, that
the Clergy of all the Cities round about were there too; In Mileto convocatis
Episcopis and Presbyteris, qui erant ab Epheso, and a reliquis proximis civit
atibus -- The Bishops and Presbyters were called from Ephesus, and from other
neighboring Cities. And indeed S. Paul's words do intimate thus much; for says
he ver. 18. Ye know from the first day I tame into Asia, after what manner I
have been with you at all seasons. Now S. Paul had been with the Bishops and
Presbyters of other Cities in Asia besides Ephesus; and S. Paul's speaking to
them, and appealing to their Knowledge of his Behavior, does plainly argue,
that they were with him now; and that this Convention did consist of very many
of the Asiatic Bishops and Presbyters. There is then neither necessity nor
reason to imagine, that only the inferior sort of Clergy appeared at the
Apostle's Summons; much less that he should call them Bishops. Rather it is
presumable, that as he spoke to all in general, so that he directed his speech
chiefly to the most honorable and principal part of that Reverend Assembly,
and that he called them Bishops who were so in truth, and told them that the
Holy Ghost had made them Bishops over their respective Charges, so addressing
himself immediately and more particularly to them, whose Office it was to
superintend the Flock of Christ, and to obviate the Incursion of Wolves. And
thus this place may be fairly understood, without confounding of Names, without
offering violence to History, or without robbing the Bishops, to give their
Title and Honor unto Presbyters; because it is reasonable to conceive, that
the Apostle convened Bishops and Presbyters too, and spoke directly and
immediately to the Prelates, (of whom it is likely that Timothy was the chief;)
and to the rest accommodating himself collaterally, secundarily, and by Grot.
in loc.
way of reflection.

Another place which has been hotly urged in this Controversy, is that
mentioned before in Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. where Titus is left in Crete -- (...),
that he might constitute Presbyters city by city, if any were blameless, the
husband of one wife -- for a bishop must be blameless, says the Apostle. Now
they who accuse Bishops as Corah did Moses and Aaron, for taking too much upon
them, triumph mightily Number. 16.
from this Text, as if the Names of Bishop and Presbyter were clearly
synonimous. But upon due examination we find, that the Apostle's Sense does not
at all carry it this way, much less is there a necessity for us to understand
him after this manner. For all that S. Paul requires of Titus here, seems to
be this, that he would advance the Presbyters which were under him, and ordain
them Bishops, and dispose of them into Cities, fixing each of them to a certain
Cure: that is, such of them as were approved men; for a Bishop must be
blameless. This Sense is easy, and the thing is probable. For questionless
there were many Presbyters now in Crete, (whether ordained by S. Paul before
his departure, or by Titus himself afterward, I will not dispute; but many
Presbyters there were) it being impossible for Titus to take a due care of so
considerable an Island without Assistants. It Is likely therefore, that when S.
Paul was going away, either he left Presbyters behind him, or appointed Titus
to ordain some, to take part of his burden; and advised him not to prefer them
hastily, but to prove them first, and then to ordain them Bishops, having made
sufficient experiment of their Abilities and Fitness for so great a Trust. And
in this Epistle sent to him from Nicopolis, he minds him of that which he
ordered him before, viz. that upon proof and trial made of his Presbyters, he
should promote them, and set them over Cities, (over every City one;) for
(says he) a Bishop must be blameless. So that according to this easy and fair
Construction, there can be no pretense of any confusion of Names; because the
Apostle does not mean that Titus should take Deacons or Laymen into the Order
of Presbyters, but that he should advance such as were Presbyters already into
the superior Order of Bishops; and having first consecrated and ordained them,
to assign each of them his Diocese and City, that they might be invested with
their Episcopal Authority and Jurisdiction too. And this seems to be that
(...), that Constitution or Promotion of Presbyters, which the Apostle
requires here.

Other places there are, where St. Paul speaks of Bishops and Deacons only,
without taking notice of an intermediate rank of Clergy; as 1 Timothy 3. he gives
instructions for the Ordination of Bishops and Deacons: And in Phil. 1. 1. he
saluteth the Saints at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons. Whence the
Adversaries of Episcopacy do conclude, that by Bishops there, Presbyters are
intended; otherwise we must suppose them to be past over wholly, which is not
to be conceived the Apostle would do. But by their good leave, I do assert,
that where the Apostle mentions Bishops, he ever means such as are truly
and properly Bishops, not including Presbyters under that Notion. And for the
clearing of the Objection, three things are observable.

1. First, that when Churches began to be gathered, many Epiph. haeres. 68.
times it happened that two Churches were in one and the same City; the one,
consisting of believing Jews; the other, made up of converted Gentiles. Now
over each of these Churches, there did preside a Bishop with his Deacons; so
that frequently you shall find in Church History two several Bishops in one
City.

2. Secondly, that these and the Neighboring Bishops were wont to convene and
meet together, to consult concerning the ordering and management of
Ecclesiastical Matters.

3. And thirdly, that the necessities and condition of places were such in the
beginning, that all Churches were not so completely and perfectly modelled at
the first, as they were in process of time. For, as Churches were greater or
less in proportion, so were Church Officers more or fewer in number. Where the
multitude of Christians was not great, there a Bishop and his Deacon were
enough to discharge the work of the Ministry: where the numbers of Christians
did increase, there Presbyters were appointed to assist the Bishop, and to act
under him: and where an Apostle thought good not to fix any Bishop, but to hold
the Government of a Church immediately in his own hands, there he did commonly
appoint a College or Bench of Presbyters to perform Ministerial Offices, as his
Proxies in his absence, and by his Authority derived and delegated unto them:
For so did St. Paul keep the Superintendency over the Church of Corinth in his
own hands, as their immediate and sole Bishop, because he had converted them to
the Faith; and what the Presbyters did in excommunicating that incestuous
person, they did it by St. Paul's Spirit, that is, by 1 Cor. 5. 4.
his Episcopal Authority and Power committed unto him by Christ: I verily as
absent in Body, but present in Spirit (or by my Authority) have judged already
concerning him, says the Apostle. This Observation will give us to understand
the meaning Epiph. haeres. 75.
of that which we collect out of Epiphanius, that in one Church there were
Bishops and Deacons only, (where the numbers of Converts were small) in another
there were Presbyters without any Bishops, besides an Apostle (where there was
need of many Ministers, and yet one could not be found that was so fit for the
Bishopric:) in others again there were Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons too
(where the condition of the place did require it, and the worth and abilities
of the Men did admit of it.) Now then to come to the Objection. St. Paul gives
Timothy an 1 Timothy 3.
account of the Qualifications necessary in Bishops; and this questionless was
in order to their Ordination. But how does it appear, that Presbyters are meant
by the word Bishops? Were Presbyters now to be Ordained? Did the word of God
Act. 19. 20.
grow and prevail so mightily in the Ephesian Churches, and yet no Presbyters
in them? Was St. Paul among them for the space of three years, preaching,
disputing, and converting so many Act. 20. 31.
Multitudes to the Faith, and yet ordained no Presbyters to water what he had
so prosperously planted? And if Presbyters were ordained were settled in the
Churches of Ephesus before the Apostles departure to Macedonia, what necessity
was there for him to send his Son Timothy Instructions concerning the
Ordination of Presbyters, especially when he hoped to return unto him shortly?
Divines conceive that this Epistle was sent by 1 Timothy 3. 14.
him soon after he departed from Ephesus: and were all the Presbyters dead in
that little time? It Is hardly to be believed, that Presbyters were wanting: but
Bishops were. For hitherto St. Paul had been with the Ephesians, for the most
part, in his own person; he had governed them in his own person; and had
exercised his Episcopal Authority in his own person: But now he was gone,
leaving Timothy in his room; he was the first Bishop that was fixed at Ephesus,
and the only Bishop indeed now; and yet but a young Man, that had need of other
Bishops to concur with him, and help him in his Office, and considering, that
St. Paul was uncertain when he should see him 1 Timothy 3. 15.
again, there was an urgent necessity for him to write speedily to his Son,
that other Bishops might be ordained, that other Churches might be guarded from
the Gnostic Seducers, as well as Ephesus it self, the great Metropolis. There
is no necessity then for us to conceive, that St. Paul in his Epistle to
Timothy did mean Presbyters when he spoke of Bishops; but rather that he gave
directions for the Ordination of those, who were to be Bishops indeed, to be
invested with Episcopal Power, and to preside over other Cities, as Timothy did
over Ephesus, in St. Paul's own Chair.

Again; the Apostle saluteth the Saints at Philippi, with the Bishops and
Deacons, Phil. 1. 1. But there is no Demonstrative Reason to constrain, nor
probable Argument to induce us to believe, that he directed his salutation to
Presbyters, much less, that he gave them the Title of Bishops. For, there are
several fair accounts to be given of this matter: either (as some conceive)
that there were two Bishops over two Churches in Philippi (Jewish, and Gentile
Christians) as 'twas usual in other places: or (as others are of Opinion) that
the Neighboring Bishops were now assembled at Philippi, as 'twas usual at
other times: or (as others are persuaded) that the Salutation is sent not to,
but from the Bishops and Deacons; and so the words are to be read thus with a
Parenthesis, Paul and Timotheus the Servants of Jesus Christ (to all the Saints
in Christ Jesus, which are at Philippi) with the Bishops and Deacons; Grace be
unto you, etc. But which way soever we interpret the Text, we are so far from
finding any Presbyters in the Salutation, that there is no argument to prove,
that they were at all in the City whither the Salutation was sent. For
Epiphanius tells us, that many Churches at the first were ordered by Bishops
and Deacons only: and then, why not the Churches of Philippi also.

Thus their whole Argument fails them, who would prove the Office and Order of
Bishop and Presbyter to have been the same in the Apostles days, because
forsooth the Name is given to both in Scripture. Though the Consequence would
not be good, should their grand Principle be granted, yet there is no solid
reason for us to grant the Principle it self. And therefore I shall not stick
to conclude peremptorily, That the Order of Bishops, both as to name and thing,
is so far from being either an Antichristian or an Ecclesiastical Ordinance,
that it was instituted by Christ himself, and founded in the Apostles of
Christ, and by them so established and continued in all the Churches of Christ,
that for 1500 years together no Church in the world, being perfectly and
rightly formed, was ever under any other sort of Government: but that the
Episcopal Office and Authority has through a continual Succession of Ages been
communicated, transmitted, and handed down to the whole Catholic Church, even
from the most primitive and infant times of Christianity: and consequently,
that this way of Government, still retained and defended in the Church of
England, is undoubtedly the old and the good way.

The truth is, Aerius was the first man that ever durst affirm, that a Bishop
is not above a Presbyter in Power, Order, and Authority: but he was counted a
mad man for his pains, and was ranked by the Church in the black Catalogue of
Heretics, not only for his Separation from the Catholic Bishops, nor only
for his condemning of Catholic Customs, nor only for embracing the Heretical
Sentiments of Arius, but also for affirming, that Presbyters were of equal
power and authority with Bishops. And yet I much question, whether he spoke his
free opinion, or only said so out of envy and spite to Eustathius. For Aerius
would fain have been a Bishop himself, but Eustathius stood in his way; and for
that reason he grew sullen, dogged, and envious: and such men commonly vend
some new opinion, to be revenged for their disappointments; and so did he this:
because he had not Merits enough to advance himself from a Presbyter to a
Bishop, he had it seems impudence enough to degrade a Bishop into a Presbyter.

I will not make any untoward Reflections upon those Disciples of Aerius, who
in these our days have greatly wounded Christianity by the same groundless and
singular, but confident Assertion. Yet I think it is no uncharitableness to wish
for the Peace and Interest of Christendom, that their tallons were well pared,
who are not content to scratch and deface the Walls of the Church, unless they
undermine the very pillars of it too; those ancient and strong Pillars, upon
which the Church has rested, and by which Religion has been upheld even from
the beginning.

2. Having said thus much touching the Antiquity of our form of Government, I
proceed now to that, which is another most material part of our Establishments,
that is, the form of our Service Book, or Liturgy. Concerning which I will be
bold to affirm, and be bound to maintain against all parties whatsoever, that
whosoever does either deprave, or dis-esteem it, must of necessity be either a
very Ignorant, or a very naughty person. Very Ignorant if he does not see, that
our Service is so correspondent to that of the Ancient Churches, that no Church
in Christendom this day can show a more lively Monument of Antiquity, than our
Common Prayer Book. But a very naughty person, if seeing and knowing this, he
does presume yet to condemn it; because he cannot in this respect condemn the
Church of England, but he must likewise condem all the Old Churches in the
World; which, whether it be not an Argument of an Unchristian and naughty
Spirit, I leave to all moderate men to Judge.

I am apt to hope, that those calumnies and reproaches which our Liturgy has
been laden with, have been occasioned by men's Ignorance of its excellencies.
And therefore, to prevent those aspersions for the future (if it be possible) I
shall endeavor to show. First, the Antiquity of set forms of public Prayer,
in general. Secondly then, the Antiquity of our English Liturgy, in particular.
And when these two things be made to appear, I hope the Church of England will
be acquitted in this respect, as following the Old way of serving God.

1. Touching the Ancient use of set Forms of public Prayer, in general, three
things are proveable, for the satisfaction of all Modest and Ingenuous People.
1. That set Forms of Divine Service were used among the Ancient Jews. 2. That
set Forms of Divine Service were used also among the Primitive Christians. 3.
That after our blessed Lords Ascension, in that interval between the Burial of
the Synagogue, and the settling of the Christian Church; set Forms of Divine
Service were allowed also, even by the Holy Apostles. These three Heads I shall
insist on, the more largely and particularly, because they may serve to inform
and satisfy many (even prejudiced) persons, who have not searched into the
bottom of things, but have contented themselves with many superficial (not to
say, groundless and impertinent) Notions.

1. First then, it is manifest, that the whole Body of Divine Service among the
Jews, did consist of several Prescript and set Forms.

At their Temple; though a great part of their Service was Ceremonial and
Typical, consisting of diverse kinds of Sacrifices and offerings, which in the
fullness of time were to be done away; yet this was attended with Moral and
Spiritual Services, consisting of Praises and Prayers, which were to continue
for ever. For, the Levites, whose office it was to stand every morning to thank
and praise the Lord, and likewise at the Evening, were wont to perform their
parts, as with a world of 1 Chronicles. 23. 30.
solemnity, so also with Hymns and Songs, that were composed and set to their
hands. Most of these were Psalms endicted by David; some were framed by Asaph,
and other Prophets; and all were put together into a Book, out of which the
Levites were appointed, in the Name of the Congregation, to worship and praise
God in one of the outward Courts of the Temple, while the Sacrifices were
offering by the Priest within. Hence it is, that we find many Psalms directed
to the chief Musician; for Tunes to be set unto them, that the Sons of
Jeduthun, Korah, and other Levites in their courses might sing them in Consort,
with wind Instruments, and stringed Instruments (of which there were diverse
kinds, as Flutes, Cornets, Trumpets, Cymbals, Harps, Psalteries, etc.)
according to the commandment of the Lord, by his Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 29. 25. And
hence it is too, that we find some Psalms framed on purpose to be used on some
special occasion; as particularly, the 92 Psalm, entitled, a Song for the
Sabbath day; which was intended, questionless, to be sung solemnly on the
Sabbath, in memory of Gods rest upon that day, and to give him thanks for his
wonderful works of Creation and Providence. And, Lastly, hence it is, that the
fifteen Psalms immediately following the Hundred and Ninetenth, are called
Psalms of Degrees, or steps; because the Levites were wont to sing them upon
the fifteen Stairs (upon each Stair, one) which were between the women's and the
men's Court. Briefly; we find it said expressly of King Hezikiah, that he
commanded the Levites to sing praises unto the Lord with the words of David,
and of Asaph the Seer. 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. So that it seems to be without
question, that all Acts of Divine Worship done by the Levites, were performed
in Prescript, and set forms. And let me add touching the People of Israel, that
when they presented their first fruits at the Sanctuary, the offerer was to
make an humble acknowledgement of Gods mercy to him, and to the whole Nation,
in a set Form of words; Deuteronomy. 26. 5. Thou shall speak and say (these words) a
Syrian ready to perish was my Father, and so on to the Tenth Verse inclusively.
And at the end of their Tithing, every man of them was to say (these words)
before the Lord, I have brought away the hollowed things out of mine house, and
so on from the 13. to the 15. verse of the same Chapter. And to all this they
were to add a set and a formal Prayer, look down, (O Lord) from thy holy
Habitation, from Heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the Land which thou
have given us, as thou swarest unto our Fathers, verse. 15. And then, lastly, as
concerning the Sons of Aaron, the Priests, their Office was in Gods name to
bless the Congregation, after the daily Service was finished: and their custom
was to go up together upon an eminent place for that purpose, and there all of
them lifting up their hands (and the People bowing their heads) one of the
Priests was to pronounce the Blessing; and he was tied to a certain Form (which
is still Visitation of the sick.
retained in our Liturgy;) On this wise, ye shall bless the Children of Israel,
saying, the Lord bless thee, and keep thee; the Lord make his face to shine
upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord lift up his countenance upon
thee, and give thee peace. From all these instances it does plainly appear,
that the whole public Service of God, in all its Parts, whether they did
concern the People, or the Levites, or the Priests, was of Old transacted by
them according to set and solemn Forms, at the Temple.

It is well known, that besides the Temple at Jerusalem (which was the only
place of Sacrifices) the Jews had (especially after the long Captivity) many
Synagogues up and down in Cities at home and abroad, where they were dispersed:
and we are told that in Jerusalem it self there were no less, than an hundred
and eighty Synagogues. The exact time is not known, when they were first
Erected; but that the Moral and standing Service of God was ministered in those
Synagogues, is altogether out of Question; and some are of opinion, that this
Moral Service was answerable to that which was (but with more solemnity)
celebrated at the Temple. However, that this Service Mr. Thorndike, Rel.
Assemb. p. 227.
was performed by Book, is evident and plain. For in every Synagogue there was
an Officer, part of whose business it was, to read the Service. This was that
Minister spoken of, in Luke 4. 20. One, who was inferior to the Rulers and
Elders of the Synagogue, and correspondent to a Deacon in the Christian Church,
as the Learned Grotius tells us. And Buxtorf affirms, In Loc. Buxt. in (...).
Rel. Assemb. p. 56.
that Precibus and cantu Ecclesiae praeibat, he went before the Congregation in
Praying and Singing. And the Learned Author before mentioned tells us out of
Maimonides, that when he stood up to Prayer, he had his back to the people, and
his face toward the Elders, and the Sanctuary; and thence he rationally
collecteth, that he prayed according to a prescript Form; because it is not to
be supposed, that an Inferior Officer in the Synagogue should direct the
Prayers of his betters, but upon this ground, because the Prayers had been
composed before by fit and competent persons, and so might be Ministered by their
Inferiors, the Deacons of the Synagogues. Besides; the Noble and Learned
French Protestant; Du Plessis, has given us this account of the ordinary De
Missa lib. 1. c. 3.
Synagogue Service; that it began with that general Confession of Sins, which
was used at the Temple over the Sacrifices, the Form whereof is fetched by him
out of P. Fagius and by Mr. Ainsworth out of Maimonides, O Lord, thy people the
house of Israel, have sinned, In Levit. 16. 21.
and done iniquity, and trespassed before thee; O Lord, make Atonement now for
the sins, and for the iniquities, and for the trespasses, that thy people the
house of Israel have sinned, and unrighteously done, and trespassed before
thee, as it is written in the Law of Moses thy Servant. Then follows the
singing of several whole Psalms composed by David, and other Prophets; together
with set Prayers of Thanksgiving (I conceive, he means, those eighteen
Benedictions, which we find frequently mentioned, and which the Jews say, Ezra
composed after the return from Babylon:) and if I mistake not Dr. Hammonds
sense, where he Cites Seldens Notes upon Entychius, these Prayers were begun
with View of the direct.
Psalm. 51. 15. O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy
praise, (the very form of words retained in S. James Liturgy, and in ours
before the Introite,) and concluded with, Psalm. 31. 6. Into thy hands I commend
my Spirit; for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, the God of Truth. After this,
followed the Reading of the Law and the Prophets, which was not Arbitrary, left
to the Readers pleasure what parts of Scripture to make choice of; but certain
Lessons were appointed for the day, and the Law was divided into fifty four
Sections, and the Prophets into as many portions; for every week a portion; so
that the Office was prescribed for the whole year. Moreover, the Scriptures
being read at large, they went to their Prayers again, for the Church, and for
the Commonwealth, for public blessings, and for particular private Mercies;
and so the Ruler of the Synagogue dismissed the Assembly, with the usual and
solemn Benediction.

I cannot imagine what more is needful to show, that the public Service of
God, among the Jews was ordered into certain and set Forms, both at the Temple,
and in their Synagogues; that is, that they had their Liturgy and
Common-Service Book, as the Christian Church had in after Ages, and as the
Church of England has still. Only I shall add Ex abundanti, that even their
more private Devotions were Prescript and Formal also. And I instance in the
solemnity of the Passover, which was kept in their Private houses; they had set
Forms of words, whereby they declared the meaning of the Mystery, and of the
institution of the Lamb, the bitter Herbs, and the unleavened Bread; and this
Declaration was called, a showing forth of the Passover; to which the Apostle
alludeth, when he says of the Lords Supper, that it is a showing forth of the
Lords death, 1 Cor. 11. 26. They had set Forms of words for the Consecration of
the Bread and the Wine: over the Bread they said, Blessed le thou, O Lord our
God, the King of the World, which bring forth Bread out of the Earth; and
over the Cup they said likewise, Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, the King of
the World, which Createst the fruit of the Vine. Lastly; the whole action was
concluded with singing of Psalms, beginning at the hundred and thirteenth, and
so on to the end of the hundred and eighteenth; which six Psalms were called by
them, the great Hallelujahs. And I question not, but as our Savior used the
usual or the like Form, when he blessed the Bread and Wine; so also that they
used that great Hallelujah, when the Evangelist tells us, that He and his
Disciples sang an Hymn, and went out into the Mount of Olives, Matthew. 26. 30.

2. Having thus cleared the first thing, that set Forms of Divine Service were
in use among the Ancient Jews, I proceed to make good the second Position; viz.
that such Forms were likewise used by the Primitive Christians. Here no man of
learning can deny, 1. That Prescript Forms of worship have been established in
the Christian world for above these 1200 years last past. For it is now 1312
years since the Council at Laodicea; Can. 18.
and then it was Decreed, that the Choristors should sing by Book, and that the
same Prayers should serve for Noon, and for Evening-service, (...). Can. 15.
Aristen. in Epit canonis.
(...) says Balsamon, and for every Synaxis, or Assembly; nor should any
Prayers be read, but what were received and established, having been delivered
unto them by their forefathers. Like unto this was that Canon of Can. 23.
Balsam in Can. 18. Council. Laodic.
the Council at Carthage, which was 1284 years ago, that if any man did compose
any Prayers, he should not presume to use them, till he had consulted the most
knowing men in the Church. The intent of which Decree was, that none should
have the liberty to use what forms of Prayer he pleased, but that such only
should be said, as had been ratified by due Authority, and ancient custom.
Lastly it is 1277 years since the Can. 12.
Council at Milevis; and then it was provided, that no manner of Prayers should
be used in the Church, but what had been approved of by a Synod, and I cannot
but observe the reason of this Canon, ne forte aliquid contra fidem vel per
ignorantiam, vel per minus studium sit compositum (said those wise Fathers)
lest new Prayers should contain that which was contrary to the true Faith,
either through the Ignorance, or through the carelessness of the Composer. It
was one great Reason (among many others) why Public Liturgies were compiled of
old, that they might be Repositories of sound Doctrine, and Preservatives of
the Catholic Faith, and the Ancients were wont to dispute against Heriticks,
not only out of Scripture, but out of the Churches Service-books too. For these
were Antidotes, to keep Christians from being poisoned with Erroneous and
rotten Principles, as our English Liturgy is at this day an Excellent amulet
against infection from Papists, So^cinians, Pelagians and other modern
seducers: and perhaps this is the grand reason, why, the Bell-weathers of
Faction hate our Common Prayer Book, because it stinteth their extravagant
Spirits, who can sow Heresy and Sedition by their Praying, as well
Preachments: this I am certain of, that many gross errors which now prevail
(especially in the Church of Rome) have been greatly occasioned by the base
Arts of men, who have time after time altered and corrupted the Ancient
Service-Books, thereby insensibly insinuating into men's breasts such things as
belong not to Christianity. But I will not digress further. To return to our
purpose; it cannot be denied, secondly, that in the days of St. Basil, and St.
Chrysostom, which was about 380 years after our Lords birth, Liturgies were
generally used in the Churches of Christ, for at this hour there are Liturgies
extant under the Names of those Great men; and though we do not think, that
these are the very same, which they used, because latter ages have defaced them
and foisted many Heterogeneous things into them, yet it is rediculous to
imagine, that St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom did not compile any, or that
nothing of these was of their composing. And yet what they did in this business
was not a New thing; they were not the first divisers of these Forms: no, they
framed their Liturgies out of old Materials, and did fit and suit them to their
own times. For it cannot be denied, thirdly, that Liturgies were used, before
ever these men were born. For the Ancients did conceive, that St. James the
first Bishop of Jerusalem and S. Mark the Evangelist, did both of them frame
Liturgies for the use of their respective Churches, and though I dare not say,
that this conceit is undoubtedly true; (much less, that the Liturgies, which
are now called by their Names, and as we have them, were composed by them;) yet
this I will affirm, that in the early days of Christianity set Forms of Divine
Service were used in the Churches of Jerusalem and Alexandria. Nay, if we
consider well of that Form of Service in the Constitutions of Clement (which
questionless is a most ancient one) and then compare those Liturgies we find in
the Bibliothcca Patrum called, S. Peter's for Rome; S. Thomas's for the Indians,
S. Matthew's for the Aethiopians, and the Mosarabe for the Spaniards, though we
confess, that these as well as others have suffered many alterations, yet in
all of them we may see such plain footsteps of prime Antiquity, that we may
rationally conclude, Liturgies were used in the very next ages to the Apostles,
over all parts of Christendom.

I know, this will be looked upon as a very high and bold assertion; and
therefore I am bound to be the more punctual in this matter; and for proof
thereof I shall appeal to such Testimonies as are Authentic, and which being
compared with the Liturgies beforementioned, will satisfy any indifferent
man, that such and such Forms were used by Christians in the first Ages; and
so, that in all probability they were directed by the Apostles, or Apostolical
Persons. S. Cyprian speaks of solemn offices; which cannot otherwise be
understood, then of customary Forms of Prayer; especially considering that he
elsewhere Solemnibus adimpletis Cypr. de lapsis. De Orat. Dom.
mentions a Preface (used even then, and still retained by us) before the
Commuion, the Priest saying, sursum corda, lift up your hearts, and the People
answering, Habemus ad Dominum, we lift them up unto the Lord. When Demetrian
the Proconsul of Asrick charged all the Wars, Famines, Plagues, and Droughts
upon the Christians, S. Cyprian then Bishop of Charthage answered him to this
purpose; we pour out our Prayers and Supplications Ad Them.
for deliverance from enemies, for rains, and for the removal or the abatement
of all evils, and day and night we pray continually and earnestly, for your
Peace and safety. Now, what should he mean by these continual and constant
Prayers? Why, no doubt, those charitable Forms which they used in the ordinary
course of their morning and evening-service. For such we find in all the old
Liturgies; and particularly, in that ascribed to S. Mark (which Cyprian perhaps
might refer to) there is a Collect, after the Reading of the Gospel, where the
Minister says, Be pleased, O Lord, to send wholesome showers upon every
thirsty Land; of thy Mercy give us fountains of waters; increase and bless the
fruits of the earth; preserve the Kingdom of thy Servant, whom thou have
thought fit to set over us, in peace, righteousness, and tranquillity, and
deliver this City from evil days, from famine, from pestilence, and from
invasion. Compare this Prayer with S. Cyprians words, and then judge if he did
not point to this, or to some other Form to the same purpose, and of the same
strain. Again; whereas Celsus the Pagan slandered the Christians, as men given
to Magical Arts and Sorceries, Origin (who was but one remove from the times of
the Apostles) affirms positively and upon certain experience, that they who
worship Orig. adv. Cess. lib. 6.
the Lord of the Universe by Jesus Christ, and live according to the Gospel,
using night and day, constantly and rightly, (...) the Prayers which were
Appointed, cannot come under the power of Devils. There is little Reason to
doubt, but that by these Prayers he means the Nocturnal and Diurnal Offices,
which we then prescribed and ordered by the Church; and less Reason there is to
fancy, that such were not used in his time: and for confirmation of this, it is
observeable, that Origin himself else where quotes a customary Form then in
use, We frequently Orig. H^om. 11. in Jerem.
say in our Prayers, Grant us, O Almighty God, grant us a Portion with the
Prophets, grant us a place among the Apostles of thy Christ, grant that we may
be found followers of thine only begotten. Questonless this was an usual Form
in the Alexandrian Liturgy; and though we do not now find it in so many express
words in the Liturgy ascribed to S. Mark, yet we find in it a form to the same
purpose, grant us, O Lord, to have our Portion and inheritance with all thy
Saints. And in the Aethiopick Liturgy, it is twice, Lit. S. Marci. in Anaphora
Be propitious unto us, O Lord, and vouchsafe to make us joint-Possessors and
partakers of the inheritance of the Apostles, and cause us to follow their
steps. And again; Lord write our names in the Kingdom of Heaven, and join us
with all thy Saints and Martyrs. Furthermore; Tertullian (another African
writer, and somewhat Elder then Origin) speaking of the Jam vero prout
Scripturae leguntur, aut Psalmi canuntur, aut Adlocutiones proferuntur, aut
Petitiones delegantur etc. Tert, de Anima. c. 3.
Divine-service in his time (which he calls, Dominica Solennia) reckons up four
parts of it; the Reading of Scripture the Singing of Psalms, Allocutions, and
Petitions, This place being thoroughly understood, is very pregnant and full to
our purpose. 1. Here we have the reading of the Scriptures, which in those
early and pious times was performed, not with that conciseness and brevity,
which was usual in after-ages; but 'twas Lectio fusissima; and Lit. S. Jacob.
large potions were read both out of the old, and the new Testament. 2. They
Sung whole Psalms; not only those composed by David and other Prophets among
the Jews, but, as we shall see hereafter, several Hymns and Songs of Praise,
which had been framed in the beginning by Faithful Christians, and more
immediately relating to the Christian Religion. 3. But then a doubt may be
moved, what Tertullian means by those Allocutions, which were made to the
people, and uttered at large (for that I conceive to be his sense.) And the
difficulty may be easily assoiled, if we call to mind, that in the Primitive
times it was a general custom for the Deacon that read the service to direct
the people in their devotion, to tell them what they should pray for, and to
stir them up to beg such and such things of God, calling upon them after this
manner, Let us pray, let us pray earnestly, (...), let us pray on yet, further,
and with an intense Zeal; and other such Forms there were which he frequently
used, and then dictated to them the matter of their devotion, to which all the
people gave their Suffrages readily and with much fervency of Spirit,
Litany-wise. Now these Forms of exhortation were called by the Greeks (...),
which the Latins rendered, Allocutions: We call it, Bidding of Prayers. And
though the custom be for certain Reasons grown much out of use among us, yet
there are many plain footsteps of it to Clem. Constable.
be seen in our Liturgy, especially in our Litany, and Communion-service (in
which offices it was most used of old;) for the Minister is often ordered to
say, Let us pray, let us pray. And as to the custom it self, it is so Ancient,
that I cannot find the beginning of it; and 'twas so universal, that 'twas
observed in all the Primitive Churches; for in all the Liturgies which I have
yet seen (either of the Eastern, or Western, or African Churches) such
Allocutory Expressions are still extant, more or less. Sometimes the Minister
used short and concise Forms, saying, Let us Pray; let us behave our selves
reverently, Lift up your hearts, let us give thanks unto the Lord; and to
these, the Congregation gave their customary Answers. Sometimes these
Allocutions were more large; as, for instance in that Prayer for Persons who
intended to be Baptized (to which several others did correspond) the Minister
said on this wise, (as we find in an African Liturgy.)

Let us that are Believers pray for our brethren who prepare themselves for
holy Illumination (or Baptism,) and for their salvation let us beseech the
Lord;

And the People answered, Lord have mercy.

That our Lord God may please to confirm and strengthen them, let us beseech
the Lord;

Ans. Lord, have mercy.

That he may please to illuminate them with the light of knowledge and
godliness, let us beseech the Lord;

Ans. Lord, have mercy.

That he may please in due time to vouchsafe them the Laver of Regeneration,
and forgiveness of their sins, let us beseech the Lord;

Ans. Lord, have mercy.

That he may please to regenerate them with water, and the Holy Ghost, let us
beseech the Lord;

Ans. Lord, have mercy.

That he may please to give them a perfection of Faith, let us beseech the
Lord;

Ans. Lord, have mercy.

That he may please to gather them into the holy Fold of his Elect, let us
beseech the Lord;

Ans. Lord, have mercy.

O Lord, save, pity, help and keep them by thy good Grace;

Ans. Lord, have mercy.

These, and such Forms as these, were undoubtedly used by the Churches of
Christ in the first Ages of Christianity. And these were the (...) or
Allocutions, which Tertullian speaks of as used in his time: and anon I shall
make it probably appear, that they were used before his time too. 4. In the
mean time it is observable, that in the place before-cited, he makes mention of
Petitions also used in the Public Assemblies of Christians. By which I
understand, certain entire Prayers, called (...), or Collects, when the
requests of the Church were cast into one Body of Prayer, offered up by the
Minister; to which the People answered, Amen. In the use of these he was the
Apol. c. 30.
mouth of the whole Congregation; and therefore Tertullian calls them very
elegantly, Petitiones delegatas, Petitions that were left to the Minister to
offer up in the Name of the rest, as the Delegate, and Assign of the whole
Congregation: so that, whereas they did bear a great part in other Prayers,
these were repeated entirely by him that did officiate. Many such Forms we meet
with in all the ancient Liturgies, and people were wont to get several of them
by heart, and to use them in their private Devotion. And so Tertullian tells us
in another place, that they all prayed for all Emperors, that they might have
a long life, a safe Empire, puissant Tertul. Apol. c. 30.
Armies, faithful Councils, good Subjects, and a quiet World. I do not doubt,
but this Ancient Writer had an eye to some Form of Prayer which was then to
that purpose, and in which all Christians did join. And such a kind of Collect
is still extant in S. Mark's Liturgy, where the Minister exhorts the People to
pray for the King; and the People having answered, Lord, have mercy, Lord have
mercy, Lord have mercy; the Minister proceeds thus; O Lord of Lords, thou God
Almighty, and Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we pray and beseech
thee, to keep our King in Peace, fortitude, and righteousness. Subdue, O God,
all his foes and enemies. Lay hold of the Shield and Buckler, and stand up to
help him. O God, make him victorious, that he may apply his mind to those
things which tend to our Peace, and to the honor of thy holy name; that under
him we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty,
through the merits of thine only begotten Son. Amen. Such Collects as this the
Primitive Christians borrowed of the Church, and repeated them by heart even in
their retirements. And this I take to be the meaning of that passage in
Tertullian, which has made such a noise; where he says, we pray (for our
Governors) sine Monitore, quia de Pectore, without a Monitor or Prompter, for
we pray by heart. By a Monitor here very probably he means the Deacon or
Minister, that was wont in their public Assemblies to stir them up to pray for
the chief Ruler, and to call upon them in those Allocutory Forms
beforementioned. And Tertullian tells the Heathens, that he and his
Fellow Christians did this sine Minitore, when no Minister was present to
prompt them to it; they had certain Prayers to this purpose which they used by
heart in private; so that they ought not to be looked upon as men that
flattered their Prince, men^iti vota ad evadendam scilicet vim, pretending to
pray for him, that they Apol. c. 31,
might not be persecuted; but this they did heartily and conscientiously, in
their private as well as public Devotions, at home of themselves, as well as
in the face of the World by the directions of their Minister. This is an easy
and fair construction of the words; and by the whole strain and tenor of
Tertullians discourse, it seems to be out of Question (what I am now proving)
that set Forms of Divine Worship were observed in his days.

But we have one very Ancient Writer more to appeal to, who will give us much
more light into this matter matter still: it is Justine Martyr, who lived about
thirty years after the death of the Apostle St. John: and as his Writings are
unquestionably Authentic, so the Age he lived in was so pure, that what
customs prevailed in Christian Churches then, must needs make a great
impression upon all indifferent persons now: and for that reason I shall
consider what he tells us, the more particularly and largely. In his second
Apology for the Christians, he gives the Heathens a Apol. ^.
plain account of the usages, which were then generally observed in the
Churches of Christ. Concerning persons which were to be Baptized (commonly
called, the Catechemum) he says, that they were taught to pray, and with
fastings to beg of God remission of their sins; and that believers did pray
with them, and fast with them at their public Assemblies. Then that as many as
did believe and were persuaded of the truth of those things which were preached
and delivered unto them, and did promise and undertake to lead their lives
accordingly, were bad to the place where the water stood, (which by the way,
was at the West end, and entrance of the Church) and there were Regenerate,
being Baptized in the name of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Afterward
he tells us, that the persons thus believing, thus professing, and thus washed,
were had again to the Congregation of the faithful, and that this Congregation
did make Common prayers, for themselves, and for the Baptized Parties, and for
all men in all places, with much earnestness and zeal. Further he says, that
the day when these things were performed, was the Sunday; and that on that day
Christians that dwelt in City and Country did meet together; that the writings
of the Prophets and Apostles were read unto them; that, when the Reader had
done, the chief Minister made a Sermon; and that being ended, then all did
unanimously rise up, and offered up prayers (i. e. the Prayers forementioned)
for themselves, for all estates and conditions of men in the World.) Then that
these prayers being ended, they saluted one another with an holy kiss, and
offered Bread and Wine, etc. which the President or chief Minister having
received at their hands, went to the like prayers again; and (...).
gave praise and glory to the Father of the Universe for his mercies, and
offered up thanksgivings in a Copious and Large manner, and with all his might
(meaning with all possible Zeal, Ardour, and Fervency of Spirit:) and these
prayers and thanksgivings being concluded, the people jointly cried out, Amen.
Then followed the distribution of the Elements, which (says he) was no longer
common Bread or common Drink, etc.

Now I confess, in all this History of things Justine Martyr does not tell us
in express words, that they used prescript and set Forms of Prayer (for that
was beside his purpose.) But yet it shall appear, that they did. For by the
whole procedure of the Relation it is clear, that they observed a certain
constant method in their Ministrations; and if we compare the particulars he
gives us in, with the particulars we find in other very Ancient Records, we
shall see, that Justine Martyr gives us a summary, but a pretty fully account,
of several prescript Forms, which were universally used of Old, as will
evidently appear by taking a view of the particulars.

1. He says, the Catechumeni were taught to pray, the Cogregagation of
Believers praying with them. And what can we understand by this teaching to
pray, but those (...) or Allocutory Forms, beforementioned, when the Deacons
did put words into their mouths, and dictated matter to them, calling upon them
with a loud voice, (...), Pray, ye Catechumeni. Such Forms we find in all the
old Liturgies generally. One I have transcribed already; and I shall produce
another out of Clements Constitutions, because that Book (though it has
undergone many alterations, yet) certainly contains the sense and substance of
the Churches service in the first Ages. There then the lib. 8.
Deacon is directed to say, Pray ye Catechumeni. -- And let us all pray to God
for them, that the good God would hear their prayers. -- That he may grant them
the desires of their hearts, as may be most expedient for them. -- That he may
reveal his Gospel to them, and enlighten them, and make them wise unto
salvation. -- that he may instruct them in the knowledge of his will, and teach
them his Commandments and Judgments. -- That he may plant in them his holy and
saving Fear. -- That he may open their hearts tomeditate on his Law day and
night. -- That he may confirm them in godliness, and number them among the
sheep of his Fold. -- That he may vouchsafe them the Laver of Regeneration, and
the Robe of Immortality, which is life indeed. -- That he may deliver them from
all wickedness, and from the wicked one, that he may not approach to hurt them.
-- That he may cleanse them from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and may
dwell in their hearts. -- That he may bless their goings out and their comings
in, and direct them in the ways of peace. -- Furthermore, let us earnestly
pray on their behalf, that having obtained forgiveness of their sins by
Baptism, they may be partakers of the holy Mysteries, and be endued with the
perseverance of Saints. To all and every of which particulars the people were
directed to give their suffrage and consent, saying, Lord, have mercy. Now this
is that which Justine means by the Praying of Believers for and with the
Catechumeni, and by the teaching of them to pray, viz. the propounding of
things to them to pray for, and to join with the rest in; as Constantine Eusebius
de vit. Constant, lib. 4. c. 19.
the Emperor was called, (...), a Teacher of supplicatory words, when he gave
his Soldiers Forms of Prayer to use.

2. The next thing we are to note from this Holy Martyrs account, is, that
these Catechumeni did make Profession of their Faith, and of their resolutions
to live Clem. Constable. lib, 7. c. 42. Et in Tertull Aquam adituri, contestamur
nos renunciare diabolo, and pompae, and Angelis ejus, de Cor. Mil.
according to their Profession. Now this was done in a certain Form too. First
the party was to say, I renounce the Devil, together with all the Works, Pomps,
Services, Angels, and inventions of Satan. Then being (...). Cyril. Catech. 2.
Clem. Constable. lib. 7. c. 42.
demanded, whether he did believe on the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, he answered, I believe, and am baptized into one Eternal and True God,
Almighty, the Father of Christ, the Creator and Maker of all things: and into
one Lord Jesus, etc. repeating the rest of the Articles of the Christian Creed.
So that all this was according to Form.

3. A third thing observable out of this most Primitive Author, is, that the
Baptized persons being brought from the water to the Congregation, and Sermon
ended, all went jointly to prayers, for themselves, for their new Members, and
for all men every where. Now questionless this account has a reference to
certain prescriptions then, because it does so admirably, and exactly agree
with that course of Offices, which we find in the old Liturgies, and
particularly in the book of Constitutions; where we have (after Sermon) one
particular Form of Prayer for the Baptized; (...).
another, for those who were possessed with evil Spirits; another, for such as
did Penance at the Church doors. And then they proceeded to a more general and
comprehensive Prayer, for the peace of the World -- for the holy, Catholic,
and Apostolic Church -- for that particular Diaecess -- for all Bishops under
Heaven -- for their Bishops, N. N. -- for their Presbyters and Deacons -- for
the Readers, Singers, Virgins, Widows, and Orphans -- for married persons, and
women laboring of child -- for all holy, chaste and continent persons -- for
their most pious and bountiful Benefactors -- for their new Baptized brethren
-- for such as were sick and weak -- for Travelers by Sea and Land -- for all
that were in Mines, in Banishment, in Imprisonment, and Bonds -- for all that
groaned through slavery -- for their Enemies and Persecuters -- for
unbelievers, and deceived people -- for christian Infants -- for one another --
and for every christian Soul. I cannot but admire the exuberant and unlimited
Charity of these excellent Christians: and by this we may easily see, what
Justine means by (...), the Common Prayers, viz. Such as were made for all
estates and conditions of men, and offered up by the whole Congregation. For to
every of these particulars pronounced by the Deacon, the people did subjoyn
their usual suffrage, (...), with a peircing zeal, and shrill accents (...)
Constable. Ap. lib. 8.
of devotion, saying, Lord, have mercy.

4. These things being thus dispatched, the holy kiss followed, according to
Justine; and so it did, according to S. Cyril, and the Author of the
Constitutions; which several accounts jumping together so fairly, we may
reasonably conclude, that the holy Martyr does refer to that Form which the
Deacon used at this time, crying out, embrace one another, and salute one
another with an holy kiss; meaning, that men should salute men, and women,
women, in token of perfect Love, amity and friendship.

5. After this the Offertory succeeded (agreeable also to what we find in other
the most Ancient Records) Bread and Wine, etc. being presented by the people to
the Deacons, and by them to the Bishop (or him that did officiate in chief) and
by him laid upon the Lords Table: part of which offerings was sequestered to be
the Elements of the Sacrament, and the residue was reserved for the use of the
Minister, and the poor.

6. Then the President of the Congregation proceeded to the prayer of
Consecration. Wherein it is very observable out of Justine Martyr, that the
Minister gave praise and glory to God, that he gave thanks, that he fell to the
like prayers ((...), prayers, like, in substance, to those which had been
offered before) and that all this he did (...), in a large manner. Now
throughout this particular account he does manifestly point to a certain Form
then in use; and thence we confidently conclude, that Forms of prayers were
prescribed in Justine Martyrs days. For we meet with this large Form in the
book of Constitutions, lib. 8.
and in other Ancient Liturgies; and on this wise it runs, by the consent of
Antiquity. First, the Minister mentions the infinite perfections and Majesty
of God; It is very meet and right that we should praise thee the very true God,
who art before all, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named, the
only Being, without production, without beginning -- and so on he goes
rehearsing the Divine Attributes (which I conceive is the (...) or praise,
which Justine speaks of.) Then he largely mentions Gods Creating the World,
and all things in it, his goodness to the first Man both before and after his
fall -- his providence toward the Sons of Adam before and under the Law -- his
particular favor to the seed of Abraham, their redemption from Egypt, etc. for
all which mercies, (...), (...), etc. Cyri^. Catech. ^.
Glory be unto thee O Lord Almighty, (there is the (...) mentioned by Justine.)
After this he proceeds to the (...), blessing God for the wonderful work of the
World's Redemption by Christ, for his Conception, Incarnation, Birth, Life,
Doctrine, Miracles, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension into Glory; (...), we
give thanks to thee O Almighty God, not as we ought, but as we can; and we
fulfill thy Commandment; for in the same night that he was betrayed, he took
Bread, etc. where the Minister repeates at large the History and words of the
Institution of the Sacrament, (...). Justine. (...). Cyril, ubi supra.
beseeching God to send down the Holy Ghost upon the offerings; and so at last,
at the close of this long prayer of Consecration, he proceeds to pray, as the
Deacon did before, for the holy Catholic Church, and for all its Members; at
the end whereof the Congregation answered, Amen. So it was in the book of
Constitutions; and so Justine affirms, that the President did (...), send up
prayers again in a like manner (the same after a sort with what had been sent
up before) and so that Ancient Writer S. Cyril tells us, that after
Consecration they did pray for the general peace of the Church, for the quiet
of the World, for Kings, etc. In a word, all the Old Liturgies gives us a
plain, full, and concurrent account of this matter: and whosoever shall
seriously weigh, and impartially consider the joint suffrage and agreement of
Antiquity as to this matter, he must either betray his weakness, or filthily
belie his own Judgment, if he does not conclude, that prescribed and set Forms
of Divine Service were in use universally in Justine Martyrs time: nay, that
Justine does manifestly point to that Form in S. James Liturgies, or Clements
Constitutions, such a clear agreement and correspondence there is between the
account we find in him, and in those other Records.

3. This thing then being cleared, that there were prescript Forms of Divine
Service in the Primitive times of Christianity, and even in that Age, which was
the very next to the Apostles, I proceed to show the third thing, viz. that in
the Holy Apostles time, and in that interval between the burial of the
Synagogue, and the settling of the Christian Church, set Forms of Divine Service
were allowed also. For confirmation whereof I think no Considerate man will
deny, that the Apostles and their Disciples conformed to the innocent Rites and
Customs among the Jews, and joined with them in the ordinary moral service of
God, which was appointed (...). S. Chrysostom. in Act. 2. 46.
to be used daily. 1. For, first, S. Luke tells us, Luke 24. 53. that after our
Lords Ascension, they were continually in the Temple, praising and blessing
God. Though they had frequent, peculiar coetus or Assemblies of their own, yet
they never withdrew themselves from the solemn Congregation of the Jews, that
they might not scandalize any: but they continued daily in the Temple with one
accord, Act. 2. 46. That was the place whither they constantly resorted to
Morning and Evening service. For that being Moral, it was utterly repugnant to
the design of Christianity to have destroyed it. Some other offices indeed
(such as the Celebration of the Lords Supper) as being proper to their
Profession, were to the Super-added to the ordinary service: and for that
purpose their custom was to adjourn from the Temple to the Caenaculum Sion, or
that upper room, mentioned, Act. 1. 13. The House was hard by the Temple, if
not part of it; and there they brake bread, in that House; not (as we render
it) House by House, but in the House; because they See Dr Hammond in loc. and
Mr. Medes Disc. on 1 Cor. 11. 22.
were not permitted to celebrate this Mystery in the Temple; but yet the Temple
was the place of their ordinary Devotion; and there the service was by
prescript Form. In like manner we read of Peter and John, that they went up
together into the Temple, at the hour of Prayer, being the ninth hour, Act. 3.
1. And from the whole History of the Apostles Acts it appears, that S. Paul,
and others were wont ever to resort to the Synagogues at the usual days and
hours: and as it is improbable, that they would have been so punctual as to the
time and place, of public service, had they not Conformed to the service it
self; so it is incredible, that they should have found such easy access, had
not the Elders of the Jews looked upon them as men of the same piece with
themselves, saving only in those points touching the Messiah's coming and the
Necessity of such Ceremonies as were Typical, or shaddows of better things. 2.
Again, it is clear that the Apostles were very careful, as far as it was
consistent with their duty, to give no offense unto the unbeleiving Jews, but
by all possible ways of compliance to gain them over unto Christianity: in
so much that St. Paul (who was one of the most stickling Apostles) professed
before Festus Act. 25. 8. that neither against the law of the Jews, nor against
the Temple, had he offended any thing at all. He declared before Foelix, Act.
24. 12, that they never found him in the Temple disputing with any Man, neither
raising up the people, neither in the Synagogues, nor in the City. And he told
the Jews at Rome, Act. 28. 17. that he had committed nothing against the people
or customs of their Fathers. In a word; he allowed the Jews the use of
Circumcision (thought it was needless) and he circumcised Timothy with his own
Hands (though it seemed extra-regular;) and in every particular they all went
Act. 16. 3,
as far as the Laws of Christianity would give leave, that they might not
exasperate any. Now is it imaginable, that men who were so willing to abate of
their Liberty, and to comply with the Jews even in things that were Ceremonial
and Transitory, should hold off in things that were their Duty, and oppose that
service of God which was substantial and permanent, I mean the received
Prayers, Praises and Thanksgivings? 3. But that which fully clears this matter
is, that even the converted Jews were extremely shy of letting go any of their
Rituals, though they had been better informed of the Design and Nature of
Christianity, then others were, we find Act. 21. 20, 21. that there were many
Myriads of Jews which believed, and they were all zealous of the Law: and when
they had but an incling, that S. Paul taught the Proselites abroad to forsake
Moses and not to walk after the Rites and customs of their Fathers, they were
so moved Vid. Bezam. in loc.
at it, that the Brethren at Jerusalem were fain to advise him to purify
himself, and to satisfy them that he walked orderly. And since they did so
pertinaciously insist upon Punctilio's, can we conceive, that they would not
insist rather upon weighty matters? would they suffer the whole frame of their
Religion to be altered, when they would not endure any part of it to be
changed, or omitted? Certainly, had the Apostles gone about to take away their
Sacrifices and their Service Book too, and to destroy their Legal and Moral
observances both, it would have been concluded, that their design was to make
havoc of all Religion, and to turn the World upside down; and such a Rupture
would have been made hereby, that Men would have crowded out of the Church with
greater zeal, than ever they went into it. And therefore it is unquestionably
clear, that the Apostles and their Disciples did at their public and common
Assemblies carefully keep to that way of worship, which was then established,
which (as has been proved) was Prescript, and according to Form.

2. The great Question is, what their way of worship was in their peculiar, and
more private Assemblies, when they met together to perform such proper
Exercises of Christianity, as they were not permitted to perform either in the
Temple, or at the Synagogue? That these Services were transacted without
premeditation and Form, is strongly believed and confidently asserted by some.
And it must be acknowledged, that their occasional Prayers were uttered after
that manner, such as that Prayer mentioned, Act. 4. And should it be granted,
that their whole Devotion was of sudden conception then, it would be no
prejudice to the use of Set Forms now, because the Apostles were immediately
inspired; whereas those miraculous afflations of the Holy Ghost are ceased long
ago; and the Question is, not whether unpremeditated Prayers are simply
unlawful, but whether they are so fit and convenient for the public, since our
wants and weaknesses are so great, and the best of us can pretend but to the
ordinary assistance of Gods Spirit upon our humane Endeavors.

But I must confess, that I am not at all satisfied of the Truth of that
conceit, that in the Christian Assemblies in the Apostles days, there were no
manner of Forms; or that their ordinary or standing Services were performed
wholly by extemporaneous suggestion. Indeed the Scripture gives us but little
account of this matter: and therefore what is determined about it, must be
concluded by the help of Reason, and some Collateral evidence. To the point
then. The service of God consists of Praises and Prayers. Now that the
Christians in the Apostles time had composed and set Forms of praising and
glorifying God, seems highly probable from 1 Cor. 14. 26. where St. Paul
says, that when they came together, every one of them had a Psalm. This is a
general word, comprehending both Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, to the
use whereof St. Paul advises Christians twice elsewhere; once in Ephesians. 5. 19.
and again, Col. 3. 16. Now it is hard to believe, that these several ways of
extolling Gods name, were conceived in the Church on a sudden by the whole
Congregation. Rather it is credible, that they came ready furnished with
suitable Forms; either with those which had been formerly composed by David, or
with some that had been lately framed by Men inspired; or with both (which is
most likely.) For the same Spirit which moved the Prophets of old, did breath
upon the Church now; and it is probable, that as David and others did by the
dictates of the Holy Ghost compose Forms of praising God for the use of the
whole Congregation; so in the Apostles time many were moved by the same Spirit
to compose the like Christian Hymns, for the use of the whole Church. So St.
Chrysostom tells us positively, that in those ancient (...). S. Chrysostom. in 1
Cor. 14. 26.
times they did frame Psalms by the Gift of the Holy Ghost., And since the
Apostle does distinguish between these Psalms and those Revelations, which were
given in an instant at the Church, it seems to be clear, that such Forms
were conceived at home, by such as had the Gift of Tongues, and then (being
rendered into a Language which they understood) were communicated to the People
to be used by them at their solemn Meetings; and so they had (or, came provided
of) Psalms, when they came together. For the scope of the Apostle there is to
show, that every thing should be done in the Church, that others might receive
benefit by it. And whereas some had the gift of speaking in strange Languages,
and were apt to boast of their abilities, St. Paul in that Chapter proves,
that the Service of God should be performed in a known Tongue, that every
Christian might bear a part in it; and so he concludes, that even the Psalms,
which were composed by Persons inspired, should be first made intelligible,
before they were used in their public Assemblies, because all things were to
be done to edisying. And truly that there were such divine Songs frequently
used in the Apostles days, seems to be clear from a testimony in Eusebius.
For speaking of several eminent Catholic Writers under Eusebius Hist. Eccl. lib.
5. cap. 28.
the Emperor Severus, he says, that in confuting the Heresy of Art^^^on (who
denied the Godhead of our Savior) they appealed to those Psalms and Hymns,
which had been written in the beginning of Christianity by the Faithful; in
which Hymns they confessed Christ to be the Word of God, and worshipped him as
God. To which I shall add that account given by Pliny the Heathen (who lived
about St. John's time.) For writing to Trajan the Emperor, he informed him of
the Christians, That they were Plinius Trajano.
a sort of People, that on a [certain day were wont to meet together early in
the morning, and did sing a Hymn unto Christ as unto God, and did bind
themselves in a Sacrament, not to steal, not to commit adultery, etc.
Questionless this Hymn was some set Form of Praise, which was used by the whole
Congregation at the Communion Office. And if I may be allowed my conjecture, I
conceive it might be that Hymn, which we find still in Clements Constitutions,
the Clem. Constable. lib. 7. in fine.
Tenor whereof is this; Glory be to God in the Highest, Peace on Earth, good
will among men. We praise thee, we sing unto thee, we bless thee, we glorify
thee, we worship thee through our Great High Priest (thee, the very true God,
the unbegotten; inaccessible Being) for thy great glory; O Lord, heavenly King,
God the Father Almighty: O Lord God, the Father of Christ, that spotless Lamb,
that takes away the sin of the World: receive our prayer, thou that sit
upon the Cherubims. For thou only art holy; thou only, O Jesus, art the Lord,
the anointed of God, our King, to whom be Glory, Honor, and Worship ascribed.
This was that (...), morning Prayer, or Hymn (so called in the (...).
Constitutions,) and 'twas usual at the close of the holy Sacrament. And if it
was not this Hymn which Pliny meant, some other of the like nature it was,
which he pointed to. And so from all these Testimonies put together, I do
conclude, that in the Apostles days there were certain set Forms of praise,
which was one main part of the ordinary Service then, in their peculiar and
select Assemblies.

2, As touching Prayers (which made up the other part of Gods Worship) S. Paul
says to Timothy, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort, that first of all, Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all men; for Kings,
and for all that are in authority, etc.

1. Here it is clear, that the Apostle does enumerate several sorts, kinds, and
parts of devotion, making a plain distinction and difference between
supplications (against all evil things) and Prayers (for all good things) and
Intercessions (for others as well for themselves) and Tanksgivings (for mercies
already received.) There is no doubt, but he means several distinct offices,
unless we be so impudent as to affirm, that S. Paul heaped up many words, to no
purpose.

2. It is clear that he required, that these several offices should be
observed, these distinct Acts of Devotion should be performed in the Christian
Church: and to show the necessity of it, the Apostle exhorts Timothy to take
care of it, first of all.

3. It is as clear, that the whole Church of Christ has conceived and taken
for granted in all Ages, that the Apostle in this place did intend to fix a
certain Rule of Devotion, and did order a Platform and Model to be observed in
all public Services, and especially at the Celebration of the holy Communion.
Indeed the words of S. Paul do not force us to believe, that he required
Prayers to be composed, and digested into a certain Form (although that
expression, (...), may bear that sense:) but yet the Judgment of the Church
was, that the Apostle did design and intend to have a standing Rule and Model
of Devotion set up. S. Chrysostom puts the Question, what does the Apostle
mean, when he says, I exhort, that first of all supplications, prayers, etc.
(...), says that excellent and Ancient Father; S. Paul means that this must
be done in our daily services: and this (says he) we do daily both at Morning
and S: Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 2. 1.
Evening Service, such Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and
Thanksgivings, they had prescribed and fixed; and in using them they did
conceive, that they answered the Apostles design, and did according to his
Order, Directions, and Appointment. To the same purpose S. Ambrose upon Haec
Regula Ecclesiastica est tradita a Magistro Gintilium, qua utuntur sacerdotes
nostri, ut pro omnibus supplicent, etc. Ambros. Comment.
the place says, This is an Ecclesiastical Law, delivered by the Doctor of the
Gentiles, and observed by our Priests, to pray for all men, and particuarly for
Kings, etc. Questionless the good man conceived, that the Church was obliged by
virtue of this Apostolical precept, to use some constant Forms of Prayer for
all men in general, and especially for such as were in Authority. And though
this was done frequently in the time of Public Service (for fear they should
fall short of their duty) yet S. Austin was of opinion, that S. Paul In hujus
[Sacramenti] Sanctificatione, and distributionis preparatione, existimo
Apostolum jussisse proprie fieri (...), id est, Orationes. S. Aug. ep. 59. ad
Paulin. Sol. q. 5.
had an eye chiefly to the time when the Blessed Sacrament was celebrated, and
that then these charitable Prayers were commanded to be made, as in their
proper and fit place. And to confirm S. Austins opinion, I observe of the
Church of England, that though Prayers for all men, and for Kings, be directed
by her to be made in several places of her Liturgy, yet in the prayer, for the
whole Church before the Communion, particular mention is made of this command
of the Apostles; as if (in her judgment) S. Paul required such Prayers to be
used at that time chiefly. In a word; the manifest agreement of all Liturgies
in this particular, and the constant, uniform, and universal practice of all
Christians from the beginning all along, using certain Forms of Supplication,
Prayer, Intercession, and Thanksgiving for all men, and for Kings especially,
(and that too in the Communion-office) is a loud and clear argument to me, that
they conceived this their practice to have been according to the Apostles
order, and those their Forms to have been according to the Apostles mind. And
hence I conclude, that either the whole Catholic Church has not yet
understood St. Paul's sense, but has been clearly mistaken in his meaning (which
I hope will never be granted;) or else, that that carries much truth in it,
which Durantus Cites out of Haymo, viz. that the Blessed Apostle Durant. de
Rit. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 33.
directing his words to Timothy, did in and by him deliver unto all Bishops,
and Presbyters, and to every Church a Form, how they should celebrate the
Sacrament, and pray for all men; which Form, or Model, the whole Church does
observe. From all which, the least that we can gather, is, that certain Forms
of Divine service were allowed and approved of, even in the Apostles time.

But to speak freely, it seems very probable, that the holy Apostles did, in
their ordinary Ministrations, observe Forms of Prayer themselves,
notwithstanding those extroardinary assistances of the Spirit, which they were
blessed with. I do not say, that they Prayed by Book, as they did in following
Ages. Nor do I mean, that they tied themselves to words, as they did when the
miraculous Gifts of the holy Ghost ceased: but this I do affirm; as highly
probable, that the Apostles used a certain Form, or Method, and that the matter
and substance of their ordinary services, was for the most part the same. My
reasons are these three chiefly.

1. Because St. Paul advised Timothy (who was gifted, as well as others, 1 Timothy
4. 14.) to a fixed Rule, Model, and Form of Public Devotion: which advice, it
is not likely that he would have given unto him, had not he himself, and his
fellow Apostles, observed the same course.

2. It is observable, that there is such a mavelous Harmony and
Correspondence between all ancient Liturgies in the materia substrata, matter,
body, and substance of them, that it is not imaginable (by men that will give
their impartial Judgment) how there could be that harmony without a general
consent; or how there could be that general consent without the Apostles
directions. Some indeed have been forward to expose the Errors of the ancient
Fathers; and as forward to expose the Corruptions of the Ancient Service-books,
(and we as well as they do acknowledge those Service-books to have been tainted,
since they were first compiled;) but yet I never saw any one sufficient
Argument to prove, that the main frame of those Liturgies was not founded upon
the practice of the Apostles; nay, it is very probable, that the old Compilers
of those Liturgies took their measures from the Practice of the Apostles.

3. For, Thirdly, S. Chrysostom speaking of the Constitution of S. Chrysostom.
in Romans 8. 26. Hom. 14.
the Apostles times, tells us, that among other extroardinary Gifts of the Holy
Ghost then, there was (...), the Gift of Prayer, that this Gift was not
bestowed upon all, but upon some one (a few, in comparison:) that the persons
thus inspired did pray for all the rest (and that (...), with much compunction,
and with many groans;) and moreover, that they taught others to pray also. Now,
a man that would be nice, might make it a question, what S. Chrysostom means,
when he says, that these gifted men taught others to pray? and, whether his
sense be not this, that they dictated prayers to the Congregation, by calling
upon them to join their suffrages for such and such Mercies. If so; then here
is an account of the Original reason and use of those Allocutory Forms of
Prayer, which were so anciently and so universally received. And that de facto,
it Was so, seems to be probable from a following passage in St. Chrysostom,
where he tells us, that the manner of Deacons praying in his time, did which
resemble, and was correspondent to the way, after (...).
those inspired persons prayed in the Apostolic Age, now that was Litanywise;
and it was a very ancient and very usual way of teaching people to pray (as was
noted before out of Justine Martyr, and others;) and that it is not unlike to
the style and strain of Gods Spirit; shall be showed hereafter. In the mean
time, if there be any truth in S. Chrysostomes account of this matter, we must
couclude, that the men, who were thus enabled to Pray, did teach others, either
by propounding prayers to them, that they might give their consent to them,
saying, Lord have mercy, or some such Form: or by using the same prayers
frequently, so that by the often repetition of them they might the better be
fixed in peoples memories; or by committing those Prayers which they had
conceived, to writing, that they might be of constant use unto the whole
Church, in their ordinary services. Which way soever we pitch upon, it is very
unlikely that the Apostles, who ordered all things unto edification, would not
order the Worship of God so, that all people might go along with them in it
with their hearts, and with their tongues too. It is unlikely, that they, who
did insist so much upon order, and decency, would not be careful rather of that
which is most material. It is unlikely, that they, who would not endure any
Confusion, any Irreverence, any Vncomliness (not so much as a man's Head to be
covered) in the Service of God, would not settle the service it self, and cast
it into such a Model, that all Christians might bear a part in it. The Learned
and Judicious Dr. Hammond was clearly of opinion, View of the New Directory.
that such as had the Gift of prayer in the Apostles days, did first conceive,
and then did frequently use some special Forms of Prayer for daily and constant
wants; and that these Forms were received and kept by Apostolical men, who had
so benefited under them. And it seems reasonable to believe, that this was
the Original of those Ancient Liturgies, which go under the names of S. James,
S. Peter, S. Mark, etc. should it not be allowed, that they were the Penmen,
and Compilers of any Service-books, yet there are fair Arguments to persuade,
that these and other inspired persons did conceive, indite, and utter many
admirable Forms of Prayer, which are still in being (as to the matter and
substance of them;) and that these Forms were methodized and cast together into
several Bodies, by some Apostolical men, to be the standing Church Service.
For, the extroardinary Gift of Prayer beginning to fail, there was a necessity
for certain fixed and prescript Forms: and what better Forms could they use,
then what had been used by the Apostles themselves; and which they remembered,
and knew, and kept upon Record? And so, I conceive, the Ancient Liturgies came
to be compiled and perfected, by the pious diligence of holy and good men, who
made what Collections they could of this and that Apostles prayers, and added
others, where it was needful. For it was some considerable time, before these
Liturgies were perfectly completed; because some Doctors of the Church were
ever and anon desirous of prescribing new Forms of their own, and of adding
them to the old stock. And this was a thing so usual in those early times, that
some Councels were fain to V. Council. Milevit. Can. 12. Carthag. Can. 23. and
Zonar. in Can. 18. Concilii. Laodiceni.
interpose, and restrain men from adding Prayers of their own, at their
pleasure. The Reason of this, was founded on the Practice of the Apostles and
Apostolical persons (their Co-temporaries and Followers:) 'twas in imitation
and by example of them, that Bishops in succeeding Ages did prescribe certain
special prayers of their composing; because they had observed, that many Forms
had been conceived heretofore by S. James for the use of the Churches of
Jerusalem; and that the like had been done, not only by other Apostles for the
use of other Churches, but also by the Apostles immediate successors, who had
collected many Prayers composed by their Predecessors, and added more of their
own Conception: which gave encouragemant to others to do so too, till Liturgies
did swell so, that S. Basil and S. Chrysostom thought it convenient to abridge
them. All this framing, composing, and prescribing of Forms of Prayer, was
originally occasioned by Apostolical practice. And for what the Holy Apostles
did in this matter, there are such precedents, as are beyond all manner of
exception. For so did David and other inspired persons of old, conceive,
prescribe, and deliver Forms of Service unto the Church under the Law. So did
S. John the Baptist in Christ's time, teach his Disciples to pray, by giving
them a Form. Nay, so did Christ himself teach the very Apostles to pray, by
delivering to them a most perfect Form of his own conception. And then, that
the Apostles themselves (who were acted by the same Spirit) should likewise
conceive, and give unto Christians Forms also, I think no wise man will wonder;
and that they used not the Lords prayer themselves in all their Services, I
think none but a mad man will have the confidence to assert.

All which things being duly considered, I will take upon me to affirm, that
as Set Forms of Divine Service were used by the Jews before and in the
lifetime of our Savior, and by all Christians after the Age of the Apostles;
so in that intermediate juncture of time, between the Ascension of our Savior,
and the settling of Christianity, set Forms of divine service were for certain
allowed, and in all probability practiced, used, and transmitted unto the
Church, by the Apostles, themselves, and their Fellow Laborers, whose names
were written in the Book of life. And so the first thing is dispatched, which I
undertook to make out, touching the Ancient use of Set Forms of Divine Service
in General. Thus far, to be sure, we tread in the old ways, in that we worship
the God of our Father, as our old Fathers did, by a set and prescript Form.

2. Next I proceed to speak of this form in particular; I mean our English
Liturgy, about which there have been longer contentions, then were once between
the Angel and the Devil, disputing about the Body of Moses. I shall not insist
either upon Jude 9.
the Order, or the Expressions contained in our Service Book; because all
Churches of old have taken the liberty of varying somewhat in these respects,
though the main Body of their Liturgies was in a manner the same. But my intent
is to take notice of the substance of our Service Book, and to observe what an
Eye our Learned and pious Reformers had to the Ancient Model, when they
compiled this, and to show how agreeable our standing and ordinary offices are
to those of Old, in their general Frame and Contexture. The incomparably
Learned and Moderate Grotius, though he was a Foreigner, Grot. Ep. ad Gedeon. a
^oet.
yet did us the right to affirm as a thing that was clear and certain, that the
Liturgy of the Church of England was sufficiently correspondent to the usages
of the Ancient-Church. And if knowing men would but take the pains to consider
and compare the particulars, they would find that our Liturgy is not only
agreeable to the oldest and Best, but moreover that it is the most pure and
most perfect Liturgy that is now known to be in the whole world.

We begin, as it becomes sinners and Penitents, with an The Confession. De
Missa. lib. 1. c. 3.
humble and hearty confession of our offenses. And if the Noble Du Plessis may
be credited, so did the Jews begin their service, to which the Apostles and
their Disciples did all conform. The same was the custom of Christians in
following times. So the Author de Autoritate and ordine Officii Muzarabici
tells us of the Christians in Spain, who were mingled with the Arabs, that they
began their Service with a General Confession. And so we find in the Rubric at
the beginning of the service on the Feast of St. De Aut. Et Ord. Off. Muzar. c.
37.
James, facia prius confessione, uti fit in Missis Latinis, juxta usum
Toletanum antiquum, dicitur Introitus; Confession being first made, as in the
Latin services it is usually done, according to the Ancient use of Toledo, the
Introit is said. In like manner Cassander tells Cassand. Liturgic. Cap. 1. 2.
us of the Armenians, that their Priest having put on his habits said the
Confession before the Altar with bended knees, and his head bowed down,
according to the custom of the Latins. In both these Testimonis mention is
made of the custom of the Latin Churches; that the Confession of the Spanish
course was according to the way of the Latins; and that the Confession in the
Armenian course was according to the custom of the Latins: so that in the
Latin Churches, as well as in these, Service was begun (as with us) with a
general confession. Now as for the Greek Church, St. Basil tells us, that
Basil. ep. 63. ad Cler. Neocaesar.
in his time they did rise betimes, a good while before day, and went to the
house of prayer, and there with pain, and affliction, and incessant tears made
Confession unto God; and that with one mouth, and with one heart, every one
professing his Repentance with his own tongue. Indeed St. Basil says, that
when this first course was over, at break of day, they made Confession again,
using a Penitential Psalm (and so does our Church, order the one and fiftieth
Psalm to be used after Morning Prayer; and Litany, on the first day of Lent,
and on other special days of See the Commination.
Fasting:) but it is clear from his words, that the first thing the Greeks did,
was to join in a solemn and devout Confession of their sins, at their public
meeting together.

In like manner, the Lords Prayer is constantly used in the The Lords Prayer.
^nirance to our Morning and Evening Service: And this is agreeable to the
Ancient practice of the Church. We meet together, says Tertullian, that we may
offer holy violence unto Tertul. Apol. c. 39.
God, besieging him by prayer (there, Prayer is intimated to have been their
first business.) But then he says elsewhere, that the Lords Prayer was
premised and used first as the foundation of their Devotion, to which they
Premissa Iegitimae and ordinaria oratione quasi fundamento, accidentium jus est
desideriornm, jus est superstruendi, etc. Tert. de Oratione.
might add, and on which they might build other occasional prayers, having used
that before. And as touching our frequent use of the Lords prayer, any man that
consults the Ancient Liturgies, may see how agreeable it is to the old way.

That short Address, O Lord, open thou our lips; together with the Response;
And our mouth shall show forth thy praise, are part of Psalm. 51. 15. And it has
been noted before, that The Versicles.
the Jews used that Form before their Prayers; and that Christians continued
the use of it, and is still to be seen in the Liturgy ascribed to S. James; and
in S. Chrysostomes.

The Doxology is a short Confession of our Faith in the The Gloria Patri.
Blessed Trinity, and an Act of Adoration and Worship, and moreover an Argument
of the holiness of our purposes; and therefore is fit to be used often, as a
signification that all our confessions, praises, prayers, etc. are intended,
and directed all of them to the Glory of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
That it was of Ancient and Universal use both in the Eastern and Western
Churches is most certain; and that it was used at the ends of Psalms before the
fourth Council of Toledo, and in Cassians time (which was above twelve hundred
years ago) is as certain. The only question is about the time, when it was
first appointed; and commonly it has been said, that the Fathers of the Nicene
Council ordered it (which yet was about the year three hundred twenty five.)
But Questionless, the use of it is much Elder. For the Arrians corrupted and
altered it, saying, Glory be to the Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost. But
had it been an Hymn newly appointed at Nice, instead of altering they would
have utterly rejected it. But the Hymn was in use long before; for we find it
in Clemens Alexandrinus (who lived about Anno 190.) And it is likely that 'twas
derived from an higher Fountain (though Clem. Alex. Poedag.
that is high enough;) and if the three hundred and eighteen Fathers at Nice
ordered a constant use of it at the end of every Psalm, and in other parts of
Liturgy, to secure Religion from the poison of the old Arrians; methinks it
should be as Religiously observed now, to secure our Faith from the poison of
Socinians, Quakers, and other Modern and Blasphemous impugners of the Doctrine
of the ever Blessed and most Glorious Trinity.

It has been likewise an old and general custom, at the opening of the
Service, and before the set repetitions of David's Psalms, to sing some Hymn,
which was called the Introit, or The Introit.
Entrance Hymn. The reason of the Appellation is given by Rhenanus in his Notes
upon Tertullian (as he is Cited by Durantus, Durant. de rit. lib. 2. cap. 11.
) because it was sung, while people were entering into the Church; and before
the Congregation was quite full. And Rhenanus says, that it was a Psalm of
David. In the book concerning the order of the Musarabe, it is said, that,
Judica me, Deus did follow the Confession (I suppose, the twenty sixth Psalm is
there meant.) But our Church uses the ninety fifth; as being a solomn
Invitation, to stir up men's Devotion, and to inflame their zeal, and to prepare
their hearts, for the due performance of the rest of the Service; and for that
reason was intended by the Psalmist, for Public Assemblies. And in this
matter, the Church of England follows the steps of Pious Antiquity. For
Cassander speaking of the order of Cassand. Liturgic. c. 7.
S. Chrysostomes Liturgy, tells us, that about the beginning of the Service,
the Readers did say (or sing) that Psalm, Entitled, Venite exultemus. And by
what we find in the Ritual of Jacobus Goar, it is evident, that this Psalm was
generally used throughout the Eastern Churches.

Consequent to this are the Psalms of David. A Book never to be used enough,
because it contains the marrow and flour of holy Scripture, and is the
Repository of Devotion. The Psalms and Lessons.
Therefore it made up a great part of the Jewish Liturgy (as it does of ours;)
and all Christians in all Ages have had this admirable Exercise in such esteem,
that the Service of God was never performed without it. St. Paul, and S. James,
mention it as an excellent piece of Divine Service in their times, and by all
Records of Antiquity in following Ages we find, that Christians were
wonderfully zealous in this point; that they were wont for the most part to
sing them; that they spent much time in this Divine and Heavenly exercise; and
that they Sang, not some ends and shreds, but whole Psalms, and a great portion
of the Psalter at a time; insomuch that Lucian, that old Scoffer at Christ and
Christianity, jeered the Church for spending a great part of the night in
singing (...).
of Hymns (or Psalms.) For St. Basil tells us, that they did rise to it very
early, and very long before day; and having made solemn Confession of their
sins, they did rise from prayer, and fall (as we do, especially in Cathedral
and Collegiate Luc. in Philop. Basil. ep. 63. Precibus subinde intersertis
noctem superant. Id. ibid. Laod. Council. Can. 17.
Churches) to the singing of Psalms, and so spent the remaining part of the
night. The truth is, so intent and earnest they were upon this matter, that to
make it the less tiresome they did insert Prayers between whiles; yea, and read
some Chapters and Lessons out of the Scriptures; and then fall to singing
again. So it was appointed by the Laodicean Council, that between the Psalms
there should be Lessons read; for which Balsamon and Aristenus, give this
Constit. lib. 2. Cap. 57.
reason, least people should be tired with continued Singings. And before that
Council we find it prescribed in the Apostles Constitutions, that two Lessons
should be read out of the old Testament, and then that they should sing again;
and then other portions of Scripture out of the New Testament likewise. And
correspondent to this, is the usage of the Church of England, interlacing Hymns
(and chiefly, some Psalms* of David, between Lesson and Lesson.

Of which Hymns, the Te Deum, is the first; which is certainly The Hymns.
as old as St. Ambrose, and some have confidently told us, that as soon as, that
great Luminary of the Church, S. Austin, had been baptized by S. Ambrose, both
of them did in a Divine Rapture; break forth into this Form of Praise. The
truth of the story must depend upon the Credit of its Authors: But this is
plain, that ever since, it has been used by the whole Universal Church; and
when I consider its admirable strain, and other excellencies, I am apt to
think, that the Spirit of God moved upon the face of those Waters, where it was
conceived.

The Song of the three Children (commonly called, the Benedicite) is but a
larger Edition of the one hundred forty eigth Psalm; and was framed in
imitation of the style of Psalm 136. And that it was used above a thousand
years ago by the whole Catholic Church all over the World, we have the Can. 13.
whole Council of Toledo to bear us witness: besides other single Testimonies
of the use of it in the first Ages of Christianity.

The rest of our Hymns are all of Divine composure, and as old as our Saviors
time: And why they may not be Sung (being parts of Scripture) as well as other
Psalms and Hymns, passes my skill to know. For if they, whom S. Apol. 15. 3.
John saw in Heaven, did sing the Song of Moses; what hinders but we on Earth
may sing the Song of the Holy Virgin, or the Song of Zachany, or the Song of
Simeon? Certainly we cannot follow a better Pattern, than what was showed on
the Mount.

Our Service concludes, as it did of old both in the Jewish, and Christian
Church, with several Prayers. And though The Prayers.
these Prayers are not to be found in any Ancient Liturgies, in so many express
words (except that excellent Prayer of S. Chrysostom) yet the substance and
matter of them is to be found in all. For nothing is more consonant to the
Ancient Spirit and Genius of Christianity, or more agreeable to the Practice of
all Churches in all Ages, then to pray (sometimes in short Collects, and
sometime in shorter versicles) for Grace, for Peace, for the Divine protection,
for Plenty, for seasonable weather, for wholesome air, for deliverance from
Plagues, and Enemies, for the King, for the Clergy, and their respective
Flocks, for Magistrates, for the whole Church, and indeed for all men. And of
this nature and strain are those ordinary and occasional prayers, with which
our daily Service is wont to end.

Great exceptions have been taken, by some, at our Litany: and yet it is as
charitable, and as Christian a piece of Devotion, The Litany.
as ever could be framed by humane Pen, if people will but bring with them
hearts that are as good, as the matter before them is excellent: Here is Fire
and Wood enough, if the Lamb be not wanting for the Sacrifice. Our Litany
consists of two main parts. The one is offered up by the Minister going
before in supplications, prayers, and intercessions (exactly according to S.
Paul's Rule, 1 Timothy 2.) The other part is offered up by the people following
after in their joint suffrages and with such earnest and importunate cries, as
pierce the highest Heaven. Now, this way of expressing our Devotions, by turns
(the Minister in his turn, and the Congregation in theirs) is not only an
admirable way to kindle and inflame each others zeal; but moreover, it is a way
and method suitable to the way and method of Gods Spirit, and used many
hundreds of years (or, Ages) before the date of Christianity.

1. For the Ministers going before the people, both by his example, and by
calling upon them to join with him. We find, it was the continual practice of
David, not only to make Addresses himself unto God; but also to invite, and
call upon others to do so likewise. O come, let us sing unto the Lord; let us
magnify his name together; praise the Lord, ye house of Israel: praise the
Lord, ye house of Aaron: praise the Lord, ye house of Levi: ye that fear the
Lord, praise the Lord: and in Psalm. 107. O give thanks unto the Lord; O that
men would praise the Lord; which form is repeated again no less than three
times in the same Psalm, as an admonition to keep up the Devotion of People.
And are not those Ancient Litany-forms used by the Deacons, (Let us pray, let
us beseech the Lord, let us pray earnestly, are they not) exactly answerable to
these Forms of Allocution used by this inspired and holy man? If the Spirit
thought fit to have such Forms used in praising God; it is not unsuitable to
the usual strain of that Spirit, to use the like Forms in praying unto God too.

2. As touching the peoples following the Minister by their suffrages, it is a
method no more unbecoming Gods Spirit, then the other; and nothing has been
more customary, than for the people to have their turns, and to bear a part in
Gods Worship. After that remarkable victory over Pharaoh and his forces, the
whole body of the Jews stood upon the shore of the Red Sea, to bless God for
their deliverance: and we find, Exodus 15. that Moses the Prophet and the men of
Israel divided themselves into one body, and Miriam the Prophetess with the
women of Israel divided themselves into another body; and as Moses and the men
Sang his Triumphant Hymn, so Miriam and the women answered them, saying, Sing
ye to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; the Horse and his Rider has
he thrown into the Sea. This Form of Praise they repeated (in all probability)
after every verse of Moses Song: for we read of nothing else that they
answered, but only, Sing ye to the Lord, etc. And if they had a Form of praise,
which they repeated after every verse as the ground, and foot, and burden of
the Hymn; is it unsuitable, if we have a Form of prayer for the people to
repeat after every Petition, as the ground, foot, and burden of the Litany? If
they were directed by the Spirit of God, when Moses went before them in a Song,
to answer, Sing ye unto the Lord, (when they were delivered) then it is also
agreeable to the style of the same Spirit, when the Minister goes before us in
our prayer, for us to answer, Good Lord deliver us. Further, it is to be
considered, that the 136th. Psalm seems to have been composed by the Prophet
on purpose, that the end of each Verse might be repeated throughout by the
whole Congregation; O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious; and his
mercy endures for ever, for his mercy endures for ever, for his mercy
endures for ever: this is the burden of the Psalm from the beginning to the
close of it. And we may easily collect from 2 Chronicles. 5. 13. that at the
Dedication of Solomon's Temple this Psalm was repeated thus by turns, one of the
Priests saying before, the former part of each Verse, and then all the Singers
following after with one voice, and saying (all along) for he is good, for his
mercy endures for ever. And since they were directed by Gods Spirit to subjoyn
throughout their prayers, for his mercy, for his mercy, for his mercy endures
for ever; it cannot be thought unbecoming Gods Spirit, if we are directed to
subjoyn in our Prayers, Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy upon
us. And so, I hope, the Form and Contexture of our Litany, will seem to every
indifferent person, to be free from all charge of vanity and superstition.

2. It is free also from all just charge of Vncouthness and Innovation. Many
indeed judge of things by Modern usage and practice; and because they have been
accustomed to long continued effusions, they look upon our Litany as an odd,
and a new device, for which we were beholding to the Roman Missal. But it is
clear to every knowing man, that it was a very Ancient and a very usual way
among Christians, to pray Litany-wise. It was so Ancient a way, that for ought
any man knows to the contrary, it was used in the most early times of
Christianity. For in the oldest Rituals which are in being, there are many such
Forms of Prayer; and some Ancient Service-books do consist of such for the most
part. It Is true indeed, they were not called Litanies at the first, but (...),
Diaconick Prayers, because they were wont to be Ministered by the Deacon; and
(...), Pacifick Prayers, because the purport, and scope of them, was for peace
in the World and among all mankind. It Is true also, that in after times (above
300 years after Christ) these Forms of Prayer came to be used at solemn and
public processions, when times were calamitous and full of peril, and the
destroying Angel was abroad; and then several additional Prayers were inserted
(proper and suitable to the occasion) the people still crying with a loud
voice, that God would deliver them from such and such evils. And then they were
called Litanies, and Rogations. Hence it is, that Mamertus and others are said
to have framed Litanies, because they enlarged them, and used them in manner
aforesaid. And hence it is, that S. Basil told the Clergy of Neocaesaria, that
there were no Litanies in Gregory's days; because that name, and that use of
them was not then known. But yet it is as true, that such Forms of supplication
and earnest Prayer were very anciently in use, and before the times either of
Basil or Gregory: and S. Chrysostom in his Homily upon Romans 8. deriveth the
Original of them from the Apostles times. And truly, the general use of them
does argue, that this way of praying cannot well be derived from any other
Fountain: for it was an Universal, as well as Ancient way. Look into that old
Liturgy used by the Christians in India, and you shall find large Litanies
(that is, Prayers Litany-wise, call them what you will.) Look into the
Ethiopian Liturgy (called, the Universal Canon) and you shall find Litanies.
Look into the Mosarabe, or Spanish Course,) and you shall find Litanies. Look
into the Ambrosian office, and you shall find Litanies. Look into the Jerusalem
Liturgy, and you shall find Litanies. Look into S. Chrysostomes, and S. Basils
Liturgies; and those other offices collected by Goar, and you shall still find
Litanies. And look into that most Ancient Service Book, Eucholog.
called the Constitutions of the Apostles, and you shall find Litanies
frequently used, at ordinations, and in their daily Service and Prayers for the
Catechumeni, for penitents, for persons vexed with evil Spirits, for such as
were Baptized, and afterward at the Lords Table too, for the whole Catholic
Church and its Members, before the Holy Communion. Can any thing speak louder
for the Ancient and Universal use of Litanies? And whence should this come, but
from Apostolical practice? For the Primitive Christians were not easy to be
imposed upon, or to be persuaded out of their old, beaten way: Witness, (for
all) the Condemnation of Petrus Gnapheus and his V. Can. 81. Council. sixti in
Trullo: una cum Balsam. and Blast.
followers, for adding only a little Formula, to that received and usual Hymn,
holy God, holy and strong, holy and immortal, have mercy upon us. To this they
subjoyned another clause, thou that wast Crucified for us, have mercy on us,
and the sixth Council in Trullo condemned the Author of it for a wicked and
vile Heretic, and Anathematized all that should use that Form for the future:
for their fear was, lest by that Additament it should be intimated, that our
Savior was a fourth person, distinct from the three persons in the holy
Trinity. The Fathers of Old were wise, and wary, and fearful of Innovations in
the public Service. And then, how the general use of Litanies could be brought
into the Church, but by such practice, as they took to be a safe and authentic
Precedent, I cannot well understand, or imagine.

3. The Antiquity of our Litany being thus cleared, as to its Form and
Contexture; next I am to show its Antiquity, as to its matter and substance
likewise. Now this will easily appear by observing the strain of the Ancient
Litanies; which though I have already represented in part, yet for the further
information of the Vulgar sort, I shall add, that they began and ended (as our
Litany does) with, Lord have mercy. They prayed (and that many times by the
Mercies and Compassions; as Lit. S. Basil. Lit. S. Chrysostom.
we do by the Sufferings, Cross, Passion, etc. of our Savior) that God would
deliver them, from the snares of the Devil -- from the assaults of enemies --
from the unclean Spirit of Fornication -- Can. Universe*
from famine, pestilence, earthquakes, inundations, fire, sword, invasion, and
civil Wars -- from all affliction, wrath, danger, and Lit. Basil.
distress -- from all sin and wickedness -- from an untimely end -- Orat.
Lucern.
and sudden death. They prayed, that God would keep them Lit. S. Chrysostom.
every day in peace, and without sin -- that he would grant them remission of
their sins, and pardon their transgressions -- that he Off. Muzar. and
Eucholog. Lit. S. Chrysostom.
would give them things that were good and beneficial to their souls -- that
they might lead the residue of their lives in peace and repentance -- that they
might persevere in the Faith to the end -- and that the end of their lives
might be Christian, and peaceable, Lit. S. Jac.
without torment, and without shame. They prayed for the peace, Lit. S. Chrysostom.
and tranquillity of the World, and of all Churches -- for the holy Catholic
Church from one end of the earth to the other -- for Lit. omnes.
Kings -- for Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons -- for Virgins, Orphans, Off.
Ambros. Missa Christ. apud. Indos. Clem. Cons^.
and Widows -- for such as were in bonds, and imprisonment -- for such as were
in want, necessity, and affliction -- for married persons and women laboring
of child -- for such as were sick, and weak, and in their last Agony -- for
banished people and slaves -- for their enemies and persecuters -- for persons
at Sea and travelers by Land -- for them that were without, and such as erred
from the Right way -- for Infants and young Children -- and for every Christian
soul: And to every of these particular supplications, the Congregation did
answer, sometimes, Lord Constable. lib. 8. Lit. S. Chrysostom.
have mercy; sometimes, Grant it us, O Lord; and sometimes, we beseech thee, O
Lord, hear us. This was the constant, general and most charitable way of
praying in the first and purest Ages of Christianity; and the way which the
Church of England had a careful eye unto, at the digestion of our Litany into
its Form and Model; and whosoever will but compare the most Ancient Litanies
with ours, will find, that this of ours is not only answerable to the best, and
of the same strain and Spirit with the best; but moreover that it contains the
very marrow and quintessence of them all. And so much touching the Antiquity of
our Litany.

Proceed we now to the Office at the holy Communion; which anciently was never
Celebrated without premising the Lords Prayer: for which reason it is used with
us at the beginning of that Service.

After all the people were dismissed save only those who intended to
Communicate, the Primitive Christians presented Offertory.
their Offerings; which by the Minister were reverently laid upon the Lords
Table. These offerings were so large and liberal that they served to maintain
the whole Body of the Clergy, and were a good provision for Orphans and Widows,
for sick persons, and such as were in bonds, for strangers, and for all that
were in want. This custom of making Offerings before the Sacrament is so
Ancient, that nothing can be more. We find it in all Liturgies, Justin M.
Apolog. 2.
and other Ancient Records, as in Origin, Tertullian, Irenaeus, Justin Martyr,
Ignatius, and other the most Primitive Writers, so that without all
peradventure this custom is founded upon Apostolical Institution: and exactly
agreeable to this most Ancient and Christian custom, is that Offertory,
appointed in our English Service Book.

Next follows the Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church Militant here
in earth; which is highly consonant to the practice The Prayer for the
Catholic Church.
of the Universal Church in all Ages, in respect both of its order and matter.
For, first, before the reception of the Sacrament, a Prayer of this Nature was
ever offered, and that (says S. Ambros.) according to the Rule delivered by S.
Paul. In some places I Comment on 1 Timothy 2.
find that this Prayer was used, once before the Consecration of the Elements,
the Deacon inditing it, and the people answering Litanywise, Lord have mercy:
and after Consecration it was repeated Clem. Constable. lib. 8. S. Cyril. Catech.
5. Justin Mart. Apol. 2. Ambros. de Sac. lib. 4. c. 4.
again by him that Ministered in chief, the people answering only, Amen. But
never was the Sacrament administered without supplications in the first place
for the people, for Kings, and for the rest, as St. Ambrose speaks. And to the
same purpose St. Cyril tells us, that the Spiritual Sacrifice being prepared,
they went solemnly to prayer, for the common peace of the Churches, for the
tranquillity of the World, for Kings, for their Armies and Allies, for Cyril.
Catech. 5.
sick and afflicted people, and for all that stood in need of help. And of the
truth of this, all Liturgies extant are an abundant proof. 2. Then as touching
the particular matter of this excellent and Catholic Prayer, it is observable.

1. That our Church calls the things laid upon the Lords Table, not only
Alms, but Oblations, and so did the Ancients call Clem. ep. ad Cor. p. 52.
them; even S. Clement himself, S. Paul's fellow laborer. For the old
Christians conceived themselves obliged to make Offerings of Praise and
Thanksgiving under the Gospel, as well as Abel did before the Law, and the Jews
did under the Law. The Species of Sacrifice was changed indeed (for they
offered not Bullocks and Goats,) but they did not think that all kinds of
Offerings were abolisht: but that they were bound to present Eucharistical
Oblations unto God, that they might be found thankful unto the Maker of the
Universe, as Irenaeus speaks. So that in lieu of bloody Sacrifices, they
presented Bread and Wine, Iren. lib. 4. c. 34. V. Mede's Christian Sacrifice.
and the first fruits of their increase, besides sums of money. And these were
called Oblations; gifts, whereby they acknowledged Gods right and propriety
unto all their Possessions, that the Earth is the Lords and the fullness
thereof: not as if he needed these gifts, but as humble Thanksgivings unto his
Offerimus, non quasi indigenti, sed gratias agentes dominationi ejus. Iren. ut
supra.
Sovereignty. And so they were wont to profess in those days, (...), Lord we
restore unto thee some of thine own things.

2. Our Church prays, that God would accept these our Alms and Oblations;
which is perfectly answerable to the old custom; for so the first Christians
did beseech God, that in mercy Clem. Constable. lib. 8.
he would look upon their offerings, and accept them as a sweet Odor, through
the Intercession of Christ.

3. Then our Church goes on praying for the Universal Church, for Kings,
Princes, and Magistrates, for the Clergy, and the rest. And thus did all the
Churches of old pray, for the holy Catholic Church, (...), from end to end,
for Kings Id. ibid.
and all in Authority, that they may be at peace with us, and that we living in
all quietness and concord, may glorify thee all our days through Jesus Christ:
for all holy Bishops, rightly dividing the word of truth; for all Presbyters
and Deacons; for all thy people, and all that are in want and distress, etc.

4. Last of all, it is customary with us at the end of this Prayer to make
mention of the Saints departed: and so 'twas ever customary with all the
Churches of old; to bless God for their Faith, Perseverance, and Martyrdomes;
(...). Clem. Constable. lib. 8.
beseeching, that they might be made partakers of their conflicts, and with
them might have their perfect Consummation and bliss. This was the first design
of these memorials of the dead; In fide morientium devote memoriam agimus, tam
illorum refrigerio gaudentes, quam etiam nobis piam consummationem in fide
postulantes. Origin. lib. 3. in Job. p. 274. Ed. Par. See Bishop Vshers Ans. to
the Challenge.
which latter Ages corrupted, adding Prayers for the release of souls out of a
pretended Purgatory. But this conceit and practice was never known in the
Ancient and best times: And therefore our honest Church resolving to bring
things to their first stay, threw out of her Prayers this dross, and litter,
and filthy stuff, retaining that which was pure and Primitive.

Among those things which have been corrupted in the old Liturgies (as we now
have them) there are some things which have passed all along untouched. As that
salutation of the Minister, the Dominus Vobiscum.
Lord be with you; and the peoples Answer, and with thy Spirit: it is every
where to be found, in the ancientest Monuments. And so that other, sursum
corda, lift up your hearts, with the return, we lift them up unto the Lord; we
find it in S. Cyprian, and S. Cyril, and in every Liturgy. As also the
following exhortation, let Cypr. de Orat. Dom.
us give thanks unto our Lord God, and the subsequent acknowledgement, it is
meet and right so to do, the Minister going on Sursum Corda, etc.
(...). It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, etc. these Forms are
still entire in all Service-books, that they may rationally be concluded to
have sprang from Apostolical practice.

And so, the (...). Therefore with Angels, and Archangels, and all the company
of Heaven, etc. together with the Trisagium following (which was jointly
repeated by the whole Congregation) Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Host, etc.
they are Forms which were very anciently and universally V. Lit. Jacob. Marc.
Petri. Aethiop. Mosar. Christian. apud. Ind. Clem. Constit. cum multis aliis.
used at this time, but somewhat more largely, and with a little inconsiderable
difference; for thus they said of old, before thee do stand, praising and
worshipping thee numberless Hosts of Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, and Powers; the Cherubim, and the sixwinged Scraphim, with two
wings covering their feet, and with two wings covering their faces, and with
two wings flying, and crying continually and incessantly, with thousands and
thousands of Archangels, and with myriads and myriads of Angels, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of Sabbath, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory: Blessed be
thou unto all Ages, world without End, Amen.

In like manner the Prayer of Consecration (which comes next) is very
agreeablee to that Form, which was of most ancient usage: The Prayer of
Consecration.
only it is shorter than that old, affectionate and devout Prayer, wherein they
commemorated the wonderful love of God and Christ to an undone world, and made
mention of his Humility, Incarnation, Birth, Life, Miracles, Passion, Death and
Burial; then thanked God for the Redemption of the World by these methods of
Love and Wisdom; then proceeded to the History of this Sacraments Institution,
using the same words as we do, who in the same night that he was betrayed took
Bread, etc. and likewise the Cup, saying, etc. and at last prayed unto the
Father of Lights, that he would look favorably upon the Elements, and send his
holy Spirit to Constable. lib. 8.
sanctify them, so that whosoever did partake thereof might be confirmed in
Religion, and receive remission of sins, and be filled with the holy Ghost.

These things done, and all having received, they proceeded Post Communion.
(even as we do) to a Prayer of Thanksgiving: which (as we find it in the Book
of Constitutions) did so resemble (for the most part of it) that second Prayer
after the Communion, prescribed in our Liturgy, as if it were none other than a
Copy and Translation of it.

After that, they used that Angelical Hymn, Glory to God on High, etc.
concerning which I cannot but observe the Conjecture of the Learned, Dr.
Hammond, that it is that (...), The Hymn. View of the Direct. in Philopat.
which Lucian the Heathen Scoffer pointed to, when (speaking in the person of
Triephon, who represents the Christian) he says, let those words alone,
beginning your prayer, (...) from the Father, and adding in the end, (...) that
famous Ode or Hymn (full of Synonymous and repeated words.) The Doctor
concieves, that by the former is intended the Pater Noster, with which both now
and anciently the Communion-Service was begun; and that by the latter is meant
that Hymn of ours, Glory be to God on high -- we praise thee -- we bless thee
-- with which that Service ends (having nothing but the Benediction after it)
which being so powerful and importunate repetition of O Lord God, Heavenly
King, and O Lord God, Lamb of God, etc. is most properly called (...), in the
notion that it was used in among the Heathen Writers. Now, if this opinion of
Dr. Hammonds be right, we have a most pregnant account of the Antiquity of this
Hymn; because Lucian lived about S. John the Evangelists time: but however we
find it in Clements Constitutions.

I have insisted the longer, and the more particularly upon the Antiquity of
our Service Book, to satisfy the World, that it was not taken out of the Roman
mint, neither is a late invention without good Authority and Precedent; but
that it has the practice of the Old Apostolical Churches and times to warrant
and patronize it, however it is new slighted and hated by a sort of people
among us, who either cannot, or will not distinguish between an invaluable
Jewel, and the dry, harsh husk of a sorry Barley-corn. I shall conclude this
whole matter with that known story of Archbishop Cranmer in the reign of Queen
Mary; how he offered the Queen, if he might be permitted to take unto him Peter
Martyr, and four or five more, to prove that the Communion-office set Foxes's
Martyrol. Anno 1554, in his purgation.
out by King Edward the sixth, was conformable to that which Christ commanded,
and which the Apostles and Primitive Church used many years: And that the whole
Order of Divine Service, then used by the Church of England, was the same
(meaning, in effect and substance) that had been used in the Catholic Church
for fifteen hundred years past. By what has been said hitherto, it does appear,
that the Zealous Prelate spoke not without good Reason: But the Challenge would
not be accepted, because the Learned sorts of Papists knew, that the thing
could be made out. And though some ignorant, and some malicious men among our
selves, have been pleased to say, that our Liturgy was taken out of the
Mass Book, yet the most judicious and most unprejudiced Protestants have looked
upon it to be (as in Truth it is) a most strong Bullwark and Fence against
Popery. And indeed, the Papists themselves know it to be so; and therefore,
upon the restoring of Popery in Queen Mary's time, they did with all haste and
fury throw our Excellent Liturgy, and the wise Compilers of it into the Fire:
and surely, none but Mad men and Fools would have served their friends so.

The Antiquity of our Rites, Customs and Vsages comes to be confidered in the
next place. And truly, there are some Ecclesiastical Observations, which we
meet with in the most Ancient Writers of the Greek and Latin Churches, of
whose Birth and Original, I believe the Learned men in Christendom cannot
show us the particular time, by the help of their best readings: nor can they
who dislike them, show us, when they came first into the Church.

1. The first is the use of the Cross, especially at the time of Baptism. Of
the Cross.
Mercerus Vticensis in his additions to the Hieroglyphics of Orus Apollo,
tells us, that the Cross, among the old Egyptians was an Emblem of the Life to
come. What their reason was, I Eccl. Hist. lib. 11. c. 29.
am not to enquire: But Ruffinus relates the same thing; and moreover tells us,
that the Egyptians (and especially their Priests who understood their
Mysteries best) the more willingly embraced the Christian Religion, for the
Cross sake, calling to mind its ancient signification. The Ancient Christians,
though they Min. Fell.
never worshipped the Cross, yet they used the sign of it, as an outward badge
of their Profession; and all that were received into the Church, received this
sign upon their foreheads, in token that they were not ashamed of a Crucified
Savior. It Is recorded of the Gnostics those first Heretics, who denied the
reality of Christ's Incarnation and Passion) that they branded their Proselytes
with an hot Iron in the upper part of their right ear: Iren. lib. 1.
and some conjecture, that S. Paul restected upon that custom of theirs, where
he says, that they had Consciences seared with an hot Iron (meaning) as well
as their ears.) But in all probability, this custom was taken up in opposition
to the true Christians, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
who were marked with the sign of the Cross* upon their foreheads. S. Basil, I
am sure, reckons it in the first place, among S. Basil. de Spiritu Sanctu. c.
27.
the Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which were derived by Tradition from the
holy Apostles: and indeed the use of the Cross was so ancient and so universal
over all the Christian World, that unless we fix the Original of it in the
Apostles time, we shall never tell in what Age it began.

2. The Second is, the worshipping of God with the face toward the East; which
the Centuriators themselves Antiquus and hic mos est, ora^^ facie* conversa ad
Orientem. Cent. 2. c. 6. Origin. Hom. 9. in Lev. and in lib. 1. Job. p. 233.
Hom. 5. in Number.
confess to have been a very ancient custom; for it was a Primitive and
Catholic observation in the very dawning of Christianity. Several of the
Fathers have given several different Reasons of this Rite. But Origin (tho in
some places he seems to render some account of it, yet elsewhere he) reckons
it amongst those ancient Customs, of which no clear Reason was commonly given.
However, as to matter of Fact, the Custom is acknowledged to to have been
general in the first Ages; and both Origin and Ibid. Basil. de Spir. Sancto,
c., 23. Respons. 118.
Basil, and the Author of the Questions and Answers ad Orthodoxos, do all fetch
this Practice of the Church from the directions of the Apostles. Briefly, 'twas
such an ancient and universal usage, that the old Heathens fancied the
Christians to have taken up the Persian Religion, and to have worshipped the
Sun. The occasion of this suspicion is (says Tertullian) because it is known
that we pray toward the East (just such another fancy and groundless suspicion
Inde suspitio, quod innotuerit nos ad Orientis regionem precari, Tertul, Apol.
c. 16. Lent.
as some have taken up of Us now, that we worship the Lords Table, because we
worship toward the East part of the Church, where the Table stands.)

3. A third Custom we have (but very ruinous, and of which there are now but
few and scattering Monuments, but what we find in our Liturgy and in the
Ancients) and it is the Fast of Lent. And it is a sign that Christianity is become
decrepite, that Men are so peevish and touchy, as to quarrel with one of the
most excellent Observations, that was ever recommended to the Church. I know it
has been the Subject of many great Disputes: But it is a great marvel, that, if
it were an Innovation, (and much rather, if it were a piece of Superstition) no
learned Man should yet have the luck to light upon its Author, or the Time when
it did commence (for, that 'twas instituted by Telesphorus, is an idle dream.)
It seems unquestionably true, that a solemn Fast before Easter was
religiously observed by all Christians from the very beginning. For we do not
only meet with such a Fast in the Writers of the third and fourth Century; but
even Origin tells us, that in his time, They had the days of Lent set a part
for Fastings. And Tertullian (then a Montanist, and disputing against the
Habemus Quadragesimae dies jejuniis consecratos. Hom. 10. in Levitic. Illos
dies jejuniis determinatos putant, in quibus ablatus est Sponsus, etc. Tertul.
adv. Psychic.
Church upon the point of Fasting) tells us, that his Adversaires (the
Catholics) did conceive, That those days whereon the Bridegroom was taken
away (meaning Friday and Saturday before Easter) were determined or ordered to
be fasting days; and that the Apostles themselves observed those days, and
laid the same yoke upon all others; and tho (says he) you look upon these as
the only appointed days, whereon you are bound to fast, Convenio vos and
praeter Pascha jejunantes, citra illos dies quibus ablatus est Sponsus.
yet here I meet with you and urge against you, that ye Fast on other days too
besides (or as it should be rendered, before) the Fast on Good Friday. He So the
word citra is rendered by Dr. Beveredge, Cod. Can. Vindic. c. 3. lib. 6.
does not tell us how many days they did observe, besides the two last days
of Lent; because in those Times Christians did not all observe an equal number.
And so Irenaeus in his Letter to Victor, concerning that Controversy about
Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 24. Hist. Eccl.
keeping of Easter (which was even in Polycarps days, St. John's Scholar)
tells him, that the dispute was not only about Easter Day, but moreover about
the Fast before it; for some thought themselves obliged to fast one day only
(viz. on Friday) others again did it two days (viz. on Saturday also) others
kept more days. Thus far we are sure, and by these last words of Irenaeus I
conceive, that some Christians kept ten days in Lent, because Lucian scoffs at
them for their Ten-dayes Fast; which might give occasion to Montanus to
prescribe the like number, (...). Lucian. in Philopat.
tho the Catholics opposed him, because what was only customary, and
Arbitrarious before, he would have turned into a Law, and made necessary,
thereby ensnaring Men's Consciences. But it is observable, what Irenaeus tells us
yet further; that as some kept more than one or two days of this Paschal Fast;
so others kept forty (for so Ruffinus, and others do understand him) and that
this variety of observance was long before his Time, and that it was occasioned
by the negligence, or the unskilfulness of some, who declined from the old Way,
when 'twas delivered first. Now Irenaeus was Polycarps familiar acquaintaince,
and lived in the Age next to the Apostles. So that when he says, that this
variety in keeping Lent was long before his Time, we must conclude, that kept
it was a long time before, and that he must needs point to the Times
Apostolical; and that he intimates moreover, that the regular way of keeping it
was, to observe forty days, as that which came nearest to the Apostolic
Tradition. But this is clear, that this Solemn Time was very anciently
observed, and very probably recommended by the Holy Apostles, as a very useful
Fast (with respect to Persons and Places) and so indeed St. Nos unam
quadragesimam secundum Traditionem Apostolorum, toto anno, tempore nobis
congruo jejunamus.Hieron. ep. ad Marcel. Adv. Montanum.
Jerome, and other of the Ancients did look upon it, as an Apostolic
Tradition; and considering its Antiquity and Universality we cannot well derive
it from any other Fountain. And if any man desires a full accout of this
matter, he may read the Annotations of my reverend Friend, that Learned
Antiquary, Dr. Beveredge upon the 69th. Apostolical Canon, where the
observation of Lent is required; and his Vindication of the Codex Canonum, lib.
3.

4. Another custom we have (or at least, have had, and should have still) viz.
to serve God publicly with Fastings and Can. 15.
Prayers upon the Wednesdays and Fridays of the whole year. And is there any
Ecclesiastical usage, which has been more Anciently, Constable. Apost. lib. 7. c.
22.
and more Universally observed? The Primitive Christians considering, how the
Redeemer of their Souls was on the Wednesday Wednesday and Friday,
betrayed, and on the Friday murdered, sequestered these days weekly to their
solemn Devotion, spending the time in reading of the Scriptures, with Prayers,
Tears, Almsdeeds, and Fastings from the beginning of the day till three in the
afternoon. We find continual mention made of these days, by the Greeks under
the Names of (...), the fourth day, the preparation, the day before the Sabbath
(or, Saturday.) The Latin Fathers call them generally; the Quarta and sexta
Feria, and Tertullian Tertul. de jejunio.
sometimes, stationum Semi-jejunia, the stationary half-fasts, because their
abstinence at this time was not so long, as in Lent, and on other occasional
days of humiliation, when they fasted until night. And Epiphanius tells us,
that these days were constantly observed all the world over; and that the
Original of this custom Epiphan. lib. 3. adv. Haer. Haeres. 77. adv. Aerium.
was owing to Apostolic Tradition. It is most likely, that it was so, if any
Credit in the World may be given to Antiquity. But instead of disputing and
quarrelling about that, it would be for the Interest of Religion, and for the
great good of the World, if men would buckle in good earnest to that Piety,
which is humble, grave, and serious, and not give occasion to the old fashioned
Christians to tell them, that the cross-grain Spirit of Aerius has undone all,
and to upbraid them that their Belly is their God, and a Kitchen their Church.

5. As times of Fasting, so days of Festivity and joy were very Anciently kept
by the Church; for they celebrated not only the weekly day of Christ's
Resurrection, but also the Anniversary day of Easter, and the day of the
Nativity, and of the descent of the holy Festivals. V. Eusebius. Eccl. His. l. 5.
c. 24.
Ghost; and indeed all that course of fifty days from Easter to Whitsunday. And
not those only, but moreover they honored Cur Pascha celebramus annuo circulo
in mense primo? cur quinquaginta exinde diebus in omni exultatione decurrimus?
Tert. adv. Psych. Martyrum Passiones and Dies anniversaria commemoratione
celebramus. Cyprian, ep. 34. v. Pamelii Annotat. Memorias Sanctorum facimus.
Origne. in Joh. lib. 3. Harum [sc. Innocentium] memoria semper ut dignum est in
Ecclesiis celebratur secundum integrum ordinem Sanctorum, ut primorum Martyrum.
Id. Hom. 3. in diversos, tom. 2. p. 282. Oblationes pro Natalitiis annua dii
facimus. Tertull. de Cor. Mil.
those days whereon the holy Martyrs did suffer, commemorating their Lives and
Sufferings, and offering up Thanksgivings to God for their Faith, Constancy,
and good Examples, and calling the days of their Martyrdom their Birth-days,
when they entered into Life Eternal. The Church of England, in observing this
custom, does but follow the steps of the Catholic Church of old. And in mine
opinion, men do greatly wound the Protestant Cause, when they call this, and
other ancient Customs, by the names of Popery and Superstition: For they do the
Church of Rome too much honor in calling things which are ancient and
Catholic, Popery. We know that Popery is of a late and a base Extraction; and
this has abundantly been proved by Church of England-men. And how do the
Dissenters contradict us, and justify the Romanists, when they say, that this
and that Observation (whatever is laudable, ancient, and of Catholic usage) is
Popery! Herein they befriend the Pope, and give Arguments and Encouragements to
the Papists, more than perhaps they are aware of.

6. We are required, in the time of Sacred Ministrations, to be clothed with a
white Vesture. This, forsooth, gives much Surplice.
offense, and is a great eyesore to some now: And yet for many hundreds of
years before, it was not offensive, when men had very good eyes, and
Consciences too that were very tender, but not galled. The old Fathers startled
at the very name of Perjury, Rebellion, and Dishonesty: but they were not
frighted at the sight of a Surplice; but looked upon it as a decent Habit, and
fit to be used in Ministerial Offices, because it did resemble those Robes
wherein the Angels, those Ministering Spirits, were wont to appear. This is
clear, that the custom of wearing a white Garment in time of Divine-Service
(and S. Hieron. Com. in Ezekiel. 44. and lib. 1. adv. Pelag. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 60. ad
pop. Antioch. Clem. Constable. lib. 8.
especially at the Administration of the Sacrament) is as old as St. Hierom in
the Latin Churches, and as St. Chrysostom in the Greek; (and that is 1300 years
ago, and in the most flourishing times of the Church.) It may be much older,
for ought we know to the contrary: however, I am sure that there is more to be
said for its Antiquity, than can with reason be pleaded against its Use.

7. Our standing up at the reading of the Holy Gospel, is an act Standing at
the Gospel.
Expressive of our great Reverence unto it, and Significative of our Readiness
to observe and obey it. And questionless this Custom was originally derived
from the Jews, as many other Christian Customs were: for at the reading of the
Law, this posture was used by the Congregation. Ezra opened the Book in the
sight of all the people (for he was above all the people) and when he opened
it, all the people stood up, Nehem. 8. 5. Now seeing it was more reasonable for
Christians to do Honor unto Christ, than for the Jews to do it unto Moses, it
came to be an universal Custom (even from the beginning) to stand Durant. de
Rit. lib. 2. c. 23. Constit. Apost. lib. 2. c. 57.
up at the hearing of our Saviors Doctrine and Life, and to bless God for it.
So the Apostolical Constitutions require, When the Gospel is read, let the
Presbyters and Deacons, and all the people stand with all quietness: for it is
written, Hear, O Israel, and keep silence. And accordingly St. Chrysostom
witnesses, S. Chrysostom. (...).
that when the Deacon opened the Book of the Gospel, and began to read, they
all stood up, and cried, (...), Glory be to thee, O Lord.

8. It is ordered by our Church, that for persons to be Baptized there shall be
Sureties; whose Office it is to call upon Sureties.
them to hear Sermons, to see them Catechized, and virtuously brought up. And
surely by the Laws of our Religion every man is to be his brothers Keeper. And
what these Sureties do bind themselves to by a Particular and Personal
Obligation, every Neighbor is bound to by the General Rule of Love. In my
opinion, among all the Constitutions of our Church, this is one of the most
Charitable and most Profitable Constitutions, and that which thousands have
been beholding to for their Christian Education: And were it only for the
Motherly Care and Tenderness of our Church in this particular, she might well
claim a dutiful Observance at the hands of all her Children; but that St. Paul
tells it us (as a Sign and Ingredient of perilous times) that in the last days
some great Professors of Religion would be disobedient to Parents, without 2 Timothy 3.
natural Affection, and unthankful. But in former Ages this Custom was justly
accounted a good security to Religion: And we find it not only in the Canon
Vniversalis, but even in Tertullian himself, Habemus per benedictionem eosdem
Arbitros fidei, quos and Sponsores salutis. Tert. de Bapt. Quid necesse est
Sponsores etiam periculo ingeri, qui and ipsi per mortalitatem destituere
promissiones suas possint? Id. ibid. Inde suscepti, etc. Id. de Cor. milit.
who frequently mentions it. And so does the pretended Dionysius Areopagita,
and the Author of the Questions and Answers ascribed to Justin Martyr. And
though it be acknowledged that those Books were not written by those men, yet
none doubts but they are ancient Records. And it is as certain that this Custom
is much elder than those Authors, Plat. in vita Hygini. Magd. cent. 2. c. 6.
whosoever they were: for it is confessed, that it prevailed in the time of
Hyginus, who was Justin Martyr's Co-temporary, and lived within sixty years
after S. John's decease.

9. And so for baptismal Interrogatories, and Stipulations, and Vows, of
renouncing the Devil and all his works, etc. they Tertul. Cyril. Just. Mart.
cum multis aliis.
are so manifestly ancient by the joint Consent of all the most Primitive
Writers, that I dare say, They bear date from the Apostles times. And generally
learned men do conceive, that St. Peter alludes to that Custom, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
where he calls Baptism (...), the Answer, (or the Promise and Stipulation) V.
Grotium in loc.
of a good Conscience toward God.

10. The repeating of Psalms and Hymns by turns (by Minister Antiphonae.
and People) is a very useful good course to keep peoples minds from rambling,
and to imprint holy things in their memories. And this has been customary in
the ancient Church; though, as St. Basil tells us, there was (...), variety
Basil, Ep. 63. ad Cler. Neocaes.
in singing: For sometimes the Minister began one verse, and was seconded by
the whole Congregation (as is the custom still in many of our Parochial
Churches;) and sometimes the Quire was divided into two parts, which
alternately answered each other from side to side (as it is usual in our
Colleges and Cathedrals.) At the close of each Psalm or Hymn, they commonly
had some End versicles (called by Philo, (...), De vita Contempl. Constable. lib.
2. c. 57.
and in Clements Constitutions, (...),) answerable to our Gloria Patri; and
these were recited by turns too. Certain it is, that the people were ever wont
to bear their part in praising and blessing God; which was one reason that
Eusebius took those Therapeutae in Egypt for Christians, because Eccl. Hist. l.
2. c. 17.
among other Christian Customs, they had this. And if he was mistaken in his
opinion, yet it argues that this was a general custom among Christians in his
time. And so indeed St. Basil assures us, that it prevailed universally in the
Eastern Churches. Cassiodore affirms, that Flavianus and Diodorus Tripart.
Hist. l. 5. c. 32.
brought in the Alternate singing of Psalms. But this certainly is a mistake:
for this was most usual long before their days. Socrates and others, fetch it
as high as from the holy Martyr Socrat. l. 6. c. 8.
Ignatius, who was no less than an Apostolical Bishop; and this Trip. Hist. l.
10. c. 9.
is yielded by Cassiodore himself elsewhere. But though Ignatius might have
introduced this custom at Antioch, yet in probability 'twas originally borrowed
of the Jews, and so continued among Christians from the beginning. This is
evident, that Pliny, writing to the Emperor Trajan (in whose days St. John
died) says of the Christians, that they were wont early in a morning to meet
together (which comes near to St. Basil's account) and to sing Carmen Christo,
a Hymn to Christ, and that secum invicem, by course, by turns, or one after
another.

11. As concerning the posture of the body at the receiving Kneeling at the
Sacrament.
of the Holy Sacrament, it is clear, that the sitting posture was never used,
unless by the Arrians, who denied our Savior's Divinity: All the Catholics
did receive with all imaginable Reverence; and in St. Cyril's time they did it
in a worshipping Cyril. Catech. Mist. 5.
and adoring gesture; the Adoration being directed to God and Christ, but not
to the Elements.

12. It Is customary with us (especially in some places) to read the second
Service at the Lords Table: which some are pleased to look upon as a mighty
piece of Superstition, though it be nothing else but an innocent usage,
conformable to the Practice of the most Primitive times; which is still
preserved not only in the Eastern parts, but in the Lutheran Churches also.
For, as Mr. Mede has well observed, this was the place Christian Sacrifice,
cap. 5. Ep. 56. to Dr. Twisse: and alibi.
where the Ancients offered up all their Prayers unto God: and because the
Passion of Christ is commemorated, and his Death represented there, they
thought it the most fit and proper place for Divine-Service, and so were wont
to call upon God at the Altar, signifying hereby, that they offered up their
Prayers in the Name, and through the Merits of their crucified Savior. For the
Readers further satisfaction, I shall refer him to the Observations of that
learned man; and only add, That that Phrase in Ignatius, (...), to be within
the Altar, is a plain allusion to this Ancient and Primitive custom, and
signifies, to join with the Bishop in those Ministrations which were performed,
and in those Prayers which were offered up at the Altar. And the like Phrase we
find in Clements Constitutions, Constable. l. 7. c. 41.
where (...), signifies, to partake of holy Mysteries, (...), as it is
explained afterward, to communicate in holy Ordinances.

In fine, whosoever will give himself the trouble to search, and will do us the
right to speak impartially, he must needs confess, that those Constitutions of
ours which are established by Law, and those Rites which are preserved by
Custom, have had their Rise and Original from the best and most authentic
Antiquity. I have instanced in several particulars; and a longer account might
be given, if that would do our business effectually: But I hope what has been
already showed, will satisfy all indifferent and sober persons, that our
Church is free from all charge of Superstition and Novelty. I would to God she
were as free from danger too; danger which is now threatened her, not only by
those who never were in her bosom, but by those also to whom she, like an
indulgent Mother, has held out both her Breasts, and has received nothing for
all her Milk and Tenderness, but a Stab.

And yet it is not too late to heal her wounds, if men would set heartily and
soberly about it. But in my opinion, there is no Method likely to do it, but by
taking Directions from Antiquity, and by observing the Old way, that old and
good way wherein, God be blessed, Religion has hitherto flourished among us,
and for which our Church is at this day the Envy of all Impostors, and the
Glory of the whole Christian world.

For (that I may now close up my Argument) should we deviate and wander from
the Primitive Rule, our Adversaries will have an unanswerable Plea against us,
That our Religion is not Catholic, but a Mushrome of yesterday; and by that
pretense, they will never want fair opportunities of catching up Sheep that
straggle from a secure Fold, and making a Prey of all by degrees. By what we
have found already by sad experience, we may easily foresee what advantages
they will take hereafter, should we alter our way. For how many thousand Souls
have they ensnared by this pretense, That our Religion is a new Device? 'Twould
be a strong Argument against us, were not the thing false. Now, if they have
perverted so many by an unjust Allegation, what will the consequences be,
should we do them the kindness to remove our ancient Landmarks; and make that
an evident Truth, which hitherto has been nothing but a groundless Reproach? It
may be thought a probable way to keep Popery out; but 'twill be a sure and
infallible way to let it in upon us at the last: For, what have we ever yet
gotten by pulling down, but Faction? and what are our Factions, but the Kennels
of Jesuits, and Jesuited persons? We see in part already, and when the mystery
of Iniquity comes thoroughly to be laid open, we shall see more evidently and
fully, that it is by the several Sects among us that the Jesuit gets into our
Bowels, and hides, lurks, and shrouds himself under them: and men of common
Reason will think, that it is but in vain to drive the Papist out at the fore
gate, if he be let in again at the backdoor. But should our Church be
dismantled, and Iniquity be established by a Law, instead of one Jesuit we
shall have an hundred; and in the end the wild Boar will find admittance,
after so many little Foxes.

3. I see that I am now fallen upon the third and last part of my Task, viz. to
show how infinitely mischievous and hurtful the Practices of those have been
already, who have declined from the Old way, to walk in Paths of their tracing
on.

And this I shall do out of a pure and sincere design to do the world good,
and to serve them especially who are apt to go astray in the simplicity of
their hearts, and have neither the wisdom to make a stand before they go too
far, nor the sagacity to foresee whither they are going, nor the skill to
retrive themselves, nor eyes to find out the right way, nor perhaps any great
desire to revert into the paths they have once forsaken, but walk with the
Herd, non qua eundum est, sed qua itur (as Seneca speaks) not where they should
go, but where the Multitude goes, not considering that, Argumentum pessimi
Turba est, that course is many times the worst, which has the most Voices, and
is carried by the Poll.

We read of Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. that by traducing his Father the King, and his
Ministers of Justice, he stole away the hearts of the men of Israel, and many
followed him, and went with him in their simplicity, not knowing any thing of
the Rebellion he intended, when he pretended to go to Hebron to pay his vows.
And I am verily persuaded, that this is the case of many deluded wretches
amongst us, who have been persuaded to go from Jerusalem to Hebron to worship,
in the simplicity of their hearts, having been imposed upon by the popular and
sly insinuations of some Absaloms, who designed to abuse their Credulity, and
to use them as Instruments to promote their unworthy Ends, and secular
Advantage.

To such I would address my self, beseeching them by the love of God, by the
bowels of Christ, and by the regard we ought to have of our common Salvation,
to take an Inventory of those sore Evils, which have been so hurtful to
Mankind, so reproachful to Religion, and so prejudicial to our common Safety;
and all of them occasioned principally by this one radical Evil, even men's
straggling and deviating from the good old way.

First, It has been one main thing that has stopped the Current of Religion,
and discouraged very many from entertaining the Truth, as it is in Jesus. And
though some may make light of this Consideration now, yet in the Judgment of
the Great day, when the Sins and Scandals of men shall be reckoned unto them,
it will be a sad and fearful Charge, that they have kept off so many Souls, for
whom Christ died, from coming unto him. What multitudes and sholes of Infidels
crowded into the Church in the Primitive times, when the Creed was entire, and
the Worship of God was uniform, and the Way to Heaven was one and the same over
all the World! 'Twas pleasant and safe drinking of the Waters of Life, when
they ran in so fair a Channel. Religion has been at a great stand, since the
Streams have been divided. Though Infidels of all Nations and Languages be
dispersed up and down throughout Christendom, yet how rarely do we hear of one
hearty Proselyte? No; instead of admiring Christianity, such as are aliens to
the true Faith do rather laugh at our follies, that we invite others to go
along with us, when we our selves are not agreed upon the way, but refuse to go
with one another. Did we walk quietly together in the old, beaten, and straight
road, such as have taken false steps, and wander in ignorance, might reasonably
be persuaded to submit to our Directions, because where Unity is, a fair
Argument may be used to persuade men that Truth is to be found there. But when
the Turk, or the Jew, or the blind Papist perceives us to be at variance about
the main thing, some contending for one way, and some for another, and every
Party condemning all ways but his own, he finds that it is great odds, but he
may err still, which side soever he takes; and thinks it much safer to commit
himself to his own conduct, or to the management of a Guide that pretends to be
infallible, than to trust the Directions of men divided in their Judgments, who
instead of rescuing, may chance to draw him on into further danger. When
Averroes saw the Romanists to devour that which they supposed to be their God,
he ventured his Soul with the old Philosophers, rather than he would embrace
such a Savage Religion. And when the Indians felt the barbarous usages of the
Spaniards, they loathed the very thoughts of those Celestial Mansions, whither
they were invited to dwell with those Monsters of Nature, who exercised the
utmost Cruelties upon them on Earth, and yet pretended a design of saving them
from the Torments of Hell. And so, when unbelieving or erroneous persons
observe the Feuds and Divisions which are among us, they abhor that way which
sets men a wrangling, supposing that such can never meet at their Journeys end,
who take different and contrary courses at their starting. It is manifest, that
thousands have been discouraged upon this account from embracing the Truth; and
I have known many who have plainly Apostatized to the Impieties of the
Romanists, having been frightened from all communion with us, by our Domestic
jarrs. It Is true, the Reason is very incompetent and weak, yet the Argument is
popular, especially when it is managed by a cunning hand, and a serpentine wit.
And it is a Rule among the Jesuits, That the Dissentions among Protestants do
serve the Interest of the Roman Dissensiones errantium alet, etc. Ita enim cum
omnes intelligent certi nihil apud eos inveniri, facile veritati manus dabunt.
Adam. Contzen. Politic. l. 2. c. 19. 6.
Cause, upon this score among others, because when things hang in Controversy
and undecided among us, people will conclude, that we have nothing which is
certain, and so will readily yield to that which they call Truth. I wish that
such as foment the unhappy Divisions in our Church, would lay this thing
seriously to heart, and instead of foaming out Invectives against us and our
Establishments, would sadly consider how scandalous their Practices are, and
how many Souls by their means may be consigned to eternal Ruin, who might have
arrived safely at the Gate of Paradise, had not they laid a Stumbling Block of
Iniquity before them.

2. Besides the intolerable mischiefs that have been occasioned abroad, vast
prejudices have been caused at home, by the perverse deflexions of men from the
good old way. For how many are there, who have been provoked hereby to turn
aside either into Schism, or downright Atheism? 1. That the sin of Schism
wounds the very Vitals of Religion, is obvious unto any that shall but
consider how destructive it is of Charity, which is the Life, Spirit, and Soul
of all. For it ever commenceth upon Incharitableness, and it keeps the flames
(not of Love, but) of Contention alive, till it has made a Consumptive
Sacrifice of Charity, and reduced it into Nothing; thereby annihilating
Religion, instead of refining it. Now it is manifest, that men's leaving the old
Paths, has been the sole cause of this great and ominous Evil among us: for
every new Sect and Party is but an Off-set and Branch of the first Separation.
As we say in Logic, that if but one false Proposition be granted, an hundred
more will naturally follow; so we see in the Church, that when but one Rupture
and Schism is made, that Faction is prolifick, and ingendreth a great Brood;
which, though they are unlike to each other, and quarrel with each other, yet
in this they all resemble their first Parent, that they disown and hate their
Mother. Some moderate Dissenters did ingenuously acknowledge in the late times,
that upon the pulling down of our Episcopal Government (which they decried as
Antichristian) more Sects and Heresies sprang up within the compass of very few
years, than were ever known in this Kingdom before. 'Twas an honest Confession,
and the thing is true; and yet all that Fry which troubles our Waters, are but
the Spawn of the first Innovators. Reckon on from the Independants to the
Ranters, to the Familists, to the Quakers, and the rest, and you shall find,
that they are so many fresh Editions of Smectymnuus, augmented and enlarged;
but whether corrected and amended, or made worse, impartial men may consider.
As when you cast a stone into a pool, the water curls into a little circle,
which in a moment multiplieth it self into several gyres that propagate
themselves into more still, until all of them are broken upon the bank; so when
you see a Bone of Strife thrown into a Church, whose surface was calm and quiet
before, the first breach is not all, but the mischief increases, and another
Faction makes its way through the bowels of the former, and that becomes the
Parent of a Third; and there is no end of the Evil, till all Parties dash upon
Ruin. It Is necessary therefore with all possible speed, to heal up the breach
there, where our Calamities began; and now we see the sad consequents of
Schism, to forsake the sin it self, and to return into the old Paths. For what
shall we do in the end, but fool away our whole Cause, after the rate that we
now go? it being impossible to hold out against an Enemy long, if men stand in
small companies at a distance, and only behold the valor of that wing which
is most of all beleaguered. The more an Interest is divided, the more it is
weakened ever. While we kept to our Rule, and held hand in hand together in the
Old way, all the Attempts of the Romanists were frustraneous. Our Quarrels have
served only to give our Adversaries hope of sweeping the Stakes at last.

And yet this is not all: 2. For, there is another monstrous Evil, which owes
its Production to this swerving from the Ancient way; and that is, Atheism.
Would a man think, that when the Gospel has shined so clear, and so long among
us, any such Creatures should be found, as should deny the Being of an
Omniscient God, presiding over the world? or should affirm, that there is no
Hell but what is created by men's foolish fears? or should say, that the
Scriptures are no better than a Legend? or should argue Virtue and Vice to be
empty Names, and that Good and Evil depends upon the Arbitrary Constitutions of
Men? Yet it is certain and notorious, that many parts of this Kingdom do swarm
with these Locusts; and whether you call them Atheists or Hobbists, it is
indifferent to me (only I fear, that many Jesuits go under that guise.) The
thing is the sadder, because in David's time the Atheist was a Fool, and so
accounted; whereas the most avowed Scepticks among us, are those, who pretend
to Wit and Learning, and would be thought the only Masters of Reason, able to
prescribe Forms and Laws of Government. Now I confess many Causes have
unluckily concurred to give Birth to these new and unusual Monsters; but
certainly the great Divisions (which are caused originally by men's declining
from the Old Paths) have had a very great hand in the Midwivery: For Schisms in
one Age, seldom but produce Atheism in the next; and differences in Religion
are apt to minister (especially to men of sensual minds) a welcome occasion to
suspect, that there is no such thing as Religion at all. And I wish this
Suspicion had not been heightened into a positive Opinion, by the unheard of
Extravagancies of some Non-conformists, who by their empty Prate, and scenical
Tricks, and lewd Comparisons (which my Soul even dreads to mention) have gone a
great way to turn Religion into a Ridicule, and a loathsome thing; and thereby
have done huge service to the Church of Rome. But the Innovations and
Singularities even of those who are more sober and judicious than the rest,
have strongly prevailed with many to be Neuters in Religion: For while they
behold one Party set against another, and loading each other with Contumelies
and Curses, they are ready to conclude, that every Sect cannot be in the Right,
but yet that all may be in the Wrong; and so they are willing (because it is
most consistent with their lusts) to be of no Party, till the Combatants
themselves have disputed out the Quarrel; and when they find that the ground
of this eager Controversy is about things which are confessedly little, they
are ready to mistrust that other things are little too, and in the end deride
and make light of All things, though of the greatest moment.

I should be glad to be mistaken in this particular, and that any man were able
to confute the truth of what I say. But the thing is manifest, that several who
have been Members of many Sects, have in the end ripped themselves from All, and
upon trial made of every Profession, have at last abandoned every Religion. And
I wish that some who pretend to be the great Healers in Sion, would in time
consider what account they will be able to give to the Great Physician of our
Souls, for intoxicating the world when they undertook new Ways and Methods of
purging it. For this is the true original of this sad Calamity, even men's love
of Novelty, and of new Experiments. By making a false step at the first, men
have run themselves and others upon Destruction; and there is no end of Error,
when once they have forsaken the Old Paths, where alone is to be found true
Rest, and sure Footing.

3. To these Considerations I shall add one more, which I have reserved unto
the last, because it is of very seasonable use, and may, perhaps, make a deeper
impression than the rest; and it is this: That those Innovations and Schisms
which have defaced, and almost ruined our Church, have been cunningly contrived
(at least, improved and kept on foot) by the Emissaries of Rome, who hate
nothing more than to see Government, and Order, and Unity amongst us. I do not
intend (God knows, I do not design) to embitter any Protestants heart, but
only to open men's eyes, and out of public principles, and a deep sense of our
great (and I fear, growing) Evils, to lay before them an important Truth, and
to recommend it to their Consciences, desiring that it may be taken with the
same hand of Charity wherewith it is offered.

When I behold the sad Divisions in our Church, I must say as he did, when he
saw the Tares in the field, Mat. 13. 28. An enemy has done this: The Enemy,
that implacable and formidable Enemy, whose dark and hellish Designs we are
now searching into; it is he that has craftily sown, and industriously cherisht
our Dissentions, that in the end he may make a Prey of our Enclosure and us
too. It is a piece of State Policy, which has been used by some Princes, when
they have intended to invade a neighboring Kingdom, to divide it first. And
the Jesuits have made this a main piece of their Ecclesiastical Policy too:
Those trusty Disciples of that grand Hypocrite and Enthusiast, Ignatius Loiola,
have all along made use of this effectual Stratagem; but especially here among
us, whom they have most grossly abused, by creating heats in our Bowels, by
filling men with Jealousies and Discontents, by insinuating evil Principles
into them, and by teaching them to clamor against our Government as
tyrannical, and against our Liturgy as superstitious, and to throw out bitter
Invectives against Popery; when indeed Tyranny, and Popery, and Superstition,
are the very things which they themselves would fain introduce, and introduce
them by our hands; and all this while they themselves stand behind the Curtain
and laugh in their sleeve, to see how dexterously and prosperously their design
is carried on by unwary and credulous Instruments. Contzen the Jesuit, in his
Book of Politics (for that is their main Study) laying down several ways
whereby they may reduce a Nation to their pretended Catholic Faith,
prescribes this way for one, to foment a Kingdoms Divisions, and to make use
of them so as to blow the Goals: For (says he) who could not easily Sexta
Ratio abolendi Erroris est, in rem suam vertere lites errantium. Quis enim non
facile Puritanos in Anglia redigat in ordinem, si Episcoporum approbationem ab
illis extorqueat? Contzen, Politic. l. 2. c. 18. 9.
bring the Puritans in England into Order, that can but prevail with them to
approve of Bishops? Any man that pleases may consult the place; and if he will
but consider this Jesuit's words, he must confess, that the subtle Papists
know, that our Episcopal Government is a strong Barricado against Popery, and
that if our Dissenters would but once be persuaded to submit to that
Government, it would be impossible for them to bring our Nation under the Yoke
of Bondage: And therefore here they employ all their Art and Skill, to inflame
men's hearts against our Bishops, and to prompt them on to oppose Episcopacy
with all might and main, and if it be possible, to pull it down. And by this we
may perceive whence all our Nonconformity, and clamor against our pious,
learned, and excellent Bishops, does originally come. I am bound in charity to
think (and I do verily think) that those our dissenting Brethren, who are
really Protestants, do not believe, or (perhaps) mistrust, that they are acted
by the Jesuits. But it is clear to me, and I hope to all indifferent persons,
that the Jesuits have foully infected many Sectaries among us with their
Poison, and have made use of many Hot-spirits among us, as their Tools and
Hands to work such things for them, which they themselves could not attempt
with a bare and open face. There is a very memorable Passage in Archbishop
Laud's Speech upon the Scaffold: (thither he was brought as a Favourer of
Popery; though it appears by the Letters of Sir William Boswel, and Andreas ab
Habernfield, that the Papists themselves designed See the Grand Design.
his Ruin, and brought him to the Block by their underhand contrivances; but
before the blow was given, he used these words, among others, to the people:)
You know what the Pharisees said against Christ himself in the 11th of St.
John, If we let him alone, all men will believe on him, and venient Romani, and
the Romans will come and take away both our Place and Nation. Here was a
causeless cry against Christ, that the Romans would come; and see how just the
Judgment of God was upon them: they crucified Christ for fear lest the Romans
should come; and his death was that which brought the Romans in upon them, God
punishing them with that which they most feared. And I pray God (said he) that
this Clamor of venient Romani (of which I have given to my knowledge no just
cause) help not to bring the Romans in here too; for the Pope never had such an
Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now among the Sects and
Divisions that are among us. Thus he spoke above thirty four years ago. And not
he only, but many other sagacious and wise men, when once they saw Faction to
grow bold and sturdy, See a Piece entitled Fair Warning, part 2.
did greatly fear, that the Protestant Interest would be sadly wounded by it;
and did, as it were by a Prophetic Spirit, tell us to this purpose; That if
ever Popery did return into this Nation, it ought to be laid chiefly at the
Schismatics door.

I know, it will not boot us much to charge one another now, when we have all
great reason to be humbled for our sins: But yet, it may not be unuseful for us
to observe how the Romanist has abused many silly and headstrong people among
us, making them his Machines and Instruments to shore up his tottering Cause,
and to keep it from sinking utterly. And this he has done by two several ways.

1. By poisoning them with such Principles as are either the same with his own,
or much bordering upon them, and very like unto them. Amidst that variety of
strange Opinions which has prevailed here, since men were so imprudent as to
forsake the Old way, we may find many which are very near of Kin to those,
that are directly Popish Tenants, nay, which have been the main Pillars to
support the Popish Interest. So that by the Tares, we know what the hand was
which scattered the Seed; and by the Doctrines, we may perceive who was the
Author and Father of them: and I dare say, if we search narrowly into each
Sect, we may plainly discern the print of the Cloven-foot, and easily perceive
that the Jesuit has been there. To make this good, I shall (omitting many
particulars of lesser moment which might be instanced in) take notice of the
most See Lysim. Nicanor.
material points, and such chiefly as strike at the very Heart of Government,
and which are accounted properly and strictly Jesuitical Tenants, because the
Jesuits were the first (though not the last) that had the confidence to defend
them.

It has been generally taught by our Sectaries (and I take notice of it the
rather, because this seditious, antimonarchical, and cursed Doctrine is now
strangely revived) that the power Buchanan, Goodman, Gilby, Goodwin, Bridges,
Rutherford, and a world more.
which Princes have, is derived to them by the People; that Kings, Princes, and
Governors, have their Authority from their People; that the People are better
than the King, and of greater Authority; that the People have right to dispose
of the Government at their pleasure; that the People have the same power over
the King, that the King himself has over any one of his Subjects; that the
power of making Laws belongs unto the People; that the King is but the
Peoples Trustee, and like a Master of the Rolls, accountable to his Masters for
his Trust; and that the People may (upon occasion) remove him out of his Trust
and Authority, even as men may lawfully recall their Proxies and Letters of
Attorney. This monstrous Doctrine did cost the best of Kings his Head, and the
whole Nation its Peace: and it is perfectly a Jesuitical Principle. For so
Bellarmine, and Azorius, and several more of that Grew, have Bellarm. de
Laicis, c. 6.
asserted, That all political power is in the Multitude, as in its proper Seat
and Subject, and that by Divine Right; that the Multitude being not able to
exercise their power themselves, do transfer it upon some one, or more; that it
depends upon the consent and courtesy of the Multitude, that there be either
a King or Consuls, or other Magistrates over them; and that if there be cause,
the Multitude may change the Government, and turn a Monarchy into an
Aristocracy, or Democracy, as they please. The Reason is given by the great
Azorius; because, Azor. Instit. Moral. Pars 2. l. 11. c. 4.
forsooth, though the People do transfer their power, and give it to the King,
yet they do not divest themselves wholly of it, but do retain it habitually
themselves, and in certain cases may actually take it from him again, and give
it to the next of Kin, or to any else. Any man may see whither this Doctrine
tends, even to the subversion of Government, and especially of Monarchy,
which is equally uneasy both to the Jesuit and the Schismatic. Now Father
Watson in his Quodlibets, jirks the Jesuits for borrowing their Principles of
the Scotch Fanatics; and others are of opinion, that the Fanatics borrowed it
of the Jesuits. Let such as are concerned, dispute this out; but this is clear,
that either they infected these, or these have infected them: for this is their
common Principle; a Principle which was never known among Christians till these
latter days, since Hell has broke loose.

Again, it is still maintained (and by no mean person in Dr. Owen against Dr.
Parker.
vulgar esteem) That the Civil Magistrate has nothing to do to enjoin any
thing relating to Gods Worship, which God himself has not required; and that
the Conscience is not bound to observe such Injunctions; That though subjection
be due unto the Magistrate in things of his proper Cognizance, that is, in all
things necessary to public Peace and Tranquillity in this p. 90.
world: though it be the duty of the supreme Magistrate to encourage the
professors of Religion, to protect them from wrong and violence, and to secure
them in the performance of their duties; yet the Church and its Religion, and
the Worship of God p. 161.
observed therein, is constituted, fixed, and regulated by God himself,
antecedently to the Magistrates duty and power about it: so that the
Administration of things merely spiritual in p. 164.
the Worship of God, is derived immediately from him to the Ministers and
Administrators of the Gospel; and that the things of the Gospel, and the
Worship of God, are plainly exempted from the Temporal jurisdiction and
punishment of p. 170.
earthly Princes, insomuch that they have no power over the Consciences of men,
so as to lay their Commands upon them in these spiritual things, or to back
them with temporal, corporal restraints and punishments. This is the Principle
defended by that Doctor; and it is likely that he was confirmed in it when his
Acquaintance Father Whitebread was at Oxford: for it is perfect Jesuitism, and a
piece of Politic Divinity which has done as much service to the Church of
Rome, as any other Principle whatsoever. For, how came they by that Absolute
and Arbitrary Power, which they have over men's Consciences, but by shaking off
the Authority, and clipping the Prerogatives of the Civil Magistrates? The
Jesuits would not have that Empire and unlimited Dominion in the world, did
Princes interpose, and restrain their Exorbitances. Therefore this they contend
for with all their might, That Kings indeed are and Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. l.
1. c. 7.
ought to be the Patrons and Protectors of Religion, to defend the Church, to
punish Blasphemy, Sacrilege, Heresy, etc. but yet that the Government of the
Church, or the Cognizance of Church Matters, belongs not to them; no, they
have no judgment in Ecclesiastical Affairs, says Bellarmine (even as Dr. Owen
and others say) because Civil Peace and Tranquillity is the proper Object of
the Magistrates care: Divine things are not subject to his Power; it belongs
to Ministers, not to the Secular Power, to meddle with matters in the Church;
for the Emperor himself is but a Laick, and Laymen have nothing to do in
things Sacred, says Azorius, agreeably to what Azor. Inst. Moral. pars 2. l.
10. c. 7.
Sectaries do say; and he that will be fully satisfied of the harmony between
the Jesuits and them in this particular, let him read the Survey of the
pretended holy Discipline, chap. 22, 23, 24. there it may be seen at large, how
these good Wits jump.

Thirdly, it has been asserted (not by Episcopal, but by the Survey, p. 267.
Presbyt. displayed, p. 19.
Classical Divines) That the Presbyters (having Power in their hands) may make
Decrees, and that the Prince ought to confirm those Decrees (though against his
own Conscience) and see them executed: otherwise he is censurable, and to be
forced to do it. And even thus says the Jesuit Bellarmine, That Bellarm. de
Romans Pontif. l. 5. c. 7. in fine.
Kings are bound to serve God, by defending the Church, by punishing Heretics
and Schismatics, (and so far he is right.) But moreover he tells us, That the
Church may, and is obliged to command Kings to do their office; and if they are
negligent, to compel and force them to it by Excommunication, and other
convenient ways. What an unluckie thing it is, that our zealous Reformers
should be thus Jesuited! for it is but altering Names, and instead of the Pope
and his Cardinals, to put in the Presbyterian and his Lay Elders, and the
Doctrine is the very same.

4. It needs no proof, that some pretended Protestants have counted it both
lawful and just, to bring their King to public Trial and Judgment. But as no
President can be anywhere found for that Practice (unless you will instance in
our Savior) so no warrant can be fetched for that Doctrine, but out of the
Writings of the Jesuits. So indeed Bellarmine affirms, Bellarm. ubi supra.
That Kings and Princes, being Heretics and Opposers of Religion, may be
arraigned and judged by the Church; and that the Church can exercise a coercive
power over the Civil Magistrate by any ways and methods that shall seem
necessary. And the like is argued by Azorius; only he is so kind to Princes as
Inst. Moral. pars 2. l. 11.
to grant, that though among the Ethnicks the people have power to take
Cognizance of their Kings faults, and to judge them when they are notorious
(either by evidence of Fact, or by his own Confession in Court) yet the King
has this privilege (and a huge great one it is) to be heard before he be
condemned, and to make his Exceptions in order to his defense. But, says he,
in a Christian State the people have not power to try their Sovereign without
instructions and leave obtained first from the Pope, who is to judge of his
Crimes whether they be such as render the King obnoxious. Now all this is
agreeable to the Principles both of the Jesuits and the Kirk-men, and the rest
of that Clan, viz. that the King is only a Son of the Church, notwithstanding
his Kingship; that their power is of Divine Institution, whereas the Kings
authority is only by compact with the people; and so, much inferior to
theirs, being only Fiduciary; and upon that score he may be brought to
account, and tried; and every worthy man in Parliament may, for the public
good, be thought a fit Peer, and Judge of the King, says Milton. This puts me
in mind what Mr. Oats has discovered Tenure of Kings, p. 24.
of that great Oracle, Mr. Milton; namely, that he was a member of a Popish
Clubb. The thing is credible enough, that he was a Jesuit in disguise. But this
is manifest, that they were Jesuitical Doctrines which in 48 did pass in the
Pulpits for Divinity, and in Westminster Hall for Law; and that the infamous
Court of Justice did consist of men, who were the Sons of the Jesuit, who was
the Son of the Devil.

5. Further yet; it is so notorious, that it needs not proof, that our rigid
Sectaries have held it lawful, not only not to obey wicked Kings (whom they
call wicked) but also to resist them, to take arms against them, to have no
further Buchanan, Gilby, Goodman.
regard to them than if they were the most simple Subjects within their Realms,
to excommunicate them, to depose them, to un-King them, to take their Crowns
and Thrones from them, and to banish or imprison them: for, according to
Buchanan and his whole Tribe, the band being broken between the People and De
jure regni.
the King, he loses all his power and authority which he had by compact from
the people. This is Jesuitism with a witness, or else we have been unjust in
charging this Doctrine upon the Jesuits. Kings and Princes may be deposed
(says Bellarmine) and no injury is done unto them, if they be deposed: And he
urges the Example of Vzzah, 2 Chronicles. 26. and it is De Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 8.
observable, that Mr. Knox himself urged the very same Example, to let the
world see how handsomely he and his Brethren went hand in hand with the Jesuits
in this point also: And it must not be omitted, that Buchanan defending the
Hist. of the Reform. p. 391.
same Principle, fetches many precedents from the continual Practice of the
Scots, who did depose their Kings, just as the great Cardinal fetches many
precedents from the continual Practice of the Popes, who deposed Emperors:
though an honest man will say, Quot Exempla, tot flagitia, look how many
Examples of this nature may be found, so many horrid sins have been committed
on both sides. Azorius is as positive as can be in this matter; and tells us,
That though Bartolus and Azor. Instit. pars 2. l. 10. c. 8.
others were of opinion that it belonged to the People to depose Princes, yet
rather 'twas to be said, that it is the Popes business. However, he does insist
upon it, that the thing may be done, and done justly; when a Prince is either
forsworn, or sacrilegious, or persecutes the Church, or disturbs the peace of
Christians, or is an Heretic or Schismatic, or is a favourer or a defender of
Heretics and Schismatics; then, says he, that Prince must down: and if you
read Histories, you will find, that it has been a common thing for Kings to be
dethroned. And he instanceth in the Scots (that have been Rebels and Traitors
from the beginning) In uno Scotiae regno multos Reges legimus Lib. 11. c. 5.
Nobilium and Populi communi consensu, e regno pulsos; that is, In that one
Kingdom of Scotland we read of many Kings, whose Crowns have been pulled off
their heads by the Nobles and Commonalty: Ergo, the thing is very lawful. And
truly this is De jure regni, page 53.
Buchanan's own Argument; Possum annumerare duodecem, aut etiam amplius, Reges,
etc. I could, says he, reckon up twelve Kings of Scotland, or more, who have
been either imprisoned, or banished, or slain outright (by their Subjects) for
their Crimes Truly, it is a fine Honor for that Nation: and though it be a most
pitiful and scandalous Argument, yet it is remarkable how these two men did jump
in their way of arguing; there is such an Harmonia Evangelica, such a sweet
Harmony between these two great Evangelists, that it may be questioned whether
Buchanan was not a Jesuit, or Azorius a Presbyterian.

6. The King-killing Doctrine is justly laid at the Jesuits door, for it is his
own dear Brat; only some have modestly doubted, whether a Prince, who is
counted a Tyrant, may be executed by any private hand, till he has been heard
and condemned by the judicial Sentence of the Nation. But never let this
Doctrine be laid at the Jesuits door only: For has it not been held, has it
not been put in practice by many pretended Anti papists in this Island? Give me
Buchanan for my money, who scorns to mince the matter as others do (till they
have the Power in their hands;) for, speaking of Tyrants (and any Prince that
pleases not them, shall be esteemed a Tyrant) If I, says he, were to make a
Law, I would have such men carried De Jure Reg.
away into Deserts, or drowned in the Sea; and I would have such as kill them
to be lustily rewarded, (not by single men, but by the whole Commonwealth;)
even as they are publicly rewarded that kill Wolves, or Bears, or take their
Whelps. There Is a man to be a Prince's Tutor: but the Jesuits were his Tutors
first. For what brave fellows were Clement and Ravaillac in their estimation?
and had they lived, would have been made Cardinals. For what is more
meritorious with them, than to dispatch a King that is their Enemy? Did not
Ehud kill King Eglon? says Aquinas. Did not the Captains kill Queen Athalia?
says Bellarmine. Yes surely, they did: but these instances do not reach the
Case. However, some King-killing Protestants have urged these very Examples,
which were urged by the King-killing Romanists; and by this we See Dang. Posit.
B. 2. c. 1.
may know what hands they were which cut off K. Charles's head, and by whom
they were influenced and set on work.

7. But how will men answer God for these horrid Villainies? Does not our
Savior say, Resist not evil? Does not St. Paul say, He that resists, shall
receive to himself damnation? And did not the good old Christians in the
Primitive times quietly submit to the Emperors, though they were Infidels,
Heretics, Persecutors? O, says Buchanan, and his Loyal De Jure Reg. p. 50, 51.
Brethren of the new cut, you must consider the condition of those times; the
Church then was in its Infancy, and Christians were low in Fortunes, and few in
number, and void of Arms (yet the ancient Fathers tell us the contrary) and
therefore 'twas necessary for St. Paul to advise them to be quiet; as if, says
he, one should now write to the poor Christians under the Turk, he would advise
them to be quiet, because they cannot help it (though the Apostle said, Ye must
needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake:) But,
says Buchanan, if St. Paul lived now in these times, he would say otherwise.
From this shift the Magistrate may observe how dangerous it is to indulge men
of these Principles, till they grow numerous, strong, opulent, and heady (for
then Conscience will hang at the hilts of their Swords:) but that which I
observe is, that this Evasion is downright Jesuitism. So Cardinal Bellarmine
affirmed, That the reason why Christians De Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 7.
did not depose Nero, or Diocletian, or Julian, or Valens, and the like wicked
Emperors, was, quia deerant vires Temporales Christianis, because they wanted
strength. And the same Evasion Parsons the Jesuit used in Q. Elizabeth's days;
but 'twas such a pitiful Evasion, that Father Watson, who then hated the
Jesuits, was ashamed of it, and did largely confute it. Quodlibet 9. Art. 4.


I might take notice of several more Principles yet, which have been
entertained by our Sectaries, and as like unto Jesuitical Principles as one
Apple is like another. As, that (when they please) they can dispense with
Oaths, though never so lawful, and lawfully imposed, such as the Oath of
Allegiance, Supremacy, Canonical Obedience, etc. these have been swallowed, and
gone down glib, when an unlawful Oath (like a Jesuits Vow) sticks, and is ready
to choke them. Likewise, that they make Obedience to the Civil Magistrate due,
with certain limitations and conditions; viz. if he stick to that Religion
which they suppose to be true. This is a Jesuitical Principle; and so
Bellarmine tells us, That Princes are received Vbi sup.
into the Church upon an Express, or tacit Compact, that they will submit their
Scepters unto Christ, and defend and preserve the Faith; but if once they warp,
their Subjects are free from their Oaths of Obedience. Exactly answerable
hereunto was the Tenor of the Scotch Covenant; wherein they Solemn League and
Covenant, Art. 3.
swore, to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, not
absolutely, but with this limitation and restriction, in the preservation and
defense (they are Bellarmine's very words) of the true Religion. Let a Prince
please them, and he shall be their King; and so far the rankest Jesuit will be
a good Subject; but if he be not of their Opinion, or for their Interest,
farewell Loyalty, and let the poor Prince look to himself. Moreover, they
thought (as the Jesuits do) that any Arts of Dissimulation and Equivocation
were lawful. Of which the late times have afforded us so many pregnant
Instances, that for twenty years together, Hypocrisy seemed (God be merciful
unto us!) to have ran through all proceedings, like an Anima Mundi, to give
life and spirit to every Action. But I cannot well omit one very memorable
Instance, when the House of Commons did solemnly declare on April 9. 1642. That
they intended only a due and necessary Reformation of the Government, and
Liturgy of the Church; and to take away nothing in the one or the other, but
what was evil and justly offensive, or at least unnecessary and burdensome.
Let the world judge whether this was not a plain Equivocation. But it seems,
what in a Jesuit is unlawful, that in others has been allowable and sanctified.

I have not made these Remarks, as if I did believe that all our former
Non-conformists were Jesuits; God forbid: but I fear that great numbers of them
were Jesuited, and they knew it not, at least did not consider it. And I do
heartily wish, that our present Non-conformists (among whom I doubt not but
there are many well-meaning persons) would for the Protestant Religion sake, at
last consider by what base fellows they are abused, influenced, and made use
of, to weaken us by our sad Divisions. I would not therefore be uncharitably
and unjustly censured, as if I designed to upbraid and render them odious: No,
that was not my purpose or intention. But what I have said hitherto was to
show, how crafty and cunning the Jesuit has been for many years, to take
advantage of men's discontents, and to infuse such Principles into them as are
not very distant from their own; and all this under a disguise, and pretending
to be Protestants, when indeed they were utter Enemies to Protestancy, and
intended by degrees to extirpate it, though (according to Contzen's directions)
they dissembled Dissimulet propositum extirpandae Haeresis, Contz. Pol. l. 2.
c. 18. 6.
their purpose, and seemed to row a quite contrary way. I think there is no
reason to doubt, but that several Jesuits and other Romanists have been
preaching, and infecting unwary people in separate Meetings (and especially
those which are most properly called Fanatical, as the Anabaptists, Quakers,
Muggletonians, and the rest.) And therefore I cease to wonder, that of our
vulgar sort of people who have lately been seduced to the Church of Rome, most
are such as were seduced from the Church of England before. 'Twas no hard
matter for subtle Impostors to poison those thoroughly, whom they had infected
already; and of borderers to make them Proselytes, and to draw them gradually
out of one extreme into another. There is an honest man in the world (whose
name and book I shall purposely conceal) who tells us of one Father Brown a
Jesuit, that he boasted on his deathbed at Ingeston-briggs in Scotland, that
he had preached as downright Popery in the Field-Conventicles, as ever he had
preached at Rome. Many Instances of that nature might be collected, but that
the thing is unquestionable. Now why may we not believe that the same tricks
have been played at House-Conventicles in England too? Have not the Whitebreads
and Fenwicks, and Gawens, been as industrious here, as Brown and many others
have been in Scotland? How many are there who have known and conversed with
Romish Priests abroad, whom afterward they have found here up and down in
Conventicles, preaching and scolding at Popery, to wipe off all suspicion from
themselves, and to curry favor with the silly people? Alas, some that call the
Church of Rome, Whore, have been of the same Trade: and it is in this case, as
it was with that worthy Gentleman Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, when he was murdered,
two Papists scuffled together; but 'twas only a pretended skirmish, designed to
draw in the Protestant. They followed each other with innocent Cuffs and
hurtless Blows, and the Justice was called in to end the Fray; and as soon as
he was come, the Combatants having obtained their design, parted of
themselves, fell foul upon the Magistrate, and strangled him. It Is too
notorious, that the Jesuits have played such Pranks at Conventicles in the
Savoy, in Moor fields, and in a world of places more; they cry out against
Superstition and Popery, and give the Papists gentle blows. and dry drubs
without any Arguments; but all this while the Quarrel is but a counterfeit, and
the real design is against the Church of England; and if by any wiles they can
but ensnare and ruin her (which is their great and formidable Enemy) the
Combat will soon be at an end, and the politic Antagonists will soon agree.
It Is a main piece of Jesuitical Policy, and we may count it their sole
Masterpiece, to create Divisions among us, and then to make every little Sect
an Harbor and Covert for themselves. This way they employ their utmost
dexterity (but were we all true to the Old Paths, their designs would easily
be defeated) first to form, and then to animate Factions, by setting up such
new Lights among us which serve not to illuminate, but to inflame. They skrew
themselves into all (even Mechanical) Professions; and by canting words and
fair speeches insinuate themselves into all Parties, and transform themselves
into all shapes and dresses; that what the Poets feigned of a Proteus and an
Empusa, is true of these Hobgoblins of darkness, that they put on any color,
form, and likeness; so that you have no way to discover the Serpent, but by his
poison, nor the Wolf, but by his ravenous stomach.

But of all the Sects which are among us, undoubtedly the Quakers have been and
are most eminently serviceable to our common Adversary: for their Principles
are such as could not come out of any other Mint but the Jesuits. It Is not very
long ago since one Father Talbot ingenuously told a Friend of mine, That it had
cost them Twenty years study at St. Omers, before they could bring Quakerism to
its perfection. And truly no Opinions can more resemble theirs, than those
which are held by that crafty and perverse Sect. Do they not think themselves
as infallible as any Romanist thinks the Pope himself to be? and do they not
say, that one reason why they divide from us, is because we confess our selves
to be men subject unto Error? Do they not lower the Magistrates Authority (as
the Jesuits do) and by all imaginable methods endeavor to render him
contemptible? Do they not vilisie the Holy Scriptures (as the Jesuits do) and
call the Bible a Dead Letter? Do they not cry up the Light, the Light, just as
the Jesuits cry up Tradition, Tradition? Do they not think themselves to be the
only people of God (as the Jesuits think their Faction to be) and count all
others, who are not of their Communion, to be Reprobates and damned persons? Do
they not take it for granted, that they are perfect, and cannot sin? Why, do
but turn the Tables, and behold this is Jesuitism, upon which they build the
Doctrine of meritorious good Works; for where there is no Perfection, there can
be no Merit. But the most luckie and advantageous Principle that was ever
infused into them, is this: That they must not by any means swear, though
called unto it by due Authority. The Jesuit was no fool, when he taught them
this: for hereby he keeps out of harms-way, and shelters himself from a
necessity of taking any Oaths of Supremacy or Allegiance. This Principle
therefore they do errantly guard, and make many Proposals, that they may be
allowed this; and as long as it is allowed, 'twill be impossible to hunt our
Enemies out of the Herd, or to distinguish indeed between a Quaker and a Jesuit.

By this any unprejudiced man may see, that this sullen and dogged Sect is the
Jesuits natural and undoubted Issue, though like other Bastards they are
ashamed to own their Father. And we have reason to believe, that there is not a
considerable Quakers-meeting throughout this Kingdom, but what is managed by
some Jesuit. It Is plain, that many besides White-bread and Gawen, have been
known among them; and it is much to be suspected, that those Ring-leading and
Head-Quakers, who are now so much in Vogue, and who have lately written so many
Advices to the Nation, and other scurrilous Pamphlets, are really Jesuits in
another shape. The Roman Cause is now brought to its last push here; and
therefore the Sticklers for it will have a finger in every Pie: and if by any
means they can but subvert our Government, they doubt not but their Work is
done. Therefore, what they cannot effect by a Gun, or by a Stab, or by Poison,
they try if they can bring it about by other ways, by being for men of large
Principles, by reproaching Government, by defaming Royalists and Churchmen, by
setting Republican Principles on foot, by throwing Bones into Councils, and by
all imaginable Jesuitical tricks, to put the Nation into an Hurly-burly, that
if a Tempest can but be raised, they may ply us with more security, and work
their ends without being seen.

2. Having thus showed the Mischiefs we have sustained by men's running away so
rashly from that Old way which is established in our Church; and how the busy
Emissaries of Rome have taken advantage of their wanderings to associate with
them, and to poison their Consciences with most evil Principles, and to abuse
them in points of Doctrine; I shall now proceed to observe briefly how they
have abused them and us too in point of practice, making them their Tools and
Instruments to carry their designs on. Certainly our disaffected Brethren are
strangely Priest-ridden, though they do not think it: and I am confident, that
they never yet did burn their fingers, but 'twas the Jesuit that did put their
hands (as the Monkey did the Cats foot) into the fire.

Was there an unnatural War among us? It was raised by the Sea the grand
Design in the Reign of K. Charles. Mariana de Rege, lib. 6.
Artifices of Cardinal Barbarino and the Jesuits, pursuant to those directions
which had been given by Mariana, that if a Prince was incorrigible, subjection
to him should be disclaimed, and a War should be raised, and Arms should be
provided, and Taxes should be levied upon the people; and if it were requisite,
the King should be declared a common Enemy, and then be slain with the Sword.

Was the War carried on beyond the expectations, and to the great astonishment
of the whole world? It was the Jesuit that first blinded the eyes of the
Presbyterian, and at last engaged the Independent to pursue the Quarrel further
than the other intended. For what were those Agitators, whose transactions at
Putney many still living can remember? what were they but Jesuits in Buff? Dr.
Du Moulin tells us, that in the year 1647, the question being put by some
Jesuits from England, Answ. to Philanax, p. 59, 60.
first to the Sorbonists, and then, to the Pope, whether it was lawful for them
to subvert the English Government, and to secure their Religion, by making our
King away? it was resolved in the affirmative: and upon that many Jesuits came
over to carry on the Work, and most of them took part in the Army. And about
thirty of them were met by a Protestant Gentleman between Roan and Diepe, to
whom they said (taking him for one of their Party) that they were going for
England, and would take Arms in the Independent Army, and endeavor to be
Agitators.

Did some misguided people among us bind themselves in a solemn League and
Covenant to secure Religion, and for Religion sake to pull down the Church?
Why, though they are fond of that Oath (when they have made no bones of
breaking others,) and though they think themselves still obliged to pursue the
ends of it (when others think they are bound in all Conscience to abjure it,)
yet they would do well to examine whether this their dear Darling was not a
Jesuitical Contrivance. For the Jesuits have been old excellent at framing
solemn Leagues and Covenants; witness that French League contrived by the
Jesuits and the Duke of Guise under Henry the third, which was so like unto
this, that it seems to have been the Pattern according to which this was drawn.
And if you put in the Preservation of the Catholic, instead of the Reformed
Religion; if you put in the Extirpation of Heresy, instead of Prelacy; and
make a few more such little Alterations, you will upon comparing both, find
that the Jesuits Covenant was in a manner the same with the Scotch. This (as
well as that) was entered into by factious men, meeting at Thuan. Hist. lib. 63.
seditious Conventicles, and pretending that they would correct all the
Errata's in the Kings Government. This (even as that) Ibid.
was a Clandestine Covenant, hatched at first without the Kings consent or
privity. This (even as that) was promoted by factious Preachers, who instead of
delivering the Word of God, railed against Government, and the Prince himself.
That Ibid.
(even as this) was for the taking up of Arms to defend Religion (as they
said,) to remove evil Counselors, and to force the Ibid.
King to subscribe to their own Terms. And though Religion was pretended in
both, yet the ruin and subversion of the Kingdom was to be at the end of both;
for so, that wise Statesman Christopher Thuanus told Henry the third, That
those Arms of the Covenanters would fall upon his own head; and Ibid.
let the impartial world judge, whether this League and Covenant did not bring
the Head of Charles the First to the Block. Briefly; if we compare the League
in France with that which was set up in this Island, it will appear, that the
Tenor and Spirit of both was such, as that any indifferent man may conclude,
that the Jesuit who framed the one abroad, was President at that grand Consult,
when the other was plotted and imposed here.

Was that horrible Parricide committed upon a King, of whom the world was not
worthy? Was a day of Public Thanksgiving appointed for it? Did some (still
living) applaud the Fact in their Pulpits? Did that superlative Villain Parker
say, That there never was a greater harmony of the Laws Cited by the Author of
Toleration discussed, p. 85.
of Nature, Reason, Prudence, and Necessity, to warrant any Act, than was to be
found and discerned in that Act of Justice on the late King? Did he say
moreover, That God himself had eclipsed, yea lost the brightest Beam of his
Divine Glory that ever shined on this lower world, if he had not some way or
other brought That person to some eminent and preternatural punishment? Why, to
show by whom those Regicides were acted, and whom they gratified, and whose
Interest they really served, we may remember that a Popish Priest mounted on
Horseback at Charing Cross, veiled his Hat, and flourished his Sword, saying,
Now our greatest Enemy is gone. And with what joy the news of it was received
by the Romanists abroad; and what great hopes they entertained of gaining
England thereby, Dr. Peter du Moulin (who was well able to acquaint us) has
given Answer to Philanax.
us a particular Account.

Have our imprudent Brethren laid all their Irons in the fire to procure a
Toleration? It was the way which Contzen the Jesuit advised, That the Romanists
in a Protestant Kingdom, Subornatio petentium libertatem and indulgentiam.
Contz. Pol. 2. c. 18. 6. Bellarm. in Tort.
should suborn some, and set them on work to crave Liberty and an Indulgence.
'Twas that which Cardinal Bellarmine had the confidence to advise K. James,
That he should grant a Toleration. 'Twas that which some hundreds of Papists
were so greedy of, that (as Mr. Oats tells us) they offered Cromwell, that in
case he would grant it, they would renounce the Interest of the Stuarts (such
very Loyal good Subjects they were.) Dedication of his Narrat.
'Twas that which was once obtained by the joint Interest of some, whom our
credulous Non-conformists took for their hearty Patrons, though it happened
unluckily that one of them at the same time was a Popish Lord. 'Twas that which
Coleman again labored for with all imaginable Zeal, and (by encouragements
from the French King's Confessor) endeavored to purchase at any price, and
with any hazards, and which he cajoled our Dissenters (whom he plough'd with)
into fair hopes of. In a word, it is that then which nothing can more oblige or
gratify the Romanists, and especially the Priests, at this juncture and
critical point of time.

Did the Jesuits and their Accomplices lay a most horrid and devilish Plot here
in England? And did not an open Rebellion break out in Scotland at the same
time? And that we may know by whom those Rebels were acted, it is notorious
that Ireland and other Romish Priests were dispatched away into the North to
prepare them for Tumults, and Hamilton (a Jesuited Papist) was in the Head of
the Rebellion, and their public Declaration did smell so strong of Jesuitism
(for the Act of Supremacy was condemned, the Covenants were revived, the
observation of the 29th of May was disclaimed, and the Kings Authority in
Ecclesiastical matters was called an Usurping Power) that we have no reason to
doubt, but that Declaration was drawn by the Jesuits finger.

Did the Papists here barbarously murder Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey? And did not
some Kirk-men in Scotland a little after most barbarously murder the Archbishop
of St. Andrews? Perhaps they themselves did not understand by what hands they
were set on work: but the Jesuits would greatly triumph, were all the Bishops
and Episcopal Divines in this Island served after the same manner.

It Is endless (and I hope, unnecessary) to reckon up every particular Instance
which serves to show how the Disciples of Ignatius Loiola have all-along for
many years abused our unwary Innovators, and employed them as their Tools and
unfortunate Instruments to execute those designs of theirs, which we are all
highly concerned to oppose. And those Instances which I have mentioned already,
were not intended to exasperate the minds of any Dissenters, or to give them
offense, but rather to do them service as well as our selves. For our common
Cause and Interest does lie at the stake; and if they will please to consider
things without passion and prejudice, they will see but little reason for them
to account me an Enemy, because I have told them the Truth. Were not they
concerned as well as others; and were not the Interest of the Protestant
Religion, in open and extreme danger, I should not have chosen a Subject of
this nature; because I know how sharp and picquant Truth is, especially when it
appears in matters of Fact. But though I do sincerely profess, that for the
welfare of this Church, and for the real good of our Dissenters themselves, I
could be content to offer up my life, yet I do not think my self obliged (as
things stand) to conceal my thoughts, although I am sure to reap little thanks
at the hands of some, for divulging them.

However, as I am persuaded that there are many among them who are men of good
minds and honest hearts, so I hope that some of them will do themselves and
the whole Nation that Right, as both to consider that well-meaning men are
sometimes easily imposed upon, and also to beware that they be not cheated by
Knaves for the future. And such I would beseech, by all that is sacred and dear
unto us, that they would lay to heart the perilous condition of the Reformed
Religion not in this Kingdom only, but by consequence in all parts of Europe
too. And have not our unhappy Divisions from the Old way, been a sad occasion
of this dismal Calamity? Could the Jesuits hurt us, were we of one mind, and
unanimous for that good Old way which did lead so many thousands of our
Ancestors to Heaven? Is it in our established Churches, and conformable
Congregations, that these Hornets do swarm and buzz, and threaten us with
Death? Is it not in separate Meetings that they build their Nests? And are they
not those deluded people whom they coax, and ride, and instigate to do their
jobs for them, besides their own intentions? Why, since we are not ignorant of
the Jesuits wiles, methinks Indignation, and Scorn, and an English Spirit,
should be enough to keep us from being shamm'd into the Snare; and would we but
contend for the Ancient Paths, it would be impossible for us to be in danger of
those Evils which the common Enemy exposes us unto, or to lose that peace
which he rifles us of, by leading us a side into Avenues which are uncouth and
unbeaten.

My Brethren, when first the story of this Jesuitical and damnable Plot found
credit in the world, it was hoped by charitable and sober persons of the Church
of England, that you would have taken hold of that opportunity, to have laid
down your passions, and united your selves with us, for the common good of the
Protestant Religion; and when that worthy Magistrate was so basely
assassinated, there was reason to conclude, that one of the Flock being so
worried, the rest would have ran together presently, and been frighted into an
Union. But since you hold off still, since we hear daily from the Press such
ugly Reflections upon our Church, which is altogether unconcerned in the Plot,
only as a Butt to be shot at; and since Coffee-houses are so full of
licencious Discourses, which plainly tend to the prejudice of Government, and
to the ruin of our Establishments, there is too great reason to suspect, that
there are other bad designs in hand besides those which are driven on
immediately by the Jesuits (even to throw the Church out at windows) and that
while we are in pursuit after the Popish Plotters, somebody else is following
behind to run us through the Heart. I pray God it be not so; but if it be,
assure your selves that the Jesuit is at the bottom of those Designs too: and
do not flatter your selves with fond Confidence, that you your selves shall be
safe by our Ruin.

Alas, are you so extremely in love with your own Fancies, that you will not
make them a Peace Offering for the security of this poor tottering Nation? Is
the Interest of Religion of so little account, that it is not worth your while
to part with a few Whimseys and Humors, for the sake of it? Are you busy at
drawing out new Schemes of Religion, when the common Enemy is in our Quarters?
Plutarch tells us, that when Syracuse was begirt by the old Romans, both by Sea
and Land, Archimedes the Geometrician was so serviceable Plut. in vita Marcelli.
to his fellow-Citizens by his Machins and Bellick Instruments, that Marcellus
and his Forces despaired of sacking the Town as long as that Mathematical
Briareus (so they called Archimedes) was concerned for its defense: But on a
certain day, when that great man was diverting his thoughts in his Study, and
was intent upon drawing out his Geometrical Lines and Figures, the City was
taken on a sudden, and Archimedes knew it not, till a common Soldier rusht in
upon him and gave him his Information, and his Deaths-wound too. Methinks I see
in this story, as in a Map, a representation of the Follies of some among us,
who even now, when the new Romans are at our doors, please themselves with
promises of their own safety, and spend their time in drawing out several
Models, Platforms, and Schemes of Religion, not considering that we are all
exposed to the rage of a common Enemy, nor fearing Archimedes's lot and doom.
But should our Adversaries prevail, no Faction must think to fare the better
for their pretended Demonstrations, nor must any expect either to triumph, or
to find quarter, unless it be the Atheist; because men who are imperious and
bigoted, when once they come to be armed with Power, will more patiently
endure to see men to have no Religion at all, than to see them have a different
Religion from their own. What then will our peevish Brethren get at last, but a
certainty of being buried in the common Ruin? And if they are not of Sampsons
temper, content to die themselves, rather than the House they heave at should
not fall, it highly concerns them to consider, that nothing but Unity can
support our House long; and that which is desired of them, is, that if they
will not, or cannot put their own shoulders under to prop the House up, they
would at least let the Pillars alone upon which it stands now.

Fond people! that like him that set fire on Diana's Temple to get himself a
Name, rather than venture a little of their Reputation with the Populacy, will
venture their own and the public Safety: For to that it must come in the end,
if some stop be not set in time to men's wandering from the Old Paths. Had we all
stayed there, neither Destruction nor Danger could have been before us now. And
the subtle Jesuit perceived it long ago: and therefore his great Expedient and
Design was to lead men aside out of this way, to lead them by the Nose into
some by paths, and withal to lead them like Solomon's fools, to the correction
of the Stocks. Our Dissenters are now his Instruments, but at last he does
intend to make them his Sacrifices, and to make himself either their Lawgiver
or their Priest. The little Jackall that runs so hotly after the Prey, does
but serve the Lion, that upon the least distaste is ready to devour the Booty
and him too. Such is the course of the world, that men fare very ill by serving
wicked and outrageous Masters; they receive the worst returns for the best
services, like the Elm, that is many times killed by the Ivy that twisted it
self about its body, and could not have grown without its Support. I shall add
a known story of Annibal, That his Army being environed by the Roman Forces, to
defeat them of their hopes of victory, he used this Stratagem: In the night he
gathered two thousand Oxen, fastened Plutarch in Fabio.
combustible matter about their horns, then set it all on fire, and so forced
the Cattle upon the Enemies Camp, to put them into disorder and a fright; and
by this wile he drew off his Carthaginians. The poor Beasts went on quietly for
a while, but at last the sense of the fire made them mad; and the more they
endeavored to shake the flames off, the more they smarted. An instance which I
would recommend to the serious consideration of those silly people who are
unawares employed by the politic Romanists, to disturb and defeat us, if it be
possible. However they may go on, like Annibal's Oxen, securely for a while,
with their heads and horns lifted up, and not perceive the mischief that is
over their own pates; yet before these Combustions are quite over, they are
likely to be rewarded with nothing but pain and torment for their service, and
to smart sufficiently by the fire in their heads. They may make way for
Annibal, and be burnt themselves, even by the hands that set them on work.

All this may (by Gods Blessing) be prevented, if men would but be wise in
time. But whatever Conclusions and Experiments some may think to try, no better
directions can be given, than to stand and ask for the Old Paths. There we must
begin to mend, where the Sin and Danger does commence. All our Divisions, and
Disorders, and Dangers, and whatsoever Calamities we have had either Time to
feel, or just Reason to fear, all of them take their rise from this original
Evil, that men have been unreasonable in declining from the Old way. Had our
Government its due Reverence and Authority, as in the days of old: Would the
Hearts of men not be set against our Prayers, but join servently with Us in
them, as in the days of old: Were our Rites esteemed, though little in their
own Nature, yet considerable for their Use, as in the days of Old: Were men
humble, peaceable and modest, thinking no better of themselves than they ought
to think: In a word; Would not unruly men trample under foot those things,
which have been the Hedge and Fence about Religion, but be Orthodox in their
Judgments, and especially in their Lives, as our Fathers were in the days of
old; then (by Gods good Providence over us) we need not fear, what Enemy could
annoy us.

God of his Mercy Grant us Peace in our days; and give us Eyes to see, and
Hearts seriously to consider the things which do belong unto our Peace, before
they are hid from our Eyes. Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Shall by way of Appendix transcribe a passage out of that very learned and
excellent man Dr. Sanderson, in his Preface to his Sermons, bearng date July
13, 1657. where, clearing the regular Sons of the Church of England from the
unjust Aspersions of being Popishly affected, he says, 1. That those very
persons, who were under God the Instruments of freeing us from the Roman yoke,
by casting Popery out of the Church, and sundry of them Martyred in the Cause;
those very persons, I say, were great Favorers of these (now accounted,
Popish) Ceremonies, and the chief Authors or Procurers of the Constitutions
made in that behalf. 2. That in all former Times since the beginning of the
Reformation, our Archbishops and Bishops, with their Chaplains, and others of
the Prelatical Party, were the principal (I had almost said, the only)
Champions to maintain the Cause of Religion against the Papists. 3. That even
in these times of so great distraction, and consequently thereunto, of so great
advantage to the Factors for Rome, none have stepped into the gap more readily,
nor appeared in the face of the Enemy more openly, nor maintained the fight
with more Stoutness and Gallantry, than the Episcopal Divines have done, as
their late learned Writings testify. Yea, and some of them such, as (besides
their other Sufferings) have lain as deep under the Suspicion of being Popishly
affected, as nay other of their Brethren whosoever. 4. That by the endeavors
of these Episcopal Divines, some that were bred Papists have been gained to our
Church, others that began to waver confirmed and settled in their old Religion,
and some that were fallen from Us recovered and reduced, notwithstanding all
the disadvantages of these confused Times; and of each of these I am able to
produce some Instance. But I profess sincerely, as in the presence of God, and
before the world, that I have not known (at least, I cannot call to
remembrance) so much as one single Example of any of this done by any of our
Anti-ceremonian Brethren, whether Presbyterian or Independent.

But I have somewhat to return upon these our Brethren, who thus causelessly
suspect us. Possibly it will not please them [(...):] but I must speak it out,
both for the Truths sake and theirs: to wit, That themselves are in truth,
though not purposely and intentionally (whereof in my own thought I freely
acquit them) yet really and eventually the great Promoters of the Roman
Interest among us, and that more ways than one. First, by putting to their
helping hand to the pulling down of Episcopacy. It is very well known to many,
what rejoicing that Vote brought to the Romish Party: How even in Rome itself
they sang their Io Paeans upon the tidings thereof, and said triumphantly, Now
is the day ours; now is the fatal Blow given to the Protestant Religion in
England. They, who by conversing much with that Nation, were well-acquainted
with the fiery turbulent spirits of the Scottish Presbyterians, knew as well how
to make their advantage thereof: and handled the matter with so much cunning,
by fomenting their Discontents underhand, till they had framed them, and by
their means, some of the same Party here, to become the fittest Instruments for
the carrying on of their great Design: And this, I verily believe, was the
very Masterpiece of the whole Plot. They could not but foresee (as the Event
has also proved) that if the Old Government, a main Pillar in the Building,
were once dissolved, the whole Fabric would be sore shaken, if not presently
shattered in pieces and ruined: things would presently run into Confusion:
Distractions and Divisions would certainly follow; and when the Waters should
be sufficiently troubled and mudded, then would be their opportunity to cast in
their nets for a draught, etc. Whosoever pleases, may read on; and indeed the
whole Preface is highly worthy to be read, and judiciously considered,
especially at this Time.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for and sold by Jonathan Edwin, at the Three
Roses in Ludgate Street.
A Sermon preached on the Thirtieth of January, 1678/9. being the Anniversary
of the Martyrdom of King Charles the First, of blessed Memory, and published at
the request of some Friends, by Edward Pelling, Rector of St. Martins Ludgate:
in quarto.

Ancient and Modern Delusions, discoursed of in three Sermons upon 2 These. 2.
11. concerning some Errors now prevailing in the Church of Rome, by Edward
Pelling, Rector of St. Martins Ludgate: in quarto.

The true Liberty and Dominion of Conscience, vindicated from the Usurpations
and Abuses of Opinion and Persuasion: in octavo.

The Countermine; or a short, but true discovery of the dangerous Principles
and secret Practices of the Dissenting Party, especially the Presbyterians,
showing that Religion is pretended, but Rebellion is intended; and in order
thereto, the Foundation of Monarchy in the State, and Episcopacy in the Church,
are undermined: in octavo.

The common Interest of King and People, showing the Original, Antiquity, and
Excellency of Monarchy, compared with Aristocracy and Democracy, and
particularly of our English Monarchy; and that absolute Papal and Presbyterian
popular Supremacy, are utterly inconsistent with Prerogative, Property, and
Liberty: in octavo.

The Project of Peace; or Unity of Faith and Government, the only Expedient to
procure Peace both Foreign and Domestique, and to preserve these Nations from
the danger of Popery, and Arbitrary Tyranny: in octavo.

Two Sermons preached at the Funerals of the Right Honorable Robert Lord
Lexington, and the Lady Mary his Wife; by Samuel Holden, A. M. late of
Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford, and Chaplain to his Lordship deceased: in quarto.

A Sermon preached July 17. 1676. in the Cathedral-Church of St. Peter in York,
before the Right Honorable Sir Francis North, Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas; and the Honorable Vere Bertie Esquire one of the Barons of the Exchequer;
his Majesty's Judges of Assize for the Northern Circuit. By Thomas Cartwright,
D. D. and Dean of Rippon, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty.

A Sermon preached before the King at Whitehal, January the 9th 1675/6. by
Thomas Cartwright, D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty.

FINIS.

