The expert, and famous madam LOVYS BOURGEOIS Midwife to the Queen of France.


THE Complete Midwife's PRACTICE ENLARGED, In the most weighty and high
concernments of the BIRTH of MAN.

Containing a perfect DIRECTORY, or Rules for Midwives and Nurses.

As also a Guide for Women in their Conception, Bearing and Nursing of
Children: From the Experience of our English Authors. Viz. Sir Theodore Mayern,
Dr. Chamberlain, Mr. Nich. Culpeper.
And others of Foreign Nations.

With Instructions of the Queen of France's Midwife to her Daughter, a little
before her death, touching the practice of the said Art.

As also a farther Discovery of those Secrets kept close in the Breast of Sir
Theodore Mayern, Mr. Nicholas Culpeper, and other English Writers, not made
public till now.

The Fifth Edition Corrected, and much Enlarged, By JOHN PECHET, Fellow of the
College of Physicians, London.

The whole Illustrated with Copper Plates.

London, Printed for H. Rhodes at the Corner of Bride-Lane, in Fleet Street, J.
Philips at the King's Arms, J. Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's Church Yard,
and K. Bentley, in Russel Street, Covent Garden. School.

THE PREFACE By Several PRACTITIONERS in and about the City of LONDON.
IT is high time, since there have been already published many Treatises in
this kind, for us to declare our thoughts for the public good. We have perused
all that have been in this nature in English, and find them strangely
deficient, so crowded with unnecessary Notions, and dangerous Mistakes, that we
thought it fit to give you warning of them, to prevent for the future, the many
unfortunate Mischiefs attending upon ignorance of these Matters.

It is admirable to us, that our Country should be so much deluded, to build
all their practice on such Authors, that have not at all conduced to any
considerable advantage in this so necessary and useful Art, as the preserving
of Mankind. How many miserable Volumes have these late times brought forth? Not
to disparage any that have deserved, but in so weighty a Concernment as this,
we must stand upon our integrity. There has been a reasonable intention in the
publishers of some Books, viz. The Birth of Man, the most Ancient, but very
much unfurnished; as also the Books of Childbirth, The Expert Midwife, the
worst that has been written in that kind, in French; and it is almost a Miracle
to us, that Mr. Culpeper, a Man whom we otherways respect, should descend so
low, as to borrow his imperfect Treatise from those wretched Volumes, some of
which are before mentioned; and we must deal faithfully with you, that, that
small piece of his, entitled, The Directory for Midwifes, is the most
desperately deficient of them all; except he writ it for necessity, he could
certainly have never been so idle to have exposed it to the light.

Now, to give you a true information of what we have here done for your good,
we shall not only justify what is here contained from our own Experiences, but
fully demonstrate from the Writings of the best Practisers both of the French,
Spanish, and Italians, and other Nations; and we must clearly confess, that we
are highly obliged to the incomparable labors of that most Famous Woman of the
World, Madam Louise Burgeois, late Midwife to the Queen of France: The praises
that we read of all those that ever heard of her, are not so much a flourish,
as truth; for her reasons are solid experiences, and her witnesses have been
all of the most eminent Persons of France; and not only of her, but as we have
already expressed, of the most excellent known Men and Women of this Art of other
Countries: It Is upon this account that we break the barriers, and boldly stand
the brunt of all Censures.

The chief occasion of this Book, is, to make it a great Exemplary, and School,
where Medicine married to the Midwife's industry, may teach every one the
admirable effects of this art of Midwifry.

And now knowing, Reader, that the Receipts herein contained, which have ever
had happy successes, are not made public to the World on any other design,
than for the assistance of such persons, whom either the want of fortune, or
opportunity denies such sudden helps, neither can we be without bleeding
hearts, if we but consider how many have been lost by the unskilfulness of
those that attempted this great Work; nor should we have prostrated our
reputation and private experiences, but to correct the frequent mistake of most
Midwives, who, resting too boldly upon the common way of delivering Women,
neglect all the wholesome and profitable Rules of Art, which might concern them
in the occult Diseases of Women, as also of the Anatomical parts of the Body.
Thus having discharged our Duty, we have no more to write, but refer you to the
Book it self. We are the hearty Well-wishers of your good,

R.C. J.D. M.S.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THE Bookseller designing another Edition of this Midwifry, took care to have
the Anatomick part completed, and the whole Enlarged considerably, as may
appear to any one that will compare the Fourth Edition with this.

It is a plain and useful Treatise of Midwifry, and is moreover stocked with
great variety of approved Remedies for the Diseases of Women and Children, and
therefore may well deserve to be accounted the best Book extant upon this
Subject.

Books lately Printed for R. Bentley, J. Phillips, H. Rhodes, and J. Tailor.
1. THE New World of Words; or, an Universal English Dictionary. Containing the
proper Significations, and Derivations of all words from other Languages.
Together with the Definitions of all those Forms that conduce to the
Understanding of any of the Arts or Sciences. Collected by E. P. The Fifth
Edition, with large Editions, and Improvements from the best English and
Foreign Authors. A Work very necessary for Strangers, as well as our own
Countrymen, to the right Understanding of what they Discourse, Write, or Read.

2. The Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy and Religion.
Enquired into, in a Letter to R. L. with Observations on the Answer thereto, in
a Letter to the same, to which are added. Considerations on Mr. Hobbs's State
of Nature. With several other pieces of the same Author.

3. Aesop's Fables, with their Morals in Prose and Meeter, Grammatically
Translated: Illustrated with Pictures and Emblems. Together with the History of
his Life. The 13 th Edition, by W. D. Price 2 s.

4. The Queen's Closet opened, being Incomparable Secrets in Physic,
Chyrurgery, Cookery, Preserving, Candying, etc. Which were presented to the
Queen, by the most experienced Persons of the Times; many whereof were had in
esteem, when Her Majesty pleased to descend to private Recreations. Price 2 s.

5. The English Rudiments for the Latin Tongue, Explained by way of Question
and Answer, which are so formed, that a Child, omitting altogether the
Questions, may learn only the Answers, and be fully instructed in the Rudiments
of the Latin Tongue, By W. Dugard, Price 1 s.

6. The School of Physic, or the Experimental Practice of the whole Art; a
Work very useful and necessary for the information of all in Physic,
Chyrurgery, Chemistry, etc. By N. Culpeper, late Student in Physic. With on
account of the Author's Life.

The Contents.
OF the Genitals or Vessels dedicated to Generation in men or women. Page 1 Of
the Vessels of preparation. p. 2 Of the Parastatae or Vessels where the blood
is first changed. p. 5 The use of the preparing Vessels. p. 4 Of the Testicles
in general. p. 6 Of the Tunicles of the Stones. p. 8 Of the suspensory Muscles.
p. 9 Of the substance and temper of the Stones. p. 10 Of the actions of the
Testicles. p. 11 Of the Vtility of the Testicles, and their parts. p. 12 Of the
Vessels that casts forth the Seed. p. 14 Of the Seminary Bladders. p. 15 Of
the Kernelly Prostatae, or forestanders. p. 17 Of the structure of the Yard. p.
21 Of the several parts, constituting the Yard. p. 22 Of the action of the
Yard. p. 26 Of the use of the Yard in general. ibid. Of the use of the parts
constituting the Yard. p. 27 Of the Genitals of Women. p. 29 Of those parts
called Nemphae, and the Clytoris. p. 30 Of the fleshy knobs, and the greater
neck of the Womb. p. 33 Of the Hymen. p. 34 Of the Vessels that run through the
neck of the Womb. p. 36 Of the fabric of the Womb. p. 37 Of the preparing
Vessels in Women. p. 40 Of the stones in Women. p. 41 Of the deferent, or
ejaculatory Vessels. p. 45 Of the actions and uses of the Genital parts in
Women. p. 48 Of the action of the Clytoris, p. 49 Of the action and use of the
neck of the Womb. ibid. Of the uses of the Vessels running through the neck of
the womb. p. 50 Of the actions of the Womb. p. 50 Of the Vtility of the Womb.
p. 51. Of the Vtility of the preparing Vessels in Women. p. 52 Of the Vtility
of the Stones. ibid. Of the signs of Conception. p. 53 Whether she has
conceived a Male. p. 56 Whether a Female. ibid. Of the Conception of Twins. p.
57 Of false Conception. ibid. How Women ought to govern themselves, in the time
of their going with Child. p. 63 The Womb-Cake. p. 85. Of the mixture of the
Seed of both Sexes, as also of its substance and form. p. 96. Of the three
Tunicles which the Birth is wrapped in, in the Womb. p. 97. Of the true
generation of the parts, and the increase of them, according to the several
days and seasons. p. 98 Of the nourishment of the Birth in the Womb. p. 102 Of
the condition of the Infant in the Womb, in the 6, 7, and 8 month. p. 103 Of
the situation of the Child in the womb. ibid. Of Midwives. p. 107 What ought to
be observed when she is near the time of her lying down. p. 108 How to expel
the Colic from Women in Childbed. p. 110 How the Midwife may know when the
pains of Travel do seize on a Woman. p. 111 Of the falling down of the Waters,
a good while before the Woman Travels. ibid. What the Midwife ought to do in
time of Travel. p. 112 How to draw forth the Secondines. p. 114 What may be
given to a Woman in Travel. ibid. How to put the Womb again into its place. p.
115 Against the extreme loss of blood, which happens to women, immediately
after their delivery. p. 116 What is to be done to a woman presently after her
Delivery. p. 117 Of Women that have a great deal of blood, and purge not
neither in their Travel nor after. p. 118 Of those who have but a little blood.
p. 120 What is to be done to the Infant. ibid. How to govern Women in
Childbed. p. 121 Of the bathings that a Woman is to use for the first eight
days of her Lying-in. p. 122 How a Midwife ought to govern her self, in case a
Woman be to be delivered of two Children. ibid. Of the danger that a Woman
has, to purge her self for the first days of her Lying-in p. 124 Of the second
washing for Women. ibid. What is to be done to Infants as soon as they are
born. p. 125 Of the last Washing for Women. p. 126 Of an Astringent for women,
when they shall have occasion. 127 To make Cere-Cloaths for Women. ibid. To
cleanse a Woman before she rises. ibid. How a woman lying in of her first
Child, may avoid the gripings of her belly. p. 128 The Queen of France, her
Receipt. p. 129 Certain Precepts hindering the delay and difficulty of bringing
forth. ibid. How the Secondines are to be hastened out. p. 132 Pills for that
purpose. p. 134 Of cases of extremity; and first, what is to be done to a
woman, who in her Travel is accompanied with a flux of blood, and with
Convulsions. p. 135 Of ordering the woman after she is delivered p. 148 What is
to be done to the Breast, Belly, and lower parts of the woman in Childbed. p.
150 An Ointment. p. 151 An Ointment to keep the Milk from clotting. ibid. A
Fomentation much commended. ibid. Of the choice of a good Nurse. p. 153 What is
to be done in the extreme parts of the Child. p. 154 What is to be done to such
Children as are troubled with Phlegm. p. 155 What is to be done to Children that
have their Cods full of wind. ibid. How to take away the Canker out of the
Infants mouth. 156 What is to be done to Children whose Intestines are fallen.
ibid. To make an ointment to strengthen the thighs and legs of a Child, and to
make him go. p. 157 Of the relaxations of the Matrix, and the cause. ibid. Of a
Disease that happens by reason of the fall of the Matrix. p. 159. To remedy the
fall of the Fundament in Infants. p. 160 Of the Diseases of Women: and first of
the inflammation of the Breast. ibid. Of Windy Tumors in the breasts. p. 169
Of Swelling from Milk. p. 164 Of the watery Tumor in the Breast. p. 172 Of the
Kernel in the Breast. p. 174 Of the Scirrhus of the Breast. p. 176 Of the
Cancer in the Breasts. p. 183 Of the greatness of the Breasts. p. 186 Of the
defect, abundance, and coagulation of the Milk. 187 Of the Diseases of the neck
of the Womb; and first of the Disease called Tentigo. p. 188 Of the narrowness
of the neck of the Womb. p. 189 Of Wheals, Condyloma's of the Womb, and of
Hemorrhoids. p. 191 Of the Vulcers of the neck of the Womb. p. 194 Of the Womb
being out of temper. p. 200 Of the narrowness of the Vessels of the womb. p.
203 Of the puffing up of the Womb. p. 204 Of the inflammation of the Womb. p.
206 Of the Scirrhus of the Womb. p. 209 Of the Dropsy of the Womb. p. 210 Of
the falling of the Womb. p. 211 Of the ascent of the Matrix, as also of the
Wounds and Ulcers of the same. p. 213 Of the pain of the Womb. p. 215 Of the
suppression of the Flowers. p. 216 Of the dropping of the flowers, and the
difficulty of their coming down. p. 220 Of the discoloring of the Flowers. p.
221 Of the inordinate flux of the Flowers. p. 222 Of the over-abundance of the
Courses. p. 224 Of the Whites and Gomorrhea in Wom^n. p. 226 Of the
Green Sickness. p. 228 Of the Suffocation of the Matrix. p. 230 Of Barrenness.
p. 243 Of bringing up of Children, and their diseases. p. 246 Of the Diseases
of the Head. ibid. Bigness and swelling of the head in little Children. p. 248
Of the Diseases of the eyes, ears, and noses in Children. p. 249 Of certain
Ulcers in Childrens mouths. p. 250 Of certain other Tumors called Paroulis,
and Espoulis. ibid. Of the two strings under the tongue of the Child. p. 251 Of
the Coughing of Children. p. 252 Of breeding Teeth. ibid. Of the Inflammation
of the Navel-string in Infants. p. 253 Of the Worms. ibid. Of the Convulsion in
Infants. ibid. Of the swelling of the Hypocondria in Infants. p. 255 Of
Costiveness in Children. ibid. Of looseness in Children. ibid. Of Burstness in
Children. p. 256 Of the inflammation of the Navel. p. 257 Of the jutting forth
of the Navel. ibid. Of the Stone in the Bladder. p. 257 Of the not holding of
the Urine. p. 258 Of the Intertrigo. ibid. Of Leanness. ibid. Of the difficulty
that Children have to make water. p. 259 Of the Inflammation of the Almonds of
the ears. ibid. Of Vomiting. p. 260 Of the Hicquet. ibid. Of the pain of the
Belly in Children. p. 261 Of the Small Pox in Children. ibid.
The Contents of the SVPPLY.
1. OF the generative Seed, its beginning, and particularly of the four
Concoctions. page 263 2. The Generation of Man, compared with the production of
Plants. p. 266 3. By what means Parents may get wise Children. p. 268 4. The
Signs of the several degrees of hot and dry in a Man. p. 272 5. What Women
ought to marry with what Men, that they may have Children. p. 273 6. How Males
are gotten, and not Females; and contrary. p. 275 7. How to preserve Childrens
wit, when formed. p. 278 8. Further Considerations of the gradual progress of
the births formation in the Womb. p. 283 9. The Notes of Virginity, whether
violable, but by Man. ibid. 10. Whether there may be a mutation of Sexes: and
of Hermaphrodites.
The Contents of Sir Theodore Mayern's Rare Secrets in MIDWIFRY.
TO know the time of Delivery; whereby the woman may know the better how to
prepare her self. page 295 Signs which precede Delivery. p. 296 To cause the
Woman to contain the Birth. p. 297 An Emplaister to hinder the monthly flux in
Women with Child. p. 297 An Emplaister for a Woman that is fearful of
containing the Birth. ibid. Preparatory Ointments to be used before the time of
Delivery. p. 298 In case of Vomiting. ibid. Regulation of Diet. p. 299 Other
Advertisements relating to the several Accidents which may happen. p. 300 To
accelerate and hasten the Labor before the time of Childbearing. p. 305 An
Ointment for the Midwife's hands. p. 310 After Delivery. p. 310 If the pains
cease not, etc. ibid. To strengthen the Womb. ibid. To strengthen the Womb
without the help of Swathe-bands. p. 311 A fomentation to provoke the
Afterbirth. ibid. Another for the same. p. 312. A Pessary for the same. ibid.
Two other Pessaries for the same. ibid. To expel the Child, and afterbirth, in
time of great necessity. ibid. Another to expel the afterbirth. p. 313. To
expel the Birth, whether alive or dead. ibid. Against pains of the heart.
ibid. To dry up the Milk. ibid. Another for the same. p. 314. A Fomentation for
the same. ibid. Another. ibid. An Ointment against the curdling of the milk in
the Breast. p. 315 To curdle the milk. ibid. Against Fissures in the Breasts.
p. 316 Another for the same. ibid. Pain in the Breasts after Delivery. ibid. An
Opiate to be given to Children newly born. ibid. Against Barrenness. p. 317
Another for the same. ibid. To increase Lust, and help Conception. p. 320 An
Opiate for the same. ibid. Another for the same. ibid. An Application to be
made upon the Privities presently after Delivery. p. 321 The next day foment
these parts with this Fomentation. ibid. A Bath in Summer. p. 322 The third
Bath. p. 323 After she has bathed, let her foment for one or two days the
lower parts of her Belly. ibid. A Fomentation for the Womb the second day after
the Bath. p. 324 To cause the swelling of the belly to fall. p. 324 Pain after
Delivery. ibid. Against the swelling of the Belly after Delivery. p. 325
Against wrinkles of the skin after Childbearing. ibid. An ointment to be used
before a woman lies down. ibid. Another for the same. p. 326 A Pomatum for the
same. ibid. An ointment for the same. ibid. Another for the same. ibid. Certain
Instructions grounding upon practical Observations, fit to be known by all
Midwives, and Childbearing Women, etc. p. 327. A second observation of a Woman
that had been in Travel nine days. p. 330 Of a Woman here in Town that bare her
Child eleven Months, and could not be delivered. p. 331 Of the common opinion,
that a Woman seven months gone, ought to walk very much; and of the accidents
that happen thereby. p. 333 Of a Child which they thought sick of the
Epilepsie, occasioned by the sickness of the Mother; and of the cause. p. 336
Of a young Woman, who being struck upon the belly by her Husband with his foot,
was in great pain, and could not be brought to bed without the help of a
Surgeon. p. 337 Of two Deliveries of one Woman. ibid. Of a Woman that because
she would not be ruled in her lying in, died. p. 339 Of certain women that bear
children and Lye-in before their time; and others at their full time, who grow
big, and full of humors; which causes the death of the Child presently after
their Delivery, their Children being nourished in their bellies like fish, only
with water. p. 340 The observation of a woman who was thought unable to bear
any more Children, yet contrary to expectation was delivered of one, and the
reason thereof. p. 341 A good observation in the choice of Nurses. p. 342 Of a
woman which I laid two several times, and of the difference of her bearing of
two Children, proceeding from several Causes. p. 344 Instruction of a famous
and dying Midwife to her Daughter, touching the practice of this Art. p. 345
THE COMPLETE MIDWIFE'S Practice Enlarged. Of the Genitals, or Vessels
dedicated to Generation, in Men and Women.
THE consideration of these things is so necessary for the purpose of this
Book, that they require not only a deep meditation but the pre-eminence to take
up the first thoughts of those who would arrive to the knowledge of a thing so
much needful to all mankind. And it may be reasonably feared, that many Women
do miss their design, because they know nothing but the outside of things: so
that in matters of extremity, because they are ignorant of the structure of the
parts, they cannot tell how to go about their work. We shall therefore begin
with the Anatomy of the privy parts, the Organs of generation, whereby through
procreation is conserved a perennity of mankind, which nature has denied to
particulars. These parts being not alike in both Sexes, we must necessarily
treat of each apart; and first of those of Man.

In Man, some of these parts afford matter for the Seed, viz. the Spermatic
Arteries; others bring back again the blood that is superfluous to the making
of the Seed, and to the nourishment of the Stones, and these are the Spermatic
Veins; and both the Arteries and Veins were formerly called preparing Vessels.
Some make the Seed, as the Stones; some carry the Seed back again; some contain
the Seed and an oily matter, as the Seed-bladders the first, and the Prostats
the latter. Some discharge the Seed into the Womb; and this is done by the Yard.

CHAP. I. Of the Vessels of Preparation.
AMong the Spermatic Vessels are to be considered first, two veins, and two
arteries: these are carried downward from the small guts to the Testicles, and
are much bigger in Men than they are in Women.

The original of these Veins is not always the same; for commonly the right
Vein rises out of the Hollow vein, a little below the source or original of
the Emulgent; but the least takes his original from the lower part of the
Emulgent it self. Yet sometimes it has a branch carried to it from the trunk
of the hollow Vein.

The middle part of these veins runs directly through the Loins, resting upon
the Lumbal Muscle, a thin Membrane only intervening; and thus having gone above
half its journey, it branches out and distributes it self to the near adjoining
filmy parts of the Body. The uttermost part of these vessels is carried beyond
the Midriff to the Stones, yet do they not pass through the Peritonaeum, but
descend with a small nerve and the Muscle called Cremaster, through the
Duplicity of the Midriff; when it approaches near the Stones, it is joined with
an Artery: and now these Vessels which were before a little severed one from
the other, are by a film rising from the Peritonaeum closed up, and bound both
together; and so twisting up, like the young tendrils of a Vine, they are
carried to the end of the Stones.

The arteries which are associated to these veins, take their original a little
beneath the Emulgent vein, whence they descend downward, and a little from
their beginning or original, they are joined to these veins, till they are
closed together by an Anastomosis or Inosculation, ending like a Piramid.

It has been generally taught, that there are several Inosculations of the
Arteries, with the Veins in their passage, whereby the blood of the Veins and
Arteries are mixed; but since the knowledge of the Circulation of the Blood,
this Opinion has been rejected; for the blood in the Arteries goes down toward
the Stones, and that in the veins ascends from them; and therefore if these two
Vessels should open one into the other, the Blood in one of them must
necessarily be thrust back, or else stopping, stretch and break the Vessels;
but the truth is, the blood, both for the nourishment of the Stones, and the
making of Seed, flows down by the Arteries only in an even course, without any
windings and twinings, like the tendrils of Vines, so much talked of, as the
excellent Anatomist de Graef says he has found by frequent inspection. The
Veins carry back from the Stones, what of the blood remains from their
nourishment, and making of Seed, and these indeed come out of the Stones, with
a vast number of Roots, whereby they suck up the said Blood, and are most
admirably interwoven, and inosculated one with another, 'till about four or
five fingers breadth above the Stone, which space is called the Pyramidal Body.

Two things are to be noted. First, That these spermatic Veins have from their
rise to their end several Valves, which open upwards, and so suffer the Blood
to ascend toward the hollow Vein, but not to return back again. Secondly, That
though the Spermatick Arteries go a direct course in Men, yet in Brutes they are
more complicated, and twisted with the Veins, but without any opening of one
into another. There are Nerves and Lympheducts, that pass into the Testicles
together with the Vessels of preparation.

CHAP. II. The Use of the preparing Vessels.
THE Use of those Vessels which are called the Vessels of Preparation, is
chiefly to attract out of the hollow Vein, or left Emulgent, the most pure and
exquisitely concocted Blood, which is most apt to be converted into Seed; which
they contain and prepare, giving unto it a certain rude form of Seed in those
parts that lie as it were in certain pleights or folds, which they do by a
peculiar property bequeathed to them.

Another Use of them is gathered by their situation; for as they are now
situated, that is to say, the right Vein coming from the Hollow Vein, and the
left from the Emulgent: This incovenience is avoided, that the left Vein is not
forced to pass over the great Artery, and so be in danger of breaking, by
reason of the swift motion of the Artery. Moreover, there being a necessity
that Male and Female should be begot, it is fit that there should be Seed
proper for the generation of both Sexes, whereof some must be hotter, and some
must be colder; and therefore Nature has so ordered it, that the hotter Seed
should proceed from the right Vein for the generation of man, and the colder
from the left, for the generation of Females. The left Vein has also this
property to draw from the Emulgent the more serous and less pure Blood, to the
intent that the serous humor might stir up Venery by its salt and acrimonious
substance; and therefore it is observed, that those who have the left Stone
bigger, are most full of Seed, and most prone to Venery.

These Veins are so far from preparing the Seed, as that they only bring back,
what was superfluous from the making it. And indeed the Arteries in Men do no
more merit the name of preparing Vessels, in regard to the Seed, than the
Gullet in respect of the Chyle, or the chyliferous thoracick duct, in regard to
the Blood. But however we continue the old Names, declaring only against the
reason of them.

CHAP. III. Of the Parastatae, or Vessels where the Blood is first changed.
THESE four Vessels after many ingraftings and knittings together, seem at
length to become only two bodies, full of little crumplings like the tendril of
a Vine, white, and in the form of a Piramid, resting the right upon the right
Stone, and the left upon the left Stone. These are called Parastatae, which, as
they stand, pierce the tunicles of each Stone with certain fibers or
extraordinary small Veins, which afterward disperse themselves through the
body of those Stones. The substance of these Parastatae is between that of the
Stones, and that of the Preparing Vessels; for they neither altogether consist
of Membranes, neither are they altogether Glandulous or Kernelly.

Upon the Stones, as yet clad with the tunica albuginea, are fixed the
epididymidae, called also Parastatae; these do not differ from the Stones, only
these consists of diverse ducts, but those, after their six or seven Roots, that
rise out of the Stone, are united, (which they are in a short space) but of
one, only a little thicker, and the Parastatae differ not from the vasa
deferentia; saving, that those go by a winding passage; and these by a
straight, and that those are a little softer, and narrower.

CHAP. IV. Of the Testicles in general.
THE Stones are in number two, very seldom one, and much seldomer 3 or 4 The
situation of the Stones in Men is without the Midriff, at the root of the Yard
under the belly; and that for two causes, to keep men more chaste; it being
observed, that those creatures which carry their stones within their Bodies,
are more salacious, and bring forth in great numbers.

Their bigness is not always alike in all Creatures, but in men as big as a
Pigeons Egg, or as a small Hens Egg; and commonly the left is bigger than the
right.

In the Anatomy of the Stones, diverse things are to be considered. Their
Tunicles, or the skins in which they are wrapped, as well those which are common
to both, as those which are peculiar to either; next, the muscles; then, the
substance of which they are composed; and lastly, the Vessels which are
dispersed through the body of the stones.

The Stones in Latin, are called Testes, either because they testify one to be
a Man, or because amongst the Romans, none could bear witness but he that had
them. They have a peculiar substance, such as is not in all the Body besides,
whitish and soft, made up of an innumerable little Ropes of Seed carrying
Vessels. There is no cavity in them, but those said Vessels are continued to
one another, and carry the Seed in their undiscernable hollowness. Hippocrates
held the right to be bigger and hotter than the left, and therefore called it
the Male-getter, and the left the Female-getter; these fancies seem ridiculous,
seeing there is no such difference of their bigness, and that their Vessels are
common; they have Arteries and Veins from the preparing Vessels, which some
have thought to reach only to the inmost coat, because they are not conspicuous
in the inner substance; but that comes to pass, by reason that the arterial
Blood presently loses its color, and, by the seminifick faculty of the Stones,
is turned into Seed, which being whitish, of the same color with the Vessels,
makes them undiscernible; yet in those men, that have died of languishing
Diseases, and whose Stones have their faculty impaired, Diemerbroeck says, that
he has often seen Blood-bringing Vessels in the inmost parts of the Stones, and
has showed them to many, in the public Anatomick Theater: As to Nerves, Dr.
Willis affirms, that he could never observe more to go to them, than one from a
vertebral pair, and that too was most of it spent upon the Muscle cremaster.
Concerning the Use of this Nerve, there is a great Controversy, Dr. Glisson,
Dr. Wharton, and others, will have it convey a seedy Juice, which makes the
greatest part of the Seed: But Dr. Willis is of another Opinion; however the
Seed must needs consist of a nervous Juice, and plenty of Spirits brought from
the Brain, because of the great weakness, and enervation that is induced upon
the Brain, and Nerves, by too great an use of Venery.

Lympheducts they have also, arising from betwixt their coats, and ascending
upwards into the belly with the Vasa Deferentia: these have many valves looking
upwards, which hinder any thing from descending by them to the Stones, but
permit the Lympha to ascend, which they convey into the Chyliferous Vessels.

CHAP. V. Of the Tunicles of the Stones.
THE Tunicles are wrapped up in diverse coverings about the number of which there
has been great dissension. But they are now reduced to five, whereof two are
common, and are called Scrotum, and Dartos; three particular, the names of
which are Elytroides, Erythroides and Epididymis.

The first of these, which is like a Satchel or Purse, and is common to both,
consists of a skin and a cuticle. This contains the two Stones like a Purse,
and is obvious to the touch. The skin of this part differs from any other part
of the skin which covers the body: for whereas that is stretched out and spread
close over the body, this is more loose, and made to stretch out, or to be
wrinkled up together as occasion is; that is, as the stones either ascend, or
descend: they ascend commonly in the time of Conjunction; they descend in
Fevers, weakness of the Testicles, or by reason of old age.

The second Tunicle.
The second is called Dartos, because it is easily separated from the others. In
this, the Testicles lie as it were in a nest, wrapping them about more close
than the Scrotum does. It takes its original from the Fleshy Pannicle, which
though it be thinner hereabouts than in any other part of the body, yet it is
full of little veins and arteries.

The proper Tunicles, are, The proper Tunicle.
first the Elytroides, which is also called Vaginalis, by reason it supplies
the office of a sheath. It takes its original from the production of the
Peritonaeum, for where the spermatick Vessels pass, they do not at all bruise
the Peritonaeum, but carry it down to the Stones, and so constitute or make
this Tunicle. To know this Tunicle, and the original of it, is very necessary
for Physic, because that hollowness, which the Processes of the Peritonaeum do
make for the passage of the spermatick Vessels, is sometimes dilated as far as
the beginning, or source of this Tunicle, and both the small guts and the Kall
fall down upon the Testicles, which is the cause of that kind of Burstness,
which by the Physicians is called Enterocele. This Tunicle grows to that which
is called Dartos, being joined to it by many nervous fibers. Underneath this is
a Tunicle, called Erythroides, or the red Tunicle; so called from the multitude
of red veins which are sprinkled up and down in it. It rises from the other
Membranes, and is encompassed without by the first proper Tunick.

The third, and that which immediately compasses the stones, is that which is
called Epididymis: it is white, thick, and strong, to preserve the soft and
loose substance of the Stones. It rises from the Tunicle of the seminal
Vessels, being the thickest of all the Tunicles, and has some few veins
scattered up and down in it.

CHAP. VI. Of the suspensory Muscles.
TO keep the Stones from oppressing, or stretching overmuch the passages of
the seminal Vessels, Nature has provided them two muscles for them to hang by,
on both sides one, in form oblong and slender.

The Original of these Muscles.
These Muscels derive their original from a thick membrane, which is joined to
the Hanchbone, in the further part of that region, where the hair grows; and is
fastened to this bone with certain fleshy and straight fibers; where the oblique
Muscles of the Abdomen or Midriff end, thence reaching down upon the superior
Members of the Testicles, they are extended through the whole length of that
round Body.

These Muscles are never seen in Women, being altogether useless, because their
Stones are not pendent, but are enclosed within their bodies.

CHAP. VII. Of the substance and temper of the Stones.
THE substance of the Stones is glandulous, or kernelly, white, soft, loose,
spongy and hollow, having sundry vessels dispersed through them.

Now although the substance of the Testicles be most soft and moist, yet does
not this moistness constitute an uniform, or homogeneal body; for the substance
of the Stones is wholly dissimilar, and full of fibers. These fibers also seem
to be of a different substance from that of the Stones, being only clothed
with the flesh of the Stones, as the fibers of the Muscles are inwardly
nervous, but covered over with the flesh of the Muscles. These fibers again
differ in this, that the fibers of the Testicles are hollow, but the fibers of
the Stones full and substantial. These fibers are said to come from the
spermatic vessels, and thence branch themselves forth through the Testicles, by
which that part of the Seed, which is over and above what serves for the
nourishment of the Testicles, is drawn forth and kept for procreation.

As concerning the temper of the Stones, they would sooner be thought cold than
hot, if that Maxim, were true, that, All white things are cold, and all red
things hot. Notwithstanding, because nature is known to abhor all coldness in
the work of generation; Therefore we must presume to affirm the temper of the
Stones to be hot, for they always abound with blood, and a pure spirit that can
never be without heat: besides that, heat is required for the concoction of
this blood, and the changing it into seed; yet, it is very temperate, as
appears by the softness of the substance: for as coldness and dryness is the
cause of hardness, so heat and moisture is the cause of softness.

Nevertheless, we are to understand this, that the temper of the Stones are not
alike in all, for in some they are far colder than in others. And therefore
those, who have hot Testicles, are more salacious and prone to venereal
actions, having the places near about much more hairy, and their Testicles much
harder than others. Those that have their Testicles cold, find every thing
contrary.

The greatest heat is in the right Testicle, because it receives more pure, and
hotter blood from the hollow Vein, and the great Artery; the left colder,
because it receives a more impure, and serous blood from the Emulgent Vein.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Actions of the Testicles.
THE action, and use of the Testicles, is, To generate Seed, a gift which they
obtain from an inbred quality, which Nature has bestowed upon them. For the
blood being received by the spermatic Vessels, and there beginning to change
its color, is by and by received by the deferent Vessels, or the vessels which
carry the blood so prepared to the Testicles; where it is for a while
contained, and afterward being carried to the Stones, is by them made Seed,
and the last work perfected. And it may with more easiness be affirmed, that
the Seed is generated by the Stones, because every like is said to generate its
like; now the substance of the Testicles is very like the Seed it self, that
is, white, moist, and viscous. Whether the Stones are the only efficient cause
of the Seed is not here to be disputed, being only a nice point, and no way
profitable. We shall rather with silence adhere to that opinion, which affirms
the function of the Testicles to be the generation of the Seed, which is most
likely; and proceed to the next.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the Utility of the Testicles and their parts.
THE structure of the Testicles being thus known; it remains that we show you
their use. This is first discovered from their situation. For of those
Creatures that have Stones, some have them in their bodies, as all Fowl; others
have them without, though not pendent; others have them hanging downward, as
men. Men therefore have their Testicles without their bodies for two causes;
first, because it is required that the Testicles of the Male should be bigger
and hotter than those of the Female; so that it were impossible for them to be
contained within the body, because of their quantity. Besides, the Seed of the
Male being the effective original of the Creature, and therefore hottest; it is
also required that the Seed should be more abundant than could be contained in
the Testicles, were they placed within the body: for the seminary passages must
have been less, and the veins themselves would not have afforded such plenty of
matter as now they do.

The motion of the Testicles is also to be considered; by which they move
sometimes upward and sometimes downward. The one of these motions which is made
upward is voluntary, as being made by the Muscles; but the motion downward is a
forced motion, not happening without the laxity of the Muscles; the Testicles,
through their own weight, falling downwards. These Muscles are called
Cremasters, their use being to draw up the Testicles to shorten the way of the
Ejaculation of the Seed; as also to keep the vessels from being distended too
far by the weight of the Testicles.

The use of the Tunicles is now to be spoken of; and first, of that which is
outermost, and is called by the Latins Scrotum, being the purse wherein the
Testicles are contained. It is made to wrinkle it self up, and to let it self
loose, that it may be large enough for the Testicles when they swell with
plenty of Seed, and to wrinkle up again, when the Testicles being emptied, and
so becoming less, are drawn upward. The other Coats, or Tunicles, are also made
for the defense of the Stones, but so thin and light that they should not
oppress the Stones with their weight; that which is called Erythroides has
many veins for the nourishment of the adjacent parts. The Epididymis was made
to wrap the Testicle round about, lest the Humid matter of the Testicle should
flow about, and consequently be wasted.

CHAP. X. Of the Vessels that cast forth their Seed.
THat passage which comes from the head of the Testicles to the root of the
Yard, is called the Ejaculatory Vessel. This, as I said before, rises from the
head of the Testicles, and joining downward to the Testicle, descends to the
bottom, and thence being reflected again, and annexed to the preparing Vessel,
it returns again to the head of the Testicle; from thence it proceeds upward
from the Testicles, till it touch the bone of the small guts, still keeping
close to the preparing Vessel, till it pierce the production of the
Hypogastrium. Thence tending downward through the hollowness of the hip, it
slides between the bladder and the straight Gut, till it reach the glandulous
Prostatae, or Forestanders, and fix it self at the foot, or root of the Yard,
and there end. It is not all one at the beginning, and at the end; for at the
beginning, while it remains among the Tunicles of the Testicles, it is full of
windings and turnings; near the end, it has many little bladders like to warts.

Now we must understand that these Seminary Vessels do not only contain the
Seed, but they perfect and concoct it, having a seminifick, or Seed-making
quality, which they borrow from the Testicles: There are other uses of these
seminary Vessels, for, near the original of this vessel, that is to say, the
head of the Testicles, many small passages, or as it were conduit-pipes, do
stretch themselves forward into the body of the Testicle, into which the
genital Seed that remains is remitted, and also drawn, or sucked from those
passages; this seminary passage is at length wound above the Testicles,
adjoining all along, but no where incorporated into the body of the Testicle,
unless at the bottom, in which place it is thought that the Seed does again
insinuate it self into the Testicles through those hollow fibers: being thence
propagated, and continually making supply to the Stones.

It is to be noted also, that these Vessels while they move to the root of the
Yard, do not go by straight passages, which would be then very short but by
crooked windings and turnings making the passages as long as may be, that they
may have longer time to contain and prepare the Seed.

CHAP. XI. Of the Seminary Bladders.
AT the end of the Deferent Vessels on both sides, are certain little bladders,
knit, and joined together, and placed between the Bladder and the right gut;
the last of which, together with the seminary Vessel, is terminated, in the
Prostatae, or Forestanders, by a little channel.

These Bladders have two several uses; for they do not only strengthen the
seminary Vessels where they end, but also seem to be the stores and magazeens
of the Seed. They are many, that every time a man uses the act of Venery, he
may have a new supply of matter from these several vesicles. Thus that which is
next the Yard being first disburdened, the second is the next time emptied, and
so till all the store is spent; and, were it not for these vesicles, a man
could not lie with a woman more than once.

In these Vessels such is the propensity of Nature to propagate, let the body
be never so much emaciated, there is always found a lesser or greater quantity
of Seed. They are hollow and round, to contain a greater quantity of Seed; they
are also full of membranes, that they may be contracted or extended as the
plenty of Seed requires; they are crooked and full of windings and turnings,
that the Seed contained may not easily slip out.

These small Bladders are little Cells, like those in a Pomgranate, or
something like a bunch of Grapes. De Graef compares them to the guts of a
little Bird, diversely contorted. They consist of one thin membrane, through which
some small twigs run, both of Veins, Arteries, and Nerves; they are about three
Fingers breadth long, and one broad, but in some places broader, and some
narrower, as they run in and out. They are two divided from one another by a
little interstice, and they do severally, by a peculiar passage, cast the Seed
contained in them into the Urethra: they are very winding, and consist of many
little Cells, that they should not pour out all the Seed contained in them in
one act of Copulation, but might retain it for several; they have no
communication one with another, not even in their very opening into the
Urethra, but the Seed that is brought to these little bladders on the right
side issues by its proper passage into the Urethra, and that which is brought
to the left likewise, so that if by any accident the bladders on the one side
be burst or cut, as in cuting for the Stone they must needs be, yet those on
the other being entire may still suffice for generation. When the Seed is cast
out of these bladders in the act of generation, it passes out the same way it
came in, which in this case may easily be, though it be unusual there should be a
contrary motion in the same vessel; for when it comes in, it drills along
gently without any force, but in Copulation when the Muscles of the Yard, and
all the bordering parts are much swelled, it is squirted out of them with some
violence, and passing along their neck, ouzes through a Caruncle like quick
Silver through leather into the Urethra, or Duct of the Yard, that is common both
to the Seed and Urine. I say, it ouzes from the necks of the Bladders through a
Caruncle into the Urethra; for there is one placed as a valve before the
Orifice of each of them, partly to hinder the coming of the Urine into them,
partly to hinder the involuntary effusion of the Seed. Now though the little
holes through which the Seed passes out of the necks of the small bladders into
the Urethra, be naturally almost imperceptible, yet, if they be either eroded
by the acrimony of the Seed, contracted by impure Copulation, or if of
themselves they be weakened and so become more Laxe, as sometimes happens to
old o^ impotent Men that use Copulation too frequently, then there happens a
Gonorrhea, or continual Flux of Seed.

CHAP. XII. Of the kernelly Prostatae, or Forestanders.
THE glandulous Prostatae, or Forestanders, are two little Testicles, as it
were seated at the foot of the Yard, a little above the Sphincter of the
Urinary Vessels; they are wrapped about with a membrane, which does also cloth
the seminary Vessels and vesicles: before and behind they seem more flat, on
the sides they are more round; they have a substance like other kernels, loose
and spongy, only they differ from them by reason of their whiteness and
hardness, they are endued with an exquisite feeling, to stir up greater desire
of Copulation. These Glandulae or kernels have certain pores that open
themselves into the Urethra, through which the Seed (these Forestanders being
squeezed by the lower Muscles of the Yard) distills into the Yard.

The use of these Kernels are partly to beget an oily, fat, and slippery
substance, with which the urinary passage is sometimes anointed, to defend it
from the acrimony both of the Seed and Urin, and to keep it always moist.

The other use is taken from the name of Prostatae; which word, in the singular
number, signifies a Tutor or Defender; for they are there placed to preserve
and strengthen the ends of the Deferent Vessels, lest by overmuch distention of
the Yard, the Seminary Vessels should be either burst, or moved out of their
places.

They have a third use: For, being placed between the Bladder and the right
gut, they serve instead of Cushions for the Vessels to rest upon, and to guard
them from all compression: Hence it happens sometimes that those who are very
much bound in their bodies, while they strain themselves over-vehemently, do
now and then void a kind of Seed, which happens by a violent compression of
those parts.

The Prostats, in English, standers by, or waiters, are placed near to the
Seed-Bladders. De Graef calls them the glandulous body, supposing them to be
one body, and only divided by the common ducts of the seed-bladders, and the
vasa deferentia coming through the midst of it. They are of a white, spungy,
glandulous substance, about as big as a small Wall-nut, encompassed with a
strong and fibrous Membrane from the Bladder, to the beginning of whose neck
they are joined at the root of the Yard; in shape they come nearest to an Oval,
save that on their upper and lower part, they are a little depressed, and in
that end, whereby the vasa deferentia enter, they are somewhat hollow like a
Tunnel.

The sphincter Muscle of the Bladder encompasses them so, that for so far as
they cover the neck of the Bladder, the sphincter touches it not, they coming
between. They have all sorts of vessels which run chiefly on their outside, in
the inner part, they have ten or more small Ducts, which unload themselves into
the Urethra, by the sides of the great Caruncle, through which the Seed passes
from the Seed Bladders into the Urethra; but themselves have each one, a small
one to stop its Orifice, least the liquor that is contained in the Prostats,
should continually flow out, or the Urine flow in: and these small Ducts, I
suppose, are continued from those small Bladders which are seen in the Prostats
of those that dye suddenly, after having had to do with a Female; for in such,
the spungy part of the Prostats is very full of a thin liquor, and in their
inner part may be found the same small bladders, which if you press upon, they
will discharge themselves into the above said Ducts. There is a great variety
of Opinions, what the liquor in them should be, or what is their use: Some
think that the Seed that flows from the Testicles, is further elaborated here;
but that cannot be, because the vasa deferentia deposit nothing in them, but
all into the small Seed Vessels. Others think, that there is separated from the
Blood in them, an acrimonious and serous humor which serves for Titulation, or
causing the greater pleasure in Venery. As to this, de Graef appeals to the
taste of it, which has nothing of Acrimony in it. Dr. Wharton thinks they make
a particular kind of Seed, as the Stones do another, and the Seed Bladders a
third; that these last make a different Seed from that made in the Stones, is
grounded on a mistake in Anatomy, viz. That the vasa deferentia have no
communication with the Seed-Bladders, whereas they apparently open into them,
and desposite in them all the Seed they contain; that the Prostats make a
peculiar sort, he endeavors to prove, because gelded Animals emit some Seed;
but though they do emit something, it is not necessary it should be any true
Seed; or if it be, it may well be supposed to proceed from the small
Seed-Bladders that were full when the Animal was gelt; for this reason it has
been observed, that presently after gelding, they have sometimes got the Female
with Young, but not afterward when that stock was spent. Others think they
make an oily and slippery humor, which is pressed out opon occasion to besmear
the Urethra, to defend it from the acrimony of the Seed and Urine, and lest it
should dry up. De Graef believes, that the Humor that is separated in the
Prostats, serves for a vehicle of the Seed, which flowing but in small
quantity, through small Poors into the Urethra, it was necessary, that this
Humor should be mixed with it, that it might the better reach the Womb;
whatever this Humor be, it is squeezed out partly by the swelling and erection
of the Yard, and partly, by compression of the sphincter of the Bladder, that
girds the Prostats about: These Prostats are often the seat of a Gonorrhaea,
and the Humor they contain, is that which flows out in the running of the
Reins; for if it were true Seed, they could never endure a Gonorrhaea so long,
some thirty Years, without being much wasted, the flux being so much as
sometimes it is.

CHAP. XIII. Of the structure of the Yard.
THE structure of the Yard is not unknown, that is to say, at the root of the
share bone in the hinder part of the Hypogastrion or lower part of the belly,
where the hair grows; which bone is called, Os pubis. Though the greatest part
of it, is not pendent without, but adjoining to the Podex, is situated near the
joining of the share-bone, being fast knit to it in the Perinaeum, or space
between the Cods and the Fundament; the other part is pendent and is seen
hanging outward. This situation is most appropriated to the manner of the act
of generation, usual and peculiar to men, who do not couple after the manner of
Beasts. The figure of it is in a manner round, though not exactly; broader in
the upper part which is called the back of the Yard.

The thickness and longitude of the Yard is so much as is required for
Procreation; yet it is not so long as in many other creatures. Yea, and in
several men there is a very great diversity; little men being for the most
part, best provided in that part: It is a general received opinion, that the
often use of Venery does increase the quantity of it in all dimensions.

The Yard will also be longer, if the Navel-strings are not bound up, or knit
too close by the Midwife, in Children that are newly born; but at some distance
from the Navel: This happens by reason of the Ligament coming from the Navel to
the bottom of the Bladder; which if it be too much abreviated, draws up the
Bladder, and consequently shortens the Yard; but if the Navel-string be left at
a longer distance, the Urachus is enlarged, and consequently the Yard has more
liberty to extend it self; And therefore the Midwives are from hence
advertised, that they do not spoil the harvest of generation, by cutting the
sith too short.

As to the substance of the Yard; it is not of a bony substance, as in Dogs,
Wolves, or Foxes; for so it would become always hard and erected, and hinder
men from all business but the act of Venery: Neither is it gristly, for so it
could neither erect it self, nor flag, when occasion required: Neither is it
full of veins, for so it could not be emptied and repleted on such a sudden as
often happens; besides, the Tunicles of the veins are so thin, that they could
not suffer so great a distention; neither can it be full of Arteries, because
it wants a continual pulsation; neither can it consist of Nerves, because they
having no hollowness, cannot be extended and loosned, as it must of necessity
happen to the Yard. It is therefore necessary that the Yard should have such a
substance, as is not peculiar to any part of the body. It is to be understood,
that there do concur to the framing of the Yard, two nervous bodies, the
passage for the Urine which is called Urethra, the Glans or Nut of the Yard,
four Muscles, the Vessels, and the skin.

Here does arise a question, why the Yard has not any fat? Which is in brief,
thus; because that there should be no hindrance to the perfect sense of the
Yard, which could of necessity not be avoided, if that member were subject to
any obesity; the fat being subject to be melted by frication.

CHAP. XIV. Of the several parts constituting the Yard.
AMONG the parts that compose the structure of the Yard, is that skin which
with its cuticle, and fleshly pannicle, is common not only to this, but to
other members; only it has this peculiar to it self, that it may be reflexed,
and drawn back from the Nut of the Yard. This skin that turns back is called
the Praeputium; because that part in circumcision was cut away; with which
prepuce, the Nut of the Yard is covered.

The Glans or Nut of the Yard is a fleshy part, soft, thin, The Nut of the Yard.
repleat with blood and spirits; endued with an exquisite sense; something
sharp and acute at the end. This is fastened to the prepuce at the lower part by
a certain ligament, which is therefore called the bridle, or the filet, which
commonly is broken in the first venereal assaults, which are for the most part
the most furious.

The greatest part of the Yard is constituted by two nervous bodies, The two
nervous bodies.
on both sides one, which terminate both together in the Nut. They rise from a
twofold original, leaning or resting upon the Hip, under the Share-bone;
whence as from a sure foundation they go on, till they arrive at the nut of the
Yard.

They consist of a double substance, the first is nervous, hard, Their
substance.
and thick; the inner part black, loose, soft, thin, and spongy. It is called
the Nervous pipe. These two bodies are joined together by a certain membrane,
thin, yet nervous; which is strengthened by certain overthwart fibers, being
there placed in the likeness of a Weavers shuttle: and though in their original
they are separated the one from the other, that there might remain some certain
space for the Urethra; yet they are joined together about the middle of the
Share-bone; where they lose about the third part of their nervous substance.

The interior substance, which is wrapped about by the exterior nervous
substance, has this worthy observation, That there appears stretched, through
the whole length of it, a thin and tender Artery, proportionable to the bigness
of the body which is diffused through the whole loose substance of the Yard,
reaching as far as the root of the Yard. Besides these two, there is another
body which lies between these two, as proper or rather more peculiar to the
Yard than they are. This is a pipe placed at the inferior part of the Yard,
being called the Urethra, though it be a passage as proper to the Seed, as to
the Urine; which is encompassed by the two forementioned bodies. This is a
certain Channel produced in length, and running through the middle of those
nervous bodies, consisting of the same substance that they do, being loose,
thick, soft, and tender; every way equal from the neck of the bladder to the
nut of the Yard, saving that it is a little wider at the beginning, than it is
toward the place where it ends, which is at the head of the Glans or nut of the
Yard.

The holes of the Vrethra.
At the beginning of this Channel there are three holes; one in the middle, and
something bigger than the other two, arising from the neck of the bladder; the
other two, on both sides one, being something narrower, proceeding from the
passage that goes out of the seminary vessels, and conveighs the Seed into this
Channel.

This is further to be noted in this place, that in the Channel, where it is
joined to the Glans, together with the nervous bodies, there is a little kind
of cavern, in which sometimes either putrid Seed, Note.
or any other corroding humor, happens in the Gonorrhaea; being collected, it
is the cause of ulcers in that part, the cause of very great pain: and it many
times also comes to pass, that there is a certain little piece of flesh which
grows out of this Ulcer, that oftentimes stops the passages of the urine.

To the structure of the Yard, The Muscles of the Yard.
there do moreover occurr two pair of Muscles, one more short and thick,
proceeding from a part of the Hip, near the beginning of the Yard, and being of
a fleshy substance. The use of these two Muscles, is to sustain the Yard in the
erection; and to bend the fore part of the Yard, which is to be inserted into
the womb: the other pair is longer, and rises from the Sphincter of the
Fundament, where they are endued with a more fleshy substance, being in length
full as long as the Yard; under which they are carried downward, ending at the
sides of the Urethra, about the middle of the Yard. Their use is to dilate the
Urethra, both at the time of making water, and at the time of Conjunction; lest
it should be stopped up by the repletion of the nervous bodies, and so stop up
the passage of the Seed. They are also thought to keep the Yard firm, lest it
lean too much to either side, and also to press out the Seed out of the
Prostatae, or Forestanders.

There are Vessels also of all sorts in the yard: first of all, The Vessels of
the Yard.
certain Veins appearing in the external parts, and in the cuticle; which do
branch themselves out from the Hypogastrium. In the middle, between the space
of the fibers, they send out certain branches from the right side to the left,
and from the left to the right. These veins swelling with a frothy blood and
spirit, erect the Yard. There are also certain nerves which scatter themselves
from the pith or marrow of the Holy-bone, quite through the yard, bringing with
them the cause of that pleasure and delight, which is perceived in the erection
of the yard.

CHAP. XV. Of the Action of the Yard.
THE main scope of Nature in the use of the Yard, was, the injection of Seed
into the womb of the Woman, which injection could not be done, till the Seed
were first moved; neither could the Seed be moved but by frication of the
parts, which could not be done, till it were sheathed in the Womb; nor that
neither, till the Yard were erected.

This distention is caused by repletion; which is caused by the plenty of Seed:
Secondly, by superfluity of wind, which if it be too violent, is the cause of
priapism: A third cause proceeds from the abundance of Urine contained in the
Bladder. Sometimes, the heat of the reins is a cause thereof.

CHAP. XVI. Of the use of the Yard in general.
THE Yard is situated under the Midriff over against the Womb. And is also
placed between the thighs, for the greater strengthening of it in the act of
copulation: neither is this the only strength which it has, for at the lower
part it appears more fleshy, which flesh is altogether muscely, for the greater
strength thereof. Neither is it only contented with this Muscely flesh, it
having two Muscles also for the same purpose, on both sides to poise it eaven
in the act of erection; which though they are but little, yet are they
exceeding strong.

The figure of the Yard is not absolutely round, but broader on the upper side,
lest it should be hindered by the the convexity of the superior part, in the
casting forth of the Seed.

Concerning the bigness of the Yard, it is by most esteemed to be of a just
length, when it is extended the breadth of nine thumbs.

CHAP. XVII. Of the use of the parts constituting the Yard.
THE first thing in the constitution of the Yard, that offers it self to view,
is the Skin, which is long and loose, by reason that the Yard which is
sometimes to be extended, and sometimes to fall down again, so requires it. The
extremity of the skin is so ordered, that it sometimes covers the Glans, and
sometimes draws back; that, whilst it covers the Nut of the Yard, it may defend
the Yard from frication, or provoking the motion of the Seed.

Moreover, this skin in the act of copulation, shuts up the mouth of the Womb
and hinders the ingress of the cold air. Concerning the two nervous bodies,
constituting the substance of the Yard; their use is for the vital spirit to
run through the thin substance of them, and fill the Yard with spirits.
Moreover, by their thickness, they do prevent the two hasty emptying and flying
out of the spirits which are to stay in, for the greater and longer erection of
the Yard.

The use of the Urethra is for the passage of Seed and Urine through it. The
substance of the Urethra is much of the same with the two former bodies; the
inside being more thin and loose, the outside more nervous and thick; which is
so ordained, that it may be more apt to be erected with the Yard. It goes
forward from the place where it begins, to the end of the Spermatick Vessels,
and the neck of the bladder, and the warty Forestanders, where there arises a
thin and tender membrane, which the Chyrurgeons ought to take a great deal of
care lest they break, while they thrust their Syringes toward those parts; It
is endued with an exquisite sense to stir up pleasure and venereal desire.

The use of the Glans.
As to the substance of the Glans, it is the same with that of the Yard; only it
is not invelop'd with any nervous body. For this ought to be repleted and
increased, but not hardened; lest it should injure the bone of the Womb, by
rubbing too hard upon it.

The figure of the Glans is such, that at the top where it is most acute, it
has a hole for the issuing forth both of Seed and Urine, which part coming to
the mouth of the Womb, casts the seed into that concavity, at which time the
neck of the Womb with her overthwart fibers, seems to take hold and embrace the
Glans; and, that it might take the better hold, Nature has framed a round
circle at the bottom of the Yard, for that purpose, with a convenient jetting
out round about from the body of the Yard; by the benefit of which circle, the
Seed is kept in the womb, and not suffered to fly out. Lastly, the Glans is so
constituted, as if all the actions of the Yard consisted in the Glans; whether
in the act of erection, or copulation; or as to the pleasure which a man
perceives, that lies all in this place.





SECT. II.
CHAP. I. Of the Genitals of Women.
AT the lower part of the belly appears the Pubes, or, the Region of the hair.
Under this place are, as it were, lips of flesh, which in women that are ripe
for man, are clad with hair at the upper part, because of the heat and moisture
of the place; and this part is that which is most properly called the
Privy-member, being the exterior orifice, into which the Yard of the man
enters. In the middle it has a cleft, on both sides of which are two fleshy
protuberances, beset with hair, being two soft oblong bodies composed of skin
and a spongy kind of flesh.

The parts that offer themselves to view, without any diduction, are the great
chink, with the lips, the mountain of Venus, and the hairs. The great chink is
called Cunnus by Galen, by Hypocrates Natura, and by many other names, invented
by lustful Persons, and lascivious Poets. It reaches from the lower part of the
os Pubis to within an Inch of the Fundament, being by Nature made so large,
because the outward skin is not so apt to be extended in Travel, as the
membranous sheath; it is less and closer in Maids, than in those that have born
Children; it has two lips, which toward the Pubes grow thicker and more full,
or protuberant, and meeting upon the middle of the os Pubis, make that rising,
which is called the hill of Venus; its outward substance is skin covered with
hair; as the lips are: the inner substance of this hill, which makes it bunch
so up, is most of it fat, and serves, as it were for a soft Cushion in
copulation, to hinder the bone of the Pubes of the Man and Woman to hit one
against the other; for that would be painful and disturb the venereal
Pleasures. Under this fat lies that Muscle, that straitens the Orifice of the
sheath.

CHAP. II. Of those parts called Nymphae, and the Clytoris.
THE Nymphae, or wings, are a membrany, or filmy substance, soft, and spongy,
and partly fleshy; they are of a ruddy color, like the comb of a cock under
his throat; they are two in number, though in the beginning they are joined
together by an acute Angle; where they produce a carneous substance, like the
Praeputium which clothes the Clytoris. Sometimes these wings so far increase,
that there is many times need of incision; a disease common among the Egyptians.

The Clytoris is a certain substance in the upper part of the great Cleft, The
Clytoris.
where the two wings concur. This in Women is the seat of Venereal pleasure: It
is like the Yard in situation, substance, composition, and erection, and has
something correspondent both to the Prepuce, and to the Glans in men. Sometimes
it grows out to the bigness of the Yard, so that it has bin observed to grow
out of the body, the breadth of four fingers.

This Clytoris consists of two spongy and sinewy bodies, having a distinct
original from the bone of the Pubes. The head of this is covered with a most
tender skin, and has a hole like the Glans, though not quite through; in
which, and in the bigness, it differs only from the Yard. By a little drawing
aside the lips, there then appear the Nymphs and Clytoris.

The Nymphs are so called, because they stand next to the Urine, as it spouts
out from the Bladder, and keep it from wetting the lips; they are also called
wings; they are placed on each side next within the lips, and are two fleshy
and soft productions, beginning at the upper part of the privity, (where they
are joined in an Acute angle, and make that wrinkled membranous production that
covers the Clytoris, like a foreskin,) and descending close all the way to
each other, reaching but about half the breadth of the Orifice of the sheath,
and ending each in an obtuse angle: They are almost Triangular, and therefore,
as also for their color, are compared to the thrills that hang under a cocks
throat. They have a red substance, partly fleshy, partly membranous, within
soft and spongy, loosly composed of small Membranes and Vessels, so that they
are very easily stretched by the flowing in of the animal Spirits, and arterial
Blood. The Spirits they have from the same Nerves that run through the sheath,
and blood from one of the branches of the Iliack Artery: Veins they have also,
which carry away the arterial blood from them, when they become flaccid. They
are larger in old Maids than in young, and larger yet in those that have used
Copulation, or born Children. They never, according to Nature reach above half
way out from between the lips; their use is to defend the inner parts, to cover
the urinary passages, and a good part of the Orifice of the sheath; and to the
same purposes serve the lips.

Above betwixt the Nymphs, in the upper part of the privities, a part bunches
out a little, that is called Clytoris, from a Greek word, that signifies
lasciviously to grope the privities. It is like a man's Yard in shape,
situation, substance, repletion with Spirits, and erection, and differs from it
only in length and bigness: in some it grows to that length, as to hang out
from betwixt the lips of the privities, yea, there are many stories of such, as
have had it so long and big, as to be able to converse with other Women like
unto men, and such are called Hermophridites, who, it is not probable, are
truly of both Sexes, but only the Stones fall down into the lips, and this
Clytoris is stretched preternaturally; but in most it branches out so little,
as that it does not appear but by drawing aside the lips; it is a little long
and round body, consisting like a man's Yard of two nervous, and inwardly black,
and spongy parts that arise on each side from the bunching of the bone Ischium,
and meet together at the Conjunction of the bones of the Pubes. It lies under
the hill of Venus, at the top of the great Cleft, in Venery; by reason of the
two nervous bodies, it puffs up, and straightning the Orifice of the sheath,
contributes to the embracing the Yard more closely. Its outward end is like to
the Glans of a Man's Yard, and has the same name, and as the Glans in men is the
seat of the greatest pleasure in Copulation, so is this in Women; It has some
resemblance of a hole, but it is not pervious. It is most of it covered with a
thin Membrane, by the joining of the Nymphs, which is called the Prepuce. The
Clytoris has two pair of Muscles belonging to it, the upper are round, and
spring from the bones of the hip, and passing along the two nervous bodies, are
inserted into them; these, by straitning the roots of the said bodies, do
detain the Blood and Spirits in them, and so erect the Clytoris, as those in
men do the Yard: the other arise from the Sphincter of the fundament; it has
veins, arteries, and nerves.

CHAP. III. Of the fleshy knobs, and the greater neck of the Womb.
PResently behind the wings, before we go far inward in the middle of the
Cleft, there do appear four knobs of flesh, being placed in a quadrangular
form, one against the other; they are said to resemble Myrtle-berries in form.
In this place is incerted the Orifice of the bladder, which opens it self into
the fissure, to cast forth the Urine into the common Channel. Now least any
cold air, or dust, or any such thing should enter into the Bladder after the
voiding of the Urine, one of these knobs is seated so, that it shuts the
urinary passage. The second, is right opposite to the first, the other two
collateral. They are round in Virgins, but they hang flagging when Virginity is
lost.

The lips of the Womb being gently separated, The neck of the Womb.
the neck of the Womb is to be seen: In which, two things are to be observed;
the neck it self, or the channel, and the Hymen, which is there placed: By the
neck of the Womb, is understood the channel, which is between the said knobs,
and the inner bone of the womb; which receives the Yard like a Sheath. The
substance of it is sinewy, The substance.
and a little spongy, that it may be dilated; in this concavity there are
certain folds, or orbicular pleights; these are made by a certain Tunicle so
wrinkled, as if a man should fold the skin with his fingers. In Virgins they
are plain; in Women, with often copulation, they are oftentimes worn out;
sometimes they are wholly worn out, and the inner side of the Neck appears
smooth; as it happens to Whores, and Women that have often brought forth, or
have bin over troubled with their fluxes. In old Women it becomes more hard and
grisly. Now though this Channel be something writhed and crooked, when it falls
and sinks down, yet in time of the flowers and copulation, or in time of
travel, it is erected and extended; and this overgreat extension in Women that
bring forth, is the cause of that great pain in Childbed.

CHAP. IV. Of the Hymen.
THE Hymen is a Membrane not altogether without blood, The Hymen.
neither so tender as the rest, but more ruddy, and scattered up and down with
little veins, and in a circular form; it is placed overthwart, and shuts up the
cavity of the neck of the Womb. In the middle it has a little hole, through
which the Menses are voided. This at the first time of Copulation is broken,
which causes some pain, and gushing forth of some quantity of blood; which is
an evident sign of Virginity; for if the blood do not flow, there is a
suspicion of a former deflowring.

The Hymen is a thin, nervous membrane, interwoven with fleshy fibers, and
endowed with many little Arteries and Veins, coming across the passage of the
sheath; behind the incertion of the neck of the bladder, with a hole in the
midst, that will admit the top of ones little finger, whereby the Courses flow;
where it is found, it is a certain note of Virginity, but upon the first
Copulation it is broke, and bleeds, and when it is once broke, it never closes
again. This Blood is called the flower of Virginity, and of this the Scripture
makes mention, Dut. cap. 22. and 13.21. But though a man when he finds these
signs of Virginity, may be fully satisfied he has married a Maid, yet on the
contrary, it will not necessarily follow, that where they are wanting,
Virginity is also wanting; for the Hymen may be corroded by acrimonious
fretting Humors, flowing through with the courses, or from the falling out, or
inversion of the Womb, or sheath at least: It sometimes happens, even to Maids;
for if a Maid be so inconsiderate, as to marry while her courses flow, or
within a Day after, then both the Hymen and the inner wrinkled Membrane of the
Sheath are so flaggy and relaxed, that the Yard may easily enter with out any
let, and so give suspicion of Unchastity, when really she is unblameable,
saving for her imprudence to marry at that season. Sometimes the Hymen grows so
strong in old Maids, that a Man is forced to make many essays, before he can
penetrate it, and in some it is naturally quite closed up, and these by this
means having their courses stopped, are in great danger of their life, if they be
not opened by some Chyrurgical Instrument. Close to the Hymen lie the four
Myrtle-berry Caruncles, so called from their resembling Myrtle-berries: The
largest of them is uppermost, standing just at the Mouth of the Urinary
passage, which it stops after rendering the Urine. Opposite to this in the
bottom of the sheath, there is another, and one on each side; but of these four
there is only the first in Maids, the other three are not indeed Caruncles, but
little knobs made of the angular parts of the broken Hymen, rolled into a heap
by the wrinkling of the sheath: These three when the sheath is extended in
Women's labor, loose their roughness, and become smooth, so that they disappear
until it be again contracted, and indeed, the sheath near its outer orifice,
has a Muscle near three Fingers broad, that upon occasion, contracts it, so
that Men and Women need not be solicitous concerning their Genitals being
proportionable one to the other.

CHAP. V. Of the Vessels that run through the neck of the Womb.
BEtween the Duplicity of the two Tunicles, that constitute the neck of the
Womb, there are many Veins and Arteries that run along, arising from those
Vessels that descend on both sides the thighs, and are incerted into the side
of the neck of the Womb: The great quantity and bigness of them deserves
admiration; for they are much bigger than the nature and openness of the place
seems to require.

The cause of the largeness of the Vessels.
The cause of this is twofold; first, Because it being requisite for the neck of
the Womb to be filled with abundance of spirits, and to be extended and dilated
for the better taking hold of the Yard; there is required a great heat for
these kind of motions, which growing more intense by the act of frication, does
consume a great quantity of moisture, so that great Vessels are requisite, and
only able to make that continual supply that is needful.

There is another cause of the longness of these Vessels, which is this;
Because that the monthly purgations are poured through those veins; for the
flowers must not come only out of the Womb, but out of the neck of the Womb
also. Note.
Whence it happens, that Women with Child do sometimes continue their
purgations, because that though the womb be shut up, yet the passages in the
neck of the womb are open.

This is also further to be noted in the neck of the womb, that as soon as ever
your sight is entered within the female fissure, The two holes, or pits, near
the lips of the Pudendum.
there do appear to the view, two certain little holes or pits, wherein is
contained a serous humor; which being pressed out in the act of copulation,
does not a little add to the pleasure thereof.

This is the humor with which women do moisten the top of a man's Yard; not the
Seed, but a humor proper to the place, voided out by the Womb.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fabric of the Womb.
TO the neck of the Womb, the Womb it self is adjoined in the lower part of the
Hypogastrium, where the hips are widest and broadest; which are greater and
broader thereabouts than those of men; which is the reason also, that they have
broader Buttocks than men have.

The Womb is placed between the Bladder and the straight gut; The Womb.
being joined to the bladder and leaning upon the straight gut: where it lies
as between two Cushions, this situation of the womb was fittest, that so it
might have liberty to be stretched, or contracted, according to the bigness of
the Fruit contained in it.

The figure of the womb is round, and not unlike a Gourd, that lessens, The
figure.
and grows more acute at the one end. The bottom of the womb is knit together
by Ligaments of its own, which are peculiar: The neck of the womb is joined by
its own substance, and by certain Membranes to the Share-bone, and the Sacred
bone.

As to the bigness of it; that varies according to the age or constitution of
the body, The bigness.
and use of Venery. For it is much greater in Women that have brought forth,
than in those that are with Child, and after the birth.

It is of a substance so thick, as that it exceeds a thumbs breadth in
thickness; which after conception is so far from decreasing, that it increases
still to a greater bulk and proportion.

This substance, the more to confirm it, The Fibers.
is interweaved with all manner of fibers, straight, oblique, and overthwart.

The Vessels of the Womb are Veins, Arteries and Nerves.

There are two little Veins which are carried from the spermatick Vessels to
the bottom of the womb; The Veins.
and two greater from the Hypogastricks, which go not only to the bottom, but
to the neck. The mouth of these veins pierce as far as the inward concavity; in
which place the extremities of them are called Acetabula; which in the time of
the Flowers, gape and open themselves by reason of the great plenty and stream
of blood, that pours it self from thence; and therefore they are, at that time,
most conspicuous; in women with Child, that which is called the Liver of the
Womb, is joined to them, that it might draw blood for the nourishment of the
Child; at which time their veins do so swell, especially in the time of, or
near Delivery, that they are as big as the Emulgent veins, or at least half as
thick as the Hollow vein.

The Arteries.
It has two Arteries on both sides, the Spermatick, and the Hypogastrick, which
every where do accompany the Veins.

The Womb has also diverse little nerves knit together in form of a Net, which
are carried not only to the interior part of the bottom of the Womb, but also
to the Neck, and as far as the privities themselves; and that chiefly for sense
and pleasure; for which cause there is a great sympathy between the Womb and
the Head.

This is also further to be noted, Note*
that the Womb in its situation is not fixed and immovable, but moveable, by
reason of two ligaments which hang on both sides, from the Share-bone; and
piercing through the Peritonaeum, are joined to the bone it self, so that it
sometimes happens that through those holes of the Peritonaeum, which give
passage to these ligaments being loosened, either the Omentum, or the Entrails,
do swell outwardly, and cause the burstness either of the Caul or of the Guts,
and sometimes it happens by reason of the looseness of those ligaments, that
the womb is moved with such force, that it falls down; and in the act of
Copulation is moved up and down; sometimes it moves upward, that some Women do
affirm that it ascends as high as their Stomach. Now though the Womb be one
continued body, yet it is divided into the Mouth, and the Bottom.

The Bottom of the Womb is called all that which, by still ascending, stretches
it self from the internal Orifice to the end; being narrow toward the Mouth,
but dilating it self by little and little, 'till it come at the entrails.

The Mouth of the womb, is that narrowness between the neck and the bottom; it
is an oblong and transverse Orifice; but, where it opens it self, orbicular,
and round; the circumference very thick, and of an exquisite feeling; and if
this mouth be out of order, and be troubled with a Scirrhous brawn, or
over-fatness, over-moisture, or relaxation, it is the cause of Barrenness. In
those that are big with Child, there uses to stick to this Orifice, a thick
viscous glutinous matter, that the parts moistened may be the more easily
opened. For in the delivery, this mouth is opened after a very strange and
miraculous manner, so that according to the bigness of the birth, it suffers an
equal dilatation, from the bottom of the womb to the privy member.

CHAP. VII. Of the preparing Vessels in Women.
THE Spermatick Preparing Vessels, The Vessels.
are two Veins, and two Arteries, differing not at all from those of men,
either in the number, original, action, or use, but only in their bigness, and
the manner of their insertion. For as to their number, there are so many veins,
and so many Arteries as in men. They arise also from the same place as in men;
that is to say, the right, from the trunck of the hollow vein descending; the
left, from the left Emulgent.

There are two Arteries also, on both sides one, which grow from the Aorta;
these both bring vital blood for the work of Generation.

As to the Longitude and Latitude of these Vessels, they are narrower and
shorter in Women; only where they are wrinckled, they are much more wreathed
and contorted than in men; for, the way being shorter in women than in men,
Nature required, for stretching out these vessels, that they should be more
wrinckled and crankled than in men, that the blood might stay there in greater
quantity, for preparation of the Seed.

The Insertion of the vessels.
These vessels in Women are carried with an oblique course through the small
guts to the Stones, being wrapped up in fatter membranes; but in the midway they
are divided into two branches, whereof the greater branch goes to the Stone,
constituting the various or winding body, and those wonderful inosculations,
the lesser branch ends in the womb; in the sides of which it is scattered up
and down, and chiefly at the higher part of the bottom of the womb, for
nourishment of the Womb, and of the birth; and that some part of the flowers
may be purged out through those Vessels: now because the Stones of Women are
seated near the womb, for that cause these vessels fall not from the
Peritonaeum, neither make they such passages as in men, neither reach they to
the Share-bone.

The use of these Spermatic Vessels, is to minister to the generation of Seed,
according to the ancient Doctrine; but to the nutrition of the Eggs in the
Stones, according to the new, and for the nourishment of the Foetus, and of the
solid parts, and the expurgation of the courses; in as much as blood is
conveyed by the Arteries to all those parts, to which their Ramifications come,
in which parts they leave what is to be separated, according to the law of
Nature, the remaining blood returning by the Veins.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Stones in Women.
THE Stones of Women, although they do perform the same actions, and are for
the same use as men's, yet they differ from them in situation, substance,
temperament, figure, magnitude, and in their Covering.

They are seated in the hollowness of the Abdomen; Their Situation.
neither do they hang out as in men, but they rest upon the Muscles of the
Loins, and this for that cause that they might be more hot and fruitful; being
to elaborate that matter, with which the Seed of man engenders man.

In this place arises a Question, not trivial; A doubt.
whether the Seed of Woman be the efficient, or the material cause of
generation? To which it is answered, that though it have a power of acting, yet
it receives the perfection of that power from the Seed of Man.

The Stones of Women differ from men's also, Their figure.
as to their figure, because they are not so round and oval as those of men,
being in their fore and hinder part more depressed and broad, the external
superficies being more unequal, as if a great many knots and kernals were mixed
together. There is also another difference, as to the subject, because they are
softer and moister than those of men, being more loose and ill compacted.

Their bigness and temper.
Their magnitude and temperament do also make a difference: for the Stones of
Women are much colder and lesser than Men's; which is the reason that they beget
a thin and watery Seed.

Their coverings also do make a difference: for men's are wrapped up in diverse
Tunicles, because being pendent outward, they were otherwise more subject to
external injuries; but the stones of women have but one tunicle, which though
it stick very close to them, yet are they also half clothed over with the
Peritonaeum.

They have but one membrane, that encompasses them round, but on their upper
side, where the preparing Vessels enter them, they are about half way involved
in another membrane that accompanies those Vessels, and springs from the
Peritonaeum. When this cover is removed, their substance appears whitish, but
is wholly different from the substance of Men's Stones; for men's are composed of
Seed-vessels, which, being continued to one another, are twenty, or thirty else
long; if one could draw them out at length, without breaking: but Women's
principally consist of a great many membranes, and small fibers loosly joined
to one another; among which, there are several little bladders full of a clear
Liquor, through whose membranes, the nerves, and preparing Vessels run. Galen and
Hypocrates, and their followers, imagine the Liquor contained in these Bladders
to be Seed; but from Dr. Harvey downwards, many learned Physicians, and
Anatomists, have denied that Women have Seed. Some Women, says Dr. Harvey, send
forth no such humor as is called Seed, and yet they conceive; for I have known
several Women, says he, that have bin fruitful enough without such emission,
yea, some that after they begun to emit such an humor, though indeed they took
greater pleasure in Copulation, yet grew less fruitful than before. There are
also infinite instances of Women, who though they have pleasure in Copulation,
yet send forth nothing, and notwithstanding conceive. It is moreover to be
observed, that the humor is cast out, and issues most commonly from about the
Clytoris, and Orifice of the privities, and very rarely from any depth within
the neck of the Womb, but never within the Womb it self, so as that it should
be there mixed with the man's Seed; besides it is not ropy and oily like Seed,
but serous like Urine. We must therefore agree with that new, but necessary
Opinion, that supposes these little Bladders to contain nothing of Seed, both
because the Liquor is sent forth in a greater quantity, than can be supplied
from them, and also, because they have no passage, whereby the Liquor contained
in them might issue out; for if you press them never so hard, unless you burst
them, nothing will pass out of them; therefore it must be concluded, that they
are truly Eggs, Analogous to those of Fowl, and other Creatures, and that the
Stones so called are not truly so, nor have any such Office, as those of Men,
but are indeed an Ovarium, wherein these Eggs are nourished by the blood
Vessels, dispersed through them, and from whence one or more, as they are
fecundated by the Man's Seed, separate, and are conveyed into the womb by the
Fallopian tubes. If you boil these Eggs, their Liquor will have the same
color, taste, and consistency with the white of Birds eggs, and their
difference in wanting shells is of no moment; for Birds eggs have need of a
shell, because they are hatched without the Body, and are exposed to external
injuries; but these of Women, being fostered within their body, have no need of
other fence than the Womb, whereby they are sufficiently defended. These Eggs
in Women are commonly toward the number of twenty, in each Testicle, whereof
some are far less than others: The objection of the Galenists against the
Aristotelians, (viz. That the Stones of Females must needs make Seed, because,
when they are cut out, barrenness always follows) will be sufficiently obviated
by this new Hypothesis, that agrees to the necessity of the stones so far, as
to affirm, that the little Bladders contained in them, become, when they are
impregnated by the masculine seed, the very conceptions themselves, which would
be in vain to expect, if the female were castrated.

CHAP. IX. Of the deferent, or Ejaculatory Vessels.
THE Deferent Vessels are two blind passages, on both sides one, nothing
differing in substance from the spermatick Veins. They rise in one part from
the bottom of the Womb, neither do they reach from their other extremity,
either to the Stone, or to any other part; but are shut up, and unpassable,
adhering to the womb, just as the blind Gut adheres to the Colon; but winding
half way about the Stones, are every way remote from them, no where touching
them; only are tied to them with certain Membranes, not unlike the wings of
Bats, through which certain Veins and Arteries, being produced from the Stones
do run; and end in these passages. Where they begin, at the bottom of the womb,
they are hollow and large; but as they proceed further on, they grow narrower,
till, near their end, they do again obtain a larger bigness; these two passages
thus running from the corners of the womb to the Stones, are taken only to be
certain ligaments, by which the Stones and the Womb are strongly knit together;
and these ligaments in Women, are the same things with the Cremasteres in men.

Galen and most of the Ancients counted these short processes, that go straight
from the Stones to the bottom of the Womb, to be ejaculatory Vessels, and that
the seed was cast from the Stones through them into the bottom of the Womb, and
some others have thought, they have found a small pipe passing on each side out
of these processes, by the sides of the Womb to its neck, into which they were
inserted, and opened near its Orifice. By the former it was supposed, Women not
with Child did cast their seed into the bottom of the Womb, and by these
latter, such as were already impregnated; for that if it should have issued
into the bottom of the womb, where the conception was, it would have corrupted,
to the great prejudice of the Faetus. But many accurate Anatomists have not bin
able to find the least foot-step of these latter ducts; and as for the former,
seeing they have not any cavity, and therefore can have nothing of seed in
them, we must conclude, that they are only ligaments of the stones to keep them
in their place; and this may be proved farther, by observing that they come not
into the inner cavity of the womb, but are knit only to its outward Coat, and
there are only two holes in the bottom of the womb, that admit a probe, and
those lead to the fallopian tubes, and not to these ligaments.

Seeing therefore, that those which have bin accounted ejaculatory Vessels,
either are not to be found at all, or are found unfit for such an Office, and
having withal rejected the Opinion of Women's having seed, and affirmed, that
that which makes the Conception, is one of those little bladders in the stones,
dropping from thence, and conveyed into the womb, we must enquire by what way
they can pass; for if the abovesaid ligaments reputed deferent Vessels, have no
passage, whereby the seed, if there were any might pass, much less could one of
these bladders be conveyed that way; and therefore, for deferent Vessels, we
assign those passages, that are called the fallopian tubes, they are very
slender, and narrow passages, nervous and white, arising from the sides of the
womb, and at a little distance from it, they become larger, and twist like the
tendrel of a Vine, 'till near their end, where ceasing their winding, they grow
very large, and seem membranous and fleshy, which end is very much torn and
jaggy, like the edge of rent Clothes, and has a large hole, which always lies
closed, because those jags fall together; but yet being opened they are like
the outmost orifice of a brass Trumpet These tubes are the same in Women, that
the horns of the womb are in other Creatures, for they answer to those, both in
situation, connection, amplitude, perforation, likeness, and also office: For
as other Creatures always conceive in the Horns, so it has been sometimes
observed, that a Conception has in a Woman bin contained in one of the tubes,
which must have happened, when the Egg, being received out of the stone into
it, has been stopped in its passage to the womb, either from its own bigness, or
some obstruction in the tube. The substance of the tubes is not nervous, as
Fallopius affirms, but membranous; for they consist of two membranes, the outer
and inner; the inner springs from, or at least is common with that, which
covers the inner substance of the womb: But whereas it is smooth in the womb,
it is very wrinkled in the tubes, the outer is common with the outmost of the
womb, and this is smooth.

The capacity of these passages varies very much, for in the beginning, as it
goes out of the womb, it only admits a bristle; but in his progress, where it
is most capacious, it will receive ones little finger, but in the extremity,
where it is jagged, it is but about a quarter so wide, their length also is
very uncertain, for they sometimes increase from four or five, to eight or nine
fingers breadth long. Their use is in a fruitful Copulation to grant a passage
to the finer part of the man's Seed, or of a seminal fume toward the stones,
to bedew the Eggs contained in them, which Eggs, one or more being thereby
ripened, and dropping off from the stone, are received by the extremity of the
tubes, and carried along their inner cavity to the womb.

Two objections may be made against this use: First, That the end of the tube
not sticking close to the stone, when one of the Eggs drops from the stone, it
would more probably fall into the cavity of the belly than light just pat in
the mouth of the tube. Secondly, when it is received by it, its passage is so
narnow, that it is hard to imagine how it can pass by it: But as to the first,
the same objection may lie against the use of the oviduct in Hens; for in them
it does not join quite close to the Ovarium, and yet it is certain, that the
rudiments of the Eggs do all pass by them to the womb. Moreover it is probable,
that when all the other parts of the Genitals are turgid in the act of
Copulation, these tubes also may be in some measure erected, and extend their
open mouth to the stones, to impregnate the Eggs with the seminal fume through
their passage, and if any one be ripened, and separate, to receive it
afterward by its orifice. As to the second objection against the narrowness of
these tubes, he that considers the straightness of the inner orifice of the
womb, both in maids and in women with Child, yet observes to dilate so much
upon occasion, as to grant a passage to the Child out of the womb, cannot
wonder that to serve a necessary end of Nature, the small passages of the tubes
should be so far stretched, as to make way for an Egg, seeing its proportion to
their passage, is much less, than of the Child to the usual largeness of the
said orifice.

CHAP. X. Of the Actions and Uses of the Genital parts in Women.
IN the privy part, are seen the Pubes, the mountains of Venus, the two lips,
the orifice under which the two wings lie hid, the little knobs of flesh,
resembling Myrtle-berries, the passages of the Urine, and the Clytoris.

As for the Pubes, and the Mountains of Venus, they serve for this use, that
the great Orifice might be the better shut, and to avoid compression in
copulation; for which cause they are beset with hair, and are covered with a
hard kind of fat; the great Orifice receives the Yard, and gives passage to the
Ur^ne and the birth. The use of these Wings, or knobs of flesh like
myrtle-berries, are for the defense of the internal parts, shutting the Orifice
of the neck lest cold air, dust, or any other annoyances should hurt it, from
without; and while they swell up, they cause titillation and desire in those
parts. Lastly, the passages of the Urine being shut up by the knobs of flesh,
resembling myrtle-berries, hinders the unvoluntary passage of the Urine.

CHAP. XI. Of the Action of the Clytoris.
THE action of the Clytoris is like that of the Yard, which is erection; which
erection is for the motion, and attraction of the Seed.

CHAP. XII. Of the action and use of the Neck of the Womb.
THE action of the neck of the Womb, is the same with that of the Yard, that is
to say, Erection, which is occasioned diverse ways. First, all this passage is
erected, and made straight, for the better conveyance of the Yard to the Womb,
Then, while the whole passage is erected, it is repleted with spirit and vital
blood, whereby it becomes narrower for the more straight embracing of the Yard.

The causes of this erection are; first, because if the womb were not erected,
the Yard could not have a convenient passage into the womb; secondly it would
hinder convenient affrication, without which the Seed could not be drawn forth.
Lastly, it hinders any hurt, or damage which might be done by the violent force
of the Yard.

CHAP. XIII. Of the uses of the vessels running through the neck of the Womb.
FIRST, it is required that there should be a concurrence of diverse Veins and
Arteries, for the nourishment of that part; and though that part it self, being
full of Membranes, does not require much nourishment, yet by reason that it is
to suffer Erection, that could not be done but by blood and spirits, which are
contained in these vessels: Besides, although the substance of this part be of
a cold temperament, being notwithstanding still heated by the act of
Copulation, that heat would soon consume a slender nourishment; which nature
has supplied, by the concourse of these Vessels. Another cause of the plenty
of these veins, is nourishment of the Birth, and the exclusion of flowers.

CHAP. XIV. Of the actions of the Womb.
THE first use of the Womb is to attract the Seed by a familiar sympathy, just
as the Second use is to retain it, which is properly called Conception.

The third is to cherish the Seed thus attracted, to alter it, and change into
the Birth, by raising up that power which before lay sleeping in the Seed, and
to reduce it from power into act.

The fourth action of the Womb is to send forth the birth at the time prefixed;
the apt time of expulsion, is, when the expulsive faculty begins to be affected
with some sense of trouble, that is, when the Birth afflicts and oppresses the
Womb with its own weight.

Besides these uses, it has these moreover; To nourish the Birth, and to
dilate it self, which it does by the help of Veins and Arteries, which do fill
more and more with matter, as nature requires.

The chiefest action of the Womb, The proper actions of the Womb.
and most proper to it, is, the retention of the Seed; without which, nothing
of other actions could be performed for the Generation of man.

CHAP. XV. Of the Utility of the Womb.
FIRST, it is the most fit place for Copulation, as being in a place furthest
removed from the senses; near which it were not fit to be, by reason of the
inconveniences which would necessarily arise.

It is most fit to receive the Birth, as being hollow; in which concavity the
birth may increase to its full proportion every way.

It is most fit for the exclusion of the Birth, as being placed downward,
whereby the birth might help it self with its own weight; and also by reason of
the Muscles of the Abdomen, which serve for compression, and do help the
endeavors of the mother.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Utility of the preparing Vessels in Women.
THE Utilities of these Vessels are taken from their Original, and from their
Insertion, the right Vein rising from the Hollow; and the left from the
Emulgent, as in men; that the more hot and purer blood might come from the
right vein, for the procreation of Males; and the more serous and watery blood
from the Emulgent, for the generation of Women.

The Vessels also in women are shorter than in men, because the way is not so
far to the Stones; which brevity of the Vessels is lengthned out by the many
turnings and windings with which those Vessels are endued. In the middle way,
those Vessels divide themselves like a Fork, the greater part going to the
Stones, carrying the matter for Seed; the lesser is carried to the womb, where
it scatters it self all along the sides of it, for the nutrition of the Womb.

As for the Arteries, they afford the blood which is more full of spirits to
perfect the Seed.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Utility of the Stones.
THE use of the Stones in Women, is the same as in men; that is to say, to
prepare the Seed, and to make it fit for procreation. They are seated within,
that they should not want a continual heat, to cherish them; for the matter of
Seed being colder in women than in men, it requires a greater heat, which it
would of necessity want, were the Stones placed outward, like those of men; and
for that cause are they covered only with one Tunicle, that the heat of those
parts may more easily pass to them. And therefore the Stones of women are
softer than those of men because they should not perfect so substantial a Seed;
and that the heat of the adjacent parts should not be wholly taken up in the
cherishing of them.

Their figure is not exactly round, Their figure.
but depressed, that the little Meanders of the veins dispersed through the
Membrane, from the Stones to the deferent Vessels, might have more room to be
incerted for the attraction of the Seed, out of the whole substance of the
Stones. The inequality and ruggedness of them makes for the longer stay of the
Seed in those crooked and winding Vessels.

SECT. III.
CHAP. I. Of the signs of Conception.
HAving thus showed you the Anatomy and Use of the parts, Signs of Conception.
it will be requisite to discourse of the Conception it self, which is the main
and chief end of these Vessels: And first of the signs of Conception.

The signs of Conception on the Mothers side, are certain and apparent; first,
if after she has had the company of her Husband, she has received more
content than ordinary.

Pains in the head, giddiness, dimness of the eyes; all these concurring
together, portend conception; the apples of the eyes decrease, the eyes
themselves swell, and become of a dark color, the veins of the eyes wax red,
and swell with blood, the eyes sink, the eyebrows grow loose, various colors
appear in the eyes, little red pimples rise in the face, the veins between the
Nose and the Eyes swell with blood, and are seen more plain; the vein under the
tongue looks greenish, the neck is hot, the back bone cold, the veins and
arteries swell, and the pulses are observed more easily; the veins in the
breast first look of a black color, but afterward turn yellowish, the Teats
look red; if she drink cold drink, she feels the cold in her breast, she loathes
her meat and drink, she has diverse longings, but her natural appetite is
destroyed: Continual vomitings follow, and weakness of the stomach, sour
belches worms about her Navel, faintness of the loins, the lower part of her
belly swelling, inward griping of the body, the retention of the Seed 7 days
after the act of copulation: After which act there is a cold and trembling
which seizes the external members; the attractive force of the womb increases;
the womb dries up. It is also a certain sign of conception, if the Midwife
touching with her finger the interior neck of the womb, shall find it exactly
closed, so that the point of a needle will not go between: The womb waxes
round and swells, the flowers cease to flow (for the Veins through which they
come down, carry the blood to the nourishment of the birth;) the thighs swell
with some pain, the whole body grows weak, and the face waxes pale; the
Excrements proceed slower out of the body: The Urine is white, a little cloud
swimming at the top, and many atoms appear in the Urine. Take the Urine of a
Woman, and shut it up three days in a glass, if she have conceived, at the end
of three days there will appear in the Urine certain live things, to creep up
and down. Take also the Urine of a Woman, and put it in a basin a whole night
together, with a clean and bright needle in it, if the woman have conceived,
the needle will be scattered full of red speckles, but if not, it will be black
and rusty.

Conception is an action of the Womb, whereby the fruitful Seed of the Man and
Woman are received and kept, that a Child may be formed. There are two kinds of
Conception, one true, to which succeeds the generation of an Infant; the other
spurious, and contrary to Nature, in this case the Seed changes into water,
false Conceptions, Moles, or any other strange matter.

It is to be noted, that there is no absolute necessity, that all the Seed
should be received, and retained entire, nor must we imagine that though all of
it be not received into the Womb, the Child formed out of it will want some
Limb, as an Arm, or Leg, or other member, for want of sufficient matter; for
the least drop of Seed, nay only a fume of it is sufficient to impregnate, and
form a Child: But when the quantity of the Seed is small, the Child may be the
less and weaker for it, or if the Man, or the Woman be dis^ased, or the Womb
stuffed with ill humors, the Child will be sickly, or Moles, or false Births, or
Dropsies of the Womb will be occasioned.

Though a Midwife may guess that a Woman has conceived, when all the signs
concur, or most part of them together, and successively according to their
seasons, yet many of these signs happen upon suppression of the courses, and
none of them are so very certain, as not sometimes to fail us; wherefore in
trials of Women, and upon giving physic to them, great caution must be used;
for after the Execution of some Women, they have been found with Child contrary
to the judgment of the Midwifes, and others after a long course of Physic to
open obstructions, and to cure a Dropsy, have been delivered of Children.

CHAP. II. Whether she have conceived a Male.
Conception of a Male.
IF she have conceived a Male Child, the right eye will move swifter, and look
more clear than the left. The right pap will also rise and swell beyond the
left, and grow harder, and the color of the Teats will change more suddenly.
The milk will increase more suddenly, and if it be milked out, and be set in
the Sun, it will harden into a clear Mass, not unlike pearl. If you cast the
milk of the woman upon her Urine, it will presently sink to the bottom. Her
right cheek is more ruddy, and the whole color of her face is more cheerful;
she feels less numness: The first motion of the Child is felt more lively in
the right side, for the most part upon the sixtieth day. If her flowers flow
the fourtieth day after Conception. The belly is more acute toward the navel.
As the Woman goes, she always puts her right leg forward, and in rising she
eases all she can her right side sooner than her left.

CHAP. III. Whether she have conceived a Female.
Conception of a Female.
IF she have conveived a Female, the signs are for the most part contrary to
those aforesaid.

The first motion is made most commonly the ninetieth day after conception,
which motion is made in the left side; Females are carried with greater pain,
her Thighs and Genital Members swell, her color is paler, she has a more
vehement longing* Her flowers flow the thirtieth day after Conception. Girls
are begot of Parents who are by nature more cold and moist, their Seed being
more moist, cold, and liquid.

CHAP. IV. Of the Conception of Twins.
IF a Woman have conceived Twins, Conception of Twins.
the signs thereof appear not, till the third or fourth month after her
Conception; and then they will appear by the motion of the Infant, and by the
extraordinary swelling of her Belly. As to the motion, it is plain, that she
does bear twins, if she perceive a motion on the right and left side at the
same instant, which she perceives more quick and violent. As for the greatness
of the belly; If the Woman perceive it bigger than at any other times of her
being with Child; as also if the two flanks be swelled higher than the middle
of the belly: if there do appear as it were a line of division from the navel
to the groin, making a kind of Channel all along; if the Woman carry her burden
with more than ordinary pain: These are commonly the signs of Twins.

CHAP. V. Of false Conception.
WOmen do oftentimes deceive themselves concerning their Conception; False
Conception.
for they do many times believe themselves to be big with Child, when it is
nothing else but either the Retention of their flowers, which do not fall down
according to their accustomed Periods of time; or else that which is called the
Moon-calf, which is a lump of flesh, for the most part like the guisern of a
bird, greater or lesser, according to the time of its being there, which is
most commonly not above four or five months.

Several sorts of Moles.
Of Moles there are two sorts; the one is called the true Mole, the other is
called the false mole. The true Mole is a fleshy body, filled with many
vessels, Of the true Mole.
which have many white, green, or black lines, or Membranes; it is without
growth, without motion, without bones, without bowels, or entrails; receiving
its nourishment through certain veins; it lives the Life of a Plant, without
any figure or order, being engendered in the concavity of the Matrix, adhereing
to the sides of it, but borrowing nothing of its substance.

Of the false Mole there are four sorts; Of the false Mole.
the Windy Mole, which is a conflux of Wind; the Watery Mole, which is a conflux
of watery humors; the Humorous Mole, which is a conflux of various humors; the
Membranous Mole, which is a thin bag filled with blood. All these four are
contained in the concavity of the Womb.

These Moles are sometimes engendered with the Infant, Signs of Moles.
though they do often cause the Infant to die; either because it does deprive
the Infant of that nourishment which goes from the Infant to the increase of
that; or else because it hinders the growth and perfection of the Infant. The
cause of the fleshy Mole does not always proceed from the Mother, for the Man
does often contribute to the increase of it, when the Seed of the man is weak,
imperfect, and barren, or, though it be good if there be too small a quantity
of it, which after it is mingled with the Seed of the Woman, is choked by the
menstrual blood, and so not being sufficient for the generation of the Infant,
instead thereof produces this little mass of flesh, which by little and little
grows bigger, being wrapped about in a caul, while nature strives to engender any
thing rather than to be idle.

It happens also, when the woman, during her monthly purgations, receives the
company of her husband, her body being not yet purged and void; or else when
the woman lies with a great desire and lust with her husband, after she has
conceived; or when she has retained her monthly courses beyond her time.

The windy mole is engendered by the weak heat of the Matrix, The Windy Mole.
and the parts adjoining, as the Liver and Spleen, which engender a quantity of
wind, which fix in the concavity of the Matrix.

The watery mole is engendered of many confluences of water, The Watery Mole.
which the Womb receives, either from the spleen, or the liver, or the parts
adjoining, or else from the weakness of the liver which cannot assimilate the
blood which is sent thither, for the nourishment of the thing contained in it;
part whereof turns into water, which cannot be voided, but remains in the Womb.

That which is called the Humorous Mole, is engendered of many moist humors,
serosities, or the Whites, or certain watery purgations, which sweat forth from
the menstruous veins, and are contained in the concavity of the Matrix.

The membranous Mole, The membranous Mole.
is a skin or bag, which is garnished with many white and transparent vessels,
filled up with blood: This being cast into the water, the blood goes out, and
the membrane is seen only to gather like a heap of clotted seed.

The signs of false Conception.
False Conception has many signs, common with the true conception; as the
suppression of the flowers, depraved appetite, vomitings, swelling of the
belly, and of the breasts; so that it is a hard thing to distinguish the one
from the other: only these that follow are more properly the signs of a false
than true conception. For in a false Conception, the face is ordinarily puffed
up; the breasts, that at the first were swollen, afterward become, every day
more than other, softer and lanker, and without Milk. In fine, the face, the
breast, the arms, the thighs and groyns grow lank and meager: The belly waxes
hard, as happens to those who are troubled with the Dropsy, and almost of an
equal roundness; with many pricking pains, at the bottom of the belly, which
have scarce any intermission; which is the cause that they can hardly sleep,
being encumbered with a heavy and dead burden. It may be known also by other
signs, for in the conception the Male-Infant begins to move at the beginning of
the third Month; for the most part; and the Female at the beginning of the
third or fourth Month: now where any motion happens, the woman ought to observe
whether she have any milk in her breasts or no: if she have milk in her
breasts, it is a sign of true conception; if she have not, it is a sign of
false conception. Besides, in a true conception, the Mother shall perceive her
Child to move on all sides oftener though to the right flank than to the left,
sometimes up, sometimes down, without any assistance; but in a false
conception, although there be a kind of motion, which is not enlivened; that
proceeds from the expulsive faculty of the Mother, and not from the Mole. The
Mother shall also perceive it to tumble always on that side she lies, not
having any power to sustain it self; besides, as she lies on her back, if any
one do push gently downward the burden of her belly, she shall perceive it to
lie and rest in the place where it was pushed, without returning thither:
beside, that which will confirm it more, is, when after the end of nine months
the woman shall not come to her Travel, but that her belly still swells and is
puffed up more and more, all the rest of the parts of the body growing thin and
meager, this is a sign of a Mole, notwithstanding that many Women have been
known to go ten or eleven months before their delivery.

The signs of the windy Mole are these; when the Belly is equally stretched and
swelled up like a Bladder, more soft than when it bears the Fleshy mole, and
especially near the groins, and small of the belly; if it be struck on, it
sounds like a drum; sometime the swelling decreases, but by and by it swells
more and more; the woman feels her self more light, it is engendered and
increases swifter than the fleshy mole, or the Watery, and it makes such a
distention of the belly, as if one were tearing it asunder: For the watery and
humorous mole, the signs are almost the same; the Belly increases and swells by
little and little, as the woman lies upon her back, the sides of her belly are
more swelled and distended than the middle, or the bottom of the belly, which
grows flatter then, by reason that the water and the humors fall down to the
sides of the belly, moving up and down on the belly, as if it were a
fluctuation of water there.

This distinction is to be observed in the Watery Mole, that the flank and
thighs are more stretched and swollen than in the humoral, because that the
waters flow thither oftentimes. And that which comes forth through Nature's
Conduit, is as clear as Rock-water, without any ill savor; but that which
flows out in the humoral distemper is more red, like water wherein flesh has
been washed, and is of an ill savor. This is also to be marked in false
conceptions, that the flowers never come down, and the Navel of the Mother
advances it self little or nothing, both which happen in true conceptions.

There are, besides these above-written, certain other Tumors which the Women
do take for Moles. These occasion a rotundity and swelling in the belly, which
are not discovered till the woman be opened, and then they do appear, though
the body of the womb be clean and neat, without any thing contained in it, at
one or both corners of the womb, a quantity of water, contained as it were in
little bags; in others are to be seen a heap of kernels and superfluous flesh
clustered up together in the womb, which cause it to swell. Yet in these women
it has been observed, that their purgations have been very regular, which has
been a sign that the womb it self has been in good temper.

The pendent mole.
There is also another Excrescency of Flesh, which may be termed a pendent Mole,
which is a piece of flesh hanging within the inner neck of the womb, which at
the place where it is fastened, is about a fingers breadth, still increasing
bigger and bigger toward the bottom like a little bell: This flesh hanging in
the interior neck of the womb, possesses the whole Orifice of the privy
member, sometimes appearing outward, as big as the fist, as has been observed
in some Women. Of the cures of all these, we shall treat in due place.

CHAP. VI. How Women with Child ought to govern themselves.
IN the first place, she ought to choose a temperate and wholesome air, neither
too hot nor too cold, nor in a watery and damp place, nor too subject to fogs
and winds, especially the South Wind, which is a great enemy to Women with
Child, causing oft-times abortion in them. The Northwind is also hurtful,
engendring Rheums and Catarrhs, and Coughs, which do often force a woman to lie
down before her time. Likewise those winds which carry with them evil odours
and vapors, for these being sucked with the air into the Lungs, are the cause
of diverse diseases.

For her Diet, she ought to choose meat that breeds good and wholesome
nourishment, and which breeds good juice; Her Diet.
such are meats that are moderately dry; the quantity ought to be sufficient,
both for themselves, and for their children, and therefore they are to fast as
little as may be; for abstinence, unless upon good occasion, renders the child
sickly, and tender, and constrains it to be born before its time, to seek for
nourishment; as the overmuch diet stuffs it up, and renders it so big that it
can hardly keep its place.

All meats too cold, too hot, and too moist, are to be avoided, as also the use
of Salads and Spiced meats, and the too much use of salt meats are also
forbidden, which will make the child to be born without nails, a sign of short
life. Her bread ought to be good wheat, well baked and levened. Her meats ought
to be Pigeons, Turtles, Pheasants, Larks, Partridge, Veal, and Mutton. For
herbs, she may use Lettice, Endive, Bugloss, and Burrage, abstaining from raw
Salads: for her last course, she may be permitted to eat Pears, Marmalade, as
also Cherries and Damsins; she must avoid all meats that provoke urine, or the
terms; and such meats as are windy, as Pease, and Beans. Yet because there are
some Women that have such depraved stomachs, Of longing.
by reason of a certain salt and sour humor contained in the membranes of the
stomach, as that they will eat coals, chalk, ashes, cinders, and such like
trash, so that it is impossible to hinder them; to such therefore we can only
say thus much, that they ought to forbear as much as in them lies, assuring
them that such trash does not only endanger their own health, but the health of
the child. Yet if they cannot command that depraved appetite, let them so
provide, though it be by giving some small satisfaction to their depraved
longings, that they do not hasten any further inconvenience; for though those
strange meats be very contrary to nature, yet the strange desire that they have
to them, does not a little avail to the disgestion of them. For her drink, let
it be small Ale, though now and then a cup of pure Wine does not amiss, to
comfort the Stomach, and the parts dedicated to Generation.

Her sleeping
Her time of sleep is best in the night, for the concoction of those meats which
she has eat in the day time: She must avoid by all means, the sleeping after
dinner; she may sleep full out nine hours; her sleeping beyond that time is
prejudicial.

Her Exercise.
She may exercise her self moderately; for violent excrcise loosens the
Cotyledones, through which the Infant receives its nourishment: the riding in
Coaches is forbid, especially, for the last three months.

She ought to avoid great noises, Other precepts.
as the noise of Guns, or great Bells.

Laughing and crying, if it be immoderate, is extremely hurtful, as also
immoderate anger.

In the first four months she ought not to lie with her Husband, for that
shakes and moves the fruit of her Womb, and causes the Flowers to descend; she
must also abstain in the sixth and eighth; but in the seventh and ninth it is
not denied, and is thought to facilitate the Delivery.

She ought also to keep her body soluble, which if it should not come of it
self, she must take loosening Syrups to help nature; as soon as ever they
perceive themselves to be with Child, they must lay aside their Busks, and not
streighten themselves any way, for fear of hurting the fruit of their Womb, by
not giving it its full liberty of growth.

A Woman with Child ought to be accounted sick, for the time of going with
Child is called a sickness of nine Months, and she is indeed subject to many
inconveniences on that account; therefore she ought to use her utmost endeavor
to prevent those many accidents she is then subject to, and that she may
preserve her self in health, as much as her present condition will allow of,
let her be careful to observe a good diet, agreeable to her constitution and
condition. The air of the place where she dwells ought to be temperate; for if
it be too hot it dissipats the humors and spirits, and if it be moist and cold
it occasions rheums and coughs whereby miscarriages have been caused; ill
smells are also very offensive to Women with Child, as the stink of a candle,
the smell of char-coal. Their Stomach generally loath Meat, and are weak; and
therefore they must please their Stomachs, and let them not fast too long, for
thereby their blood is unfit to nourish the Child; but they must not eat too
much at a time; especially for Supper, because the bigness of the belly hinders
the Stomach from containing much; wherefore let the Woman eat little and often.
Her bread must be made of good Wheat, white, and well baked; her meat may be
Mutton, Veal, Fowl, or Pullets, Pigeons, or Partridges, boiled or roasted
according as she likes best. New laid Eggs are also a good Diet, and to purify
the Blood, which is generally ill during the time of pregnancy; she ought to
eat sometimes Broths with succory, borrage or sorrel boiled in it, but hot
seasoned Pyes and baked meats must be avoided; if she long for Fish, River
fish, and those of running streams are to be preferred before others. But note,
that this ought to be a general rule in this case, viz. That if Women earnestly
long for any thing, they must have it. And because their Stomachs are always
weak, they ought to drink some good Wine, or some other good Liquor at Meals to
help digestion. All things very hot, and such things as force Urine ought to be
shunned, because they are apt to force the courses, and so to cause miscarriage.

They ought to sleep moderately, because by sleep, the functions and the
concoction are strengthened, whereas excessive watchings waste the Spirits, and
weaken the faculties; therefore a Woman with Child ought to sleep nine or ten
hours at least in a Night. As to exercise and rest, respect must be had to the
various times of pregnancy. At the beginning of the Conception, if the Woman
perceives it, she ought, if her condition will allow of it, to keep in Bed, at
least till the fifth or sixth day, and not to converse with her Husband all
that time, for then a little matter will cause miscarriage: She must not ride
on Horseback, or in a Coach, or Wagon, all the time she is with Child,
especially when she is near her time; because these kind of motions increase
the weight of that which is contained in the Womb, and often causes abortion.
But she may be carried in a Chair, or Litter, or walk gently. She must forbear
carrying or lifting heavy burdens, nor must she raise her Arms too high, or
dress her own head; for many have miscarried, the ligaments of the Womb being
relaxed on this account. And it must be c^refully noted, that when she walks,
she must walk in low heeled shoes; for big bellied Women are apt to stumble,
because they cannot see their feet, by reason of the bigness of their bellies;
and she must rather rest too much, than use motion too much; for immoderate
motion is very dangerous, and I believe the exercise of bigg bellied Women,
when it has been immoderate toward the latter end of their reckoning, has been
the chiefest and most general cause of hard Labors; for many times the Child
is put into a wrong position by the motion and exercise of the Mother, or the
Birth is unduly hastened; both which sometimes prove very prejudicial. The Woman
ought rather the two last Months of her reckoning to abstain from Copulation,
the Body being thereby much moved, and the Belly compressed, which makes the
Child sometimes take a wrong posture; and without doubt if these things, that
have been said concerning exercise and rest were well regarded, the lives of
many Women and Children would be saved, and much pain and sorrow prevented.

Some Women are so very apt to miscarry, that being frightened, or surprised, by
the noise of a great Gun, or the sound of a Bell or a clap of Thunder they have
miscarryed.

Women with Child are subject to be bound in the Bodies, the Womb by its weight
pressing the right gut and so hindering an easy discharge of the Excrements. In
this case, such things as loosen the belly are to be frequently used. She may
now and then eat stewed Prunes, or Veal-broth, or a Glister of Mallows may be
injected, but sharp Glisters, and things that purge too much, must be avoided;
for Hypocrates says, that too great an evacuation downward is apt to occasion
miscarriage.

The Woman's mind ought to be kept sedate and quiet, all melancholy news, and
frightful objects must be removed far from her, nor must any thing that may
cause sorrow, be suddenly told her. She must moderate her passions, and
excessive anger must by all means be avoided, for the passions do wonderfully
affect the Child and often cause miscarraige; some have been born dumb, others
have had a continual shaking of their Limbs, and the like, when the Mother has
been suddenly and violently surprised or frighted; wherefore it is best to be
discoursing of such things before big-bellied Women, as may moderately rejoice
them, and that such objects be presented, as may please and divert them; and if
it be absolutely necessary to acquaint them with sorrowful things, great care
and caution must be used, and the misery must be discovered piecemeal.

Some Women are so very vain, that they will lace themselves hard with Bodice
stifned with Whale-bone, to preserve their shapes forsooth: but they do not
consider what injury they do themselves; for their Breasts being pressed too
much, are apt to be inflamed and impostumated, and the growth of the Child is
hindered, and the Limbs of it too often disfigured thereby, and sometimes
miscarriage happens. They ought therefore at this time, to have their Clothes
more loose and easy.

Some Women have also a custom to bleed once or twice when they are with Child,
though they have no need of it, but this is certainly an error, for Women with
Child ought not to bleed but upon necessity, some having miscarried by bleeding
but once, a little too much blood being taken away, though others I confess,
having blouded nine or ten times whilst they were with Child, and yet have not
miscarried. Now seeing all are not of the same constitution, they must not be
all treated alike. Those that have most blood can best bear bleeding,

If Purging be thought necessary, gentle things must be only used, as Manna,
Rhubarb, or the like.

Women with Child are subject to many accidents, the first is Vomiting, whereby
they often judge they are breeding, it is not always occasioned by ill humors
in the stomach, but sometimes from a sympathy betwixt the Stomach and the Womb,
by the nerves inserted in the upper Orifice of the Stomach, which have
communication, by continuity with those that pass to the Womb. Now the Womb,
which has a very exquisite Sense, because of its membranous composition,
beginning to wax bigger, feels some pain, which being at the same time
communicated by this continuity of nerves to the upper Orifice of the Stomach,
cause there these Vomitings; for Women that were in good health, before they
conceived, Vomit from the first day of their being with Child, though they have
no ill humors in their Stomach.

If the Vomiting continues a long while, it weakens the Stomach very much and
hinders digestion, though it oftentimes continues till the Women are quick, and
then they recover their Appetite; but in some it does not go off till they are
delivered, and some are most afflicted with it toward the end of their
reckoning, and this sort seldom ceases before they are brought to Bed.

Vomiting at the beginning, if it be gentle, and without great straining, is
not much minded, and sometimes it is beneficial; but if it continue after the
third or fourth Month it ought to be remedied, because the nourishment being
daily Vomited up, the Mother and the Child will be much weakened; and moreover,
the continual subversion of the Stomach causing great agitation, and
compression the Belly, occasions miscarriage. It is very difficult to prevent
wholly this Vomiting, yet it may be much lessened by a good Diet, and by eating
little at a time; and to strengthen the Stomach, let her eat her meat with the
juice of Oranges, or the like. Marmalade of Quinces is also very good, being
eaten after dinner, or after meals, and she ought to drink Claret Wine with
water, and it is convenient to quench Iron in her drink. She must forbear fat
Meats and Sauces, for they much soften the membranes of the Stomach, which were
too weak and relaxed. Sweet and Sugar Sauces are also injurious.

But if the vomiting continue, though regular diet has bin used, the corrupt
humors must be purged off by stool, by some gentle purge made of Mallows,
Cassia, Rhubarb, and the like; but if the vomiting continues, though the woman
observes a good diet, and tho she has bin purged, we must do no more, for there
is great danger of miscarriage.

There are sometimes great pains in the back, reins, and hips, especially the
first time the woman is with child, by reason of the dilatation of the womb,
and the compression it makes by its greatness and weight on the neighboring
parts The ligaments as well round as large, cause these pains, being much
straightened and drawn by the bigness and weight of the womb, namely the large
one of the back and loins, which answer to the reins, because these two
ligaments are strongly fastened toward these parts; the round ones cause pains
in the groins and thighs; where they end, they are some times so violently
extended by this extreme bigness, and great weight of the womb, that they are
torn, especially if the woman happen to stumble, which causes violent pain,
and much mischief. A woman being six Months gone with Child, upon stumbling
felt something crack in her belly, near the loins, and she presently felt great
pain in her back, and in one side of her belly, she vomited violently, and the
next day was seized with a continual Fever, this lasted seven or eight days
without sleeping or resting an hour, and all the while she vomited up all she
took; and she was also very much troubled with Hicoughs, and had great pains
like those of labor: But by keeping her bed twelve days, and by bleeding in
her arm thrice, and by the use of a grain of laudanum diverse times, and by
corroborating cordials she was somewhat eased, and all the symptoms went off by
little and little, and she went her full time; and indeed there is nothing that
will mitigate the pains of the back and reins better, than rest in bed, and
bleeding in the Arm, especially if they were occasioned by the ligaments broke,
or two much extended, it may be convenient to keep up the belly with a broad
swaith, if the Woman cannot keep her Bed. Oftentimes when a Woman has
conceived, the courses being stopped, a great quantity of blood flows to the
Breasts, which makes them swell and be painful, therefore to prevent
inflammations, Women ought to take great care that they are not strait-laced,
so as to compress the breasts, and this is all that needs to be done at the
beginning, only she must be sure, that she receives no blows upon them; but
it is better to bleed in the Arm after the third or fourth Month, if a great
deal of blood flow to the Breasts, then to endeavor to repel it on some other
part by astringent or repelling Medicines; because it does least hurt in the
breasts than any where else. It may be also convenient to use an orderly
cooling Diet to lessen the quantity, and qualify the heat of the humors. Big
bellied Women sometimes are troubled with incontinence, and difficulty of
Urine, because the Womb by its bigness and weight presses the Bladder, so that
the common extension of it being hindered, it is rendered incapable of holding
such a quantity of water as it uses to do; and therefore the nearer a Woman is
to her time, the oftener she is forced to make water: but on the contrary if the
neck of the Womb be pressed, she makes water with great difficulty, and
sometimes an heat and inflammation in the neck of the Bladder is the occasion
of the suppression of the Urine, and sometimes a stone is the cause, and if so,
the pain is more violent, and much more dangerous than at another time, the
Womb by its weight and bigness causing the stone perpetually to press upon the
bladder. These frequent endeavors to make water ought to be prevented if
possibly, because the continual forcing downwards to make water loosens the
Womb, and so sometimes occasions miscarriage; and therefore, when it comes from
the bigness and weight of the Womb, as it dos most commonly, the Woman must
ease her self by lifting up the bottom of her Belly, when she has occasion to
make water or she may have a large swaith fitted for that purpose, to keep her
Belly from bearing too much upon the Bladder. But keeping in Bed is the best
and surest remedy.

If an Inflammation of the neck of the Bladder be occasioned by sharp humors,
the Woman must have a cooling Diet, and forbear Wine, and Morning, and Evening
she must take an Emulsion made of Whey, Syrup of Violets and the cold Seeds,
and this is very safe; for it cools and cleanses the passages of the Urine, and
is no way injurious to the Mother or Child. But if the pain and inflammation do
not go off by the use of these things, to prevent any ill accident that may
happen, a little blood may be taken from the Woman's Arm, and the outward entry
of the neck of the bladder may be bathed with a cooling and Emollient
Decoction, made of Mallows Marshmallows, Violets, and Linseeds; or Injections
made of the same Decoction with honey of Violets, or warm Milk may be cast into
the Bladder. But if these things do not do the business, a Catheter may be used
from time to time to draw forth the water, and if the pain be violent, a half
bath lukewarm may be used, if she be not too much moved thereby: But all
Medicines that force Urine must be forborne, for they are very injurious to
Women with Child, for they are apt to occasion miscarriage. And if a Stone be
the cause, it must for the present be only thrust back with the Catheter, for
if you should endeavor to draw it out, the life of the Child or Mother will be
hazarded; wherefore it is best to let it alone till the Woman is delivered.

When the Child lies high, coughs and difficulty of breathing afflict
big-bellied Women, and when the cough is so much as to cause Vomiting, it is a
very dangerous Symptom, being the most apt to occasion miscarriage, because the
Lungs endeavoring to cast out the offending matter, depresses the Diaphragm,
and thereby all the parts of the belly, and especially the Womb.

Many things may also occasion this cough, as salt Rheums flowing from the
whole Body to the Breast, the suppression of the course, cold taken and the
like. If it proceed from sharp humors, or salt rheums, salt and high seasoned
meats must be avoided, and also such things as are sharp, as Vinegar, Oranges,
and the like, and instead of them, she ought to use such things as smoothen the
passages of the Lungs and Breast, as Sebestins, Jujubes, Raisons of the Sun,
Liquorish, Sugar Candy, Syrup of Violets, and the like. It is also proper to
turn the humors downwards by a gentle Glyster. If these things will not do the
business, and there is a sign of a great deal of blood, the Woman must be
blooded in the Arm, and though it is not common practice, to bleed at the very
beginning of being with Child, yet it must be done, when the cough is
continual, for moderate bleeding is not so dangerous as such a cough. If the
cough be occasioned by a cold, the Woman ought to keep her Chamber, and to have
her neck well defended from the cold with clothes; and at Bed time, let her
take three spoonfuls of Syrup of burnt Wine, which is very good for the Breast,
and helps digestion. It is made of half a pint of good Wine, two drams of
Cinnamon bruised, half a dozen of Cloves, four ounces of Sugar, boil them over
the fire, burn the Wine, and afterward boil it to the consistence of Syrup. It
is to be noted, that in this case, the Woman must be never strait-laced, and
some gentle Medicine to cause sleep, ought be given; for such things are
particularly proper to stop Rheums, and to thicken the matter. The following
Anodyne may be used every other night at Bed time upon occasion.

Take of Cowslip-water two ounces, of the Syrrups of Jujubes, and Meconium,
each half an ounce, mingle them, make a draught.

Some Women, by their first Child are so much oppressed in their Breast, that
they fear they shall be choked presently after eating, walking, or going up
Stairs, the Child lying very high, by reason the Ligaments that support the
Womb are not yet relaxed; and if upon this account the Lungs be full of Blood,
they will breath more easily after a little Blood is taken from the Arm. But if
the difficulty of breathing is occasioned by the Womb's pressing upon the
Midrife, the Clothes must be worn loose, and the Woman must eat little at a
time, and often; for full feeding oppresses the Midrife, and increases the
difficulty of breathing; and she must be sure to avoid windy Meats, as Pease,
ea^ns, and the like: And Grief and Fear, if possible must be far removed; for
thereby Women are in danger of being suffocated, when their Heart and Lungs are
before oppressed.

Women with child are subject to Pains and swellings of the Legs and Thighs,
which are sometimes also full of red Spots, which much obstructs their walking;
these are occasioned by abundance of Blood, for Women that are sanguine are
most subject to these swellings and pains, much walking and exercise do also
occasion them; to remedy or prevent which, a Woman so affected should keep her
Bed, and if there be signs of fullness of Blood, she may be blooded in the Arm;
but if she be forced to walk about, her Legs must be swaithed, beginning below
and swaithing upwards. But in some Women, these swellings are occasioned by
weakness and phlegmatic humors, and if you press the swelling it will pit, as
is usual in Dropsies. In this case the natural heat is not able to concoct the
nourishment, and to drive out that which is superfluous; for this sort of
swelling make a bath of Camomile, Melilot and Lavender, and the Ashes of Vines,
afterward foment with Aromatic Wine, and in it dip compresses to be laid on,
and to be repeated three or four times a day. But usually these swellings go
off of themselves, when the Woman is delivered, the whole Body being cleansed
by the Childbed purgations.

Many big bellied Women are subject to the piles, because the courses that were
wont to be evacuated monthly, are collected in a great quantity, and flow back
upon the Body. They are also occasioned by the Costivness of the body; they are
painful Swellings and Inflammations occasioned by a Flux of humors to the
Fundament: Some are internal, some external, some small, and with little or no
pain, and some very big and painful. It is easy enough to prevent their further
growth by remedies, which hinder and turn the Flux from those parts, when they
are small and without pain; but the greatest care is to be taken, when they are
large and painful. First, therefore you must endeavor to ease the pain, for as
long as that remains, the Flux is ever increased; and if Blood abounds, she may
be blooded in the Arm-once, and again, if the case require it, to divert the
humors, and to lessen them. If Costiveness be the cause, an emollient Glister
must be injected, made of the decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows, Violets, and
sweet Butter, or Oil of Almonds; but you must be sure to add nothing that may
fret or provoke the parts, least the disease should be increased thereby,
especially when the piles are within. Some put the small end of a pullets gut
upon the end of the Glister-pipe, that it may be the easier injected. You may
else anoint the swellings with Galen's cooling Ointment mixed with an equal
part of Populeon; or you may use the hot stroakings of a Cow, or you may foment
with a Decoction of Marshmallows and linseed Oils of sweet Almonds, Poppies,
and water Lillies well beaten together with the Yolk of an Egg, and ground in a
leaden Mortar, give great ease. A cooling Diet must be ordered, and the woman
must keep her Bed, till the Flux of the Humors is gone. If the Swelling do not
abate upon the use of these things, Leeches must be applied. But it is to be
noted, that in Women with Child, the bleeding of the Piles may be beneficial,
if the Bleeding be moderate, and without pain. But if it flow in too great
quantity, the Mother and Child will be weakened thereby; therefore if so, it
will be necessary to apply an astringent Fomentation made of a Decoction of
Pomgranate Peel, Province Roses, Granat Flowers, and a little Allom, and to
turn the Blood, bleeding in the Arm is requisite.

Women with Child are subject to several Fluxes, viz. a Looseness, the Flux of
the Courses and Floodings. There are three sorts of Loosenesses, a Lientery,
wherein the meat passes through raw and undigested, a frequent Ejection of
Excrement and Humors, Lastly, the Bloody Flux, which together with the
Evacuation of Humors and Excrements, voids Blood with violent pains. But
whatever sort of Flux it is, if it be much and of long continuance, the Woman
is in danger of miscarrying; for in a Lientary, the Mother and Child are much
weakened, that being cast out by Stool, which should be the Nourishment; and
the Strength and Spirits are much weakened by a common Looseness; but the
bloody Flux is most dangerous, because the frequent endeavors to go to Stool,
greatly disturb the Womb. As to the Cure of these Fluxes, whereof great Care
ought to be had in time; for they occasion Miscarriages; the Woman afflicted
with a Lientery ought to use meat of easy digestion, and little at a time,
that so her Stomach may be able to concoct it and she ought to drink Claret
mixed with water, wherein Iron has been quenched, and before and after Meals,
a little burnt Wine, or good Canary may be drank, or a little Marmalade of
Quinces may be eat.

If it be only a looseness, and is gentle, and is not of long continuance, it
needs not be much regarded, and therefore ought to be left to Nature, but if it
continues five or six days, some gentle purging Medicine ought to be used, as
Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, or the like.

But great care ought to be taken in the bloody flux, lest by its continuance
it should cause miscarriage. In this case the ill humors must be first purged
off with Syrup of Succory and Rhubarb or the like, and Broaths made of Veal and
Chicken with cooling herbs in them must be used to qualify the Acrimony of the
humors; and she must drink Claret wine and Water, wherein Iron has been
quenched, or half a Spoonful of Syrup of Quinces may be mixed with Water, and
every other Night at Bed time after purging, she may take fifteen or 20 Drops
of liquid Laudanum, and Glisters may be injected made of Calves Head, or Sheeps
head Broth; and to prevent the frequent Endeavors of going to Stool, a
Glister made of Milk, and the Yolk of an Egg mixed, may be now and then
injected. When a Woman is with Child, generally speaking, she ought not to have
her Courses, because their ordinary passage is stopped, and also because the
Blood is then employed for the Nourishment of the Child; yet some big bellied
Women have their monthly purgations till the fifth Month, and yet go out their
time, and do very well. A Woman having her courses, thought she was not with
Child, and because she found her self indisposed, she advised with a Physician,
who by Bleeding and purging her made her miscarry, after she had bin three
Months gone with Child.

It is to be noted, that when Women with Child have a Flux of Blood, you must
carefully consider whither it be the ordinary Courses, or a real Flooding; if
if it be the ordinary Courses, the Blood comes at the accustomed times, and
flows by degrees from the Neck, near the inward Orifice of the Womb, and not
from the Bottom of it as may be perceived, if trying with a Finger, you find
the inward Orifice quite closed, which could not be if the Blood issued from
the Bottom. It must be likewise considered whether the Courses flow, by reason
of the Superfluity of the Blood, the Acrimomony of it, or the weakness of the
Vessels. If abundance of Blood be alone the Cause there being more than enough
for the Nourishment of the Child, it injures neither Mother nor Child, but is a
Benefit to both, provided it be moderate. But if there be not abundance of
Blood, and if the Woman use to have but a small quantity of her Courses, before
she was with Child, it is a sign that the Flux proceeds from the Heat and
Acrimony of the Blood, or the Weakness of the Vessels.

To prevent this Flux, when it ought to be stopped, the Woman must keep in Bed,
and forbear all things that may heat her blood, and must observe a cooling and
strengthening Diet, and feed on Meat that breeds good Blood, and thickens it;
as Broths made of Chicken, Knuckels of Veal and the like, wherein may be boiled
cooling Herbs; Rice Milk and Barley Broth is also very good, and in all her
Drink quench Iron. She must forbear Conversation with her Husband. And to
comfort the Child, which in this case is usually very weak, Linen dipped in
strong Wine, wherein Cinnamon and Pomgranat Peel has bin infused, must be
applied to the Mothers Belly.

Flooding is much more dangerous than a Flux of the Courses; for the Blood
comes from the bottom of the Womb with pain, and in great Abundance, and
continues flooding daily without Intermission; only sometimes Clods of Blood
stop it for a while, but afterward it flows more violently, and destroys both
Mother and Child if not seasonably stopped by the delivery of the Woman.

A false Conception or a Mole, which the Womb endeavors to expel is usually
the Cause, when the flooding happens when young with Child, whereby some
Vessels at the bottom of the Womb continually cast forth Blood until the
strange Body is ejected. But when a flooding comes upon a woman, that has truly
conceived, at whatsoever time it be; it proceeds likewise from the opening of
the Vessels of the bottom of the womb, occasioned by some blow, slip, or other
hurt, and especially, because the afterbirth separating in part, if not wholly
from the in side of the womb, opens all the Orifices of the Vessels where it
was joined; and for this reason a great flux of blood follows and never stops
'till after the delivery of the woman; for if but part of the afterbirth only
be once loosened, it never joins again to the womb; and therefore the opening
of the Vessels cannot be stopped, 'till all that is in the womb is expelled, and
afterward the womb like a sponge squeezed, contracts it self and stops the
Vessels.

But though it be necessary to deliver the Woman presently, to stop a great
flooding, which manifestly endangers the woman's life; yet it is to be noted,
that when the flooding is small, other things are to be first tried; for some
small floodings have for sometimes bin suppressed by keeping quietly in bed, by
bleeding in the arm, and proper remedies; and perh^ps it may in a short time,
be found to be only an ordinary flux of the Courses; if therefore the strength
of the woman keeps up, and the flux be not attended with ill symptoms, it is
best to leave the whole business to Nature, but if the flux be very much, and
the woman is afflicted with Convulsions and Fainting, she must be instantly
delivered, whether she has pains and throws or no.

Sometimes women with child are oppressed with a great weight at the bottom of
their bellies, by reason the womb bears down, and sometimes she cannot walk
without pain and difficulty: In this case the large ligaments of the womb are
much relaxed, either by the burden upon them, or by a fall, shaking, or great
pains, or bad labor in a former delivery. Sometimes also a great many humors
are the cause, for they moisten and relax the ligaments: This bearing down of
the womb hinders coition, and causes numness in the Hips and Thighs, and
difficulty of Urine, and costiveness. The best remedy in this case, whatsoever
is the cause of the bearing down, is keeping the Bed, for the ligaments are
continually more and more relaxed by the weight when she is up; but if her
condition or circumstances are such, as will not admit of continual rest in the
bed, she ought at least to keep up her belly with a swaith, and if the weight
causes a difficulty of rendering her water, she must lift up her belly as often as
she has occasion to make water; if humors be the cause of the relaxation of
the ligaments of the womb, a drying diet must be constantly used, and her meat
must be roasted, and the woman must be very careful when there is such a
weight, and relaxation of the womb, from whatsoever cause it proceeds, that she
be not strait laced, because thereby the womb is forced down; but above all,
when she is in labor, care must be taken that neither by means of the throws,
which strongly force down the womb, nor by the birth of the Child, nor the
violent extraction of the Burden, she gets a precipitation instead of a
bearing down, as is seen often.

If a woman chance to be infected with the Venereal Disease during her
pregnancy, the case is very difficult, for those Methods and Medicines, that
are proper for the Cure of it, are apt to occasion a miscarriage; and yet
notwithstanding, if she be infected at her first being with Child, or if the
symptoms are violent and dangerous, when she is ^ear her time, something must
be done, for should the disease lie unregarded upon her seven or eight Months,
her mass of blood would be corrupted, and the venom imparted to the Child in
her Belly; and though she be near her time, if the symptoms are violent, she will
be in great danger of being ruined, if Medicines be not presently used to
mitigate them

If it be only a Gonorrhea, or running of the Reins, ten grains of Mercurius
dulcis, more or less, according to her strength, must be given at Bed time, in
form of a Bolus, in conserve of Roses or the like, and some gentle purge the
next Morning, and at Bedtime after the purge, you must be sure to give some
Anodyne, to appease the commotion raised by the Purge. The Bolus and Purge must
be repeated twice a Week, or oftener, if the strength will permit, and if no ill
accident intervene. If the Urine be very hot and sharp, it will be convenient
to use an emulsion to mitigate the pain and heat, the following is of good use.

Take of blanched Almonds number 12, of the four greater cold Seeds, each one
dram and an half, of the Seeds of Lettice, and white Poppies, each half a dram,
beat them in a marble Mortar, and pour on them a sufficient quantity of barley
Water, make an emulsion for two Doses; add an Ounce of Syrrup of Violets and
half a dram of Sal Prunella. If the privy parts are excoriated or swelled, you
must foment them with a decoction of Mallows, and Fenugreek-seeds, and
afterward anoint the excoriated parts with the white Ointment with Camphor;
but if the Disease arise to a confirmed Pox, a gentle Salivation must
unavoidably be ordered. Some venture to raise it with a Mercurial Ointment, but
I think it is much safer to do it by Mercurius dulcis inwardly taken, and great
care must be taken to prevent sickness of the stomach, gripes and stools;
therefore as soon as ever you perceive any sickness of the Stomach, faintness,
or gripes, you must leave off the use of Mercury for a while, 'till the
symptoms are quieted by Opiats, and great care must be taken that the flux do
not rise too high.

That her breasts, after her delivery, may not grow big, and swell overmuch,
Precepts concerning the breasts.
as also to avoid the danger of too much blood, which being converted into
Milk, may chance to curd and breed some disease in the breast: Therefore as
soon as she perceives her self with child, let her carry about her neck, a
small neck-lace of Gold, though some do more esteem of a neck-lace of steel, or
a little ingot of Steel, to hang between the two breasts: You may also foment
the breasts a quarter of an hour every morning, with the distilled waters of
Sage, Periwinckle, or Ground Ivy, making them first lukewarm: When the third
or fourth month of her time is come, and that she perceives the Infant to begin
to swell, and to grow big, Concerning the belly.
she may swathe it with a linen swathe-band, which she may anoint with some
convenient Pomatum; this keeps the Belly smooth, and from wrinckles, and from
hanging down like a Tripe.

She may use this Liniment, or Pomatum.
Take the Gall of a Kid, and of a Sow, of each 3 ounces, Capon-grease and
Goose-grease of each an ounce, and a half; cut these into little pieces, and
melt them in an earthen dish, putting thereto as much water as will suffice to
keep them from burning; then strain it through a linen cloth, and afterward
having washed it in fair water, until it be very white, add to it of the marrow
of a red Deer, about an ounce; then wash it again in Rose Water, or some other
water of a good scent, and anoint the swathe-band therewith.

Or this,
Take of the grease of a Dog, and the fatt of Mutton which is about the
Kidneys, of each two ounces; the Seed of a Whale, about an ounce; Oil of sweet
Almonds, about an ounce and half; prepare the greases as abovesaid; then mingle
them with the other things, and wash them in Rose Water, as before.

Some women that are loath to grease their bellies with these ointments, do
carry the skin of a Dog, or else the outward and thin pilling of a Sheep's
skin: Take the skin of a Dog ready dressed, for the making of Gloves; wash it a
good many times in fair water first, and afterward in Rose Water, then dry it
in the shade, and moisten it in the foresaid Oils.

Take this one more Liniment.
Take a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, well washed in fair water; of
Rose Water, and of Oil of sweet-Almonds, an ounce; of the seed of a Whale, half
an ounce; melt these altogether, and anoint the belly. These Ointments are to
be kept in a Gally-pot, covered over with Rose Water.

In the first days of this Month it might not be unprofitable to be bathed in
the following decoction, for the space of a quarter of an hour; and being
afterward put to bed, to let her self be well rubbed, and afterward anointed
with some good Ointment all about the Navel, along the Os facrum, and the bone
of the small guts, and all about her hips and thighs.

You may use this Bath.
Take of Mallows, Mash-Mallows, Mother-wort, of each two handluis; Roots of
Lillies three Ounces, of Camomile and Melilot-flowers, of each a good handful;
Lineseed, Quinces, and Fenugreek, of each an Ounce; boil all these in fair
water to make a decoction, for a half Bath.

You may use this Ointment.
Take Hens grease, three Ounces; the grease of a Duck, an Ounce and a half; Oil
of Linseed, an ounce and a half; fresh butter two Ounces; melt all these
together, and then wash them well, either in Pellitory-water, or in the water
of Mug-wort, adding thereto two Ounces of the Muscilage of Marshmallows.

If the Woman all her time do complain that she feels little or no motion of
the Child, let her carry upon her Navel this following Quilt, which will give
strength to the Infant.

Take Powder of Roses, red Corral, Gilliflowers, of each three ounces and an
half; Seed of Angelica, two drams; Mastick, a dram and an half, Ambergreece two
grains, Musk one grain; put all these in a bag of fine linen, and quilt them
together for the use aforesaid. Thus much is to be observed by women with Child
that are in health, and have no other diseases hanging upon them: but of the
other diseases incident to women with Child, we shall take a time hereafter to
Treat.

The Womb-cake, otherwise called the Womb-liver, is much like the Spleen, it
has abundance of Fibers; and small vessels, it is two fingers breadth, thin
near the edges, and thick in the middle. And when the Child is ready for Birth,
it is a quarter of a Yard over: It is smooth and somewhat hollowish on the side
next the Child, and is joined to the Chorion, but is very unequal on that side
next the Womb, and has many Bunchings out, by which it sticks fast to the Womb.
When there are Twins, there are two Womb-Cakes, either distinct in Shape, or
separated by a Membrane one from the other, and a particular rope of umbilical
Vessels is inserted into each from each Child; it at first appears like a
woolly Substance on the outside of the outward Membrane, that encompasses the
Child about the ninth week; and a red fleshy soft substance grows upon it in a
short time, that is unequal, and in little knobs, and thereby presently sticks
to the Womb, and is very visible about the thirteenth Week; till this time the
Child is increased and nourished wholly by the apposition of the Chrystaline or
Albugineous Liquor, wherein it swims loose in the inner Membrane called Amnios,
having no umbilical Vessels formed, whereby to receive any thing from the
Womb-cake: But when it grows bigger, and begins to need more Nourishment, the
extremities of the umbilical Vessels begin to grow out of the Navel by little
and little, and are extended toward the Womb-cake, that they may draw a more
nourishing juice out of it. It has Arteries, Veins Nerves, and Lympheducts,
some from the Womb, and some from the Chorion. But though they are very large and
visible in the Womb, yet they send but very small Capillaries to the Womb-cake.
Those Vessels that come from the Chorion are Arteries and Veins, and perhaps
the Lympheducts, the Arteries and Veins that come from the Womb, Spring from
the Hypogastricks, and from that Branch of the Spermaticks, that is inserted
into the bottom of the Womb, the Umbilical Vessels of the Child come from the
Chorion. The Womb-cake for the first Month sticks very fast to the Womb, but
when the Child is come to Maturity, it easily seperates from the Womb, and
falls from it like ripe fruit from a Tree, and after the Birth makes part of
the Secundine. Next to the Womb-cake follow the two Membranes in which the
Child is wrapped, the outer is called Chorion, the inner Amnios, and when the
Child is perfectly formed, there is a third betwixt the other two called
Allantois. The Chorion is somewhat thick, smooth on the inside, but something
unequal or rough; and in that part of it, that sticks to the Womb-cake, and
thereby to the womb, there are many Vessels which rise from the Womb-cake it
self, and the Umbilical Vessels. Twins are both encompassed in one Chorion, but
each a particular Amnios, it covers the Egg originally, and when the Egg is
carried to the Womb, and becomes a Conception, this membrane sucks up the
moisture that abounds in the womb at that time; for while the Conception is
loose in the Womb, it is increased in the same manner, as an Egg in a Hen,
which while it is in the knot, it is only a Yolk, and when it drops off from
thence, and falls through the Infundibulum, it is not at all altered, but when it
comes into the Cells of the Process of the Womb, it begins to gather white,
though it adhere to no part of the Womb, nor has any Umbilical Vessels but as
Eggs of Fishes and Frogs do without procure to themselves whites out of the
Water, or as Beans, Pease, and other Pulse, and bread Corn, being steeped in
Moisture, swell and so acquire Nourishment from the Bud that is springing out
of them. In like manner, does a whitish Moisture flow out of the Wrinkles of
the Womb, whence the Yolk gathers its white, and concocts it by its vegetative
and innate heat: And indeed, the Liquor that abounds in the Wrinkles of the
Womb, tastes like the white; and in this manner, the Yolk falling by Degrees, is
encompassed with a white, till at last, the outmost Womb having got Skins and a
Shell, is brought to perfection: Even so the Chorion sucks up the albugineous
Liquor that from the first Conception increases daily in it, and sweats through
the Amnios, wherein the Embrio-swims, till the Umbilical Vessels and the
Womb-cake are formed, from and through which, the Child may receive Nourishment.
The Liquor that it sucks up is supposed to be nutritious juice sweating out of
the Capillary Orifices of the Hypogastrick and spermatick Arteries.

That Membrane that immediately contains the Child is called Amnios; it is
joined to the Chorion only where the Umbilical Vessels pass through them both
into the Womb-cake, it is soft, smooth, very thin and transparent, and loosely
invests the Child, the shape of it is somewhat oval; it has Vessels from the
same Origins, as the Chorion. This Membrane before the Egg is ripened, contains
a clear Liquor, which after impregnation, is that out of which the Child is
formed. In it resides the formative power, and the matter from whence the first
Lineaments of the Child are drawn. But because this Liquor is so very little,
there sweats through this Membrane presently part of that nutritious albugineous
humor that is contained in the Chorion, which it had sucked out of the Womb,
and the Child receives its increase by Addition of this humor to its
undiscernable Rudiments. Yet after the formation of the Umbilical Vessels and
the Womb cake, the Amnios receives a nutritious humor after another manner,
and not as before, only by transudation. Milky Veins come directly to the
Womb-cake, acrording to the Opinion of some, and out of it arise others that
carry the Chyle to the Amnios, but it is doubted of by others.

The Membrane called Allantoides is the third that encompasses the whole Child;
it is very probable that this as well as the other two was originally in the
Egg, yet it does not appear, till after the formation of the Umbilical Vessels
and Womb-cake, and 'till the Albugineous Liquor ceases to be sucked up by the
Chorion out of the Womb: but as soon as the Child begins to be nourished by the
Umbilical Vessels, and the Urachus is passable, then this Membrane begins
presently to appear. It contains the Child's Urine, brought into it by the
Urachus from the Bladder, and with which it is filled more and more daily till
the birth. This Membrane is very thin, smooth, soft, and yet dense, it may be
distinguished from the Chorion and Amnios, because they have a great many
Vessels dispersed through them, but this has neither Vein nor Artery that is
visible. After opening the Membranes that encompass the Child, the Navel-string
appears, which is membranous, wreathed, and unequal, arising from the Navel,
and reaching to the Womb-cake; it is about half an ell long, and a finger
thick. The Vessels contained in this string are four, one vein, two arteries,
and the Urachus wrapped in a common Coat. The Vein rises from the Liver of the
Child, and is larger than the Arteries, and from thence passing out of the
Navel, it runs along the common Coat to the Womb-cake, into which it is
implanted by many roots; but before it reaches it, it sends some little twigs
into the Amnios. It was formerly thought, that the only use of this Vein was to
carry the blood from the Womb-cake to the Child, and some still think, that it
carries chyle. In the common coat are included also two small Arteries; they
spring from the inner Iliack branches of the great Artery, and passing by the
sides of the bladder, they rise up to the Navel, out of which they are
conducted with the Womb-cake, in the same common cover with the Vein and
Urachus; wherewith they are twined like a Rope. Spirituous blood is driven from
the Child by the beating of its Heart to the Womb-cake, and the Membranes for
their nourishment, from which, what blood remains circulates back again in the
umbilical vein, together with the nutritious juice afresh imbibed by its
Capillaries dispersed in the Womb-cake; but Blood and Vital Spirits are not
carried by the Arteries from the Mother to the Child, as Galen and many others
have taught. The Urachus is the fourth Umbilical Vessel, which is a small
membranous, round pipe, endued with a very straight Cavity, it rises from the
bottom of the Bladder up to the Navel, out of which it passes along within the
common Cover, and opens into the allantoides; these four Vessels have one
common Cover, which keeps each of them from touching the other, which is called
funiculus, it is membranous, round and hollow, and consists of a double Coat,
it has several knots upon it here and there, whereby the Midwives guess how
many Children more the Mother shall have; but this is vain and superstitious.
This Navel Rope is wont to be tied, when the Infant is born, one or two fingers
breadth from the Navel, with a strong thread cast about it several times, and
then about two or three fingers breadth beyond the ligature, to be cut off;
what is not cut off, is suffered to remain, 'till it drop off of its own accord.

There have been great disputes among Physicians, with what, and by what way
the Child is nourished, some say by blood alone received by the umbilical Vein,
others by chile alone conveyed in by the mouth; but indeed, according to the
different degrees of perfection, that an Egg passes from a Conception to a
Child fit for the Birth, it is nourished differently; for as soon as an Egg is
ripened, and falls into the womb, it immediately sucks up through its outward
membranes some of that albugonious liquor, wherewith at this time the internal
superficies of the womb is much moistened; and therefore as soon as the first
liniaments of the Child begin to the drawn out of that Humor contained in the
Amnios, they are immediately increased by the apposition of the said liquor
strained out of the chorion through the amnios into its cavity; but when the
parts of the Child begin to be a little more perfect, and the chorion is so
dense, that not any more of the said liquor is sucked up by it, the umbillical
Vessels begin to be formed, and to extend to the side of the amnios, which they
penetrate, and both the Vein and the Arteries pass also through the allantois
and Chorion, and are implanted into the Womb-cake, that at this time, first
gathering upon the Chorion, joins it to the womb, and now the hypogastrick and
spermatick Arteries, that before carried the nutritious juice into the cavity
of the womb, open by their orifices into the Womb-cake, where either by
straining through it, or by fermenting, they put off the said juice, which is
sucked up by the umbilical Vein, and carried by it, first to the Liver,
afterward to the Heart of the Child, where the thin spirituous part of it is
converted into blood, but the thick and earthy part going down by the aorta
enters the umbilical Arteries, and by those branches of them, that run through
the amnios, is discharged into the cavity of it. Some perhaps may ridicule this
passage of the nutritious juice, because it is supposed, according to this
account to choose its way, as if it were a reasonable Creature, but they may as
well expose the passage of the Chyle from the common duct to the Womb-cake,
when the Child is in the Womb, for how should the Chyle know, or the milky
Vessels by which it passes, that there is any Child in the Womb, that the one
should offer to go that way, and the other give it way to go thither at that
time; whereas the passage is shut at other times; and yet this, they that laugh
at this passage of the nutritious juice, allow; and how comes the Chyle to turn
its course presently after the Child is born, and instead of going down to the
womb, rise up to the breasts. What reason can be given for these and many other
things in nature? We are therefore forced to confess, that there are many
things in nature, that are only known to Almighty God, the maker of all things.
There is also another objection against this opinion, because it allows none of
the Mothers blood to be received by the Child through the Umbilical Vein, but
only nutritious juice, and how should it come to pass that the blood should be
bred in the Child, seeing it has blood before the Liver, or Heart, or any other
part that assists in the making blood, are in a condition to officiate. It is
indeed very strange, how blood should be made so soon, but that it is made out
of the Nutritious Juice, without the mixture of any from the Mother, is
manifest by Dr. Harvey's curious Observations concerning the order of the
generation of the parts in a Chicken, which from first to last receives nothing
from the head; (says he) there appears at the very first a red leaping Speck, a
beating Bladder, and Fibers drawn from thence containing blood in them; and as
far as one can discern by inspection, blood is made before the leaping Speck is
formed, and the same has vital heat, before it is stirred by the Pulse: And as
the beating begins in the blood, and from it, so at last, at the point of Death
it ends in it. And because the beating Bladders, and the sanguinous Fibers that
are made from it, and are seen first of all, it seems as if the blood were
before its Receptacles. This Worthy Author, in his Treatise of the generation
of Animals, owns it is a Paradox, that blood should be made, and moved, and
have vital Spirit before any Organs for making blood or of motion have a being;
and that the Body should be nourished and increased before the Stomach and
Bowels the Organs of Concoction are framed. But neither of these are stranger,
than that there should be Sense and Motion before there is a Brain. And yet he
says in his 57 th Exercitation, that the Faetus moves, contracts, and stretches
out it self, when there is nothing to be seen for a Brain but clear water. Now
if all these wonderful and unaccountable things do undoubtedly come to pass in
an Egg, by the warmth of the Hen only, why should we count it a wonderful
thing, that nutritious Juice impregnated with the vital Spirits of the arterial
blood wherewith it circulates through the Mother's Heart, should be turned into
blood in a Child, comforted with the friendly warmth of the Womb, though the
Mother sends no humor to it under the form of Blood, and though it self as yet
has no perfect Organs to make Blood.

The thicker nutritious juice being put off in the Amnios, by the umbilical
Arteries, the Child sucks in some of it, as soon as the Mouth, Stomach, and the
like are perfectly formed, which going down into the Stomach and Guts, is
received by the milky Veins, as in grown people. Diemerbrock proves that the
Child is nourished this way, by the following Reasons; first, because the
Stomach of the Child is never empty, but has a milky whitish liquor in it, and
in the mouth of the Child, there is also such an humor. 2 dly. Because there
are Excrements in the guts, and the Child voids them by stool, as soon as it is
born, and certainly these are Excrements of some nourishment taken in by the
Mouth. 3 dly. Had not the Stomach been accustomed to perform Concoction in the
Womb, it would not presently after the Birth perform the same. 4 thly. Because
the Infant presently after it is born, knows how to suck the Breast, which it
cannot be thought it could so readily do, if it had taken nothing by suction,
while it was in the Womb. 5 thly. Because many Children vomit up a milky
nourishment, as soon as they are born, before they have sucked any Breast, or
taken any thing by the Mouth, which therefore must needs be received into the
Stomach.

Some say by way of Objection to what has bin before set down, if the Child be
not nourished by the Mothers blood, why should her Courses be stopped, all or
most of the time she goes with Child? to which may be answer^d, that it is for
the same reason, that Nurses that give suck commonly want them also, for as in
Nurses, the Chyle passes in a great proportion to the Breasts, whereby the
Blood being defrauded of its due, and wonted share, does not increase to that
Degree, as to need to be lessened by the flowing of the Courses, so there is so
great a quantity of the nutritious Juice, in women with Child that passes to
the Womb-cake, by the Hypogastrick and Spermatick Arteries, for the Nourishment
of the Child, that the Courses stop after the first or second Month, if the
Woman be not very sanguine.

The Child is nourished three several ways, by one and the same humor, first
by apposition, whilst it is yet an imperfect Embryo, before the Umbilical
Vessels are framed: But when the Umbilical Vessels are perfected, then it
receives the same Liquor by the Umbilical Vein, the most spirituous and thin
part whereof, it changes into blood, and sends the thicker part, by the
Umbilical Artery into the Amnios, which the Child sucks in at its Mouth, and
being concocted again in the Stomach, is received out of the Guts by the mill^y
Veins, as after the Birth.

The parts of a Child in the Womb differ very much from those in a grown
person. All the parts are less the bones are softer, and many of them grisly
and flexible; the head is proportionably bigger than the rest of the Body, the
Crown is not covered with Bone, but with a membrane, the Bone of the forehead
and under jaw is divided, the Bone of the hinder part of the Head is
distinguished into three, four, or five Bones; the Brain and Nerves are softer
than in grown persons, the Bones that serve for hearing are very hard and big,
the Breasts swell, and out of them, in Children new born, whether Boy or Girl a
serous milk flows forth, sometimes of its own accord, sometimes with a light
pressure. The spinous processes of the Vertebrae of the Back are wanting; the
Heart is very big, and its Ears large; there are two unions of the greater
Vessels that are not to be seen in grown persons, namely, First the Oval Hole,
whereby there is a passage open out of the hollow Vein into the Vein of the
Lungs, just as each of them are opening, the first into the right ventricle,
and the latter into the left Ventricle of the Heart; and this hole just as it
opens into the Vein of the Lungs has a Valve, that hinders any thing from
returning out of the said Vein into the hole. Secondly, the Arterial Channel,
which two fingers breadth from the Basis of the Heart joins the Artery of the
Lungs to the Aorta, it has a pretty large cavity, and ascends a little
obliquely from the said Artery to the Aorta, into which it carries the Blood
that was driven into the Artery of the Lungs out of the right Ventricle of the
Heart, so that it never comes into the left Ventricle, as the Blood that is
sent out of the left Ventricle into the Aorta, never came to the right, but
immediately past into it out of the hollow Vein by the Oval hole, so that the
Blood does not pass through both the ventricles as it does after the Child is
born. The Lungs will sink before the Child is born, whereas if the Child be but
born, and takes only half a dozen of breaths, they become spungy and light,
that they will swim; and by this may be known whether those Children that are
murdered by Wenches, and which they commonly affirm they are still-born, were
really so or no; for if they were still born, the Lungs will sink, but if
alive, so as to breath never so little a while, they will swim. The Umbilical
Vessels go out of the Belly, the Stomach is narrower, but pretty full of a
whitish Liquor; the Caul can scarce be seen, being somewhat like a Spiders web,
the Guts are seven times longer than the Body; in the small Guts, the
Excrements are phlegmatic and yellow, but somewhat hard and blackish, sometimes
greenish in the thick Gut, the blind Gut is larger than usual, and often filled
with Excrements; the Liver is very large and has a passage more than in grown
People, called the Veiny Channel, it carries the greatest part of what is
brought by the umbilical Vein, directly and in a full stream into the hollow
Vein above the Liver; but as soon as the Child is born, this Channel closes
presently, so do the Urachus, and the two umbilical Arteries, the spleen is
small, the Gall Bladder is full of Yellow or Green Choler, the Sweetbread is
very large and White, the Kidneys are big, and unequal, and seem, as if they
were compounded of many Glaudules, the Ureteres are wide, and the Bladder is
stretched with Urine.

SECT. IV. Of the formation of the Child in the Womb.
CHAP. I. Of the mixture of the Seed of both Sexes, as also of its substance
and form.
AFTER that the Womb, which is the Genital Member of the Female Sex has
received the Seed of the Man, she commixes also her own Seed, so that there is
now but one mixture made of the Seed of both Sexes.

Now of the next matter, of the birth; There is a difference among the Learned,
which being unnecessary The natural form of a child lying in ye womb.
for this place we shall let go, and stick close to them, who affirm, that the
seed of both Sexes, being confused in the Womb, does make up the first matter
of the Birth; so that if there were not a mixture of both Seeds, it were
impossible that any generation could be. Yet though there be of necessity a
confusion of both Seeds, we deny not but that their qualities are different,
for the Seed of a man exceeds the Seed of a Woman, both in thickness and heat,
which is more cold and moist, and therefore more watery. Yet though they differ
thus in quality, it is not to be denied, but that the Seed of the Woman gives a
mutual assistance to the Seed of the Man, in the work of generation.

But it being unquestionable, that the menstruous Blood is the matter of the
Woman's Seed, therefore that ye may know the Original of it, it is to be
understood that the Menstruous blood is nothing else but an Excrement of the
third concoction, gathered together every Month, and purged out. Which
Purgation being duly made, the Woman is then in perfect health of body; but if
they come not down according to their accustomed times, and seasons, or do not
come down at all, the Woman neither can conceive nor engender.

Thus the Seeds of both Sexes meeting in the Womb, and there mixing together,
they are presently enclosed in a little Tunicle, begot by the heat of the Womb,
and are there as it were coagulated and curdled together.

CHAP. II. Of the three Tunicles which the birth is wrapped in, in the the Womb.
FIRST, out of the extreme superficies of the Seed, by reason of the more watery
moisture of the woman's Seed, a thin Membrane is generated, which by reason of
its moist quality is dilated farther, being at first transparent; but, after
the Birth comes forth, folded up together, and is called the Secundine.

But of the superfluous moisture of these two Tunicles, are begot two other
Tunicles, which defend the Infant from being clogged with any superfluities, as
from the Flowers retained after Conception, which serve neither for the
nourishment, nor for the increase of the Infant. Yet are they retained 'till
the very time of the Birth: At which time they are either let out by the hand
of the Midwife; or else bursting the Secondine wherein they are contained, they
flow out of themselves.

The second Tunicle is that which was anciently called Allantoides, wrapping
about all the interior parts, frrom the Navel downwards; this is full of folds
and wrinckles; in which the Urine, Sweat, and other sharp Humors that distill
from the Infant, almost grown to maturity, are contained and kept to the time
of Delivery.

By this second Tunicle, therefore the Infant is delivered, and defended from
those humors, lest they should either corrode, and hurt the tender skin of the
Infant, or else any way defile and foul the Infant.

The third Tunicle, within all these, compasses the whole Birth round about,
defending it from all sharp exterior humors, being very soft and tender.

CHAP. III. Of the true generation of the parts, and the increase of them,
according to the several days and seasons.
AFTER the Womb has received the Genital Seed, and by its heat has shut them
both up, curdled and coagulated together, from the first to the seventh day are
generated many fibers, bred by a hot motion, in which not long after, the Liver
with its chief Organs is first formed. Through which Organs the vital spirit
being sent to the Seed, within the tenth day forms, and distinguishes the
chiefest members. This Spirit is let in through certain Veins of the Secondine,
through which the Blood flows in and out, of which the Navel is generated. At
the same time, in the clotted Seed there do appear three white lumps, not
unlike curdled Milk, out of which arise the Liver, the Brain, and the Heart.

Presently after this, a Vein is directed through the Navel, to such the
thicker sort of the Blood that remains in the Seed, for the nourishment of the
parts. This Vein is two-forked.

In the other branch of this Vein is a certain blood collected, The Liver
framed.
out of which the Liver is first framed; for the Liver is nothing but a certain
mass of Blood, or Blood coagulated, and hardened to a substance: And here you
may see what a company of Veins it has, which serve both for the expulsive,
and attractive faculty. In the other Branch are generated those Textures of
Veins, with a dilatation of other Veins, as also of the Spleen, and the Guts in
the lower part of the Belly; by and by all the Veins like branches gathering
into one Trunk, toward the upper part of the Liver, meet all in the Concave or
hollow Vein. This Trunk sends other branches of Veins, to constitute the
Diaphragme, others it sends into the upper part of the backbone, seated about
the Diaphragme, as also the lower parts, as far as the Thighs.

Afterward the Heart with its Veins, directed from the Navel to that part of
the Seed, and carried as far as the Backbone, is formed.

These Veins suck the hottest, The Heart formed.
and most subtle part of the Blood, out of which the heart is generated in the
membrane of the heart, otherwise called the Pericardium, being by nature thick
and fleshy, according as the heat of the Members requires. Now the hollow vein
extending it self and piercing the interior part of the right side of the
heart, carries blood thither for the nourishment of the heart: From the same
branch of this vein, in the same part of the heart arises another vein called
by some the still vein, because it beats not with so quick a Pulse as the
others do, ordained to send the most purely concocted blood in the heart to the
lungs, being encompassed with two Tunicles like Arteries, But in the concavity
of the left part of the heart arises a great beating vein, called the Aorta,
diffusing the vital spirit from the heart into all the beating veins in the
body.

Under the said vein called the Aorta, in the concavity of the heart, there is
another vein called the veiny Artery, which was therefore framed to carry the
cool air from the lungs to temper the great heat of the heart.

Now there being many veins, which running from the concavity of the heart, are
inserted into the lungs, therefore by these veins the lungs are also framed;
for the vein which proceeds from the right concavity, produces a most subtle
blood, which is turned into the substance of the lungs. By the great veins of
the heart and liver the hollow vein, and the Aorta is the whole breast
generated, and after that the arms, and legs in order.

Within the foresaid time, is generated the last and chiefest part of this
substance, that is to say, Brain, in the third little skin of this mass: For
the whole mass of the Seed being repleat with vital spirits, that vital spirit
contracts a great part of the Genital moisture into one certain hollowness,
where the Brain is formed; outwardly it is covered with a certain covering,
which being baked and dried by the heat, is reduced into a bone, and so is the
Skull made.

Now the Brain is so formed as to conceive, retain, and change the nature of
all the vital spirits, whence are the beginings of Reason, and of all the
Senses; for, as out of the Liver arise the Veins, out of the Heart arise the
Arteries, so out of the Brain arise the Nerves of a more soft and gentle
nature, yet not hollow like Veins, but sollid. These are the chiefest
instruments of all the Senses and by which all the motion of the Senses are
made by the vital Spirit.

After the Nerves, is generated by the Brain, also the pith of the backbone,
which cannot be called Marrow: For the Marrow is a superfluous substance begot
out of the Blood, destined for the moistening, and for the strengthening of the
bones: but the brain and pith of the backbone take their beginning from the
Seed, being not destined for the nourishing, or strengthening of the members but
to constitute certain private and particular parts of the body, for the motion
and use the Senses, that all the other. Nerves may take their beginning thence;
for from the pith of the backbone, do arise many Nerves, by which the body
obtains both sense and motion.

Here is also to be noted, that out of the Seed it self are generated gristles,
bones, tunicles, for the Veins of the Liver, the arteries of the heart, the
brain with its Nerves: besides, the tunicles and pannicles, and the other
coverings which the Infant is wrapped in. Now of the proper blood of the Birth,
the flesh is formed; and whatever parts are of a fleshy substance; as the
heart, the liver, the lights, Then are all these nourished by the menstrous
blood, which is attracted through the veins of the Navel. This is all
distinctly done from the conception unto the eighteenth day of the first month,
in all which time it is called Seed. After which it receives the name of Birth.

CHAP. IV. Of the nourishment of the Birth in the Womb.
WHilst the Birth remains in the Womb, it is cherished up with blood attracted
through the Navel, which is the reason that the flowers do cease always in
Women, as soon as they have conceived.

Now this blood, presently after conception, is distinguished into three parts;
the purest of it drawn by the Child for the nourishment of it self; the second,
which is less pure and thin, the Womb forces upwards to the breast, where it is
turned into milk. The third and most impure part of the blood remains in the
Matrix, and comes away with the Secondines, both in the Birth, and after the
Birth,

Now the Infant being thus formed and perfected in the womb for the first month
sends forth its Urine through the passages of the navel; but in the last month
that passage being shut up through the privy-members; yet notwithstanding,
while the child is in the Womb, he voids nothing out at the Fundament, because
he has taken no nourishment in at the Mouth. After the forty fifth day it
receives life, and is then called an Infant.

Now, though the Infant has by this time obtained sense, yet does he not move:
He most commonly moves in twice the time that he was formed, and in thrice the
space after he began his motion, he hastens into the world; as for example, if
the infant were formed in forty five days, it will move in ninety, and be born
the ninth month after that.

CHAP. V. Of the condition of the Infant in the Womb, in the sixth, seventh,
and eighth month.
AFter the third and fourth month, the Infant is nourished with more plenty of
nourishment, until the time of delivery approach. Now you must observe that a
child born in the sixth month cannot live, by reason that it is not come to its
just perfection; but if it be born in the seventh month, it will very easily
live, because it is come to its full perfection. Now the reason why those that
are born in the eighth month do not live, when as those that are born in the
seventh do, is plain; for in the seventh month the Infant stirs it self to come
forth; so that if it have so much strength it easily performs its desire; if
not, it remains in the womb, till it have gathered two months more strength.
After this motion of the seventh month, if it be not able to come forth, it
changes it self into another part of the womb, by which motion it is so
weakened, that if it should be born in the eighth month, it were impossible
that it should live, for it is weakened by a double motion; not only that of
the seventh month, but also by that motion whereby it strives to go forth in
the eighth month.

SECT. V.
CHAP. I. Of the situation of the Child in the Womb.
COncerning the situation of the Child in the womb, it may be considered either
generally, or specially; specially, either as it concerns the Male, or the
Female.

The Male is commonly situated in the right side of the Womb the Female in the
left.

The general situation of the Child, either Male, or Female, in the Womb, is
always the same which has been observed and seen to be in this posture, when
the Infant lies with his Back and his Buttocks leaning against the Back of the
Mother, the Head inclined, and touching his Breast with his Chin; resting his
two Hands upon his Knees; his Navel and his Nose between his two Knees, with
his two Eyes upon his two Thumbs, his Legs folded backward, and touching his
Buttocks with each Leg.

This Figure is the most natural, as being least subject to suffer any
accident, being less inconvenient, and less troublesome to the Mother.

The most natural form for the Child to come into the World, is when the Head
comes forward, the Hands being stretched upon the Hips.

The things which are the Causes of a Woman's delivery, are three; first, the
want of respiration and Air for the Infant. The second is the want of
nourishment, of which, when the Infant finds a defect in his Mothers Womb he is
forced to seek it in another place. The third is the narrowness of the place
where the Infant lies, so that he is forced to seek room other where, which
makes him to break the Membranes, wherein he was contained, pressing and
constraining the Mother by the sharpness of those Waters, to do her duty for
his release. Now as some say, there are three ways or manners of Childrens
coming upon the Earth; First, when the Head comes foremost, and then the Woman
is easily delivered: The second, when it comes forth across, or one side, or
the Feet foremost, and then the Woman suffers much, and either they both die,
or one of them, As for those Births which are unnatural, we shall in another
place treat of them, and their remedies. In this combat, the Infant and the
Mother suffer very much, by reason that Woman is a Creature delicate and
timorous, and not patient of much labor: or, because women great with Child
live a lazy and sloathful life; and besides that, many times they eat bad
victuals, which increases Humors and superfluous Excrements, which quantity of
Humors makes the Woman to breath short, which is a thing very troublesome to
the Infant; for a Woman that will expel the Birth quick, ought to keep her
breath in, as much as she can. The third Reason of the pain in Women's Travail,
is by reason that the Head of a Child is bigger, being compared to the Members,
than the Head of any other Creature, which makes a greater opening and
dilaceration.

But the Women that suffer most pain, are they who were not delivered before,
having not been accustomed to the sufferance of that labor; as also elderly
Women, by reason that the Bone of the Pubes, the Bone of the Hip, and the Os
Sacrum, are not so easily separated, the ^igaments being more strong and hard.

Now in the contention which the Child makes to issue forth, the Head comes
first, by reason of the weight, being more heavy than the other Members.

Explanation of the Third Figure.
THIS Figure contains the Birth at full maturity, ready to come forth in the
truest posture.

AAAA. The parts of the Midriff dissected. BBBB. The body of the Womb dissected
into four parts. CCCC. The Membranes or Films, called Chorion, and the Amnios,
dissected likewise into four parts. D. The Birth in its natural posture.
Explanation of the Fourth Figure.
This Figure contains the Navel Vessels, and the films or Covering of the
Infant.

AAAA. The Muscles of the Midriff, the Peritoneum, and the skin it self
dissected into four parts. B. The Liver of the Infant. C. The Urinary Vessels.
D. The hole of the Liver, into which the Navel-vein does pass. E. The
Umbilical, or Navel-vein it self. FF. The two Navel-arteries tending downwards
to the small Gut-Arteries. G. The passage for the Urine proceeding from the
bottom of the Bladder. H. The Umbilical Vessels taken out of the Body of the
Infant, to show how they are joined together. I. The Membranes that involves
the Navel Vessels. KKKK. The Guts or Intrailes of the Infant. LLL. The Navel
Vessels extended from the Children to the Birth. M. The place where the
branches of the Navel-Vessels are first collected into one Trunk. NN. A branch
of the Navel-Vessels scattered through The fleshy parts of the Chorion. OOO. A
branch of the Navel-Arteries. PPPP. The Conjunction of the Umbilical Vein and
Arteries. QQQQ. The extremities of the Navel-Veins and Arteries, ending the
fleshy parts of the Chorion. RRRR. The Membrane called the Chorion.
SECT. IV.
CHAP. I. Of Midwives.
ALthough in these days there are many unskilful Women that take upon them the
knowledge of Midwifry, barely upon the privilege of their age: Yet there are
many things which ought to be observed in a Midwife, that they are utterly
wanting of. Let us therefore consider of the things required in a Midwife, in
relation both to her Person, and her manners: As for her Age, she ought to be
neither too young, nor too old, Her Age.
in a good habit of Body, and not subject to Diseases, nor misshapen in any
parts of her Body, peculiar in her Habits, and in her Person; her Hands must be
small. with her Nails pared close, without any Rings upon them, in the time of
her Duty, nor Bracelets upon her Wrists; she must be cheerful, pleasant,
strong, laborious, and used to travel; it being required that she should be
stirring at all Hours, and abiding a long time together with her Patient.

For her Manners, she ought to be Courteous, Sober, Chaste; not repining, Her
Manners.
Choleric, Arrogant, or Covetous, nor apt to talk of what she sees in the
Houses where she has to do.

Her Spirit.
For her Spirit; she ought to be prudent, wary, and cunning, oft-times to use
fair and flattering words.

She ought moreover to know, that God has given to all things their
Beginnings, their Increasings, their Estate of Perfection, and Declination:
Therefore the said Midwife, nor any of her assistants, must not do any thing
rashly, for to precipitate or hasten Nature.

CHAP. II. What ought to be observed, when the Woman is near the time of her
lying down.
Of Women near the time of their lying down.
THE Hour of the Woman's lying down approaching, the Woman with Child ought to
prepare her self in this manner; she must presently call her Midwife and
Assistants to her, it being requisite to have them rather sooner than later.

Her Bed.
She ought to prepare a little Bed, or Couch, of a moderate height, as well for
the covenience of the Midwife, as for the ease of her self, and others that
shall be about her to assist her in her Travel: This must be situated in a
place convenient for the People to pass up and down, near the fire, and far
from Doors: It will be requisite for her to have change of Linen, as also a
little Cricket for her to rest her feet on, having more force when her Feet are
bowed.

In the time of Travel what to do.
When she finds her Pains growing, it will be necessary for her to walk
leisurely up and down the Chamber, afterward she may lie down warm, and then
rise and walk again, expecting the coming down of her Waters, and the opening
of the Womb. For to keep her self long a-bed, is very troublesome: Though when
she is a-bed notwithstanding that she has some certain pains sometimes, yet
she may lie and rest her self, and now and then take a nap: By which means,
both the Mother and the Infant do with greater strength endure their succeeding
hardship; besides that, her waters do come down better. If her Travel be long,
she may take some broth, or the yolk of a porched Egg, with some bread, or a
cup of wine, or distilled water; yet she must have a care lest she over-charge
her self either with meat or drink.

It is certain, that all women are not delivered alike; for some lie in their
bed, others sit in a chair, being supported and held up by others, or else
resting upon the side of the bed or chair; others upon their knees, being
upheld under their arms; but the best and safest is to lie in their beds; and
for her good and convenient delivery, let the Midwife and others observe what
follows.

First, the woman that is in travel, ought to be laid upon her back, Certain
Rules.
her head being lifted up a little higher with a pillow, having also a pillow
under her reins to sustain her back; under her buttocks she must have a larger
pillow, to raise them a little, and that her rump may be elevated; for a woman
that lies low in those parts, can never be well delivered, for the avoiding of
which, this situation is very convenient. Her thighs and knees must be a good
way separated the one from the other, with her legs bowed, and drawn up toward
her buttocks, the soles of her feet, and her heels, being fixed upon a board,
laid thwart the bed for that purpose.

Secondly, to some women they do use a swath-band four double; this swath-band
must be a foot broad or more; which being put under her reins, is to be held up
straight, by two persons standing on each side just at the time of her pains,
both of them, at the same instant, heaving up both ends, with an exact eveness;
for otherwise it does more harm than good. It is also requisite, that two of
her friends should hold the upper part of her shoulders, that she may be able
to force out the Birth with more advantage; And it will not be amiss, for some
of her friends to press the upper parts of her belly, so to thrust down the
Infant, by little and little. Such a soft compression, will much facilitate the
travel, and give ease to the woman's pains.

Thirdly, as for the woman her self, she must be of a good heart, and force her
self by striving as much as possibly she can; stopping her mouth, and keeping
her breath, as if she were doing the ordinary deeds of nature.

As for the Cholick, if it seize Women in Travail, you may read the Remedies in
the following Chapter.

CHAP. III. How to expel the Cholick from Women in Childbed.
THere are some women, who at the same instant that they are in travel, are
taken with fits of the Cholick; which is often caused by the crudities and
indigestions of the stomach, which do torment women so extremely, that it
exceeds the pain of their Travel; and while this pain lasts, a woman advances
nothing toward the end of her Travel: the pain of Travel being hardly to be
distinguished from it.

For her ease therefore, the woman ought to take these Remedies; two ounces of
oil of sweet Almonds, with an ounce of Cinnamon water, or else some wind
dispelling Clyster, and if the first time suffice not, you may re-iterate it;
and sometimes fomentations, that are proper for the dispelling of wind, are
very necessary for this purpose.

CHAP. IV. How the Midwife may know when the pains of Travel do seize upon a
woman.
WHen the Woman begins to cry out, and has sent for her Widwife; the first
thing that the Midwife is to ask, is, when she did conceive? 2. Then is she to
look diligently upon the belly of the Woman and to mark it well; for if she do
behold the upper parts of the belly sunk and hollow, and the lower parts of the
belly full and big, she may then conclude that the Child is fallen down. 3. She
ought then to ask her some questions concerning her pains; for if they be quick
and strong, beginning at the Reins, and sliding down all along the belly,
without ending at the Navel, but still falling down upon the groins, and
inwardly at the bottom of the belly, below which is the interior neck of the
womb; these are certain signs that the woman begins to be in Labor. 4. But for
more certainty, the Midwife may put up her hand, being anointed first with
fresh butter, and if she perceive the inner neck of the womb to dilate it self,
it is a certain sign that the pains of Childbed are upon the woman, or if she
perceive any thing to push forwards her travel is also undoubtable.

CHAP. V. Of the falling down of the waters, a good while before the woman
travels.
THere are some women, who have their waters come from them, a long time before
their travel, sometimes twelve days, sometimes eight Days, sometimes six and
sometimes four; though the ordinary time be not above three Hours before her
travel; they remaining for the most part not above twenty four Hours. This is
caused by some Ruptures of the Membranes, where, from the beginning of the
formation of the Child, the Humor is contained, rather than by the abundance
of Humors; and therefore though a Woman that has abundance, and that the
Membranes containing them, are so strong, that they will not break suddenly,
though the Woman shall not travel 'till they break, yet the Midwife ought not
to break them, but rather hold the Voman over a Vessel of warm Water and also
use some softning Liniment, to soften the, Membranes, that so the Mother
straining, the Head or other Member of the Child, may break them more easily.

But for those Women that have these evacuations so long before they travel,
they must refrain going into the Air, for fear of injuring themselves, the
passages being open; for though the Air cannot hinder the Child from coming
forth, by reason of its weight, yet oftentimes getting within the Secondine, it
not only streightens the Vessels, and Mouths of the Veins, that are at the
bottom of the Womb, but also causes several Convulsions, to the great danger of
the Woman: But it is an easy thing to remedy these accidents, by keeping close
in her Chamber, having also a special regard to distinguish, whether they be
the Waters of the Birth, or any Hydropick humor of the Matrix.

CHAP. VI. What the Midwife ought to do in time of Travel.
THE Midwife seeing the Birth come naturally, the Pains now coming thicker and
thicker, the Womb also opening to be delivered of its Burden, and the
endeavors of the Child being seen to come forth; the Midwife must now
encourage her Patient, admonishing her to shut her Mouth, and to hold her
breath, and to strain and endeavor with her lower parts: Neither ought the
Midwife to be too hasty, either to widen or force the passage of the Infant, or
to break the Membranes, but to stay 'till the Membranes do burst of their own
accord.

And here is to be noted the ignorance of some Women, who for haste to be gone
to other Women do tear the Membranes with their Nails, to the danger both of
the Woman and of the Child, which then remains dry, without that moisture which
makes the passage slippery; which must of necessity augment the pain of the
Woman.

When the Head comes forth of the Womb, the Midwife must take it gently between
her two Hands, and then when her Pains increase, slipping down her Hands under
the Arm-holes, gently drawing forth the Infant, yet staying her Hand always,
but when the Pains come upon the Woman: This must be done with a very delicate
and tender Hand, lest the Child, by any rude or harsh handling, should receive
any deformed shape of Body.

When the Child is come into the World, which is commonly with his Face
downward, it must be suddenly turned upon his back, lest it should be stifled
for want of Air. Then let her cut the Navel-string, leaving the length of four
Fingers, tying it with a silk Thread as near the Belly as may be: Which done,
the Child if it be well, may be laid aside, only care must be had, that the
Head and the Stomach be well covered, and that nothing come upon his Face.

CHAP. VII. How to draw forth the Secondines.
THE Child being thus drawn forth, and in safety, the Midwife must now apply
her self to the drawing out of the Secondines, which must be done by wagging
and stirring them up and down, and then gently drawing them forth, causing the
Woman to take Salt in both her Hands, and to shut them close, and then to blow
in them whereby you shall know whether they be broken or no: It may be done
also by causing her to put one Finger in her Mouth, to provoke a desire of
vomiting, or else by stirring, as when she is doing the ordinary deeds of
Nature, or as Nature it self constrained her to do, before the Head of the
Child was come forth. All this must be done speedily; yet if this be not
sufficient, she may take the Yolk of an Egg raw, or she may take a small
draught of raw Elder-water, or you may cause her to smell to a piece of Assa
Foetida. If she be troubled with Wind-Cholicks, or have taken Cold, which
oftentimes does breed Wind, which is a great hindrance to the coming forth of
the Secondines; the Midwife ought to chafe the Woman's Belly with her Hand,
which does not only break the wind, but causes the Secondine to come down. If
this fails, the Midwife may with her Hand dilate the Orifice of the womb
drawing it forth gently and by Degrees.

CHAP. VIII. What may be given to a Woman in Travel.
IN the first place, hot and violent Remedies are to be avoided, but in cases
of great necessity; for it many times happens that they are the cause of
dangerous ^eavers.

Two other things are also very dangerous to a Woman in Travel, too much
repletion, and too much emptiness; for the Stomach of a Woman with Child does
not digest her meat in so short a time as Women that are not with Child do;
Therefore the Midwife ought to inform her self how long it was since she eat,
and in what quantity; and if it were long since she did eat, and that she grow
feeble, they may give in the intermissions of her Pains some warm cherishing
and Cordial Broths, or the Yolk of a poached Egg: If her Travel endure long,
then to strengthen her and comfort her, she may take a draught of
Cinnamon Water, not exceeding an ounce, or at twice, a dram of the Confection
of Alkermes; dissolved into two spoonfuls of Claret Wine, and not more than one
of these three things. For if they take two much, as is before said, it causes
Fevers, and Heats in the whole Body, of which follow many inconveniences, for
it stops the Purgations, of which many strange Diseases ensue.

CHAP. IX. How to put the Womb again in its place.
SOME Women newly brought to Bed, are many times afflicted with greater Pains
than those of their Travel, by reason that the womb is not well put into its
place, or if it have, the Swathe-band being loose, it is apt to roll upwards in
the Belly. This happens to Women that are not well purged after their Delivery;
for remedy hereof, having put the Matrix right into its place, roll up two
linen Swathes pretty hard, bringing them also round the Hips; then take whites
of Eggs, beaten, and a dram of Pepper in Powder, which being spread upon Tow,
is to be applied warm to the Navel; then let the Belly be well swathed. This is
the only remedy to ease the Pain.

CHAP. X. Against the extreme loss of blood, which happens to women immediately
after their delivery.
THere are many women which immediately after their Delivery do suffer great
loss of blood, which proceeds from a great plentitude or fullness; or by reason
that in their travel they took too many hot and corrosive medecines; or, by
straining themselves too hard overheated the blood, so that after Travel, it
runs from them in great quantity. To remedy this, the woman ought to take a
small quantity of wine, in a spoon; and if the weakness be much, let her mix
half a dram of Alkermes, with a draught of wine, and take care that she be well
swaithed upward; for that presses down and streightens the vessels, and hinders
the violent flux: Give her also the yolk of an Egg to take, for that recalls
the natural heat to the stomach, which was dispersed through the whole. It
would be necessary also, to spread along the reins of the woman and all along
the backbone, by reason of the hollow vein, a napkin dipped in Oxicrate, or
Water mingled with Vinegar. You may also lay upon each groin, a Skein of raw
Silk, moistened in cold Water, Take also of that well tempered Earth, of which
they make the Floor of an Oven, and steep it in strong Vinegar, then spread it
upon a linen Cloth, and lay it upon the Reins; this moderates the heat of the
Blood, and stops the violent flux of it: Great care must be also had, that all
the while the blood comes from her, she do not sleep, for many times they are
taken away in that weakness, when the people think they do but take their Rest:
But when you see this great Flux moderated, you may take away the astringent
Medicines by little and little, so that the Blood may cease running by degrees,
lest any blood should be retained that may chance to do mischief.

CHAP. XI. What is to be done to a woman presently after her Delivery.
PResently after a woman is delivered, if she have had a sore Travel, they
ought to cast her into the skin of a Sheep flead alive, and put about her Reins
as hot as may be; upon her Belly also lay the Skin of a Hare flead alive,
having cut the Throat of it afterward, and rubbed the Skin with the Blood,
which is to be clapped as warm as may be to her Belly.

This closes up the dilatations made by the Birth, and chases from those parts
the ill and melancholy Blood. These remedies are to be kept on two hours in
Winter, and one hour in Summer.

After this swathe the Woman with a Napkin about a quarter of a yard large,
having before chafed the belly with Oil of St. John's-wort. Then raise up the
Matrix with a linen Cloth many times folded; then with a little pillow about
a quarter of a yard long cover her Flanks, then use the Swathe, beginning a
little above the Hanches, yet rather higher than lower, winding it pretty tite,
Lay also warm Clothes upon the nipples, letting alone those remedies which are
proper for the driving back of the Milk, which are not so soon to be applied,
for the body is now all in a commotion, and there is neither vein nor artery
which does not beat: Wherefore those Remedies that chase away the Milk, being
all dissolving, therefore it is not proper to put such Medicines upon the
Breast during that commotion, for fear that those medecines should make a stop
of any thing hurtful in those parts, and therefore it is better to give ten or
twelve hours for the Blood to settle in; as also for that which was cast upon
the Lungs by the agitation of Travel, to distill down again into its place.

You may also make a restrictive of the white and yellow of an Egg beaten
together, with an Ounce af Oil of St. John's- wort, and an ounce of Oil of
Roses, an ounce of Rose Water, and an ounce of Plantain-water, beat all these
together very well; in this you may dip a linen cloth folded double, and
apply it without warming of it to the Breasts: This comforts and eases the
pains of that part.

She must not sleep presently; but a matter of four hours after her delivery,
you may give her some nourishing Broth, or Caudle, and then if she will, she
may sleep.

CHAP. XII. Of women that have a great deal of Blood, and purge not, neither in
their travel nor after.
SOme women have great Superfluity of Blood, and yet purge not at all, neither
in their Travel, nor afterward; to which, if remedies be not applied, the
Women do run great Hazards and Dangers in their lying in, great Suffocations of
the Matrix, and continual Fevers; this may be remedied, being first informed
of their natural disposition before they were with Child; knowing that when
they had their purgations, they had them in great quantity, and for a good
while together, as also when they came, being a gross and thick Blood; and
therefore seeing that now they do not purge in great quantity, and that they
have diverse unquietnesses, weaknesses of the Stomach, and pains of the head;
wherefore you may give her in the Morning a little Syrup of Maidenhair, and
Hysop-water mingled together, and Syrup of Wormwood, with White Wind; in their
broths you may boil Jacines and opening Herbs, keeping the belly soluble with
Clysters; she must eat no solid Meat, she must be well chafed from the Groins
down to the very Ankle-bone, always strokeing and carrying the hand down-ward;
Blood-letting also in the Foot in the morning is not amiss; as also foam
Fumigation that cleanses the Matrix, and draws down the Blood: Yet care must be
had, that these last Remedies be not used before the Matrix be put into its
place, for fear that these remedies should draw it down too low, but about
eight or ten Days after the Matrix was put into its place. For cleansing the
Matrix, you may use this Receipt.

Take Pellitory, Sanicle, Camomile, Melilot, Greenbalm, Red-balm, white
Mullein, Mallows, Marshmallow, Betony, Margeram, Nipp, March-violets, Mugwort;
take of each a like quantity, and cut them small, and let them boil in a new
pot, with three pints of good White Wind; let the Woman take the fume of this
Receipt three times in a day; if she have any gross Blood in the Matrix, it
will undoubtedly bring it down: You may also chafe the Woman's Belly with Oil of
Violets, this helps the Purgations being once dissolved. The reason why this
thick Blood stays in these parts, is, because the Woman having it before she
was with Child, the heat of the Womb, when she is with Child redoubling
thickens it more, so that when she comes to lie down, it cannot flow; so that
it is to be taken away as much as may be with the aforesaid means; Mollyfying
Fomentations are also proper for this purpose, while the woman sits over the
fumigation.

CHAP. XIII. For those who have but a little blood.
THose Women that have but little blood, ought not to lie in their beds as
those who have a great deal. They ought to take good nourishment in a little
quantity: As Eggs well boyld in the shell in a Morning: The juice of Mutton and
Veal, squeezed out, and Mutton broth; and all these being mingled together,
nourish very much, and make very good blood; as also Pigeons, Partridge,
Mutton, Quail, and such other meats good for the stomach.

CHAP. XIV. What is to be done to the Infant.
THE Midwife having tied up the Navel-string, as is before said, she ought next
to cleanse the Infant, not only in the face, but also over the whole body;
anointing the groins, hips, buttocks, thighs and joints with Oil of sweet
Almonds, or fresh Butter; this makes the skin more firm, and shuts up the pores
of the skin, so that the exterior air cannot come to hurt it; and besides this,
it strengthens all the parts of the body.

It would not be amiss to make a bath, or decoction of Roses and Sage in Wine,
and with that to wash the Infant every morning

After the Infant is thus well anointed, and after that well dried and wrapped
up, you may give to the Infant a little Sack and Sugar in a spoon, or else the
quantity of a Pease bigness of Mithridate or Treacle dissolved in Wine, with a
little Carduus-Water.

CHAP. XV. How to Govern Women in Childbed.
THere is great difference in the governing Women in Childbed; for she that
thinks to order an ordinary laboring, or Country-woman, like a person of
quality, kills her, and she that thinks to govern a person of quality like an
ordinary Country-woman, does the same to her. For the Stomach and Constitution
of the one is tender and weak, and the Constitution and Stomach of the other
strong and lusty; which will not be satisfied with ordinary Viands: For if you
give to one of these strong Stomachs presently after their delivery, any strong
Broth, or Eggs, or a draught of Milk, they are like Mills that always grind,
and empty as fast as they pour in; and that that gives one Woman a fever, keeps
another from it; and therefore Women in Childbed are to be governed by their
several Constitutions. As for Women that are delicate, and have been accustomed
to live delicately, greater care must be taken of them, giving them meats that
breed good nourishment, and do not clog the stomach, forbearing also to give
her those meats to which she has too great a dislike, agreeing to her humor,
provided, that the meat which she loves be not hurtful; and giving her for the
first eight days of her lying in, boiled meats rather than roasted, as gellies,
etc. the juice of Veal, or Capon, but not Mutton, it being too feverish: giving
her to drink Barly-water, or else water boiled, wherein is boiled a dram of
Cinnamon to every pint, and two ounces of Sugar dissolved; or if she do not
love Sugar, Coriander-seed water; if she drink wine, let it be two thirds of
water to one third of wine, giving her in the morning white wind, and in the
afternoon Claret, taking care of eating any thing that may breed any crudities:
She may also take at the discretion of those about her, Almond-milk now and
then. There are some women that cannot be kept from sleeping, and others that
cannot sleep at all. It will not be amiss to give to those that cannot sleep,
French barley-water; the way to make it well, is to let it boil well, and to
take the broth without straining it; neither ought it to be taken after the
eight days are past, by reason that it nourishes exceedingly, and does not a
little obstruct the Liver.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Bathings that a Woman is to use for the first eight days of
her lying in.
TAke a good handful of old or new Chervil, and boil it in a sufficient
quantity of water, then taking it from the fire, add to it a spoonful of Honey
of Roses; this draws down the Purgations, cleanses and heals the part. The herb
it self may serve for a fomentation, to take away any inflammation. There are
some that use milk to the purpose aforesaid, affirming that it is a great
asswager of the pain; but that having been proved by others, has been observed
rather to engender filth, than to be any way a clearer, by reason that the
sharp humor causes it to curdle.

CHAP. XVII. How a Midwife ought to govern her self, in case a Woman be to be
Delivered of two Children.
TAE Travel of a Woman bringing forth two Infants is more tedious, and it many
times happens that one of the Children comes forth very well, and the other
comes forth very hardly; and this is certain, that that which comes forth
first, is always the strongest having the power to go before the other, and to
break the membranes that enveloped it. And ofttimes while the first is born,
the other remains behind, wrapped in such membranes as the former was, so that it
remains a good space behind the other, sometimes two hours, and yet it has
been very well born. Now knowing, that that which came first was the strongest,
it would not be amiss to assist the other in coming forth, by breaking the
Membranes that contain the waters; and, if that fail, by giving strong Clysters
to excite the pain; which were it not many times done, the Child would never be
able to endure the pain of coming into the World, by reason of its
extraordinary weakness; which is so great sometimes, that the bone of the
Forehead is divided, and separated down to the nose; although the Infant being
born, it joins together again, and the Infant does very well: Which if it
happen, you must have a great care to bind some kind of soft pillow upon the
place, that the air may not enter in. If the second Child come forth ill, you
must not delay to break the Membranes, and to draw the Infant gently out by the
feet: For (having used all its endeavors to come forth) to keep it there, or
to prolong the Travel any longer, is more dangerous than profitable; sometimes
two come so suddenly the one after the other, that there seems to be but one
Delivery of both, there being but a little Membrane that separates them; In
this case, holding the first, you must cut the Navel-string, and bind it about,
and tie it about the Hip, while they draw forth the other Infant, which by a
longer stay would be much weakened.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the danger that a Woman has, to purge her self for the first
days of her Lying in.
IT is an ordinary thing for Women that lie in, by reason of their bed to lose
the benefit of their bellies, which hinders the evacuation of their Milk, which
causes Fevers, by sending gross vapors to the head; yet can they not be freed
by any Purgation taken in at the mouth; but it would be much to the purpose to
take pertinent Clysters which hinder the foresaid evils causing their breasts
to become full, and to become, stiff, taking them as occasion requires, once in
two or three days. There are some unskilful women, that not understanding the
ill consequences which may follow, do give Sena to Women in the first days of
their lying in; of which some have been very ill, and others have died. For
Nature being now weakened by the Travel, and while it is laboring to restore
the body to its former Estate, is not to be disturbed with violent Purgations.
And therefore Clysters are always most proper: Neither are laxative broths, nor
the broth of prunes, nor baked apples fasting; for these do engender wind, but
rather some good Suppositories would be more useful.

CHAP. XIX. Of the second washing for Women.
THE second washing for Women ought to be with Province Roses, put into little
bags, and boiled in water and wine, of each a like proportion; and this is to
be done for the second eight days.

CHAP. XX. What is to be done to Infants as soon as they are born.
IT is an approved Maxim, that as soon as a Child is born, you ought to give it
a spoonful of pure wine; for that assists and helps the Child to regain its
spirits Another advantage is this; that the wine cuts the phlegm which the Child
has in its throat; besides, the spirit of the wine rising up to the head,
comforts and strengthens it; and it hinders also from the Epilepsie, which
proceeds from the debility of the brain.

This being done, and the Mother fully delivered, you must tie the Navel-vein
with a silk well twisted, and many times doubled, and if there be any blood in
the vein, you must be sure to empty it, for fear, if it should be left, it
should turn into corruption; then it must be well dried with powder of rotten
wood: You must tie it two fingers breadth from the belly, and leave it long,
three fingers breadths above the tying place; and if it be fat, you must close
it over and above, that the vein may be well closed, then wind the string twice
about it, knitting as many knots. But if the Child be come before its time, you
need not tie it so strong, for fear of cutting it with the silk; but if the
Navel-vein be full of water and wind, you ought then, having tied it one time,
and wrapped a linen cloth about the end of it, which is still to be held upward,
to uncover it again, about half an hour after, and then to tie it and wrap it
about again, still keeping the end up; for fear, that if the vein were not
fully closed, there might be some danger in the bleeding.

Some people give to the Infant Treacle dissolved in Wine; but this must be
done warily in a very small quantity, and that not commonly neither.

The Infant must be washed with water and wine lukewarm, to cleanse it;
afterward wash the face, as also chafe the throat, the arms and hands, with
Oil of Walnuts, drawn without fire, which some say will keep them from
Sun-burning, then put one hand upon the bone of the Forehead, and another upon
the bone called the Coronal bone, and softly close up the gap which was made
during the time of travel, closing also the Sutures one against another
exactly; then gently put your finger under the tongue, to see if the Infant
have the string or no; and if it have, it may be clipped away with the point of a
pair of sharp Cizzers, without danger. There are some that think they can shape
the head and nose of a Child as if it were of Wax, But let such take notice
that have flat nosed Children, rather to let the nose alone, than by squeezing
and closing it too much to render the nose obstructed; for that compressing the
Gristles of the nose, renders the Child liable either to speak always in the
nose, or to lose his smelling. There are some Children that are born with their
noses awry; for the help of which, you may with your finger moistened in fair
water, gently stroke the nose, but lay no stress upon it. That happens by
reason that the nose of the Child lights upon some bone of the Mother as it was
coming into the World.

CHAP. XXI. Of the last washing for Women.
THE last washing for Women, is to be for four days, with Province Roses boiled
in Wine and Myrrh-water.

CHAP. XXII. Of an Astringent for Women, when they shall have occasion.
TAke Galls, Cypress-nuts, and Pomgranate-flowers, Roch-Allome, of each two
ounces, Province Roses, four ounces, Knot-grass a good handful; the rind of
Cassia, the rind of Pomegranates, Scarlet berries, of each three ounces, the
nature or Sperm of a Whale, one ounce, Rose Water, Myrrh-water, and
Burnet-water, of each an ounce and a half, Wine and water of a Smiths forge, of
each four ounces and a half, then make two little bags about a quarter of a
Yard long, and half a quarter of a Yard broad, then boil all these in the
foresaid water in a new Pot, using the bags one after another, as occasion
serves.

CHAP. XXIII. To make Cere-cloaths for Women.
TAke white Wax, half a pound, the sperm of a Whale, and Venice-Turpentine,
well washed in Rose Water, and Plaintain-water, of each an ounce and a half,
then melt all these together, then mingle with them an ounce of Venice white
Lead, then order your Cloth as you please, making some for the Belly, and some
for the nipples, having first rubbed it over with Oil of Acorns or the sperm of
a Whale.

CHAP. XXIV. To cleanse a Woman before she rises.
TAke bitter Almonds and peel them, make thereof a Paste with the Powder of
Orris, and the yolk of Eggs, and put it in a little bag of Tammy, and temper
within the bag, with black Wine lukewarm, and afterward use it upon the
places where the sear-cloaths had been laid, then wash the places with black
Wine mingled with Orange flower.

CHAP. XXV. How a Woman lying in of her first Child, may avoid the gripings of
her belly.
THere are some women lying in of their first Child who are troubled much with
gripings in the belly, and these Women commonly endure Pains when their Terms
come down, by reason of the smalness of the Veins which conveigh the blood into
the Matrix; such women have Gripings in their bellies, when they lie in of
their first Child, which other women are not troubled with, by reason that they
have larger Vessels yet although they have them not in their first lying in, it
would not be amiss to use some proper remedies, that so they may be never
troubled with them; which if they receive not at their first lying in, they
will be incapable of receiving them ever after; for though they may take
remedies afterward to lessen the pain, yet they can never cure it wholly.

Now that which is ordinarily done to women is, as soon as ever they are
brought to bed, to give them two Ounces of Oil of sweet Almonds drawn without
fire, with two ounces of Syrup of Maidenhair; it is true, this is good to make
her purgations part away, but not to remedy the griping.

Some there are that do take two drops of the blood which comes out of the
Navel string of the Infant, and give it mingled to the Woman in the foresaid
Syrups, though there is much fault to be found with this, by reason of the
nastiness of it.

Others do boil a white Chicken, in the which they do put two ounces of Sugar,
a dram of ^^ne^ Cinnamon, half a Nutmed grated two or three Dates, five or six
Cloves; the Fowl being boiled, you may put into it a small quantity of Claret,
then boil it altogether again letting it boil till the Fowl be well soaked,
then strain it, and give it to the Woman as soon as she is laid down; for want
of a white Hen you may take a Pigeon, or a red Partridge for want of either:
Only take heed to give her this if she be feverish, because it is something hot.

The Seed of Savory taken in warm broth is very good, and it is also very good
for those that have the Cholick.

The Queen of France, her Receipt.
Take a dram of the root of the great Comfrey, one of the kernels of Peaches,
Nutmegs, of each two scruples, yellow Amber half a dram, Ambergris half a
scruple, mingle all these together, and give to the woman as soon as she is
laid down, the quantity of a dram mingled in White Wind, or, if the Woman be
feverish, in some good warm broth.

CHAP. XXVI. Certain precepts concerning the delay and difficulty of bringing
forth.
BEing now come to talk of the impediments of the Birth, you may know that the
Birth is hindered by a twofold manner, the one natural, the other not natural;
of the unnatural we shall treat in its place; for the natural take these
following directions: But in the first place let the Midwife be very skilful
that she may decline, as much as in her lies, all the Impediments that may be
avoided.

If the Birth be hindered by the dryness and streightnes of the neck of the
Womb, take a little beaten Hellebore or Pepper, and blow it into the nostrils
of the Mother. Her Mouth must be held close, her Breath, kept in, and sneezing
must be provoked as much as may be, whereby the Spirits being forced to the
lower parts, may be the more available to force down the Child. You may also
give her Shepherds purse dried in a little Broth, or Wine; also a little
quantity of Honey mingled with twice as much lukewarm water, and given her,
will not be unprofitable. The milk also of another Woman mixed with Maidenhair,
and applied warm to the Navel. She may take also Oil of Laurel in Wine, or warm
Broth; two Grains of Pepper being taken inwardly, do not only force out the
Birth, but also drive out the Secondines.

This is also an excellent remedy against a difficult Travail.

Take Trochischs of Myrrh one dram, grains of Saffron ten, Cinnamon one
Scruple, mingle all this with two ounces of Penny-royal-water, and give it the
Woman to drink.

Let her drink it warm, and let her go to her Bed for an hour, till she finds
the Operation of the drink moving her to her Labor. If this profit and that
the Infant coming with his head foremost stick in the Womb, you may use these
pills, of which she may take seven and then rest.

Take Gum Bdellium, Myrrh, Savin-seed, Liquid Storax, Agaric, of each half a
scruple, Diagridium six grains, mingle all these with Cassia extracted, as much
as suffices, and make up Pills about the bigness of a Pea.

You may also use a pessary, as long, and as thick as your finger, of pure
wool, which must be covered over with silk, and dipped in the juice of Rue, where
Scamony has been dissolved, and so used. If these things prove without effect,
she may use this ensuing Bath above her Belly.

Take of the Root and Herb, Marshmallows six handfuls, Mallows, Camomile,
Melilot, Parsley, of each four handfuls, Line-seed, and Seed of Fenugreek, of
each two pound, Lavender, and Laurel Leaves, of each two handfuls.

Let all these things be boiled together in Water, wherein the Woman is to sit,
or else to have those parts well wet and moistened with Spunges, which being
done, and the Woman well dried with warm Clothes, let her be brought to the
Bed, and anointed with this Ointment.

Take Oil of sweet Almonds, Hens Fat, Oil of Lillies, Muscilage of
Marshmallows of each half an Ounce, Mingle all these with as much wax as is
sufficient, and make an Ointment: This being done, give her this little Dose.

Take two Yolks of Eggs and boil them in old Wine, then mix with them these
Spices, Cinnamon half an Ounce, rind of Cassia, 2 drams; or you may leave out
the Cassia, and instead thereof put in the more Cinnamon, Saffron half a
Scruple, Savine, Betony, Venus-hair, Dittany, Fenugreek, Lawrel-berries, Mint,
of each one dram: The bone of the Heart of a Heart, Pearls prepared, mingle all
these with Sugar, and make a thick Powder and give it.

If the Secondine come before the Child, and hinder the Egress of the Child, is
to be cut off, and this following Pessary to be put up.

Take Marshmallows with the Roots two handfuls, Mother-wort one handful, Rue
one ounce and an half, Fenugreek, Line-seed, of each an ounce, ten Figs; make
of these a decoction, with as much water as is sufficient, and when you have
strained it, add this to it, Oil of Lillies, Oil of Linseed, of each two
Ounces, Musk one grain: In this decoction, let the pessary be dipped, and put up;
she may afterward use this Electuary.

Take Myrrh, Castor, sweet smelling Flag, of each two drams, Cinnamon one ounce,
Saffron half a Scruple, Mace, Savin, of each a Scruple, clarified Honey half a
pound: You may also make an Electuary with the water of Thyme, and Mother-wort,
wherein have been boiled Fenugreek, Linseed, grains of Juniper, of each one
spoonful.

Now, after that the Woman has been weakened with these Impediments, you may
give her in Broth, Species Laetificans; or Manus Christi, or Diamargariton.

CHAP. XXVII. How the Secondines are to be hastened out.
THE Secondines, after that the Infant is born, may be many ways hindered; first
by the debility, or weakness of the Matrix, which happens by the frequent
motion and endeavoring of the Infant, as also by reason of the difficulty of
the Birth, or by reason that the womb does not continue distended, or because
it is many times straightened, by which the womb is so weakened, that by its own
force it is not able to expel the Secondines: Besides, the Secondines may
inwardly stick close to the womb, which happens many times through the
abundance of superfluous Humors that are retained in the Matrix, by reason of
which glutinous Humors, the Secondines stick to the Matrix. These are no way
else to be pulled away, but by the Hand of the Midwife. Thirdly, the Secondines
are hard to come away, if all the waters come away with the Infant, for then
the Secondines, being left without moisture, cannot come away by reason of the
dryness of the womb; besides that, the Matrix and the Neck of the womb are
rougher by reason of the dryness thereof, for these waters render the way
slippery and easy, both for the Infant, and for the Secondines; which being
slipped away, the womb is to be anointed with Juices and Oils. Fourthly, when
the Mouth of the Matrix, by reason of the pains of Childbearing, swells, as
often happens, unless there be a provident care taken to prevent it. Fifthly,
when the Neck of the Matrix is streighter and more close, and for that reason
fat Women travel with much more difficulty: Therefore when the Secondines do
make any extraordinary stay, the Midwife is to use all her endeavor to make
way for them; for that retention causes suffocation, and diverse other Evils;
for being long detained, they putrify and cause an evil smell, which ascending
up to the Heart, Liver, Stomach, Diaphragme, and so to the Brain, cause pains
in the Head and Lungs, shortness of Breath, Faintness, cold Sweats; so that
there is great danger; and also Apoplexies and Epilepsies, are not a little to
be feared. Now in all the time of their stay, the Women are to be refreshed
with convenient Food, to add strength to them, giving them sometimes the Yolks
of Eggs boiled in old wine with Sugar, and sprinkled over with Saffron and
Cinnamon, or some Broth made of Capon or Hen, seasoned with Cinnamon and Saffron:
It may not be amiss to make certain Perfumes for the Woman to receive up into
her womb, made of Saffron, Castor, Myrrh, and Cinnamon, of each the quantity of
a Bean, and care must be had that the Fume pass no further than the Matrix, and
this may be done till the Fume of these Spices shall cease. After this a little
sneezig Powder is to be put into to her Nostrils, composed of Hellebore, or
such like; the Woman shutting her Mouth hard, and keeping her Breath: If these
things prevail not, give her this following Potion.

Take Trochisch of Myrrh, ten grains of Saffron, one Scruple of Cinnamon, Penny
Royal waters two ounces; make of this one draught and give her; after she has
taken this, and rested a little while, let a Pessary of Hellebore and Opoponax
wrapped up in pure wool, be thrust up into the neck of the womb. This will
certainly bring down the Secondines, for it is of so great virtue, that it is
efficacious in expelling the Child which is dead, together with the Secondines.

Take Mallows, Hollihock, Wormwood, Mugwort, Calamint, Origanum, each one
handful, make a Bath, and let her sit therein up to the Navel, and stroke ever
downwards with her Hands, and give her inwardly Myrrh a Scruple, Cinnamon
poudered in Nutmeg-water or wine, or drink Calamint, or Pennyroyal in wine.

Neither will it be amiss to anoint the Matrix with the Ointment called
Basilicon; if this does nothing avail toward the bringing down of the
Secondines, and that the Woman is in great danger of her life, then with the
Consent of her Husband and Kindred, give her seven of the following Pills,
which being taken, let her lie still 'till the virtue of them do provoke new
Pains; for they are of so great Virtue, that they also do expel the dead Child,
together with the Secondines; yet herein it will not be amiss to consult the
skilful Physician.

The Pills are these.
Take of Castor, Myrrh, Liquid Storax, of each a scruple; the bark of Cinnamon,
or Cassia, and Birthwort, of each half a scruple; Agaric half an ounce,
Diagridium 6 grains, Saffron, Siler of the Mountain, Savin, of each 3 gr.
Thebaic Opium, Assa faetida, of each one gr. mingle all these with as much
extracted Cassia as is sufficient, and make of them certain Pills as big as
pease, and give them to the Woman in a small quantity of Pennyroyal water. It
may be also expedient to apply this ensuing Plaster.

Take one part of Coloquintida boiled in water, and as much of the juice of
Rue, with these mingle Lineseed, Fenugreek, Barley meal, of each a spoonful, let
them all boil together, and the Plaster made of these must be laid upon all
that part, from the Navel to the Privities.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of cases of Extremity; and first, what is to be done to a Woman,
who in her Travail is accompanied with a flux of blood, and with Convulsions.
IN the first place, great care must be had, as to the situation of the Woman:
The Woman in this case must be laid cross her Bed, where she must be held by
some one that has strength, that she may not slide, or move her self in the
operations of the Surgeon. Her thighs must be held hard and wide abroad,
with her legs bent backwards toward her Hips, and her Head leaning upon a
Bolster; the reins of her Back and her Crupper being a little elevated, with
certain pillows put underneath her Thighs; besides this, she must be well
covered with linen Clothes laid upon her stomach, Belly, and Thighs, to defend
her from the cold and wind: Being thus situated, the Chyrurgion ought to put up
his Hand, being first well opened within the neck of the womb, to remove all
those clots of blood, which may lie there to obstrust the passages of the
blood. He may then try if the interior neck of the womb be sufficiently
dilated, that he may put in his hand, and move the Infant, if it be needful,
which must be done as gently, and with as little violence as may be: He must
anoint it on all parts with sweet-butter, or good Pomatum, and so opening it by
little and little, he may put his hand quite in; and if the waters are not yet
come down, he may without any difficulty let them forth; and then at the same
instant, if the Infant comes with the head forwards he shall gently turn it. to
find out the feet, and when he has found one of them, he shall gently draw it
forth, and immediately tie a riband about it, with a knot hanging downward,
then let him put it in again, suffering part of the riband to hang out, that he
may more easily be able to find out the other foot; which he shall quickly do,
by thrusting up his hand along the thigh of the Infant; when he has found it,
he shall take the other foot, and draw them both together at an even length,
giving the woman now and then some leisure to breath, but urging her still to
strain her self, when she feels the pains coming on her: Then shall the
Surgeon or Midwife take a fine linen cloth, and wrap about the thighs of
the Child, lest by taking it naked, his fingers should slip; in that manner
drawing it forth, 'till it appear all come forth, observing still that the
Belly and the Face be still kept downward.

Now if the woman has a flux of blood, and that the neck of the Matrix be
open, the Surgeon ought to consider, whether the Infant or the Secondines
come forth first of all, for it oftentimes happens that the Secondines passing
toward the mouth of the Matrix, do so stop and obstruct it, that they do not
give leave for the Child, or the Waters to come forth; so that some perceiving
that softness, are presently of opinion that the mouth of the Womb is not open.
But this the Midwife or Surgeon may easily discern, by thrusting up the
middle finger as high as may be, and feeling therewith the circumference of the
neck of the Womb, by which they will soon perceive whether the Womb be dilated
or no, and whether it be the Secondines that present themselves. Now when it is
found to be the Secondines, and that they cannot easily come forth, the Midwife
may with her two fingers widen the passage, that she may have thereby the
liberty to put up her hand, and seek for the Infant. Now if the Secondines be
not placed in the middle, they must be turned a little, as quickly as may be,
that you may more conveniently seek for the feet of the Infant, to draw it
forth as we have said.

In such a case as this, all care must be had that nothing be broken, and that
every thing be brought out whole, for so though the woman should die, the
Midwife or Surgeon would be blameless.

If the Secondines come first, the best way is to deliver the Woman with all
the expedition that may be, by reason of the great fluxes of blood that will
follow, by reason that the veins are opened: But here are two things to be
considered; the first is, whether the Secondines are much, or little come
forth; if they are but little advanced, they must be put back with care and
diligence; and if the head of the Child appear first, it must be guided
directly toward the neck of the Womb, as in the most natural birth; but if
there appear any difficulty in the birth, by reason of the weakness, either of
the Child, or of the Mother, then the most convenient way will be to seek for
the Feet, as we have said before.

Another thing to be observed is, that if the Secondines be so far advanced,
that they cannot be put back, and that the Child follow it close, then are the
Secondines to be pulled away with all the care and expedition that can be, and
to be laid aside without cutting the Entrail that sticks to them, for by that
you may be guided to the Infant, which whether it be alive or dead, Of the
Child dead in the Mothers Belly.
is to be pulled out by the feet with as much care and quickness as may be;
though it is not to be done but in case of great necessity, for otherwise the
Secondines ought to come last.

If the Child be dead in the Womb of the Mother, the Woman is then to be
situated in the same posture, as when she is troubled with a flux of blood.

If it present it self dead, with the head foremost, and that there is little
or no hope that the woman may be delivered without assistance, and that her
strength begins to fail her, the most certain and safe way is to put up the
hand: For the Surgeon must then slide up his left hand being hollowed, as
when a Man strives to hold water in it, causing it to slide in the neck of the
Womb, along the lower part thereof toward the feet, and that between the head
of the Infant, and the neck of the Matrix: And having thus opened the Womb with
his left hand, he shall with his right put up his hook above his left hand,
between the head of the Child, and the flat of his hand, and fix in in the bone
of the temple, toward the ear, or else in the hollow of the eye, or in the
Occipital bone, keeping his left hand still in its place; after this, gently
moving and stirring the head with his left hand, with his right hand holding
the hook well fixed, he shall draw the Child forth by degrees, exhorting the
Woman all the while to force and strain her self with all her power, and then
is the best time to draw forth the Child, when the pains shall seize her; now
if it happen that he lose his hold in one place, the danger is nothing, for he
has the liberty to fix his Instrument better in another place. The head being
thus drawn forth, he must with all speed that may be, slip his hands down the
Child's arm-holes, to draw forth his shoulders, and the rest of his body: In
the mean while it will be requisite to give the Woman a small draught of wine,
or a tossed sopt in wine of Hipocras.

If, after these Medicines following adhibited, Another way.
the Child make no haste into the World, but lies unmoved in the Womb, then you
may proceed to Instruments after another manner. First of all, as soon as the
Woman is brought to bed, let her take this following potion hot, and abstain
from all other meat, and remain quiet for the space of an hour or two, 'till
she feel the power and efficacy of the Medicine.

Take seven cut Figs, Fenugreek, Motherwort-seed, and Rue, of each two drams,
water of Peny-royal and Motherwort, of each six ounces, boil all these to the
consumption of half, strain them; and to the straining add Trochischs of Myrrh
one dram, three grains of Saffron, Sugar as much as is sufficient; make one
draught of this, and spice it with a little Cinnamon.

After she has rested a little upon this, let her again return to her travel,
at what time certain perfumes must be made ready of Trochischs, composed of
these following Spices to be cast on the coals, and so used, as that the
perfume may only come to the Matrix, and no further.

Take Castor, Sulphur, Galbanum, Opoponax, Pigeons-dung, Assa-faetida, of each
half a dram, mingle all these with the juice of Rue, and make a Trochisch of
them in the form of a Filberd.

If these produce no effect, you may use this following Emplaister.

Take Galbanum an ounce and a half, Coloquintida without the grains two drams,
the juyces of Rue and Motherwort, new wax, as much of each as is sufficient, of
each make a plaster. Let this be spread upon a cloth to reach from the Navil
to the Privities, and in breadth to both the sides, which she may keep on for
the space of an hour or two. A Pessary may be also convenient, made of Wool,
and closed over with silk, and then moistened in the following Decoction.

Take of round Birth-wort brought from France, Savin, and Coloquintida, with
Grains, Staves-acre, black Ellebore, of each half a dram, bruise these
together, and make a Pessary, with as much of the juice of Rue as is sufficient.

But now if all these things avail not, and that the Midwife is not able to
dilate the passage for the Infant, then you must have recourse to the
Surgeon; to which purpose, she is to be placed in a seat, so that she may
turn her crupper as much from the back of the Chair as may be; drawn up her
legs as close as she can, but spreading her Hips abroad as much as may be. Or
else if it seem more commodious, she may be laid upon the Bed, with her head
downwards, her buttocks raised, and her thighs drawn up as much as can be: then
you may go to work, either with your speculum matricis, or his Apertory; so
that the womb being sufficiently widened by the help of these Instruments, the
birth may be drawn out by the hands of the Surgeon, together with the
Secondines, if possible may be. The womb must then be washed and anointed, the
woman then must be laid in her bed, and well comforted with spices, as also
with some comfortable meat and drink. This course must be taken with all dead
Infants, and also with Moles and Secondines, which are hindered in their coming
forth naturally.

If by these Instruments the Womb cannot be sufficiently widened for the egress
of the Infants, there are yet other Instruments, by which the Womb may be
widened without damage to the Mother, and the Birth be brought forth, such as
are Drakes-bill, and the long Pincers, by which the Womb is not only widened,
but the Birth taken hold of by them for the more forcible drawing it forth.

If there be any swelling, or inflammation, or concrete blood, gathered
together in the preputium of the Matrix, under the skin, those tumors either
before or after the Birth, where the matter appears thinnest and ripest, the
Midwife may cut with a penknife and squeeze out the matter; anointing it
afterward often with a pessary dipped in Oil of Roses, until it be whole.

If it happen that the Child be swollen in the Womb in any part of it, by
reason of Wind or any watery Humor, yet if it be alive, such means are to be
used, as may be least to the detriment of the Child and of the Mother; but if
it be dead, in whatever part those humors be, either in the breast, arms, or
legs, the Midwife may then put up her hand, and with a little knife for that
purpose, cut the swollen part, that by letting out of the Wind or humor, the
Child may grow less and be brought forth with less difficulty.

Many times it happens that the Child comes into the World with the feet
foremost; and the hands dilating themselves from the hips. In this case the
Midwife ought to be well furnished with Ointments, helping the egress of the
Infant, by anointing and stroaking it, lest it be carried backward. Having also
a great care to take hold of both the arms of the Infant, and keep them close
to the hips, that the Child may come forth after its own manner. If by reason
of this deduction of the Arms, from the sides of the Infant, and the narrowness
of the Matrix, it so happen that the Child cannot make a total egress, the womb
of the Woman, and the Infant it self, are to be well anointed, sneezing Powders
being administered to the Woman, to help her endeavors; the womb is also to be
pressed hard with both hands, that the Child make no retirement back, but may
still move forward.

It happens sometime that the Child comes forward with its feet, with the Arms
not close to its sides, but extended above its head; which when it comes to
pass, the Midwife is by no means to receive this Birth, unless the Child be
very small, and the Matrix so wide, that it may afford an easy passage to the
Child; yet may she not then receive it, till she has well anointed both the
Child and the Matrix. But it would be much more safe and convenient, for both
the Child and the Mother, to put back the Child into the Womb and bring it to
its natural form, which may be done in this manner. The woman must lie on her
back upon her bed, with her head downward, and her buttocks a little elevated,
which being done, the Midwife shall gently compress the belly of the Woman
toward the Midriff, thereby to put back the Infant into the Womb. But above
all, things let her take care that she turn the Face of the Child toward the
back of the Mother, raising up the thighs and buttocks of the Child, toward the
navel of the Mother, to bring the Child to a more legitimate and natural
production.

If the Child happen to come forth but with one Foot, the Arm being extended
along the sides, with the other Foot turned backward, the Woman is instantly to
be brought to her bed, and laid in the same posture as we have before told you,
and then is the other foot which came forth first to be put back into the Womb;
which being done, let the woman rock her self from one side of the bed to the
other, (lying always with her head low, and her Buttocks raised) 'till she
apprehend the Child to be turned, upon which she may immediately expect her
pains with all the assistance that may be given; and in the mean while to be
comforted as much as may be with Cordial Potions, and wholesome Medicines.

Many times it happens that the Child lies athwart, and falls upon his side,
which when it comes to pass, the Mother is not to be urged to her labor,
neither is the Birth to be expected after that manner, for it is impossible
that the Child should be so born without some conversion; and therefore the
Midwife is to do all she can to reduce it to a more natural form of Birth, by
moving the Buttocks, and steering the Head to the passage; if this succeed not,
let her try by often rocking the Woman to and fro, to bring the Child to its
natural form of being born.

If it happen that the Child hasten to the Birth, with the Legs and Arms
distorted, the Midwife ought not to hasten the Woman, but immediately cast her
on her Bed, where she may direct the Woman to roll her self to and fro; or else
she may gently stroke the womb of the Woman as she lies, 'till she have reduced
the Infant to a better posture; If this profit not, the Midwife must take the
Legs and close them together, then if she can, she must get her Hand about the
Arms of the Child, and in the safest way she can, direct it to its coming
forth; though it be the safest way to turn the Infant in the Womb, and by that
means compose it to the natural Birth.

If the Infant come into the World with both knees forward, with the Hands
hanging down upon the Thighs. The Midwife may then put up both the Knees
upward, 'till the Feet happen to come forward, and then with her left Hand let
her take hold of the Feet, and keep her right Hand about the sides of the
Child, and in that posture endeavor the Birth of the Child; but if that
succeed not, let the Woman as is said before, be brought to her Bed, and there
wallow from side to side, 'till she have moved the Child into a better posture.

But when it happens that the Child hastens forwards, with one Arm extended
upon the Thigh, and the other stretched over the Head, the Feet being stretched
out at length in the Womb, the Midwife may by no means receive the Child in
this posture, but must lay the Patient upon the Bed, as we have said before;
then must the Woman's Belly be gently pressed backward, that the Infant may
retire into the Womb, and if it give not backward of its own accord, the
Midwife may with her Hand gently thrust back the Shoulder, and bring the Arm
that was stretched back to its right place.

The most dangerous of all those that we have spoken of is this, and therefore
the Midwife must take care to put back the Infant in this case into the Womb:
First of all therefore anoint well her Hands, as also the Womb of the Woman,
then, if she can, let her thrust in her Hand near the Arms of the Infant, and
so move the Shoulders that the Infant may fall back into the womb; and then to
bring it to the natural form, let her thrust up her other Hand, and reduce the
Arms of the Infant to the sides of it; If this succeed not, the Woman must be
laid on her Bed, and after a little rest, she must be ordered as before we have
said: If this avail not, she must be brought back to her Seat, as we have
before rehearsed; then must her womb, by the help of those Women that assist
her be gently pressed downward, and on both sides, while the Midwife having
anointed the Matrix, and both the Arms of the Infant, joins them as close
together as she can, and in that manner receives the Infant. And there is the
less danger in this form, if the Midwife be diligent, and the Child slender.

If the Infant thrust it self forwards with the buttocks foremost, the Midwife
must put up her Hand well anointed, and so by heaving up and putting back the
Buttocks strive to turn the Head to the Passage. Yet overmuch haste must not be
made, lest the Infant should fall back into some worse Posture; and therefore
if it cannot be turned by putting up the Hand, the Woman must be brought to her
Bed, and ordered as we have often said before; comfortable things being
conveniently ministered to her.

If the Child come forward with the neck bowed, and the shoulders forward, with
the Hands and Feet stretched upwards; in this case the Midwife must carefully
move the shoulders backward that she may be able to bring the Head forwards,
which may be easily done, for the shoulders being removed, the Head will soon
appear foremost, yet if this suffice not, the Woman must be laid on her back
upon the Bed, and ordered according to the former Precepts.

When the Infant thrusts forth the Hands and Feet foremost care must be had to
avoid the danger of this misshapen posture, and therefore the Midwife must
strive by removing the Feet, to lay hold on the Head, and, as much as in her
lies, to direct it to the passage; the Hands are also to be removed, unless of
their own accord they fall down to the sides. If by this means it cannot be
done, the former Precepts of converting the Child are to be observed.

Sometimes it happens that the Child strives to force its passage in this
posture which is very dangerous. First of all therefore let the Midwife anoint
her Hands well, and the Womb of the Woman; which being done, let her put up her
Hand, and seek for the Arms of the Child, which when she has found, let her
hold them fast, till she has hold of the Head also, which she must with all
her skill endeavor to bring foremost, then let her remove the Hands of the
Infant, and fix them upon the sides of the Infant. Yet if this do not avail, it
will be the safest way to lay the Woman on her Bed, and to proceed according to
the former Precepts, to try if by that delay she may have the more advantage to
proceed as before

The same method which is to be observed in single Birth, is also to be
observed in case of Twins or of tripple Birth; for as the single Birth has but
one natural way, and many unnatural Forms, so is it with the Birth of many
Children; and therefore when it happens that Twins appear, coming into the
World according to the natural form, the Midwife must observe to receive that
first which is nearest the passage; yet be sure not to let go the other, lest
it should fall back into the womb, and tumble into some other form, but the one
being born, immediately to receive the other; this Birth is the more easy in
the natural form, because the first Child widens the passage for the latter,
but in unnatural Births there is most difficulty in the passage of the second
Child: Care must be also had in the birth of Twins, that the Secondine be
naturally brought forth, lest the womb being delivered of its Burden, should
fall, and the Secondine by that means be delayed to the damage of the Woman in
Childbed.

If there be Twins in the Womb, and one of them endeavor to come forth with
the Head foremost, and the other with the Feet: First of all the Midwife must
consider, which of the two the Woman may be delivered of with most expedition;
if the Head of the one be less forward than the Feet of the second, it will be
most convenient to draw that forth by the Feet, turning the head of the other a
little to the other side; and that being delivered, she must presenty lay hold
of the Head of that which is within, and direct it just to the passage of the
Womb; which may be done with more ease, by reason of the gap which the foremost
has made.

If it happen, in drawing forth the first by the feet, that the other change
its situation, the Midwife may then draw forth the other by the Feet as she did
the first; and if the head of the first be more forward, then she must put back
the Feet of the first, and receive that which comes with the head foremost.

If both of them press together to the passage of the Womb, the Midwife must
take great care; and therefore she must put up her hand to see which of them is
most forward, as also to try whether it be not some monstrous Conception, as
two heads upon one body, or two bodies joined in one, either at the shoulders,
or at the sides, which may be known, if she put up her hand gently between the
two heads as high as she can; and if she find that they are twins, she may
gently put the one to one side, to make way for the passage of the other, which
is most advanced; which must be directed just to the orifice of the Womb,
having a great care that she do not change the situation of the second; and as
she feels the pains of the Mother coming on her, she must by all means bring
forward the Child she would receive, still keeping the other back, with two or
three fingers of the left hand: and thus having delivered the first, if the
second be not well situated, she must bring the head to (...) neck of the Womb,
where it will find the passage (...) to it, by the delivery of the first.

Now lest the first Child should be in danger of its life, you must take it
from the Mother, and carefully tie up the Navel-string, as is formerly
mentioned, and also bind again with a large and long fillet, that part of the
Navel which is fast to the Secondines, that they may be more easily found, Then
the second Child being born the Midwife must see if there be not two
Secondines, for by reason of the shortness of the ligature, it may have happened
to retire back again, to the damage of the Woman; and therefore the Secondines
must be hastened forth as soon as may be, lest the Womb should close.

If the two Infants have but one body, the better way is to turn the head
upwards, and to draw it forth by the Feet, than by the head: Taking care when
you come to the Hips, to draw it forth as quick as may be.

The second form of unnatural Birth is very dangerous, and therefore requires
the greater care of the Midwife. First, therefore let her well anoint the Womb
of the Woman that the passage may be more slippery; which being done, let her
take hold of the hands of one of the Infants, and keeping them close to the
sides, direct the head to the orifice of the Womb; that being born, let her
proceed in the same manner toward the other. If she cannot come to take hold of
either of the Infants Arms, she must bring the Woman again to her Bed, and try
by the aforesaid Agitation of her body, if the Infants may be brought to a more
convenient form of delivery.

CHAP. XXIX. Of ordering the Woman after she is delivered,
IN the first place she must keep a temperate diet, having a great care not to
over fill her self after so great an evacuation; and indeed her diet must be
like that of wounded persons; neither are the tales of nurses to be believed,
who exhort them to fill after so great an emptiness, telling them that the loss
of blood must be restored, for these are mere Fooleries; for as for that blood
which she has lost, it is but unnecessary blood, such as is usually kept for
the space of nine months, which to void, is much conducing to her Health.
Besides, their nourishment for the first days, must be but slender, for fear of
falling into a Fever; besides, the abundance of milk, which it would bring into
the breast, where it might be in danger of curding, or Apostematizing; and
therefore for the first five days, let her use Broths, Panada's, potched Eggs,
Gellies, abstaining from Flesh, or French Barley: In the morning, Broth will be
expedient, at dinner, Broth, or Eggs, or Panada; and at supper, the same with
some Gellies for the second course. If she intend to nurse her Child she may
feed more plentifully, and drink some Barl^ water, wherein some Corianders, or
Fennel^ (...) be put.

In Italy the persons, of (...) account do use this water. Take two (...) the
Feathers being well pulled off (...) ^he bowels wholly taken out, which you led
off boil in a glazed earthen pot, in a sufficient quantity of water till they
be half boiled, then must they be taken out of the pot, together with the
Broth; and being cut to pieces are to be put into a Lembick in manner following.

Take Bugloss, Borage, and Time, two good handfuls, and with that cover the
bottom of the shell, then lay upon that a row of flesh, then upon that a rank
of leaf-Gold, with a dram of powder of Pearls, and upon that pour the broth;
let all this be distilled in Balneo Mariae, drawing forth a pint at a time,
which you shall re-iterate as often as you have any thing left, to give to the
Woman in Childbed, for the space of ten or twelve days. This water must be
drawn six weeks or two months before it be used; if the Woman be not troubled
with a Fever, let her drink a little white Wine, or Claret, with twice as much
hot Water; If she have a mind to drink between Meals, or at night, it may be
convenient to give her some syrup of Maidenhair, or any other Syrup that is
not astringent, with a little boiled water. After the suspicion of a Fever, or
heat of her breasts is over, she may be nourished more plentifully, and you may
give her, together with her Broth, some other meat, as Pullet, Capon, Pidgeon,
Mutton, or Veal boiled. After the eight day is past; at what time the Womb is
well purged and discharged, it will be expedient to give her good meat in
greater quantity, that she may be enabled to gain strength; during all this
time, she must rest very quiet, and be (...) from all manner of disturbance;
she must sleep as (...) the day time as may be. If she go not well to stool,
(...) some such kind of Clyster as this.

Take of Mallows, (...) mallows, and Pellitory of the wall, each one handful,
(...) ^f Camomile, and Melliot, of each a small handful, A^ (...) and
Fennel-seeds, of each two ounces; boil these in (...) ^^coction of a
Weathers-head, take of this three quarters of a pint, and dissolve in them of
course Sugar and common Honey, of each two ounces, new fresh butter three
ounces; of this make a Clyster, and if occasion serve, add to this an ounce of
Catholicon.

What is to be done to the Breast, Belly, and lower parts of the Woman in
Childbed.
IN the first place you may lay the skin of a Hare, or Sheep, for the space of
four or five hours; which being taken away, you may then anoint it with this
following Ointment, and then lay a linen Towel all over her belly and hips,
which must be continued on for the first seven days, looking after it, and
turning every Morning.

The Ointment may be this.
Take the Oil of sweet-Almonds, Camomile, and St. John's wort, each one ounce
and a half, Sperma ceti two Ounces, Goats fat one Ounce, Oil of Miriles half an
Ounce, melt all these, and make an Ointment to anoint the Belly: Now before the
Cerecloth be put on, you must apply a little Plaster of Galbanum, about the
bigness of 2 or 3 fingers to the Navel, in the middle of which may be put two
or three grains of Civet, yet so as that the Woman may not perceive the sent of
it. The Cerecloth may be this.

Take White Wax four ounces, Pomatum without Musk, Calfs-grease, of each one
ounce, Sperma ceti an ounce and a half, Oil of St. John's- wort, and Sweet
Almonds, of each one ounce; Venice-Turpentine washed in Pellitory-water half an
ounce; melt these in Balneo Mariae, and spread them upon a cloth about the
bigness of the belly, and when it is cool apply it.

The next care is to be had of the Breasts, upon these some put round Cerecloth
made thus; Take six ounces of new Wax, Oil of Myrtle, Roses and Honey of
Narbon, of each two ounces; melt these altogether, and make a Cerecloth, let
them have holes in the middle for the Nipples to go through.

This Ointment is also very good to keep the Milk from clotting.
Take Ointment of Populeon one ounce, Galen's refrigerating Ointment half an
ounce, Oil of Roses six drams, Vinegar a small quantity; melt them together and
make an Ointment.

This fomentation is also much commended.
Take Fennel, Parsley, Mallows, Marshmallows, of each a small handful, Laurel
and Camomile-flowers, of each half a handful, boil these according to Art, and
make a Fomentation for the Nipples. After this Fomentation, anoint them with
Oleum Rosatum, Omphacium, and then apply this following Plaster.

Take Venice-Turpentine four ounces, well washed in strong wine, and
Rose Water, adding to it two whole Eggs, and a scruple of Saffron, with as much
wax as is sufficient; spread this upon a linen cloth, and apply it. As for
the lower parts, for the three first days they are to be fomented with a
certain fomentation of Milk, wherein has been boiled a few Roses, some
Chervil, and a little Plantain. From the next day to the eighth day, you may
use this bath; Wine and water, of each half a pint; red Roses and flowers of
St. John's wort, of each two handfuls; Agrimony one handful, make of this a
decoction; after bathing once, or twice, lay this following Ointment along the
lips of the Privities upon a linen cloth.

Take Oil of St. John's wort 2 ounces, Sperma ceti an ounce and a half, a
little white wax, mix all these together, melt them, and make an Ointment.

After the eight days are past, you may lay upon her belly this following
Plaster.

Take Oil of St. John's wort, Camomile, and Anniseeds, of each one ounce, Oil
of Mastick an ounce and a half, Oil of Mirtles six drams, Sperma ceti two
ounces, the fat of the Reins of a Goat an ounce and a half, Deers suet one
ounce; of this make an Ointment to anoint the belly of the woman in Childbed,
and then apply this following Plaster.

Take Oil of Myrtles, and St. John's Wort, of each an ounce and a half, Oil of
Nip one ounce, Venice-Turpentine, washed in water of Motherwort, four ounces;
melt all these together, and put them upon a Hempen cloth, that may cover all
the belly, and let her wear it the space of eight days.

These fifteen days being past, for the space of eight days more, you may lay
upon her belly and her hips this following Plaster.

Take Oil of Mastick, Myrtles, Jasmine, and Quinces, of each an ounce and a
half, Oil of Acorns two ounces, Sperma ceti one ounce, Venice-Turpentine washed
in Plantain-water, half an ounce; wax six ounces, melt all these together,
adding powder of Mastick, and sealed earth, of each half an ounce, Florentine
Orrice one ounce, spread all these upon a hempen cloth, and lay it upon her
belly, to be kept there for the space of eight or ten days; for the lower
parts, this Fomentation may be needful.

Take Leaves of Plantain, Mullein, Knot-grass, and Horse-tail, of each one
handful, Cypress-leaves a handful and a half; of the rind of Pomgranates,
Cypress-Nuts, and Pomgranate-flowers, of each half an ounce; red Roses,
Camomile and Melilot, of each a handful; Roch-allum two ounces, Sweet
smelling-Flag and Florentine-Orrice, of each three drams, Gilliflowers one
dram; make of these two bags, and boil them in like quantities of sour wine,
and Smith's water, for the exterior mouth of the neck of the Womb.

Of the choice of a good Nurse.
THE choice of a good Nurse is very important, and therefore you must first
look upon her aspect, and see whether her sight be no way imperfect, as whether
she be squint-eyed, or have a down-cast look; you must have a special care that
she be not red haired, for their Milk is extremely hot; see moreover, whether
her teeth be sound and white, and well set; know whether she come of Parents
that have been troubled with the Consumption; and if she have not, nor be
consumptive her self, you may judge of her stomach, and whether she be subject
to Catarrhs; you must also take heed that she send no stinking-breath, either
from her mouth, or nostrils, for that corrupts the Lungs of the Infant. Enquire
whether neither she, nor any of her kindred have been troubled with Leprosy,
by reason that it is very contagious, or with the Falling Sickness. And
therefore those Women that either cannot or will not nurse their own Children,
must make use of such women as are most fit to the humor they would have the
Child to be of: For the Nurse is now to be the second Mother of the Child, from
whom the Infant draws all her Conditions, be they good, be they bad; and it is
often seen, that Children do partake more of the Conditions of the Nurse, than
the Mother, and therefore care must be taken that the Nurse be good
conditioned, good teeth, brown hair, of a healthy generation; that neither she
nor her Husband have had the French Disease; that she be not peevish nor
choleric, that she have Milk in abundance, and a good fleshy breast, that her
breast be not over-fleshy, that she be not over fat; and, above all, that she
be not of too amorous a humor, and desirous to be with her Husband, for that
is perfect venom to the milk.

What is to be done in the extreme pains of the Child.
IF a Child have extreme throws presently after it be born, you must rub it
with Pellitory and fresh butter, or Spinach, or else with Hogs-greace, and
apply it upon the Navel, having first a great care that it be not too hot. Or
else make a little cake of Eggs, and Oil of Nuts, and apply it in the very same
place; if this avail not, give it a little Clyster of Milk, the yolk of an Egg,
and a little Sugar; this eases the pain of the Intestines.

What is to be done with those Children that are troubled with Phlegm.
THere are some Children born of ill-constitution'd Women, or else of Women
that have not used good nourishment in the time of their being with Child, who
are very full of phlegm, these you must lay upon one side, and sometimes upon the
other; for if you lay them upon their backs, you may perchance choke them; you
must be sure to keep their bellies soluble, causing them to void that blood
kept in the Entrails from the time of their being in the womb, by giving it a
little Suppository of black Soap well rubbed in fresh butter, to take away the
Acrimony of it; then give it a spoonful of Syrup of Violets, this causes the
phlegm to pass down. If you perceive that the Infant has not much heat, you may
mix with it half the quantity of Oil of sweet Almonds, and half of the syrup of
Violets, and continue it, stroaking the stomach an^ the belly of the Infant
with fresh butter, every time tha^ they undress him.

That which ought to be done to Children that have their Cods full of wind.
WHen Infants have their Cods full, ye must examine whether it be with wind, or
water; if it be with water, by rubbing and chafing the skin with fresh butter,
the waters will sweat out; if it be wind, the Children must be stirred, and
swung gently, mingling in their drink the decoction of Aniseeds.

How to take away the Canker from the mouths of Infants.
THere have been known certain Children which have been nourished with cold
milk, which has been thick, and in great quantity, which a few days after its
birth, has heated the mouth of the Infant in such a fashion, that it caused a
white Canker, which presently possessed the tongue, palate, the gums, the
throat, and all the mouth, whereupon it was taken with a Fever, and it could no
longer suck, all the assistance that could be was still applied, and when no
other Medicine did avail, there was found one, a particular remedy, which was
half a handful of Sage, a handful of Chervil bruised a little, and boiled in a
sufficient quantity of water, about a dozen seethings, to which you must add a
spoonful of Vinegar; when you have strained it, you must put to it an ounce of
Honey of Roses, then you must have a little hooked stick, with a little piece
of Scarlet tied at the end, then putting the water in a Sawcer, dip the end of
the stick where the Scarlet is tied, and then rub the place affected gently,
and you shall find the Canker (...) a^swage by little and little.

What is to be done to Children whose Intestines are fallen.
THERE are a great many Infants, whose great gut falls; which is a thing very
easily remedied at the beginning, and therefore you must put it up again:
First, lay the Child with the Head lowermost, then you must have a thick
Cushion, soaked in Smiths Water, then you must have an emplaister made of the
Roots of great Comfrey scraped, and put upon it as an Ointment; then looking to
it every day, taking care that it cry but little, and never unbind him, but as
he lies, lest the Gut tumble down again, and so the Cure be delayed; as the
Child grows big, the Hole lessens, and the Intestine grows big. This is an
experienced way.

To make an Ointment to strengthen the Thighs and legs of the Child, and make
him go.
TAKE Sage, Marjoram, Dwarf-Elder, bruise them a good while together, 'till you
have beaten out a good deal of Juice, then put it into a Glass Vial, 'till it
be full, and stop up the Hole with paste, and round the sides also of the said
Paste; put it then in an Oven, to bake as long as a good big Loaf, then draw it
forth, and suffer it to cool, then break the Paste which is round the Vial;
break the Bottle, and keep up that which is within, which you shall find turned
to an Ointment: And when you would use it, you must add to it some of the
Marrow of the Hoof of an Ox, melting it altogether, and when ye have so done,
you must rub the hinder part of the legs, and thighs of the Child. This has
been done to a Child, whom a famous Physician, after 3 Years having in hand,
gave over, saying, that it would never go.

Of the relaxations of the Matrix, and the cause.
THere are many causes of the relaxation of the Matrix, the one proceeding from
great Fluxes, which fall down upon the ligaments thereof, causing them to wax
loose; Others come to this Disease by some falls, others by reason of carrying
in their womb too great Burdens, others by straining themselves in travail
before their time, and because the Orifice of the Womb is not open; sometimes,
and very often by reason of the Midwifes, who putting up their Hands into the
Womb, tear down they know not what, which is oftentimes a part of the Matrix,
to the bottom of which the Secondines adhere, drawing down part of the womb,
which they take to be the Secondines; which is oftentimes brought also to a
worse condition, when the unskilful Women force her to the Remedies, for
bringing down the Secondines; as holding Bay salt in her Hand, streining to
Vomit, and the like. For remedy whereof, all these telaxations of the Matrix,
are by the same Remedies, except those which are occasioned by strong Fluxes,
for in this case other Remedies are not sufficient, being that you are to take
away the cause of those defluxions, before you can proceed to the Cure of the
relaxation. Among the rest, I will relate one that has been found very
profitable and experienced, which is this astringent. Take Gall-nuts, Cypress
nuts, and Pomgranate Flowers, Roche-Alum, of each two Ounces, Province Roses
four ounces, Knot-grass a good big handful, the Rind of Cassia, the Rind of
Pomegranates, Scarlet Grains, of each three Ounces, the nature of a Whale one
ounce; Mirrh-water, Rose Water, and Sloe-water, an ounce and a half, thick
Wine, and Smiths-water, of each four ounces and a half; then make two little
bags of a quarter of a Yard long, causing them to boil in the aforesaid waters,
in a new pot, using one after another as you have occasion, letting it lie upon
the Bone of the Pubes, passing in between the Hips, chafing her often, and
holding her Head and her Reins low, using in the Morning sometimes a little
Mastick in an Egg, or sometimes Plantain Seed: If the Disease be not too old,
it may be cured by this means; but if it be of a long standing, you must make a
pessary half round, and half Oval, of great thick Cork, pierced through in the
middle; tie a little Pack-thred to the end, then cover it over with white Wax,
that it may do no hurt, and to make it more thick, this must be dipped in Oil
of Olives to make it enter, and it must be straight, that it may not easily
fall out; and if it be too little, to have another bigger, and when the Woman
goes to do her necessary occasions, she must hold it in, lest she should force
it out; the Hole is made, that the Vapors of the womb may have a vent, and to
give way for her purgations to flow, neither must it be taken away 'till after
the Purgations are passed, the thickness causes the Matrix to mount up as long,
as it is very thick, for the Ligaments being close do then retire. If they be
Women that bear Children, the Midwife ought not to suffer them to force
themselves, but as Nature constrains her, having her own hand ready after the
throw, to put back the Matrix with her finger, and when she is brought to bed,
lay her low with her head and with her reins, raising her up with pillows put
under her hips; and for Women that are troubled with this Disease, they ought
not to lace themselves over hard, for that thr^sts down the Matrix, and makes
the Woman pouch bellied, and hinders the Infant from being well situated in her
Body, causing her to carry the Child all upon her Hips, and makes her Belly as
deformed as her Waste is handsome.

Of a disease that happens by reason of the fall of the Matrix.
THere is sometimes a relaxation of the Membrane, that covers the rectum
Intestinum, when the head of the Child, at the beginning of the Travel falls
downward, and draws it low; oftentimes it comes by reason of Women with Child
lacing themselves, which causes such a conflux of wind to these parts, that it
seems to the Woman to be the head of the Child, insomuch that she is hardly
able to stand upright, neither can she go. For remedy hereof, you must keep the
woman soluble, giving her Anise, and Coriander seeds to dissipate the winds.
You must take Sage, Agrimony, Motherworth, Balm, white Wormwood, Margerom, a
little Rue, and a little Thyme, and Camomile and having picked all the above
written Herbs, you must cut them very small, and having well mingled them, put
them into a maple platter, and then put hot Cinders upon them, and upon those
another handful of Herbs, covering the platter with a close cloth, that the
woman may receive the smoke; this is a remedy which has been much approved and
experimented.

To remedy the fall of the Fundament in Infants:
TAke of the green shrub whereof they make ^rooms, and cut, it small, and lay
it upon the Coals, and set the Child over the smoke thereof, and it will
certainly cure it.

Of the diseases of Women, and first of the inflammation of the breast.
THe Inflammation of the Breasts is a hard swelling together with a beating
pain, redness, and shooting. The chief cause of this is the abundance of blood,
drawn up together in that place, though there be sometime other causes also, as
the suppression of the courses, the Haemorrhoids, or a blow received upon the
Breasts. The signs of it are easy to be known, that is to say, a certain
redness and burning heat, oft-times joined with a Fever. For the cure of this,
there are four sorts of remedies; First, the order of diet, which must be
comforting and moistning, as Broth of Pullets, where Endive, Borage, Lettice,
and Purslain may be boiled also; she may drink the Juice of Pomgranates, or
Barley water, with Anniseeds boiled in it: the use of Wine, and all sorts of
Spices are very dangerous, and if the Woman go not freely to the stool, there
is nothing better than a Lenitive Clyste^; she may sleep much, and must not
disturb her self with any passion. The next way of Remedy is by diverting the
humors, which is done by frictions, letting blood in the foot, scarrification
of the legs, or veficatories applied to those places, especially if the flowers
are stopped, or ready to come down; if not, it will be expedient to open a vein
in the arm.

You may also prepare the humor to void it out of the place affected, by
opening either the middle vein, or the Basilic, or the Vena Saphena, which may
be done two or three times, as occasion serves; after blood-letting, purge, but
let this be done with gentle Medicines; such are Cassia, Manna, Tamarind, Syrup
of Roses or Violets Solutive, having a little before used certain Syrups which
may assuage and temper the humors.

Take syrup of Roses and Purslain, of each one ounce, Endive* water and
Plantain-water, of each an ounce, give this to the Patient, neither will it be
amiss to give her Syrup of Succory, or Endive, or such like; for these Syrups
have a cooling and refreshing faculty, especially being mingled with Plantain
or Endive-water, or such like, or the decoction of the said Herbs; now when the
humor is thus prepared you may give her some gentle Purges. As for Example,
take of the pulp of Cassia, and Tamarinds, of each six drams; of this make a
little Bolus with some Sugar, and give it to the Patient; or with this Potion.

Take of the Leaves of Italian Orach three drams, of Aniseed one scruple,
infuse these into four ounces of the foresaid waters. Into this being strained,
infuse an ounce of Cassia, and into the streining of this, dissolve an ounce of
Solutive Syrup of Roses, of this make a Potion and give it. The fourth way of
cure consists in Topics, such as may drive back and repress the humor, though
care must be had that they be not over-strong, lest you thereby do cool the
heart too much, and thereupon drive the humor upon the heart it self. And
therefore temperate Medicines are chiefly to be chosen, and such especially as
are to digest and dissolve the humor: Wherefore it shall not be amiss to apply
a linen cloth dipped in white strong vinegar, and a little cold water, which
must be applied to the Breasts, and often changed. Or else you may dip linen
clothes also in a decoction of Camomile-flowers, and Violet-flowers, with a
small quantity of Oil of Roses, and a drop of vinegar or two; or you may use
this Fomentation. Take of the juice of Nightshade and Oil of Roses, of each an
ounce and a half; of the decoction of Fenugreek, Camomile, and Line-seed, two
ounces, vinegar one ounce.

This Medicine you may use by dipping a sponge therein, and so washing and
fomenting the Breast therewith.

Or you may apply this Cataplasm; take of the leaves of Nightshade, and
Mellilot, half a handful of each, let them be boiled and extracted through a
course cloth, then add to them Bean-meal two ounces, Oxymel, and Oil of sweet
Almonds, of each one ounce; of this make a Cataplasm, and apply it. If the
Disease be be more prevalent, you must use more forcible Remedies, and among
the rest this Fomentation. Take of the leaves of Mallows, Violets, Dill, of
each one handful, flowers of Camomile and Mellilot, of each a small handful and
a half, boil these together, adding to them a little Wine and Oil of Dill, or
Mustard; first let the Breast be fomented with this, and afterward with an
Ointment composed of equal parts of new butter, Oil of Violets and Hens fat.
But if these things avail not to dissipate the humor, you must observe whether
the inflammation tend either to a suppuration, or induration. If you find that
it tends to a hardness, you must try all means to hinder it by the way of
mollifying Plasters; among which this is not a little experimented: Take the
Marrow of a Calves leg two ounces, Sheeps-grease one ounce, Saffron four
Scruples; Cumin-seed bruised, two Scruples; mingle all these and make a
Plaster. If the inflammation does not harden, but does altogether tend to a
suppuration, which may be known by these signs; that is to say, the increasing
of the tumor, the beating and excessive heat and pain which rages about those
parts so vehemently, that they do not admit them to be touched. But now the
suppuration is to be hastened with hot and moist Medicines, which have an
Emplastick faculty, for which purpose this is much commended: Take the leaves
of Mallows one handful, roots of Marshmallows one ounce, boil these together,
and when they are mashed draw them out, and add to them Bean-meal and
Fenugreek, of each one ounce, the whites of two Eggs, Myrrh, and Assa faetida
of each one dram, Saffron one scruple, mingle all these together, and make a
Cataplasm for your use; to this you may either add Capons-grease, Hog's Grease,
or fresh butter: If these Remedies do not suddenly bring the inflammation to a
suppuration, you must then take of the shells of Snails bruised, and lay them
upon the Cataplasm in such a manner, that the Snail-shells may come to touch
that part of the tumor which is most elevated and pointed; whence it appears
that the matter will first issue; if these Remedies avail not, it will be
necessary to open the said Aposthume with a Lancet, and this must be done when
you are sure that the matter is ready to come forth, which may be known by
these signs, when the beating ceases, when the Fever, the pain, and the Heat of
the part do begin to diminish, when you perceive the place pointed, and raised,
and enclining to a blackish color. When the wound is open, you must first
apply to it a digestive, composed of an ounce of Turpentine, half an ounce of
Oil of Roses, and the Yolk of an Egg. After this, you must cleanse it with
Honey of Roses, Turpentine and Barly-meal, or with the Ointment of the
Apostles, or the Ointment called Aegyptiacum, then you may put on the top of
the place, the Ointment called Basilicon, or Paracelsus plaster which does
digest, cleanse, carnifie, and cicatrize after a very extraordinary manner.
This is furthermore to be observed, that an Ulcer in the Breast is not easily
cured, if the Milk be not dried out of the other Breast; and therefore the Milk
is to be dried up by keeping the Child from sucking, and by putting upon the
Breasts of the Woman, clothes dipped in cold water, together with Bean, Barley,
Vinegar, and such other like remedies.

CHAP. XXX. Of Swellings from Milk.
MILK is certainly the occasion of many tumors of diverse kinds; if the ferment
of the Breast be over-active and vigorous, it separates Milk with too great
Violence, causing thereby an over-fermentation of the parts, which usually
occasions an Inflammation; if the Serum be hot or partake much of blood,
otherwise it raises a flegmatic Swelling; or if the matter be disposed to
coagulation, the King's Evil; and these are the most frequent species of
Swellings commonly supposed to arise from milk. Any of these three may
degenerate into a Scirrhus, and that Scirrhus into a Cancer. The signs are
visible; if the first happen, there are all the Symptoms of an Inflammation,
namely Heat, Redness, Tension, pulsation, and the like. If the second, large
Distension with pain, but no heat: If the King's Evil, then hard Kernels are
easily felt. Swellings made by the over eagerness of the milky Ferment go
easily off, if no other Symptom attend them; sucking and drawing the breasts
commonly discharges the Milk as fast as it can be made, and then all the danger
is over. But if the fermentation occasion any disorder in the Blood, the
Patient is more or less endangered, according to the quality of the swelling
produced, namely an inflammation occasions a Fever. Phlegmatic swellings are
apt to grow Ulcerous, and sometimes turn to the King's Evil, or a Scirrhus, and
require a long time for their Cure. Abundance of Milk causes inflammations, and
apostumations, and the like, and therefore the Woman ought to use a slender
diet, and it ought to be of such a quality as may less dispose the Humors to
ferment. Panadoes, Barley grewel, and such like cooling and moistening
Spoon-meat ought to be used; Chicken Broth is the highest Diet whilst the
Humor is fermenting; the Medicines proper to diminish the Milk, are Lettice,
Purslain, Endive, Succory, Smallage and the like; the Milk is usually drawn out
of the Breasts by the Infant's sucking; but if the Child be so weak it cannot
suck, or not sufficiently, the Milk must be discharged by Whelps sucking, or
the Mother may draw her own Breasts her self by an Instrument sold for that
purpose. The swelling made by the Milk is restrained by the application of
Nightshade, Lettice, Plantain, Vine tops, Bramble-buds, Horse-tail, and the
like, or Oil of Roses, Myrtles with Vinegar and the like. The Tumor may be
discussed by the application of Mints, Cat-mints, Rue; the Seeds of Fenugreek,
Cumin, Fennel, and the like; or dried up by applying Clothes dipped in
Limewater, or in a solution of Sacharum Saturni made in Frogs Spawn-water,
during which time fine Towe sprinkled with Ceruss, may be applied to the
Armpits. When the Swelling is very painful, a Cataplasm made of the Meals of
Barley, Beans and Lentils boiled in Oxymel, is proper; at the same time Towe
dipped in Oxycrat may be applied under the Arms: If the Inflammation be gone too
far toward Suppuration, it must be promoted with Suppuratives, and opened by
Incision or caustic. When the Swelling is hard and not inflamed, apply the
following Cerate.

Take of the tops of Wormwood powdered, two drams, of the Seeds of Lentils,
Fenugreek, and Fennel, each an ounce; of the juice of Henbane and Hemlock, each
three ounces, of ointment of Marshmallows two ounces, of Ducks and Goose
grease, each one ounce, of Deers Suet two ounces, of liquid Storax half an
ounce; with a sufficient quantity of Wax make a Cerat. Hemlock boiled in Wine,
and beaten up with Hogs lard, resolves the hardness in the Breasts; but if it
be applied alone, it stirs up Heat, and occasions Ulcers in the skin. Green
Mints or Chick-weed are common applications, and of good use, either alone, or
mixed with other Medicines in all the hard Swellings of the Breasts occasioned
by Milk. All Plasters applied to the Breasts, ought to have a hole snipt in
them for the Nipples, lest they be fretted by them, especially that the Milk
may be drawn forth while the Medicines lie on.

A young Woman after Childbirth was afflicted with a swelling in her Breasts,
one was called, that persuaded her Relations it was a Cancer, and treated her
accordingly, but her Breasts growing more painful, and much danger being
apprehended from such a Disease, a Physician was advised with; but he being
wary in giving his judgment in Surgery, where there might happen any dispute,
desired that a Surgeon might be fetched; upon their view, the Breast appeared
big, and inflamed; it was apostumated, and the matter perfectly digested, and
the skin thin and ready to break. The Surgeon proposed the applying of a
Pultess of white-Bread and Milk, assuring them before Morning, they should find
a Porringer full of matter discharged; they did so, and the swelling broke, and
was cured by the use of Basilicon without any more trouble; and indeed when the
matter is well suppurated, and a convenient opening made for discharge, these
Tumors generally heal of themselves, if the Habit of the Body be good; but
where it is otherwise, or the management ill, the Cure is many times very
troublesome.

A Young Gentlewoman after Childbed, being indisposed in her Health, her left
Breast became diseased and swelled, and after some days by ill management,
growing more painful and swelled, one was called in who endeavored
suppuration, and after some time opened it; but the fluxion increased, and
other obcesses were raised, and from the several Apostumations, sinous Ulcers
were afterward made, and so the work became difficult; the abscess begun deep
in the body of the Glands, and through length of time, corrupted them, and
rendered the swelling hard, and the Tents stopping in the matter between
dressings, had occasioned a large discharge: The method of Cure consisted in
the enlarging of that Orifice, where the matter seemed to be detained, and then
to proceed with detersives and the like; a caustic was applied to the part
round about the Orifice, stoping the hole with Lint. by which means in a short
time, a clear way was made for the matter, as the Eschar separated, a Fungus
thrust forth, which was sprinkled with red Precipitat, and the Eschar was
dressed with Basilicon, and the other openings with Diapompholigos, and the
Cerate of Marshmallows over all: After a more full-separation of the Eschar,
observing the Fungus to rise more large, a Stupe was applied, wrung out of a
decoction of the tops of Worm wood, Rue Mint, the Flowers of red Roses and
Balaustines made in Wine and Water, and Chalcanthum was applied upon the
Fungus, and pledgets of the Ointment of Tutty over the Ulcerated parts. The
second day after the Dressings were took off, and the Eschar was found to be
made by the Catheretick, which was thrust off, and it was dressed again with
the same, and the use of the Escharoticks was continued; during these
applicationss a Plaster of Bole was applied over the Breast to restrain the
fluxion, yet notwithstanding the fungus increased, and raised the swelling
between that and the other Orifices, and therefore a large Caustic was applied
upon the swelling, which laid some of the Orifices into this, the Eschar was
divided, and dressed up with lenients, and the Fungus was covered with
escharoticks, wherever it began to thrust out, by which it was kept down: But
after the separation of this latter Eschar, the Fingus appeared great, and the
way of extirpating it by Escharoticks being slow, the Surgeon thrust his Finger
under it, and at once broke it, and pulled it out in pieces, and then filled up
the place with Par^celsus's mundificative upon Pledgits sprinkled with red
Precipitat, and the foresaid Plaster being applied over the whole Breast, it
was bound up. The second day after it was opened again, and by this method
often repeated, the remainder of the Fungus was subdued, and a firm basis
raised, on which to incarn with an addition of powders of the roots of orris,
myrrh, and Sarcacoll to the forementioned Mundificative, and Agripa's Cerate
was applied over the breast and in a few days it was cicatrized with a smooth
Cicatrix, the lips falling in by the benefit of Nature, which was assisted the
while by traumatick decoctions, and the like. When one of the Breasts has been
Cured, it happens often that the other swells from the abundance of Milk, and
grows hard and apostuntats; sometimes both Breasts are thus diseased at one
time. A Gentlewoman had both her Breasts swelled a long time, and afterward
they apostumated by reason of the pain; several abscesses were made, and the
matter discharged by such openings. In process of time the Ulcers became
sinuous, and callous, with hardness of the glands; the Cure was begun by
Fomentations, and discussing and resolving Pultesses made of the roots and
leaves of Marshmallows, henbane, the tops of hemlock, mint, rue, the flowers
of elder, the seeds of fenugreek, flax, and the like, and with the meal of
lentiles, barley, hogs-lard, ducks and goose grease, and the like; and dilating
the orifices, and cleansing with paracelsuses mundificative, red precipitat and
allom; while the Surgeon was endeavoring by the methods abovesaid, new
troubles arose within, which forced him to lay such places open by caustic, as
might best serve for the discharge of matter, after separation of the Eschar,
he again cleansed and healed them.

Of windy Tumors in the Breasts.
THE flatuous Tumor of the Breasts is caused by a thick vapor, which rises
from the menstrual blood which is retained* or corrupted in the Matrix. The
causes of which are; first, the suppression of the flowers; or when the flowers
are not discharged into their proper place, and in their proper time; as also
from the corruption of the humors, by which are ingendered diverse bad fumes
and vapors; for, this being received into the Breasts, causes a distention
much like a true swelling. The sign by which it is known, is the pain which it
brings along with it, which is sharp and prickling, causing a distention of the
part. The heart is not a little out of order, by reason of the windinesses
which lie so near it; and commonly the left Breast is mow swollen, communicating
its pain to the arm, shoulder, and ribs of the same side. And the signs differ
from those of a Cancer; for in this distemper the Breast is white and shining,
by reason of the distention; and if you touch it, it sounds like a drum. And if
you press it with your hands, you will find that it is swelled in all parts
alike, and not in one more than another. This is Cured first by a good order of
diet, taking little victuals, whereby crudities may be avoided that do afford
matter to the obstructions, and increase windiness: For which cause she must
also drink little, and that, water boiled with Cinnamon, Aniseed, and rind of
Citrons. The next remedy is by using things which are good to provoke the
Courses, (among which use this Receipt, strain Celandine stamped into posset-ale,
and drink it four days before the new mood, and four days after.) And it will
not be amiss to let blood three or four times in the year, about the time that
the Courses ought to begin. For by this means you may provoke the flowers, and
hinder the increase either of a Scirrhus, or of a Cancer; to which purpose,
baths and frictions are not a little to be used. In the next place, you must
prepare the humors that foment this windiness both in the Matrix and in the
Veins, and that by Syrups which do expel phlegm and melancholy; after which
you must purge your Patient; for which purpose you may use this gentle Apozem.
Take of the root of Tamarinds, Cypress, Bugloss, of each an ounce and a half;
flowers of Borage, Epithymum, Sena, of each half a handful, flowers of Balm one
handful, Raisins one ounce, Prunes in number twelve, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of water, and then in a pint of the water dissolve four ounces of the
syrup of Violets; make of this an Apozem clarified according to Art, and
sweeten it with a sufficient quantity of Sugar, giving four or five ounces at a
time. In the next place, you may use Topics to attenuate and resolve; to which
purpose you may bathe or foment the Breast with a Sponge dipped in Lie, and then
lay upon it a linen cloth, dipped and moystned in Aqua-vitae, and dried in the
shade, or else dipped in fresh butter that has boiled a good while, or in oil of
Lillies, or in oil both of the root and seed of Angelica; or you may foment the
Breast with this Decoction. Take wheat-bran two handfuls, leaves of Dill and
Melilot, of each half a handful; Aniseed, Fennel, and Cuminseed, of each two
drams, Camomile-flowers one handful; boil all these in a sufficient quantity of
water and white wind, and let them boil to the consumption of the third part.
In this decoction you may wet a sponge, and wash or foment the Breast
therewith. After you have fomented the part, you may put this Ointment upon the
part affected: Take oil of Lillies and Elder, of each an ounce and a half, of
the best Balsom half an ounce, powder of burnt-lead unwasht, Aniseed one dram,
and as much wax as is sufficient.

Of the watery Tumor of the Breast.
THE watery tumor is ingendered by a thick and watery phlegm gathered together in
great abundance in the Breast and parts adjoining, and it happens many times
that this watery and flegmy substance is not always gathered to one particular
place, but also diffused through all the parts of the Breast, which causes a
general swelling in that part. This swelling (that we may define it) is a loose
and soft tumor without much pain, yielding to the touch and pressing of the
fingers, so that the hole which is made by the pressing of the fingers remains
a pretty while after; yet it soon becomes painful, if there be any Acrimony
joined with it; or if there be any distention by reason of the press of Vapors
to that part. This oftentimes happens by reason of the suppression of the
Courses; sometimes it is occasioned by reason of a clear and watery phlegm, which
discharges it self upon these parts. This swelling is easily distinguished from
other swellings, by reason of the looseness and softness thereof, and by the
pain, which is always less than in other swellings: and in this kind of tumor
the pain ascends up to the arms and shoulders, and the whole Breast is
altogether swollen and raised; and this pain comes at certain times, chiefly when
the Flowers ought to come down, which being once come down, the pain
diminishes, by reason that the Woman is then thoroughly Purged. Yet
notwithstanding, there does remain some certain kind of swelling, which happens
not in the windy tumors, by reason that the purgations of the Flowers do
totally dissipate the matter of those swellings. These flegmy tumors do easily
turn into Cancers, and are therefore to be diligently looked after. As to the
Cure of these tumors, there is required first an orderly Diet, which must be
drying, her Bread must be well baked and levened, dried Raisins, parched
Almonds, Asparagus, roasted Flesh, and small Birds. Before meat she may take a
little Honey of Roses upon a wafer-cake. For her drink, let it be the decoction
of Aniseeds, China-roots, Sassafras, and Sarsaparil. If the retention of the
Flowers be the cause of this evil, let her then use rather boiled than roasted
meats, and then let her boil them with Sage, Bettony and Hysop. All meats made
of Milk are dangerous, as also sleep after dinner, and unleavened bread.

You may in the next place, use things to divert the humor, as Frictions, and
Baths. If her Flowers are suppressed, let a vein be opened in the Feet. Next
after you have prepared the humor by the use of Syrups, as those of Mint,
Wormwood, Hysop, Liquorish, Maidenhair, Honey of Roses, with Fennel-water, water
of Hysop, Marjoram, Rosemary, Betony, Mint, then may you use some Purges with
those Pills, called Sine quibus, Agarick Pills, and Cochy Pills. If the Patient
be strong, and not to be worked upon by weak Physic, you may then add two or
three grains of Diagridium, or of Troches of Alhandal; these Pills are to be
used for eight days, half a dram at a time. Another way may be by Topics, to
attenuate and resolve; for which purpose the Fomentations specified in the
foregoing Chapters, may be very fitly used, being prepared with Vine-ashes, or
Figtree-ashes, whereto a little Vinegar may be put; though the use of things
that drive back the humor are not here to be used; you may also rub and chafe
the Breast with this Ointment. Take of Oil of sweet-almonds, Oil of Line-seed,
of each one ounce, Ganders-grease of each half an ounce, a little Diachylon
instead of Wax; a plaster of great Diachylon would not be amiss in this
Disease; if the Woman feel any pain, or heat in her Breasts, let her anoint
them with Oil of Roses, a little burnt-lead, and a little white wax, or with a
little Oleum Omphacinum, and Oil of sweet almonds tempered together in a
Mortar. In the dispersing and resolving of the humor, you may use baths of
Alum and Sulphur prepared with the decoction of Hysop, Mint, and Sage, and
after that such Ointments as are most approved for the same purpose, always
taking heed of too boisterous Remedies. If you would suppurate, or mature the
swelling, you must use such Remedies as we have described in the following and
foregoing Chapters; the strongest of which you may here apply, because the
matter is more obstinate and tenacious, mingling with them, for that purpose,
other more effective Remedies, as are the roots of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Lillies, Figs, goose-grease, and the like; when the sore is opened, you must
tend it after the same manner, as is before rehearsed. There are other
Remedies, either to be taken inwardly, or to be outwardly applied, which serve
to fortify and comfort the Stomach, as to take every morning a spoonful of
Conserve of Rosemary, preserved Orange, or Trochisques of Aromaticum Rosatum,
Diagalanga, or Diacuminum.

Of the Kernels in the Breasts.
THE Kernels of the Breast are little round Bodies soft and thin like a sponge,
which sometimes grow hard by reason of the phlegmy humor which is sometimes
purely so, and sometimes is mingled with other sharp and acrimonious humors:
But sometimes it comes to pass, that not only the kernels of the Breast are
swollen, but also that there do grow others which ought not to be there, which
may not unfitly be termed a kind of King's Evil, being a swelling which proceeds
of thick phlegm, or else of a thick mattry blood hardened under the skin; they
are caused many times by the detention of the flowers, the blood oftentimes
mounting up into the Breast.

The Cure of these is undertaken two ways; by softning the hard tumor, and
preventing the Cancer; and then also a strict diet is to be observed, which
must be moderately attenuating, and by keeping themselves warm, which is
performed by moderate exercise before meals, as also by using sulphury baths;
but full diet, ease, idleness, and meats of hard digestion are very dangerous;
and indeed in all respects besides, the cure is the same as is set down in the
foregoing Chapter. but if the kernel be swelled up with a sharp tumor, those
topics are to be used that are prescribed also in the foregoing Chapter, only
in case the fluxion remain any time, you may mingle those things which do a
little more refresh; such are oil of Roses, and oil of Violets; when the flux
of humors ceases, you may then add oil of Camomile, and Lillies, and other
such like things, to dissolve and dissipate the humor. If you find that this
kernel is become a kind of King's Evil, you must then use stronger Medicines;
adding to the forementioned purgation, a dram and a half of the root of
Mechoacan, or three drams of Diaturbith. For topics you may use such as do
soften and dispel, but such as are stronger than these, we have expressed in
the former Chapter. You must at length, when all other ways do fail, use the
operation of the hand to take away the root of the disease; but this is not to
be done, 'till you have used all other means to soften and dispell the humor,
which may perhaps be done by the use of Diachylon, or by a plaster of melilot,
to which you may add half an ounce of Ammoniach, an ounce of Oly of Lillies,
and an ounce and an half of the root of Flower-deluce of Florence. Neither may
this following Plaster be amiss: Take of the roots of Marshmallows two
ounces, boil them and strain them, and add to that Oil of Lillies,
Ganders-grease, of each an ounce, burnt Lead, and roots of Orrice, of each an
ounce and an half; mingle all these together, and make of them an Emplaister:
If this avail not, the operation of the Hand must be used, in which the skill
of the Surgeon must be very able, and ready.

Of the Scirrhus of the Breasts.
THE Scirrhus of the Breasts is a hard swelling without pain: Of this there are
two kinds, the one engendered of a Melancholy, and produced by a feculent and
gross blood, or else from a thick Phlegm; now this exquisite Scirrhus is without
pain, in which it differs from the other: The other is not so exquisite an
hardness, perhaps because it is not yet come to its full maturity, or else
because it has certain other humors mixed with it. This exquisite kind of
Scirrhus is engendered, either because the Spleen is obstructed, and cannot
purge away the melancholy Blood, which for that reason abounding in the Body,
discharges and empties it self upon the Breasts; or by reason of the supression
of the Courses, which causes the feculent and gross humor to disgorge it self
upon the Breast, gathering together in the Veins and Flesh of the same. Many
times the ignorance of the Surgeon is the cause of it, when they apply an
unreasonable company of refrigerating Medicines to the inflammations of the
Breast, or too many resolving and heating Medicines to it, in case the Breasts
be over-hard. This Scirrhus is known by its hardness without pain, from the
unevenness of the Body, and the color of the part either inclining to black or
brown. Now though the cure of these hardnesses be something difficult, yet is
there great hopes that they may be overcome; which is to be done two ways, by
mollifying diligently that which is hard, and by taking that away which remains
hard and knotty in the Breast. And first of all, care is to be had to keep good
order of diet; to which purpose she must use Wheaten bread, rear Eggs, Pullets
Capons, Partridge, Veal and Mutton, which must be boiled with Spinach. Bugloss
and Borage; she must abstain from Beef, Venison, Hares-flesh and Brawn, from
Pease and Beans, and unlevened Bread, from all Salt and Smoaked Meats; as also
from all things that have a sharp biting quality; also she must abstain from
all care and sadness, immoderate exercise and going in the Winds. If the
monthly Courses be stopped, you must seek to provoke them gently, which may be
done by letting Blood in the Foot, or to let blood with Horse-leeches: In the
next place, it will not be amiss to purge well with Sena, and Rheubarb, to
which you may add Catholicon, or Triphera Persica, if you find that the Disease
needs a more strong purgation. Between every purge it will not be amiss to take
good Cordial and Comfortable things, as Confection of Alkermes, Triasantalon,
Electuarium de gemmis, conserve of the Roots of Borage, Conserve of
Orange-flowers. You may after all this use Topics, that is to say, such
Medicines as heat and dry moderately, being hot in the second degree, and dry
in the first; such are Sheeps grease, especially that greasy substance that
grows upon the flank of a Sheep; Wax, Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of Camomile,
Oil of Dill, Capons-grease, Goose-grease, Hog's Grease, Bears-grease, etc.
Veal-marrow, Deers-marrow, Emulsions of Mallows, Lillies, and other things of
more force: As liquid-pitch. Liquid Storax, Galbanum, Cummin-seed, Rue-seed,
Broom-flowers, and Dill-seed. If this swelling come of a hard Phlegm, which is
known because it yields not so much to the touch as the other; you must use the
same Topics to this, as to the watery tumor before rehearsed. If melancholy be
the cause of it, you may use a Fomentation of the leaves of Mallows, and
Marshmallows, of each a handful and a half, of Fenugreek and Lineseed, of each
two drams, Cucumbers, Bears-foot, of each two ounces; boil them in as much
water as is sufficient, and Foment the breast with this twice or thrice a day
After that, take this Ointment: Take of the root of Mallows one ounce, when it
is boiled and bruised, take it out, and add to it Sheeps grease, and
Capons-grease of each two ounces, and with a little Wax make an Ointment: This
you may use for some few days, after which you may, if need require, use this
Ointment: Take Hysop-leaves, Dill-leaves, and Thyme-leaves, of each half a
handful; roots of Mallows, and Fenugreek-seed, of each half an ounce, boil them
in as much Wine and Vinegar as is sufficient, 'till half be boiled away; then
take of the aforesaid Vinegar, Goose-grease, Ducks-grease, and the marrow of
the leg of a Heart, of each two ounces, boil it to the Consumption of half the
Vinegar: You may add to this two drams of Diachylon, and make it into the form
of a Plaster: You may also use for this purpose plasters of Melilot, or
Oxycroceum. At length, if all remedies fail, the operation of the hand must be
the last succor, which we leave to the Surgeon.

In the Cure of a Scirrhus three intentions are required, the first is the
regulation of Diet, and manner of living; the second is the preparing and
evacuating the antecedent or peccant Humor, the third is the application of
external Medicines; in order to the first, the Air ought to be clear and
temperately hot and moist, their Food such as may breed good blood, as new laid
Eggs, Chicken Pullets, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Kid, and these boiled with Spinach,
Borrage, Endive Succory, Lettice, Sorrel, and the like, their Bread ought to be
of good Wheat, and well baked, their Drink a well boi^ed small Ale, or small
white Wine, Rhenish or the like, their exercise and sleep must be moderate,
their minds must be cheerful* and their bodies soluble by Glisters, or
otherwise. The second intention is the evacuation of the Humor, which abounds
in the Body, whether phlegm, or Melancholy be the cause of the Scirrhus or
whether it proceeds from obstructions of the Courses, or a suppression of the
Hemorrhoids; if from any of these causes blood abounds, and be feculent,
bleeding is allowed, but if Blood do not abound, forbear bleeding, and proceed
in preparing and evacuating the humors; the Ancients used for preparatives the
Syrrups of the juice of Borrage, Bugloss, of Hops, of Apples, and the Bizantine
Syrup, and the like, and also the destill'd waters of the same Plants or Whey
The following are also used, Gerion's decoction of Senna, the decoction of
Dodder of Time, also the decoctions of Cassia, Tamarinds and the like, with the
purging Syrup of Apples. These Humors being tough, require frequent purging,
but the Purges must not be strong. After evacuations, you must endeavor
revulsion to contrary parts by Frictions, Cupping, Issues, and the like; for
obstructions of the Hemorrhoid, Leeches may be applied; and in a suppression of
the Courses, a Vein may be opened in the Leg or Arm. The third intention is
performed in treating the Humor it self, in doing which, these directions are
to be followed: First, you must not use repe^^ents, for cold and tough Humors,
whereof these Swellings consist, cannot return back as hot humors, but do
increase thereby. In the next place you ought to be cautious in the use of
Emollients alone; for thereby they are frequently exasperated, and end in
Cancers. You ought also to forbear the use of strong Discutients, lest thereby
you resolve the serous thin humors, and convert the thicker part into a more
solid substance; therefore you are to consider well the habit of the body, and
whether the Scirrhus be old or new. As to the habit of the Body, young People,
and such as live effeminately must be treated with milder resolvents than those
who live a laborious life. So also a new Scirrhus, whilst it is increasing,
requires milder applications than the confirmed and inveterate one, the milder
resolvents are fresh Butter, Hens-grease, oil of sweet Almonds and Lillies,
Ducks and Goose-grease, the Suet of a Calf, a Goat, Cow, old Lard, the roots of
Marshmallows, Lillies, and the like; the stronger are the roots of wild
Cucumber, Briony, Solamons seal, Orris, Shippitch, Liquid-pitch, Turpentine,
Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Opoponax, and the like. Vinegar, by reason of
its penetrative quality, is properly mixed with other Medicines to dissolve
thick humors. For Fomentations use the following

Take of the roots of Marshmallows and Lillies, each four ounces, of the roots
of wild Cucumber two ounces, of the tops of Hemlock two handfuls, of the tops
of Marjoram one handful, of the flowers of Melilot and Elder, each one Pugil,
of the seeds of Flax, Fenugreek and Marshmallows each one ounce, boil them in
a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water, to the strained liquor add a little
Vinegar.

In soft Bodies when the Scirrhous is new.

Take of the roots of Marshmallows half a pound, of the roots of Lillies three
ounces, of the seeds of Flax and Fenugreek each one ounce, boil them in Broth
made of the feet and head of a Sheep, then beat them and pulp them through a
Sive, and add to them of the oil of Camomile and Lillies each two ounces, of
Oesypus one ounce and an half, of simple Diachylon Plaster dissolved in oil of
Lillies three ounces, with a sufficient quantity of white wax make a Cerate.

In dry bodies, where the Scirrhous is more confirmed, a fume of Vinegar, or of
Spirit of Wine sprinkled upon a hot stone, are of excellent use for resolving
these tumors; afterward you must chafe the part, and apply the following.

Take of Galbanum, Ammoniacum, and Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar, and of liquid
Storax, each one ounce, of great Diachylon two ounces, of oil of Lillies, and
Goose grease, each one ounce; of the cerate of Oesypus two ounces, melt them
all together, and with white wax make a soft Cerate.

If by the use of these Medicines, the Scirrhus tend to suppuration, it must be
treated accordingly; but be careful you be not deceived, and the suppuration
prove false, and end in a Cancer.

A Gentlewoman of a full body having been long diseased by an immoderate flux
of the Courses, and subject to a Cough, and shortness of breath, and the like,
at length recovered her Health by the prescriptions of her Physician, and
enjoyed it the space of a year, but was afterward seized with a straitness and
pain in her right Breast, which increased much with inflammation. At first sight
it seemed to be a confirmed Cancer fixed to the ribs. but upon more mature
deliberation, and handling of it, the Surgeon found the Disease was in the
skin, and that the Glands and Musculous flesh underneath were not hard, or
otherwise affected, than as they were bound in by the intense hardness of the
skin, which kept them immovable; from that uneasiness an Erisypelas was
raised, which overspread the skin of the Breast, and parts about with great
heat. The Surgeon supposed the hardness proceeded from a concretion of the
nutritious juices, he applied over the parts affected, Galen's Cerate, to
repress the heat, and supplied her with Medicines to dress her self, that she
might according to her desire, return to her house in the Country, where she
was let blood, and purged with Manna, and Cream of Tartar, dissolved in Whey;
and she was afterward purged with Epsom waters. But after all, growing more
indisposed, she returned to London at which time her Breast was inflamed, and
excoriated and several hard Tubercles were upon the skin, that gleeted much;
the Scirrhus was also spread up that side of the neck by the Mastoide Muscle,
to the bone of the shoulder, and Scapula, and so under that arm-pit, and down
that side; some of the excoriations were dressed with Vigo's Ointment of Tutty,
and others with Pledgets dipped in this following Lotion.

Take of Frog spawn-water one pint, of the seeds of Quinces two drams, of the
seeds of Plantain one dr^m, infuse them hot twenty four hours; to the strained
liquor add of the white Troches of Rhasis powdered one dram, of Sugar of Saturn
half a Scruple.

Over all was applied some of the following Cerate.

Take of the Muscilage of the seeds of Quinces, and Fleabane extracted in
Night-shade-water, each four ounces, Unguentum-nutritum three ounces, Populeon
Ointment six ounces, with a sufficient quantity of white wax make a Cerate.

Thus the Inflammation remitted, and the Excoriations were healed in some
places, and checked in others. Many inward Remedies were also prescribed, viz.
Emulsions, Cordials, and the like, according to the accidents which hapened;
but the Scirrhus still spreading, overran the other Breast, and side of the
neck, and in a few weeks made her neck stiff and immovable, and by reason of
the compression which was made in the arm-pit, and about the shoulder, there
was a stagnation of the humors, and the arm swelled to the fingers ends. The
arm was fomented with a decoction of the leaves and roots of Marsh mallows, of
the leaves of Violets, Plantain, Nightshade, Willow, Ducks-meat, of the
flowers of Camomile and Melilot, of the seeds of Flax and Fenugreek, and
Embrocations, Cerates, Emollients and Resolvents were used to succor the
parts; but all this while she was afflicted, either with the Colic, a
Looseness or Vomiting, Mercurius dulcis was also used inwardly to carry off the
matter, and Mercurial Ointments outwardly, and the Surgeon would have Salivated
her, if she would have permitted. The Scirrhus seized on both sides of her
neck, her shoulders, arms, breasts, and sides, and began to invade the skin of
her loins and hips, yet she was not sick or pained, but eat her dinner well;
she at length grew weary of Medicine, and with patience endured the remaining
accidents of her disease, 'till it kill^d her. She was seized with this
Scirrhus in May, and died the August following.

Of the Cancer in the Breast.
THE Cancer is a venomous tumor, hard, and very much swelled, hot, and
durable, more exasperated oftentimes by remedies than assuaged. The Cancer
proceeds from a feculent and gross humor, which being gathered together in the
spleen, is chased away from thence after it grows too hot; which when Nature
cannot void, it most commonly in Women empties it self upon the Breasts, by
reason of their cavernous and spongy nature: the matter of it is a hot
melancholy blood, and it is known by the crooked windings, and retored veins
that are about it, stretching out long roots a good way from it, being
sometimes blackish, and sometimes inclined to black and blue* It is soft to see
to, but it is very hard to the touch, extending the pain as far as the
shoulders. It will sometimes remain for two years together, no bigger than a
Bean; afterward it grows to be as big as a Nut, then to the bigness of an Egg;
and after that increasing to a larger size. When the skin breaks, there issues
out a great deal of pestilent matter, thin, and blackish, and having a very bad
smell. The Ulcer it it self is very unequal, the lips and orifice thereof being
swelled with hardness, and inverted; a light Fever possesses the body, and
often swoonings. And many times the pestilency of the humor having corroded a
Vein, there issues out a great deal of blood. If the Cancer be ulcerated, or in
any inward part of the body, no Medicine can prevail; for remedies do more
exasperate than help it. To burn it with Iron is pestilent, and if it be cut
with a Pen knife, it returns again as soon as it is but skin^d over. But if it
be an exulcerated Cancer (which is easily known) and arises from a more sharp
matter, for then the flesh is corrupted, sending forth a very noysom matter,
being very irksom to the sight, and accompanied with a gentle Fever, and
swooning, and issuing out of blood;) The cure of this is to be done by drying
and refrigerating Medicines, or by incision to the quick, and expression of the
corrupted blood afterward; after which the wound must be well cleansed; For
which purpose the powder which is called Hartman's blessed Powder, is very
prevalent. The diet must be of meats that moisten and refrigerate; blood
letting also is profitable, as also preparation of the Humor, with the juice
of sweet smelling Apples, and extract of Ellebore, and often purgation with
Lapis Lazuli pills; and particularly if the Cancer be not ulcerated, you may
apply this Ointment. Take Litharge one ounce, beat it in a marble Mortar with a
leaden Pestle, incorporating into it two ounces of Rose Water and Oil of Roses.
In case the pain be great, use this remedy, Take white Poppyseed one ounce, Oil
of Roses four ounces, Henbane seed and Opium, of each a dram and a half; Gum
Arabic half an ounce, a little Wax, of which you may make an ointment. If the
Cancer be already ulcerated, take this water: Take of the juyces of
Nightshade, Housleek, Sorrel, Scabious, Honey-sucles, Mullein, Figwo^t,
Dropwort, Plantain, Toads flax, Agrimony, of each half a pound, juice of green
Olives one pint, the Flesh of Frogs, and River-Crabs, of each a pound and a
half, the whites of six Eggs, Alum three ounces; Camphire one dram; let all
these be distilled in a leaden Limbeck, and with the distilled water foment the
part affected. Take also Alum as much as a Nut, Honey two penniworth, red Wine
a pint, sees them together 'till the fifth part be spent, strein it through a
cloth, and wash the Cancer therewith.

A Woman having a pain in her Breast, advised with a Surgeon, who felt one of
the Glands swelled; he advised her to forbear handling it, and to forbear
lacing her self too strait It lay some Years quiet; but then the death of her
Husband happening, and one affliction following another, and the Courses
stopping, the humors ^omented in this Gland, and afterward the breast
swelled, and seem^d to apostumate. Some assured her, it was a simple
aposthumation, and required digestives, and she was persuaded to follow their
advice, 'till she became extremely pained. It was without inflammation, but
swelled very big, and seemed to be full of matter; it was not without hard
tubercles, and other symptoms to show it would end in a Cancer, whenever it
should break; therefore a skilful Surgeon refused to open it, but advised the
best he could to give her ease, and promised to come to her, if after it brake
she would send for him. Some Months after she sent for him, and showed him a
great quantity of curdled matter newly burst forth; the Breast was lank, but
very hard Glands lay within, and in the circumference of the tumor, there were
some tubercles that required to be eradicated; to which purpose, he designed to
have slit open the abscess, and to have pulled away the Cancerated Glands, but
she would not permit him so much as to enlarge the orifice; upon which
consideration he left her, and she died within half a year after.

Of the greatness of the Breasts.
THE greatness of the Breasts is very unsightly, the cause of their greatness
is often handling of them, store of windy Vapors, and retention of the monthly
Courses; The cure of them is not to be neglected, because the lesser the
Breasts be, the less subject they are to be cancered; they are cured by diet
first, wherein the use of astringent meats is to be recommended, so that they
be not windy by repercussion of the humors and blood which flow to that part,
such are the juice of Hemlock, and the anointing of the place with Partridge
Eggs: Or you may use this following Cataplasm; Take of the juice of Hemlock,
three ounces, of white lead, Acacia, and Frankincense, of each three drams, of
Vinegar one ounce, mingle all these together, to which you may add powder of
Sponge, burnt Alum, burnt Lead, bole Armoniack, and of these with a sufficient
quantity of Wax and oil of Myrtle, make a very profitable Ointment. Thirdly, by
the discussion of that which is gathered together in that part; for which
purpose you may make an Ointment in this manner; take of the mud or lome, found
in molis Tonsorum, two ounces; Oil of Myrtle one ounce, Vinegar half an ounce;
or thus, take of the same lome and Bole Armoniack, of each an ounce, white Lead
two drams, Oil of Mastick two ounces and a half, of the Emulsion of Henbaneseed
one dram and a half, anoint the Breast with this, and then upon that put a
linen cloth dipped in the deco^tion of Oke-apples. Fourthly, by compression of
the part, which is done by using a kind of plate of Lead upon the Breast
anointed within side with Oil of Henbane-seed.

Of the defect, abundance, and coagulation of the Milk.
THE defect of Milk arises from a double cause; for either it is a defect in
the blood, which is dried up by reason of some hot maladies of the body, either
through intemperancy of the Liver through fasting, or too much evacuation. If
the deficiency of milk come from these causes, it may be increased again,
either by prepared Crystal; The leaves also, root and seed of Fennel do avail
much in this particular, and the powder of Earthworms prepared and drunk in
Wine, as also the Electuary called Electuarium Zacuthi. There is another cause
which proceeds from the Lactifying quality, which is many times so weak, that
it can neither attract nor concoct the Blood, by reason of some outward
refrigerating, and astringent qualities, or by reason of some other Diseases.
The Cure of which being looked after in their respective places, much conduces
to the restoring of that defect. The redundance of milk proceeds from too great
a plenty of blood, and a strong lactifying quality. In the cure of which the
increase of blood is to be impeded, which is done by drying up that humor, and
diversion; to which blood-letting conduces much: Medicines also that drive it
back are to be put upon the Breasts toward the Arms; to which purpose Hemlock
boiled in Chervil-water and Vinegar avails.

Curdling of the milk is when the thinner part of the milk exhales, and the
more gross and heavy part stays behind, which many times is the cause of
tumors, kernels, and Aposthumes. In this case the Infant is not to suck the
part affected; though that Breast is also to be sucked for fear, lest the milk
which is newly generated, should be curdled and knotted by that which is there
already; and so that part of the coagulated milk may be hindered from
putrefying. To the dissolving of the Milk it much conduces to wash the Breast
with Water, Wine, and Vinegar mixed together; as also a Fomentation made of the
decoction of Marshmallows, Fenugreek, and Melilote, and then anointing them
with a liniment of Oil of Roses, Oil of sweet Almonds, juice of Parsley and
Vinegar, wherein let the Gall of a Hare be first dissolved. Hemlock water in
this case also is not a little commended.

Of the Diseases of the neck of the Womb, and first of the Disease called
Tentigo.
TENTIGO is a Disease in Women, when the Clitoris increases to an over great
measure; the subject of this Disease is the Clytoris, or nervous piece of
flesh, which the lips or wings of the privities do embrace, and which suffers
erection in the act of Venery: The signs of it are evident, for it hangs below
the orifice of the Privities as big as the neck of a Goose: The causes hereof
are a great concourse of Humors, or nutriment, by reason of the laxity of it,
which happens by often handling. The Cure is performed by the diminution of the
blood, and drawing out of the other humors. A slender and refrigerating diet
is also necessary, and such things as have a discussive faculty, as the leaves
of Mastick-tree, and the leaves of Olive Tree. In the next place, by taking
away the excrescence, to which purpose gentle Causticks may be first applied,
as Alum, and the Aegyptiack Ointment, and that Lie whereof Soap is made, being
boiled with Roman Vitriol, to which at last you may add some Opium, and form
the composition into Trochisques, which being afterward made into a powder, is
to be sprinkled upon the fleshy excrescence: At length the flesh is to be out
away, either by binding hard, or by section; care being taken that you avoid an
inflammation.

There is another Disease, which is called Cauda, which is a carnous substance
proceeding from the mouth of the Womb, which sometimes fills up the privy
parts, and sometimes thrusts it self outward like a tail. The Cure of this is
the same with the former; only if it come to Section, it may be done either
with a Horse-hair, or a silken thread wound about it, being first dipped in
Sublimat water; or else with a Knife.

Of the narrowness of the neck of the Womb.
THIS narrowness is either of the Womb it self, or of the Orifice of the Womb;
the signs are the stoppage of the Courses, followed with a depressing and
weighty pain. The cause is partly natural from the Nativity, and partly varies
according to the differences of the Disease: The difference is in this, it
happening sometimes that this streightness consists in the exterior orifice,
whereby neither the Flowers have free passage, neither can she enjoy coition,
or conceive with Child, because she cannot receive either the Man or the Seed.
Sometimes the narrowness is in the interior orifice of the Womb, into which the
flowing retires back again, to the absolute hindrance of Conception; sometimes
it is occasioned by way of compression, when the Caul being fatter than
ordinary, lies upon the neck of the Womb. Sometimes the splaying of the thighs
stone in the Bladder, or some tumor in the straight gut. Sometimes it happens
by the clinging of other parts together which happens either from the Birth,
and then either the Flesh which appears red, and is soft to the touch,
intercepts the passage; or else the Membrane which seems, white feels hard
being touched. In the Cure of this, the use of moist Fomentations is very
prevalent, and an insection is to be made perpendicularly; great care being
taken for fear of hurting the neck of the Bladder. The Humor is next to be
provoked forth, and a Tent dipped in some suppurating Plaster is to be put up;
the next day it is to be washed with water and Honey, and cicatrizing Plasters
to be applied; if it come after the Birth, it is either occasion^d by an Ulcer,
and then either the sides of the neck cling together, in which case either
incision, or cauterization is to be used; or else there is a brawny substance
which is to be cut away with a Penknife; or else some spongy and luxuriant
flesh, in which case drying and d^^cu^^ng Medicines ^re to be used, as
Birthwort, Frankincens^ Myrrh, and Mastick, afterward you may apply things to
eat it away; and last of all to cut it away by incision.

Of Wheals, Condyloma's of the Womb, and of the Hemorrhoids.
THE Wheals of the Womb are certain risings in the neck of the womb, which by
their acrimony excite both pain and itching. The signs of them are an itching
pain, and full of scurf from that part, for the better searching of which, the
Instrument called speculum Matricis is to be used. The Causes of this are,
certain choleric, sharp, and adust humors, and thick. Among the preparing
Medicines, Syrup of Fumitory is much commended, and Chichory with a decoction
of Lupines. Topics also are useful that discuss and mitigate the humor, as
Baths, and insessions, and the washing of the place with Wine and Nitre, which
is often to be used. These Wheals are divided into gentle, and venomous, which
are said to be contagious; they are to be washed in a water thus made. Take of
Aloes the quantity of a Pea; of the flower of brass the quantity of half a Pea,
powder these, and mingle them in an ounce of white wind, Plantain-water, and
Rose Water, of each an ounce, which is to be kept in a glass vessel.

Condyloma's are certain swelling wrinckles in the neck of the Womb, with pain
and heat. There is no need to tell the signs of these, for they are apparent to
the eye; the wrinkles are like those which appear in the hand when you close
the first; but are much bigger when the courses flow: they are caused by adust
and thick humors; some of these are with an inflammation, which have more pain
and heat, and the swelling is hard: In the cure of which, you must use
insessions, and fomentations that ease pain; sometimes they come without any
inflammation, which if they be new come are to be dried up; if they be old,
they are first to be softened afterward to be digested and dried up; for which
purpose you may use powder of Egg-shels burnt, or this Ointment: Take of the
Trochisques of Steel one dram powdered, mixed with a little Oil of Roses and
Wax, with half an ounce of the juice of Mullein; if this profit not, the Warts
are to be shaved away with a knife, and an astringent powder laid upon them.

Hemorrhoids of the Womb are little protuberancies like those of the Fundament,
produced in the neck of the Womb, through the abundance of feculent blood; the
subject is the neck of the Womb, for where the Veins end, there do grow these
extuberancies, just as in the Hemorrhoids.

The signs are evident, and easily seen by the help of the Speculum Matricis:
The women who are thus affected look pale, and are troubled with a weariness.

The cause is a feculent blood, which flowing to these Veins before its season,
and settling there, grows thicker, so that it cannot pierce the orifice of the
Veins. They are cured by a revulsion of the humor; First, by letting blood in
the Arm. Secondly, by drawing it to another part, as by letting blood in the
heel. Sometimes these Hemorrhoids are very painful, and are distinguished from
that menstruous effluxion, by the pain which they bring: they are cured by
mittigating and asswaging in^e^^ions, ^s also by Opiates carefully applied.
Others are without pain, to which the foresaid remedies may be applied

Others are open, and do sometim^s run moderately (and then Nature is to be ^et
alon^) or violent^y, so that thereby the strength of the person is impaired, in
which case a Vein must be opened in the arm, two or three times, purgation is
also to be used by Myrobolans, Tamarind, and Rheubarb; and at length you must
apply those things which cease the blood.

Others are termed blind, out of which there issues no blood; they are cured by
blood-letting; the part is to be also softened and fomented with things that
soften and open the orifices of the Veins, and dispel the humor; such are an
Ointment made of the pith of Coloquintida, and Oil of sweet Almonds, or the
juice of Capers mixed with Aloes; neither is the applying of Horseleaches amiss.

The Cure of these Excrescences at their first budding forth, may be attempted
by drying and astringent Medicines, as with the tops of Brambles and
Horse-tail, with the Leaves and Berries of Myrtles and Sumach, with the rind of
Pomgranats, Balaustins, scales of Brass, washed Lime, Allom, and the like, made
into fomentations, or powdered and mixed with Ointments, and applied upon Tow.
If these do not check their growth, you may cut them off with a Knife, or
Scizers, and consume the remaining roots by Escharoticks, or actual Cautery,
and then proceed in the cure by digestion, and Epuloticks accordingly. To
prevent their growing again, Authors commend the ashes of Vine and Bean-stalks
mixed with Vinegar, to apply upon the part.

The Cure of Chaps or Fissures consists in removing the Callosity, and
Cicatrizing them smooth; if moisture abound, things that are dry must be used.
To which purpose,

Take of the flowers of Red-Roses, of Myrtle-Berries, of the tops of Brambles,
each one handful; of the roots of Tormentil and Bistort, each one ounce; of
Allom one dram, boil them in a pint and an half of Steel-water; toward the end
of boiling, add four ounces of red wine, wherewith foment the part, then apply
what follows.

Take of Litharge and Ceruse, each three drams, of Sarcocoal, Mastick, and
Frankincense, each one Scruple, of Sealed-earth two Scruples, of Oil of Roses
four ounces, of Wax a sufficient quantity, mingle them over the fire, then beat
them in a leaden Mortar for use.

If dryness be the fault, you must dress them with Medicines that are
moistening; as,

Take of Calves fat, of Ducks and Hens-grease, each two drams, of Litharge of
Gold one dram, mingle them in a leaden Mortar, according to art.

The material cause of all these sorts of Excrescences, is flegmatic or gross
clammy blood thrust forth, by the strength of the expulsive faculty, out of the
Pores of the skin, and dried up into these forms in which you see them. All
these species of Excrescences, are for the most part Symptoms of the French Pox.

Of the Ulcers of the neck of the Womb.
THE signs of these Ulcers is a pain, and perpetual twinging, which increases,
if any thing that has an abstersive quality be cast in; the issuing out of
putrid humors, and matter with blood, if the Ulcer be great, or the Flowers
come down; often making water, and the water hot; as also a pain in the
forepart of the head toward the roots of the eyes; as also some kind of gentle
Fever.

The Cure of this is hard, because of its being in a place of so exquisite
sense, and moist, and having such a sympathy with other parts of the Body: For
the easing of the pain, Chalybeated milk is very much conducing; and to the
drying of them up, drying baths are the best and most prevalent remedy. These
differ much, coming either from external causes, as rash Physic, hard labors,
and violent coiture; or from internal causes, as the corruption of the
Secondines, the Courses retained, and the Urine flux, a virulent Gonorrhea the
Pox, inflammations turned into Apostems, humors flowing from other parts of the
body, and there settling; all which must be duly considered in the Cure. Others
are in the outward part, and may be easily come at with Medicines; others deep,
and must be come at only with injection; for which purpose, use this following.

Take whites of four Eggs, beat them well, and put to them an equal quantity of
Rose water, and Plantain-water, as much in quantity as they come to, C^mphire,
Ceruse, Litharge of Gold, and Bole-Armoni^ck of each a like quantity, green
Copperas, half as much as of any of them, beat all to powder, mix it, and
strain it through a cloth, and make your injection 'till the part infected be
whole; and if there be any pain, sometimes inject a little new warm milk.

Others are more gentle, with a little stinking matter flowing from them. For
the cure of which, gentle abstersives are profitable, as Honey of Roses with
Barly-water, Whey with Sugar, and the decoction of Lentiles: after these,
gentle astringents must be applied. Others are sordid, with much matter slowing
from them: In which case stronger Medicines must be applied. Others do eat into
the Flesh, having a colored, green, and stinking matter flowing from them. For
the cleansing of which, Aloes and Wormwood are very much commended, or the
foresaid injection.

There are another sort of Ulcers, little and long, which eat the skin of the
neck of the Womb; they are known by the pain and blood which they produce
immediately after congression; they are seen also by looking into the neck of
the Womb, being much like chilblains that come upon the hands in Winter time.
They are caused diverse ways, either by a difficult Lying in, or by a violent
coiture, and cured by an astringent Clyster: or they are produced by some
Inflammation, or Flux of sharp humors; Purgations are here needful, before
Topics be applied, among which is much commended the grease that fries out of
wooden ladles, much used in Kitchens being held to the fire; as also the
Ointment called Pomatum

The Cure of the Ulcer must be perform^d by stopping the defluction of acrid
humors, and by cleansing and conglutinating the Ulcer. And first, if the body
be Plethorick, or if the Ulcer be accompanied with an inflammation, a vein must
be opened in the arm, and bleeding must be repeated as often as there is danger
of a new Fluxion, especially at the time of the Courses, to lessen them, which
are wont to increase the matter of the Ulcer, and to promote the Flux of other
humors to the Womb. Purging is also very necessary to cleanse the body from ill
humors, but it ought to consist of gentle Catharticks, as of Sena, Rhubarb,
Tamarinds, Myrobalans, and the like; it must be often repeated, that the
vicious humors may be diverted; and this is of so great moment that a Noble
Matron was cured of an Ulcer of the Womb, by taking every day five ounces of a
decoction of Sena, dodder of Thyme, red Roses. Indian Myrobalans sweetened with
Sugar, and by injecting a cleansing decoction into the Womb.

If the Sick vomits easily, a Vomit is most useful; for it m^kes a revulsion of
the humors from the Womb, and the days the sick does not purge, a vulnerarary
decoction must be used a long while, made in the following manner.

Take of the leaves of Agrimony, Knot-grass, Burnet and Plaintain, each half an
handful, of the roots of China three drams, of Coriander-seed one dram, of
Raisins half an ounce, of red Sanders one Scruple, boil them in Chicken Broth,
strain it, let the sick take of it Morning and Evening.

If the Fever be violent, and if a great quantity of Sanies be evacuated, Whey
is very proper, half a pint or more being taken in a morning with a little
honey of Roses. If the Body begins to w^ste, and there is a Hectic Fever,
Asses milk must be taken with Sugar of Roses for a whole Month, Sudor^^^ks may
also do good to dry the Ulcer; and to drive the serous humor toward the habit
of the body, if the^e be no inflammation or hot intemperies, Turpen^ine washed
in some proper water for the Womb, as in Mugwort, or Feverfew-water, or in some
water proper for the Ulcer, taken with Sugar of Roses by intervals, cleanses
and heals the Ulcer, Pills of Bdellium taken daily, or every other day, are
also very good.

Take of Bdellium three drams, of Myrrh and Frankincense, each one dram, of
Sarc^coal, Amber, S^orax, and Myrobalans called Chebule, each one dr^m, of red
Coral two Scruples, with Syrup of Poppi^^, make a mass for Pills, to which,
when the pain is violent, may be added a little Opium. Troches of Al^^kengy
with Opium may be also used, when the pain is violent. The following powder is
also very e^^ectual to dry the Ulcer.

Take of Acatia, and Hypocistis, each one dram, of Dragons-blood, white Starch,
the roots of Pl^ntai^, and of round Birthwort, each half a dram, of Bole
Armoniack one dram, of Mastich and Sarcacoal, each half a dram of these make a
fine Powder. The Dose is one dram in Plantain^ or Rose Water, or in some
Chalybe^^ Water.

To cleanse, heal, and dry the Ulcer, various In^ections are prepared; but they
must not be used 'till the inflammation is taken off* and 'till the pain is
e^sed* and therefore upon account of the inflammation and acrimony, Emulsions
of the cold seeds, the whey of Goats Milk, or the Milk it self, or mixed with
the juice of Plantain, or Shepherd's-Purse, may be injected first If necessity
requires, a decoction of Poppy heads, and tops of Mallows may be injected. Some
Practitioners say, the Sick may be much relieved by injecting frequently warm
water.

The hot intemperies, and the pain being quieted, at least diminished, such
things must be used as cleanse, beginning with the gentle, as Whey with Sugar,
a d^coction of B^rly with Sugar, or honey of Roses; but simple Hydr^mel cleanses
more. A decoction will be a little stronger made with Barley, Lentils, Beans not
excorticated, of the leaves of Smallage, Plantain, and Pellitory a little honey
of Roses may be added. When the Ulcer is very sordid, the following decoction
may be used.

Take of the roots of Gentian, Rhaponticum, Zedoary, and round Birthwort, each
one ounce, of white Wine three pints, boil them to the consumption of a third
part; in the strained Liquor dissolve half a pound of Sugar, and keep it for
use.

If the Ulcer be very faetid, a little Aegyptiac Ointment may be added to the
decoction; when the Ulcer is well cleansed, you must use such things as dry and
consolidate.

Take of the Roots of Comfry, and Bistort, each one ounce, of the leaves of
Plantain, Horse-tail, Shepherds-purse, Sanicle, Mouse-ear, Milfoil, each one
handful, of red Roses half an handful; boil them in a measure of Water for an
injection. The following sarcotic powder may be added to it.

Take of the Roots of Orris, Birthwort, and Comfry, each half an Ounce, of
Myrrh one ounce, of Aloes three drams, make a Powder, whereof let half an ounce
be mingled with every injection.

Take of Turpentine washed in Plantain-water, two Drams, dissolve it with Honey
and the Yolk of an Egg, and mingle it with the injection. This is very
effectual, and is more so, if the Sarcotic Powder be also added.

Fumes must be used for deep Ulcers, for they penetrate to the bottom of the
Womb, and dry the Ulcers.

Take of Frankincense, Myrrh, Mastick, Gum of Juniper, Labdanum, each one
ounce, with a sufficient quantity of Turpentine, make troches for a fume.

When the Ulcer is very obstinate, Cinnabar must be added, which is of
excellent use. The Bath-waters have cured some Women, when all other Medicines
have bin ineffectual. After you have sufficiently cleansed the Ulcer, you must
apply a drying and cicatrizing Ointment. Take of Tutty washed half an ounce,
and of Litharge, Ceruse, and Sarcacoal, each two drams, of Oil and Wax a
sufficient quantity, make an Ointment. Sometimes the Ulcer penetrates the right
gut, and sometimes the bladder, which may be known by the matter evacuated by
those parts; if it flow by the right gut, lenitive, cleansing, and drying
Glisters must be injected; but if it flow from the Bladder, gentle and cooling
diuretics must be used, as an emulsion of the greater cold Seeds, Turpentine,
and the like. If the Ulcer turn to a Fistula, which chiefly happens, when it is
opened outwardly toward the Hip, though it may happen in the womb it self, or in
the neck of it. In this case we must consider, whether it be best to leave the
accustomed passage untouched, through which nature endeavors to evacuate various
Excrements, or to undertake the ^ure of it: But if that be thought most proper
for the sick, a Cure that is called palliative, must be instituted by purges
frequently-repeated, and by sweatlng twice a Year, and by cleansing and
strengthening injections, and by applying over a plaster of Diapalma, or the
like; but if there be any hopes of a Cure, the same Remedies must be used,
which are proper for other Fistula's. If the Ulcer be occasioned by the French
Pox, it cannot be cured without an universal Cure; in performing which, the
fumes of Cinnabar received through a Tunnel into the womb, are peculiarly proper.
Also the anointing the inner parts of the womb with a Mercurial Ointment

In all Ulcers of the womb if there be a troublesome itching about the neck, as
it frequently happens, by reason of a defluxion of an acid and Salt Humor to
the part, a pessary must be made to qualify it, dipped in the ointment of
Elecampane with Mercury, or in Aegyptiacum dissolved in Sea or Allom-water, or
in fresh Butter, wherein Quicksilver has been extinguished, to which must be
added Sulphur.

Of the Diseases of the Womb. Of the Womb being out of temper.
THE intemperance of the Womb is when it has lost its natural temper, and is
affected with a preternatural intemperancy arising both from inward and outward
causes. The one of these is hot, and is known by the woman's proneness to
Venery, by the small Flux of the Monthly Courses, by their adustness,
sharpness, inordinate, and difficult Flux. (Hence in process of time they are
very Hypochondriack) by early growing of the hairs about the Privities, by
redness of the Face, and dryness of the lips, and frequent pains of the head,
and abundance of choleric humors in the Body; it arises either at first from
the Birth, which causes Women to be Virago's, and to be barren; or after their
Nativity, from outward causes, as the use of hot things, overmuch Venery, and
such Medicines as bring the heat and blood to the Womb. The cure consists in a
contrary diet, and cooling Medicines, both internal and external, which are to
be applied to the back and sides; which must be very moderate, that the heat
which is necessary for Conception may not be weakened, and the cold and
membranous substance of the womb come to any harm; or lest the Vessels which
serve for the carrying away of the Courses should be thickened, and the Nerves
of the back and sides be any way mischieved.

The next way of cure is performed by evacuating Medicines, namely, Rheubarb
and solutive Syrup of Roses, Manna also profits much; the flower of Vitriol
of Venus and Mars, taken from three grains to six, and put in any proper Syrup,
purges the Womb.

There is another intemperancy which comes of cold, which is known by a lesser
proneness to Venery, and little pleasure taken in it, a settling in the Courses,
with a slimy and flegmy matter mixed, and an inordinate flowing of them by
reason of the plenty of Humors collected in the Womb, which causes
obstructions, by reason of abundance of windy vapors in the Womb, crudities
and watriness of the Seed, which causes it to flow without any pleasure, a pale
color in the Face: It arises from causes contrary to the former, it is cured
by contrary diet, by hot Medicines applied to the womb, among which the roots
of Birthwort, Clove-Gilliflowers, Angelica, and Eringo's, are very much
commended. The leaves also of Mercury, Balm, Dittany, Pennyroyal, Sage,
Rosemary, Mugwort, flowers of Centaury, Marigolds, Sage, Rosemary, Borage; and
sundry spices, as Nutmegs, Cubebs, Saffron and Cinnamon. These kind of Compounds
are also very useful, as Oil of Mace, Oil of Amber, Oil of Myrrh, and of
Cinnamon.

There is another intemperancy of the womb, which comes of moisture, and is
joined most commonly with the cold intemperancy: it is known by the plenty of
the Courses, and by the thinness and watriness of them; as also the moistness
of the Privities, by reason of the moistness of the Excrements; no pleasure in
the act of Venery, and proneness to abortion, by reason of the growth of the
Birth. It has the same original with the frigid intemperancy, and happens most
commonly to Women, who are lazy and sedentary: It is cured with the same
Medicines as the former; only this may be added, that a fume may be made of the
shavings of Ivory: And the decoction of Sage, being received into those parts
before supper, is very much commended. Baths of Sulphur do also profit much.

There is another distemper of the Womb, which is dry, which is discerned by
the want of Seed, and the defect of the Courses, by slowness to Venery, dryness
of the Mouth of the Womb, by a blackish color of the lower lip, which is
always chopped. It sometimes arises from the very Nativity, which causes a dry
and lean constitution of Body; sometime through age, and then Women cease to
bring Children; sometimes from inflammations and such like Diseases; sometimes
from a defect of blood, which ought to moisten the parts; which happens either
through a narrowness and obstruction of the Veins, or else because it being
voided out at the neck of the Womb, cannot pierce to the bottom. The cure of
this is performed first by a contrary diet, where you must also avoid much
labor, watching, hunger, and sadness. Secondly, by the use of moistning
things, amongst which are most commended, Borage, Bugloss, Mercury, Mallows,
Violets. Among outward means, Baths of sweet water, and unctions with Oil of
sweet Almonds, Oil of white Lillies, Hens-grease, and the marrow of Calves
legs. The cure is the more hard, if the dryness have been of any long
continuance.

There is another which is a compound distemper, which is most often cold and
moist, which is discerned by comparing the signs of the simple distemperatures
together. It arises from Flegmy humors: The cure is performed by preparing the
matter with hot things, by evacuation of the matter with such Medicines as are
most proper to purge Phlegm: As also by a particular purgation of the Womb it
self; to which purpose pessaries do very much conduce; as also sulphury and
drying baths; as also the use of Sudorificks, or things that provoke sweat may
be very profitable, as the decoctions of Lignum sanctum, China, Sarsaparella,
and Mastick wood.

Of the narrowness of the Vessels of the Womb.
THE signs of the narrowness of the vessels of the Womb, are partly the
retention of the Flowers so that they cannot flow, as also the hindrance of
conception, by reason that the passage of the blood is intercepted.

The causes are partly external, as from astringent baths and medicines, which
is known from the relation of the party affected; it is cured more easily by
moistning and mollifying Medicines.

The other causes are internal, as from Flesh, or Membrane, clinging to the
orifice of the Womb, or by a closing up of the orifices of the veins, by reason
of some violent extraction of the Secondines, which is commonly incurable; the
only cure which may be tried is by mollifying applications. Another cause is
deduced from obstruction, which arises from certain thick viscous and copious
humors flowing from other parts of the Body, the heat of those places not
being able to attenuate them; or else gather together in the Womb it self, by
reason of the weakness of the heat of that part; it is discerned by the same
signs as the cold Distemper, there being also a slimy matter which now and then
comes down from the Womb: It is cured as other obstructions, by sharp and
bitter Medicines, and steel-wine, as also baths made with opening and
mollifying things.

Sometime^ this narrowness arises from a compression of the parts, occasioned
either by some swelling or Schirrus, either within or without the Womb; if this
be, there do appear manifest signs of swelling: It is an evil for the most part
incurable; many times it is occasioned by an over-fatness of those parts, which
is plain to the sense.

Of the puffing up of the Womb.
THE puffing up of the Womb is a windy swelling of that part, occasioned from
cold, flegmy and flatulent matter, which is increased through the defect of
natural heat in the Womb. This is called the windy Mole, it giving hopes of a
conception. The signs of this, are a distention of the Womb not far from the
Midriff, which is now increased, now diminished; sometimes extending it self to
the Navel, sometimes to the Loins and Diaphragm. It differs from the Dropsy,
partly because the swelling is not so great, and the party affected is not much
troubled with thirst, by the increasing and diminishing of the tumor; and by
the upper part not being so lean.

It is distinguished from the Dropsy of the Womb by the fore apprehension of
the causes that beget those windy vapors, by the sound, and less ponderosity,
as as also by a feeling of an extensive and pricking pain in the womb, and
parts adjoining. It is also distinguished from the inflammation of the
intestines, because here is no great pain, neither is the Patient hard bound;
yet the Flowers are suppressed, and the feet and hollow of the eyes do swell,
and the color of the body is changed, the woman draws her breath short and is
sad, and when she awakes is fain to lift up her head to take breath. It differs
from a Mole, because there is not that heaviness and ponderosity in the womb;
besides the woman does not feel the burden of her womb tumble from one side to
the other: It is distinguished from conception by the sound, and by the
increasing and decreasing of the swelling, and by the deadness of the motion,
not unlike that of a dead Infant: for if the Midriff be violently compressed,
the wind being then compelled to the part adjoining, there is a kind of
palpitating motion perceived through all the Midriff.

The matter of this distemper is generated either in the Womb it self, or by
reason of the suppression of the Courses, or by the interception of due
purgation after delivery. Many times it comes through the veins and seminal
vessels. Now the weakness of the heat proceeds sometimes from the external air,
sometimes from hard Delivery, from the suppression of the Courses, from
abortion, etc. The Cure is performed after the same way that other Cures are
managed: among those things that purge, Species Hierae, and Diaphaenicon, with
Castor, are most commended; for Fumes, Nutmeg is counted the best; for Potions,
Nutmegs bruised and boiled with the roots of Mather, and drunk in six ounces of
wine, and two drams of Sugar. Sometimes this wind gets into the cavity of the
Womb, and then the neck and orifice of the Womb is closed, so that nothing can
go forth, when the woman is moved, or when the Midriff is pressed down with her
hand, and then a kind of noise and sound is perceived. Sometimes the wind gets
into the tunicles of the Womb, and then the mouth of the Womb may be open: by
reason of the shutting up of the windy vapors in a narrow place, there goes a
noise forth, and the pain grows greater, and extends farther. This is more hard
and difficult to be cured than that which is in the concavity of the Womb.

Of the inflammation of the Womb.
THE inflammation of the Womb is a swelling of the same through the
putrefaction of blood which is fallen down into its substance, having many
symptoms, and now tending to a Scirrhus, now toward an Apostem.

The signs are various; there is a swelling in the Womb with heat and pain, and
a retraction of the Womb to the more inward parts; the neck of the Womb appears
red, with little veins scattered up and down in it, like the web of a Spider.
There is sometimes a difficulty of breathing, with some kind of Pleurisy,
because the interior tunicle of the Womb being extended, which rises from, and
is joined to the Peritonaeum; the parts also to which that coheres, are
stretched.

The excrements of the belly and bladder are detained by reason of the heat and
dryness of the belly, and the compression of the passages. Sometimes the whole
body of the belly seems empty, or filled with water, and the Navel hangs
forward, and the mouth of the womb is made very slender and close; and upon a
sudden few depraved courses come down: then happens a burning Fever by reason
of the great sympathy with the womb and the heart, occasioned through the
Arteries and great Vessels. There is a pain in the breasts, with a swelling in
them, by reason of the consent and agreement between the groyns, the hips, the
septum transversum claviculare, and the forepart of the head, which is extended
to the roots of the eyes; as also from vapors which rise from the putrified
blood to the head, through the Arteries that run along through the neck,
passing by both parts of the infundibulum into the fore part of the head.

The cause of this consists in the blood, which is sometimes with Choler, and
sometimes with Melancholy.

The Cure is difficult, if the blood in that part be wholly putrified; for that
causes a sordid humor which consumes the Patient with a continual Fever. If it
be an Erisypelas, or St. Anthonies fire, there is no cure at all, because the
Birth dies by reason of the excessive heat which causes abortion to follow,
which kills the Woman; if it turn to a gangrene, it is deadly: it is cured as
other inflammations, which may be observed in the following Chapters. Only
observe that for revulsion you must not let blood in the veins of the thighs,
for that draws down the blood to the womb; but in the arm, the blood flowing
from the Liver, and the parts adjoining. For deriving of the matter, you may
cut a vein in the ham, unless the Woman be with Child, for that will cause
abortion: Refrigerating and moistning Topics, without any binding faculty, may
be well applied; to which purpose the decoction of wild Thyme, prepared with
Chalybeat water, and outwardly applied with a sponge, is an excellent Remedy.

These inflammations sometimes affect the whole womb, and sometimes either side
of the Womb, which causes the heat to descend into the Hip, because of the
ligaments of the Womb which are carred thither; the thigh is difficultly moved,
and the groins are inflamed; sometimes the inflammation possesses the
posterior part, which causes the belly to be bound, and a pain in the loins and
backbone; sometimes it possesses the forepart, which because it coheres to
the bladder, the Urine is suppressed, or made very difficultly; and the pain is
extended above the Privities: Semetimes it possesses the bottom of the Womb,
which causes such a pain in the lower part of the Belly, that it is hardly to
be touched, and the pain extends to the Navel.

There is another inflammation which degenerates into a Scirrhus, whereall the
symptoms are not so dangerous, yet there is a great heaviness perceived in the
parts adjoining. This evil is diuturnal, and commonly ends in the Dropsy;
sometimes it turns to an Apostem, swelling 'till it break: In this case, the
body is troubled with a shivering, especially toward the Evening; when the
Apostem is broken, sometimes it empties it self into the concavity of the Womb,
wherein there is less danger; and sometimes in other parts of the Body; which
causes sometimes a stoppage in the Urine, and sometimes in the Belly, with a
swelling of the hairy parts, and the feeling of something floating up and down.

Of the Schirrus of the Womb.
THE Schirrus of the Womb is a hard swelling of the said part without pain,
begot by some thick earthly and feculent Humor; the signs, besides others that
are general, are these in particular: The Flowers at the beginning are either
wholly stopped, or flow very sparingly, the evil increasing, there is a great
flux of blood by intervals, the mouths of the Veins being opened more than
ordinary, or because the Womb is not able to receive, or to retain its wonted
proportion of blood: It is distinguished from the Mole, because in that
distemper the Flowers, if they flow, flow inordinately; the Breasts swell with
Milk, which in the Schirrus grow very lank.

The cause of this is a gross feculent humor, being a thick blood, sometimes
Flegmy, sometimes melancholy, which happens to those who decline in their age;
or to those who have been troubled with a squeamish and naughty stomach: Often
it arises from an ill cured Inflammation, through the use of Medicines that
cool too much.

The Cure is difficult, either because having been dried for a long time they
cannot be softened, or because the natural heat in those places where the
Schirrus is, is for the most part extinct; and then because while the humor is
mollifying, if it have conceived any putrefaction, it easily turns to the
Cancer: For the cure, it is the same as of the Breasts.

It differs either as being in, and possessing the substance of the Womb, which
causes the Womb to lean downward upon the Hip, and Back, and there begets pain;
sometimes possessing the neck of the Womb, which is discerned by touching it,
and is cured more easily than the former: If it be in the upper part of the
neck of the Womb, the Woman is hindered; in the lower part of the neck of the
Womb, the straight gut is affected.

Of the Dropsy of the Womb.
THE Dropsy of the Womb is a distemper from water collected in the Womb,
either by some fault in the part it self, or in the parts adjoining. The signs
of this are a loose swelling at the bottom of the belly, extending it self
according to the proportion of the Womb; the fewness and naughtiness of the
Courses; a moistness, and slenderness of the neck of the Womb, softness of the
Breast, want of Milk, a shivering in the Body, and sometimes a Fever: It
differs from an inflammation by the symptoms above related; and from an
inflation, in the defect of sound and distention; from a Mole, because in this
there is a greater weight perceived at the bottom of the belly, and the Breasts
at the time of delivery are not without milk. It differs from Conception,
because in the Dropsy the swelling is just according to the form of the Womb;
but in Conception it is always sharper. In Women with Child the Flowers do not
flow; but in this Disease there flows such a certain bloody vicious humor,
without any order, which ceases quickly. It differs from the Dropsy of the
Belly, because the face of the Patient is colored, unless the Liver be any way
affected, the want of thirst, and the ascent of the swelling from the lower
part to the upper.

The cause of this is a water gathered there through some defect of the Liver
or Spleen, or through some weakness in the Womb; by reason whereof it is not
able to concoct or expel the Excrements; or through a too immoderate defluxion
of the Courses, which oppresses the natural heat; or through a suppression of
them, which suffocates the heat.

The cure is to be performed by the eduction of the water, and strengthening of
the Womb; for which purpose the use of Antimonial Pills is not a little to be
commended. Her diet must be of meats that breed good Juice; she must drink
little, she must use instead of drink, a Ptisan or Barly-broth, made with
Sassafras, or Sarsaparilla, if her Courses be stopped, you may let her blood in
the foot; if the repletion be great, then to let her blood in the arm will not
be amiss. The use of Clysters is not amiss, and Fomentations are also very
necessary, made with the decoction of Broom, wild Cucumbers, Flowers of
Camomile, Melilot, with Origan, Cumin, Fenel, Aniseed, of which you may make
several injections. Ointments also may be useful, made of Oil of Lillies, or
Oil of Dill: Then may you apply upon the Belly this Plaster: Take of the
emplaister of Laurel berries two Ounces; Oil of Camomile and Melilot, two
ounces and a half; Pigeons dung and Goats dung, of each half an ounce; mix them
altogether, and make a Plaster, adding thereto a little Venice Turpentine.

Of the falling of the Womb.
THE falling of the Womb is the falling of it down below the Abdomen or
Midriff, proceeding from a looseness of the Ligamants.

The general signs of this, are a pain in the loins, and hairy parts, and of
the Os sacrum, or holy Bone, to which the Womb is fastened; at the beginning the
pain is not very great, nor after long continuance, by reason of use: The
weight thereof being only troublesome, which is an impediment to the Patient in
going* The particular signs do vary according as the fall is greater or less;
for in the one the Womb descends to the middle of the Hips and lower; in the
latter there is perceived the distention of the skin, and as it were the weight
of a good big Egg about the Privities.

The Cure of this is difficult, if there be the greater falling of the Womb, if
the Woman be in Age, if a Fever, Convulsion, or other symptoms happen; if that
be in women with Child, it is deadly; and sometimes it is corrupted by the
ambient Air, and turns into a Gangrene. The Cure consists in the re-putting of
it into its own place, where you must observe, first to stop the inflammation,
if there be any; or if there be any swelling caused by the cold Air, you must
foment the part first with decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows, Flowers of
Camomile, and Laurel Berries: If there be any wind or excrement in the Gut, you
must use Clysters first; it is also to be fomented and anointed with
agglutinating and astringent, or binding Medicines, there is a Fumigation to be
made of the skin of a salt Eel dried, and poudered. When it is to be put into
its place, the woman must be laid with her Belly upwards; then must the
Midwife, or other Party employed, with a linen Cloth dipped in Oil of Roses, a
little warmed, gently thrust up the part affected which is fallen, as gently as
may be, turning a little. Now to keep it up, the woman must be kept lying on
her back, with her thighs stretched out, and one laid upon another across; the
Belly must not be too much bound, lest in the ejection of the excrement, the
Womb should be again precipitated, neither must it be loose, lest the Membranes
binding the Womb should be unloosed: Then must you use agglutinating Medicines,
Pessaries, Fomentations, and Injections; yet great care must be had, lest you
suppress the Courses. Of this there be some differences, either by reason of
the looseness of the Ligaments which are four, which is discerned in that it is
generated by degrees, and with less pain: It arises either from hard labor, or
a ponderosity or heaviness of the Child, or from the concourse of flegmy
humors; it is cured by the evacuation of humors, and by the use of astringent
and corroborating Medicines; such as are the decoction of Musk of the Oak,
Hartshorn, Laurel-leaves, and the astringent Plaster.

Another cause and difference arises from the rupture of the Ligaments; which
is discerned by this, that the evil comes suddenly, and is more painful, and is
sometimes followed with a Flux of blood; it arises from the heaviness of the
birth, or from a difficult labor, or from Abortion, or a difficult and violent
extraction of the Secondines.

Sometimes it happens, because the Ligaments are eaten away, and then the signs
of some Ulcer are discerned by the flowing forth of matter.

Of the ascent of the Matrix, as also of the Wounds and Ulcers of the same.
SOme have thought that it is possible for the Womb to ascend up to the
Stomach, which opinion is altogether false; for first it is tied so fast with
four Ligaments, that it is impossible for it to move to the upper parts:
Besides, suppose it had a natural motion by the Fibers, yet the Womb being so
firmly annexed to the right gut, and to the Privities, it would necessarily
follow that those parts should be also stretched. And though it happen to be
stretched, and distended by the windy vapors, yet it follows not that
therefore it should be moved upward: and whereas women do say that they do
sometimes perceive a certain round body moving about the region of the Navel,
that may rather be said to be the stones, and that blind Vessel, than the Womb.

Of the wounds of the Matrix this must be noted, that they are very difficult
to be cured. Yet the cure is to be assayed five manner of ways; by the use of
things which do evacuate the peccant humor, which is done partly by a good
order of diet, and living in a dry and temperate air; longer sleep than
ordinary, and the avoiding of exercise in this case is to be observed; and
instead thereof to use moderate frictions: All repletion, and a loose belly are
naught; the meat that she eats must be little, and contrary to the humor that
offends, as rear Eggs, Milk, Chicken-broths, and the meat of them, dry Raisins,
Almonds, and Pistaches. For her drink, it ought to be chiefly the decoction of
Barley or Liquorish.

In the next place, it will not be amiss to let blood in the Basilick Vein: let
her take some convenient purge according to the humor which abounds: Vomitings
also and frictions may be used, and the provoking of sweat by the decoction of
Guaiacum, Salsaparil, and China-root, which are very proper to turn away the
humors from the Matrix.

Sometimes this happens from an intemperancy of the womb, which if it be cold,
the womb is not able to concoct sufficient quantity of nourishment, and
therefore heaps up together many excrements; if it be moist, it is not able to
contain either the blood, or the seed, or the birth, as it should do. The cure
of this is above touched in the Chapter of Distempers.

There is another difference which is taken from the occult qualities which the
womb is seen to have, there being a sympathy and antipathy between that and
diverse things, as to covet the seed of Man, and to love sweet things; and then
the affection arises from no evident cause, there being no excess of coldness,
or moisture to be apprehended. The Medicines which are to be applied for the
cure of this, must be proper in their whole substance.

Sometimes the difference arises in this, that the natural heat is either
suffocated or dissipated; this affection is something dangerous, because it is
a difficult matter to restore the natural heat. In the cure of this,
restoratives must be notwithstanding used; such are Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Species
diaxylo, Aloes, Aromaticum Rosatum.

Of the pain of the Womb.
THere is no need to give other signs of this than the complaint of the Woman;
it affects both women that are free, and women that are with Child: It happens
sometimes from corroding humors, especially caused by Ulcers, or vicious
Flowers* The cure whereof is referred to these heads; sometimes it happens from
a distention caused either by some curdled blood sticking in the cavity of the
Womb, and then there is a copious Flux of blood out of the Womb, and the pain
is fixed chiefly about the orifice of the Womb; the right Gut and the Bladder
being affected by reason of the continual desire of expelling forth the humor.
In the Cure, first you must seek to dissolve the clotted blood, which is done
by the use of Treacle dissolved in wine; and then to evacuate, which is
performed with Agaric, Aloes, with the juice of Savin, decoction of Rosemary,
with the Flowers of Cheiri, in Wine. Sometimes it is caused by the menstruous
blood, when the vessels are more open, or the blood too thick; which happens
through the overmuch use of cold drink, especially when the woman is hot. The
cure may be found in the cure of the suppression of the Flowers. Sometimes it
is caused by other vicious humors collected in the concavity of the womb, or
adhering to the other Vessels; and then these humors are to be removed with
purging and evacuating Medicines. Sometimes windy vapors are the cause hereof,
arising from the heat of the vicious humors caused by copulation. It is cured
by things that discuss the wind; to which purpose it may not be amiss to use a
Clyster made of Malmsey and Oil of Nuts, of each three ounces, of Aqua vitae
one ounce, of Oil of Juniper and distilled Rue of each two drams, and applied
warm; or a mixture of spirit of wine and spirit of Nitre, of each half a dram
or two scruples, exhibited in the spirit of Wine, Sperma ceti, with Oil of
sweet Almonds, or a Plaster of Caranna and Tachamahacca applied to the Navel.
Sometimes it is occasioned by the retention and corruption of the seed. For the
Cure, look the Chapter of the suffocation of the Matrix.

Of the Suppression of the Flowers.
THE suppression of the Flowers is the retention of the menstrual blood, either
by reason of the narrowness of the vessels, or through some corruption of the
blood. The signs are evident from the relation of the Woman: Yet if they are
loath to confess, it may be discerned by this; for in Virgins the suppressed
blood wanders up and down the Veins, and begets obstructions, changing the
color of the Body, and causing Fevers. In Women, because the blood is carried
down to the Womb, where it begets many diseases, it is distinguished from
retention after Conception, because women with Child find no alteration of
affections of the mind, and retain the native color of their bodies; and in
the third month they shall perceive the motion and situation of the Infant; and
lastly, the mouth of the womb is closed up.

The Causes of this distemper are the narrowness of the Veins, and the
vitiousness of the blood. The Cure of this must be hastened, because this
suppression if it stay long begets many more diseases, as Fevers, Dropsies,
Vomiting of blood, and the like: The Cure is hard if it be of any continuance,
and if it stay beyond the sixth month, it is almost incurable; especially if it
happen through any perversion of the neck of the Womb; for then the woman is
troubled with often swooning, and vomiting of blood, and a pain seizes the
parts of the Belly, the Back, and the Backbone, which is attended with a Fever,
and the excrements of the Belly and Bladder are suppressed; a weariness
possesses the whole Body, because of the diffusion of the retained blood
through the whole body, and especially the hips and thighs, because of the
sympathy of those parts with the veins of the Womb. In the first place, the
letting of blood is commended; for the blood which every month stays in the
body, and sticks in the Veins, is to be provoked downward to the Womb; and
therefore a vein is to be opened in the heel, for so the plenty of blood is
diminished, and the motion of the blood is made toward the Womb; if necessity
requires that it should be done more than once, one day a vein must be opened
in one thigh, and another day in the other; and that which is opened for
evacuation must be first opened, that which is opened in the ham, or heel, must
be done after Purgation, three, or four, or five days before the time that the
accustomed evacuations of the Woman ought to come down. Cupping-glasses also
are to be applied first to the more remote places, as to the thighs; and then
to the nearer parts, as to the hips: Ligatures, or bindings and frictions, at
the time of the coming down of the Flowers, after Purgation of the whole body,
are not to be omitted. In the second place the matter is to be prepared, for
which purpose, in bodies troubled with Phlegm, the decoction of Guaiacum, with
Cretan Dittany, does much avail without provoking sweat. In the third place
evacuation is to be made at several times. Among evacuating Medicines are
commended Agaric, Aloes, with the juice of Savin, and these Pills: Take Aloes
Succotrine three drams; the best Myrrh one scruple, extract of sweet smelling
Flag, Carduus, Saffron, of each three drams; Roots of Gentian and Dittany, of
each five grains; make them up with Syrup of Laurel-berries, taking the
quantity of one scrup^e at evening before supper. In the fourth place, by
opening obstructions by those things which provoke the Flowers, of which these
are most to be commended, the decoction of Rosemary with Flowers of Cheiri,
Pennyroyal-water twice distilled, and mingled with Cinnamon Water; Extract of
Zedoary, Angelica, and Castor, and the Earth which is found in Iron Mines
prepared in the same manner as Steel, spirit of Tartar, the fat of an Eel,
Colubrina with the distilled water of Savin: And in the fifth place, by the
discussion of the dregs and relics that remain, by sudoroficks, or things that
provoke sweat, with a potion made of a Chalybeate decoction, with spirit of
Tartar, etc.

The differences of this Disease arise, partly from the obstruction of the
Veins of the Womb, caused by a cold and thick blood, and thick slimy humors
mixed with the blood, and coming either from some hot distemper of the Womb,
which dissipates the sharp and subtle humors, and leaves behind the gross and
earthy parts, or from the cold Constitution of the Liver and Spleen; especially
if at the time of the menstrual Flux (at what time the Flux of Blood is more
violent) those subtle humors happen to be dissipated, and then at the time of
the monthly Purgation, the Party affected feels a great pain in the loins, and
parts adjoining; and if any thing come down, it is slymy, whitish, and
blackish: The whole Body is possessed with a numness, the Color pale, a slow
Pulse, and raw Urines. The Cure is the same with the former, great care being
taken of a gross and ill diet.

There is another difference of this Disease when it happens by Compression,
which arises from external causes, as the Northern wind, and long standing in
cold water, which may be known from the relation of the sick Person. The Blood
in this case is to be drawn to the lower parts by Frictions and Baths; or from
internal causes, as fatness, or swelling of the Womb, or of the lower parts; in
which case Medicines must be applied that assuage the swelling. There is
another difference which is in the hardness of the skin which happens either
from the first Nativity, and then the disease is not easily taken away; or long
after, from some cold and dry distemper: Concerning which look the former
Chapters.

Another difference there is, when there happens a closing up of the skin,
which is caused after Cicatrising of an Ulcer, or by reason of some skin or
Membrane growing to the Vessels of the Womb, or by reason of frequent Abortion;
after which these Veins to which the Secondines adhere, do grow together so
close that they cannot be afterward opened.

Another difference of this Disease there is, when it happens through want of
Blood, which is not generated, either by reason of external causes, as Famine,
over much evacuation, Issues, and such like; or through internal causes, as a
frigid Constitution of the principal parts, old Age, and Fevers; or when it is
converted to other uses, as before full growth, to the nourishment of the Body:
In Women with Child, to the nourishment of the Birth: In those that give suck,
to the increase of Milk: And in fat people, to the augmentation of the Fat: Or
when it is consumed either by External causes, as over much Exercise,
Affrights, Terrors, Sadness, Baths, overmuch Sweating, which do consume the
serous quality of the Blood; or through Internal Causes, as are hot and dry
Diseases, or overgreat evacuations in other parts of the Body. Sometimes
another difference of this Disease proceeds from the dryness of the Blood,
which happens to Women, who in the Winter time do too much heat their lower
parts, by putting Coals under their Coats. For the cure thereof you must use
refrigerating and moistning Medicines.

Of the dropping of the Flowers, and the difficulty of their coming down.
THE dropping of the Flowers is, when they are coming down for many days
together drop by drop.

This happens both from external causes, as over hard labor, etc.

And sometimes from the drossiness of the blood, the passage not being wide
enough. For the cure of this, it is convenient to open a Vein in the Arm with
gentle purging, as in the former Chapter.

Sometimes from the weakness of the retentive faculty, there being at that time
great plenty, thinness, and serosity of the blood. In this case there is no
pain; Medicines that bind and corroborate the Stomach here must have place.

The difficulty of the Flowers is when they come down with pain and trouble,
either through defect in the Veins, or in the Blood. The signs of this are
gathered from the relation of the sick person, who is then much troubled with
pain in the Head, Stomach, and Loins, and lower parts of the body. And they do
either flow altogether, or drop by drop, as in the former disease; It is a
Disease more incident to Maids than married Women, because the Veins of the
Womb are less open in them, than in those who brought forth Children.

It happens sometimes from a corruption of the blood, that is, from the
drossiness and thickness thereof, and then the blood clots together; and there
is a great pain long before the Flowers begin to come down. The Cure of this is
performed by attenuating Medicines. Sometimes from the sharpness and acrimony
of the Blood, which proceeds from a mixture of sharp humors with the Body, and
then the genital parts do itch. It is cured by those Medicines that temper the
sharpness of the Humor, as the four greater Seeds, Violets, and Flowers of
Nenuphar. Sometimes from windy Vapors, and then the pain comes by intervals,
and is suddenly exasperated, rumbling up and down; and when the wind is forth,
the pain cease. The cure hereof is procured by evacuation of the matter, and
dispelling of the wind, as is before declared.

Of the discoloring of the Flowers.
THE discoloring of the Flowers is when their right color, which ought to be
red, declines either to paleness, whiteness, greenness, yellowness, or
blewishness, through some defect, or vitiousness of the blood.

The signs are apparent by the sight of the blood; besides that it is
accompanied with an ill smell, many times also it is the cause of Fevers,
trembling of the body, loathing of the meat, pain in the stomach, etc.

The differences of this disease consist first in the vitiousness of the blood,
which is caused through some distemper either of the whole body, or some part
thereof. Sometimes the blood is affected by reason of some stoppage thereof,
and then the Flowers are suppressed, which causes pains in the Breast, and
strong beating of the Breast; and if the woman begin to amend the Blood flows
out with a stinking putrefaction, which continues 'till the eighth day; or it
may be, because the Blood is foul'd by the Womb, being full of excrements; and
then you may perceive the signs of a foul Womb.

Sometimes the difference of this disease consists in the mixture of the Blood
with other vicious humors. The Cure consists in preparation and evacuation, but
care must be had, that because the thick humors need attenuation, and that over
attenuating things do melt the serous humor, that you therefore do not use over
attenuating things, as Vinegar, etc.

Another difference is, when the Flowers decline to a whitish color, which
'proceeds from abundance of Phlegm, or from Putrefaction, and then Ulcers follow
in the Womb, and barrenness follows; unless the woman's Flowers do happen to
flow for seven or eight days together, by which the woman is freed from the
disease; or else they break out to the parts above the groin without any tumor,
and burst forth a little above the Hypochondrium, and then the woman seldom
lives, or else there will appear after some few days a great swelling in the
Groyn, without a head of a red color, because the Flesh is there filled up
with the Blood.

When it inclines to yellowness, or greenness, the distemper comes of Choler;
when to a blackness and blewness, from Melancholy.

Of the inordinate Flux of the Flowers.
THE disorderly Flux of the Courses is either the coming of them down before
their time, or else the stoppage of them for some time after the usual course
of Nature. They come down sometimes before their time, partly by reason of
internal Causes, and partly by reason of external Causes, as falls, blows, and
such like casualties that open the veins: Or from the expulsive faculty of the
Womb too much provoked. First, by the plenty of blood, which is known by this,
that the blood which is sent to the womb from all part is fluid, and of its
natural constitution; signs of a Plethora, or fullness of blood, are apparent in
the Woman. It is Cured by blood letting if the blood abound by good diet, and
frequent though gentle exercise. Secondly, it proceeds from the Acrimony and
sharpness of the blood which is known by the hot temper of the body, the blood
it self is more thin and yellowish. It must be Cured by evacuating Medicines,
as Rheubarb, and such things as temper the blood, whereof we have already
spoken.

It comes also when the retentive faculty of the womb grows lank, which may be
known by the looseness of the Vessels of the Womb, besides a moist and faint
habit of the body: In the Cure, beware of things which are too Astringent;
baths, wherein the force and strength of Iron may be effectual, may with safety
be used. The subsistence and stay of the Courses beyond the accustomed time,
proceeds from a frustration of the expulsive faculty; as when there is small
store of blood, which is known by this, that the Woman is not troubled with the
stay of the Courses; and especially, if she have over-exercised her self, or
used a spare diet before. Secondly, the thickness of the blood, which is known
by the whiteness and clamminess thereof. In the performance of the Cure, you
must purge before too much blood be gathered together: Next, the Courses are to
be attenuated, for the performance of which, Calamint and Mercurialis are to be
most commended. In this Case scarification of the heels is not amiss.

There is another difference of this Disease, which arises from the weakness of
the expelling faculty, caused either by the frigid distemper of the Womb, of
which we have spoken already; or by a kind of numness thereof, of which we
shall speak anon.

Of the over abundance of the Courses.
THE over much flux of the Courses is either a more abundant, or a more lasting
Purgation of the Courses, through some defect, either in the blood, or the
womb, or the veins of the womb.

The signs are evident, viz. want of Appetite, Crudities, a bad color in the
face, a swelling in the feet, and the rest of the body, a waxing lean of the
body; and in brief, a general ill habit of body.

The Cure (if it be of any continuance) is difficult; if it happen to an aged
woman, there is none at all. It requires a revulsion, or drawing back of the
blood, interception, and incrassation, or thickning thereof, and a closing up
of the Vessels by astringent Medicines. Yet observe that they must be stopped by
degrees. To this effect, you may take this Powder.

Take of the seed of White Henbane, red Coral, of each half a dram, white
Camphor half a scruple, and give the quantity of half a dram at a time; powder
of Amber, Dragons-blood, Bloodstones, Red Coral, Lettice seed, of each one
dram, Balaust two scruples, Bole armoniack two drams, given in three ounces of
Plantain-water, Asses milk heated with Steel. You may externally also apply a
girdle made of the bruised leaves of Baresfoot.

Of this Disease there are many differences: Sometimes it happens from the
blood which is derived from the bottom of the Womb, where for the most part
lies the blackest and most clotted blood; or from the neck of the Womb, which
is more red and fluid. Another difference arises from the plenty of blood,
which appears by this, that the Vessels are either broken or much opened,
especially in those women who have had a stoppage in their Courses for a time,
which presently break out again. The signs of this are evident; that is to say,
a fullness of blood in the body; besides that, the blood which comes forth
easily curdles.

In the Cure, you must have recourse to blood-letting, which if you do for
evacuation, it must be done in the Hepatick Vein: If the woman be weak, in
Salvatella of both hands. In the next place the use of Cupping-Glasses is to be
commended, being applied with scarification to the back, etc. Or, without
scarification to the Breast, being used again when the woman is troubled with
difficulty of breathing. In the third place, ligatures and frictions of the
Arms are to be used.

Another difference of this disease arises from a sharp blood, which is known
by the gnawing of the humor upon the Vessels. In the Cure, you must purge with
syrup of Roses solutive, or with leaves of Sena; a pessary of Sows dung and
Asses dung, which is made up with Plantain water, and the muscilage of the seed
of Quinces, is here of use if need require.

Another difference arises from a serous and watery blood; for either the Liver
is weakened, or the Veins so debilitated, that it cannot attract the serous or
wheyie humor in the blood: in this case, the blood flows not forth in such a
quantity, nor is easily curdled: If a Cloth be dipped in it, and then dried in
the shade, it presently discolours. In the Cure hereof you must look to the
rectifying of the weakness of the Reins and Liver with convenient remedies, for
which purpose the Livers of Foxes, Calves, Hens, etc. are very good.

Sometimes from a Rupture of the Veins, which proceeds either from a fullness of
blood, or from Causes that do vehemently stir up the blood, especially from
hard labor; if it be needful, you must let blood, and apply conglutinating
Medicines.

Or from a gnawing of the Vessels, which is known by this, that sometimes there
flows forth little blood, and that purulent, and full of the wheyie or serous
humor. It arises from a sharp and corrupt blood, and sometimes from the use of
sharp Medicines. Among the astringent Medicines, the root of Filipendula is
much to be commended, or a decoction of the same Root.

Of the Whites and Gonorrhea in Women.
THE Whites is an inordinate eruption of an excrementitious humor collected
together through some vitiousness of the blood. It affects Women chiefly, and
sometimes also Virgins, of which there are Examples: Yet it is more often in
women, especially if they be of a moist constitution, and live an idle and
delicate life, eating such things as are cold and moist. Old women also are
affected herewith through the abundance of Phlegm, and the weakness of the
concoctive faculty.

It differs from the Gonorrhea, because in that the seminal matter is white,
and thicker; and flows by long intervals, and issues forth in a lesser quantity
from a nocturnal pollution; for that is joined with venereal imaginations, and
only happens in the time of sleep. It differs from the discoloring of the
Flowers; for they though not exactly, do always observe their times of Flowing.
Besides, they happen not to Women with Child, or such whose Courses are
stopped. It differs from the putrid humor that issues from the Ulcers of the
Womb, because that is joined with the signs of an Ulcer, and the putrefaction
is thicker and whiter; if it be mattery, it is colored with blood, and issues
forth with pain.

The Cure of this must be hastened, because in a short time it endangers the
making of women barren, causing them to be lean, to fall into a Consumption,
Melancholy, the Dropsy, fall of the Womb, Swoonings, and Convulsions; which is
the cause that though it be not hard to be cured in the beginning, yet it is
afterward very difficult; for by this means the whole body accustoms it self
to send forth its excrements this way, and the Womb being now weakened, gathers
excrements apace.

Sometimes it proceeds from the whole body, and then you may perceive the signs
of an ill humor through the whole body. In the Cure of this, you must avoid
blood-letting, for that the bad humor must not be recalled to defile the blood;
besides, that the disease is a sufficient weakening and consuming of the body.
The humor is discussed by the decoction of Guaiacum and China, and
Lentisk-wood. For the drying up of the humor, the Root of Filipendula does very
much conduce. For astringent Medicines you may use chiefly the powder of dead
men's bones, the ashes of Capons-dung in rain water. The Patient must avoid
sleeping upon her back, lest the heat of the Lungs should carry the humors
toward the Womb: Frictions also of the upper parts, for the diversion of the
humor may be used.

Sometimes it is caused by the Womb it self, and then there will appear signs
of the affection of the Womb, and the Flux is not so great. For the Cure of
this, Suffumigations of Frankincense, Labdanum, Mastick, and Sanders are very
requisite.

Of the Green Sickness.
THE Green Sickness is a changing of the color of the Face into a green and
pale color, proceeding from the rawness of the humors. The signs of this
appear in the Face, to which may be added a great pain in the Head, difficulty
of breathing, with a palpitation of the heart, a small and thick beating of the
Arteries in the Neck, Back, and Temples; sometimes inordinate Fevers through
the vitiousness of the humors, loathing of Meat, Vomiting, distention of the
Hypocondriack part, by reason of the reflux of the menstrous blood to the
greater Vessels; a swelling of the whole body by reason of the abundance of
humors, or of the Thighs and Legs above the heels, by reason of the abundance
of serous humors.

The Cause is the crudity and rawness of the humor, and quantity withal,
arising from the suppression of the Courses through the natural narrowness of
the vessels, or through an acquired narrowness of the vessels by the eating of
Oatmeal, Chalk, Earth, Nutmegs, and drinking of Vinegar; or from the
obstruction of the other bowels. Hence arises an ill concoction in the bowels,
and the humors are carried into the habit of the body, or become habitual
thereunto.

The Cure is performed by the letting of blood, especially in the heel; if the
Disease be of any continuance, by Purgation, preparation of the humor being
first considered; which is performed by the decoction of Guaiacum, with ^retan
Dittany; purging of the humor is performed with Agarick, Aloes Succotrin, with
the ^^ice of Savin; for the unobstructing of the humor, prepared Steel, the
root of Scorzonera, Bezoarstone, in diet, Vinegar is utterly to be avoided.

The Cure of this Disease is performed by opening Obstructions, by purging off
vicious Humors, by correcting the intemperies of the Bowels, and by
strengthening them. First therefore, a gentle purging Medicine must be given,
that is agreeable to the Constitution, that the first region may be emptied,
and if the Belly be bound, a Glister must be given first of all, afterward
bleeding must be ordered, unless the Disease is very inveterate, and the Maid
be inclined to a Cachexy. But a Vein in the Arm must be opened, though the
Courses are stopped; for at that time, if you bleed in the Foot, the obstructions
of the Veins, and of the Womb would be increased. That quantity of Blood being
taken away, that is necessary, proper purges must be used.

Take of the Pill Coch. major two scruples, of Castor powdered two grains, of
Peruvian Balsom four drops, make four Pills, let her take them at five in the
Morning, and sleep after them if she can. Let these Pills be repeated twice or
thrice every Morning, or every other Morning, according to the strength of the
sick, and their operation.

After the purging Pills let her take the following.

Take of the fileings of Steel eight grains, with a sufficient quantity of
extract of Wormwood, make two Pills to be taken in the Morning, and they must
be repeated at five in the Afternoon. She must continue this Course for a
Month, drinking presently after the Pills a draught of Wormwood-wine.

If a Bolus be more pleasing,

Take of the conserve of Roman Wormwood, and of the conserve of the inner peell
of Oranges, each one ounce; of candied Angelica, and Nutmegs candied, and of
Venice Treacle, each half an ounce, of Ginger candied two drams, with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Oranges make an Electuary, take of this
Electuary one dram and an half, of the filings of Steel well powdered eight
grains, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Oranges, make a Bolus to be
taken in the Morning, and at five in the Afternoon, drinking upon it a draught
of Wormwood wine.

Of the suffocation of the Matrix.
THE signs of the Suffocation of the Womb, are a weariness of the whole body,
with a weakness of the Thighs; a paleness and sadness of the Face; a
nauseousness though seldom vomiting; oftentimes a loathing and distate of Meat,
and that sometimes with a grumbling and noise in the Belly, and sometimes
without.

The signs of the present Disease are, that when the Vapors are carried up to
the Heart, and do there stop the vital Spirits, a light swooning follows, the
Pulse changes and is little, the Body grows cold, all the spirits flying up
into the Heart; the Vapor being thrust up to the Head and Chaps, the Chaps are
many times set fast, the Patient seeming to be stifled; the motion of the
Breast and Diaphragm is disturbed and hindered, so that the breath is almost
stopped, the Patient living only by transpiration. Sometimes there is joined with
it a kind of Uterine fury, with talking and anger: Sometimes it causes other
madness; sometimes the Woman falls into a dead sleep, which makes her seem as
though she were dead.

It differs from the Epilepsie, because in that the Convulsive motions are more
general; nor is there any memory of those things which happen about them after
the Fit; the Pulse is great, and the Mouth of the Party affected fomes with a
froth: It differs from the Apoplexy, because in that the Fit comes suddenly
without any notice; and the Patient is affected with a kind of snorting, and
there is such a Resolution of the parts, that they feel not although they be
pricked: It differs from a Syncope, in that there are no signs when the Fit
will be, the Pulse ceases to the apprehension, and the Patient is troubled with
cold sweats. They differ from dead people by sneezing, which may be provoked by
putting something for that purpose into the Nose.

The cause of this is a venomous, subtle, and thin Vapor, piercing in one
moment through the whole body, and carried up from the matter in the Womb,
corrupted after a peculiar manner, either by it self or from external means,
such are perfumes, anger, fear, etc. and not only ascending through the veins,
but also through all the other breathing holes, and secret passages of the body.

The Cure is doubtful if it have possessed old Women for a time, for it begets
weakness, consumes the strength, and shows abundance of humor; or if it
possesses Childbearing Women, either after a difficult Travel, or after an
Abortion; or if it possesses Women with Child, because it induces fear of
Abortion; there is more hope, if the act of Respiration be not too much
impeded, and if the Fits do not return too often.

The Cure regards first the time of the Fit, being performed first by means of
interception, which may be done by binding the Belly under the Navel with a
girdle made of the skin of a Heart, killed in the very act of Copulation.
Secondly, by keeping the natural Spirits awaked and rouzed up by painful
friction, by pulling the hairs of the Privities with violence and
suffumigations made with Partridge feathers burnt, as also Eel-skins, the
application of Assa faetida and Oil of Tartar to the mouth. Thirdly, by way of
revulsion of the humor, by Frictions and Glysters dispelling the winds, and
the application of Cupping-glasses with much flame, first to the Thighs, and
then to the Hips, putting sweet things into the Privities; such as are Oil of
Sivet half a scruple, Oil of Nutmegs one scruple: Fourthly, by discussion of
the humor, which is performed inwardly by the Oil of white Amber, with the
powder of Walnut Flowers, extract of Castor; externally by an Emplaister of the
fat of a black Heifer, Sclarea boiled in butter, adding to it a sufficient
quantity of Tachamahacca and Caranna: After the fit is past, evacuation is to
be regarded, first with purgation, for which purpose it will not be amiss to
use these ensuing Pills: Take Siler mountain, Pennyroyal, Madder, the innermost
part of Cassia Pipe, Pomegranate Kernels, Piony roots, and Calamus, of each
three drams; Muscus and Spike of India, of each half a dram; then make Pills
thereof with the juice of Mugwort, of which she may take every day, or every
other day, before Supper. If the disease proceed from the terms, let the Woman
affected take an Ounce of Agarick poudered in Wine or honied water, or a dram
of Agnus Castus powdered with an ounce of Honey of Roses: The Womb is also to
be strengthened by the internal and external application of such things as
resist the malignity of the Disease; among which are numbered, Faecula Brioniae,
and Castor: The difference of this Disease consists in this, that sometimes it
happens that it is occasioned by the retention of the Seed, which is known by
this, that the symptoms of the Disease are more violent; and after the fit is
past, there flows out of the Womb a matter like to that of the seed. It is
cured by evacuation of the seed, such as are Rue, and Agnus Castus, and
anointing with odoriferous salves, especially if the woman be to live without
the use of man.

If it come from the suppression of the terms, which is known by the Courses
being mingled with a melancholy blood, take powdered Agaric, a dram of Pioney
seeds, or the weight of a dram and a half of Triphera magna.

But take this for a secret, that for a married Woman in case of the present
suffocation, there is nothing better than for the Man to anoint the top of his
Yard with a little Oil of Gilliflowers, and Oil of sweet Almonds together, and
so to lie with her; for this assuredly brings down the Matrix again.

This Disease is very frequent, the Procatartick or external Causes of it, are
either violent motions of the body, or, which is much oftener, vehement
commotions of the Mind from some sudden assault, either of Anger or Grief, or
the like Passions. Therefore as often as Women are troubled with this or that
disorder of Body, the reason whereof cannot be deduced from the common Axioms;
for finding out Diseases, we must diligently enquire whether they are not
chiefly afflicted with that indisposition which they complain of, when they
have been disturbed in their minds, and afflicted with grief; which if they
confess, we may be fully satisfied that this disorder proceeds from this
Disease we are now speaking of; especially if Urine as clear as Crystal
evacuated copiously some certain times, makes the Diagnostick more manifest.
But to these disorders of the Mind, which are usually the occasions of this
Disease, is to be added emptiness of the stomach, by reason of long fasting,
immoderate bleeding, and a Vomit or Purge that worked too much; and certainly
this Disease proceeds from a confusion of the Spirits, upon which account too
many of them in a crowd, contrary to proportion, are hurried violently upon
this or that part, occasioning Convulsions and pain, when they rush upon parts
endued with exquisite sense, perverting the functions of the Organs, both of
that into which they thrust themselves, and also of that from whence they
departed, both being much injured by this unequal distribution, which is quite
contrary to the Economy of Nature.

The Origin and Antecedent Cause of this confusion, is a weak constitution of
the Spirits, whether it is natural or adventitious; for which Reason they are
easily dissipated upon any occasion, and their System soon broke: For as the
outward Man is framed with parts obvious to sense, so without doubt the inward
Man consists of a due Series, and as it were a Fabric of the Spirits, to be
viewed only by the eye of Reason; and as this is nearly joined, and as it were
united with the constitution of the Body, so much the more easily or more
difficultly is its frame disordered, by how much the Constitutive Principles
that are allotted us by Nature, are more or less firm. That the said Confusion
of the Spirits is the cause of Hysteric Diseases, will appear by Mother-Fits,
wherein the Spirits are crowded in the lower Belly, and rushing together
violently toward the Jaws, occasion Convulsions in every region through which
they pass, blowing up the Belly like a great Ball, which is yet nothing but the
rolling together or conglobation of the parts seized with the Convulsion, which
cannot be suppressed without great violence. The external parts in the the mean
while, and the Flesh being in a manner destitute of Spirits, by reason they are
carried another way, are often so very cold, not only in this kind, but in all
other kind of Hysteric Diseases, that dead Bodies are not colder, but the Pulse
are as good as those of People that are well; nor is the Woman's life in danger
by this cold, unless it is occasioned by some very large evacuation going
before.

And the inordinate agitation of the Spirits disturbing the blood, is the cause
of the clear and copious Urine; for when the Economy of the blood is
interrupted, the Sick cannot long enough contain the serum that is imported,
but lets it go, before it is impregnated with saline particles, whereby the
Citron color is to be imparted to it, whereof we have daily experiment in
those that drink much, especially of thin and attenuating Liquors; for then
their Urine is very clear; in which case, the blood being overpowered by that
quantity of serum, and being wholly unable to retain it, puts it off quite
clear, not yet died by the juice of the Body, by reason of its too short stay.

As to the Cold, by which the external parts are so often chilled, it is very
manifest that that happens, because the Spirits forsaking their stations too
officiously, intrude themselves into this or that part. Nor is it to be
doubted, that weeping and laughing fits, which often seize hysterical women
without any occasion, are procured by the Animal Spirits forcing themselves
violently upon the Organs that perform these Animal functions.

And now I suppose it is manifest, that this whole Disease is occasioned by the
Animal Spirits being not rightly disposed, and not by seed and menstruous blood
corrupted, and sending up malignant Vapors to the parts affected, nor from I
know not what depravation of the juices, and congestion of acrid humors as
others think, but from those Causes we have assign^d; for that the fomes of the
Disease does not lurk in matter, will plainly appear by this one instance, viz.
A Woman that used to enjoy perfect health, being delicate, and of a thin habit
of body, if she chance to be weakened, and exhausted by some error, or by some
strong Vomit or Purge, will certainly be afflicted with some one of those
Symptoms that accompany this Disease, which would rather be removed, than
occasioned by such Vomiting or Purging, if the fomes of the Disease was
contained in matter. The same may be said of a great loss of blood, whether it
is taken away by opening a vein, or flows immoderately in Labor; or of
emptiness, or too long abstinence from Flesh; all which would rather prevent
hysteric Diseases, than occasion them, if the fomes of them was involved in
some matter; whereas on the contrary, nothing does so constantly occasion this
Disease, as these evacuations* But though it is apparent enough, that the
Original fomes of this Disease is not lodged in the humors, yet it must be
confessed that the confusion of the Spirits produces putrid humors in the Body,
by reason the function, as well of these parts which are distended by the
violent impulse of the Spirits, as of those which are deprived of them, are
wholly perverted; and most of these being as it were separatory Organs designed
for the reception of the impurities of the blood, if their functions are any
way hurt, it can not be but a great many feculencies will be heaped up, which
had been elimmated, and so the mass of blood purified, if the Organs had
performed their office, which they had certainly done, if a due Economy of the
Spirits had invigorated them. To this Cause is to be attributed great
Cachexies, loss of appetite, a Chlorosis, and the White Fever in young Women,
which is a species of hysteric Diseases, and the source of many miseries.

From what has been said, it is very manifest that that is the chief indication
in this Disease, which directs the corroboration of the blood, that is the
Fountain and Origin of the Spirits, which being done, the invigorated Spirits
can preserve that tenure that is agreeable to the Economy of the whole body,
and the particular parts; and therefore when the confusion of the Spirits has
vitiated the humors by long continuance, it will be proper, first to lessen
those humors so corrupted by bleeding, and purging, if the Patient has
sufficient strength before we endeavor to corroberate the blood, and which
indeed we can scarce do, whilst a feculent heap of humors lies in the way. But
forasmuch as Pains, Vomiting, and Looseness, are sometimes so very severe that
they will not bear a truce so long, until we have satisfied the first intention
of fortifying the blood; therefore sometimes we must begin the Cure by quieting
the effects (the cause being let alone a little while) with some anodyne
Medicine, and then we must endeavor to rectify the Spirits, whose infirm
constitution is the cause of this Disease, by which we may again endeavor to
Cure such kind of Symptoms. And because experience teaches, that there are many
stinking things that will repel the inordination of the Spirits, and contain
them in their places, which are therefore called hysterics, we must make use of
them when we would answer such intentions.

According to what has been said, I order the Sick to be blooded in the arm,
and that after bleeding, she be purged three or four Mornings following. The
Woman thinks her self worse of those days she is blooded and purged; for these
evacuations promote the confusion of the Spirits, which I take care to forewarn
her of, that she may not despair, the Disease of it self being apt to incline
her so to do: But however those ill humors heapt up by the long continuance of
the Disease, are in some sort to be evacuated, before we can well answer the
prime intention. After these evacuations, some steel Remedy must be prescribed,
to be taken about a Month, to comfort the blood, and so consequently the
Spirits, that proceed from it, and nothing will more certainly answer your
intention in this case than steel; for it raises a volatile ferment in the
vapid and languid blood, whereby the weak Spirits are roused, that before were
kept down by their own weight; and this is very manifest, for as often as
Chalybeats are given in the Green Sickness, the Pulse are presently greater and
quicker, and the outward parts grow warm, and the pale and dead Countenance is
changed, and becomes fresh and lively. But here we must take notice, that
bleeding and purging must not always be used before Chalibeats, or when the
Woman is weak, and almost worn out by the long continuance of the Disease, they
may and ought to be omitted, and you must begin with steel, which must be well
minded.

I think steel is most conveniently given in substance, and as I never
observed, nor heard, that so taken it ever injured any person, so I have been
fully satisfied by frequent experience, that the bare substance performs the
Cure sooner, and better than any of the common Preparations of it; for busy
Chemists make this, as well as other excellent Medicines worse rather than
better, by their perverse and over-officious diligence. I have also heard, and
if it be true, it much strengthens our assertion, that the crude Mine, as it is
dug out of the Earth, is more effectual in curing Diseases, than Iron that
has passed the Fire, and bin purified by fusion: So the Author affirms, but I
have not yet tried whether it be so or not. This I certainly know, that there
is no excellent and powerful Remedy, which has not received its chief Virtues
from Nature: Upon which account, grateful Antiquity called excellent Medicines
God's handicraft. Next to the substance of the steel, I choose the Syrrup of it,
prepared with the fileings of Steel or Iron, infused in the cold in Rhenish
Wine, 'till the Wine is sufficiently impregnated, and afterward strained, and
boiled up to the consistence of a Syrrup, with a sufficient quantity of Sugar.
Nor do I use any purging Medicine at set times, during the whole Chalybeat
course, for I think the Virtue of the Steel is destroyed by a purge in
hysterical Diseases; and when the chief design is to reduce the Spirits to
order, and to renew and confirm their System.

If any one objects that fileings of Steel may hurt those that take them, by
sticking in their Bowels, unless they are purged now and then; I answer first,
that I never found any such thing in any one, and it is much more probable,
that being involved in the slime, and with the Excrementious humors of the
parts, they should at length pass away with them, than when they are exagitated
by purging Medicines, which occasion unusual compressions, twisting and
contraction of the guts, whereby the particles of the steel, thrust upon the
coats of the Bowels, may penetrate deeper into them. When the patient is in a
Steel course, remedies commonly called Hysterics are to be used, as it were by
the by, to comfort the Blood and animal Spirits; in that manner and form, which
is most agreeable to the sick. But if she can take them in a solid form, they
will more powerfully retain the Spirits in their office and place, than things
that are liquid; for the very substance affects the Stomach longer with its
savor, and works more forcibly upon the body, than either decoctions or
infusions. Being about to answer all the indications I have touched upon above,
I use to prescribe these few and common things, which commonly do what I
desire. Let eight ounces of blood be taken from the Arm, the next Morning let
her enter upon the use of the Pills of Coch. Major and of Castor, as they are
mentioned in the Chapter of the Green Sickness, and let them be repeated, as it
is there ordered. Take of Galbanum dissolved in tincture of Castor, and
strained three drams, Tachamacha two drams, make a Plaster to be applied to
the Navel.

Take of black Cherry-water, of Rue-water, and compound Briony-water, each
three ounces, of Castor tied up in a Rag, and hanged in a glass half a dram, of
fine Sugar a sufficient quantity, make a Julep, whereof let her take four or
five spoonfuls when she is faint, dropping into the first Dose, if the Fit is
violent, twenty drops of Spirit of Hartshorn.

After the Purging Pills are taken, let her use the other Pills made of
fileings of Steel and extract of Wormwood, mentioned in the Chapter of the
Green Sickness, according to the directions there set down; or she may take the
Bolus there mentioned, if she likes a Bolus better than Pills.

Take of choice Myrrh and Galbanum, each one dram and an half, of Castor
fifteen grains, with a sufficient quantity of Peruvian Balsome, make twelve
Pills of every dram; let her take three every Night, and drink upon them three
or four spoonfuls of compound Briony-water through the whole Course of this
process.

But if the Pills last prescribed move the Belly, which sometimes happens in
Bodies that are very easily purged, by reason of the Gum that is in them, the
following are to be used.

Take of Castor one dram, of volatile Salt, Amber, half a dram, with a
sufficient quantity of extract of Rue, make 24 small Pills, let her take three
every Night.

But it is to be noted that Steel Medicines in whatsoever form or Dose they are
taken, occasion sometimes in Women great disorders both of Body and Mind, and
that not only on the first days, which is usual almost in every body, but also
almost all the time they are taken; in this case the use of Steel must not
presently be interrupted at those times, but Laudanum must be given every night
for some time in some hysteric water, that they may the better bear it; but
when the symptoms are mild, and it seems that the business may be done without
taking steel, I think it sufficient to bleed, and to purge three or four times,
and then to give the altering hysteric Pills abovementioned, Morning and
Evening for ten days.

It is to be noted that some Women do so abhor hysteric Medicines, that they
are much injured thereby, therefore they must not be given to such.

If the blood is so very feeble, and the confusion of the Spirits so great,
that steel ordered to be used, according to the method prescribed, is not
sufficient to cure the disease, the Patient must drink some mineral waters
impregnated with the Iron Mine, such as are Tunbridge, and some others lately
found out. But this is more especially to be observed in drinking of them, viz.
That if any Sickness happens, that is to be referred to hysteric symptoms, in
this Case the Patient must forbear drinking them a day or two, 'till that
symptom that hindered their passage is quite gone.

But if the Disease by reason of its obstinacy will not yield to steel-waters,
the Patient must go to the Bath; and when she has used these waters inwardly
three Mornings following, the next day let her go into the Bath, and the day
following let her drink them again; and so let her do by turns for two whole
Months.

Venice Treacle alone, if it be used often, and a long while, is a great remedy
in this Disease.

Spanish Wine medicated with Gentian, Angelica, Wormwood, Centaury, the yellow
rind of Oranges, and other Corroboratives infused in it, does a great deal of
good, some spoonfuls of it being taken thrice a day, if the woman be not of a
thin and choleric habit of Body.

The Peruvian-Bark also wonderfully comforts and invigorates the Blood and
Spirits, a Scruple being taken Morning and Evening. But if any of the Remedies
abovementioned do not well agree, which often happens in choleric and thin
Constitutions, then a Milk Diet may be used; but nothing does so much
strengthen the Blood and Spirits, as riding much on Horseback every day for a
long while. If the Disease be such, or so great a one, that it will not bear a
truce 'till it may be cured with Medicines that corroborate the Blood and
Spirits, we must presently make use of hysteric Remedies, as Assa-faetida,
Galbanum, Castor, Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, and whatever else has a filthy and
ungrateful smell.

To conclude, if some intolerable pain accompanies this Disease, or if their be
violent Vomitings, or a Looseness, then besides hysteric Medicines
abovementioned, Laudanum must be used, which is only able to restrain these
symptoms. But in quieting these pains which vomiting occasions, we must take
great care that they are not mitigated, either by Laudanum, or any other
Paregorick, before due evacuations have been made, unless they almost exceed
all humane patience; but if the Sick has vomited a great while, you must give
Laudanum without delay, and such a dose as is not only equal to the violence
and duration of the symptom, but such an one as is sufficient to vanquish it.

Of Barrenness.
BArrenness is an impotence to conceive, coming from defect either of the
Genitals, or of the blood, or of the menstruous blood.

First, through the defect of the Genitals, either by the closing up of the
Orifice of the womb, which may be cut and opened by Art; or through the
narrowness of the parts, for so they will not admit the Yard; or by reason of
some Ulcers or Excrescencies in the neck of the womb. Or by reason of some
fault in the seed, either the woman being too young, or too old, or through
some distemper in the Vessels dedicated to generation, and then the woman
perceives very little or no pleasure in the act of Copulation. The Cure of this
is referred to the Chapter of the distempers of the womb.

Or when there is not that due proportion of seed which ought to be in both
parties, which chiefly arises from the use of those things that extinguish
barrenness, as Mint, Rue, Camphire.

Or from Enchantments; and then the man cannot lie with his wife; or though he
should, yet cannot emit the seed: Against which it is affirmed that the
drinking a draught of cold water that drops from the mouth of a young
Stone-horse as he drinks, and saved in a little vessel, is very potent.

Or when the womb does not draw the seed which is ejected, and that by reason
of some cold and moist distemper; in which case all sorrow, anger, and much
sleep are to be avoided; as also the eating of Milk, fresh Cheese, and any
thing that is made of dough. Neither is she to eat Endive, Spinach, Beets,
Lettice, Nuts, Cherries, Purslane, Onions, Garlic, or such like; nor much
broth, vinegar, and fat flesh. In the next place, the womb must be cleansed
from over-abundance of moisture, with syrup of Wormwood, with the decoction of
Hart's-tongue, Fennel, Cumin, and Aniseed.

After this take once every 14 days, a dram of blessed Pills, fasting five
hours after them.

Take also of these following Pills. Take of Labdanum, Agaric, Wax, and Sheep
suet tried, of which you may make Pills to take two or three of them every
morning, or use this confection: Take shaven Ivory, Ash keys, yellow and wild
Rape-seed, Siler mountain, with red and white Behen, of each one dram, Cinnamon,
Galingale, long Pepper, Cloves and Mace, Balsam-wood, Rosemary-flowers,
Blatrae, Byzantiae, Marjoram, Pennyroyal, of each four scruples, Baulm,
Bugloss, Citron Pills, of each two scruples, Pearls one scruple, Musk 2 grains,
white sugar twenty four ounces; sees this with Malmsey, and make thereof a
Confection.

Or because of some Diseases in the parts; where note, that too much fatness of
the Call does close the mouth of the womb: such women must not sleep much,
especially in the day time; they must use strong Clysters that are warm and
dry, and purge often.

Or when the Womb does not attract the seed when it is cast in; which proceeds
from a moist intemperance, which is by the looseness of the fibers of the Womb,
so that the Womb cannot contract it self; which is cured as in the moist
distemper: Or by reason of the thickness of the Womb; for then the blood that
increases the seed does not slide down to that place. The cure hereof requires
a thin diet, purging and sweating; or by reason of the slipperiness thereof,
which happens by reason of the running of the whites in women: The cure whereof
consists in the stopping of the whites, which has been already treated of, or
by reason of the gaping of the Orifice, which has been occasioned either by
difficult birth, or by some abortion. The cure is performed by astringent
Medicines, among which the chiefest are the fomentation of Lentisk and Myrtle;
or by reason of some sudden cough or sneezing, immediately after copulation, by
which the seed is shaken forth. Or when the Womb does not alter the seed that
is cast in, through an immoderate cold distemper.

Sometimes through heat, and then it would be requisite to avoid hot air, and
to keep the part about the womb cold; the eating of hot meats and spices must
be avoided. Purge after blood-letting in the Basilick vein of the right hand,
with Electurium de Epythymo, and juice of Roses, of each two drams and a half,
whey four ounces, mix them well together, and take them in the morning,
sleeping on, and fasting four hours upon. Purge also with Triphera Saracenica,
and Rheubarb, with potions prepared and mixed with syrup of Roses, Violets, and
Endive. Take Pistacia, Eringo's, of each half an ounce, of Saffron a dram,
Lignum Aloes, Galangal, Avens, Mace, red and white Behen, Baulm-flowers, of
each four scruple, shavings of Ivory, and Cassia rinds, of each two scruples,
syrup of Ginger confected twelve ounces, white Sugar six ounces; sees these
together with the syrup in 12 ounces of Baulm-water, until it be all boiled
away; when it is cold, put some more water to it, and stir them together; and
at last of all, mix with it a scruple and a half of Musk and Amber: of this
Conserve let the woman take thrice a day; to wit, in the morning, an hour
before supper, and an hour after dinner.

Or it proceeds from obstruction of the Flowers; in which case, first let blood
in the Basilick vein, then purge with Opoponax, and Hiera Composita, of each
half a dram, to be made up into seven Pills, to be taken in the morning,
sleeping upon them an hour and a half, with a draught of sugared water five
hours after; or with a potion of syrup of vinegar compounded, syrup of Hemp
agrimony, of each three quarters of an ounce; Feverfew, Mugwort, and Elecampane
roots, of each an ounce, and mix them together: Then she may put up into the
Womb a pessary of Musk, Amber, Aloes-Wood, and Ash keys, of each three grains,
Saffron half a scruple, Hares rennet as much as suffices, which being made up
like a good big Tent, she must keep a whole day in her Body.

Of the bringing up of Children, and of their Diseases.
Of the Diseases of the Head.
THE Diseases common to Children, are first certain little ulcerous risings,
chiefly in the Head; sometimes in the whole Body; they arise from some vicious
humor either collected in the Womb, or out of the Womb, by reason of the
badness of the milk containing a serous, salt, and nitrous quality: If there be
no ill to be suspected, the humor may be driven forth by giving the Child some
Syrup of Fumatory, or Hartshorn burnt: The Nurse is to be purged, and the
matter offending to be tempered with Syrup of Borage, or Fumary: If there be
much corruption under the Crust of the Scab, the Head of the Child is to bo
bathed with some softning decoction, and then to be anointed with some drying
Ointments.

Sometimes they are troubled with an inflammation of the Head, with which is
joined a hollowness in the forepart of the Head; and in the Eyes; it may arise
from the milk, if the Nurse be subject to drink overmuch strong drink; in the
Cure, you must beware of applying things which are too refrigerating.

They are also many times affected with a kind of Epilepsie, which proceeds
sometimes from extraordinary frights, from Milk that lies corrupted in the
stomach, and sometimes from Worms moving themselves in the guts; and sometimes
it is the consequent of other Diseases. The Cure is to be observed, partly in
the Fit, and partly after the Fit: The Smaragd-stone, and the Hoof of a wild
Elk put into the left Ear are very profitable, and take good effect; vomiting
also, and this Emplaister of white Amber, Frankincense, and Mastick, of each a
dram and a half, Galbanum, Opopanax* of each a scruple, Misleto of an Oak two
drams, Ambergreece six grains, Musk three grains, seed of Male Peonie half a
dram, Labdanum, one dram and a half, a little Oil of Nutmeg, and sprinkled with
the dust of Cubebs; the forepart of the head may be also anointed with Oil of
white Amber. Fears and starting in the Child's sleep, are occasioned from the
putrid Vapors which are carried up with the animal Spirits, and arise from the
Stomach; therefore they happen to Infants that suck greedily. In the Cure, care
must be taken that the Child do not fill it self too unreasonably, and provide
that good and sound Milk may be generated, and that the Children be not put to
sleep upon a full stomach: The stomach of the Child anointed near the orifice
with Oil of Quinces, and Mastick, and Oil of Nutmegs. Before sleep dissolve a
little roll of Diamosch in Milk, and give the Child; unless the Child be
overmuch troubled with heat, you may give it a little Treacle once in a week;
overmuch watching, or weakness, is occasioned by sharp Vapors which arise out
of the stomach, by reason of the badness of the Milk; sometimes it is
occasioned by Fevers, and pain of some peculiar parts; there is nothing better
than to anoint the soles of the Child's feet with Marrow, which has no danger
in it, rather than to give the Child stronger Opiates. A looking asquint; in
new born Children is cured by putting a Candle opposite to the place where the
Child casts its Eyes.

Moistness of the Ears, by reason of the moistness of the Head, gathers
quantity of humors together: The Cure of this must not be overhasty; yet the
Urine of Children distilled and dropped into the Ear, is a very approved Remedy.

Bigness and swelling of the Head in little Children.
SOmetimes in Children that are newly born, the Head grows to an extraordinary
bigness which come to pass, either by reason of abundance of water contained in
the same, which water is contained, either between the skin and the
Pericraneum, or between the bone and the Pericranium, or between the bone and
the Membranes called the Dura Matter, and the Pia Matter.

Or by reason of abundance of Vapors gathered together between the bones and
the skin of the head, which cause the head to grow to such an extraordinary
bigness, that it causes oftentimes the death of the Child.

If water be gathered together between the bone of the head, and the Membranes
of the Brain, it causes a giddiness and Epilepsy to the Infant, without being
able to take any rest. For the Cure of the windy affection you may use
fomentations, in case the wind be contained only between the skin and the
Pericranium; for which purpose, you may take of the leaves of Sage, Betony,
Agrimony, sweet smelling flag, and wild Margerom, of each a handful; Aniseed
and Fennel seed, of each two drams; Camomile flowers, Melilot, and red Roses,
of each one handful; boil all these in common water, adding to it a little
Wine, and thereof make a Fomentation for the part affected, which may be
assisted with a plaster made of Oil of Aniseeds, and bitter Almonds, of each
one Ounce, Oil of Camomile an Ounce and a half, Laurel and Juniper Berries, of
each two drams, Aniseeds and Fennel-seeds, of each one dram and a half, of the
best Wine a pint; boil them to the consumption of the Wine, adding to the rest
half an ounce of Venice Turpentine, and as much Wax as is sufficient: As for
the watery distemper though it be difficult to Cure, yet you must try this
Fomentation to digest this Humor: Take Wormwood, Betony, creeping Time,
Pennyroyal leaves, of each a handful, red Rose leaves, and leaves of Stoechas,
a little handful, Cypress Nuts, Orange-flowers, and Florentine Orrice, of each
two drams, boil them all in a Lie made of Vine-twigs and stalks; after which
you may use this Plaster. Take the powder of Bettony, Sage and Wormwood, of
each two drams, Oil of Camomile and Roses, of each two Ounces, Unguenti
Comitissae one ounce, as much Wax as is sufficient: But if these Remedies
profit nothing, the only means left is to open the Head.

Of the Diseases of the Eyes, Ears, and Noses in Children.
MANY times Children are troubled with a light inflammation in their Eyes, with
a certain gum, and thickness which hinders them from opening the eyelid: The
most present remedies are, either for the Nurse to wash the Eyes with a little
of her Breast milk, or else with a little Plantain and Rose Water mixed together.

Sometimes the Nostrils are so stopped that they are not able to draw their
Breath, but with much pain. For the Cure of which, the Nurse must moisten a
linen Cloth in a little Ointment of Roses, or a little very good Pomatum,
'till the hard matter within be dissolved.

Many times there flows a moist humor from their heads, which happens to those
who have moist brains in the cure of this it must be the care of the Nurse to
cleanse the ears, both within and without; afterward let her drop into them a
little oil of bitter Almonds, and Honey of Roses mixed together.

Of certain Ulcers in Childrens mouths.
THere do many times grow a certain kind of Ulcers in Childrens mouths: For the
cure of which the Nurse in the first place must use a good and sound diet, then
must the Ulcers themselves be rubbed with a little Honey of Roses, and syrup of
Violets, with a drop or two of Plantain-water; or you may wash them with half
an ounce of Rose Water, or Plantain-water, in which put half a dram of Vitriol;
if they be very red and inflamed, take Brambles, flowers of Pomgranates, Roses,
Sanders, of each two drams, Alum half a dram; boil them in water, afterward
strain them to the quantity of three ounces, in which dissolve half an ounce of
syrup of Mulberries.

If they be white, take Amber, Frankincense-wood, Cypress-Nuts, Pomegranate
flowers, of each two drams, flowers of Roses and Myrtles, of each half a
handful; boil them in water to the consumption of four ounces, wherein dissolve
an ounce and a half of Honey of Roses.

Of certain other Tumors, called Paroulis and Espoulis.
PAroulis is a little swelling, red, and inflamed, and is ingendered commonly
of a hot choleric blood, or else from a salt phlegm that falls down upon the
gums, causing not only the gums, but the neck and chaps to be swelled. For the
cure, you may anoint the gums with this ointment: Take of fine Flower eleven
drams, powder of Tragachanth one dram, burnt Alum one scruple, Rose Water one
ounce; if there be any inflammation, rub the gums with a muscilage made of the
seed of Quinces, made with Rose Water, and Plantain-water, adding to it a
little syrup of Jujubes. If the swelling be obstinate, bring it to a
suppuration with Figs, Raisins, Jujubes, Liquorish, and French Barley, well
boiled; when it is opened and launced, cleanse and dry it with honey of Roses
syrup of Roses and Cherries.

The Espoulis is a little excrescence of Flesh happening between the teeth, but
most commonly the great teeth. Take the root of Bugloss an ounce and a half,
Plantain, Agrimony a handful, whole Barley a small handful, red Roses half a
handful, Pomgranate flowers 2 drams, 4 Dates, a dram and a half of Liquorish;
make a decoction and strain it, and then add to it an ounce of syrup of Roses,
and Pomgranates, to wash the place affected: you also may wash it with this
Remedy. Take of the juice of Pomgranates and Quinces, of each half an ounce,
juice of Barberies and Lettice of each two drams, a little of the decoction of
Lentils, and red Roses.

Of the two strings under the Tongue of a Child,
THere is one of these Strings or Ligaments, which appears, reaching from the
bottom of the tongue, and extending it self to the top of the tongue; this must
be cut off first with a pair of Cizers, and the place rubbed with a little
Mosche Salt.

There is another Ligament which rises from the root, and extends it self to
the middle of the tongue, which is more hard and large, which hinders the
tongue either from being stretched out, or to be moved in the mouth. The Cure
hereof belongs wholly to the Surgeon.

Of the Cough in Children.
THE Cough in Children comes either from the distillation of some cold and
sharp humor distilling from the brain: If the humor be cold, the Child is also
troubled with a viscous and slimy Phlegm, which lies in the passages of
respiration: If the humor flowing down be hot, the face of the Infant will be
red; if it come of a cold humor, the Child must be kept indifferently warm,
giving it a little oil of sweet Almonds and Sugar Candy; it will not be amiss
also to wash the feet of the Child in Ale, wherein certain Cephalic herbs have
been boiled, and after that to anoint the plants, or soles of his feet with
Gooses fat.

The breast of the Child may be also rubbed with oil of sweet Almonds, and
fresh-butter, and upon this put little linen clothes something warm. If it be
accompanied with any viscous matter, or phlegm, you may give the Infant a little
syrup of Maidenhair, or syrup of Liquorish, and Hysop mingled together; or
give the Infant this water to drink; Take of Rainwater, and Fountain Water, of
each a pint, white Sugar one ounce, Honey an ounce, Vinegar two drams; boil
them altogether, and clarify them, and let the Infant drink it.

Of breeding Teeth.
IN breeding Teeth, the difficulty and pain that the Child endures, is easily
perceived; and whether that be the thing which the Child is afflicted with, may
be easily guessed at by the time of breeding teeth, which is about the seventh
month; beside, the Infant is perceived to be often putting his fingers in his
mouth, and the Nurse perceives the Infant to gripe her breasts hard, etc. the
place where the teeth are about to break out looks white; there are also
watchings, and the sense of a very great pain. The swelling gums are to be
anointed with Hares brains boiled, or the fat of it. If they be inflamed, wash
them with oil of Roses, and white Wax, and the juice of Nightshade: if they be
exulcerated anoint them with butter that has no Salt in it, with a little
Honey and powder of Frankincense.

Of the inflammation of the Navel-string in Infants.
SOmetimes after the binding of the Navel-string, it happens to exulcerate: for
the cure use an emplaister of Pompholyx, or anoint it with oil of Roses, and a
little Populeon.

Of the Worms.
OFtentimes Children are extremely troubled with Worms; they are generated of a
viscous and flegmy humor; are sometimes round, and then Children are commonly
troubled with a Fever, and grow lean, their appetite fails them, they start in
their sleep, they have a dry cough joined with it, with a stinking breath, and
an ill color in their faces; the eyes hollow and dark with a kind of irregular
Fever, which comes three or four times a night, and they often rub their
noses; if they be little worms, they have always a desire to go to stool, and
their excrements are very purous. If the Infant be young, the Nurse must be
sure to keep a good diet, abstaining from all raw fruits, Pease and Beans, and
all milky things, and any thing that shall be of a hard concoction: Next, you
may lay a plaster of the Mass of Pills Sine quibus, half a dram, powder of
Wormwood one dram, Myrrh and Aloes of each two scruples, meal of Lupines a dram
and a half, the Gall of an Ox as much as suffices; if the Infant be any thing
grown, you may give him in a little broth a small quantity of Hartshorn.

Of the Convulsion in Infants.
THe Signs of Convulsion are the hanging backward of the head, insomuch that
the hinder part of the head seems to touch the shoulders; sometimes the head
and the neck hang so far forward, that the Chin touches the Breast.

The Cure of this: If it come of too great abundance of humors, let the Air
wherein the Child is nursed be hot and dry, and exercise much; let the Nurse
not sleep long, especially after dinner; and let her diet be rather drying than
any way moist. If the Child do not suck he must avoid Meats that do trouble the
head, and fill it up with Vapors, or slimy meats that may stop the passages of
the Veins: Sweet things are very hurtful, but Honey and Water wherein a little
Sage and Betony have been boiled, it will not be amiss to give him: If
purgation be needful, let the Nurse rather than the Child purge, which may be
performed with Cassia or Manna. If the Child be any thing big, let his Belly be
kept loose, by giving him a little water wherein Sena has been steeped 24
hours, tempering it with a very small quantity of the juice of Citron; or you
may give him a little of the powder of Diacarthamum in the pap of an Apple.

If the Convulsion comes of dryness or emptiness, or by reason of some great
evacuation, flux of the Belly, vomiting, hunger, or the like, the Child must be
nursed in an Air more moist than dry, and his diet must be the same. The best
and most approved remedy is to apply a cautery in the hinder part of the Head
to the nook of the Neck, between the second and third Vertebra, which may be
done to new born Children; Frictions also of the Legs, Backbone and Thighs are
very profitable; as also Cupping-Glasses applied to the Thighs and Legs.

If the Convulsion come by reason of the Worms, you may give him this Clyster.
Take of simple Hydromel four ounces, new butter one ounce, powdered Aloes half
a dram, and make a Clyster. Or you may give him two drams of Earthworms killed,
dried and poudered, Sugar poudered one ounce, and let the Child take two drams
of it every day in a spoonful of Lettice-water.

If any venomous Vapor be the cause hereof, let him take six grains of
Treacle, or Mithridate in Mint-water.

Of the swelling of the Hypochondria in Infants.
WHICH causes Children by reason of the narrowness of the Mouth of the Stomach
to be troubled with a difficulty of breathing: It arises from the greediness
of the Infant, which either sucks too great a quantity of Milk, or of other
Meats. The inward Cure of this is performed by administering the Powder of the
root of Orrice or Paeonie.

Of Costiveness in Children.
THIS proceeds from the unskilfulness of the Nurse in the Dieting of the Child,
or from a cold and dry Distemper of the Guts, or from the hot and dry Distemper
of the Bowels; in this case the Belly may be well loosned with Cassia, or with
a liniment composed of new Oil of sweet Almonds, Goose fat, May butter,
Ointment of Marshmallows, of each two drams, Colocynth. gr. sixteen, one
scruple of Salt, Species Hierae one scruple, Diagridion four grains; make of
this an ointment, and anoint the Navel.

Or it proceeds from a viscous Phlegm, which wraps about and holds the dregs,
which may be remedied by a suppository of Mouse Dung, and Goats suet, or by the
use of an Emplaister of Aloes, Bulls-gall, Myrrh, and May butter, to be laid
upon the Navel.

Of looseness in Children.
LOoseness of the Belly happens either in the time of Teeth breeding, or out of
the time; in the time of breeding Teeth, either by reason of the corruption of
the nutriment, or by reason of overmuch watching through the pain of the Teeth,
or by reason of a Fever, and some unnatural heat: It must not be suddenly
stopped, if it be not over copious, and that the Infant can endure it; the Belly
must be afterward cleansed with Roses solutive, and afterward stopped; great
observation being had whether the cause come from a hot or cold Distemper.

Of Burstness in Children.
BUrstness happens to Children, either by reason that the Peritonaeum is burst
through crying, or falling, or splaying with the Thighs: For the Cure whereof
the Child must be kept quiet, and still from crying; upon which, after the part
affected is well bound up, you may give the Child inwardly of the essence of
the greater Comfrey one spoonful, with two drops of Balsam of Sal Gemma. You
may also foment the place with a fomentation made of the roots of the greater
Comfrey, and Osmund Royal, the bark of Elm, and Ash, Knot-grass, each half an
ounce, the leaves of Plantain, Mullein, Rupture wort, Horsetail, Flowers of
Camomile, red Roses, and Melilot, of each a handful and a half, Balaust,
Cypress Nuts and Acorns, of each two drams; put these into two bags, and boil
them in equal parts of sour Wine and Smiths water, for a Fomentation to be
used for a quarter of an hour; then you may lay on a Plaster of the red drying
Ointment eleven ounces, powder of Mastick, Olibanum, and Sarcocol, Cyprest
Nuts, of each one dram, with a little Wax and Oil of Mastick to make a
Plaster, which must be put upon the place affected, and bound down with a
little pillow.

Sometimes this burstness proceeds from a watery humor abounding in the
Abdomen, which descending into the Cods causes them to swell; for which you
may use with good success this Ointment: Take of Unguent. Comitiss. and the red
drying Ointment, of each two ounces, Pigeons dung half an ounce, live Sulphur
three drams, powder of Laurel Berries, and Mustardseed, of each a dram, Oil of
Dill, and Venice Turpentine of each three drams, Wax as much as suffices: This
is also an extraordinary remedy for the burstness proceeding from Wind.

Of the Inflammation of the Navel.
THE Inflammation of the Navel arises when the blood gathers thither by reason
of some external hurt; the danger is very great, if it should Apostemate, and
so the Guts fall down; and therefore suppuration must be hindered as much as may
be.

Of the jutting forth of the Navel.
THIS differs from the Inflammation, because here the Navel does not give way to
the touch, neither is the color of the Skin changed, neither is there any very
great pain, or Pulse, unless the Intestines are very much fallen; it proceeds
from the ill binding thereof at first, which is incurable; or when a greater
portion than needs of the Navel string is left. Secondly, from a laxation of
the Peritonaeum, and then the tumor is equal, nor does the Navel jut forth
very far: In the Cure hereof, you must let the Child abstain from all windy
meats, and from much crying. Sometimes it is occasioned by the rupture of the
Peritonaeum; the swelling is hardly perceived when the Child lies upon his
back, but increases and swells forward when he walks, sits, cries and bawls:
In the Cure of this, the Moss that grows upon the wild Prune Tree, is very much
commended; or you may make little swathbands of Leather, and anoint them with
Oxycroceum.

Of the Stone in the Bladder.
THIS is known by the coming forth of the Urine by drops and with pain, which
is sometimes unmixed, sometimes containing a kind of serous humor, sometimes
died with a little blood: It is produced either by the Milk which is engendered
of meats that do increase the Stone, or through a hot distemper of the Liver,
which attracts the Chyle, and sends it unaltered to the Bladder: For the Cure
you must use Baths, among which this is commended to anoint the Bladder withal;
take Oil of Scorpions, Oil of bitter Almonds, Conies Grease, and Hens Grease,
of each an ounce and a half, and of the juice of Pellitory of the Wall two
ounces: Or take Sal Tartar one ounce, Parsly-water a Pint, mix them through a
fine paper rubbed over with the Rinds of Oranges, and give a small quantity
thereof.

Of the not holding of the Urine.
THis arises either from the Muscle, which shuts the orifice of the Bladder,
which is so disposed, that it is loosed upon the least exciting of the Urine,
and grows so into a habit, that it many times accompanies them to their Graves;
or from the stone in the Bladder, or from the weakness of the Sphincter
proceeding from a cold and moist distemper; which is cured partly by the good
diet of the Nurse, and partly by convenient Medicines, among which a bath made
of Sulphur, Nitre, and the leaves of Oak, is exceeding good.

Of the Intertrigo.
WHen the little skin in the Hips is separated from the true skin; it arises
first from the sharpness of the Urine, especially in Children that are more
corpulent, by reason of the dirt which frets the skin, being gathered together
in the wrinkles. Bath the place, and then sprinkle upon it either white Nihili,
or anoint it with Oil of Litharge.

Of Leanness.
THis arises either from a subtle kind of Worms, which are generated in the
most musclely parts of the Back and Arms, and consume the Body; they break
forth sometimes like to black hairs; if you wash those parts with a Bath mixed
with Bread and Honey, they are taken away either with a Razor, or with a crust
of bread. Secondly, it arises from the small quantity of milk, which is
oftentimes remedied by changing the Nurse.

Of the difficulty which Children have to make water.
IF the Disease proceed from sharpness of the Urine, the Nurse must use such a
way of diet as is proper for the tempering and cooling of the blood; she must
be purged, and let blood, using afterward cooling and refrigerating broths. If
it proceed from any gross humor ingendered in the Bladder, the Nurse must
abstain from all meats that do breed gross humors, as milky meats, Pease and
Beans, and such like.

If the Child be troubled with gravel, which may be perceived by the whiteness
and rawness of the Urine, with a gravelly settling at the bottom, and the
continual pain in making water: If the Child be any thing big, let a potion be
given him of an ounce and a half of sweet Almonds, an ounce of Pellitory water,
and two drams of the juice of Lemons; use as much of this at a time as is
convenient. Or take of this powder, of the blood of a Hare six ounces, of the
root of Saxifrage one ounce, burn them in an earthen pot; and if the Infant
suck, give him a scruple of this powder in a little milk.

Of the Inflammation of the Almonds of the Ears.
IF the Child be very small, you must wash the throat as near the root of the
Tongue as may be with a linen cloth, tied to a stick dipped in this Gargarism;
Take of new extracted Cassia one dram, syrup of dry Roses one dram and a half,
six ounces of the decoction of Coriander. Or you may anoint the Neck with Oil
of Violets, and Camomile, binding the Neck with a little roller well anointed
with the same; when the Child goes to bed, you may give him in a spoon a little
syrup of dried Roses, of Pavot and Nenuphar mingled together, Oxycrate alone
does make an excellent Gargarism.

If they come to a Suppuration, you must use this Gargarism: Take of the
decoction of Barley, Plantain, Agrimony, Speedwell, Honey-suckle, and herb Rob
six ounces; in which dissolve Honey of Roses, and Sugar Candy, of each half an
ounce, to make a Gargarism.

Of Vomiting.
IF it proceed from abundance of milk which the Child sucks, you must take care
that the Child suck less and often.

If it come from any ill humor contained in the stomach, besides that the Nurse
must keep a very good diet, the Infant must be purged with a small expression
of Rheubarb, giving it afterward a little Mint-water, sweetened with syrup of
Quinces to comfort the stomach; putting afterward upon his stomach this
Plaster: Take of the pulp of condited Quinces two ounces, red Roses, Wormwood,
and red Saunders, of each two drams, Oil of Quinces as much as suffices; make
a plaster of this, and lay it upon the stomach of the Child.

Of the Hicquet.
IF it come from an over much repletion, it will not be amiss to make him
Vomit, of whatsoever age he be; or if it be necessary that a greater force
should be used, you must try to make him Vomit by putting down the Throat a
feather dipped in oil: If from the badness of the Nurses mi^k, she must be
changed for a better; if from the coldness of the stomach, you must use
remedies to comfort it, as little Tablets of Diarrhodon, of which you must
dissolve a scruple in the Milk of the Nurse; you must also chafe the stomach of
the Child with Oil of Wormwood, Mastick, and Quinces.

Of the pain of the Belly in Children.
IF the disease come from indigestion, and moistness, the little Infant will
Vomit, and be troubled with a Flux of the Belly, and the Belly will be hard. In
which case, you may give the Infant one ounce of sweet Almonds drawn without
fire, and mingled with a quantity of Sugar Candy, or anoint the Belly with this
ointment: Take Oil of Camomile, and Oil of sweet Almonds, of each an ounce and
a half, mingle them, and therewith anoint the Belly: If wind be the cause, you
may mingle a little Oil of Rue in the foresaid Ointment.

Of the Small Pox in Children.
THE signs of this disease are pains in the Head, accompanied with a Fever,
redness about the Eyes, a dry Cough, and you shall mark in the skin up and down
the body, certain little spots upon the Face, Back, Breast, and Thighs. The
small Pox is dangerous if they come forth with much pain, if they be greenish,
bluish, or blackish.

For the cure of this; If the Infant suck, the Nurse must keep a good order of
diet, she may eat broth of Hens, with Endive, Cichory, Bugloss, and Borage
boiled therein.

Now to make the small Pox come forth the more quickly; if the Child be little,
the Nurse must drink this following Potion. Take of fat Figs one ounce, peeled
Lentils half an ounce, Gum Lacca two drams, Gum Tragacanth, and Fennel-seed, of
each two drams and a half; make of this a decoction in Fountain Water, and
strain it to the quantity of two pints, sweeten this either with Sugar, or
syrup of Maidenhair; let her drink of this in the morning a good glass full.

Or, you may give the Child, if it be able to take it, this Julep to be used
very often: Take of Cordial-waters two ounces and a half, syrup of Lemons one
ounce, mingle it, and use it often; four or five hours after, give him of
powder of Unicorns-horn, and Bezoar. Now to keep this venomous humor from
attacking the eyes, temper a little Saffron in a small quantity of Plantain and
Rose Water, and rub the eyelids, or you may anoint them with Tutie: For
keeping them from the Nose; take Rose Water, and Betony-water, of each an
ounce, Vinegar half an ounce, juice of Pomegranates six ounces, in which steep
two drams of Sanders, and two drams of the powder of Citron-peel; add to this
six grains of Saffron, and make a Medicine for the Child to smell often to; the
same Medicine will serve for the ears, by stopping them with a little Cotton.

To preserve the Mouth and Throat, and Tongue, take this Gargarism; Take whole
Barley one handful, Plantain leaves, leaves of Sorrel, Arnogloss, Agrimony, and
Vervein, of each one handful; boil this to the quantity of six ounces,
dissolving in it syrup of dry Roses, and Pomgranates, of each half an ounce,
Saffron half a scruple.

To preserve the Lungs, use syrup of Jujubes, Violets, and Nenuphar; when they
are fully come out, to make them die the more quickly, rub the Face with Oil of
sweet Almonds drawn without fire. Or use this Ointment; Take old Lard, cut it
in small pieces, and melt it in a pot, then strain it, then beat it, and mingle
it with water for your use.

When the Pox is totally dead, take this Remedy to take away the marks. Take
Half the weight of two Crowns, clear Cream two ounces, mix them together, and
with a Feather dipped therein anoint the Face of the Child two or three days;
this causes the skin to grow smooth, leaving not a pit in the Face.

A Full SUPPLY
Of such most useful and admirable Secrets, which Mr. Nicholas Culpepper in his
brief Treatise, and other English Writers in the Art of Midwifery, have
hitherto wilfully passed by, kept close to themselves, and wholly omitted; now
at last made public for the general good:

By T. Chamberlain, M. P.
CHAP. I. In what manner the Generative, or Begetting Seed has its beginning;
and particularly of the four Degrees of Concoction.
THAT we may the better discern the whole course and order of Generation, I
have thought it convenient to demonstrate how great a similitude it bears with
the production of Plants: but first it is necessary to take notice what
Generative Seed is, and how extracted out of the three Concoctions.

We may observe the natural Procreation of man to be altogether such, as we
perceive the generation and beginning of Plants or Herbs of every kind to be:
For as they every one of them from the Seed of his Kind, cast into the Womb of
the Earth, do bud or increase, and do naturally grow to the perfect Form of its
proper Nature: So Man also being a reasonable Creature according to the quality
of the Body, does naturally draw his Original and Beginning from the sperm and
seed of Man, projected and cast forth into the Womb of Woman, as into a Field:
But that matter of Generation which we call sperm or seed, by its original and
nature, is only a superfluous Humor, the residue and remainder, I say, of the
nutriment and food, and the superfluity of the third concoction in the Body,
derived and conveyed along through the hidden and secret organs or instruments
from the chiefest Members of the body unto the generative parts, and serves
for generation And it has its beginning and breeding from the residues and
remnants of all the meats belonging to the nourishment of Man, after they be
altered and transmuted even to the third Concoction: Of the superfluity of
which concocted food collected and gathered together in its proper and due
manner, it is evident that the same is engendered, according to the constitution
of the age and nature; for there is made a threefold concoction of any meat,
altered and converted into the nourishment of the living Creature, even to
generation of seed, that concoction nevertheless following, which is the purest
of all Concoctions: For the Food being sent down into the stomach, by chewing
streightway the pure Nutriment which is ordained to the other part (the dry
Excrement being driven downward thorough the Guts to the Belly) through the
sucking Veins (named in Latin mesaraicae) carried as it were to one Gate
flowing out of innumerable Channels, is brought to the Liver; where to the
disposition of the former concoction, made in the stomach, there is forthwith
made the second concoction in the Liver of the food derived unto it, the
superfluous matter being separated, that is to say, both kinds of choler, and
the watrish humor drawn and attracted by the emulgent vessels (in Latin vasa
emulgentia) that it being strained through the kidneys, might descend down into
the bladder; then the residue, refined and cleansed in the Liver by this
concoction, that is to say blood, is conveyed over to the Heart, to receive its
vital administration and office. In the Heart again, is made the third
Concoction of the food being received at one time; for there blood having taken
unto it vital and lively spirit, being diffused and sent abroad throughout the
several members of the body, does again expel and void out that which is
superfluous in it self, by the secret pores and passages. At length here the
Spirit changes and turns the blood conveyed through the spermatical or
seed-vessels (being branches of vena cava) there also further concocted into
the nature of sperm or seed, by the twined revolutions and back-turnings of the
smallest vessels for this purpose, and by the glandulous or kernel'd substance
of the Testicles, and the seed passages (which they call Parastatae) available
in that behalf: So the blood, exquisitely wrought and labored, and for the
most part converted into vital spirits, is straightway conveyed by the Artery
named Aorta, and branches thereof to all the other Members of the whole body.
But in the fourth place (that we may add one thing over and above our purpose)
there is made an alteration of the food into the like substance of the thing
nourished, this juice quickening and strengthening life, which being the purest
of all, remained lastly with the vital spirit; that in like sort being
expelled, if any impure thing shall be remaining or engendered.

CHAP. II. The Generation of Man, compared with the production of Plants.
THAT the reason of this Generation may be made the more plain and evident unto
us, we will declare by a brief demonstration, that there is the same beginning
of Plants and Herbs, and of other things which fall under the same
consideration; therefore as in the seeds of every kind, the grain it self cast
into the Earth, is the food, and as it were the first subject of all the
alteration following, whereby it buds and springs, is augmented and grows up
into a nature like unto it; so meat being taken, affords in man's body the
first matter to a variable concoction. And as in Plants we may observe a most
certain separation of the pure from the impure, and of the remnant from the
superfluous matter; so here we perceive a natural separation and sequestration
of that which is unprofitable, from that which is profitable, by their certain
degrees: For first the seed being committed to the Earth, by and by swelling
with the moisture of the same, strippeth it self from that little skin, in
which it was enclosed, and springing upward, casts forth the same being
empty, as a dry Excrement, the grain in the mean time budding and sprouting
forth, that it may proceed forward toward the increase; afterward the increase
and growth stretching even to the fruit disrobed and bereaved of the Flower,
the second purging casts down the flower sprung up in the top of the bough,
but preserves the hope of the Fruit, being stripped of his flower, as that
thing which remains pure and profitable by the second purging. Afterward the
Fruit being grown to its just quantity, the third alteration casts down the
leaves, as the superfluity of this degree; but ordains the fruit, being now
so often cleansed and purged, for the utility of man's nourishment, maturity,
and ripeness being granted unto it. Put now, either the seed breaks, the
fruit lying hid in it, or else it sends it out by putrefaction; and being
cast into the ground it hasteneth again into the property of its own nature,
not tending toward it self, which is remaining, but to the likeness of its
first original, from whence it had its beginning; so that in this it appears
absolutely true, that Nature ingendereth things like unto it self; for every
thing does naturally covet and desire the form and likeness of that form whence
it is bred: Hence it comes to pass, that Apples grow not from Pears, nor Pears
from any other kind of fruit, unless it be so brought about by the means of
grafting and planting. And the same thing is to be acknowledged in the
generation of Man and Woman, which is to be confessed in the growing of Plants
and Herbs; that because we see bodies well distinguished by Members to be
engendered of seed, we may also believe that the same seed is derived from the
distinct and several parts of the body; wherefore let those be advised what
they say, who affirm the seed of generation to be engendered of the Brain only,
when as it is not so agreeable to the consideration of the Concoctions, nor to
the constitution of the bodies. True it is, that some, and that not a small
part, is derived from the Brain, but the chiefest part is collected together
from the chiefest parts of the whole body: For if we say, that this should be
engendered of one or two parts only; every one would find that this consequence
would follow by an infallible reason, namely, that those same parts only should
be engendered again: Therefore we may more rightly conclude, that besides that
beginning which it draws from the Brain, it is engendered from the whole body,
and the most especial parts of the same, the effect it self manifesting the
cause, most especially when we see distinct members, and perfectly finished,
according to the due form of the body, and so truly, that the thing begotten
does answer and agree to the constitution of the thing begetting; of feeble
seed, a feeble man being born; of strong seed, a strong and lusty man: By which
means it happens that we many times see the infirmities and ill favored
marks of the body in the Children, which are inherent in the Parents, and these
we firmly believe to have passed into them by the corruption of the seed. And
these things thus determined, may suffice to have been spoken concerning the
beginning and substance of Ingendring Seed.

CHAP. III. What course Parents ought to take that they may beget wise Children.
IT may well be admired, what the reason should be, that Nature being so wise
and provident in all her actings, should nevertheless be so overseen in a work
of so special regard as Mankind, that for one whom she produces wise, solid
and judicious, she brings so many into the World of those that are shallow,
half witted, and void of prudence: But having seriously considered with my
self, and searched into the reason of natural causes of this so strange a
matter; I easily found the true reason to be this, namely, that Parents apply
not themselves to the act of generation, with that order and diligence that is
required by nature, nor know the conditions which ought to be observed, that
their Children may prove wise and judicious. Now if by art we may procure a
remedy for this, we shall have brought to the Commonwealth the greatest
benefit she can receive. The main difficulty of this matter chiefly consists
herein, that we cannot discourse hereof in terms so seemly and modest, as exact
decency would require; but if for this reason I should forbear to insist upon
any particular note or observation, the whole business would be of small
validity; forasmuch as diverse grave Authors are of opinion, that wise men
ordinarily beget foolish Children, because in the act of Copulation they
abstain from certain diligences, which are of importance that the Son may
partake of the Fathers Wisdom.

For the more Methodical proceeding, I have thought good to divide the matter
of this discourse into four principal parts. The first is to show the natural
qualities and temperature which Man and Woman ought to possess, that they may
use Generation. The second, what diligence the Parents ought to employ, that
their Children may be male, and not Female. The third, how they may become wise
and not fools. The fourth, how they are to be ordered after their birth for
preservation of their wit. As to the first point: Diverse both ancient and
modern Authors have delivered their opinions to this effect, that in a well
ordered Commonwealth, there ought to be assigned certain surveyors of
Marriages, who should have skill and judgment sufficient to look into the
qualities of the persons that are to be married; and to allot to every woman a
husband, and to every man a wife agreeable and proportionable to them in all
respects: But whether such a thing be of absolute necessity in a State, or no,
let it lie upon the care and consideration of such as take upon them to manage,
and dispose the affairs of Commonwealths. Hippocrates and Galen took much
pains in prescribing certain Precepts about this matter, with several rules to
know what sort of Women were fruitful, and what not; what men were able for
generation, and what disable: But touching all this, they deliver very little
to the purpose, and that not with such distinction as is requisite for the
business in hand, therefore it will be necessary to begin this discourse from
its principles, and briefly to give the same its due order and method that so
we may plainly and clearly demonstrate from what Union of Parents wise children
are generated, and from what fools and faineants issue. To which end is
needful: First to be informed of a particular point of Philosophy, upon the
knowledge of which depends all that which is to be delivered touching this
first point; and that is this, that man is different from Woman in nothing else,
as Galen also observes, than in having his genital Members without his body
whereas a woman has all the very same parts within, so that if, when nature
has finished her work in the formation of man, she would convert him into a
Woman, there needs nothing else to be done, saving only to turn the Organs of
generation inward, and if, having formed a woman she would transform her to a
man, she may effect it by doing the contrary: But whether or no these things
have happened, as some affirm they have, and of the certainty of Hermaphrodites
being found in nature, may more commodiously be referred to a discourse by it
self. Now what might be the cause that the genital Members are engendered
within, or without, and that the creature becomes Male or Female, is a thing
plain and evident enough to demonstrate, considering that heat extends and
enlarges all things, and cold retains and closes them up; so that it is
concluded by all that are knowing in Philosophy and natural causes, that if the
seed be cold and moist, a woman is begotten, not a man: And if the same be hot
and dry, a man is begotten, not a Woman: Whence it is to be inferred, that
there is no man to be termed cold in respect of a woman, nor woman hot in
respect of a man.

This therefore is to be noted as a thing without all controversy or
exception, that the qualities which render a woman fruitful, are cold and
moisture, the womb holding the same proportion with man's seed, that the earth
does with Corn or any other grain; and we see, that if the earth want cold and
moisture, the seed will not prosper; and that those are the most fertile soyls
which partake most of cold and moist: yet these two qualities ought to keep a
certain measurableness, lest that, either by excess, or deficiency, generation
be spoiled; for as the Corn is vitiated by excess of rain, and overmuch cold;
so in conception the seed may be choked by over-abundance of these qualities;
and on the other side, if those parts in a woman should be temperate as in a
man, it were impossible she should conceive, or be a woman: Nor could she breed
that phlegmatic blood which ingendereth milk, by which, as Galen and Hypocrates
affirm, the birth is nourished while it remains in the mothers belly; neither
could she be beardless, or void of hair, if she were overmuch inclining to hot
and dry. Nevertheless, all women are not cold and moist alike, there being of
these qualities several degrees, some being cold and moist in the first degree,
some in the second, some in the third, and in each of these they may conceive,
if a man answer them in proportion of heat. As for the signs of these several
degrees of coldness and moisture in women, though hitherto they have not been
taken notice of by any, yet it will be very requisite in this place to consider
them according to the several effects, which each of these degrees produces.
First, by the quick apprehension and acuteness of wit in women, for if they be
very witty and acute, they are to be judged cold and moist in the first degree
only; if very shallow and simple, in the third degree, but if they partake of a
middle nature between these two extremes, it signifies that they are in the
second degree. Secondly, their Conditions; they being either cursed, or good
natured, according to these three degrees. Thirdly, their voice; which is
either shrill, or big according as they are more or less cold and moist.
Fourthly, their substance in flesh; leanness being a sign of little coldness
and moisture; grosness or over much corpulency, of the redundance of those
qualities: to be meanly fleshed, betokens the second degree. Fifthly, the
color of their face; which is either white, or swarthy, as these qualities are
intense or remiss; of the second degree is composed a fresh and lively color.
Sixthly, their hair; which is also either much, or little, according to the
exuberance, or defect of cold and moist. Seventhly, a handsome form and
proportion of body is the result of the middlemost degree; deformity arising
from either Extreme.

Now from all these Signs it may be concluded, that those women who are cold
and moist in the second degree, are of the perfectest temper, and in the best
capacity, as to their own proper nature, of bringing forth Children.

CHAP. IV. The signs to know the several degrees of hot and dry in a Man.
AS there are in Women three degrees of cold and moist, so likewise in Men
there are as many of hot and dry; and the same signs which discover those in
women, specify these in men; only, the first, or remiss degree in women
holds a proportion with the third, or intense degree in men; as namely,
whereas among women those have the biggest voices that are cold and moist in
the first degree; the like is to be concluded of men that are hot and dry in
the third, the defect in those answering to the excess in these: now to
understand these temperatures the more exactly, we must take notice of a very
observable point mentioned by Galen, which is; that the temperature of all
parts of the body, especially the brain, follows the temperature of the
Testicles: and he affirms that they are of more importance than the Heart,
alleging this reason; namely, that the Heart is the beginning of the life
only, but the Testicles are the beginning of living healthfully, and without
distempers.

CHAP. V. What Women ought to marry with what men, that they may have Children.
IN respect of married Women that prove Childless, Hypocrates advises this
experiment to be tried, to know whether the defect be on the Woman's part, or on
her Husbands, which is to make her suffumigations with Incense, or Storax, with
a Garment close wrapped about her, which may hang down on the ground, in such
sort, that no vapor, or fume may issue out, and if within a while after she
feel the savor of the Incense in her mouth, she may conclude that the
barrenness comes not through her own defect, but through her husbands; for as
much as the fumes found the passages open, whereby it pierced up to the
Nostrils: But although this proof perform that effect which Hippocrates
speaks of, namely, the piercing up to the inner part of the mouth; yet this
is no infallible argument of the Husbands barrenness, nor of the fruitfulness
of the Wife: Since want of Children may arise through an unapt disposition in
them both, in respect of the correspondency of qualities, for it has
oftentimes happened that a man who could not have Children by one wife, has had
them by another; the like also has befallen Women. What the correspondency
should be, which the man and wife ought to bear each to other, is expressed by
Hypocrates in these words. If the hot answer not the cold, and the dry the
moist, with measure and quantity; that is, if there meet not in the Womb two
Seeds, the one hot, the other cold, the one dry, the other moist, extended in
equal degree, there can be no generation: For so mavelous a work as the
formation of Man could not be performed, without a proportionable commixture of
seeds, which could not be, if the man's seed and the woman's were both of the
same temperature. To exemplify what I have said, it is to be concluded, that a
woman who is wily, ill-condition'd, shrill-voiced, lean, swarthy-coloured, and
deformed, (which are the signs of cold, and moist in the first degree) may
conceive by a man who is ignorant, good natured, sweet voic'd, corpulent,
having little hair, a well-colored face, and a handsome body, which are the
signs of hot and dry in the first degree; a woman cold and moist in the second
degree, in regard she retains a mean in all those signs abovementioned is
most like to be fruitful, because she comes nearest in proportion to men of
each several temperature: But from the first of these Unions or Conjoynings of
man and woman, are most likely to issue the wisest children, because the
dryness of the mother, corrects and amendeth the defect of the father.
Moreover, it is requisite that women be dried by a mature age, and not marry
over young; for from thence it comes to pass most commonly, that children prove
shallow, and endued with little wit.

CHAP. VI. What course is to be taken that Male Children be brought into the
World, not Female.
THose who see the comfort of having wise Children, must endeavor that they be
born Male; for the Female, through the cold and moistness of their Sex, cannot
be endowed with so profound a judgment. We find indeed, that they talk with
appearance of knowledge in slight and easy matters, but seldom reach any
further than to a slight superficial smattering in any deep Science. It is a
thing very well worth observation, that, whereas the right side of the reins,
and the right testicle, are naturally more hot and dry, and the left side of
the reins with the left testicle, more hot and moist, Nature seems to have
intended that which at the beginning of the World is recorded in History to
have been very frequent; as namely, that a woman brought forth two Children at
a birth, the one Male, the other Female, the right side which is hot and dry,
being assigned to the generation of Males* the left side which is cold and
moist, to the generation of Females, and it seems to have been so ordained, to
that end, that for every man there might be a wife: But after the Earth came to
be well increased with people, it happened as it appears, that this method and
design of Nature was broken off, and now not only the double Childbearing is
very rare, but a far greater number of women are daily brought forth into the
World than men: Whence it is to be gathered, that either Nature is grown weary,
or else interrupted in her course of working: However, since this defect of
Nature is to be remedied with care and diligence, if men would employ their
serious considerations in a matter of such importance; there are six things to
be observed by those that would obtain the accomplishment of their desire, in
the design whereof this Chapter treats. The first is, the eating those sorts of
meats which are hot and dry, provided they have not those qualities in too high
an excess, lest thereof be engenderd a man extremely wily and malicious, and
such a one whose actions may prove pernicious to the Commonwealth; but rather
let those viands be hot and dry in a moderate degree, such as are Hens,
Partridges, Turtles, Thrushes, Goats, etc. and those roasted. The second thing
is the feeding so moderately, that the stomach may overcome and digest that
meat which is eaten; for those very sorts of meat which are in their proper
nature hot and dry, yet being eaten in so great a quantity, that the nature
cannot digest them, they become cold and moist also, the immoderate drinking
Wine is absolutely to be forbidden, there being no rawness which so much
endamageth generation, as that of Wine, being so vaporous and subtle a Liquor.
Whereupon a Law was anciently enacted in the Carthaginian Commonwealth, which
prohibited the married couple to taste of Wine that day they were to perform
the rights of the Marriage Bed. The third is, to use much exercise, which by
fretting and consuming the excessive moisture of the Seed, heateth and dries
the same; whereas ease, and overmuch delicacy breeds coldness and moisture in
the Seed. And hence it comes to pass, that rich and great persons that live at
ease and feed high, have for the most part Daughters: And Hypocrates reports
that the principal persons of the ancient Scythians, who were very effeminate
and womanish, most commonly either begot Females, or else they proved either
Eunuchs, or Hermaphrodites: and being ignorant of the natural cause of this
defect, he says (and derides them for it) that they used to sacrifice to their
gods, imploring from them a remedy of that which was an effect of their
mis-governance. The fourth diligence is, not to use the act of Generation
until the Seed be well concocted and ripened, it being convenient for seven or
eight days before, to use those meats which we have already prescribed, and
observing the same course as Gardiners do with the Seeds which they would
preserve; for they attend till they ripen, and cleanse, and wax dry, since if
they should pluck them from the stalk before they are deeply seasoned, and
arrived to that point which is to be required, though they should lie in the
ground never so long, they would not grow at all. The fifth point, for a man to
accompany with his Wife four or five days before her natural Courses, in regard
the Child immediately stands in need of much food to nourish it. The sixth
and last point is to procure, that both the Seed of the Husband and Wife fall
into the right side of the Womb, by which means it happens that Males are
engendered; the reason of which is, as Galen affirms, that the right side of
the Womb holds affinity in temperature with the Liver, the right side of the
Reins, and the right Testicle, which we have already delivered to be more hot,
as the left side is more cold, by which Females are ingendered: To these things
there is another consideration to be added, which Galen has also observed,
namely, that the Seed of each Testicle, are of a different nature, for whereas
that of the right Testicle comes out more hot, more speedily, and in a lesser
quantity, that of the left comes out more cold, more slowly, and in greater
abundance.

CHAP. VII. What means are to be used for preserving the Childrens wit, after
they are formed.
MAN is compounded of a substance so subject to alteration and corruption, that
at the same instant in which he begins to be formed, he also begins to fade and
decline; whereupon Nature has provided, that in man's body there should be four
natural faculties: Attractive, Retentive, Concoctive, and Expulsive; the first,
concocting and altering the aliments which we eat, return to repair the
substance that was lost, each succeeding in his place; So that it little
avails to have ingendered a Child of the perfectest Seed, if we make no
choice of the meats which afterward we feed upon: For the Creation being
finished, there remains not for the creature any part of the substance
whereof it was composed. True it is, that the first Seed, if it be well
concocted, possesses such virtue, that digesting, and altering the meats, it
makes them (though bad and gross of themselves) to turn to its own good
temperature and substance; but yet we may so far forth use contrary meats, as
the creature shall lose those good qualities which it receives from the seed
whereof it was made; therefore Plato said, that one of the things which most
brought man's wit and his manners to ruin, was, his evil bringing up in diet:
For which cause, he counseled that we should give children delicate meats and
drinks, and of good temperature, that, as they grow up, they may know to
abandon evil, and embrace good; the reason whereof is very clear: For, since at
the beginning the brain was made of delicate seed, and that this member is
every day impairing and consuming, and is to be repaired with meats which we
eat; it follows certainly, that by using such meats as are gross, and of evil
temperature, the brains will become of the same nature: Therefore it will not
suffice that the Child is born of good seed; but also that the meat which he
eats after he is born, be endued with the same qualities.

The ancient Greeks were very curious in this particular; Galen, and other
Greek Physicians, prescribed to those parents who were desirous of begetting
wise children, to eat much Goats milk boiled, for about seven or eight days
before Copulation; this meat being of a moderate substance, the heat exceeding
not the cold, nor the moist the dry. The Greeks also used to extract out of the
milk, the Cheese and Whey, as being the grosser parts of the Milk, and left the
butter; which being of a more spairy substance, they gave their Children,
mingling it with Honey. They also gave them Cracknels of white bread, of very
delicate water, with Honey, and a little Salt. But yet, in this way of regiment
and ordering of the diet, there arises one great Inconvenience; namely, that
children using such kind of delicate meats, will not enjoy strength sufficient
to resist the injuries of the Air, or other occasions which use to breed
Maladies: And so by endeavoring that our Children may become wise, we shall
cause them to become unhealthful, and short-lived; Therefore it is to be
considered, how things may be so ordered, that the advancing of Childrens wit
by their diet and education, may not prove inconsistent with the preservation
of their health and strength; which may be easily effected, if Parents will put
in practice these Rules and Precepts which I shall prescribe. Hypocrates takes
notice of eight things which make the flesh plump and fat: The first is, to be
merry, and enjoy content and ease of heart; the second, to sleep much; the
third, to lie in a soft bed; the fourth, to fare well; the fifth, to be well
furnished and apparelled; the sixth, to ride much on horseback; the seventh, to
have ones will, and not be crossed in any thing; the eighth, to be much
conversant in all kind of Plays and pastimes, that yield contentment and
delight. That this manner of life produces the aforesaid effect, is most true;
but is likewise true, that it causes the seed to be moist, and that the
children engendered of that Seed, must also abound with superfluous moisture,
which both for the production of Wit, and the preservation of health, ought to
be dried up; for as much as this quality stifleth the operations of the
rational soul, and also occasioneth sickness and short life: So that it
appears, that a good wit, and a sound body, arise from one and the same
quality, namely, dryness; whence it is to be observed, that the same rules
which we are to lay down for the making Children wise, will also be effectual
for the making of them healthy and long lived.

First, it behooves for those Children that are born of delicious Parents,
whose constitution must therefore necessarily consist of more cold and moist
than is convenient, to be washed as soon as they are born with hot salt water,
which, according to the opinion of all Physicians, soaketh and dries up the
flesh, strengthens the Nerves, and by consuming the superfluous moisture of
the brain, increases the wit, and freeth him from many dangerous Diseases;
whereas a Bath of hot water that is fresh, breeds (as Hypocrates affirms)
five inconveniences; namely, the effeminating of the flesh, weakness of the
sinews, dullness of the spirits, fluxes of the blood, and a nauseating in the
stomach: But those that are born with excessive dryness, are to be bathed in
hot fresh water, that the extremity of their temper may be corrected by a
contrary quality. Now the reason why hot salt water is available for those that
are over moist, is, because it stops the pores of the skin, and of two
extremes, it is more conducing to health to have a skin hard and somewhat
close, than thin and open.

The second thing requisite to be performed when the Child is new born, is to
make him acquainted with the winds, and with change of air, and not to keep him
locked up in a Chamber, which much enfeebleth the strength, and wastes the
spirits; nothing being so advantageous to a healthful kind of living, as to
expose ones self to all kind of winds and weathers, hot, moist, cold and dry;
it is no wonder therefore that Shepherds of all men living enjoy the soundest
health, since they accustom themselves to all the several qualities of the Air,
and their nature is dismayed at nothing; whereas on the contrary we find that
those men that give themselves to live deliciously, and to beware lest the Sun,
the Wind, the Evening, or the Cold, offend them, are within a small time
dispatched with a Post-Letter to another World. So far were the ancient Germans
from nicety in this point, that they use to dip their Children as soon as born,
in a cold River.

The third thing necessary to be performed, is to seek out a young Nurse of
temperature hot and dry, with which two qualities the much cold and moist will
be corrected, which the Infant brought from his Mothers Womb; she should be
innur'd to hardness and want, to lie on the bare ground, to eat little, and to
go poorly clad in wet, drought, and heat, such a one will yield a firm milk, as
being acquainted with the alterations of the air, and the Child being brought
up by her, will come to enjoy a great firmness of body. The course then which
is to be observed with the Nurse, is to take her into the House about four or
five Months before the Child's birth, and to give her the same sorts of meat to
feed on, which the Mother uses to eat, that she may have time to consume the
blood and bad humors, which she has gathered by the harmful meats she used
before, and also to the end that the Child may suck the like milk with that
which relieved it in the Mothers belly, or at least made of the same meats.

The fourth thing requisite to be observed, is not to accustom the Child to
sleep in a soft bed, or to keep it over-warm in apparel, or give it too much
meat, which are things that fatten and enlarge the Flesh; whereas the restraint
of them diminishes and dries it up, which dryness increases wit, and much
avails toward long life, According to this Rule which I have prescribed, was
He, who of all men living that ever the World had, was the wisest brought up;
for as soon as he was born, he began to be inured to cold and other alterations
of the air; his first bed was the Earth, his apparel coarse; and a few days
after, they went with him to Egypt, a place very hot, and the meat they gave
him, was that which I have already mentioned to have been used by the ancient
Greeks. Whereupon it is that the Prophet Esaias says, He shall eat butter and
honey, that he may know to eschew evil, and choose the good: For though he was
very God, yet being also perfect Man, he omitted not to make use of the same
natural remedies as were used by the rest of the sons of men.

Thus we have shown what the qualities are, which the Brain ought to have, and
what the substance; having proved according to the opinion of Heraclitus, that
dryness makes the wisest soul; and that by age from the day of our birth,
'till that of our death, we still acquire more and more dryness, and by
consequence more knowledge. We have also proved, that the subtle and delicate
parts of the Brain are corrected by what we eat; for those that always feed
upon Beef and Pork, must of necessity have a Brain so gross and of such evil
temperature, that the reasonable soul cannot be so capable of eschewing evil,
or adhering to good.

CHAP. VIII. Some farther Considerations than have before been mentioned
concerning the gradual progress of the Births Formation in the Womb.
COncerning the Gradual Formation of the Infant in the Womb; of the growing up
of the Fibrae within the first seven days; of the Umbilical Veins and Arteries,
of the Formation of the Liver, the Heart, the Brain, the Nerves, the Gristles,
etc. a particular Discourse has been already made in this Book: It remains
only that we touch upon some things, in reference to the same matter.

As the use of the two Membranules that enwrap the Birth (whereof the first is
called Ambiens, Avicius, Amnium, Aurela, Abcas, Abigas, Sela, Aligas, or the
Armature of the Conception; the latter Alanthoides, Bilis, Ascari, Secca,
Involucrum) which has been formerly delivered, is a thing of great
consequence, to be known and well considered; so likewise is the consideration
of the Umbilical Veins and Arteries a matter no less important. These Veins
meeting together a little beneath the Navel, and extended along that concavity
where the Liver is to be formed, serve for the purging of the menstruous blood,
which is to be distributed through the members. The two Arteries are connected
with ductile ligatures unto the great Artery: Through those the heart of the
Embryo receives ventilation, and draws spirit, and the purer part of the blood
from the Womb.

Then after the first six or seven days, the lineaments of all the members are
described. Next, the Lineation being perfected within the space of between four
and eight days after, a certain sanguinous matter drawn through the Navel,
passes all along through the whole Birth, and being pre-disposed toward the
formation of the members, fills up at that time the lineatures. The following
days from the ninth to the fifteenth, this sanguineous juice is converted into
Flesh. At which time also the Members receive their color, and that degree of
hardness or softness, which is peculiar to them; like as a Painter when he has
drawn the outward lines of any Picture, in the next place, he fills it up with
various colors, according as the nature of each several part requires.

Thus Nature proceeds to perfect the Formation of the Heart, Liver, Brain, and
other principle Members: All which things are distinctly brought to pass from
the Conception to the eighteenth day of the first Month, at which time it is
called Seed, but afterward it begins both to be called, and to be a Feature.
But for the better retaining of these things in memory, that Author did not
amiss who thought fit to comprehend them in these following Verses. Sex in
lacte dies, ter sunt in sanguine trini;
Bis seni carnem, ter seni membra figurant.
Six days complete to milk, thrice three to blood convert the seed;
Twice six soft flesh do form, thrice six do massive members breed.


Otherwise thus, Injectum semen sex primis rite diebus,
Est quasi lac, reliquisque novem fit sanguis; at inde
Consolidat duodena dies, bis nona deinceps
Effigiat, tempusque sequens producit ad ortum;
Talis perficitur praedicto tempore forma.
The first six days to milk the fruitful seed,
Injected in the Womb, remains still;
Then other nine of milk, red blood do breed,
Twelve days turn blood to flesh by Nature's skill.
Twice nine firm part, the rest ripe birth do make;
And thus foregoing time does form man's shape.


To conclude this subject, the ancients were of opinion, that the heart (which
in all animals possesses the middle seat, (like a King which has the chief
Seat of his Empire, in the midst of his Dominions) is both the first principal
member which is formed in man's body, and the last which dies: But later
Physicians hold that the liver is first formed, next the Heart, and lastly the
Brain.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the Notes of Virginity, and whether or no it may be
Violated without the knowledge of man.
ABOUT the orifice of the sinus pudoris, vulgarly miscalled the Neck of the
Womb, is that pendulous production, by some termed the Hymen; by others (more
rightly) claustrum Virginale, and by the French Bouton de Rose; for that it
bears a near resemblance with the expanded bud of a Rose or Gilli-flower;
Hence therefore originally sprung that common expression of the Deflowring of
Virgins.

Forasmuch as the Integrity or Violation of this part is accounted the most
certain and infallible sign of Virginity entire, or violated, some Learned
Physicians that have written of this Subject, esteem it a great vanity and
folly, to think that there is any other Hymen.

Moreover, this word Flower, is used in diverse acceptations, for besides the
proper signification it is commonly taken for the prime or chief part of any
thing, and so youth is called the Flower of a Man's age; or for that which is
handsome or elegant; and so Rhetorical expressions are called Flowers; or else
for such things as are not marred or spoiled by use; and according to this
sense a Woman deprived of her Virginity may be said to have been Deflowred, or
to have lost her Flower.

Now this Claustrum Virginale, or Flower consists of four Caruncles, or
Fleshy substances, called Myrtle-formed, in regard they resemble Myrtle
berries. These four caruncles are situated as it were in the four Angles of the
said Sinus Pudoris, and are connected together by certain Membranes or
Ligatures, which are each of them situated in the interstices or spaces between
each Caruncle, with which they are in a manner equally extended; which
Membranes being once dilacerated, are an apparent sign of devirgination; nor
can it be denied, but that this dilaceration may be caused by other accidents,
besides the accompanying with a man; as by violent Coughing, Sneezing, or loud
Vociferation; all which may occasion a violent flowing down of humors, to the
breaking of those ligatures or membranes; but as for any Stories of a Hymen, as
that it should be a transverse membrane, situated now in the lower extremity of
the Sinus Pudoris, now in the midst of the concavity, that it is perforated all
about in the manner of a Sieve, or in the middle only with one larger hole, or
that the breaking of this Hymen should be the only cause of Devirgination, are
all to be rejected as vain and Frivolous,

CHAP. X. Whether there may be a mutation out of one Sex into another; and of
Hermaphrodites.
BEfore any thing can be positively determined concerning this argument (so
much of uncertainty there is in it;) it will be convenient to recite what has
been delivered both as to the negative and the affirmative, by Authors that
have maintained each contrary opinion, Severinus Pinaeus, who holds the
Negative, writes to this effect, viz. That the genital parts of both Sexes, are
so unlike each other in substance much more in composition, situation figure,
action, and use, that scarce any thing can be found more unlike, and by how
much the more all other parts of the body (excepting the Breasts, which in
women are more tumid, because of their secondary use) have an exact
resemblance; so much the more unlike are the genital parts of the one Sex,
compared with those of the other; and if their figure be thus different, much
more is their use. True it is, indeed, that both are appointed for generation,
but in a different manner; for women contribute the matter, but men the form:
The Venereal appetite also proceeds from different causes; for in men it
proceeds from a desire of emission, in women, from a desire of repletion. In
women also the chiefest of those parts are concave, and apt to receive; but in
men they are only porous, and in a manner solid.

These things considered, I cannot but wonder, says he, how any one can
imagine, that the Genital Members of Female Birth should be changed into those
that belong to Males; since by those parts only the difference and distinction
of Sexes is made: Nor can I well impute the cause of this vulgar error to any
thing, but a mistake of some not over-expert Midwives, who have been deceived
by the evil conformation of the parts, which may have happened in some
Male-births, to have had so small a protrusion, as not to have been discerned;
as appeared by the example of a Child Christened at Paris, by the name of Joan,
as if it had been a Girl, when as it proved afterward a Boy: And on the
contrary, the over-far extension of the Clitoris in female Births, may have
occasioned the like mistake. But notwithstanding what has been thus said in
the Negative, there have not been wanting some learned Physicians, who have
firmly asserted the affirmative part; of which number Galen himself is one. A
man, says he, is different from a woman in nothing else except in the having
his genital members without his body: And this is certain, that if Nature
having formed a man, would convert him into a Woman, she has no other task to
perform, but only to turn his genital members inward; and if a woman into a
man, to do the contrary. And this, however held for a Fable, has chanced many
times in nature, as well while the Creature has been in the Mothers Womb, as
after the same has been born: For diverse times Nature has made a Female
Child, and she has so remained in her Mothers belly for the space of one or
two Months, and afterward plenty of heat growing in the genital Members, upon
some occasion they have issued forth, and the Child has become a Male; but yet
retaining some certain gestures unbefitting the Masculine Sex; as a shrill
voice, womanish actions, and the like. Contrariwise, Nature has often made a
Male, and cold growing on, and turning the genitals inward, it has become a
Female; yet still retaining a manlike fashion, both in voice and gesture.

Now to give an impartial judgment of these two opinions, I cannot but hold
that the latter of them carries a greater semblance of truth with it; for as
to what Pinaeus affirms of the great difference of figure in the genital
members of each, it will not be of so much force; if we consider that the
inversion of them is that which chiefly occasioneth this difference of form;
the reason of which is evidently deduced from the contrary natures of heat and
cold; heat enlarging and extending all things, and cold retaining and closing
them up.

Now as to the business of Hermaphrodites, or those that enjoy both Sexes in
one person, many there are that will not afford any belief, or, at the least,
doubt whether or no there are any such things in nature; but although there
cannot be so apparent a reason given for this as for the mutation of Sexes; yet
in this we may suffer our selves to be guided by the same Criterium, as in the
business of Specters and Apparitions of Spirits; concerning which, although it
has puzzled many learned men to find out, what should be the true causes and
reasons, that such things come to pass; yet it argues much indiscretion not to
give credit to them, both in regard Histories have abounded with frequent
examples of them in all ages; and also, considering the daily reports we have
of such things, both from the mouths and pens of serious and judicious men.

Perhaps it may be judged by some, to have been more decent that these things
should have been delivered in the Latin, than in the vulgar Tongue, that so the
secrets of Nature might not have been prostituted to every unworthy Reader,
that makes use of such things, only for a mockery, and a May Game, and to
promote idle and lascivious discourse; yet forasmuch as they are written for
God's Glory, and the benefit and help of mankind, and intended only for the use
of sober, pious, and discreet Matrons; and that the want of skill and knowledge
in these mainly important Secrets, has been the occasion of very many
mistakes, to the great misery oftentimes of Women in travail, and prejudice of
the poor Infant, the concealment of them had been much more inexcusable, than
the publishing can be.

Exodus 1.17. But the Midwives feared God,




Deo Gloria.
RARE SECRETS Brought to LIGHT, Which for many years were locked up in the
Breast of that most Famous and Learned Physician, Sir Theodore Mayern,
Physician to His late Majesty, King CHARLES the First, Of Ever Blessed Memory.

In which are contained the sufficient Testimonies of the renowned and happy
successes of his management in his general Practice on the greatest Ladies of
the Court, and Country, in the use of so public a benefit, as that of the
Excellent Art of MIDWIFRY.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1696.

TO THE Understanding Reader.
I Shall not need to spend many words in recommending to the World these
present Observations and Experiments in Midwifry, since, had not my own
knowledge and experience of them, warranted me to give a sufficient testimony
of them, It had been enough to say, that they were the Collections of a Person
of so great a fame, and therefore of so general a practice for a long series of
years, both abroad, and in this Nation; that, not to mention his universal
insight in all parts of Learning, his judgment chiefly in matters of this
nature ought not to be suspected. He must needs be an absolute stranger to all
the Concerns of public fame, and the knowledge of eminent men, who has not
been very well acquainted (though living in the remotest part of this Nation)
with the high reputation of Sir Theodore Mayern, who not only as he was
Physician to the late King, but by the proof he had given of his eminent skill
and perfection in his faculty, has gained the greatest esteem and generality of
practice at Court, and among the Nobility, of any man in his time: By which it
appears that these present Receipts extracted from the Musaeum of this
excellent Person, have been frequently made use of by himself among the
greatest Ladies of Court and Country; Upon this account I having had the
fortune (as being a near Relation of his) to get these among several other of
his Papers into my hands, should have thought my self very injurious to the
World, if I had not taken the first opportunity to communicate to the public
view a matter of so public a benefit; especially, since it is a business of no
less importance than the preservation of Life, to be very cautious what to make
choice of, and not easily to be satisfied with every thing that may have,
rashly and without mature judgment, been published of this Subject. The truth
is, among all the Treatises of Midwifry that I have seen set forth in our
Language, I have not met with any to which I can more willingly subscribe my
approbation, than to the works of Madam Lowise Burgeoise, late Midwife to the
Queen of France: Therefore hearing of a second Edition of the said Treatise to
come forth, I thought it most convenient to annex thereunto this collection,
more considerable for its quality than quantity; the experiences of the one
having been no less approved among the Ladies of the French Court, than those
of the other among our great Ladies of England: To conclude, I shall not for
this supplement go about to implore the favorable censure of the Courteous
Reader, but commit it to the fortune of that free reception which it cannot but
meet with, both from the advantageous Testimony I have alleged, and the
beneficial Effects I dare promise it will produce.

RARE SECRETS Brought to LIGHT, Which for many years were locked up in the
breast of that most Famous and Learned Physician, Sir Theodore Mayern,
Physician to His late MAJESTY, King CHARLES the First, of ever Blessed Memory.
To know the time of Delivery, whereby the woman may know the better how to
prepare her self.
THE natural time of Delivery falls out to be at the end of nine months,
especially if at that season the Woman be wont to have her natural purgations;
or else if at nine Months end she happen to be near the full or the new Moon:
For these things happening together, not only hasten her Delivery, but also
facilitate the Labor.

To this end, it is necessary that a Woman should be careful to remember and
take notice of the time of her Conception, that she may be able to govern her
self according to the seasons, as she grows near her time.

It is also very necessary for Women to have in memory the days and seasons of
their natural Purgations, not only in regard of their delivery, but also in
regard of several Maladies and Diseases, which upon this occasion happen at the
said time, and of which no person can rightly judge of the cause, unless those
things be well known.

Now if it happen that a woman have mistaken or forgot, as not being rightly
able to observe, either because of some retention extraordinary, or some
extraordinary and tedious flux of her natural Purgations; she may redress her
self by the means which follow.

Most commonly and ordinarily, women have their natural Purgations from the age
of fourteen years to twenty one, at the new Moon; after that, from twenty one
to thirty, in the first quarter; from thirty to thirty seven, or thirty eight,
they have them at the full of the Moon; from thirty seven to the time that they
begin to cease, in the last quarter.

Signs which precede Delivery.
THE Woman having a regard to the end of the nine Moons, as also to the times
of the full and new Moons, as also to the time that she uses to have her
Purgations, as has been said, she must be provided of all things for her
assistance and preservation. Now when her Delivery is near, she shall know by
these signs.

Great pains in her groins thighs, the small of her belly, and all the lower
parts of the Navel, together with swellings, and hardness in the said places.

Shiverings and shakings through the whole body, as at the coming of an Ague;
after that again a sudden heat, feebleness, lassitude, and small sweats upon
the face; after which the blood being inflamed, rises up into the face, which
causes a heat, and redness; great unrest, and changing from hot to cold, from
strong to weak, from weak to strong; and she shall feel the Child to make
violent thrusts. There will come bloody water from the lower parts. When these
signs, but especially the bloody waters appear, then she ought to commit her
self to the care of the Midwife, for before it is in vain, and may prove
dangerous.

Nature has so well ordered her works, that the Matrix never opens it self
before the time prefixed, at which time these signs appear; and therefore a
woman ought to be very diligent in the observance of the said seasons and signs.

To cause the Woman to contain the Birth.
TAke Mint, Roses, Marjoram, Saffron, Musk, as much as suffices of each; put
them into a bag to be hung about the neck, so that it may reach to the stomach;
this will keep the womb from falling low.

An Emplaister to hinder the Monthly Flux in Women with Child.
TAke Oil of Roses, white Wax, juice of Male-knot-grass of each 2 ounces,
Bole-Armoniack, Crocus Martis, each six drams, of this make a plaster: when
the Flux comes down, let the woman contain her self in her bed, and let this
plaster be spread upon her loins. Lay a Goats-skin between the sheet and the
bed, because of the heat of the hollow Vein; or else take Crocus Martis one
dram, juice of Knot grass four ounces, Rose Water and Vinegar, of each one
ounce; mingle them all well together with the white of an egg, then dip a
linen cloth therein, and apply it cold to the loins.

An Emplaister for a Woman that is fearful of containing the Birth.
TAke of the root of Snake-weed, and Tormentil, each one ounce and a half,
Joubertus astringent powder, Myrtle-berries, Psidia, Pomgranate-flowers, of
each six drams; Dragons-blood, Spong* Bedeguar, of each half an ounce,
Frankincense, Mastick, of each three drams; Cummin one dram; Nutmegs, Cloves,
of each half a dram, Common Pitch six ounces, Venice Turpentine, washed in
juice of Shepherds-purse, Ship pitch three ounces, Wax as much as is
sufficient; make of these an Emplaister to be applied to the reins.

Preparatory Ointments to be used before the time of Delivery.
TAke Oil of Lillies, and Cammomil, of each four ounces, new Hogs-seam
strein'd, new fresh Butter, of each an ounce and an half, Muscilage of the seed
of Fenugreek extracted in Mugwort-water, two ounces of powder of round
Birth-wort, and Saffron, of each two drams, Wax as much as suffices, make a
mollifying Ointment to anoint the Thighs, Hips, and Matrix Or else,

Take the roots of white Lillies cut small, four ounces, leaves of Violets and
Mallows chopped, of each one handful; oil of Lillies one pint: boil these
together upon hot embers, in a silver dish, always moving them 'till they grow
soft, in the nature of a Cataplasm. Then strein it, and to the streined liquor
add Goose-grease, Hogs-seam, of each three ounces, Saffron one ounce, mingle
them well, and make an Ointment for the use abovesaid.

In case of Vomiting.
APply to the Stomach a Stomachical Cerecloth sprinkled with Galbanum powdered,
powder of Cloves and Mastick, and then covered with fine linen.

Or else give Aromaticum Rosatum before meals, which is a most excellent remedy.

A woman in the first place finding her self to be with Child for the three
first months, ought to keep from violent exercises, as also at the first
quarter, at Full of the Moon, and in the time when she has her natural
purgations; for at all these seasons there is a motion of the humors, and of
the blood, which many times causes a discharge of the Birth; neither ought a
woman at such times as these dance, ride, or go in Coaches, but upon urgent
necessity, and that very softly.

In the fourth month the Child being alive moves and stirs, which causes a
squeamishness in the stomach, where at that time it is good for the Woman to eat
alone, that she may neither see nor hear of any thing of hurtful diet, to which
she may have a longing desire. Neither is it good at that time for her to walk
in the field, or in gardens, for fear she should see any thing to long after,
offensive to her health.

The fifth and sixth months are not so dangerous, yet it is good to have a care.

In the seventh month the Child comes to perfection, and oft-times endeavors
to come forth; for which cause great and diligent care is to be taken of the
Woman at that time. For though the Child born in that month may live, yet it
will prove weak, and harder to bring up. The eighth month in indifferent. The
Child which is born in that Month is not long lived, because it is much weakened
by its endeavors to get forth in the seventh, and has not yet recovered
strength.

Regulation of Diet.
FOR the first eight months, it will be convenient for her to use such meats
and drinks, which neither moisten, loosen, nor bind overmuch, but moderately;
and let them be of easy digestion, and good juice.

As to Flesh; Capons, Partridges, Larks, Pullets, and Mutton afford good
nourishment.

As to Fish; the Gurnard, the Sole, the Smelt, and many other firm Fish may be
eaten.

Her Bread ought to be white, well baked, and light. Marmalade is good after
meals, and sometimes before, neither are the best sort of Pears forbidden. As
for her drink, Claret is very good, as also small Ale and Beer well brewed;
strong wines are very hurtful, especially those that are white.

She must have a care to abstain from Spices, opening and windy meats; as also
from raw herbs, and Salads, from Beans and Pease, and all baked meat.

In the ninth month she must abstain from all astringent things, as Paste of
Quinces, Rice, and Pears, Marmalad, and the like; on the contrary, let her use
mollifying and loosening meats, as flesh that is young and tender, Pottages
made with Borage, Bugloss, Lettice, Violets, March-mallows, and such like.

Other Advertisements relating to the several accidents which may happen.
FIrst, if the Woman fear Abortion, and that she carry her Child low near her
Privities, let her do as follows.

Take the Treddles of three new laid Eggs, and beat them well together, then
take of Scarlet Silk as much as suffices, and cut it very small, and mix it
with the egg, and make the said mixture into Pills, take of these Pills in a
little Claret Wine; do this three days together, and every month three times in
the same manner.

You may also use this following Plaster.

Take of Myr^les, Orange-flowers, of each one ounce, Acorn cups, stalks of
Roses, each one ounce; Bole Armonick fine and true, Dragons-blood, of each
three ounces. Turpentine two ounces; Oil of Quinces or Myrtles as much as is
sufficient to make the plaster: which is to be applied to the reins, and upon
the belly, and withal to be stretched out upon the thighs. It may lie on five
or six days without changing.

However a woman ought not to tamper, nor use any thing, unless there be very
great necessity, which she shall know thus; If at the full or new Moon, or else
at the time when she uses to have her monthly purgation; if at that time her
Purgations come down, then Abortion is to be feared, and remedies are to be
applied.

But if the woman carry the Infant high, and that her belly swells, and extends
so strongly, that there may be some danger of fissures and clefts in the skin,
then let her use this following ointment.

Take half a hundred of Sheeps trotters with bones and wool; when the Moon is
at the full, bruise them, and beat them, then let them boil in a good quantity
of water, for half a days time, let them cool, and then take off the fat that
swims, and with this mingle four ounces of Sperma Caeti, four ounces of Oil of
Almonds drawn without fire, and four ounces of white Wax; melt all these
together over a soft fire, then put therein half a pint of Rose Water, then
take it off the fire, and stir it till it grow cold; with this ointment you
shall first anoint the part extended, and then lay some of it on the said part
where ever it be, spreading it upon soft leather, such as Childrens gloves are
made of.

About fifteen days or three weeks before she lies down, she must begin to use
mollifying ointments, anointing therewith the lower part of the belly, her
thighs and genitals.

The Ointment of Sheeps trotters will serve for fifteen days, but some eight
days before she lies down, let her use one which is more mollifying, such as
this which follows.

Take of roots of Lillies two ounces, Marsh-mallow-roots two ounces, leaves of
Marshmallows, Mallows, and March-Violets, of each one handful; of Hempseed,
and seed of Fenugreek, of each one ounce; two Sheeps trotters with their Wool
on, cut and bruised: boil all these together in a great quantity of water, till
all be boiled to a mash, then strein them hot, then set the streined liquor
over a soft fire, let it consume and evaporate, 'till there be nothing left but
the fat, and something of a viscous matter beside. To this add eight ounces of
oil of Hempseed, drawn by expression like Oil of Almonds, and eight ounces of
Hogs-Seam; This Ointment mollifies very much, and renders the passages very
slippery and easy, to extend upon any occasion.

While the party is with Child, if she happen to be bound in body, let her use
this following Clyster.

Take one Sheeps trotter, Hempseed, and Fenugreek-seed, of each one ounce;
Melilot-flowers two handfuls, boil these in Cows milk, then strein it, and take
six ounces thereof, and put thereto four ounces of Oil of Hempseed, if she be
near the time of her Labor, but if not, Oil of Roses, and if the excrements be
very hard, you may add thereto one ounce of Catholicon.

At the time of Childbearing, it is good to take the abovesaid Clyster, if it
may be done possibly, for that, after the Woman is delivered, she is to be four
or five days without a stool, as well because of the great evacuations which
she has so lately had, as also that being to be kept continually hot in her
bed, the excrements do thereupon harden, and afterward putrify, and then
generate putrid vapors, and many times a fever.

There happens also another inconvenience from the said excrements, being kept
in the body, and not emptied before delivery; and that is this, that when the
Patient endeavors to deliver her self of the Infant, the excrements do also
forthwith come out, which many ways give annoyance, as well to the Child, the
Midwife, as to the other Assistants, by reason of the change of linen, and the
troublesome smells.

Beside the foresaid inconveniences, the Child will not come forth so easily,
because the Intestines being full, do compress the Matrix, and by consequence
cause the passages to be more close and difficult. In the mean time, that is to
say, when the woman is in pain, and that all the signs of Childbearing do
appear, then let her take about two ounces of Cinamon-water, this will fortify
her spirits, and hasten the coming forth of the Infant.

If the water alone do not suffice, you may give it her the second time, adding
thereunto the weight of a half crown of counterfeit Borax made of Roach-Allum,
such as the Goldsmiths use; it is neither offensive to the taste, nor any way
dangerous, as some Physicians think, mistaking it for Chrysocoll of the Greeks;
for it is a sovereign medicament both to cause the Child to come forth, and to
expel the Secondines, if they come not forth in their due time.

If you cannot have the said Borax, To help difficult Labor.
then take two scruples, or forty grains of Date-stones powdered very fine, and
drink it in Cinamon-water; or for want of that, in a draught of good Hypocrass.

The weight of a Crown of the powder of the leaves of Cretan Dittany, drank in
Cinamon-water, works the same effect.

Or else take of Venetian Borax, one dram, Saffron three grains; drink this in
one spoonful of water of white Lillies: Or else, take this following powder.

Take Cretan Dittany half a dram, Savin, yellow Amber, of each two scruples,
make it into powder, and drink it in water of Cinnamon, Hysop, or Rue.

Or else,

Take of the powder of leaves of Cretan Dittany half a dram, of Pennyroyal
half a scruple, a little Cinnamon, Myrrh one scruple; mingle these powders well,
and drink them in Hypocrass. Or take this following water.

Take Water of Cinnamon four ounces, of Hysop and Thyme of each two ounces, of
Rosewater one dram, in these waters dissolve half an ounce of Confectio
Alchermes, let them stand a whole night, then distill them in Balneo; the dose
to be taken at a time is two drams; you may add, if there be necessity, a drop
or two of Oil of Savin. Or, you may use this powder.

Take of Myrrh, of Cinnamon, and Saffron, of each the weight of the third part
of a Crown, mix them well together, and put them into a raw egg, and cause the
party to sup it up; and let her drink after it a draught of Hypocrass. Or else
take this potion.

Take of the juice of Savin two ounces, Cinamon-powdered two drams, Saffron
half a Scruple, water of Radishes four ounces, and a little Sugar; of this make
a potion for the woman to drink in time of travail.

There be many other Remedies, but these are the most certain, and easy to
take, where the danger nor the pain is excessive; but in cases of urgent
necessity, you may use these following remedies.

Take of Mugwort one handful, Butchers Broom and Fennel, of each one handful;
of salt three drams, of Assa foetida two drams, of bran one handful, of water
and white wind, of each eight pints: boil them to the consumption of the third
part. Or take this, which never failed.

Take of the root of Gentian powdered one or two drams, take this in white wind
or honey, it never hurts the Infant.

To accelerate and hasten the labor before the time of Child bearing, use this
following ointment.
Take of the muscilage of the seed of Fenugreek, and the root of Marshmallows,
with water of Mugwort two ounces; oil of Lillies, and sweet Almonds, and
Hens-gerase, of each one ounce and a half, of Saffron half a scruple; of Wax as
much as suffices: Of this make an ointment to anoint the back, belly, and privy
parts, for fourteen days together before the birth: Or else take this following
Ointment.

Take oil of white Lillies, with hens grease, of each an ounce and a half, of
Saffron half a scruple, of these make an Ointment with as much Wax as suffices,
to anoint the Back, Navel, and privy Parts, for fourteen days together.

Note that all those things which we have said to be good, to be given at the
time of delivery, must never be given before; for that otherwise they will be
of little use, they serving only to facilitate the Birth without endangering
the Child or Mother.

The Woman ought also to walk about the Chamber as much as she can, being held
by other Women.

Neither let any person, whether Man or Woman, against whom she may have any
ill will, or whose presence may breed any thing of shame in her, be at that
time in the room, because any such accident as that retards Nature, but let
them be such as she loves, sociable, merry, and helpful toward her.

It is also necessary for a Woman in Travel to sneeze and cough, which are
great means to force down the Infant to the lower parts.

And as to the Midwifes duty, she ought to anoint the lower parts with oil of
Hemp Seed, or Nuts, if the waters which should precede the Birth do not come
forth, or if they be come down a good while before the Birth, to the intent to
make the said parts slippery to ease the coming forth of the Child.

If the Child descend not easily, the Midwife may with her hand gently press
the top of the belly, to the intent to make the Child descend with more have.

As soon as the Woman is delivered, and that the Secondines are likewise come
away, it shall be convenient to wrap her in a warm sheep-skin, which must be
flead near the Chamber, for that purpose; which must be done with as much
expedition, and as near a great fire as may be, that there may be nothing of
coldness when the Woman is wrapped therein In this the Patient must continue
twelve hours. This will much help the Matrix in its natural purgation; when you
take it away, you must apply warm Cloths in the stead, and above all things
take great care that no air do enter into the Matrix, which oftentimes is the
cause of very great evils.

Or you may apply warm to the belly of the Patient, Tow dipped in the whites of
Eggs, wherein the pouders of Cloves, Pepper, and Nutmegs shall be mingled,
which must be bound close to the body with swathbands.

Great care is to be taken how you apply astringent things to the Womb
presently after delivery, unless after perfect purgation of the Secondines; for
fear of very great mischiefs.

Now if you use the said sheep skin, and that you find the woman
notwithstanding tormented with very great pains, and that the said skin does
not at all appease them; let her take an ounce and a half more or less
according to the height of the distemper, of oil of sweet Almonds drawn without
fire the same day; and two hours after, let her take the weight of half a crown
of this following powder either in White Wind, or Capon broth.

Take of the root of great Comfrey dried, two drams, kernels of Peaches,
Nutmegs, each one dram, yellow Amber and Saffron, of each one scruple, Amber
greese half a dram, make a powder of all this. For, besides that it asswages
the Throws, it corroborates and fortifies the body, weakened by reason of those
great evacuations.

After you have taken away the sheep-skin, if there be any excoriation in the
privy parts, by reason either of the bigness of the Child, or the streining of
the woman, you must anoint the said parts with this following ointment, which
is infallible.

Take of Oil of St. John's wort well made, one ounce, Sperma Coeti half an
ounce, balsom of India two drams, white Wax two drams. This ointment does
consolidate all the parts. But if together with this excoriation, any thing of
the Secondines remain in the Womb, Oil of St. John's Wort only will suffice, or,
for want of that, oil of Nuts.

If the evacuations after the Secondines be too much, so that they cause too
great a weakness, you must apply to the Navel this following plaster.

Take of Treacle one dram and a half, Bean-meal one dram Venice-Turpentine one
dram, and thereof make an emplaister to be spread upon thin Leather.

If all be well, and that only the lower parts be prejudiced, after you have
anointed them with Balsom of the Indies, together with oil of St. John's Wort,
you must foment the said places with the following fomentation.

Take of Sage four little handfuls, wild Pomgranate flowers, Myrtle berries,
Acorns, Cypress nuts, of each two ounces; let them be well bruised together;
red Roses four handfuls, Roche-allum one ounce; put all these into two little
bags, and let them boil in Smiths water, or in water where iron has been often
quenched: when one bag is cold, apply another.

The Sheep-skin being taken away, if the patient be afraid of any wrinckles in
the skin, which now is as much relaxed, as it was before extended; let her
anoint the belly with this following ointment.

Take of Sperma Caeti, two ounces, oil of Myrtles, of Mastick, and St.
John's-wort, of each one ounce, white wax an ounce and a half, Turpentine of
Venice, washed in Vinegar of Roses, one ounce; of these make an ointment over a
gentle Fire, with which you must anoint the belly once a day, continuing so to
do for ten or twelve days, laying when you have done upon the place so
anointed, a linen cloth dipped in the following ointment.

Take oil of sweet Almonds, oil of Nuts, Sperma Coeti each four ounces; white
Wax four ounces; melt these together, and dip therein a good large towel, big
enough to wrap about the belly; when you do these things, great care is to be
taken, that the patient do not take any cold.

If the patient have no mind to nurse her Child, and desires to dry up her
milk, then do as follows, some six or seven hours after the Delivery.

Tak a linen cloth cut round, about the bigness of the breasts, making a
little hole in the middle for the Teat to come through; then dip the clothes in
the following ointment, and lay them upon the breast, not taking them off
again, 'till the end of ten or twelve days.

Take Venice Turpentine four ounces, washed in one half part of Rose Water, and
one half part of Vinegar, Populeon one ounce, mix them together, and apply them
as is before said. If the milk does not dry up for all this, make the Cataplasm
as follows.

Take Bean-meal four ounces, Bole-amoniack one ounce, juice of Plantain three
ounces, Vinegar of Roses, two ounces, Fountain water half a pint; let them boil
'till they come to the thickness of a Cataplasm, adding toward the end two
ounces of Populeon, spread this on a linen cloth, and apply them to the
breasts without washing them, changing the Cataplasm twice a day.

The juice of Chervile boiled with Bean-meal, and a little Populeon, works
the same effect. Because the difficulty of Child bearing proceeds from the
loss of those waters that break forth before the Child; therefore, to supply
that defect, and to render the places slippery, let her use these following
remedies.

Take Marshmallows with the roots one handful, Mugwort, Savine, of each half a
handful, Hempseed, and Fenugreek seed of each four ounces, Cummin seed one
ounce and a half, boil all these in water; then take four ounces of this
decoction, and add thereto oil of Hempseed two ounces, Mosch. gr. 2. and inject
it into the neck of the womb. Then take this following powder.

Take of the bark of Cassia, Dittany, of each two drams, Cinnamon four scruples,
Sugar the weight of the other ingredients. Make them into powder, and let the
Patient take one dram thereof in white wind, or Mugwort water.

An Ointment for the Midwifes hands.
TAke Oil of Hempseed, one ounce and a half, Oil of Castor half an ounce, Gall
Moschate half a scruple, Labdanum one scruple, make of this an Ointment, with
which, let the Midwife often anoint the neck of the womb.

After Delivery.
WHen the Infant is well cleansed by the Midwife, let her give unto it in the
Winter nothing but a little Mithridate, but in the Summer let her mingle
therewith a little conserve of Roses and Bugloss.

If the Mother have not yet taken any thing, let the Midwife give to her the
juice of a Capon pressed out in a press, with a little Saffron, and the yolk of
an egg. Then let her take this following powder, against gripings of the belly,
or after throws which indeed she ought to take before any meat, presently after
Delivery.

Take of the greater Comfrey dried, one dram and a half, kernels of Peaches,
Nutmegs, of each two drams, yellow Amber, one dram, Amber-greese two scruples;
or this,

Take kernels of Peaches and Dates, of each one dram and a half, Nutmegs four
scruple, Pulv. Elect. Diamargarit. Calid. two drams, Aniseed condited, one
dram; of the best Cinnamon two scruples, Saffron half a scruple, Sugar as much
as suffices, drink two drams of this powder in white wind twice or thrice a
day, if the pains be very great.

If the pains cease not with these remedies, use that which follows.
TAke the whites of twelve eggs roasted under the embers, Cummin-seed and
Hempseed, of each one ounce and a half, flowers of Camomile and Melilot, of
each two drams; boil these in oil of Dill, 'till they come to the form of an
ointment; apply it warm to the belly, still changing it as it grows cold. Or
thus:

Take the flowers of Dill, Rosemary, Melilot, and Camomil, of each one handful;
Fennelseed, Aniseed, and Cummin-seed, of each two drams: boil them in part
wine, and part water, and make a Cataplasm for the whole belly.

To streighten the Womb.
TAke of the leaves of Myrtle and Starwort, of each three handfuls, green
Medlers, green Prunes, and the sharpest wild Pears, of each one little handful
and a half, the Stomachs of three Cocks newly taken out, distill all these
together, then take Cotton and dip therein, and then put it into the womb, and
let it continue there a good while.

To streighten the Womb without the help of Swathe-bands.
TAke the white of an Egg, and meal as much as is sufficient; make thereof a
Cataplasm to cover the lower part of the belly; where it lies upon the belly,
there must be a hole made, and that hole must be covered with moss.

You must cover the plaster also with powder of Frankincense.

This plaster profits more in a little while, than a Swathe in many weeks.

A Fomentation to provoke the afterbirth.
TAke the Birth-worts, of each of them one ounce, or a handful; Carduus,
Feverfew and Mugwort, each one handful; Dwarf Elder, half a handful, ground Ivy
one handful, boil them together in Wine, or Water, or Ale, especially if there
be any Fever, for then you must by no means meddle with Wine, adding to it one
handful of the leaves, or half a handful of the roots of Master-wort.

For the same.
TAke Savine, one scruple, rind of Cassia, half a scruple, Saffron ten grains,
Assa-faetida two grains, juice of Wall-Ivy, half an ounce, Snakeweed one ounce,
Pulvis diagar* five grains, Syrup of Mugwort half an ounce, mingle all these
together, and make a potion to drink at once.

Or else take four drops of the distilled oil of Savin in white wind.

A Pessary for the same.
TAke the leaves of red Coleworts, and bruise them, and put them into a little
piece of linen cloth in the shape of a finger, then bruise them again, that
the juice may come through, and dip the cloth in a mixture of oil of Lillies,
Camomil, and sweet Almonds.

For the same.
TAke long and round Birthwort, Assa-Faetida, of each half an ounce, Myrrh one
dram, Spike two drams, make them up with the decoction of Parsley, and
Apple Tree leaves.

For the same.
TAke of Borax one dram, Cinnamon one scruple, Saffron three grains; make a
powder, and let the woman drink it in four ounces of water of Mugwort.

To expel the Child, and afterbirth, in time of great necessity.
TAke of the water of Mugwort, Agrimony, and Pennyroyal, of each one ounce,
Syrup of Mugwort one ounce and a half, powder of Castor, round Birth-wort,
Myrrh, Asarabacca, of each one scruple, mingle them together, make a potion.

Or else take Origanum, Calaminth, and Hysop, of each two drams, roots of
Orrice, Asarabacca, Savin, each one dram, Myrrh, Olibanum, Galbanum, Sagapenum,
one scruple; dissolve them, and make a Pessary.

To expel the afterbirth, another.
TAke one stone of a Castor, and distill it with strong Vinegar; when you have
so done, let the Patient take four ounces of this distilled liquor.

Or, you may take of the Oil drawn out of the stone of a Castor, with a soft
fire, mingle it with a sufficient quantity of this Oil, a little of the waters
of Pennyroyal, and Dittany, and a little strong Vinegar.

To expel the Birth, whether alive, or dead.
TAke the milk of a woman that nurses a male child, and dissolve it with a
little Saffron, that it may not be known; then boil an egg rear, and take out
the white, and in the place of that, put in the milk, and let the patient sup
it up; if it prevail not in a quarter of an hour, prepare another egg, and fill
it with milk, as aforesaid.

Or take of the juice of Bugloss, four ounces sweetened with Sugar.

Against pains of the heart.
TAke of the roots of Fennel, Bugloss, and Cicory, each two ounces; boil them
in three pints of white wind, to the consumption of two parts, then add
Fennel-water, and Cicory-water, each six ounces; then boil them again till
there remain but a pint and a half, take one spoonful morning and evening.

To dry up the Milk.
TAke Honey newly drawn out of the Hive, and dissolve it in water, and wash the
breasts therewith.

For the same.
TAke of the juice of Mint and Shepherds-purse, of each half an ounce; mix them
together and drink them a mornings, with the broth of a hen or chicken.

A Fomentation for the same.
TAke of the juice of Parsley, and the strongest wild Turnep, equal parts; and
moisten therein a linen cloth, and apply the said Cloth to the Breasts.

Another.
TAke Oil of Violets three ounces, juice of Mint and Parsley three ounces,
white Vinegar one ounce, Rose Water two ounces: boil all these over a gentle
fire, to the consumption of the juyces; then add a little wax, and make an
ointment. Or,

Take of the tops of Elder, Sage, and Mint, one little handful; boil them in
common water, and make thereof a Cataplasm to be applied to the breasts.

If you would increase the milk, foment the breasts with the decoction of
Fennel, To increase Milk.
or else give her the decoction of Mint, and lay the Mint boiled upon her
breasts.

Or, if these things prevail not, use this following Powder.

Take of Anise, Fennel, Cummin-seed, two drams, Ginger half an ounce, Carui, of
both sorts of Pepper, Coral, each one dram, Cinnamon, three drams, seed of
Daucus one dram, Siler montan. half an ounce, Cardamom, Long pepper, each three
drams, Seselos half an ounce, seed of Sesamum one ounce, white Poppy half an
ounce, mingle them, and make a powder thereof, and take one dram at pleasure,
in broth made of red Coleworts.

Or, you may use this following ointment.

Take of Venice-Turpentine, oil of Roses, Vinegar of Roses equal parts, add to
this a little new wax, and therewith anoint the breasts.

But if the Milk do curdle and harden in the breasts.

First chafe the breasts well with raw honey, then take of new wax two ounces,
new oil of nuts and vinegar two or three spoonfuls, melt them together, and dip
that in little round linen clothes, with holes in the middle to lay upon the
breasts.

Now if there be any tumor or hardness caused by the coagulation of the milk,
then

Take of the leaves of Parsley, Hemlock, Uinca pervinca, Box and Chervile, and
let them boil in the strongest Vinegar, and then strain them; then take oil of
Roses, Lillies, and sweet Almonds each one ounce, of the foresaid Vinegar four
ounces, mingle them in a marble mortar for an ointment, adding one scruple of
Camphire dissolved in part of the oil and toward the latter end of your
stirring it, add the white refrigerating Ceratum of Galen, Unguent of Roses of
Messu one ounce and a half, mingle them all well together, and apply them to
the hard swelling part, it asswages the tumor, and causes the milk to flow
through the Teats.

If the Tumor be painful and enflamed, you must not use the Camphire, (for it
increases the pain) till that the pain be assuaged.

An Ointment against the curdling of the Milk in the Breast.
TAke of the roots of Marshmallows half a pound, boil them well in Vinegar,
and strain them through a hair sieve, add to this Bean-meal one ounce, powder of
Rue, and dried Mint, one dram; Oil of Mastick as much as suffices.

Against Fissures in the Breasts.
TAke Gum-Arabick most finely powdered, one ounce, Rose water and Aqua-vitae a
sufficient quantity, prepare them together, till they come to a just thickness,
make thereof an ointment, and apply it to the said Fissures.

Or else, anoint the said Fissures with Ointment of Roses, then apply the
inside of the leaf of Ground Ivy, changing often; this cures within six or
eight days.

Another of the same.
TAke Lytharge of Silver, Myrrh, Ginger, and oyl-Olive, as much as suffices;
mix them to the thickness of an ointment; before you apply this, moisten the
Fissures themselves with spittle, but no part of the breast beside.

Pain in the Breasts after Delivery.
TAke new Wax two ounces, oil of Nuts half an ounce, oil of Rape-seeed, or
Turnep seed half an ounce; first melt the Wax, then add the Oils; dip therein
the clothes cut fit to the breasts; if there be any pain after delivery, the
application of these clothes, will with great success assuage the same.

An Opiate to be given to Childern newly born.
TAke Mithridate of Alexandria three drams, Conserve of Bugloss and Roses, of
each one dram; mingle them well together, and keep them in a glass Vessel well
stopped; an hour, or half an hour after the Child is born, before it has sucked,
give to it of the foresaid opiate, to the quantity of a Filberd; let it not
suck till five hours after; continue thus doing for a month, giving the Child
this opiate once in a week; and then it will be sufficient, that the Child
abstain but an hours space from the Teat.

It will not be amiss to anoint the Navel of the Child with an ointment made of
Ambergreece, and Suet, equal parts, with a little oil of sweet-Almonds. This
will preserve the child from Epilepsies and Convulsions.

Against Barrenness.
TAKE of Pine-nuts, first well washed in Rosewater, six ounces; sweet Almonds,
washed in like manner, and bruised, each two ounces, Citron pill, condited root
of Satyrion, Erythranion, one ounce, Pulp of Sebesten, Prunes of Damascus fat,
boiled in Sugared water, each one ounce and a half; Coriander prepared three
drams; Pulveris Diambre one dram Penidium one ounce and a half, the inner rind
of Cinnamon, half an ounce, true Amber of an Ash Color, one dram, Moso. one
Scruple, refined Sugar boiled in Rose Water, one pound and a half; take all
these things and beat them, and powder them well, and make thereof a Paste so
dried at a gentle fire. Let the woman take this at pleasure after dinner, and
three hours before at pleasure, abstaining from liquid meats. The man also may
eat of this paste; but let him not use copulation at the time of the Woman's
Purgations, nor when she bathes her self, but presently after. Those mornings
that he abstains, let him take one spoonful of the water of Cocks-blood, with
three or four spoonfuls of the best Broth.

For the same.
A Syrup. Take Syrup of Hempagrimony, Simple, Oxymel, Syrup de rad. each one
ounce and a half, waters of Nipp, Betony, and Mugwort of each three ounces,
make thereof a syrup perfectly boiled, strein it, and let it he aromatized with
Cinnamon, for three doses, morning and evening.

A Potion. Take Agarick infused in Honey of Roses, and a little White Wind for
a whole night, one ounce; Diacatholicon, half an ounce, Diaphenicon, Elect.
Ind. major, each one dram and a half; Syrup of Roses Solutive, with Agorick one
ounce, with a decoction of red Chiches; make a Potion thereof, and give it
after the Syrup is all taken, for ten days, and ten days before the coming of
the monthly purgations.

Three days after the operation of the said potion, let blood in Vena Saphena,
of the right foot, and take away three ounces of blood at evening.

An Opiate. Take of the great Triphera without Opium, two ounces, Methridate
three ounces, mix these well together, and let her take thereof the quantity of
a Walnut after she is let blood, drinking upon the said Bolus, a spoonful of
Aromatic Wine, white or Claret; let the Patient take this when she is clean
from her Purgations only in the morning, while she has them upon her only at
night, and then let her also make use of this Pessary.

Take of Spike, Myrrh, and Agarick, and Colocynth each three drams, Benedict.
one ounce and a half, mix them well together with the juice of French Mercury,
and wrapped in fine red silk, make thereof little Pessaries, and put one of them
into the Womb in the day, and another at night: But, from the time that she is
let blood until her Purgations, let her use but one in the day; but from the
time that they begin, until the time that they end, let her use two, as is
before said.

Let her withal take this following Clyster two or three days before her
purgations.

Take Feverfew one handful, Pennyroyal, Calamint, and Savine, of each half a
handful, seed of Juniper one ounce, flowers of Melilot, and tops of Dill, of
each one handful, make a decoction of nine ounces of water, add thereto oil of
Lillies four ounces, two whites of eggs, and one dram of common salt.

Lastly, one day before her monthly purgations, let her take three Pills of
those which are called Pillulae Rufi, then after she is clean from her
Purgations, let her lie with her Husband.

For the same.
AN Injection. Take Cypress one ounce, Myrrh half an ounce Pulp of Colocynth
one dram, Bdellium one scruple, water a pint; boil them altogether to the
consumption of the third part, then strein them, make an injection of four
ounces of the streined liquor into the Womb, three days before the Bath, and
let the Patient keep it as long as she can.

A Fumigation. Take juice of Bistort, Schoenanth, Cypress nuts, red Storax, and
Mastick, one ounce, Hares-dung; mix them, and pound them well together, and
make a Fumigation; let the patient receive it sitting on a stool with a hole in
it.

Then let her use this following Bath.

Take Basil, Calamint, Betony, Melilot, Roses, each two handfuls. Thyme, Elder
Germander, Mugwort, Savin, Balm, of each two handfuls, Feverfew, leaves of
Laurel, and Lavender, each one handful, bruise them together, and when the
water boyls, throw them in; when they have boiled sufficiently, let her take
the waters off, and bath therein.

A Plaster, Take of the mass of Emplaister of Mastick, one ounce; of Plaster
for the Womb, two ounces, mingle them together, and extend them upon a round
piece of red cloth; in the middle whereof, put one Trochisch de galla Moschat.
and six grains of Ambergris; the last day of her bathing, when she goes to
bed, let her apply that plaster to the region of her Matrix.

That Night, after due concoction, let her lie with her Husband,

To increase Lust, and to help Conception.
TAKE of the juice of the Herb Mercury, and clarified Honey, of each one ounce;
of meal of Nigella, two ounces; make thereof a mass, and let the Patient take
two or three every night.

An Opiat for the same.
TAKE Conserve of Eringo-roots, and Satyrion, each three ounces, green Ginger
condited, Citron rind one ounce and a half, sweet Almonds, Pistaches,
Pine-Apples, Filberds, Chestnuts, Dates, the Pulp of Cocus's of each one ounce;
of the reins and loins of the beast called a Skink, of the pizzle of a Bull, of
the stones of a Hare, or Boar, of each half an ounce; seed of Parsnip,
Rockquet, and Nettles, each three drams, white Pepper, Galang. and cinnamon,
each half a dram; all these things being well provided, and beaten mix them
together with Wine, sweetened and boiled to a thickness, and make an Opiate; add
thereto of the powder of Glowworms killed in the steam of Vinegar, one scruple.

For the same.
TAKE Pine-Apples, new Filberds peeled, of each one ounce and a half, brains of
Cock-sparrows two drams, new Satyrion, roasted under the ashes in wet tow, three
drams; Stones of a Ram roasted, half an ounce, Indian Nuts, one dram, pound
them all with the broth of young Pigeons, then mingle therewith six ounces of
refined Sugar, and boil it to a thickness, and add thereto the following
pouders.

Take seed of Bombax cleansed, the best Cinnamon, each two scruples, seed of
Rocket, Onions, Nettles, and Parsnips, each half a dram, the reins of Skinks,
Long Pepper, Galang. White Ginger, of each two scruples, shavings of the pizzle
of a Heart four scruples; make a Confection, and take the quantity of a Walnut
after the first sleep, and two hours before you eat.

An application to be made upon the Privities presently after Delivery.
TAKE the whites of two Eggs, and oil of St. John's wort, of each one ounce and
a half, oil of Myrtles one ounce; dip therein flat stoups of Hemp, and apply
them to the lips of the Privities; do this three or four times a day, but take
heed that it touch not the neck of the Matrix, because it hinders its purgation.

The next day foment these parts with this following Fomentation.
TAKE of Wine and water half a pint, of Madder, Rose-mary, and St. John's-wort
of each two little handfuls, let them boil for a Fomentation, which is to be
applied hot, with the Hempen stoups aforesaid. This is to be done the second
day.

The third day, take wine a pint, water half a pint, Myrrh two drams, Cinnamon
two drams and a half, Alum two drams and a half; of the stones of Grapes two
drams, the rind of Granates one dram, flowers of red Roses, one little handful
and a half; make of this a decoction to foment the Womb until the ninth day
twice a day.

Take oil of St. John's wort one ounce and a half, Sperma Coeti three drams,
with a little wax; make of this an ointment to use at the beginning, with the
aforesaid Fomentation to the lips of the Privities.

When you have taken away the sheeps-skin, as is before said, you may not only
do as is there set down, but also use this following method.

First, take Sperma Coeti two ounces, oil of sweet Almonds, Camomile, and St.
John's wort, of each an ounce and a half, Goats suet one ounce, oil of Myrtles
half an ounce, Saffron half a scruple, with this ointment being lukewarm, let
the belly be well anointed once every day, then lay over the whole belly this
following Cerecloth.

Take of new wax four ounces, Sperma Coeti one ounce and a half, Turpentine
washed in Rosewater two ounces and a half, oil of Almonds and St. John's-wort,
of each one ounce, Saffron half a scruple. Let them melt and boil together;
when all the ingredients are well mixed, take them from the fire, and put into
it the hempen cloth, and when it is cool, make it smooth, and apply it; let it
be bound on with swathes, and do this for eight or nine days together.

The Woman being thus duly and rightly purged, and being free from any Fever,
or other bad symptoms, she may make use of these following Baths.

She shall go into the Bath three mornings together, the first being lukewarm,
staying therein but a very little. The second a little hotter, with something
longer continuance therein. But in the third let her stay as long as she can.

The Bath in Summer.
TAKE a very clean Tub, wherein wine has for sometime been; put therein a
quantity of the best Wine, and fill it with River-water, and the second day
after you have filled it, put therein Marjoram, Mug-wort, Agrimony,
Pennyroyal, of each two handfuls, then let them boil, and as they boil, now
and then quench a hot piece of Iron therein, then add flowers of red Roses, two
ounces and a half, Camomile, Dill, and Melilot, of each one ounce and a half,
strein them all, and so make the first Bath, out of which let her come out as
soon as she feels any pain.

When she comes out, let her take as follows.

Of the rind of Pome-citron, and Conserve of Bugloss, of each two scruples, let
her take this going into her bed; then let her sweat, and the sweat being wiped
off, let her eat some good and wholesome meat.

Take the water of the first bath, and add thereto Bean-meal, and Oat-meal, of
each two pound and a half, meal of Tares one pound and a half, of Lupines one
pound, Roach-allum, and Salt, of each four ounces, Cloves and Nutmegs, of each
one dram; let them be aromatized with Benjamin and Storax, then put them all
together in a bag, and let them boil in the foresaid water.

When she comes forth, let her take the aforesaid Bolus.

The third part.
FILL the Tub emptied of the Wine with River water, then add thereto a quantity
of white wind; then take of Rosemary, Mint, Marjoram, Mugwort, Savin, Ground
Ivy, of each two handfuls, Scarlet grains, four ounces, flowers of Rosemary,
Camomile, Mint, of each two ounces; Bean-meal, Oat-meal, of each one handful
and a half, meal of Lupines and Tares, of each one pound; Cloves, Nutmegs, and
Cinnamon, of each half an ounce; bruise all these things together, and let them
boil in a little bag, adding thereto a pint and a half of Aqua vitae, and let
burning Iron be often quenched therein. This is the third Bath, wherein she is
to stay as long as she can.

When she comes forth, let her take the same Bolus, as before.

After she has bathed, let her foment for one or two days the lower parts of
her Belly.
TAKE of red Roses two handful and a half, Shoenanth half a handful,
Myrtle-berries two drams and a half, Alum one dram and a half, Mastick three
drams; let them be bruised, and then boil together in sower red wine: Add also
two drams of Nutmegs; with this being taken lukewarm, let fomentation be made
for eight days together.

The fomentation ended, let her receive this following Fume, in a Chair with a
hole in it.

Take Lignum Aloes raw, half an ounce, Nutmegs, and Cypress nuts, of each two
drams and a half; yellow Amber one dram and a half, make all these into powder,
and let her sit over the Fume.

A Fomentation for the Womb the second day after the Bath.
TAKE Galbanum and Cypress-nuts, of each half an ounce, rind of Granates two
ounces, red Roses dried, one ounce, Marjoram a handful Schoenanth one handful;
Alum a dram and a half, Thyme half a handful; let them be boiled in sharp wine
for a Fomentation.

To cause the swelling of the Belly to fall.
SOme women have their bellies as much swelled after Delivery as it was before;
when any such thing happens, do as follows.

Take half a pound of Figgs, Barley-meal and Beanmeal, of each four ounces,
powder of Brick two ounces, Cypress nuts one ounce; let them boil all together
in Smith's water, 'till it come to a thickness, then spread it upon a linen
cloth, and apply it warm to the Belly; re-iterate this often, and the belly
will fall to its wonted shape. Or else,

Take meal of Beans, Rice, and Almonds, of each two ounces, powder of Brick one
ounce and a half, Bole-Armoniac two ounces and a half, Dragons blood one ounce
and a half; of Cypress-nuts ten drams, Scarlet grains, three ounces, Galls half
an ounce, oil of Myrtles six ounces, wild Prunes, Rosewater each a pint and a
half; boil them to the thickness of a Pultess, and apply them as aforesaid to
the belly.

Pain after Delivery.
TAke heed, that when you find the Patient in pain after Childbearing,
especially on the right side, that the redness, or high color of the Urine do
not deceive you, whereby you may be induced to give refrigerating medicines,
finding the whole body to be hot for such urine proceeds from the greatness of
the pain and commotion in the body, and the hot lying in bed.

Therefore if you find the Patient to be full of pain in her belly, and sides,
and likewise perceive a retention of humors that should be voided more
fluently.

Take of Sweet Smelling Flag, one ounce and a half, Zedoaory half an ounce,
Mace eight scruples, Cinnamon four scruples; make thereof a powder, and give her
one dram at a time in powder.

Now though there be a Fever which seems burning, yet refrain not at all to
give this powder; for it does not for all that augment the Fever, but causes
the Womb which was so lately and violently moved, to return to its former
estate, and the pain of the Matrix being ceased, the Fever will cease of it
self. Or else, take sweet-smelling-Flag one dram, Dittany half a dram; make
thereof a powder.

Or, take root of Dittany one dram, Seed of Hartwort, and leaves of Rue, one
scruple and a half, make them into powder, and give it as is before said.

Against the swelling of the belly, after Delivery.
TAke Origanum, Nightshade, Mastick, of each one scruple, Sagapenum as much as
suffices; make of this seven Pills, let her take them all at once, and let her
drink upon them four ounces of the water of the flowers of white Lillies.

Against wrinckles in the skin after Child bearing.
TAke oil of sweet-Almonds two ounces, Capons-grease half an ounce, liquid
Storax half a dram, Muscilage of Tragacanth, extracted with Rose Water, two
drams, Wax as much as suffices, make thereof a Cerecloath, and apply it to the
belly.

Oil of sweet-Almonds, with the marrow of a Heart, is good also for this purpose.

This following ointment may be used before a Woman lies down.
TAke the marrow of the fore foot of a weather in the full of the Moon, set it
on the fire, and let it melt in Rose Water by degrees; you may conveniently add
to this Hens-grease, or oil of Lillies.

Another.
TAke the Seam of a Goat, a Kid, and a Weather, of each three ounces; wash them
diligently in Rose Water, adding Sperma Caeti, Rose Water as much as is
sufficient, and as you beat them, and mix them together, add powder of Mastick
with the white of an egg, and so make an ointment.

A Pomatum for the same.
TAke Oil of sweet-Almonds eight ounces, Sperma Coeti, Capons-grease, marrow of
a Heart, and the bone of a Weather, four ounces; melt them all together between
two dishes, in water of Lillies, then in Rose Water.

An Ointment for the same.
TAke of the Muscilage of the Seed of Fenugreek, and Hempseed, extracted in
water of Lillies, one ounce, oil of sweet Almonds and Lillies, of each half an
ounce, the blood of a Hog fried, the fat of a Capon, and a wild Duck, of each
six drams, with a little new wax; make thereof an ointment, and keep it in a
glass covered with wax.

Another.
TAke white Wax four ounces, melt it, and add thereto the marrow of fifty feet
of black weathers, gathered in the full of the moon; when they are melted, add
thereto oil of sweet Almonds, six ounces, wash them in water of Gourds and
Lillies, 'till it grow cold, then wash it again in Rose Water; if it be too
thick, you may add a little oil of Olive.

Or, you may take oil of sweet-Almonds, and oil of Olives of each five ounces,
Clove-water four ounces, Musk three grains; a little Benjamin; mingle them, and
bruise them well together, and let them digest for twenty days together: Then
dip your clothes or skins therein, and keep them clean wrapped up in clean linen.

THE COMPLETE MIDWIFE. Her Practice Enlarged.
The serious and most choice Secrets of Madam Louyse Bourgioes, Midwife to the
Queen of France; which she left to her Daughter as a Guide for her: And also
for the Practice of all discreet Midwives, to prevent all dangerous Mistakes in
a work of so high Concernment; necessary to be known by all Childbearing
Women, and others.

IN the Year 1630. a young Lady whom I was wont to bring to bed, passing by my
house, came in to me, and told me, that she was four Months gone, and that she
perceived the Infant to stir; about a Month after, she came to see me, and told
me that she was in much pain, for that she had not perceived the Infant to stir
in two days, and that therefore she believed that it was dead, by reason of a
certain very great Fright which she had had; for at the time that she was
frighted, she perceived the Child to move, but after that never; and her belly
began by little and little to wax less; and about three weeks after she had
that reflux of milk that Women use to have that lie in; when this was gone, she
had no grievance; yet seeing her often, and knowing her to be big with Child,
she asked me my advice, to know what she should do. Whereupon I asked her, if
any ill vapors rose up into her mouth? she told me no. If she had not lost her
appetite? she answered, that she never had a better in her life; her heart was
light, her body in good temper, so that there was nothing that troubled her but
an apprehension she had, that the Child was dead: whereupon I made her try all
means to make the Infant stir; but she notwithstanding felt nothing, only she
perceived that something did heave a little upon the operation of the Remedies,
which was nothing but the Matrix, which being now distempered and grown cold,
did as it were answer the hot Remedies, testifying thereby some good which it
received thereby. I advised her to be patient, and to wait Nature's leisure,
which is provident enough of it self; telling her that I had seen an infant
which had lain a long time in the womb without budging, which for all that was
not dead, although you could not perceive in the woman any thing, but the signs
of a dead Child. I had oftentimes brought the Lady to bed, and she still had
very good Deliveries, and very sound Children, of a good color, so that I
believing her to be of a sound constitution, thought that if the Infant were
dead, Nature, which was very strong in her, would expel it in time convenient,
and that she should not be forced, not having given any testimony of defect;
resolving also, when her Reckoning was out, if then Nature showed it self weak,
that we would consult her Friends and Physicians. Many of her Friends told me,
that they doubted that she was deceived in thinking her self to be with Child;
to which I answered, that they might be confident that it was so. In brief, she
was brought to bed, sixteen weeks after the fright which she had. Now here
arises a great doubt, whether the Child died at the hour of her being scared,
by reason that it did not move in all that time? A reason that the Child was
not dead, may be, because that the Gentlewoman had not her milk till within
three weeks after; and yet I cannot but think that it died at the same time;
for certainly, by that fright the vital spirits were ravished from it, and the
blood of the Arteries retired to the heart of the Mother, not being distributed
to the Infant, but at the good pleasure of Nature; the course of which being
stopped, it retired to its first source, through which the Child suffering a
suffocation, gave a violent motion; and now, after the fright, was come to her
self, and that Nature would have returned to finish her work, she was not
deceived, because the vital faculties of the Infant were extinct; and,
notwithstanding all this, the Mother not ceasing to restrain the menstrual
blood as she was accustomed; that finding it self stopped, and still increasing
without that use made of it that was wont, it made a reflux to the Breasts,
which flowed down again in five or six days; for the Infant coming to decrease
in the womb, now way was made for them, which came not down for all that, but
in the Delivery and after; which was in this manner: At the end of the
sixteenth week after the fright, she had pains in the night, she thinking to
endure them well enough 'till morning, in the morning caused me to be sent for.
I came to her, finding with her a Physician, and sundry others of her
acquaintance. The Physician that expected me, had ordered a Clyster to give it
her if I thought it to the purpose; I found her pale, cold, and yet in a sweat,
with so little pulse, that I esteemed her dead; I touched her, and found she
had been in Travail, which had been too long neglected, I called presently for
a plain silver dish, into which I squeezed the juice of half a Citron, and set
it upon a Chafing dish of coals; being warmed, I caused her to take it; this
restored Nature a little, and stirred up her pains, and then I assisted her;
notwithstanding some of the waters ran down: After her first throw, the legs
and thighs of the Child came forth: Now finding the Infant to be dead, and
seeing that she was troubled with no more throws, I was afraid of drawing it
forth, for fear it might be rotten: I did give her a Clyster without moving
her, the force of which bringing the Child away, she was delivered of a dead
Infant, all over of a leaden color, without any ill vapor; the Secondine
sound and fair as you shall see, her purgations as clear as could be, and she
had as good and as happy a Lying in, as any woman in the World; all which time
she had not the appearance of any Milk at all. Hence we may admire the effects
of Nature, which are wonderful! But in such cases Women must be sure in due
time and place; for if a Woman do resist her pains, and does not put her self
in a right posture, she runs a great hazard of her Life.

A second Observation of a Woman that had been in Travail nine days.
BEing called to the Labor of a Woman that had been in Travail nine or ten
days, of whom there was little hope; I went, and there found the Woman almost
dead, her eyes open and fixed, her nose shrunk in, her breath smelling like a
Charnel-house; and she took nothing down into her stomach, that she did not
instantly vomit up again; she had drunk up above two pints of water in an hour,
and by her bed, there was a whole sea of those things that she had vomited up.
They gave her cold water, and the yolk of an Egg sometimes, though it came up
again at the same instant. She felt no pain of the Infant, but finding her Womb
was open and her waters beginning to come down: I found that she had been in
Travail; only Nature was oppressed, and had not had any good assistance, so
that the Infant was retired back again, which stifled the Mother, and provoked
her vomiting. Upon which, I gave my advice, and though I thought my self come a
little too late, yet I resolved to do what lay in the power of my Art; and
therefore I resolved to give her a good strong Clyster to awaken Nature, and to
bring the Infant lower, which did according to our hopes; afterward to drink a
small quantity of Rhubarb-water which stayed with her; a little after, I gave
her the Yolk of an Egg, which stayed with her also, causing her to drink
nothing but Rhubarb-water; and at every hour's end, I gave her the Yolk of an
Egg, which did also stay with her; by this time, Nature began to strengthen it
self, and the pains of the Infant came again; and in less than two hours, after
the Clyster and other nourishment given, when I saw her pretty well, and that
Nature strove to expel the Infant, I gave her half a dram of Confection of
Alkermes in a little Wine; and a little while after I caused her to take
another Clyster, into which I put a little Hiera, and a little Benedictum,
which finished the work; for she was then delivered of a very lusty Child,
which lived about two days: I came thither about noon, and she was brought to
bed before nine at night. I wrote this thus particularly, to let you know that
oft-times for want of knowing where the mischief lies, the Remedies are
misapplied; and indeed a Woman Travailling in the ninth Month, ought chiefly to
be succored with Clysters.

Of a Woman here in Town that bare her Children eleven months, and could not be
Delivered.
BEing called to a Woman in this Town, that thought her self three months and a
half gone, which is one of the Terms of time, wherein commonly the Moles and
False-births are delivered; having then some loss of blood and pain, I was sent
for, and judged it to have been some imperfect Conception, and therefore I used
all means to assist her; yet could she not expel it, for all these long pains:
Whereupon finding some strange apprehensions in her, I wondered; for, in all
the time of my Practice, I never knew such a thing as that dangerous in my
life. But I afterward found this apprehension to come from a certain accident
that had happened to a Sister of hers, who being with Child, carried it very
well to the end of the ninth month; at the end of which she began to be in
pain, as if she would have cried out: the pains were great and long, which they
were not at all astonished at, by reason that it was her first Child, yet were
not these pains accompanied with any signs of Labor, as, the opening the
exterior orifice of the Womb: And they continued thus for the space of two days
and two nights. Many medicines were used to facilitate the birth, but to no
purpose; and now she felt not the Child stir any more. And now it was
concluded, that she had mistaken her time; and now being at rest for four or
five days, and growing weary of the City, she went into the Country, and being
returned without taking notice that she had received any harm, she was taken
with the same pains as before, which continued a day and a night, and then
ceased as before. This was adjudged to be certain pains of the Colic; after
this, she endured one month longer in her former estate, which was now the
eleventh month complete; at the end of which she felt some little pain like
throws, which presently affected her heart; upon which she was laid upon her
bed, and they brought her Wine; but at the very instant she died, without
having any time to call for assistance: Seeing her dead, they perceived upon
the right side of her belly a very black mark about the breadth of a Dollar;
being opened, they found the Child all putrified. Hence we must observe, that
in Women that are big with Child, who have frequent pain, and nothing coming
forth, the Matrix that should open, rather shuting it self closer, whether it
be at the time or no, you must make for them clysters that expel wind, which
are to be reiterated as occasion requires; which Rule if it had been observed
in this Woman, she, nor the Fruit of her Womb, had not perished in that manner.

Of the common opinion, that a Woman seven months gone, ought to walk very
much; and of the Accidents that happen thereby.
IT is a common error among Midwives, which is not to be passed by, that a
Woman with Child, when she has gone seven Months of her time, is to walk much:
Upon a conceit that exercise is very proper for her; for that, they say, does
loosen the Child from the reins, and facilitates the Birth. I confess, as to
facilitating of the Birth, it may something avail; only I must add this also,
that it is better to draw away the Child than to break it; and moreover it is
better to be something longer in Travail, than to incurr two or three evils
which ordinarily happen; the first is, that the Child in the end of the seventh
month, does make certain endeavors to free it self from the belly of the
Mother; and without doubt his first endeavor is to turn himself in the belly
of the Mother; for the Infant turns himself a good while before the time of
Labor; and therefore, I say, Exercise is very dangerous: The first reason is,
because by pushing downward the belly is dilated, and especially in such as
carry their Children low; and besides, often times the head drags down all the
body of the Womb, and loosens the ligaments in such a sort, that after Delivery
it can hardly be put into its place again. Besides, the Children having their
heads between the bones of the Mother, by much walking of the Mother, they come
to be bruised, so that the Infants do many times dye, and no man is able to
give a cause why; for the branches of veins which are for the nourishment of
the brain open in an instant, letting out the blood which is contained in them;
and when the corruption is ingendered, there follows immediately Fevers, and
corruption of the Infant: At other times, Women coming to sit upon a hard seat,
do bruise the head of the Infant, which causes like accidents; and in all these
accidents, none but the Midwife is to blame, unless the belly it self be
spoiled. This, they say, is the fault of the Nurse, who did not apply remedies
fit to restore the fault. I must confess that remedies do much avail to the
recovery of the aforesaid malady, and do much avail to the healing of that
disease; but, to restore it to such an estate as it was in before, I say it is
a thing impossible for medicines to perform: For the skin which is once
separated, cannot be closed again without a scar. I would now not only blame
those that assist them, but, by putting the actions of people before them, show
them where lies the fault, and what reason I have so to do: I must confess that
false accusations have made the most able Midwives timorous; for they lie
liable to so many causes of detraction, that all that are either but
indifferent good, or else not good, are all accused alike, if any thing fall
out amiss with the Patient, as if they were the absolute causes of the evil, or
that it lay absolutely in their power to hinder it. It happens also many times,
that a Midwife worthy of that name, does deliver a woman from death, and yet in
the place of much praise, she incurs many times much blame; so that they are
oftentimes constrained (to avoid the scandal) to advertise them of their ill
procedures, and to give place to those that know not how to do things with that
sweetness and judgment. The fault is no where but in the ignorance, scandal,
and ingratitude of Women toward those of this Calling. Besides, there are a
company of young Women, that because they have had one Child, do give
themselves a great deal of liberty to talk of these things. Cries one, I like
not these Midwives that handle me; I will change mine, cries another, for that
trick also; so that many out of a kind of fear have a greater desire and will
to be complacent than to do well; and so sitting with their hands before them,
entertain their Patients with discourse; who for all that feeling their pains,
are constrained to thrust forward, upon which the head of the Infant coming
first, for the most part the womb serves for a Head-band, which comes forth
before it; whereas, might the Midwife be permitted to touch the Patient, they
might put back the Womb, and prevent many accidents that happen in Lyings-in,
which happen sometimes to be a total relaxation of the Matrix; of which when
the Women complain to their complacent and flattering Midwives, they reply;
why, Mistress, you know I did not touch you; and besides, I am not in fault if
you have been touched: This is the fruit of their reproaches. You will say,
there are abundance of Countrey-women that the Midwife never touch at all, and
they do not know scarcely, whether a Woman lie in, or no, unless they see the
Infant appear. But they are not free from the Disease whereof I speak; for I
have seen so great a company of them, that I have been afraid to behold them.
This comes, say the Midwives, because they touched them not, and that it is
occasioned, either because the Infant is too big, or they say, it is a
burstness, or the coming down of the great gut; the most subtle put up a Clew
of Thread, the others a Ball of wax, which eases a little while, but comes out
again every hour.

Of a Child which they thought sick of the Epilepsie, occasioned by the
sickness of the Mother, and of the cause.
ONE day there came to me a Gentlewoman, to desire me, that I would give her
something for her Daughter that was sick of the Mother: When her Mother related
what she ailed, I desired to see her. I saw her, and she had in one hour two
several fits, which was an affrightment, attended with very much yawning, after
which she remained in a very great weakness; all which time the mouth of the
Child was drawn more to one side than the other; the eyes when she was out of
the fit were open, and fixed in one place; I inquired of the Mother, at what
age her daughter came to be first troubled with it; who answered, that she had
been in this Town something more than a year; and that before that time she was
never troubled with any such thing: I gave her the best Counsel that I could;
and first of all I bid her to carry her again to the place where she was first
nursed: using some few remedies that were convenient; which prospered so well,
that, after she came thither, she had but one fit, though she had them so
frequently before. Of this no other cause can be given, but that the air of the
place where she lived for that year being thicker then that where she was
nursed, caused in her a stirring of the humors, with which the mother was
continually afflicted, she being disposed naturally to that kind of disease.

Of a young Woman, who being struck upon the belly by her Husband with his
foot, was in great pain, and could not be brought to bed without the help of a
Surgeon.
I Will here relate a thing which I have seen in a young Woman; that, if the
like accident should happen, the same Remedies may be applied. There came a
Woman to me, to declare to me a disease with which she was troubled, desiring
me to do my utmost; for that hitherto, she could not lie in without the help of
a Surgeon, who had already killed two of her Children. I, knowing what an
ill Husband she had, and that he had given her a blow upon the belly with his
foot, and had broken the Peritonaeum; which was the reason, that part of her
guts hung down upon the share-bone like the bag of a Bag-pipe; to which place,
being big, the Womb jutted out, so that when the time came, the Infant had not
liberty to turn it self; so that the Midwife seeing she could not have the
Child without losing the Woman, was fain to make use of Surgeon. I
considered her disease, and ordered her to carry a swatheband, such a one as
Women with Child carry to support their bellies, only made a little more
hollow; and I caused her to wear it as they that are burst do wear half-flops,
lying smooth with cushionets within, and never to rise without this, whether
big, or no; which she did, and still does, and bears as fine Children, and lies
in as well, as any other Woman.

Of two Deliveries of one Woman.
THere was a Woman, who being come to a sufficient age, became big: she causes
two of the best Midwives of the Country to assist her in her Lying in; the
hour being come, they did as Art commanded them, which was, The Child coming
well into the world; to keep her in a good situation, to cause her to eat
things which were only for the purpose, to keep her moderately warm, and then
to bring her pains to a good issue. I excused the passion and impatience of
friends, but I would not do any thing against my duty for complacency; a fault
that is soon committed, but not so easily repented of; This Woman was pretty
long, as most Women are of their first Children; in which time her husband,
altogether impatient, and seeing her to doubt the report of the Midwives,
Therefore, said he, here is a Surgeon hard by, who may be sent for to
resolve the doubt of the Midwives; he sent for him just about the hour that the
Woman was to be brought to bed: The Surgeon when he came, saw that the Child
was ready to come forth. The Midwives who had given way to the Surgeon,
thinking to take their place again as soon as he had touched her, to make his
report, were deceived; for he seeing the business ready to be done, told her
Husband that it was necessary for him to operate, but that he would proceed
with so much industry, that he would not only bring forth a sound and a lusty
child, but moreover that he would render his wife also into a safe condition.
The Midwives when they would have spoken, were put to silence. The Gentlewoman
was presently delivered, and he stayed but a little while to receive his
reward: Thus the Midwives that had attended long, and all the while of the
Travail, were despised, and put off; and the Surgeon extolled and praised,
and well rewarded with several most obliging and courteous invitations. About a
year after, he was entertained upon the former score like a Prince; the hour of
her Labor came again; and the Gentleman was gone to visit some of his friends,
having such a confidence in the Surgeon, that he set his mind at rest for
any danger. The Labor of this child was not like the Labor of the other
child; for it came with the feet foremost; and when the whole body was come
forth, the head could not be got forth. He had brought with him no instruments,
thinking that this Delivery would have been like the other; but seeing himself
at a stand, he sent to a Surgeon not far off for an Istrument: in the mean
time, he sent into the kitchen for a Ladle, with a hook at the end thereof, to
draw forth the child. He drew it so well, that he drew away the life of the
child: and without seeking any further for any body to saddle his horse, or
bidding any body farewell, he fled his ways. This may be an instruction to
those that are so ready to entertain Mountebanks, and Empericks; than whom,
there are no men more prodigal of the life of another for money.

Of a Woman, that because she would not be ruled in her Lying in, died.
I Was one day called to the Labor of a woman, which had good Deliveries of
her Sons and Daughters, at their due time, although her Deliveries of Boys were
always more difficult than those of her Daughters; being come to her, I found
her walking in the Chamber with her legs bare, in a season that was not
over-hot. I caused her to be put into her bed to warm her again, but she would
by no means endure it; although I prayed her, she was angry with me, and told
me, This was not the rule, to be constrained. The Mistress and the Nurse
combined against me; the night approached; the waters being come down, I feared
the ill success of this business, that her disease would be irrecoverable by
reason of her self-will'dness. I desired her husband to use his endeavor, but
he could do no more with her than I: about midnight, I prayed her to go to bed
again, and to warm her self, and unless she would do so, I could do nothing.
She told me, I understood nothing in respect of a certain Surgeon, who, when
she had such a kind of Labor before, only touched her with his finger, and
delivered her; and that she would have him. I was content, and so she sent for
him. He came very confidently, but his work was not at so easy a pass as
formerly: he put a good large Table-Napkin before him, trussing it up to his
elbows, saying he was as able to deliver her as before. She would no more see
me after his arrival: the Surgeon to whom I represented (after his arrival) all
that I had understood and seen, and the fear which I had of her, told me that
all would be well. At day break, a neighbor of mine calling me away, I desired
her Husband to let me go; but he was unwilling, unless I would promise to come
again, which I did; and as soon as the door was open, one of the servants told
me, another Midwife was sent for. Her Husband desired me again, that since the
Chyrurgeon failed of his skill, I would use my skill; but it was too late, for
the Chyrurgeon left them, and the Woman died. See here how ill a thing it is to
be opinionated, for I could easily have delivered her, if she would have been
ruled by me.

Of certain Women that bear Children, and lie in before their time: And others,
at their full time, who grow big, and full of humors, which causes the death
of the Child, presently after their Delivery; their Children being nourished in
their bellies, like fish only with water.
I Knew a Gentlewoman who had Laid-in three times, but yet none of her Children
lived: I desired her to take a Physician that might give advice both to her and
me, and to order her some remedies, and a government of diet to keep her from
suffering the like accidents for time to come. We chose a Physician, who
prescribed certain Tablets or Trochisques, to take from the time she began to
grow big, until the time of her Delivery, twice a week; as also to take the
water of Indian Bul-rush, and of Sarsaparilla, to mix in her drink, or broth,
as often as she would, having a due regard to the heat of her blood: She
observed every tittle of his directions, which made her to bear a Son, alive,
sound, and healthful. She continued these Remedies four years together, but the
next time she grew big with Child, she thought that Nature of ^t self would be
sufficient: I counseled her to the contrary, but she hearkened not; so that
when her time came, she was brought to bed of a dead Child. I shall give you
the Receipt of the Tablets, and of the water, for the benefit of Women that are
subject to an ill Delivery, by reason of the great quantity of water, which
hinders the Child from turning in the Womb: The Water is made in this manner.

Take two pints, or two pints and a half of water; put therein half an ounce of
the root of Indian Bul-rush, and an ounce of Sarsaparilla; put this in the
drink, and let it infuse one night; mix it with the drink, or else drink it
pure.

The Tablets are made after this fashion

Take Mace, Saunders, Rhubarb, Pearl, and Coral, Sena, of each 25 grains, with
one ounce and half of Sugar; let every Tablet weigh six drams.

The observation of a Woman, who was thought unable to bear any more Children;
yet contrary to expectation, was delivered of one; and the reason thereof.
THere are certain Women who have the neck of the Womb long and hardened, by a
cold humor that falls down thereon, and renders them incapable of conceiving.
One I have heard of, who was afflicted with this Disease, and voided a great
deal of putrified blood; by a certain fumigation that I taught her, she was
cured. I can say this of a certainty, that after this Woman had voided this
putrefaction, she came to see me with a very lusty Child, and was big of
another; for being discharged of the burden of putrified blood, she found her
self marvellously free for Conception; for the Matrix that began to be
ulcerated, was now fortified, and strengthened again, and the natural heat began
to take possession there again.

A good observation in the choice of Nurses.
THere be two sort of Nurses which I have found: The one is of such Women as
are of an ill humor, or juice; which humors settle all in the milk, for that is
the place where these fluxes discharge themselves. These Women are in a better
condition being Nurses, than when they are not Nurses; and being not Nurses are
subject to pains, sometimes in the arms, and sometimes in the shoulders,
sometimes in one of their legs or thighs; or else they are subject to the
watring of the eyes, or swelling in the corner of the eye or nose. These are
good Nurses, as long as Children are fat; but the fat is soft, and the Infants
dull and sottish, giving no great signs of vivacity; coming to bear teeth, they
are very sickly, and do ordinarily die, by reason of the flux, that pusheth out
too great company of teeth at once. The Children that escape this, are more ill
juic'd in their infancy, than are their Fathers and Mothers in their old Age.
If the flux that afflicts them be salt, the milk is of a blackish and bluish
color, if it be of Choler, it is more dangerous than the other, for that is
more dangerous and venomous to the Children. There is another sort of Nurses
more dangerous than these I have now spoken of; who presently after they have
Lain in (that is, three, or four, or five, or six months) are taken with their
Purgations, a thing which never happens to good Nurses: for this is the course
of Nature, that all the blood which is retained, is dedicated to the
nourishment of the Infant. This is caused by a moderate heat which is in their
blood; and, to say true, as soon as ever this happens, the Infant must be taken
away, for they are more apt to conceive, than to nurse; and if they continue
Nurses, they do but ruin the Children. This is but too much experimented, and
I speak this to save the lives of a great many Children, when seeing them suck
I have discovered their want of milk; so that I may say, there dies a third
part of the Children, for want of taking care in this particular, which yet
seem fat, and in good case.

This is the cause of great Cholicks and windinesses in Children, which kills
them in a moment; for the least Fever that takes them, carries them away.
Besides this, there are some whose milk is so little, but withal so thick, that
it sticks upon the tongue, palate, and throat, which causes, as it were, a
white canker, which is more and more heated by reason of their forcible drawing
in vain; and possesses all the throat, whereby they are hindered from sucking.
These Nurses will milk after this, a drop or two out of their breasts, crying,
Look ye, the Child cares not for sucking. I never knew more abuse in any thing,
than in Nurses: for let them make what excuse they will, it is nothing but
necessity that reduces them to be such. Although the greatest part do say,
that it is to get acquaintance; yet when they have a Child, whether they have
milk or no, yet they desire not to part with it, no more than they do to drown
themselves; whereby the Parents are often deceived. And therefore the Mothers
ought to have a great care, and to make it their business to surprise the
Nurses at their own houses, that if there be any miscarriage, they may find it
out. And indeed it is very reasonable, that the cause of these poor creatures
that cannot complain, should not be neglected; and these She-murderers be made
known, that they may not go unpunished.

Of a Woman which I laid two several times, and of the difference of her
bearing of two Children, proceeding from several causes.
I Was called to lay a Woman, who said she was gone her full time; she had the
same pains that women are wont to have in the time of Travail, but her waters
came not down. At one forcible Throw she cast forth a great membrane like a
Hogs-bladder, all united within and without, only that it had diverse branches
of veins, as you shall see in a bladder; which I presently cut, and found
therein a little Infant, well shaped, swiming in black waters: it had gone its
full time, and was so lean, that it resembled a mere Picture; it had the
Navel-string holding fast to the bladder, where it is to be supposed those
small branches of the veins do end. Here, as I guess, as long as it found any
blood, it lay languishing; but, that beginning to fail, it died, and presently
voided those excrements that were contained in the intestines, which being
mingled in the waters, made them black: And as for the Woman her self, she was
the fullest of humors that ever I saw in my life. Another time I brought the
same Woman to bed, who was delivered of a Child that came the ordinary way into
the World, with the head foremost; now I perceiving her in Labor, found
nothing at first but a certain softness, as if the waters were coming down:
Afterward I perceived a certain bag with hair; athwart which I saw certain
great knobs or heads. The Infant being come forth was not yet formed; the face
and the head were like vizards more than any face; it had the form of a nose,
but it was soft like wool: The head was full of water, and those knobs which
appeared, were nothing but the futures of the head, which the too great
abundance of water had disjoined: in the hands it had nothing but hair instead
of bones, and the toes were of the same: The woman her self was said to be
extreme choleric, and moist.

Instructions of a famous and dying Midwife to her Daughter, touching the
practice of this Art.
DAughter, if the excellencies of what is to be known in this World are to be
found not in one, but in several Countries; certainly they are most able to
instruct who have had the greatest experience, and longest travel in the World;
which is the reason, that in this small Treatise I have not tied up my self to
the rules solely of my own Nation, but have searched the studies also of other
Nations, that thou may be bettered, not only by my experience, but by the
Labor of others.

In the first place therefore, I exhort thee to be diligent, and to leave
nothing unsearched that may tend to the advantage of thy practice. And to this
end, be always learning to the last day of thy life; which that thou may not
cease to do, be always humble; for those that are proud and obstinate, never
gain upon the hearts of those that are knowing in secrets. Be sure thou never
make trial of any new Remedy or Receipt, either upon poor or rich, if thou
be'st not assured of the quality and operation thereof; and that it can do no
hurt, whether it be applied outwardly, or taken inwardly. Hide none of those
good Receipts which thou know, either from Midwives, or Physicians; for
otherwise they will esteem them as little as those of Mountebanks, as if thou
had but one cure, like them, for all Diseases, and yet did brag as they do
of doing wonders, yet still conceal their Receipts. Thou must speak freely of
that which thou know, and give a reason for what thou say. Be not
negligent, but so increase thy Talent, that people may say, you are better than
ever your Mother was: I must tell thee, thou have taken a matter of great
importance into thy hand; and that in this Art there are two ways easy to
take; the one to save thy credit, and the other to lose it. Above all things,
you must beware (for any treasure in the world) of adhering to one vice, such
as they are guilty of who give Remedies to cause Abortion; for those that do
ill, and those that seek a damnable remedy, are wicked in a high degree. But it
is a higher degree of wickedness for those that are no way engaged in the
business, for lucres sake to kill both the body and soul of an Infant. This I
do not speak that thou should refuse to give Remedies upon just occasions:
but to take heed how you be cheated by subtle persons, who shall tell you fine
stories of the diseases of their Wives, or Daughters, which they may say are
very honest, hoping to get from you some Receipts to effect their wicked
designs, send them to the Physicians, for you may give them a lawful excuse, in
saying that such matters do not belong to your charge. Never keep the cawl
called Amnios, which covers the head and shoulders of the Child, for Sorcerers
to make use of.

If you are sent for to any house, inform your self of what condition they are,
and whether they be rich, or whether they be the poorest creatures in the
world, serve them with like pains and affection, and if you find them to be
very poor, take nothing; for to them a little is a great deal: visit them also
afterward with diligence, that for the small time wherein they keep their bed,
you may be assisting to them in strengthening and recovering of their healths. I
charge thee, Daughter, that in all thy life thou never receive a Woman into thy
house to lie in; for that is but a kind of Panderism clothed in some pretense
of Charity; neither does thy profession oblige thee to do it. If it chance to
be a woman that is not wholly betaken to whoredom, that there is some hopes of
recovering her from that lost condition; if then she desire you out of a belief
of your sufficiency, or secrecy, you may then go to her in an honest place. You
must comfort her, if she be afflicted, and put her in the right way, exhorting
her never to commit the like again; but to receive such persons into your
house, is but a means to encourage evil: As the receivers of stolen goods are
a means to encourage Thieves; even so, the Midwives that bring such a stench to
their house, do assist and abet the evil which they do, whilst they know where
to discharge themselves of the like burden again. At the first when I took
upon me this Calling, I took two into my house, the one of Quality, the other
of an ordinary condition; I saw them sometimes in such fits of despair, that I
could hardly bring them out of them again. Those from whom the evil came; upon
whose account I had received them, came now and then to see them, because they
brought them maintenance; I was continually fain to keep watch with them, for
fear they should do any evil in the house: And I must needs say, I had better
have kept a herd of Swine. Such unrests as these ought not to enter into the
breast of a Midwife; for, her mind ought to be free and at peace. Besides that,
a custom of laying Women of an ill life, spoils the reputation of a Woman, and
often times endangers the health also. To confirm which, I knew an honest
understanding Midwife, that laid a Courtezan that seemed to ail nothing at all;
but she, having an inveterated Pox, gave it to the old Midwife upon her right
hand, upon which there came a red Bubo; for all which, being unwilling to leave
off her Calling, she spoiled after that above thirty Households; for the
Husbands got the Pox from their Wives, and the Children from their Mothers

Now let me tell thee, Daughter, that thou ought not to take it ill to see
the condition of Midwives despised; neither let this hinder thy Studies in the
perfections of this Art, which are not to be comprehended by those that despise
it. Neither be dismayed if thou see people in this condition, that do not
deserve to be; for this does not at all diminish the honor of those that are
good: for it comes from hence to pass, because they that receive them for money,
do as Stablers do, put the good and bad Horses together; the good Horses are in
no danger to be hurt by the Jades, but the Jades are in hazard of being kicked
and spoiled by the good Horses.

Never think of any think else but of doing well, and serving those that shall
call thee according to their own liking, if that which they desire be not
prejudicial to them, but if that which they desire; be to their hurt, be sure
that thou discharge thy self of them, and especially excuse thy self to the
assistants, that thou may persuade them to reason. A sweet disposition in a
Midwife is much more commendable than a rigorous: the pain of Childbearing is
a very hard labor, which thou must consider, and accordingly conform thy self
to the humor of the Patient, knowing thy self to be called to comfort and
assist her.

Mark well, entering into a house, in what condition the Patient is; if the evil
be at hand, you must encourage her, and prepare your self with those things
that are necessary; and first you must see that the Bed be well made for the
woman that is to be brought to bed, and then to put on her a little smock, and
waste-coat, and other linen necessary: And if she be so opinionated, as that
she will not; tell her how much you do it for the better; and how great a pain
it will be afterward; content her though, for you must make of a bad Market no
more then you can. You ought to give order for things to be had from the
Apothecaries with her consent; or if she be young, with the consent of her
friends. You must take order also that some good broth be made for her to take,
in the time of her Travail, if it should chance to be long; and also two hours
after her being brought to bed. Above all things I charge thee, that what ever
business thou may have there, that thou go not about them too hastily. For
there is nothing so nauseous to be seen, as the improvident actions of
over-busie women. Never be dismayed if every thing go not well; for, fear
disorders the senses; and a person that keeps her wits together, without
suffering them to be scattered by fear, is capable of giving assistance in
weighty affairs, and especially where things are done with leisure; for in such
cases Nature helps marvellously, when we are most at a stand. There is a great
necessity of prudence, especially in the age wherein we live. There is now no
need of Coloquintida to render any thing good in it self, bitter and
disagreeable to the taste. There are few Women now a days that do give that
respect, or have that kindness for them as in former ages; for then, when their
Midwife died, they showed a great deal of sorrow, and prayed God that now they
might have no more Children: which though it were not well done, yet it showed
their affection. Now adays, Women use them as mere Hirelings.

There is a great deal of artifice to be used in the pleasing of our Women,
especially the young ones, who many times do make election of Men to bring them
to bed. I blush to speak of them, for I take it to be a great piece of
impudence to have any recourse unto them, unless it be in a case of very great
danger. I do approve it, I have approved it, and know that it ought to be done,
so that it be concealed from the Woman all her life long; nor that she see the
Surgeon any more: for it is very inconvenient to Husbands, that (unless in
cases of very great danger) such things concerning their own Wives should be
communicated to any other men but themselves.

To this purpose shall I tell thee Daughter, that being called to the Labor of
a Friend, where were none but 2 or 3 of her acquaintance, they asked me what I
thought of the Labor: to which I answered, that the Child did not come well,
but that I would do the work with the assistance of God, without danger to the
Child, or to the Mother. They desired me that I would let a Surgeon see her:
for their satisfaction, I consented to it; provided that she might not see him;
for I was fearful, lest she should die with apprehension and shame; I persuaded
her to slide down toward the feet of the bed, and darkened the Room on that side
where he was to come; at the feet he touched her, and she was brought to bed
without any other assistance, save that of God and Nature. Since these injuries
have bin put in fashion, there have bin observed greater hazards and dangers in
lying in than before, which might be remedied by persons capable of their
profession, if they might be let alone. But this Detraction is so much in
request, that among some kind of people, there is much ado to make them believe
the truth, and especially where they cannot get great advantage by so doing,
and truly, Honorable persons which I have had the honor to serve, make other
women seem monstrous to me. You shall come into some houses, where there are
certain persons that hold such false lights to the Mistress of the House, that
she sees quite contrary to that which is real; which persons if they are not
humoured, your business will be there soon dispatched. Take great heed of
coming there, for it may chance to gain you nothing but a great deal of care.
There are some Women that have no Children, at which they are very much
troubled; which is so, notwithstanding that they might easily be helped, if
they would tell an understanding Midwife where the defect lay.

As concerning those, who are sent for to lay Women in the Country, I must say
this, that as for those that are not very well experimented, they may incur
many hazards by reason of their ignorance, and the multiplicity of accidents
that may happen: And for those that are knowing, to leave their Patients in the
City, is a thing that may displease, and wrong many, and run the hazard of
being no more entertained among them, to their own ruin; neither is there any
certainty of a Woman that will run rambling into the Country. My last advice
is, that thou do well, and in so doing, fear nothing but God, that he may bless
thee, and thy endeavors.

Explanation of the first Figure.
A A. The right and left Kernel of the Reins. B. The true Kidneys. CC. The
Emulgent Veins. DD. The Emulgent Arteries. E E. The Spermatic Veins. F F. The
Spermatick Arteries. GG. The Trunk of the hollow Vein. HH. The Trunk of the
great Artery. IIII. The Ureters. KK. The Vessels that prepare the Seed. MM The
Stones with all their Tunicles. N N. The Vessels carrying the Seed, retorted
back into the Bladder. O. The Bladder. P. The Neck of the Bladder. QQ. The two
glaudulous Fore-standers. R R. The two Muscles that erect the Yard. S S. Two
other Muscles dilating the Ureter. T. The body of the Yard. U. The Praeputium
that covers the Nut of the Yard.
Explanation of the second Figure.
A. The Bladder turned downward. BB. The insertion of the Uterers into the
Bladder. CC. The neck of the Womb, which Anatomists call the Sheath, which
receives many vessels. EEEE. The two lower round Ligaments of the mouth, cut
away. FF. The blind Vessel of the Womb annexed here to the uppermost and broad
Ligament. GG. The same vessel on the other side, separated from the broad
Ligament. HH. The different or Seed-carrying vessels on each side, ending in
the neck of the Womb. II. The upper and membrany Ligament of the Womb, like the
wings of a Bat; through which many vessels, that arise from the preparing
vessels, are scattered and diffused. K. The preparing Vessels of one side, not
yet discerned from the first membrany, or filmy Ligament. L. The preparing
Vessels on the other side, severed from the filmy Ligament: to show you their
insertion into the stone, with its films. MM. The Stones; where one is covered,
the other is bare. NN. Many Veins and Arteries scatered into the neck and
bottom of the Womb; serving for the purgation of the flowers, and the
nourishment of the birth. OO. The Nerves scattered through the body of the
Womb.
FINIS.

