A SERMON PREACHED TO THE Artillery-Company, AT S. MARY LE BOW, OCTOBER 21.
1679.

AND Published at their earnest Request.

By EDW. PELLING, Rector of S. Martin Ludgate, and Chaplain to his Grace the
Duke of Somerset.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1679.

S. LVKE III. 14. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what
shall we do?
WHat shall we do? is an old and general Question, which many times will puzzle
even a wise man to answer. In this Chapter we find, first the People facing
John the Baptist with this Question in their mouths. He had told them of an Ax
that was now laid to the root; and presently the people (who are commonly
frighted at the noise of such fatal and edged Instruments) came unto the
Baptist, like a Forlorn Hope, and desired him to tell them, what they should do
then? v. 10.

Then came the Publicans; which were Officers under the Romans, that did Farm
and Collect the Customary Taxations; but not content with their ordinary
Profits and Pay, used all manner of Oppression, racking and pillaging the
people; so that the Name and Office of a Publican was infamous even among the
Romans themselves; and in the Scripture, Publicans and Sinners commonly go
together in Files. As soon as they heard of an Ax coming, it is no wonder if
they should be alarmed too; they put the same Question to the Baptist which the
rest did, Master, What shall we do? v. 12.

In the Rear of all came these Soldiers in my Text, a sort of men that had
been used to the Sword, but yet were apt, as others, to be afraid of an Ax, and
as unwilling to be hewn down. These Soldiers are thought to have been Jews,
that listed themselves under the Romans, and quartered up and down in Garrisons
for the security of the Nation; who, though they thought themselves obliged in
Conscience not to undertake any Military Expeditions, or to engage in an open
War, and pitched Battle, against their Countrymen, yet were a rapacious sort of
Infantry, (as sordid Auxiliaries for the most part are) and not so over-kind to
their Brotherhood, but that upon occasion they would plunder and Forage in an
Hostile way, or skrew Booties out of them by Accusations, after the manner of
Delators and Pick-thanks. But as stout and insolent as they were, it seems that
S. John's Sermon took down their Courage, when they heard that the Judgment of
God was at their Heels, ready to cut its way, so that no Shield or Buckler
could be their defense against it, their hearts sunk (like men desirous of
Quarter) and hereupon they follow their Leaders, the Publicans and People, and
beseech the Baptist to give them their Charge likewise, they demanded of him,
saying, And what shall we do?

From the Occasion and Connection of the Words, I might proceed to entertain you
with John's Resolution of the Soldiers Question. Do Violence to no man,
neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your Wages; which was a very
seasonable Charge then, considering, first, that the Jews at that time were
yoked and kept under by the Roman Forces, and were subject to be oppressed and
harrassed, and made a Prey of, whenever the Roman Eagle should invade them
with her Tallons and her Bill. And considering too the insolent and base
behavior of these Soldiers, that not content with their ordinary Pay, lived
like Harpies and Sycophants, upon Rapine and Spoil. To them the Baptist spoke
home, aiming at the proper mark, and levelling his Admonition at their sin, and
darting his Arrow that way where he was sure to hit and to wound deepest.

But these directions may not seem so proper for this place, and for this
Auditory, there being a vast disparity and difference in respect both of
Persons and Times.

1. In respect of Persons. These Soldiers in the Text were not so much as
Listed into the Christian Religion, nor very well Disciplined in their own: but
men who followed the Conduct of their own impetuous Appetites, and minded no
Law so much as that of Arms. But You have not so learned Christ, the Captain of
your salvation; You, that are clad in the Armor of God; You, that have Truth
for a Military Girdle, and Righteousness for a Breastplate, and Charity for a
Marching-Shoe, and Faith for a Shield, and Hope for an Helmet, and the Word of
God for a Sword, as S. Paul describes a Christian that is armed Cap-a-pe, and
that is strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.

2. There is difference too in respect of the Times; things being with us
(though to the great dissatisfaction of some Renegado's abroad, and some
Mutineers at home) in a quiet and peaceable state, and those two dear Darlings
of men's Affections, Liberty and Property, being in our actual and plenary
possession. Indeed S. John's Admonition would be pertinent, were the Times such
as they were not so long ago that we should forget them, when the Pulpit was
the Drum, and Curse ye Meroz, and Rebellion, was the Beat; when the whole Land
was sequestered into the Claws of our Mortisied Saints, after they had lustily
squeezed the Public Faith, and when an Information was the Price of the
greatest Estate; then 'twas a seasonable Command to our Masters, those Ruffians
in Buff, Do no violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely. But considering
the posture of our Affairs, that (God be blessed) it is yet undisturbed, so
that your Arms are not for Terror, but for Show only, I must be pardoned, if I
do not tie my self strictly to the Baptist's Answer, but resolve the Soldiers
Question in such a way as may suit with our Times, and in some measure answer
the purport of this Solemnity.

The general design of S. John, was to Train these Soldiers into good Manners;
and so my first business shall be to advise you to have a good Conscience. I do
not speak of a cheap Humor, or an Opinion that is easily taken up, or a
perverse Persuasion; much less do I mean the acting upon loose Principles;
Principles which among honest men will not pass Muster; for such a Conscience
is nothing else but the Color of a Knave, or the Trumpet of a Rebel. But by a
good Conscience, is understood a Judgment that is rightly informed, and that is
faithfully obeyed, so that the result thereof is Virtue, and Religion, and
Righteousness, which is indeed the Breast Plate of every good Christian. Let
such a Conscience as this be your Armor; a Conscience that will endure the
Shock, that will stand by a man undaunted in the day of Battle, and that will
be a Guard and a Comfort to him at the Onset of Death. We read of that
Centurion, Cornelius, that he was a devout man, and one that feared God, with
all his house, Act. 10. 2. Piety, and a Religious Dread of offending God, is a
necessary Qualification in a Soldier; whether we consider, First, the Quality
of his Office; or, Secondly, the Dangers which do attend his Employment; or,
Thirdly, the Issue which he expects by his Atchievments.

1. A good Conscience is necessary in respect of his Office; for so it makes
him the more Honorable. Those Military Exploits, with which Great and Noble
Spirits have made all Histories to swell, were so far from being any Blot in
their Escutcheons, that they have been a Luster to their Families and Names,
and were many times the Foundation, sometimes an Addition, always an Ingredient
of their greatest Honors: And generally the beginning of the most splendid
Fortunes, and the Originals of the highest Titles and Names of Renown, were
fetched from the Camp, as the just Reward of Fortitude and Gallantry, of Gore
and Blood. Upon which score, the Greek Hero's, the Roman Consuls and Dictators,
and (who have been as matchless as any) our English Worthies, have been Great
and Honorable at Home, because they were Faithful, Valiant, and Victorious in
the Field.

Now, what a disparagement is it to your Coat, that a Noble and Brave Spirit
should Cashier his Honor, and stain his Name and Blood with Vice, which is
even a stain to the Dunghill? What a blemish is it, that he should drink
himself out of the shape of a Man into the similitude of a Beast, that you
would think you saw a Swine in Buff, or a dead Ass in a Lions skin? what a
dishonor is it, that he should take up the Porters sin, and discharge Oaths
instead of other Ammunition? and let fly upon the Cross, which has been the
Ornament of Scepters and Banners? and imitate the impertinent Malice of that
Infidel that stuck Christ's side with a Spear? In a word, what a shame is it,
that men, for whom States and Empires cannot afford Trophies enough, should be
Beleaguered and Vanquished by their Lusts; and that they who fear not the
threats of a Cannon, or the face of Death, should not be so much as
Beautyproof, but captivated by the very Looks of a Female Enemy? When you see a
Sampson putting off his Laurels of Victory, and yielding up his Locks to the
Scissers of a Dalilah: When you see an Hercules submitting to carry Omphale's
Slippers; an Athanericus stooping down to tie his Mistresses Shoes, a
Sardanapalus exchanging his Sword for a Distaff; a Coesar and an Anthony led in
Triumph by a Defenseless Cleopatra; and the Flower of all Greece taking up Arms
for the sake of a Noble Whore; what shameful Instances do you not see of folly
and degenerous Natures, which are so far from becoming the Chieftains and
Masters of the Artillery, that they are reproachful to the rudest Tyro, and to
the meanest Rank of Drudges that attend the common Baggage.

So that were only the Grandeur of your Society concerned, Virtue and a Good
Conscience is necessary in a Soldier, to make him the more Honorable and
Illustrious.

2. But, secondly, If he does consider the Dangers which meet him in the Face,
he will find another necessity for it, to make him the more Valiant. The
Apostle, speaking of those Religious Champions of old, tells us, That through
Faith they subdued Kingdoms, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in
Fight, and turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens, Heb. 11. A firm Belief in
God, when it is Harnessed with Good Works, is a sturdy, puissant, and victorious
thing. But Vice makes men Sneaks and Cowards; and a Wing of Miscreants have
just Reason to flee, when Death is coming out of the Muzzle of a Gun, or upon
the Point of a Sword; because the formidable appearance of Hell is coming too;
and then the hearts of Irreligious men will Recoil, and evil Consciences will
run into Pits, or Woods, or into any Corners on this side the Territories of
the damned, and out of the reach of him whose Name is Legion.

It is not to be denied, but there is a sort of audacity and fool-hardiness,
which is a resemblance of true Valor, and which the vilest of men are capable
of, either by reason of the heat of a sanguine Constitution, or through the
prevalency of wrong Principles, which hurry them headlong upon danger, or
through Malice and Spite against Government, or through a necessity of
Effrontery, when their Fortunes are desperate, or their Persons are environed
with straits and inconquerable difficulties, or the like: And so Turks, and
Jesuits, and Heathens themselves have been bold; and our own Histories of the
late Times afford us Instances of many who did not dare to be loyal and good
Subjects, but yet did dare to be Traitors, Regicides, and Devils in the shape
of men. But this is a brutish sort of Bravery, like the Valor of an Horse,
that rusheth into the Battle without fear or wit, or consideration of a Spears
point. But let the Impetus be once over, let the Wretch come soberly to debate
his present Affairs, and to take a true prospect of his future state, then his
spirits will Flag, and his stoutness will be Crest-faln; and take it for a
general Rule, that none shall undertake an Enterprise with so much readiness,
or engage in a Rencounter with so much fortitude, or maintain his Ground with
so much constancy, or defy the Roarings of the Field with such a fixed
resolution, as the man who is Girt about with Integrity, and to whom a Good
Conscience is a Coat of Mail: (...), as Maximus Tyrius, the Pagan Philosopher,
said, He that loves God receives death willingly, and is not cowed at its
approaches, but keeps his Station, and his Post, with a Steeled Courage.

3. Let me add, thirdly, that none shoulders off an Enemy with such success, or
Crowns his Feats of Arms with such prosperity; because his whole life is a
Prayer, whereby he offers Violence to Heaven, quasi manu facta, (as Tertullian
speaks) Besieging and Battering it, as it were with a mighty Host: And on this
score too, Virtue and a good Conscience is necessary in a Soldier, because it
makes him the more Victorious.

It Is true; a good Cause, and good Men, and good Soldiers do not always
succeed. A Senacherib, or a Nero, or a Cromwell may win the day, when Providence
intends to bring a People under the Harrow and the Saw: Then indeed God passes
Sentence, as a Judge; but generally with good men he helps as a Confederate
and a Party. The care of good Joshua was, that himself, and his whole house,
and all Israel might serve the Lord, and Victory still waited at his Heels,
and, like that Centurion's Servant, Mat. 8. 'twas at his beck and command; so
that within the compass of a few years, more Conquests were made, more Kings
vanquished, more Crowns won, and more Scepters were broken by that one General,
than, perhaps, the twelve Caesar's at Rome ever saw. So also we read of David,
that he was a man according to God's own heart, and from the Age of a Stripling
all-a-long he got Victories after Victories, (over the Philistines, the
Amalekites, the Moabites, the Ammonites, the Syrians, and the rest) some by his
Sling, some by his Sword, some by the Terror of his Arms, all by the Blessing
of God, as the Brabium and Prize which he obtained by his Zeal for Religion.
Not to speak of other Victorious Captains among the Jews (who were therefore
Victorious Commanders, because Pious Men;) it is clear, that in the
Infant-times of Christianity, though the Holy Professors of it were hated,
harrassed, and great numbers of them cut off by the Heathens, yet were they so
serviceable to them in their Wars, that the Brunt of the Battle was wont to lie
upon them. Whereas others were Lions in Peace, but Hearts in War, (as Tert. de
Cort. Mil.
Tertullian speaks,) the Christian was their only trusty Soldier; so that
though the Infidels hated them for their Religion, yet did they make use of
them for their good service; witness the Army under Julian, which was most of
them Christians; and the Theban Legion under Maximian, which were Christians;
and the Fulminatrix Legio, under Antoninus, which were Christians; to whose
Piety the Romans were so indebted, that the Emperor, writing to the Senate,
told them in his Letter (a Copy whereof we have in Justin Martyr,) that the
Christians Apol. 2.
saved his whole Army from destruction at that time, when he was in the bowels
of Germany. For all being ready to perish for want of water, the Christians
fell down upon their Knees to Prayer; and thereupon plenty of Rain fell down
straight, which preserved the Roman Forces; but Hail mingled with Fires fell
down in abundance on the Heads of their Enemies. And thence it was (as some
conceive) that That Legion of Christians was called, the Lightning-striking
Legion.

You see by this time, how necessary Religion and a good Conscience is for a
Soldier: It makes him the more Honorable in his Office, the more Valiant in
his Expeditions, and the more Victorious in the Event.

And when I have said this, you may think that in effect I have said all. But
yet, to come somewhat closer home in the Resolution of this Question in my
Text, there are some particular things which must fall under the Consideration
and Care of a Soldier, that the Formidable Issues of his Warlike Undertakings
may be legitimated.

No doubt, but upon certain Occasions, and in certain Cases, Wars may be
lawfully Levied. These Soldiers which came to John here, were not ordered to
lay down their Arms, but to do no Wrong, and to be content with their Wages:
And Cornelius, that was made a Christian by the Ministry of S. Peter, was not
directed to lay down his Commission, but continued a Centurion still. And the
Truth is, Wars between States are of the same Nature with Lawsuits between
Private Persons, only the Charges and Cost are much more considerable, by how
much Blood is more valuable than Money. Now as Appeals to the Magistrate are
lawful, so are Appeals to the Sword, when the Accounts and Considerations are
weighty, and there is no other possible way of redress.

Yet the lawfulness of War notwithstanding, there are three things chiefly
which every Military man is bound in Conscience to have a careful Eye unto. 1.
The Authority, by Virtue whereof he enters into the Field. 2. The End, to which
he imployeth his Arms. 3. That Obedience and Fealty which he owes to the
Magistate, throughout the whole course of his Actions. Of these briefly, that I
may not hinder your March.

1. For the Authority: it must be just and lawful. All they that take the Sword
shall perish with the Sword, says our Savior, Mat. 26. 52. meaning such as
take it of themselves, and snatch it into their hands, being not called unto it
by due and competent Authority. For God being the sole Author of our lives, the
Power of life and death is Originally in him alone; but Derivatively in those
to whom he has delegated this Power by special Commission; and they are those
whom S. Paul calls the Higher (or the Supreme) Powers, Romans 13. 1. where he
means the Person of the Magistrate in chief, who is legally constituted, and
has gotten the Authority into his hands not by Usurpation, but by Law and
Right; the Independent and Rightful Magistrate in every Nation, whether it be
the King as Supreme, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Now he is called the Minister of God,
because the Sword which he bears is put into his hands by the Authority of
God alone, to be drawn by him, and to be put into the hands of his Subjects by
his Warrant; so that whosoever shall enter into dangers of his own life, upon
his own head, is a Murderer of himself; or shall take away the life of his
Neighbor, without the Command or leave of his Sovereign, is a Murderer of
another. And upon this score, I stick not to say, That the Unnatural War which
was raised lately by the Long and Disloyal Parliament, was a direct Rebellion;
and (they having not the Power of War legally in their hands) all such as did
engage by pretended Commissions from them, were (notwithstanding their
Saintships) so many Formal Murderers, and were actually guilty of all that
Bloodshed, for which, for ought I know, the Ax is now laid to the Root of the
Tree; which as it ought to be a Terror to all Representatives of the People
for the future, so it ought also to be a warningpiece to every Subject
(especially to every Soldier) to take diligent care (as he will answer it to
the Lord of Hosts, who will one day make Inquisition for Blood) that he Sound
not to the Battle, or run into it, but by the Commands of due and lawful
Authority.

2. A second thing he is to do, is to consider the Ends of his Martial
Undertakings, whether they be lawful and good too; for the End serves very
much to denominate an Action either good or bad. Now if a man enters himself
into the Muster-Roll out of a sincere design to serve his King, to preserve
Peace, and to defend his Country from Foreign Invasion, or Domestic
Insurrections, either by preventing, or by suppressing the Hostilities of evil
men, the End is good, and the Action is just, honorable and excellent.

But then, first, for a man to aim at men's lives for Spoylsake, to Trail for
Plunder, and to Advance for Pay, as the main end of his Military Services, is a
vile and a base thing; because Violence is not to be a man's ordinary Trade for
a Livelihood; nor is it to be imagined, that he was born into the World, that
he should live only by slashing and wounding, and cutting men's Throats. To
which purpose some learned men have noted upon my Text, That had these been V.
Grot. in Loc.
such Soldiers of Fortune, as lead a Mercenary and Belluine life, and rove up
and down, hewing and hacking merely for Booty sake, the Baptist would have
given them another kind of Answer, and sent them from their Quarters, as a sort
of Inhumane and Barbarous Villains.

So, secondly, for men to Rendezvous with a design to make Havoc of the true
Religion, is a most Wicked and Damnable thing; for the Charge here, Do Violence
to no man, does rather restrain Soldiers from doing Violence to the Men of
God, and to the Faith of Christ. None can, but with a most guilty and seared
Conscience, be a Pioneer in this sense, to Blow up Religion, or to Undermine
the Church, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. These Jewish
Soldiers, though they were men of large Consciences, and of Iron Hearts, yet
they abhorred the very thoughts of turning the Point of their Swords upon their
Countrymen, and would choose to endure any Punishments, rather than they would
strike a Blow to the prejudice of their Native Religion. Nay, Josephus Antiq.
l. 20. c. 4.
tells us, that, When an Heathen Soldier had by chance found the Books of
Moses, and tore them in pieces, the Roman Procurator, Cumanus (a man that hated
the Jews sufficiently, but) was so ashamed of the Fact, that to revenge the
Affront which had been offered to God himself, ordered the profane Wretch
presently to be beheaded. What an horrid thing would it be, should You that
have been Trained up in the best Reformed Church upon the Earth, (a Church,
which, though Militant, was never yet the Mother of Rebels, should You at last)
espouse a Quarrel against her Bible, against her Sacraments, against her Faith,
or against her Members? When the Thebean Legion of old was commanded by the
Emperor to fall upon their Fellow Christians, rather than they would wound
their own Consciences by such an Act of Impicty, they were content first to lay
down their Arms, and then to offer up their own Necks for a Sacrifice. In those
times more or braver Martyrs were not to be found, than what were bred in the
Field. They were a Safeguard to their Prince, and an Honor to Religion, and
counted it Honorable to dye for Religion; but if once Religion was to be
persecuted, no Inducements in the World could prevail with them o lift up a
Weapon, or so much as a Finger against it.

I have the more insisted upon this, because the Ax is now laid to the root of
Tree: Not only the Ax of Gods Judgments, but the Ax of some men's Malice too,
who design to extirpate our true Religion, to Hew it all down at once, and to
make destruction of Root and Branch. To assist and join with such Engineers, is
a most impious and sacrilegious thing.

And let me add, thirdly, That to take up Arms rashly, and without or against
due Authority, merely for the Defense of the true Religion, is unwarrantable
and unlawful. For Christ's Kingdom is not of this World; and for that Reason
his servants are not to fight for him, because his Kingdom is not from hence,
Job. 18. 36. He left the Power of the Militia in the same hands where he found
it. And Christians are not to snatch that Power into their own hands, to
maintain the Cause of Religion, and to decide Controversies in Divinity by the
Edge of the Sword. Though some have fought for an Alcoran, others for a Legend,
and others for a COVENANT, yet no Pretenses, no Cause, no Church can justify
such violent and arbitrary Proceedings, no, not for the sake of the Gospel; For
we do not war after the flesh, neither are the Weapons of our Warfare carnal,
says S. Paul, 2 Cor. 10. And elsewhere showing the Christians Arms, he
mentions Truth, Righteousness, Charity, Faith, Hope, the Word of God, and
Prayer; and of these he says twice together, that it was the Armor, and the
whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.

That Soldier then that will keep a good Conscience as his Sentinel and Guard,
must consider first the Authority by which, and then the Ends for which he
undertaketh a Martial Employment. And according as those Ends are either. Good
or Evil, so are his Undertakings either honest or sinful.

3. There is now but one thing more you are to consider of; viz. That Obedience
and Fealty you owe to the Supreme Power under whom you act. For it is required,
as in a Steward, so in a Soldier, that he be found faithful: Neither a
Desertor, nor a Traitor. Let every Soul be subject, faith the Apostle, Romans 13.
1. where he takes in men of all Ranks and Qualities, whether in an
Ecclesiastical, or in a Civil, or in a Military Station: and whosoever
resists (either the Authority or Person of the King) shall receive to himself
damnation. A dreadful Sentence: because Subjection is a most necessary Duty.
And this the Primitive and best Christians were so careful to observe, that
notwithstanding the impious Persecutions, and the unheard of Cruelties of their
Princes; though some of them were Infidels, some Heretics, one of them an
Apostate, and most of them Oppressors and Persecutors of Religion, yet
Christians (and even those who had Swords in their hands) resolved to undergo
all Miseries and Torments, and a thousand Deaths, rather than they would make
any the least Resistance. Nay, notwithstanding the prodigious numbers of
Christians too; though (as Tertullian tells us expressly) Christians filled the
Roman Empire, their Cities, Apolog. c. 37.
Islands, Castles, Towns, Councils, Palaces, Senates, Courts, and their very
Camps too, so that they could have ruined their Enemies even without the use of
Arms, and merely by holding off from their services; yet so true were they for
Conscience sake, that not so much as one Christian did ever offer (in those
days) to Rebel. And of this we have two very memorable Instances: The one in
Julian's Army, which consisted for the most part of Christians; who,
notwithstanding those intolerable usages, which they, and the whole Christian
Religion, received at his hands, yet never so much as attempted to use those
advantages they had, either to attack his Person, or to invade his
Prerogatives, nor lifted up their hands, but in Prayer for the Emperor, when a
Pagan, an Apostate, and their inveterate Enemy. The other is in the Thebean
Legion (I mentioned before) consisting of six thousand six hundred sixty six
Soldiers, and all of them Christians, and, had they not been so, enough to
have been successful Traitors. But after too several Decimations, each Tenth
^ucker. L^d.
man being killed upon the spot, for refusing Maximian's most unjust Commands,
they meekly yielded up themselves (the whole Body of them) to be cut in pieces
at their Enemies Feet, thereby showing unto all men, and especially to men of
War, how necessary it is for such, as are once Matriculated into the Service of
Christ, to live good Subjects, and, if need be, to dye Martyrs.

By this time, Beloved, you cannot but see your Duty, if you enquire, as those
Soldiers did in my Text, And what shall we do? When the Ax is laid to the
root, the best way to keep the Tree from falling, is to prevail with God to
take his hand off; and the way to that, is not to murmur and complain of the
Danger, but for every man to do his Duty in his Place, and to move regularly in
that Sphere where Providence has set him. You are Christians, Citizens, and
Soldiers, and your Society is a Nursery of Valor: Men, in whom our Sovereign
does repose much Trust, and on whom the whole Nation may at this time have fixed
their Eyes, observing your Motions, and which way you will lead others, whether
to the Right, or Left. Your care ought to be the greater, in the prudent and
Christian Government of your selves, that you give not Fire to those, who are
ready to receive any little Spark. Herein then Exercise your selves
principally, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, to keep a Conscience void of
Offense both to God and Man. The Word of God is the great Standard whereby your
Consciences must be guided; and that Word tells you, that you are to render to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's. That Word tells you, That Sedition is a
work of the Flesh, and that Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft: That Word
gives them the Character of Reprobates, and ranks them in Jannes and Jambres's
Society, that resist the Truth. That Word calls them the Enemies of God, who
have evil will at Sion, and are Enemies to the Church, to whom Kings are bound
to be Nursing-Fathers. And that Word requires you, as to Fear God, so to Honor
the King, and not to meddle with them who are given to Changes. Take heed
therefore that you leap not over your Lines, or break your Ranks, or run cross
to the Laws of your great Commander, lest you be found even to Fight against
God. Beware that for the sake of Liberty, you engage not against Authority;
that you plead not Conscience to destroy Obedience; and that you pawn not your
Souls as Hostages, under a pretense of Redeeming Religion: But let the Faith of
Christ be your Buckler, and Trust in God be your Helmet, and whatsoever is
just, and pure, and honest, and lovely, and of good report, be the rest of your
Accoutrements; and then will the Spirit of God be your Strength, and the
Providence of God will be your Banner, and a Crown of Righteousness will be
your Prize, and the Kingdom of Heaven the Place of your Everlasting Triumphs.
To which Kingdom, God of his mercy bring us all, for Christ Jesus his sake, the
Prince of Peace, and the Captain of our Salvation: To whom be Glory and
Dominion, world without end.

Amen.

