Jerub-baal, OR THE Pleader impleaded.

BEING An Answer to Mr. Croftons (lately published) Plea for Communion with the
Church under her present Corruptions, etc. Entitled Reformation not Separation.

By way of humble Remonstrance thereunto.

SHOWING, That Non-Communion with the Church of England in her Liturgy and
Common Prayer, in those that (yet) join with her in the substantial Ordinances
and instituted Worship of Christ, is no Schism, and that Such are unjustly
called Separatists.

In a Letter written by T. P. for the private satisfaction of a Friend, and by
him published for Common benefit.

In cujus perniciem aliquando convenimus? hoc sumus congregati quod et
dispersi, hoc universi quod et singuli, neminem laedentes, neminem
contristantes. Tertul. Apolog. adversus Gent. LONDON; Printed in the Year 1662.

A Letter Written by T. P. for the satisfaction of a Friend, in case of
Non-Communion with the Church of England in her Liturgy and Common Prayer.
Honored Sir;
SChism being a dissolution and breach of Union, 'twill not be amiss, if for
the better understanding of the nature of the Schism in question, we make some
enquiry into that Church-Vnion whereof it is a breach: Now, from the distinct
notions and acceptions of the Church, the nature of Church-Vnion will best
appear.

The Church of Christ, (even that which is Militant (for the Triumphant comes
not here to be considered) is usually distinguished into 1. Catholic. 2.
Particular.


The Catholic Church again, into 1. Visible. 2. Invisible.


1. The Catholic Visible Church is the Universality of Persons called by the
Word into External Fellowship with Christ, and Communion amongst themselves,
professing the true Religion, the Faith, Doctrine, and Worship of Christ
throughout the world; called Visible in respect of Outward Administration and
Profession.

2. The Catholick-Invisible Church is the Collective Body of the truly
Faithful, the complete Quorum of the Elect, Gods Chosen ones, called out of
the whole World of Mankind, into an intimate Union with Christ, and Communion
one with another, not only externally by the Word, but effectually and
internally by Gods holy Spirit; called Invisible, no^ qua Men, but qua Elect,
the Man is seen, but not the Christian: The Lord (only) knows them that are
his, 2 Timothy 2.19. The Church-Catholick is under both those considerations,
called the Mystical Body of Christ, viz. 1. By League and Outward Profession
under the former; 2. By true Faith and real Possession under the latter: Christ
is a Common Head both to the one, and to the other.

2. A Particular Church is a Society or Societies of Persons called to the
participation of, and subjected to the Ordinances and instituted worship of
Christ, under certain external Rules accommodated for Local Joynt-Communion
therein, in a particular place: Such are the English, French, Dutch Churches,
and such like, including Parochial Distributions and Congregations as the
Church Catholic includes them, viz. as a totum Integrale, or Universal, so as
that nec totum recte de una praedicetur, nec una totum sibi vindicare possit,
says Junius, lib. de Ecclesia; though the Papists make a kind of Monopoly of
their Romish Church, obtruding it for a Catholic, yea, the only Catholic
Church in the World; and thus by a cursed Sacrilege impropriate (as I may say)
the Church of Christ.

This Distinct Notion of the Church, arises from the diversified Nature of her
Members (the Constitutive Matter thereof) who may be considered, either 1. as
Professors of the Faith of Christ, in obedience to an External Call by the
Word; those constitute the Church Catholick-Visible: or 2. as Possessors of
Christ by Faith (true Believers) in Obedience to an Internal Call by the
Spirit; those constitute the Church Catholick-Invisible; or 3. as Partakers of
the same Ordinances and instituted worship of Christ, in a particular place, in
Obedience to a Providential Call, and in answer to an Opportunity serving
thereunto; those constitute a Particular Church, so that the same Persons may
be Members of the Church under that threefold consideration at once.

Church-Vnion then must be threefold, or considerable under a threefold Notion.

1. The First is the Union of the Members of the Church Catholick-Invisible,
with Christ, and their Communion amongst themselves, wherein they are, through
the Inhabitation and Indwelling of the same Holy Spirit in all, and by virtue
of a true Faith, jointly incorporated into Christ, and concorporated one with
another; as Fellow Members of the same Select Fraternity, the Son of God having
assumed their Persons into a Mystical, as well as their Nature into a Personal
Union with himself.

Now Sir, This Union admits of no breach, Christ and his Elect Members (the
true Branches of that true Vine) are inseperably conjoined; their Persons (as
well as their Nature) are eternally matched and married to Christ; the Mystical
Union of the one, is indissoluble, as well as the Personal Union of the other
with him. There is no fear of a divorce here; neither can the Body be severed
from the Head, nor any one Member from the Body: the Members may quarrel (an
Israelite with an Israelite) thus we read that Paul and Barnabas did contest
and contend so fiercely, that their Paroxysme of strife ended in Separation,
Act. 15.39. Yea, they may join to their breach of Society, a breach of Charity
in some degree; but neither is the one nor the other a dissolution of that
Internal Union whereby the truly Faithful are coupled together, one with
another, and all of them jointly with their Common Head, Christ. The Vinculum
Vnionis, the Conjugal-Vnion-Knot (viz: true Faith, or the spirit of grace in
the Faithful) being altogether inviolable. The Holy Ghost is the
Fountain-Radical of Faith, (as of all other Graces) and therefore of this
Communion. One Spirit quickening and influencing both Head and Members in the
Mystical, as one Soul conveys life and sense to all the Members of the Natural
Body, (and hence it is I conceive, that Christ and Believers are said to be, not
One Body only, but One Spirit (viz: in Esse Mystico) 1 Cor. 6.17.) Now this
same Spirit may suspend his influences, viz: Comfortable and Augmentative, not
Vital (as in the dark and solitary days of soule-desertion) and Faith may in
such a case be much weakened and impaired, (viz: in its Graduals) but True
Faith being the Seed of God (1 John 3.9.) is, in Esse vitali, as to its Truth
and Nature (intrinsecally) permanent, an irreradicable principle, Perseverance
and indeficiency being its Genuine property, as well as Christ's purchase, Luke
22.32. there is a kind of Immortality in it; So that, as there is a weakness
in the strongest Faith, so there is truth in the weakest; now this Union
depends not upon the strength, but upon the truth of Faith; and not upon the
Gradual Communications, but upon the Radical Inhabitation of the Spirit: Such a
suspension then, is unfitly termed a separation, ( David lost Comfort, but not
the Comforter, Psalm. 51.11, 12.) or if we grant (with some) that it is (a
breach in tantum, though not in totum) a breach in, yet it is no interruption or
breach of, Union, but rather a temporary intermission of (Comfortable)
Communion. What though the Trees of Righteousness have their Autumn-season,
their fall of the leaf (the trees of the Vineyard, as well as those of the
Forest)? There is still an Indeficient principle of life in them, by virtue of
their incision and ingrasture into their Common Root, Christ, the Tree of Life.
This is both defensive and offensive Armor against our Arminian Adversaries,
who daringly assert a Schism and Separation here, de possibilis; that is, that
it is possible for the truly Faithful, totally and finally to apostatize from
Christ, and thus, of true Converts, to become very Cast-awayes; sad doctrine
Might we receive what they obtrude for Orthodoxy, verily we might betake our
selves to our pen, and write our faith vain, all our prayers lost, and our
selves of all men most miserable. If the foundation be destroyed, what can the
Righteous do? But now here is the Believers Fort-Royal, namely his Inviolable
Conjunction with his Living Head, Christ; this is an impregnable bottom of
Saint-stability, ground of Christian-perseverance, and guard against their
total-final Apostasy: Quatenus unimur, munimur, this Unity is our Safety. By
virtue of this (to speak a big word) the State of grace is equally safe,
(though not equally comfortable) with the State of glory; and the Spiritual
State of the weakest, equally safe (though not equally comfortable) with that
of the strongest Believer; salvation being annexed to a Real Union with Christ,
which is grounded on the truth of Faith, not to comfortable Communion with him,
which ordinarily attends the raised degrees, and strength of Faith. Conclude we
then all the Members (yea the very meanest) of the Church Invisible to be (in
this sense) Invincible; Obeunt non pereunt,
dye they must, perish they shall not, cannot, -- None of them is lost.

The second is that Union and Communion wherein all the Members of the Church-
Catholick-Visible, the Professors of the true Religion, throughout the world,
are by virtue of their Common Profession of One Lord, One Faith, Ephesians: 4.5.
One Baptism, Gospel-doctrine, and worship, united amongst themselves, and
jointly concorporated with Christ, as One Entire Body Catholic. Now to apply
this to our purpose:

1. The Union that is between Christ and the Catholic Visible-Church,
considered as a Collective Body of Professors, is also un-interruptible, admits
of no breach: She (in this sense) can neither, by Universal Apostasy, fall off,
nor by any Violence, be broken off from her Common Head, Christ. True, The
Church has her Moon-like waxings and weanings, gradual though not substantial
Changes. SIONS Sun has his Apogaeums, and Perigaeums: The Waters of the
Sanctuary, their Reciprocations, they (often) ebb as well as flow; The Churches
Glory is frequently (what by Intestine Corruptions and Divisions, what by
foreign Combinations against her, and Torrents of persecution) clouded and
eclipsed, insomuch that an ICHABOD might often seem, best to become her whom
(yet) her Lord has dignified with this title of honor, Christ-Mystical.

But the Light of the Church (though often eclipsed) was never as yet
extinguished; being continually renewed by the Auxiliary influences of the
great Sun of Righteousness. The Truth has in no age wanted either Patron or
Proselyte. The Visible Church surely was very Consumptive when the whole Body
seemed to be contracted to one Member, abridged in a single Elijah (that second
Jerub-baal, a Champion-Zealot for the Truth) and yet even then were there no
less than 7000 Non-Conformists in Israel, 1 King 19.10.14.18. God had got their
Hearts, and now Baal shall not so much as have a knee. Reflect we upon the
Primitive Churches Sanguine Complexion under the Tyranny and ten Persecutions
of the Heathenish Heroes, when the whole earth was Aug. in Psa. 118. Vid. Corn.
Tacit. Lib. 5. Annal. Tertul. Apolog. advers. Gent.
purpled and scarleted with Martyr-blood: when the very name of Christian was a
Crime, when he that professed himself a Christian dyed by a Sanguinary Law
enacted to that purpose, without either self-defence or conviction; when
thousands were dispatched being nominis tantum et sectae rei, guilty of a mere
name (Christian). When Dioclesian that Infernal Wolf, (having upon a
Hell-devised Oracle or Prophecy, viz: That if the Christians were but once cut
off, the Roman Empire would wonderfully flourish) caused no less than 17000 to
be massacred in one month) did most wickedly boast De delet^ nomine
Christiano, That he had everlastingly rased out of memory, and utterly
abolished the very name of a Christian; yet could not the sword of violence
ever intersect the line of Church-Succession; yea the more they were mowed
down, the more they multiplied; Plures efficimur, quoties metimur, says that
Christian-Mecaenas, Apolog. adver. Geut.
Tertullian. Again, who could have expected any to have appeared for the
patronage of the Truth, under the Torrid Zone of Antichristian persecution? and
yet behold even then, has Christ his two Witnesses, Rev. 11. Two. though, but
two; though the least number, yet a number; though a small, yet a competent
number; a Quorum of Witnesses, by whose testimony the opposed Truth should be
protected and established; so impossible a thing it is that Christ should ever
be (...), without a Witness. Call we to mind Modern Persecutors, That English
Lioness Q. M. with her Wolf and Leopard, Brethren in iniquity; Bloody Charis
the fifth, and the Duke of Alva, both which died their souls red with blood,
they having destroyed, of Protestants, the one 50000 in the Low Countries, the
other 18000 in Belgia in six years time; the French Massacre Anno 1572. Even
all the conflicts between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent,
since the quarrel was first begun in Paradise, which has been fiercely pursued
well nigh six thousand years: All that time has God uninterruptedly maintained
a continued Series and Succession of Persons, (notwithstanding Captivities and
hostile Cruelties) Patriarks, Prophets, and all the Old-Testament-Professors;
Apostles, Fathers, Councels, Confessors, Martyrs, and all New-Testament-Saints;
in and by whom the true Religion, has been professed, preserved, and (
successively though not always very successefully) propagated, kept by some,
guarded by others, and (through good providence) transmitted, by all to us.
Isa. 53.10.
It Is impossible that Christ should want a Seed (a Church) or that Church, a
Guardian and Defendor of the Faith: For the Church to be Christ-lesse, and for
Christ to be Church-lesse, are equal impossibilities. The Church Militant is
Christ's Sublunary Kingdom, which admits of no Interregna, or Vacancy: There is
in her (though not an Infallibility) yet an Indeficiency; Subject she is to
Corruption within, but not to Interruption; to Obstruction from without, but
not to destruction. She is a house built upon a Rock, Mat. 16.18. and this Rock
is Christ, (the Foundation, as well as Founder of his Church,) therefore she
must needs be Impregnable and Invincible; -- The Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against her: A promise ever made good to the Whole Body of the
Catholick-Visible, as it is to every Individual Member of the
Catholick-Invisible-Church.

2. That the Union which is between Christ and Particular Visible Professors
and Churches, (parts of the Church Catholick-Visible) may be broken and
interrupted, is a truth that has been verified in many sad experiences;
forasmuch as all are not Israel, that are called Israel: Many Particular
Churches and Councels (however our Neighbors in the Church of Rome amongst the
rest of their Romish strange-fire, ascribe an Infallibility and unerring
Quality to them, yet) are known to have so far degenerated as to become instead
of Churches of Christ, Synagogues of Satan; witness the Churches of Asia
(which (though once recorded for Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 2. yet) are at this
day the Receptacles of Mohammedan Idolatry) Judea (that degenerate Vine) Rome
(that Adulterate See) etc. But this is not only Schism, but Apostasy, being a
degeneracy from the true Catholick-Apostolick Faith, and a Separation from, or,
not holding of the head, from which all the body by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God,
(Col. 2.19.) which is inconsistent, not only with the Unity, but with the
Verity and very Being of a (true) Church; whence those Churches are deservedly
called Apostatical, as well as Schismatical, and Renegadoes or Fugitives from
the Faith of Christ, such as Parphyrie, Julian, miserable Spira, and such like
(who have of Visible and Professed Members of the Body, become Enemies to the
Head, some of them turning open Persecutors of that Faith whereof they were
once Professors) are not barely called Separatists, but branded for cursed
Apostates.

3. The Communion wherein the Members of this great Corporation the Church
Catholick-Visible are by virtue of their Common Profession of the true
Religion, and Faith of Christ, united one with another, is subject to a twofold
Schism or breach; viz: 1. A breach in the Church, and 2. A breach from the
Church: The first consists in Intestine Divisions and differences, either 1. in
point of Judgment, and that (principally) about matters either of Discipline
or Worship (if the Error be in a point fundamental or incorrigibly persisted
in, it is then Heresy, which St. Augustine calls Schisma inveteratum); or else
2. in point of Charity and Christian Love. The second consists in a degeneracy
from the true Religien, and a voluntary relinquishing of a Church State but
this is (as I have said above of not holding of the Head) not Schism only,
but Apostasy, a Cat holick and Universal Separation; for one that thus
relinquisheth Christ's Body-Catholick, separates from it, Tanquam Membrum ab
Integro, as a Member from the Whole; now as a Leg or Arm, when lost, cease to
be a member of the body Natural, to which it was united, even so a Professor
thus degenerated, cease, In statu quo, (without recovery by repentance) to be
a Member of this Body Mystical. Whereas many are most justly condemned for
Separatists (I shall not need to name any) who (yet) while they hold the Head,
and professedly own the Catholick-Apostolick Faith of Christ, cannot be
disowned for Members of the Body, Branches in the Vine, Part of the Mystical
Building, the Church Catholick-Visible: Church Communion is distinguishable
into 1. Real. 2. Pesonal.


There is a Real Community, and a Personal Society: now though those
Separatists refuse, by way of Personal Association to communicate with that
Church from which they separate, yet they continue a Real Saint-Communion and
Fellowship with her in the Enjoyment of the same (Objective) Ordinances;
Prayer, Word, and Sacraments, and therefore notwithstanding their Separation
from a Particular, they cease not to be Members of the Catholic Church; Real
Community being maintained, though Personal Society be (unjustly) denied.

The Third Church-Vnion is that Social-Local-Joynt-Fellowship, wherein the
Members of a Particular Church are united one with another, not only by the
Profession of the same Faith and Religion (all the Members of the Catholic and
Universal Church are thus united) but in the participation of the same
Ordinances, Administrations, and instituted worship of Christ, in a particular
place, where there is fitting opportunity of executing, and yielding due
observance to Rules of Joynt-Communion; which is not a thing possible for the
Universal Church, now, through numerosity and multitude; though once it was,
viz: when the whole Catholick-Christian Church consisted of about but 120.
Members in all, Act. 1.15. Now

This Comunion may admit of a twofold breach, viz. 1. Schism in the Church, 2.
Separation from the Church (as the breach in the Church- Catholic before): The
first is a breach either 1. in point of Judgment and Opinion; or 2. in point
of Charity and Christian Affection, (the too too frequent issue and result of
the other) it is chiefly the former (I presume) that Sr. Augustine calls
Dissidium Congregationis, Church-dissention; the latter he calls Odium
Fraternum, Brother-hatred and dis-affection; both sad Church-Rents: What, when
Lot and Abraham (Brethren) are at strife, when Brethren fall out by the way!

Separation from the Church, is either 1. Partial. 2. Total. 1. Negative. 2.
Positive.


1. A Partial Separation; when we decline Communion with the Church in some
Ordinances, but join with her in others; as in Prayer, but not in hearing of
the Word, or in both those, but not in the Saerament. 2. A Total Separation is
an Universal declension of Communion with a Church in every Ordinance.

1. Negative Separation; when we withdraw from Communion with some Church, not
joining with any other, but continuing in hopes and expectation of the happy
amendment of that Church from which we withdraw, with a purpose of returning to
her when reformed. 2 Positive Separation; when we do not only decline Communion
with a Church, but divide into several Parties, Combinations, and new
Conventions, as (probably) 'twas amongst the Corinthians; One saying I am of
Paul; another, I am of Apollo; a third, I am of Cephas, etc. (1 Cor. 1.12.)
embodying in several Church-wayes, setting up Altar against Altar, and
Threshold against Threshold.

Separation from the Church, may be Culpable or Inculpable, Lawful or Unlawful
(and that more or less) according to its Grounds and Causes: Now the only
lawful Grounds or Causes of a Total-Positive Separation, are usually reckoned
three, viz.

1. Intolerable Persecution from Persons. 2. Damnable Heresy in point of
Doctrine. 3. Gross Idolatry in point of Worship.
These are the Grounds of our just Departure from the Tyrannical, Heretical,
Idololatrical, Church of Rome: O happy Divorce! may the Lord perpetuate it!
that we may never say a Confederacy to her again, Isa. 8.12.
but upon Gods own Terms of Accommodation, -- Let them return unto thee, but
return not thou unto them, Jer. 15.19. Again, when the Corruptions of a Church
are such, as that one cannot communicate with her without sin unavoydably; That
seems to me, to be a just ground, though not of Positive, yet of Negative,
though not of Total, yet of Partial, Separation; and Non-Communion in such a
case, can be no sin, therefore no Schism. How can Non-Communion be sin, there,
where one cannot communicate without sin? unless men will impose or suffer to
be imposed upon themselves, a Necessity of sinning; that which true Piety
abhorrs. I am not alone here, or without the suffrage of the sober-Learned, (a
sufficient protection against the brand of Novelty) who say that if a Church be
either no true Church, See Dr. Cawdrey, in his Treatise Entitled, Independency
a great Schism.
or so extremely corrupted, that a good Christian cannot hold Communion with
it, without sin; Separation in that case is no Schism; but they are the
Schismatics that give the Cause of that Separation: Then let the World Judge
who in England may most deservedly be branded for Schismatics.

On the Contrary, Culpable, Faulty, and sinful Separation from the Church (the
Schism in question) is (as I think it is generally described) a Causeless
Separation from Communion with, and participation of Christ's instituted Worship
in, a true Church.

Sir, This premised, we shall easily discover what Church-breach, Schism, or
Separation, it is, that Mr. Crofton charge upon those in the Church of
England, (and amongst those my self) who under the present Providence (though
they join with her in the Instituted Worship, and Substantial Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, therein administered by, as Prayer, Hearing of che Word Preached,
Singing of Psalms, etc. yet) do not, cannot, communicate with her, in her
Liturgy or Common Prayer; as being guilty of a sinful Practice, etc.

1. It Is not a breach of the first Union, viz. That wherein the Elect, Gods
Chosen Ones, are by a true Faith or the Spirit of Faith un-interruptedly
indwelling in them, conjoined one with another, and all of them with their
Public Head, Christ; for this (as is declared) is an utter Impossibility;
which none but an Arminian Spirit will deny.

2. It Is not a Breach of Communion with the Catholick-Visible Church, and her
Common Head, Christ, by virtue of Outward Profession, (which is called a
Catholic and Universal Separation); for this were not only Schism but
Apostasy, (as has been said) not only a Breach of Church-Vnity but a Voluntary
forfeiture of a Church State; an Imputation which my Creed will acquit me from;
while I professedly own the true Catholic Doctrine of Christ and (...)
Apostles, the Orthodox Fathers, Councels, Confessors, Martyrs in all Ages, and
the Reformed Churches.

3. It Is not a Breach in the Church; either, 1. in point of Judgment and
Opinion; nor 2. in point of Charity and Affection. 1. Not in point of Judgment
and Opinion; for, as for Erroneous Principles, according to that light God has
given me, I abhor them: Church-rending Divisions, I shall not willingly or
wittingly be accessory to; never forgeting (what Luther said of Caspar
Schwenckfield) that Church-Incendiaries may kindle a fire here, which may burn
themselves to all eternity, hereafter; But if a Dissent in Judgment about
matters of Worship or Discipline (yea and (perchance) in Doctrinal points too,
at least Non-Fundamentals) from our present Church-Pilots, be a Schism, I shall
not busy my self about either Vindication or Excuse, under the Censure; but
sure I am, either Mr. Crofton himself is in this sense a Schismatic, or else
justly may he be branded for an Apostate. 2. Nor in point of Charity and
Christian Affection: Mr. Crofton is no competent Arbitrator in that case; God
himself is best able to judge, who at this day walks charitably, who not: for
my own part, I have Charity for all Church Members, (understand their Persons,
not their Corruptions); The Law of Piety, and the Law of Charity God himself
has married together, and whom God has joined, let no man separate.

4. The Breach or Schism (then) charged, must be a Separation from the Church
of England; not 1, Total, since I communicate with her in those Parts of
Christ's instituted Worship and Ordinances, Prayer, Hearing, etc. Nor 2.
Positive, whilst I turn not Conventicler, and embody not into a Party or
Convention set up against her, Altar against Altar, Threshold against
Threshold, etc. But 1. Partial, and 2. Negative, viz: mere Non-Communion with
her in her Liturgy or stinted and Set-Forms of Common Prayer. This is the
Schism and Separation charged, This is the Crime and great Article of
Endictment. What, and is Mr. Crofton turned Accuser of the Brethren?

Sir, Two Things I equally dislike, Separation on the one hand, and
Superstition on the other, (and what sober Christian will not?) they being
destructive, the one to the Unity, the other to the Purity of the Church) and
the latter not more than the former, (understand I pray you sinful
Separaiotn); Schism in the Church, is a Rent and Wound in Christ's Body, a
Crucifying afresh of the Son of God: The Schismatical Rendings of the Church by
Anabaptists, and such like Fanatics in Germany, cost Zealous Luther no little
grief and lamentation. God forgive those who are known to have been too too
guilty of such Sectarian-Cruelty here at home: 1 Cor. 1.13. Zech. 13.6.
Is Christ divided? was a sad Interrogatory: What, Christ wounded in the house
of his friends! that is sad! The Voluntary Rending of Christ-Mystical is a sin,
nothing inferior (in my mind) to that of the Jews Crucifying of Christ
Personal, forasmuch as that it reaches both Head and Members.

That then which inclines me to this attempt is, not Consciousnesse to my self
of any Schism or (sinful) Separation (though I perceive you are ready to
espouse mine Acculers quarrel in case of non-satisfaction to your enforced
request) but the prevalent sense as well of your importunity, as of mine own
innocence.

This Epistle (possibly) may seem to be with the City of Myndus, liable to
upbraiding, the Porch being too big, but neither is the premised Introduction
larger, nor the subsequent discourse more brief, than (I judged) expedient.

Mr. Croftons Grounds and Reasons, urged for Communion with the Church of
England in all Acts of worship (and consequently in Common Prayer) therein
administered by; and against Separation or withdrawment from the same; are all
reduced to four Positions, or Argumentative Propositions; from which (Premises)
he infers, partly the Lawfulness, partly the Expediency, and partly the
indispensable Necessity of the former, as the sinfulness and
unwarrantablenesse, (the Schism) of the latter: And those Positions he calls
CONSIDERATIONS, which come now to be considered.

CONSID. 1. Page 4.
Communion with the Church-Visible in all the Acts (I had rather say Parts) of
Solemn Public Worship, is an Essential part of the sanctification of the
Sabbath, or Lords day, and positive indispensable duty of every particular
soul, called by the name of God, to be only superseded by a real inevitable
necessity, with assurance to any, that God will have mercy, and not sacrifice.
This is the Major-Proposition of Mr. Croftons great Doom-Argument. The
Assumption must be this.

But Communion with the Church of England in her Liturgy or Common Prayer
(commonly called, Divine Service) is Communion with the Church-Visible, in
Solemn and Public Worship: and then the Conclusion must be,

Therefore Communion with the Church of England in her Liturgy and
Common Prayer, is an Essential part of the sanctification of the Sabbath, or
Lords day, and a positive indispensable duty, etc. and by consequence
Non-Communion, etc. must be a breach of duty, and therefore, a sin, viz: SCHISM.

REMONS. Honored Friend, My Answer to this, shall be threefold. Viz: 1. By way
of Concession. 2. By way of Distinction. 3. By way of Retortion.


1. By way of Concession.

That the Church of England (That is the Community of Christians in this
Nation, concorporated by Baptism, professing the true God and Jesus Christ, and
subjected to the Word and Sacraments, etc.) is a true Church, cannot in justice
be denied; Her Primitive Constitution being by History ( Times Index, and our
best Intelligencer touching Antiquity) known to have been Apostolical,
administers to me no occasion of doubt in the thing: But whoever were the
Seminary Founders thereof, (whether Simon Zelotes, or Joseph of Arimathea
(Christ's Immediate Emissaries) or Aristobolus, or Augustine the Monk,) it is no
matter of Faith; only let none despise-his Birthright, as Esau did his. O what
a happiness is it that our Native Land should be a (thus) Consecrated Soil;
and that we should be by birth (in this respect) Sons of the Church, (Visible
Church Members:) The Inroades of Popery into this Island, since the Sun of
Righteousness first rose herein, have been both various and violent, (and what
they may further be, God knows) but God has safe-kept his English-Ark in the
midst of that Deluge; the Rock of Ages, has hitherto been her Ararat; By no
Antichristian Inundations, was she ever as yet (totally) overwhelmed; Popery
spoiled her Beauty, but did not destroy her Being.

Mr. Crofton turning Confessor, has acknowledged this Churches (present)
Corruptions as well in Things (viz: Worship and Ordinances therein
administrable by) as in Persons, both Ministers and People, Visible Members,
(the Integral Parts thereof): But a True Church is one thing, a Pure Church
another; Here is the New Creature, Hereafter (only) the Pure-Creature. Now the
question is not about Church-purity, (alas! Adulterate Mixtures and Innovations
in the Worship of God, are a too too plain confutation of this now) but
Church-Entity, the Truth and Being of the Church, (which our English Donatists
(Mr. Crofton may know whom I mean) having (formerly) well nigh confounded, did
(like their Progenitors) most sacriledgiously monopolize the Church of Christ
in this Nation, confining the Formality (and therefore the Truth and very
Essence) of a Church, within the narrow compass of their Confederate Members,
as if it had not been possible, for their Ark to contain a Cham, or for Tares
to grow within their Enclosure; (God will I hope, humble them for it). Truth,
we must needs ascribe to the Church of England, while She professedly owns the
Faith of Christ, and the True Religion: For the Truth of Religion proves the
Entity (or Being), as the Power of Religion the Purity of a Church: while She
owns the Head, she must not be disowned for a Part of the Body (the Church
Catholick-Visible); while She separates not from Christ, we have no warrant (
totally and positively) to separate from Her: She may be Christ's Spouse (viz:
Visibly and Professedly) though not a Chast-Virgin-Spouse; a Wife, though an
Adulteress; retaining her Affinity, though not her Virginity. Corruptions in
the Church are either

1. Personal. or 2. Real.

Real, again, either or 1. Substantial and Intrinsecal. 2. Circumstantial and
Extrinsecal.


The latter is Mr. Croftons own distinction (though possibly he and I may
differ in the application of it).

Personal Corruptions in Scandalous Professors, or Visible Church- Members, (
Ministers (as well as others) the Hophnie's and Phinehas's of our age) defile a
Church: Corruptions Objective and Real, though only Circumstantial and
Extrinsecal, (in Outward Rites and Ceremonies, or corrupt Modes and Methods of
Administration, as the Antiquated Jewish Vestments, Cross in Baptism,
Kneeling at the Supper, etc.) adulterate a Church. Corruptions Substantial and
Intrinsecal (which are Church-wasting Corruptions; the very Vitals and
Intrinsecals of Religion, being by them destroyed) do (ipso facto,) actually
divorce a Church from Christ; those are the steps of Church-Apostacy, when the
Wife becomes a Lewd-Woman; ( Single Fornication in the first; Adultery in the
second; A Bill of Divorce in the last:) The Church of England is too truly
chargeable with the two first, but not with the last, as is the Church of Rome,
she having not (as yet, I pray God she never may) with her degenerated from a
Christian Church, into an Antichristian See; nor her Members with hers, from
Professors to Persecutors of the Faith, not holding the True Head, but setting
up ANOTHER NAME; being in Doctrine (damnably) Heretical; in Worship (grossly)
Idolatrous; in both Antichristian. The Essentials Constitutive of a True
Church, are 1. the Head; 2. the Body; 3. the Union that is between them: which
three concurring in the Church of England; Christ being her professed Head, she
being Christ's professed Body, and the Catholick-Faith being the Vnion-Bond
whereby they are coupled together; She cannot in justice be denied to be a True
(though the Lord knows, far from a Pure) Church. Vid. Jun. lib. de Ecclesia.
Herein I agree with Mr. Crofton.

2. By way of Distinction.

Two things are here to be distinguished; viz.

1. Communion with the Church-Visible. 2. Solemn and Public Worship.
1. There is a twofold Communion; viz.

One by Profession. Another by Participation.
1. Church Communion by way of Common Profession of the same true Religion,
Faith, Doctrine, and institured worship of Christ, (by virtue whereof all the
Members of the Church- Catholic Visible throughout the World, are
concorporated and embodyed, one with another, and all of them with Christ as a
Public Head, Catholic Faith being the ground of Catholic Communion, the main
Ligament of the great Body Mystical) is not only a Duty, but a Privilege too,
indispensably necessary to salvation. Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus, is a severe
Maxim not more known then true; no Salvation (ordinarily) without the Churches
Line of Communication. The Church is Gods Enclosure, ( Cant. 9.12.) his Nursery
planted with the Trees of Righteousness; without whose Pale and Boundaries all
that die do perish: Ah, my Dear Friend, Let me rather be a Myrtle in the
Vineyard, then a Cedar in the Forest. 'Twere better England should be
unpeopled then unchurched: A Church-lesse People is a Christ-lesse People; and
if Christ-lesse then Hope-lesse, Ephesians. 2.12. Christ is the Head of the Body
the Church, Coll. 1.18. No Union with this Head without Communion with this
Body: Christ must be professed, or (else) never possessed; no Saint-State
without a Church State; no Call by the Spirit without a Call by the Word first;
so that no Word, no Life: Romans 10.13, 14.
-- Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved; -- Worship
is necessary to Salvation: -- How shall they call on him, in whom they have not
believed? Faith is necessary to Worship: -- How shall they believe in him, of
whom they have not heard? Hearing is necessary to Faith: -- How shall they hear
without a Preacher? Preaching is necessary to Hearing: so that, without Worship
there is no Salvation; without Faith, no (true) Worship; without Hearing, no
Faith; and without Preaching no Hearing; therefore (a primo ad ultimum) the
Word preached is necessary to Salvation; -- no Word, no Life; (ah! may this
(loathed) Manna never fail from amidst our Brittish-Israel!) Thrice miserable
are they whose Sun sets, where the Sun of Righteousness never rose, -- with
healing in his Wings. Solomon (the great Sophi of the World) has long ago
read the Destiny of such; Where there is no Vision, ^^eunt pere^^t.
the people perish, Prove. 29.18. a sad Exit! There is Visio Salvifica in the
Church Militant, as well as Visio Beatifica, in the Triumphant: There be no
true Saints who are not (in this sense) SEERS. This is the first Communion,
wherein I am chargeable with no Breach, while I profess my self a Christian:
All Professors throughout the World, are in this respect Communicants.

2. Communion with the Church Visible, by way of Participation, or actual
Enjoyment of the Ordinances, and celebration of the instituted Worship of
Christ in a particular place (the Communion in question) is (I grant) a Duty
oblieging semper, but not ad semper: To explain my self; A Particular Church
(such as is the Church of England) having her rise (as such) not from a Common
Call by the Word only, (for the Catholick-Visible Church has her rise from
that) but from a Particular Providential Call, (for so I may term it) whereby
Persons (whether Natives or Foreigners), are called to inhabit, reside, or
live, there, where there is fit Opportunity of enjoying the Public
Ordinances, and celebrating the instituted Worship of Christ by way of
Social-Joynt-Communion; as Providence, Opportunity, or necessary Occasions,
shall vary, the Obligation to Joynt-Communion must vary also. Mr. Crofton
cannot deny that there may be many Members of the Universal Catholic, who
(yet) never had opportunity of associating themselves with, or of
Joynt-Communion in the Solemn Public Worship he speaks of, in a Particular
Church; and many have had it, who have been deprived of it, as Merchants and
Mariners, professing the true Religion, who in pursuance of their Secular
Callings, are distanced from a true Constituted Church, some of them living in
Spain, others in India, others in Turkey, etc. or such as through sickness are
kept from the Enjoyment of Public Ordinances, etc. We cannot say that
Communion with a Particular Church, in such Persons under that providence is an
Indispensable duty, or Non-Communion, Schism, unless we also say (which were
very hard) that they are bound to an Impossibility; Providence gives a
Dispensation (as it were) in case of Necessary and Inevitable Non-Communion: In
a word, Where Opportunity is serving, Violence not obstructing, Corruptions not
barring, no Necessity hindering, there Joynt-Communion in Solemn Public
Worship is an Indispensable duty; otherwise, That which gives a Call, gives
also a Discharge, viz. Providence.

Those that disclaim all Church Fellowship out of a peevish petulancy,
slighting all opportunities thereof, are justly to be disclaimed as
Self-out-lawed; such as the Vagrant Seekers, etc. led by the Ignis Fatuus, the
wildfire of their own deluded Fancy: Surely Communion of Saints is no Article
of their Creed, the maintaining of which should be in our respective
Capacities, every ones endeavor. But to proceed.

Sir, I own an Obligation lying upon me, whereby I am bound to communicate with
the Church of England (whereof I profess my self a Member) she being (as is
acknowledged) a True Church (notwithstanding her many Corruptions,) in these
Parts of Gods Real-Solemn, Public Worship, wherein Violent Impositions,
Prevalent Corruptions, or some or other Inevitable bars necessitate not a
withdrawment and Non-Communion; and if I should not, I should greatly sin. But
what does this make for Communion with her in her Liturgy and Common Prayer?
Yes, (says Mr. Crofton) It Is an Act of Solemn Public Worship, etc. and
therefore matter of duty: That is (next) to be tried.

The Second Thing to be distinguished, is, Solemn Public Worship.

Religious Worship may be said to be Solemn and Public in respect of a
threefold Community or Solemnity: viz: 1. Personal, In respect of Persons
worshipping. 2. Local, In respect of the Place of worship. 3. Real, In respect
of the Matter and Constitution of worship.


1. That Worship which is celebrated by a Plurality or Society of Persons,
wheresoever convented, is Solemn and Public in respect of Persons; now our
English Liturgy-Service may (I confess) in this respect pass for Worship
Solemn and Public, and so may the Popish-Masse-Service too.

2. That Worship (properly) is in respect of Place, Solemn and Public; the
particular Place whereof, as well as the Worship it self is appointed of God:
Now the Jewish Worship celebrated in the Temple and Tabernacle, was in this
respect (as shall appear by and by) the only Solemn and Public Worship in
the world.

3. That Worship, whereof God is the Author as well as the Object; the Word,
the Rule, as well as the Matter; The Catholick-Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles; That Worship which Christ Himself (the Churches Lord-Regent and
Lawgiver) did appoint and institute; which the Apostles (His Seminary
Disciples) did, by virtue of Authority derived from Him, commend and command;
which the Gospel (the Christian Churches Directory) does License and Warrant;
which has been by a Continued Series and Succession of Christian Professors
(Faiths Defenders) from Christ and his Apostles, uninterruptedly maintained,
and at length through the Current of Sixteen hundred years, happily (as to
substance at least) transmitted and conveyed to us, is in respect of Matter,
Authentic Constitution, and Reality, the only Solemn Public Divine Worship
in the Christian world. Now to apply.

1. Communion with the Church-Visible in that Worship, which is in respect of
Matter and Authentic Constitution, Solemn and Public, namely, That which
was instituted by Christ Himself, the Churches Public Head; preached and
pressed by the Apostles, the Churches Public Guides; recorded (as the only
Evangelical Worship) in the Gospel, the Churches Public Rule; and (in
conformity to this Rule) observed and performed by the Primitive Christians for
the first two hundred years, the purest Ages of the Christian Church, This and
all other Churches Public Example; is (I readily grant) an Essential Part of
the Sanctification of the Lords Day, and a Positive indispensable duty, to be
upon peril superseded or intermitted, upon no less Warrant or Authority then
that which imposed it, (with this assurance that God will have mercy, and not
sacrifice); In Conscience whereof, I own my self obliged to join with some
Society in a Particular (True) Church (a Part of the Church Catholick-Visible)
while opportunity serves, and no Real Inevitable Obstruction hinders, in all
the Parts of Real-Solemn-Publique Worship ( Prayer, Praise, the Word, the
Supper) wherein no Violent Impositions, nor any Real Impediment may bar but
that I may communicate, nor Prevalent Corruptions necessitate a declension or
withdrawment, but that I may without sin. As Saint-Communion is matter of Faith
((...)) so Joynt-Communion is (Caeteris Paribus) matter of Duty ((...)); That
which all the Professed Members of this Spiritual Corporation (the Church) are
bound in their respective Capacities to maintain: Church-Vnity and Uniformity
should be the Joynt-endeavour of all, but so as that the purity of the Church
be also endeavored, and (much more that) her Truth and Being, be not
destroyed. I am no Divinorum Desertor Castrorum (as St. Ambrose describes a
(real) Separatist) no Camp-Fugitive or Assembly-Forsaker; no, God knows I
detest and disown the Principles and Practices of such as (wilfully and
willingly, unnecessarily and peevishly) forsake the assembling of themselves
together, as the manner of some (too too many in these late times) has been in
all Ages. There is a twofold Christian Scope; one Primary, viz. Gods Glory; the
other Subordinate, viz. the Christians Own Good. The Glory of God is or ought
to be by a Gospel-Law (1 Cor. 10.31.) the Terminus Reductivus of all our
actions: To glorify God is a Natural debt, due from the Man as well as from
the Christian, and from an Angel as well as from a Man; the whole Host of
Heaven are Gods Tributaries herein. The Christians own Happiness is to be
pursued next and in subordination to this. Now, neither is the Crown-Revenue of
Heaven so much inhaunced, nor the Catholic Benefit of Christians so much
advanced, by Solitary Worship, as by the Joynt-Services of Professors. It Is
well worthy of our Observation, That Christ gave that Portion and Measure of
his Spirit to his Disciples when assembled, which he never gave them whilst
apart, (the richest Donative that ever he bestowed upon the Sons of Men!) Act.
2.1, 2, 3, 4. great encouragement to Saints Joynt-Communion! Vis unita fortior.
Now

2. This Real-Solemn Worship and Indispensable Joynt-Communion therein, is not
confined to any one Particular place more then to another, under the Gospel;
not to Rome, more then to England, nor to a Cathedral more then to any other
Church; nor to any Church or Chapel, or any such Fabric and Structure in the
World, more then to the open Fields; nor to a Public, more then to a Private
house, in it self: The house of an Obed-Edom may receive this Ark: The Churches
Chamber-Worship (Act. 1.15.) was true Solemn Worship. My Friend, mere
Conscience of the Truth constrains me to speak: They miserably err, who
restrict the truth and reality of Solemn Worship to a Public place, a
material Church and Structure (which yet none that I know, but a few peevish
Sectaries can dislike) as if Locality, which is but a mere natural
Circumstance, were Intrinsecal or Essential to Gospel Worship: And what if
those Places thould chance in process of time to become the Receptacles of
Jewish, Popish, Idolatry? where would their Solemn and Public Worship then
be? But (more Argumentatively) where were Material Temples or Churches in the
days of the Apostles (other then that of Jerusalem, and the Jewish
Synagogues)? where were they for the first hundred and fifty years after
Christ? when Christians did celebrate their worship in (...), in the Burial
Places of Martyrs, (whence (probably) 'twas that their places of Assembly were
called Martyria, and the Temple of Jerusalem, Martyrium magnum); and this was
the reason why Persecuting Emperors made it their first business and care to
bar and banish the Christians from those places: yea, Lib. cont. Valent.
Tertullian tells us, that in his days ( viz. about two hundred and sixty
years after Christ) the Christians had no other Meeting-places (Churches) then
simplices domes, poor despicable Cottages, which were (says he) antris and
latebris quam Templis similiores, more like unto Caves, or Corners, then
Churches: And it is probable, that there was not a Material Christian Church,
till about or after the times of Evaristus and Dyonisius, Bishops of Rome, well
nigh three hundred years after the birth of Christ; Parochial Distributions
being begun by the one, and furthered by the other. Sir, you may please to
consult De Rer. Invent. lib. 4. c. 9. lib. 5. c. 6.
Polidor Vergilius and De Orig. Temp. c. 6.
Hospinian (both expert and learned Antiquaries) in the case. Now, were
Christians all that time, because not Templers, therefore no true Worshippers?
Was there no Solemn Public Worship performed for so many hundred years (the
purest Ages of the Christian Church)? But further; When I read of St. Paul
Sermoning, of Lydia converted, and of Prayer wont to be made by a Riverside,
(Act. 16.13, 14.) Of St. Paul a private House-Preacher eighteen months, and
that in a house adjoining to a Synagogue ( Basils (...)) Act. 18.7.11.) Of St.
Paul and his Followers, their Chamber-Communion in the Word, the Supper,
(doubtless there was Prayer there too, Act. 20.7, 8.) When I read of the whole
Catholic Christian Church (a Conventicle consisting of about 120 Persons)
convented and worshipping in a privateroom (Act. 1.15.) I am sufficiently
warranted severely to condemn all such as limit Solemn Worship to any
Particular place, as if its Solemnity consisted in its Locality.

The Jewish Worship was the only Worship that ever could be called Solemn and
Public in respect of Place; for God himself (not Men like our selves)
determined upon the Place as well as the Matter and Manner of his worship in
the Jewish, which he did not in the Christian Church; the Jewish Sacrifices and
Oblations being limited first to the Tabernacle, and after that to the Temple;
the former whereof was built according to Gods own Instructions and Platform,
namely, the Pattern showed to Moses upon the Mount; the latter was Gods own
Choice (Deuteronomy. 12.5.11. 1 King. 8.29. 2 Chronicles. 7.12.) by Solomon through Divine
Instinct dedicated to him, and by a miraculous Signal of favor and acceptance
(2 Chronicles. 5.13, 14.) owned by him; and thus 'twas said, In Jerusalem is the
place where men ought to worship, John 4.20. So that the Place of worship, was
indeed a Part of worship, not only a Circumstance, but of the Substance of
worship, amongst the Jews; God having stamped Sanctity and Sacred Solemnity
thereupon, (Mr. Altar Worship. page 77.
Crofton himself bearing me witness.) But under the Gospel, and in the
Christian Church, Locality is a mere matter of Indifferency; Local Liberty
being a great part of Evangelical Liberty, Mal. 1.11. Mat. 18.20. John 4.21,
24. Act. 10.35. 1 Timothy 2.8. Christ having Ore and Corp^re, both as Man, and as
Prophet, by his Preaching, as well as by his Coming abolished Sanctity and
Peculiarity (as of Time, so) of Place; the Typical Use of Temple and Tabernacle
ceasing in him as Antitype, and Local Liberty being preached by him as Prophet,
John 4.21. Insomuch that Two or Three (wheresoever) met in his Name, have the
Solemn promise of his presence (now) Mat. 18.20.) whereas if the Solemnity of
his worship were tied to any one place, his presence and the Concomitant
blessing of his worship should be tied to that place also. Who would have
thought that Vid. lib. 3. De Cultu Sanctorum.
Bellarmine that great Light of the Romish Firmament, (the chief Atlas of that
Orb) should have been so much in the dark, as to think that, Prayer, or (any
other part of worship, performed in a Material Church, etc. is of more
Efficacy, then if it were celebrated elsewhere? as if Stone and Timber did
contribure virtue to our devotion; or Prayers Efficacy depended on Locality! I
wish there be not many Bellarmines in this respect, foolish Superstionaries!
that cry, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, Jer.7.4.
etc. like their silly, blind Pharisaical Progenitors. But Sir, You and I are
taught of God, assured by Holy Record, that Prayer, or any other part of Divine
Worship, in what place soever performed, will be accepted of God, through
Christ, so he be but worshipped according to his own Canon, viz. -- In Spirit,
and in Truth, John 4.24. Let none then presently conclude from a necessary
declension of Local Society in a Public place, a breach of Real Community in
True Solemn Public Worship, which may (indeed) be maintained in any place
indifferently. Yet

3. The Church of England (while she holds the Head (Christ) and professes the
True Religion,) being a True Church (a Part of the Church Catholick-Visible) as
is acknowledged: and a Public Place, being dictated by the light of nature,
and judged by men (to whose Prudential Determination the Convenience or
Inconveniency of Place of worship, as a Natural Circumstance, is left, though
it be a mere matter of Indifferency under the Gospel, and in it self) to be
fittest for Public Joynt-Communion, and therefore (though not sanctified) yet
prudentially sequestered and devoted thereunto; I must needs own my self called
to communicate (and in answer to that call I do communicate) with her, and
that, in the Place of Public Assembly, in all the Parts of Real-Solemn Divine
Worship, wherein I may without either let or sin. And thus Sir, it is my known
Practice (which you are no stranger to) to join with the present Assemblies in
Prayer, (though not their Common Prayer) Praise, or Singing of Psalms, Hearing
of the Word, all which are Substantial parts of True Solemn Divine Worship;
what? and yet a Separatist? Judge how little I deserve that name, while this is
my practice, and I exhort you and others to the like; Only give me leave to
tell you, that what was Reverend Beda's advice to him that should chance to
read the Books of that Heretical Bishop Julian, I desire (and it may be so will
you) to improve in the hearing of ours, -- Ita carpat botrum ut spinane caveat,
Take of the Cluster, but beware of Prickles, be sure they be of Canaans Grapes;
I would not willingly be starved, but God keep me from being poisoned; Take
heed of Choking, chew before you swallow; a Proselyting Romanist (a Seminary
Priest) will tell you otherwise; once swallow his Churches Infallibility, and
any thing will go down then; there is no room left for dispute more, no need of
the true Balance of the Sanctuary. But I have not as yet laid finger upon the
soar; therefore consider,

4. That the Church of Englands Liturgy or Common Prayer (the great apple of
strife, etc.) is a Part of this Real-Solemn worship of God, and that Communion
with her therein (the thing urged) is (therefore) a Positive Indispensable
duty, I must take leave (at least till I see more cogent Arguments for it then
have as yet been pleaded by the best that ever undertook the patronage of it)
utterly to deny. This I know would seem strange to many, (what, a
Convocation-Master-piece! the Summum quod sic of the Wit of men and Angels! the
Monopoly of Divine Service! the Prayers of the Church! etc. and yet no Part of
True Solemn Worship!) but that it is written for private satisfaction, and by
way of private Apology. Sir, it is a fixed Principle with me, which I should not
fear to publish to the world, (had my tongue the liberty of mine Accusers in
the case, viz.) That there is no True Divine Worship whereof God is not the
Author as well as the Object, the Alpha as well as the Omega: What is not
Instituted Worship, is none of His Worship, but mere Will Worship, for God will
be worshipped Desuo, his Soul loathing all that Service (though (possibly)
nicknamed Divine,) wherein there is more of the Creature, than of Himself,
(more of Man than of God); What Reason either from Scripture or Common Light,
can persuade me otherwise? Now, can Mr. Crofton say Bona fide ('it is not a
matter to be dallied withal) that Liturgies or stinted and Set-Forms of Prayer,
were ever Instituted by Christ, Practiced by the Apostles, Intended in the
Gospel, or observed by the Primitive Christian Church, in the best and purest
ages after Christ, (whose Practice in the case was to be a Leading Case and an
Imitable Example to all succeeding Churches) In a word, Can he prove Englands
Common Prayer part of Christ's Instituted Worship? Let him produce Authentic
(either) Precept or President for it, (which will be a hard matter for him to
do) else surcease his censure; for what other can it be then a mere Humane
Ordinance, Super-erogatory Worship, Arbitrary Service, even Scripture-bitten
Will Worship, one of the (justly condemned) Commandments and Ordinances of
men, Col. 2.22, 23. What is Will Worship if this be not? Yea, but the Matter of
it is good, (this is the ordinary plea, but) so is a great part of the Popish
Missal, (with which it so much symbolizeth, (especially their Letany, the first
Edition of ours); and so of the Turkish Alcoran: But will that prove it a
Divine Constitution? Now, the Question is not, whether it be Divine Matter, or
not, but whether a Divine Constitution or not? and therefore I join Matter and
Constitution together: The Matter proves not its Legitimacy, unless such a
Frame, Method, Composure and Constitution of Worship can be proved Jure
Divino, to be Christ's Own. Prayer is Christ's own Institution, (I communicate
with them in that) but here is my Crime, I join not with them in Prayer in
such a Dress or Form, which (though I neither question the Wisdom that
composed it, nor the Authority that imposed it, yet) I professedly declare, is
in my weak judgment merely Humane; and therefore I do not a little wonder that
such a man as Mr. Crofton should become its Mecoenas and Advocate, who cannot
be ignorant of the unhappy occasion of the first introduction of such
man-devised Forms and Frames into the Christian Church, administered by the
prevailing Arrian and Pelagian heresies, above three hundred years after
Christ; nor of the approved Testimonies of Justine Martyr, Tertullian, etc.
witnessing the immunity and freedom of the Church in their days from such
impositions, alleged by his SMECTYMNVAN Brethren: But the grounds of my
doubts herein shall be disclosed in the next answer; however you may judge from
what has already been said, how unjustly Non-Communion with the Church of
England in her Liturgy and Common Prayer, is interpreted sinful Separation, it
being a necessary declension of mere Will Worship.

5. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is indeed a Substantial Part of
Real-Solemn Divine Worship, being one of Christ's Fundamental Institutions; but
the known Violence of Imposition, the Will Worship and Superstition, which
attends the celebration thereof in the Church of England, (so that I cannot
communicate with her therein without sin) does warrant and necessitate my
(present) Non-Communion and Withdrawment, this being clearly Mr. Croftons
alleged case of Real Inevitable Necessity. Thus then,

Though the Church of England be a true Church (so that a Total Separation from
her is unwarrantable) and therefore Communion with her in all the parts of
Real-Solemn Divine Worship, wherein I may join with her without either let or
sin, be a Duty, yet, her Liturgy and Common Prayer, appearing to be no part of
Real-Solemne Divine Worship, but a mere humane Constitution; and the Supper
(though a Substantial Part of Real-Solemn-Divine Worship, yet) being by
corrupt Mixtures and Appurtenances, much adulterated, so that I cannot
communicate therein without sin; my (present) Non-Communion with her, in both
the one and the other (which is a Partial Separation) is so far from being a
breach of Duty, that it is a Duty, therefore no Schism, (the thing charged)
which is a Causless Separation, etc. This may acquit me, and all men in my
Capacity, from Mr. Croftons Nickname of Separatist in the Case. But I refer
you, Sir, to my next answer for further satisfaction in both.

3. By way of Retortion.

Communion with the Church of England may be superseded in case of
Real-inevitable Necessity (ex Concessis) by Mr. Croftons own Doctrine and
Assertion; but mine (that I may put in for a Supersedeas) is a case of Real
inevitable Necessity; therefore (by Mr. Croftons own Acquittance) my
Non-Communion, etc. is no sin, no Schism.

There be two things wherein I cannot communicate with the Church of England,
viz. 1. Her Liturgy and Common Prayer: 2. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
under her present method of administration; for Non-Communion in both which, I
allege a Real-Inevitable Necessity,

1. The Necessity of my Non-Communion in the Liturgy and Common Prayer, is
grounded on Invincible doubts about the very Lawfulness of such a
Constitution, and those upon three Maxims (shall I call them?) or Principles,
which Mr. Crofton (possibly) would term Schismatical as well as my Practice.

Viz: 1. Ecclesiastical Constitutions that are not Useful, are Unlawful. 2.
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, that are not Needful, are Unlawful. 3. That
Constitution of Worship which is not commanded, is forbidden.
(Which though they may seem to be very Paradoxes, and strange Positions in
this age, yet I profess to you (without any censorious reflection upon either
the Principles or Practices of others) they hamper me:)

The Assumption peculiar to each of those Propositions contains my doubt --

But the Liturgy or Common Prayer of the Church of England, is an
Ecclesiastical Constitution, which is neither 1. Useful, nor (much less) 2.
Needful, nor 3. Commanded, Ergo, etc.

1. That Ecclesiastical Constitutions which are not Useful are not Lawful,
which are Unprofitable, are Unwarrantable (where, by that which is unprofitable
I understand that which is un-edifying) is a Truth bottomed upon a great Canon
Apostolic (in respect of which all Church-Constitutions ought to be Acts of
(True) Canonical Obedience, viz:) (...), Let all things be done unto edifying,
1 Cor. 14.26. Now (...), Edification (according to the language of the Holy
Ghost) is not only, 1. a Freedom from positive damage; nor 2. a Single; but 3.
a Successive and gradual Benefit: For Confirmation hereof, I might produce the
Joynt-determination and Vote of a whole Jury of the Orthodox-Learned. Calvin,
Junius, Tilenus, Alstedius, Hospinian, Beza, Pareus, Prof. Leidens. Jus
Canonicum, Perkins, etc. who unanimously conclude the same, whose several
Testimonies I should here insert, but that I must shun prolixity. It Is
observable what is left upon everlasting Record, namely, That the Ceremonial
Law of Moses was disanulled because of its weakness and unprofitablenesse,
Heb. 7.18. (that which may be urged (in my mind) invincibly against the
retention of Jewish Ceremonies in the Christian Church) whence I argue,

If a Divine Law (one of Gods own making) must be reversed, disanulled, and
abolished, (the Holy Ghost himself being Judge) because unprofitable, (as the
Ceremonial was, Christ the Substance being exhibited) then surely (A fortiori)
all Humane Laws (those of Men's making, especially Ecclesiastical) which are
unprofitable, are (hoc ipso) unwarrantable: I should not fear to assert this in
the face of the world. Now

That the Liturgy or Common Prayer is a Constitution unprofitable (which is the
Assumption) will need no great labor to prove. It Is hurtful, and is that
useful? who cannot witness the unhappy Consequences, Mischiefs and
Inconveniences attending it? I should say but little, if as some call
Ignorance the Mother of Devotion, so I should call it, The Nursery of
Ignorance: Nay what greater Schismatic this day in England? what has more
divided between Faithful Pastors and their dear People? the Service has stopped
the Prophets mouths, pad-lock't those lips which should preserve knowledge;
alas! those are but few amongst the many thousand Malignant Influences of this
Convocation-Wildfire: And yet, There is no hurt in it, say some; that is
strangel but admit there were not, does it any good? the Negative will prove it
an Illegitimate brood; yes, may some Commoner say; and so may I say of the
Popish Missal, it may accidentally profit me; but neither will Collateral nor
single Benefit prove the Legitimacy either of the one or of the other: Further;
Is it an Edifying Constitution? if not, cashier it for Apocryphal, it is an
Adulterate piece: The waters of the Sanctuary must rise higher and higher; now
what influence has it in building of a man, a Churchmember, up in his most
holy Faith? were this to Edify? In a word; It must Instit. lib. 4. c. 10.
Sect. 32.
Manifestam utilitatem prae se far, (according to Calvin's Rule,) It must
conduce to the neanifest advantage of the Church of God, to her growth and
gradual Prosiciency (since the riper she is for age, the riper she should be
for knowledge, etc.) to the perfecting of this Mystical Building, Ephesians. 4.11,
12. else (believe it) it is not (...), and if un-edifying, then unwarrantable.
Now how little our Liturgy or Common Prayer is contributary hereunto, let the
Impartial judge.

2. That Ecclesiastical Constitutions which are Unnecessary, are (also)
Unlawful, (the second Proposition) seems to be firmly grounded on the
Authentic Decretal and Resolve of the famous Synod of Jerusalem, consisting of
Apostles and Elders (Men extraordinarily gifted, and infallibly guided by the
Holy Ghost) Act. 15.28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon
you no greater burden than those necessary things: An Imitable and Regulative
Example to all Councels and Convocations in succeeding ages; for there the Holy
Ghost Himself was President (as I may say) it seemed good first to the Holy
Ghost, and then to Us. 'Twas His Own Visum est, and Canon. -- All Peace be on
them that walk according to this Rule.

That the Liturgy or Common Prayer is an Unnecessary Constitution (which is the
Assumption), none (...), none of the Necessary things licenced by the Holy
Ghost, appears to me from a threefold consideration, namely, Of 1. Christ; 2.
The Spirit; and 3. The Gospel.

1. All Necessary Parts of Divine Worship are by Christ (who is the Churches
Lawmakers, as well as Peacemaker, the great Master of Assemblies) undoubtedly)
instituted and appointed; else that might be justly imputed to the Son, from
which the Holy Ghost acquits the Servant, Heb. 3.5. (which were blasphemy once
to imagine,) and 'twere not a little strange, if when the Man Moses did
punctually prescribe all the Tabernacle-Appurtenances, even to a Pin and
Snuffers, the Lord Christ should not also be faithful over his house in
describing and prescribing all the necessary Parts of his Worship and Service;
as if Scripture-Oeconomicks were defective and incompetent Church-Rules without
the Contribution of Men-devised, additional-traditional Forms, etc. But now the
Liturgy or Common Prayer (that Constitution) is none of Christ's either in
respect of Composition, or (much less) Imposition; Ergo, etc. Most of the
Matter though I grant to be Divine, yet that will not prove the Constitution
(the thing in question) Divine: What need many words? For the Lords sake let
either Precept or President in either Christ or his Apostles, be produced for
such a Frame, Contexture and Constitution of worship, and the question is
decided. The Lords Prayer is an Instance and President, say some! It Is
Authentic Common Prayer indeed, (and that which I reverence for the Authors
sake, but not idolize) but that it is a Form, needs proof; however, be it a
Form, be it a Pattern, it makes nothing against me; for if a Form, then Humane
Forms are Unnecessary, (that is my Quaesitum) unless men will tax Christ's Own
with some defect or Insufficiency, -- Frustra fit per plura, etc. Religion
abhors Superfluities as well as Nature. If Christ has accommodated me with a
Divine Form of Prayer (one of his Own) I may by Authority slight all Humane
Forms in the world: Again, If a Pattern, then no President nor Protection to
Set-Forms, etc.

2. Where the Spirit of Prayer is plentifully effused and diffused, there
Set-Forms of Prayer are unnecessary; because whatever Benefit can be imagined
to accrue from Forms, all that and much more does accrue from the Spirit: Are
Forms Helps to the weak? cannot they go without them? The Spirit helps our
infirmities, Romans 8.26. He being the Christians Auxiliary in, as well as the
Author of prayer: Are Forms Guides to the Blind? cannot they see without them?
The Spirits Office is to -- guide into all Truth, John 13.16. Now this same
Spirit is plentifully powered out in Gospel Times, being Christ's
Exaltation-Donative, Act. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Ephesians. 4.8. By virtue whereof the
Christian has commenced a degree above the Jewish Church: This being subjected
to a Servile and Infant-state, (the Legal Constitution,) That being promoted
to a Filial Adult-State, (the Evangelical Constitution of the Church); Ergo,
etc.

3. The Gospel (Christ's Canon Law) is (as a Perfect System of Sound Words and
Doctrine, so) a Sufficient Directory for Worship, able to make the man of God
perfect, (2 Timothy 3.15, 16.) without Humane Contributions; Ergo, etc.

I am not ignorant that Error has its Advocates; it is pleaded, That Set-Forms
of Prayer are needful for maintaining of Uniformity, etc. Good Lord! have
those Patrons no better Pleas than what Adulterate-Rome may espouse for defense
and insinuation of her Masse-Service, and Metropolitical Antichristian Head?
Are there no Church-Ligaments? no Bonds or Badges of Church-Vnity, but what
would inevitably destroy Church-Purity, if not (eftsoon) Church-Entity? Why,
will men create more Necessities than the Word will warrant, and thus occasion
more Sins than ever God forbad? But enough of that. Sir, With Your leave I will
now conclude that our Liturgy or Common Prayer is unnecessary, therefore
unwarrantable; not useful, not needful, therefore not lawful.

3. That that which is not commanded in the Worship of God ( viz. in point of
Matter or Manner) is (consequentially) forbidden, (the third Proposition) may
be (in my Judgment) undeniably concluded from these three gradual Axioms,
(which are indeed (...), Common, Innate, Rational Principles,) viz.

1. There is a GOD; This is (...), the very First and Fundamental Article of
our Faith; a Truth, which the Creatures may serve for Catholic Teachers, (the
Universe for an University) to school us in, Romans 1.20. Creation-works are a
Revelation-Book, which reveals a God, though not a Christ; a Deity, though not
a Trinity: Natural Conscience is a Bosom-Volume, wherein we may read the same;
which, should a man become a tractable Disciple to, he should never die (in
this sense) Atheist or Infidel. David's Fool may say in his heart, Psalm. 14.1.
There is no God, but it is not said he (really) thought so; for this is a
Truth, which may be read by Natures Common Light, yea, by that of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars.

2. There is Worship due from the Creature to this God. This is a main (...),
Romans 1.19.
one of the prime things which may by Natures Light and Creature-evidence be
known of God; a Principle depending upon the former. That very Light which
convinces men of a Godhead, convinces them also of this Worship as a Natural
Debt and Tribute due thereunto: Both are Common-Creed: Thus the Gentiles are
not charged with Ignorance of a Godhead, nor with neglect of Natural Worship
(the Thing), but with a defect in the Manner of Worship, -- When they knew God,
they glorified him not (...) AS God, Romans 1.21.

3. This God is to be worshipped in a way suitable to his own Will and Nature:
What more Rational then this? What Heathen Socrates ascribed to his Idol-God,
surely we may, and must (much more) ascribe to Our Only True God, namely, that
he must be worshipped (...) in a way, manner, and method most pleasing to
himself; and what Manner or Method of Worship more pleasing to God, then that
which is agreeable to his Own Will, or most suitable to his own Nature? Now
then to apply.

Since there can be no true Divine Worship, which is not either suitable to
Gods Nature (as is Gospel Worship, it being spiritual as God himself is a
Spirit, Joh. 4.24.) or (at least) agreeable to Gods Will (as the Jewish
Worship, by Sacrifices and Oblations, the blood of Bulls and Goats, etc. which
had nothing at all to commend it, but the Quod libet licet, the very Will and
Authority of the Lawgiver, (else how irrational had it been?) God having by
way of Indulgency, accommodated the Outward Method and Manner of his Worship
under the Law more to the Nature of the Jews, then to his Own; whereas
Evangelical Worship is not only agreeable to his Will, but suitable to his
Nature). Since the agreeableness of Worship to Gods Will, and the
suitableness of Worship to his Nature, is to be measured by the Manner, as
well as (if not more then) by the Matter of it, ( That being the Distinctive
Form thereof): And since the true Regular Manner of Divine Worship is only
revealed and dictated in and by Scripture-Canon; Scripture Light directing to
the Manner, as Natures Light directs to the Object of Worship; (else what
advantage have We to whom are committed the Oracles of God, over the Pur-blind
Gentiles? who are not taxed for not worshipping of God according to the light
they had, whereby they were directed to the Object of Worship; but for not
glorifying of God AS God, (Romans 1.21.) they failed in the Manner): Since (I
say) it is so, I must needs conclude, that That Manner or Constitution of
Worship, which is not Prescribed, is (ipso facto) Probihited, which is not
Commanded, is (consequentially at least) forbidden. Some (possibly) will
Object, What Reason, that That which is not Commanded, should (consequently) be
forbidden; more then why that which is not forbidden, should be (consequently)
commanded? (a common Plea in the Case): But, Dispar est Ratio, there is a great
disparity, a Negative will prove a Sin, but every Positive will not prove a
Duty; thus whatever is not agreeable to the Will of God is a Sin, but all that
is agreeable to the Will of God is not a Duty; this is plain, a Moral Duty is
the Obligatory Influence of some Positive Law: To proceed then.

That such a Constitution as Liturgy or Common Prayer is not commanded of God
(the Assumption) is proved abundantly: Where is there ever a Deus dixit, a
Thus says the Lord for it in all the Book of God? An Ecclesia dixit, will not
go down with me, who cannot put Church-Infallibility into my Creed, nor suffer
my soul to become Captive to an Implicite-Faith, Infallibility is one of Gods
own Crown-Royalties; He only is Infallible in point of Knowledge, who is
Immutable in Being and Existence. Where is there ever one Authentic President
for it? Mr. Crofton (I know) does attribute the Essential Form of Prayer to it
(page 25.) which he describes to be, A calling upon God in the name of Christ;
But if he understand not, in the Name of Christ, the Will of Christ, then I
say, It Is not a Right Description of Prayer, (whose ((...) Essentiale)
Essential Form depends upon the Rule, Gods own Prescript, it being a Moral
Duty) no better then what may agree to the Romish Letany: But if he do
understand therein the Will of Christ, I once more call for an instance in some
Authentic Precept or President (the only Commentaries upon Gods Will
Regulative) for such a Constitution; which I despair ever to see. I might have
told you, that it is a Humane Tradition, and therefore a sin against the 2.
Commandment, being contrary to Bishop Expos. on 2. Com.
Andrews his Modus Praescriptus; Gods own Prescribed Manner of worship: But I
shall not need to go so far; let it be proved, that it is a Constitution
whereof God is the Author, the Word the Rule, the Practice Apostolic the
Pattern; or what can it be other then Cultus ex humane cerebro confictus? mere
Will Worship and Superstition, which (being Sir France Bacon, in his Essays.
the reproach of Deity) must needs be as well (though not as much) as
Idolatrous Worship displeasing to Him who with his own finger twice wrote
Himself (...) A Jealous God; who therefore may justly say of such Officious
Service; -- Who has required this at your hand? O that men would seriously
consider (what I tremble at the very thoughts of, namely) the dreadful doom
and sentence gone out against such, as either add to, or substract from Gods
own Volume, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Rev. 22.18, 19.

Thus Sir, a Conscience fettered with doubts is that which I plead as a ground
of Real inevitable necessity in this case of my Non-Communion with the Church
of England in her Liturgy and Common Prayer. So that whereas Mr. Crofton pleads
for Communion with her in that (as well as in other Parts of Solemn Public
Worship) as a thing not only Lawful, but Expedient, yea, Indispensably
necessary, I question all, viz: not only the Necessity, but the Expediency,
yea the very Lawfulness of it, it being in mine opinion upon the accounts
aforesaid, none of the Real or True Worship of God, but mere Will Worship and
Contrivance of Men, so that I cannot communicate therein without sin; For To
him that esteems a thing unclean, to him it is unclean: And he that doubts
is damned, if he eat, because he eats not of faith, for what is not of faith
is sin, Romans 14.14.23. And what though my Conscience be Erroneous herein, yet
does it lay upon me a Negative Obligation in the case, Ligat, though not
Obligat; Though an Erroneous Conscience obliegeth me not to do what it
commands, yet it obliegeth me to refrain from what it forbids; this is the
determination of Learned Casuists in the Case: Conscience being the Queen
Regent-Faculty of the soul, Gods Own Representative therein, must not (at least
in matters of Indifferency) be controled; For Ames. de Consc. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Quicquid dictat, dictat sub ratione Voluntatis Divinae. Better it is that I
should not at all communicate, than to communicate with a Reluctance of
Conscience; for in such a case, what is an Indifferency to another, may be
Iniquity in me; Mr. Crofton should rather pity than censure such a One; what
must all be cut off that are not skilled in his Shibboleth? His Invective
against Church-Yard-Loyterers, Judge. 12.6.
(Page 24.) might well have been spared in a time, wherein Vineyard-Labourers
are so few.

2. The Real-Inevitable Necessity of my Wit^drawment from, or Non-Communion in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, under the present Modes and Methods of
Administration in the Church of England, is grounded upon the Constit. and Can.
Eccles. An Dom. 1603. Can. 27.
Imposed Gesture, the Superstition and Corruptions which attend it: (which who
can be such a stranger in our Israel as to be ignorant of)? Though I could go
near to approve of the gesture of Kneeling, being lest Arbitrary, and commended
or practiced only as an Outward Badge of more than ordinary thankfulness,
under the reception of an Extraordinary Blessing, and not as an Act of Piety,
Necessity, or Worship: And though I shall not (at this time at least) go so far
as some, namely, to assert that the Consecrated Bread purposely set before
Superstitious Kneelers (Protestants), and the (supposed) Transubstantiated
Bread purposely placed before Idolatrous Kneelers (the Papists) is the same, In
Esse Ad. rabili; yet two things I shall say: First, A Papists Idolatrous
Kneeling. before the Bread (supposed to be Transubstantiated, is (in some
respect) more Excusable, than a Protestants Superstitious Kneeling before the
Bread (being only) Consecrated; for his Creed does (though not Justify, yet)
in part excuse his gesture; Did I believe that the Sacramental Bread, is no
sooner Consecrated, than really Transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, I
should think, I should greatly ^^n if I did not forthwith exhibit Worship
thereunto, since (as the O thodox-Learned generally grant) there is Adoration
and Worship due to Christ even as Man, viz: by virtue of the Personal Union of
his Humane with his Divine Nature. Secondly, The gesture of Kneeling at the
Sacrament, etc. in the Church of England, having Necessity placed in it (else
why is it imposed, and not seft Arbitrary?) yea and holiness and worship too,
(as its The Archbishop of Spalato: Dr. Burgess: Dr. Mortoun; Paybody, etc.
learned Patrons inform us), and so becoming a dangerous piece of Superstition
and Will Worship, I am warranted to withdraw, and refuse Communion with her
therein, by a Supersedeas of Mr. Croftons own grant, viz: in case of
Real-Inevitable Necessity; with this assurance, that God will have mercy and
not sacrifice. The Sacrament is a Privilege, but Superstition is Sin; now I
may often warrantably wave a Privilege, but never am I warranted to commit the
least Sin; and therefore for fear of Poison, I deny my self Food. Alas! Mr.
Croftons Instances in Stinking Fish, etc. Pudled water, etc. An Unclean
Vessel, etc. yield not the least satisfaction to me; what if there be poison in
the dish, though never so well garnished? My Dear Friend, The case is very
hard; but what shall I do? If I must dye, let it be by famine, as soon as by
poison, If I must be forty years without a Passover, (even as long as the
Israelites were in the Wilderness without theirs) The will of the Lord be
done: I had rather be in the Wilderness without it, than go back to Egypt for
it, while I know that I am in the way toward Canaan; not so getting St.
Bernards Maxim, Non privatio sed contemptus damnat; The want of a Sacrament is
my Affliction, but the Contempt of it only (under that want) is my Sin; only
my prayer is that God would forgive them, Who make the Lords offering to be
abhorred. Thus Sir, I hope you are by this time satisfied in the case, namely,
That Non-Communion with the Church of England, in her Liturgy and
Common Prayer, as also in the Lords Supper under the present method of
Administration, in those who yet join with her in Prayer, Praise, The Word
Preached (Parts of True Solemn Divine Worship) as you and I do) is no breach of
duty, but a duty; (the one being no True Divine Worship, but Will Worship; the
other being though a Substantial Part of Worship, yet Adulterated and extremely
Corrupted Worship) therefore no SCHISM, which was the thing charged. Now give
me leave before I conclude this, to produce my Warrant and Protection in the
case, from the Church of Englands own Canon and Constitution; namely, the 9th
made in the year, 1603. Entitled Authors of Schisms in the Church of England
censured; the words whereof are these, viz: Whosoever shall hereafter separate
themselves from the Communion of Saints, as it is approved by the Apostles
Rules in the Church of England, and combine themselves together in a
new-Brotherhood, accounting the Christians who are conformable to the Doctrine,
Government, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, Profane and unmeet
for them to join with in Christian Profession, let them be excommunicated, Ipso
facto, etc. Now 1. I separate in case of Real-Inevitable Necessity only,
therefore not contrary to the Apostles Rules; 2. Mine is not Positive
Separation, therefore no Combination in a New-Brotherhood; 3. I am not only a
Professor of the same Faith, (which is all the Canon seems to require) but a
Partaker in the same Ordinances, (though not in all) with those who are
Conformable, etc. and therefore that very Canon which censureth Schismatics,
protecteth Me.

Now Honored Sir, Though I persuade my self that your request is satisfied in
the case touching Non-Communion, etc. Yet cannot I satisfy my self unless I
give a brief touch upon Mr. Croftons other Considerations; and before I come to
them, assoile what is objected from the High Places amongst the Israelites; ( A
Recocta crambe with him, and an ordinary Allegation with all that are of his
persuasion in the case in hand).

Do men complain (says he) as they have cause, Page 39.
That some Roman Rites were retained, when this Church was reformed, let them
consider, many pious Kings of Judah, have their reforming-Governments stained
with a -- But the High Places were not taken away, but the People went thither
to worship, yet I find not that any God-fearing Israelites who loathed those
Relics of Idolatry, ever barred themselves because thereof from Gods Altar
and Worship.

Ans. 1. The Retention of Jewish Ceremonies in the Christian Church, is (God
knows) a just cause of Complaint, since by reason of them, the condition of the
Christian Church, is become more intolerable than was that of the Jewish
Infant Church; the Jews being subjected to Divine Impositions, the Christians
(oh, sad!) to Humane Presumptions (the Arbitrary Laws and Lusts of Men)
witness Sr. Augustine. Ad Januar. Epist. 119. c. 19. Item Epist. 118. c. 2.

2. If the Retention of Jewish-Popish Ceremonies in the Church of England at
first, (when Reformation was but Early) was a just cause of Complaint, how much
more grievous must the Reduction of them after Sacred and Solemn Expulsion be?
the First compared to that of the last 20 years, being as the Twilight to a
clear Sunshine: It St. Augustine complained of the intolerable burthensomness
of Ceremonies in his days, (as in the places before mentioned) what cause have
we to complain, etc. in our days? For if the first Introduction of them into
the Roman Church, was a Reduction of Judaisme, how like does the Reduction of
them into the English Church, look to the Introduction of Romanisme? what? and
not complain!

3. Mr. Croftons alleged case of the Israelites, and their High Places, etc.
is (alas!) infinitely wide of Ours; (and therefore I marvel that a man of such
Parts as he is, should once plead the thing): For,

1. Though the High Places of old were, even under Reforming Governments, both
retained and frequented, (which I deny not) yet what makes this against me, who
dispute not about the Retention, but about the Restitution of a piece of
Superstition and Will Worship? When did any one of those Pious Kings of Judah,
first reform, and then restore the High Places spoken of? Can Mr. Crofton
instance when the High Places were restored by the King, and frequented by the
People, after sacred and solemn expulsion of them (to use his own words) by
Both? O, but Retrogradations in Religion are dangerous! Let me rather sojourn
in a Wilderness, then return to Egypt; Alas! this is our Case: Who can be
insensible of the Retrograde Motion of Englands Sun? Our High Places are
restored after sacred and solemn Expulsion; 2 Kings 18.4.
a blasted Nehushtan reintroduced: Ah! this is the Spot in our Moon: It Is
happened to us according to the true Proverb, 2 Pet. 2.22.
The Dog is turned to his Vomit, and the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing
in the Mire.

2. The Israelites were confined in their Sacrifices and Oblations to Gods
Altar, ( viz. at first in the Tabernacle, Lev. 17.3, 4. and afterward in the
Temple, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6, 11. from which it was not lawful, but upon extraordinary
occasions, or by divine Inspiration, to separate;) God having determined upon
the Place, as well as the Manner, of his Worship in the Jewish Church: No
wonder then, if the God-fearing Israelites did not bar themselves from Gods
Altar and Worship, notwithstanding those Relics of Idolatry, since they
should have in so doing transgressed a Positive Law. Now will Mr. Crofton argue
from hence, against the Practice of Christians, amongst whom the Place of
Worship is a mere Matter of Indifferency, Local-Liberty being a part of Gospel
Liberty, (as has been cleared above)?

3. Though the High Places were originally devised by the Idolatrous Israelites
in imitation of the Heathenish Groves, yet the use of them was changed by the
God-fearing Israelites, who (even the Priests and Levites themselves being of
the number, 1 Chronicles. 16.39.) performed Religious Worship in an Idolatrous
Place: Now will Mr. Crofton infer from the Israelites worshipping in an
Idolatrous Place, a necessity of Communion in a Superstitious Worship? My
Friend, I distinguish between Presence and Communion. The Devout Israelites
were present in an Idolatrous Place, but did not therein partake of Idolatrous
Worship: Now, What does Mr. Crofton plead for? Is it my Presence only in the
Church at the time of Divine Service (as it is called)? or is it Communion in
that Service? To be plain with you; The former I could give, and yet refuse the
latter, but so, as That also shall be the fruit of cogent Necessity, (not of
Choice) hoping in that case for Naamans Dispensation, 2 Kings 5.18, 19. (it
that sense be received) Presence is a Civil, but Communion a Religious Act, so
that should I in Obedience to a Poenal Law, or out of Necessity of hearing of a
soul-saving Sermon, give my Personal Presence in the public Congregation in
time of Common Prayer, knowing that an Idol is nothing in the World, 1 Cor.
8.4. let none conclude from my Presence in the Place, Communion in the Worship,
(or rather Will Worship): Naaman's Servile presence in the house of Rimmon
(being granted) would not prove his Communion in the Worship of Rimmon, 2 Kings
5. Elijah could look upon Baals Prophets Sacrificing, and condemn them, 1 Kings
18. God-fearing Israelites did frequent the High Places, but that proves them
not Communicants in the Superstition or Idolatry of those Places: Their
Practice then herein, are but weak Premises to Mr. Croftons Conclusion. Once
more;

4. The disparity between the case of the Israelites, and that of ours, lies
greatly in this, viz. There the Worship was good, the Place only bad; but here
the Place only is good, and the Worship (being mere Will Worship) bad: So that
Mr. Croftons Inference drawn from the Jewish Practice, in that case, against
Non-Communion, etc. is (with me) a manifest non sequitur.

CONSID. 2. Communion with the Church under many and great Corruptions, is not
inconsistent with Zeal, Care, and Contest for Reformation.

Remons. 1. That the Reformation of the Church is a Duty incumbent upon every
Man and Member thereof, to be pursued within the Verge of their respective
Places and Capacities, by all Just and Lawful Means, is a Truth here supposed,
and hereafter ( Page 28.34.) asserted by Mr. Crofton himself: Certain it is,
that every Churchmember ought to be in this respect a Church-Reformer: And
according as his Capacity shall vary, whether in respect of Power, Interest,
Office or Opportunity, etc. accordingly does his Obligation hereunto, vary also.

2. Mr. Crofton had done well to have stated the question aright de Ecclesia
Reformanda, and de Ecclesia Reformata: The Question with us, is not, Whether
Communion with the Church under many and great Corruptions be consistent with
Zeal, Care, and Contest for Reformation thereof? Who will deny that? But this,
Whether Communion with the Church of England under many and great Corruptions
be consistent with due and constant endeavors of reforming, after sacred and
solemn Expulsion of the same? Nay Sir, more particularly yet, It Is this (and I
would Mr. Crofton had well considered it, viz.) Whether Communion with the
Church of England (not under, but) in those very Corruptions which (he says) we
are by a Duty-Obligation bound (in our Capacities) to reform, be consistent
with due and constant endeavors of reforming the same? More particularly yet,
Whether Communion with the Church of England in her Liturgy and Common Prayer
(That (once) Exploded Will Worship and Corrupt Constitution) be consistent with
that Tie, whereby we are bound to constant endeavors of Reformation? The
Question thus stated, who cannot but resolve into the Negative? Especially, if
he consider, that the Liturgy and Common Prayer is not a Luxurious Branch,
which ought to be lopt off, but an Adulterate Plant, Math. 15.13.
which ought to be rooted out, as being none of those Plants which our Heavenly
Father has planted; so that the Reformation herein obliged to, must consist
not in an Alteration, but in the outer Ejection and Abrogation of such a
Constitution, (but such as is to be endeavored only in our several Places and
Capacities, and by Lawful and Warrantable Means: Schism and Sedition, Faction,
and Rebellion I am taught of God to abhor, as well and as much as does Mr.
Crofton himself.) Now then, If I be bound to contribute by all lawful
endeavors, what in me lies, and in my capacity, to the Reformation (that is, to
the Extirpation) of such an Adulterate Constitution (viz. the Liturgy or
Common Prayer), how inconsistent with such a Tie must my Communication in that
worship be! Were not this to plant what I am bound to root up? and to build
what I am bound to destroy? Or if I should after sacred and solemn Ejection
thereof, re-embrace or countenance or communicate in it, were not that to
return with the Dog to the old Vomit? to re-build our (once) demolished
High Places? and is this to reform? Connivance is to Mr. Crofton (Page 28.) an
Argument of Affection; and Communion is to me an Argument of Connivance: Ah!
Romans 14.22,
my Good Friend, Happy is he that condemns not himself, in that thing which
he allows. How can I countenance or communicate in that Worship, whereof I am
bound constantly to endeavor the Reformation? Yes, says Mr. Crofton, very
well, while the Matter is good, the outward Mode or Method only bad: This is
his Recocta Crambe, but he must prove the Whole Frame and Constitution good,
which as yet he has not done, else it is but a mere evasion. Now let me ask,
What is it that he is bound to reform? Is it the Matter of the Liturgy, etc.?
Or the Outward Mode only? or the Constitution and Whole Frame of such a
Worship? the Whole Frame and Constitution, surely, a piece of Adulterate
Worship, else why was it ever wholly exploded and ejected? But This Reformation
is to be endeavored only in our several Places and Capacities: Truth, Buth the
Negative Part obliegeth ad semper, thus, Though I cannot go on, yet I am bound
never to go back; my Progress may be obstructed, but my Regress is not the reby
warranted; If my Sun be hindered in its Course, let it stand still, rather then
go, one, much less, ten degrees backward: My Positive endeavors may be ad
extrinseco obviated, so that I can not reform, but the Moral Obligation cannot
be violated, so that I must not retreat; the Negative is the least that I am in
the case obliged to: Now, If by Mr. Croftons own Rule, (Page 28.) Error cui
non resistitur, approbatur, the non-resistance of Error (viz. when it is in our
power to give a stop) be an Allowance of it, and Connivance be an Act and
Argument of Affection, what must Personal Communion in the Liturgy and
Common Prayer, be? surely an Act and Argument of, Connivance in, Allowance of,
and Affection to it: And how inconsistent this is with his alleged Zeal,
Care, and Contest for (and due uninterrupted Endeavors of) Reformation, etc.
let the impartial judge. Sir, I need not to tell you that I am under no
Obligation from the Oath, commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, (I
never took That, more then the slavish Engagement, which you well know); who
then can imagine that I should once plead That? But had it been my sad Lot to
be, either through a Precipitant Zeal (the Predominant humor of former Times)
entangled, or by the circumventing Perswasives of Covenant-Zealots, inveagled,
into such a Labyrinth, and yet free, yea, forward with Mr. Crofton and other
Reverend and Worthy Presbiters, to swallow down Common Prayer, and to
proselyte others to Communion therein, I should have owned my self a perpetual
Debtour to King and Parliament for a Release, whose Wisdom judged it fit to
open a door of Liberty by disanulling that Oath. But I go on.

Reformation and Separation (says he (whereof Voluntary Non-Communion is the
Privative Part) though confounded, Page 30.
yet are in themselves vastly different, inconsistent, and destructive each to
other.

Ans. 1. Separation from the Common Prayer, is an Act of Reformation, being a
Continuation of Reforming Endeavors in this juncture of time, wherein
Scrupulous Weaklings, are loath to contribute to the maintaining of That by
their Practice, which after Solemn Ejection, is returned and retained by Power.
It Is Negative Reformation; an Act of Primitive Zeal; whereby those Persons
refuse to conform to, what they cannot (positively) reform; the same Principle
oblieging them to decline and disown it, when (after Expulsion) restored, that
at first obliged them (and possibly Mr. Crofton too) to that Expulsion; 'Twere
strange if it should be otherwise.

2. Separation sinful, and Reformation, are indeed inconsistent, and
destructive each to other: Virtus stat in medio: Reformation (which supposes
(hurch Entity) is an Act of Virtue, equally opposite to those Extremes,
Superstition and Separation (the Scylla and Charybdis, the two Rocks, upon
either of which, the Mystical Ark (the Church) is in danger of being split)
the one being destructive to Church-Purity, the other to Church-Vnity (as has
been said), so that, That very Principle, which obliegeth to Reformation (be it
Conscience, or Conscience under such or such Enforcements, etc.) does ipso
facto obliege to an Equal abhorrency and detestation of Both: And thus, Schism,
I abominate, it is a thing my Soul loathes, I desire to keep the Unity of the
Spirit, in the Bond of Peace (Mr. Crofton wrongs me if he thinks otherwise),
for I am sufficiently apprehensive, how near, Church-Rents border upon
Church-Ruine. But now, That Separation only is Sinful and Schismatical which
is Causeless, and not warranted by the (often mentioned) Case of
Real-Inevitable-Necessity; which will acquit me from such an Imputation, who
communicate with the Church of England in Prayer, Praise, the Word, Parts of
True Divine Worship, but decline, and modestly refuse Communion with her only
in those two things; viz: 1. Her Liturgy and Common Prayer; 2. The Sacrament of
the Lords Supper under the present Method of Administration and Appendices; the
first appearing to be no part of Christ's Instituted Worship; the second (though
for substance a Part of Christ's Instituted Worship, yet) being by Superstition
and Adulterate Mixtures of Pharisaical Leaven with the Sacramental Bread, etc.
so extremely corrupted, that I cannot communicate with her therein without sin;
I cannot partake of the Sacrament, but that I must partake of the attending
Superstition too; I cannot celebrate the Death-memorial of a Crucified Lord,
but that I must by sin crucify that Lord afresh, and thus Commemorate his
Death with his Death. I must add,

3. There is a Separation Passive, whereby Pastors are separated from their
People (their Charge) and a breach made upon their Joynt-Communion; Hereby
judge who are the greatest Schismatics; Those who are separated, being by a
Violent Interruption at first driven away, and by Prevalent Corruptions (at
least in the Things just now mentioned) kept away, and barred from Communion,
etc. or, Those who cause that Separation: This is a Poenal Evil, the Condign
punishment of our Laodicean Neutrality and Lukewarmnesse in the work of
Reformation; there have been in former times too too many Jehu-like Reformers,
who have made Religion to stoop to a Carnal Interest, to Secular and Selfish
Ends and Aims; this has kindled a fire in Heaven, which nothing but Prayers
and Tears, etc. can quench; for This, Psalm. 78.21.
A fire is kindled against Jacob, and anger also is come up against our
Brittish-Israel: Isa. 43.28.
Ah! for this has God profaned the Princes of the Sanctuary.

I cannot (says he, page 31.) without trembling consider the Circumcised Sects
in the Church of Corinth are charged to have left the Head, by leaving the
Body, Col. 2.19.
etc.

Ans. 1. This is a strange Argument to be urged against his censured
Non-Communicants, unless they be proved to be (such as by his own confession,
those whom the Apostle there taxes, were, viz:) Circumcised Sects, or guilty
of such Corruptions as will amount to a -- Not holding of the Head, the thing
there charged upon those Circumcised Sects, and as justly chargeable upon all
Judaizing Christians, who contend for the Introduction and Retention of the
Antiquated, Jewish Rites, and Ceremonies, in the Christian Church: 1 John 4.3.
Qui negat Christum in Carne venisse, Ive est Antichristus. Tertul. lib. de
carne Christi.
for this is (virtually) to deny that the Son of God is come in the flesh, He
being the Body and Substance presigured and shaddowed thereby; This is Real
Antichristianism; Enough to turn a Bethel into a Bethaven! Now who in England
are most Criminal herein, who most exposed to the Apostolic Censure, let an
Altar and Organ, and other Romish Relics and Jewish Popish Ceremonies,
witness: Ah Judge. 6 32.
Jerub-baals are rare in our age. Is this Reformation? Yes, such another as was
that of King Henry the Eighth, when he had renounced the Popish Jurisdiction,
but retained the Ceremonies; whom Luther, (that great German-Reformado)
upbraided with a -- He has killed the Popes Body, but saved his Soul: Yet

2. That the Church is Gods Ark of Salvation, and therefore not to be totally
and universally forsaken, upon peril of inevitable Ruin, is a received
principle with me. The Church is both an Ark of Safety, and an Ark of Plenty;
It saves both from drowning and starving: Noah's Ark saved from the Deluge, all
that were in it, and none but those: The Ark under the Law contained in it
three things, viz: Aarons Rod, the Tables of Testimony, the Pot of Manna, Heb.
9.4. This Ark represented the Church; Aarons Rod, Discipline; the Tables of
Testimony, the Word; and the Pot of Manna, the Sacrament: Where is either
Soul-Safety, or Soul-Plenty, to be had but within the Verge and Limits of the
Church? This is the only Ark that can land us safe at the Heavenly Haven, the
Land of Rest; so that Universal Separation must needs forestall Salvation: But
enough of that. Generalia non pungunt.

CONSID. 3. Page 37.
Scandal is an Argument of no strength, when pleaded to supersede, or condemn a
Positive duty.

Remons. 1. Who denies that? But Communion with the Church of England in her
Common Prayer (it being none of Christ's Instituted Worship) is not as yet
proved to be a Positive duty: What Communion has light with darkness? 2 Cor.
6.14.16. But 2. Scandal is an Argument of strength, when pleaded in matters of
Indifferency (by his own confession, P. 39.) now such I hope he will grant
(which I cannot as yet do) our Liturgy and Common Prayer to be, unless he say
as a Reverend Bishop (one of the greatest in this Nation) once upon occasion
said to me; who when I humbly desired to know wherein the weak were to be
indulged, was pleased to resolve it into Things Indifferent; and I assuming
that a Liturgy or Common Prayer is a Thing Indifferent, replied, It Is not
Indifferent when imposed: And then, sarewell Christian Liberty, for there is
nothing Indifferent (in Actu exercito, or) when imposed. But Right Reverend
Fathers, etc. what a woeful case is this? You tell us, that in things
Indifferent we are to indulge the weak; and yet by reason of your Impositions,
you leave nothing Indifferent; far be it from You to render that Necessary by
Your Law, which (you grant) should be left Arbitrary by Gods Own: There is an
Indulgency (you grant) allowed us by the Law of God (Romans 14.13, 15, 21. 1 Cor.
8.9, 13.) and yet how are we abridged of it by the Laws of Men? Is this
Charity? or is it Sacrilege? Now 3. Why may not Scandal accrue from Mr.
Croftons Communion in, as well as from his Conformity to the Common Prayer? May
not a weak Brother hereby suffer in the tortures of a Scrupulous Conscience,
being racked between his own doubts and the Offenders Practice? Or, may not
this administer to him an occasion of sinning, either in his condemning of that
which may be Lawful to Mr. Crofton, seeming Unlawful to him; or, in doing what
yet he condemns or doubts of, being animated thereunto by Mr, Croftons
Practice? Or, may not this tend to the hardening of men in sin? And is not this
Real Scandal, being Factum quo alius deterior redditur? (Amandus Polanus, Synt.
Theol. l. 6. c. 3.) I dare say many Nonconforming Ministers, who have judged a
set Form of Prayer to be Lawful in it self, and therefore a thing which might
be used without any trespass upon either the Law of Piety (the Word), or the
Law of Purity (Conscience), who yet would have totally declined it upon the
account of the Law of Charity, fearing least they should destroy him (or them)
with their meat, for whom Christ died, Romans 14.15. Now 'twere strange if this
were an Argument strong enough against Conformity, and yet an Argument of no
strength against Communion. But Scandal in this case is Offense taken only, not
given? This is as Common as the Prayer it self, but it is assumed gratis.
However 4. Admit it were scandalum accep um, an offense taken, and groundless:
Shall there be no Indulgency showed in that case? What shall we think of the
Christians in the Primitive times? the weaker had no cause or ground to be
offended with the stronger about their Indifferent use of mean, Christ having
purchased for them an absclute liberty therein; and yet what strict laws are by
St. Paul enacted, against the scandalizing of such? and is it nor his own
Personal Resolve in the case, to become a perpetual Debtor to (...) Bell,
rather than a Debtor to the law of Charity? (1 Cor. 8 13.) This was my Reply to
that Reverend Bishop, when he was pleased to assert, that the weak are not at
all to be indulged, where there is no cause or ground of offense; (and if there
be any real ground of offense, how can they be called weak?) strange Diocesian
Doctrine!

CONSI. 4. I am not without the Caution and Conduct of the seber Godly, Learned
Promoters and Purjuers of a Perfect and Complete Reformation. Remon 1. It Is
strange Mr. Crofton should argue from Communion amongst Distinct Churches,
against the present Non-Communion of Particular Members of one and the same
Church; since that which is between the other Reformed Churches, and this of
England, is a Communion, not by way of Participation or Joynt-Fellowship etc.
but of Profession of the fame true Religion only, which I have here owned, and
asserted. 2. There are indeed Liturgies used (though not imposed) in some of
those Reformed Churches, But (though they are not Mala peruse yet) this proves
them not Authentic more than the Priests and Levites Sacrificing in the High
Places (1 Chr. 16.39.) proves those Lawful; why then may they not be looked
upon as Spots in their Feasts? God conniving at those in Christians, as He did
at Polygamy amongst the Jews, which yet he did not approve of. 3. Mr. Croftons
Instance in the Primitive Non-Conformists is wide of that of the Modern; for
our Communion in the Liturgy and Common Prayer, were a Relapse and Return into
(I am loath to say) an Egyptian darkness, after a Noonday Sunshine of the
Gospel; and that (by Mr. Croftons own grant) after Sacred and Solemn Ex ulsion
thereof; now Prom^ters of Reformation, are no Patterns of a Retrogradation; ah!
this may humble Englands declining Sun! lengthned Shaddowe: (Jer. 4.6.)! It Is
Low Water in the Sanctuary! out English Ark is retarded in Her Voyage
Heavenward! Wind bound by Ser-Forms, etc. saint Gailes of the Spirit!
persuaded I am, were those Worthies now alive, they would be loath to become
Baals (either) Advocates or Adherents. 4. What does Mr. Crofton think of the
thousands of Non Conforming Ministers in our days, who (in my mind) deserve the
name of, Church, as well as any Papal Conclave, or, Prelatical Convocation in
the world: But however 5. I must not draw every Example into a Rule, Judaizing
Peter's I must not pattern by; Mr. Crofton and his Liturgy-Communicant-Fellow
Presbyters. I respect and reverence; but he he a MOSES, be he an AARON I have
no warrant to follow him any further then he is a Follower of Christ, 1 Cor.
11.1.

Now Dear Sir, The good Spirit of God be your Convoy to guide you through the
Syrtes of this World in a straight course Canaan-ward, that you may not split
upon the Rock, either of Church-rending Separation on the one, nor
Church-Adulterating-Superstition on the other hand, till he at length land you
sale within the Vail.

T. P.

FINIS

