IMPRIMATUR.

Hen. Maurice Reverend. Willielm. Cant. Archiepisc. a Sacris.

ERRATA.
Page 11. l. 23. for imparable, r. incomparable, p. 13. l. 22. f. Monarch, r.
Monarchy. p. 24. l. 5. f. the, r. their.

A SERMON Preached at WEST MINSTER-ABBEY On the 26th. of July, 1685. BEING THE
THANKSGIVING-DAY FOR HIS Majesty's VICTORY OVER THE REBELS

By Edward Pelling, Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Sommerset.

Printed at the Earnest desire of some Friends.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Keble at the Turks-Head in Fleet Street over
against Fetter Lane, and Walter Davis in Amen Corner, 1685.

A SERMON PREACHED AT WESTMINSTER-ABBEY On the 26th. of July, 1685. BEING THE
THANKSGIVINGDAY, etc.
Psalm 124. 6. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a Prey to their
Teeth.
THE good Providence of God over the Sacred Persons, and the just Government of
Princes, in preserving both from the most malicious designs of so many restless
and sanguinary Spirits, is one of the most stupendous Works of Gods
Omnipotence that ever he has showed since the last day of the Creation. A
Miracle, which was the common subject of King David's thankful Meditations, up
and down throughout his whole Book of Psalms, and particularly in This Psalm;
where after a most humble manner, he does adore the infinite Mercy and Power of
God, for delivering Him and his Subjects from the threatening dangers of a fresh
Insurrection. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel
say: If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against
us; they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us:
Then the Waters had over whelmed us, the stream had gone over our Soul: The
proud Waters had gone even over our Soul: When the Insurrection was so
formidable, when the malice of wicked men was so outrageous, when their
appetites were not to be satisfied but with streams of Blood; when Ruin was
breaking in upon the whole Land like a mighty Torrent; when, without the
immediate help of God, nothing could be expected, but utter Desolation; when
the danger was so imminent, and seemingly so inevitable, that those men of
violence thought themselves as sure as if the prey they sought after were
already in the Gin; Then was the time for God to lay to his Hand, to make bare
his Arm, and to gain himself Honor by rescuing Innocence from the Pit, as it
lay at the Brink, ready to drop into the Depth of Destruction.

This Psalm was David's (...) like the Eucharistical Sacrifice of Jonah, after
he had been delivered from the belly of the Whale. And that I may not spend my
time in a curious, but unnecessary division of the Text, let us fall directly;
first upon the consideration of David's deliverance, which was the ground of
his thankfulness, and the purport of the Psalm; and so proceed in the second
place, to the consideration of our own deliverance, which is the reason of Our
thankfulness, and the business of the Day.

1. As to that deliverance for which David here blessed God, indeed Divines
cannot find out any one certain Era, or point of time, where to fix it. But if
I may have leave to conjecture, I conceive, that David spoke here in reference
to those his Signal Victories over some Domestic Conspirators, whereof we find
a most devout and grateful Commemoration in 2 Samuel 22. For several of the same
expressions we meet with there, which we find in this Psalm. There he spoke, as
he did Here, of the Waves of Death, of the Floods of ungodly Men, of many
Waters, of Snares, of them that rose up against Him, and the like. Now it is
evident, that in that place the King of Israel had in his mind, not only the
former downfall of Saul, but chiefly the late Victories which God had given him
over two formidable Traitors; the one a discontented, yet an Ordinary Subject,
the other a Darling, but a graceless Son. Let us look a little, I beseech you,
into the Story of both.

The discontented Subject I speak of, was that considerable man, Sheba: Sheba
the Son of Bichri, as he is called eight times together in one Chapter. The
Scripture seems to set a mark of infamy upon his Father, as well as on Himself.
Wherever the Traitor is named, it is always Sheba the Sonof Bichri, as if he
were an Hereditary Rebel. Now David's deliverance, out of the Hands of this Man
of Belial, was a Work of Gods wonderful Providence. For, though this Rebellion
was not so near David's Doors as the other was, yet David mistrusted this Son of
Bichri would do him more harm, than had been done him hitherto, 2 Samuel 20. 6.
For the wretch was haughty and enraged: His party was very numerous; yet not
more numerous, than they were perfidious and disloyal: Men that had set up for
their King one of Saul's Family, while the House of Judah followed David: Men
that consented to the Kings Restoration upon mere necessity, and yet would
have gone away with the Honor of it: Men that had great expectations from
David, and because they could not get their Ends, and obtain the Government of
him, took up presently a mortal grudge against him, as if they had no part, no
inheritance in the Son of Jesse (as they spoke by way of contempt) and so the
Alarm was instantly taken by them all, Every man to his Tents, O Israel. This
was Sheba, and these were his Associates; a desperate Leader of a very terrible
Defection; nothing being more dangerous to any Prince, than the united malice
of Rebellious Spirits, that submit, not for Conscience sake, but either upon
Constraint, or for their Interest only.

Yet how soon did the hand of God break that dark and threatening Cloud which
now covered the greatest part of David's Kingdom? Joab indeed pursued the Rebel
from place to place; and at last hemmed him in. But the Victory was from
Heaven; without any battle in the Field, without the personal valor of Joab,
without the loss of any of Joabs Forces was this deliverance wrought: by the
contrivance of a woman was Sheba's Head taken off, and cast over the Wall; by
one of the weaker Vessels was the main thing done, that the Excellency of the
Power might be of God, and not of man; that I may allude to the expression, 2
Cor. 4. 7.

But there was a Greater deliverance than this, which I doubt not, but David
particularly thought of, when he penned this Psalm: A deliverance from a
Conspiracy, that might have swallowed up the King, and all the people that were
with him, as it is said of that Conspiracy, 2 Samuel 17. 16. the very same
expression, as is used at the 3d. Verse of this Psalm: A Conspiracy that was
not only near David's Threshold, but went to his very Heart too, the Conspiracy
of his Son Absalom. His bloody Son Absalom, that formerly had been guilty of
shameful Murder. His Ambitious Son Absalom, whom none of those Preferments
could Content, which would have contented Sheba; nothing would satisfy him but
the Crown. His ungrateful Son Absalom, that so basely rewarded him for his
Longings after him, when he fled from his presence to Geshur, and for his
Pardon, for his Kisses upon his Return, and upon that his most solemn, though
artificial submission at his Fathers Feet. His perfidious Son Absalom, that no
sooner went out of his Fathers Court, but ran to the Gates to steal away the
hearts of his Fathers Subjects with such mean addresses to the Populace, O that
I were made Judge (meaning, King) in the Land. His hypocritical Son Absalom,
that pretending a desire to perform his Vow, declared for the Throne, and under
color of Religion raised an open and barefac't Rebellion This was such a
dreadful Conspiracy, as made David himself, though a man of such Prowess and
Conduct, presently to flee for his Life. For so it was that Absalom, what with
the gracefulness and beauty of his Person, what with his Popularity, and what
with other sinister and sordid Artifices, had insinuated himself strangly into
peoples Affections; the hearts of the men of Israel were after him, says the
Scripture; so that the Conspiracy was strong; the business was laid very broad,
for the People increased continually with Absalom, though at the First he was
but two hundred Men strong, as we read, 2 Samuel 15. Had not the hand of God,
which commands the Seas, governed and overruled this design, the King had been
utterly undone, and all his Loyal Subjects that clave to him: Such a violent
agitation were disaffected People in then, that they were ready to flow to him
from all Quarters, like the meeting and inundation of many Rivers to make a
Deluge.

But that which made this Conspiracy the more terrible, was this, that
Achitophel was in the head of it. Achitophel, that had served to corrupt and
debauch the young man, Absalom, and had ministered to his Lusts. Achitophel,
that False and Treacherous Villain, that had been one of David's Counselors;
nay, the President of his Council, as it is plainly intimated, 1 Chronicles. 37. 34.
Achitophel, that dexterous man at wickedness; such a cunning and crafty
Politician, that he was looked upon as infallible, as an Oracle. Achitophel,
that was so maliciously set against the King, that nothing would satisfy him,
but the Assassination of his Person. Achitophel, that hardened Traitor, and
cursed Reprobate, that when his Counsel and Bloody endeavors would not take,
fled for it presently, and through anguish and vexation hanged himself: (A sad
End indeed, for any Rebel to be his own Executioner, though in some cases it is
pity that an Achitophel, an inveterate, and advising Rebel should ever die in
his Bed.)

When the highest Treason was formed by such working heads, when 'twas
conducted by such Politic Counsels, when 'twas Executed by such desperate
Instruments, when it prosper'd on a sudden by such successful stratagems
nothing could be expected, but the Kings inevitable ruin, had not the hand of
God been more concerned in the cause, than the hand of Joab.

Herein was manifested the great power of God, that notwithstanding all these
Arts, Enterprises, and desired Events of wickedness, the whole frame of the
Conspiracy was dashed down in a moment, the King was delivered, Peace was
restored, the whole Nation was freed from commotions and dangers; and all this,
by the unexpected and surprising death of Absalom, who, as God, would have it,
was caught in a Wood; and hung by his Locks upon a Tree; to show the World what
a Reward all they deserve, that take up Arms, and Rebel against their Lawful
Prince.

2. You have now seen some of David's deliverances; I mean his deliverances from
Homebred dangers, from Enemies that were in his own Country, in his own
Bosom; which, as I conceive, David had an immediate eye upon in this Psalm,
where he blessed the God of his Salvation, that he and his people were not
delivered as a Prey unto their Teeth.

To proceed in the next place, to the consideration of our own deliverances,
which is the necessary subject of our Meditations this day. I know not any
deliverances, that can come nearer (perhaps not so near) to those of David,
either for the Quality, or for the Circumstances of them, then those wonderful
deliverances from so many Sheba's and Achitophels, which God has from time to
time wrought for this Nation: Perhaps no Age, no State, no History can show the
Like instances of his good Providence; so unwearied has his Goodness been to
our Princes, as if he had entailed his Mercy upon Them, as he did upon David,
and upon his seed for evermore. It Is true (a most sad and shameful Truth, God
knows) such was the monstrous impiety of the Last Age, that it afforded one
unpresidented, unparalled instance of Gods wrath, when that imparable
Monarch, the Glory of our Reformation, and the Honor of the World, was forced
to bow his head down, and to fall a Sacrifice to the Lusts of the most
barbarous Villains, as if God had forsaken him. Yet I cannot tell, but that
God, who draws Good many times out of the greatest Evil, did in that terrible
juncture design to show men the excessive sinfulness of their Follies, in
throwing away a Felicity, always to be reflected on, but hardly ever to be
recovered to the Worlds End. However, that some Compensation might be made for
that superlative (and otherwise irreparable) loss, by the due succession, and
after Greatness of his Posterity, God has multiplied those temporal Glories
upon the Sons, which he took from the Father, and gave him a Blessed Eternity
in Exchange for. And to let the World see, that resistance is criminal even
when it is prosperous, and to punish Rebellion in a second Age, though it escaped
in the First, God has delivered the two Royal Brothers from six troubles and
seven, though Sheba and Absalom, with their wicked Confederates, joined hand in
hand to Execute a Conspiracy, which had been long a forming by the Serpentine
subtilty of a twining and party colored Achitophel.

This Deliverance was manifestly the work God. For first our dangers were so
immense, and yet so close and privy, that it both passed the sagacity, and
exceeded the reach of humane Force to prevent them; and nothing could deliver
us from them, but the Power and Wisdom of Almighty God. What were the
Conspirators, but the most daring and desperate Villains? Men of the most
desperate Principles, ready and disposed for the most desperate undertakings;
and either so laden with the guilt of former Crimes, or so linked together in
the Communion of New ones, that nothing less could be expected, then the utmost
of those mischiefs which are always acted by men of the most desperate
Fortunes? And what was the Conspiracy it self, but a long studied, and now ripe
Design, to draw in upon us a whole Deluge of Blood, to overwhelm Prince and
People, with final slaughter, to destroy the very Name, as well as to stifle
all further efforts of Loyalty, to bury our Monarch beyond all hopes of a
Resurrection, to ingulph the Church in an eternal Chaos, so that you should
hardly have seen the very Ruins of it, to dash down at once the whole frame of
the present Government, and to leave it to Time, and Fortune, and the Decision
of the Sword, what other Model should be set up? And what would have been at
the end of all this, but Irreligion and Atheism, accompanied with the most
dismal Confusions, and a perpetual War, till by weak'ning and killing one
another, each Party must have given a Foreign Power the fairest opportunity of
Invading and Captivating all. Nothing could destroy such a bulky, such a
barbarous Design, but the Arm of God, whose extroardinary providence is then
wont visibly to interpose, when dangers are so Immense; so Imminent, and
otherwise Inevitable. And the Truth is, the Conspiracy was too great to
prosper, too excessively monstrous to give any but Atheists promises of
success; the Mercy of God being such, that amidst all our Corrections, he has
still kept us from Ruin, and has always saved us from the Ax, though we have
been often delivered most deservedly to the Rod.

2. Again; the Conspiracy was laid so very broad (as one of the Criminals
himself confessed) that there is little reason to doubt, but that innumerable
numbers of disaffected men in all parts of this great Island, diverse of the
most Potent, many the most Active, all the most Violent of the Faction, were
more or less actually engaged to carry the Design on; so that had not that good
God wonderfully interposed, who commands the hearts, and stilleth the madness
of the people, by his own secret, and unaccountable, but yet overruling and
efficacious power, in all humane probability no way could have been left for
innocence to escape. And when the Rebellion was now begun by the most Forward
of the party, that gave the Alarm to the rest, who only waited for an
invitation; to distract the whole Kingdom, Sheba had so posted himself in one
part of it, and Absalom in another, that all such whose hearts were after both,
had their choice given them of repairing unto either, had not God restrained
and dampt their spirits, and made even resolute men, Cowards. This we must
needs ascribe to the particular providence of God; especially if we do
consider, that those ordinary Forces throughout the Nation, on which we
confided for the curbing and suppressing of Rebels, were, (for the most part)
what through cowardice, what through perfidiousness, and what through both,
much prepared, and much more desirous themselves to turn Fugitives.

Not but that God permitted the Foeces of the people to gather together into a
considerable (nay, I must call it, because we once thought it, a formidable)
body; for never is there an inundation without a great scum. But yet, such was
the good Providence of God to us, that all this was, more for our Terror, then
to our Injury: that by making us sensible of our Conquest, God might show us
our danger; which had it not appeared at our Doors, might have made no more
impression upon us, than a Dream in the Night.

3. And in this, Thirdly, the Hand of God was most plainly seen, that after so
many preparations on the one side, after so many terrors on the other, and
after so many uncertainties on both, the Scales were turned so in a moment,
that we no sooner heard of a Conflict, than we were sure of a Victory, and that
in such a Nice and Critical juncture, that we might have thought our selves
happy, might have blessed God for but a Drawn Battle; they that shall duly
consider what a condition the Kings affairs was in that Fatal Night, (for it
was the most Fatal Night-work that ever Absalom had in hand) how
disproportionable his Majesty's Forces were in Number, how secure they were,
like so many good Consciences at their Repose, how unexpectedly fire and Sword
came against them, how silently he stole upon them like a Thief, whose design
was to plunder a whole Kingdom; and yet how suddenly that desperate engagment
ended, I do not say in a Victory, but in an utter defeat and overthrow of the
whole Faction; they must needs look upon it as a Miraculous deliverance, and
grant the providence of God to have been as visible then in the Preservation of
the Crown, as it had been before in the Restoration of the Prince himself.
Lord! how in a moment was that great work done which the Government had been
laboring at for so many years, and yet unsuccessfully? How soon were all the
Councels of Achitophel turned into foolishness; and all the Arts and
Machinations of his numerous Adherents brusht down all at once like a Cobweb,
in the twinkling of an Eye? After so many designs against the Monarchy and the
Church, which had been so Politickly, and so deeply laid; after so many close
and Treasonable consultations that had been held; after such along trade of
Perjuries, that to the wounding of their consciences, and to the scandal of
Religion had been practiced: after so much industry that had been used in
lying, Libelling, and debauching the World with wicked Principles; after so
much pains that had been taken in setting up Magistrates to overlay and stifle
the Laws; after so much villainous Hypocrisy, which profligate Souls had been
guilty of even before the Altar of God; after so many correspondences that had
been maintained throughout these Kingdoms to hew down all the pillars thereof;
after such a train of Arts, which they had been laying so many years to begin
and carry on a Rebellion; after such a vast expense of time and Money; (Money
like that which Judas received, that may cost even the Creditors their Necks)
after all this, I say, and a great deal more, the whole controversy was ended
as it were at a Blow, by a few men, by an hours push; and so, that those very
methods which they used for the Ruin, have effectually served to the
Establishment of the Throne; they have made our Prince (though against their
own Wills) a glorious King indeed, and Us his faithful Subjects, an happy and
safe People: And all, by the good Providence of our God, who for his Mercy sake
governed and overruled even Midnight surprises, and in that critical and most
dangerous juncture kept us All from being the prey to the fury, or cruelties of
those Abaddons.

4. And yet, Fourthly, the Providence of God did not stop here; but as his bare
and outstretched Arm had now unexpectedly defeated those villainous
Enterprises, so to Crown the Victory after a signal manner, his vengeance
pursued and overtook the Men, even the most Principal Traitors, to deliver up
those to the Law, who had escaped the Sword. This was a singular and very
remarkable Work of God; because on this our future Peace and Felicity did
depend: and to see how strangely God does sometimes bring his great purposes to
pass, this Last, this greatest Work was done after a most Providential manner,
and by the meanest and most ordinary Instruments. For as that Sheba of the
North was after a Months Invasion, taken at last by three Servants, in the
Water; so that Absalom of the West was after his Months Invasion, or
thereabout, caught also by three Men of the like Figure and Condition, and that
like Absalom the First, in a Wood, among Brakes and Trees; and hereby God
showed his just displeasure against All the Rebels both ways, by exposing the
most honorable of them to Disgrace and Shame, as well as by bringing them to
capital punishment. And thus by a Wonderful and an uninterrupted course of Gods
blessed providence, he has in a very short time wrought one of the greatest
Deliverances for us, and our Posterity; these having been (we hope) the Last
Efforts of that wicked Cause, which for many years has made such mischiefs in
the World, but (God be blessed) was brought at length to it is extreme Agonies,
and is now Dead: Dead, and I hope Buried, till the day of Final Reckoning, when
it is more valiant Patriots will rise up in judgment, and upbraid these for the
less fortunate successes of their more Open and Notorious Wickednesses.

That I have thus particularly observed the several steps of Gods Providence in
this case; is not only to express mine own deep and humble Sense of those
manifold Mercies which never fail us; or to quicken the like Sense in you, and
to excite the Endeavors of us all, to give due Testimonies and Expressions of
the most Religious Hearts; of Hearts Penitent for those Sins which drew the
point of the Sword upon us, and Thankful for our speedy and effectual
Deliverance from it.

Though these are Eucharistical acts, very suitable to the purport of this day;
very necessary to be performed by us, for the infinite goodness of God to us,
when we were in trouble: yet there are three other things, which I would by way
of practical Inference draw out of this whole consideration; and methinks we
are so plainly taught them by this our late Deliverance, as if God himself did
purposely intend to direct us to these three things with his own Hand.

1. That we carry in our minds a Fixed and Awful Remembrance of a Deity. Good
God! That ever Atheism should prevail in such a Land as this, where not only
all Demonstrative Arguments have been used to prove a Being infinitely Wise,
Just, and Good, to Preside over the World, but moreover where the Presence of
God has been so often, so long, and in all the vicissitudes and changes of
this Sublunary World, so constantly seen and manifested, as if he had taken up
his Abode with us, as if he had said of this Kingdom, as he did of Zion, Psalm.
132. 14. This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have a delight
therein.

And yet I may say truly, but to our great shame, that since the Creation of
the Universe there never was such an Atheistical Generation, no not in the most
dark, in the most distant, in the most infidel parts of the World, as this
Nation has groaned under of late years. And yet it is observable, though it be
very strange, that none among us have pretended greater concernment for the
Reformation, for the interest, for the security of our established Religion,
than those who have bid open defiance to all Religion whatsoever. Men of the
most Licentious Lives, of the most seared consciences, of the most profligate
Reputation: Open Drunkards, professed Adulterers, Notorious Cheats, Forsworn
Rebels, Impudent Liars, perfidious Hypocrites, and but the other day Scoffers
at God, and at the very show of piety. It Is enough to move the meekest, the
most patient man on Earth to consider, what foreheads of steel and Adamant
those impious Wretches have, that could take the confidence thus to gull and
impose upon the World by a seeming zeal for Religion; and especially, that when
they were now up in Arms for it, they should Ravish Virgins, commit Sacrilege,
and drink the most villainous Healths in the Bowls of the Sanctuary, and even
before the Altar of God: such a barbarous profanation, as Belshazzar himself
would have dreaded amidst all his Concubines.

It Is no wonder that the righteous God did presently write Mean, Mean, upon the
Plaster of the Walls, and made a very short Work with that Kingdom, which they
thought to have had; for who could think, that such monstrous Impieties could
prosper? And when God did on a sudden, and after such a Providential and
Signal manner, blast the designs of those wicked men, he did not only vindicate
his own Holiness, and gain himself Honor upon those sons of Belial that were
Rebels against Himself, as well as against their Sovereign; but he did that
too, which was enough to Convince even the Actors of those wickednesses, that
verily there is a Reward for the Righteous, and that there is a God that
Judges the Earth. In which respect God was so kind and good to those his
Enemies too, that he made their very Punishments to Instruct them, and took a
direct course to convince the Atheist by defeating, and plagging and delivering
up the Trayter: I pray God, all such of them as yet survive may be thoroughly
sensible of his Providence, and make a Christian use of it, while it is called
to day; and that all such as have not God in their thoughts, may learn once to
make him their Fear, by impartially considering the Exemplary fall of Absalom
(if I have not done him too Great an Honor in calling him Absalom, whose
persidious and mean spirit never argued him to be the son of a Prince.)

2. As for those, in the Second place, who own and acknowledge a Diety, and yet
are apt to stagger (as many among us of late have done) in their belief of the
Divine Providence, as if our trusting in God were a thing of small value, as if
we and our Religion were in a dangerous case, as if ordinary means would do us
no good, and as if nothing but violent and indirect course could secure our
Civil and Sacred Interests; in the Name of God let such men seriously reflect
upon this our Late Deliverance, and thereby learn that excellent Wisdom, in all
Cases and Circumstances, still to commit themselves to God in well doing.

That which was the Ground (or, at least, the Pretense) for the late Rebellion,
was this. Unreasonable Jealousy, which some weak men have entertained, that
the Ark of God, which has been (blessed be God) fixed in this Kingdom, has
been so Glorious since the Reformation, is now in a tottering, in a falling
Condition, so that nothing but strong and Armed Hands can support it. This, you
know, is the Common Plea, which Malcontents and Rebels use for their
disobedience to, and resistance of the Lords Anointed. Now I am apt to believe,
that in working this late mavelous Deliverance for us, one of Gods good
purposes was, to signify from Heaven, that as he has been all along with our
Fathers, so He is still with Us, that in all circumstances and junctures, he is
able to take care of us, and that his good Providence shall not be wanting to
us, if we be not wanting to our Duty, but adorn our Faith with sincere
obedience to Himself and his Vicegerent, and so put our Trust and Confidence
in him, as good and honest hearted Christians ought to do.

Give me leave to deal plainly with you; for the condition of the Times
requires plain-dealing.

It has been generally believed, that a Prince, who is in the communion of
another Church, must needs endeavor the alteration of the Established Religion,
if it be different from his own. Men are ready to think it must necessarily be
thus, and that it cannot possibly be otherwise. But this is a very great
mistake: and to prove that it is so, I appeal to a most memorable story, that I
perceive is not taken notice of, and yet the truth of it is acknowledged by
one, that is well known to be of Republican Principles, and that a while ago
wrote a very Seditious Book, to Subvert our Monarchy, and to reduce our
Government to the Venetian form; I mean, the Author of Plato Redivivus. That
very man tells us (page 207) that a few years since, a Duke of Hanover was
reconciled to the Roman Church, and even went to Rome to abjure the Protestant
Religion. Yet upon his return home, he lived and governed as he did before,
without the least animosity of his Subjects for the change he had made, and
without any endeavor of his to introduce any change in his Government or
People, but reigned peaceably fourteen years, and then dying left the
Established Government and Religion entire to his Brother, the Bishop of
Osnaburg, who was a Protestant. Here now is plain experience and matter of
Fact, which shows that it is very possible for a Prince to Reign very quietly
and peaceably over a Church, that is of a different Faith in some things from
his own. Consider this instance well: it may be a good means, by the blessing
of God, to remove those in ordinate jealousies, which are so destructive both
of the Kings and the Peoples peace, and which we should carefully stifle for
that reason; especially since our Prince has given us so many Solemn
Assurances, and in all his actions hitherto has given Real Demonstrations of
his sincerity. A Prince, not of Absaloms temper, unstable, fraudulent, false;
but one of that True Honor and Greatness, that he never yet deceived any part
of mankind, and I am persuaded never will; unless it be in one point; I mean as
to their Fears: those indeed, he has deceived already, and truly the World is
bound with all Thankfulness to forgive him that.

But I was speaking of the Providence of God and of casting our selves upon it
in all Circumstances and Conditions. And do but consider, I beseech you, what
is it, but the Providence of God, that all Princes and people live by: And what
is it, but that wonderful Providence which has made our Prince and us to
outlive these late dangers, which threatened us with no less, then utter and
remediless Destruction? Here we have had fresh Experience of Gods overruling
Providence at Home, in a Deliverance, that may trouble an inquisitive Historian
to find out it is parallel; if you take it all together, and consider how black
the Cloud over our Heads was, and how suddenly it increased from the bigness
of a man's hand, and what Assurances so many Sons of Belial went upon, and how
ready the hearts of vast multitudes more were to run to their assistance; and
what Encouragements they would have had upon the least success, and how near
that Success was; and yet how this great Complication of dangers was broken,
dissipated, and utterly destroyed in a moment, in the turn of an hand, in the
twinkling of an eye, as if God was making us a new world after the same manner
he made this, when he only spoke the word, and it was done.

What can there be more, to encourage us to an entire and constant dependence
upon the good Providence of God? Especially, if we remember what David said,
when he reflected upon that satisfaction and ease of mind which was the result
of his Integrily, This I had, because I have kept thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.
56. And this, perhaps, We have had too as the Reward of our integrity. For
though we are far from ever owning the doctrine of Merits, yet it is not
immodest to think, that God, who has a Respect unto the Meek, Regard to the
Lowly, and a Favor to all such as are true of heart, has in this our late
Deliverance showed some regard and favor to our Zeal in the late Times for
true Allegiance, Justice, and Honesty, when others did not care what evil they
did, as long as it tended unto good. Though for a good Conscience Sake we ran
the greatest hazards, and were wrapped up in the greatest difficulties, and yet
had but very little Encouragements before us, yet (blessed be God) we were
mindful of our Duty, and Resolved to Live and Die by it, and acted like good
Christians, though seemingly at all manner of disadvantage; and all this upon
that firm trust and confidence we had in the Providence of our God. And now we
see his Providence has not failed us, nor have our hopes made us ashamed; but
God has marvellously done the blessed Work for us, and strangely restored us
to a blessed condition, while his just judgments have been such upon the
Enemies of our peace, that all those Arts and Methods which they employed for
Our ruin, have after a most stupendous and unaccountable manner turned to
their Own. I dare say, that if you trace over all those wicked practices which
they have used for several years last past to undermine the Throne, to blow up
the Church, to destroy and overthrow All; you will find that true, which David
observed of such men in his days, that they are sunk down in the pit that they
made; that in the Net, which they had hid, their own foot is taken; that they
are caught in the devices which they themselves imagined for others, that they
are fallen into the ditch, that they dug with their own hands; that their
mischiefs are returned upupon their own heads, and their violent dealings come
down upon their own Pates. Blessed be God that it is so; it is mavelous in
our eyes.

3. Lastly therefore, that I may conclude all by applying my self to such as
hate the sins of Faction and unfaithfulness; let the consideration of this
astonishing deliverance, strengthen our hopes and confidence still, that God
will perfect that good work which he has wrought in us. I was upright before
God, says David, upon the consideration of his deliverances, in Psalm 18.
Therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness, according
to the cleanness of my hands in his eye sight. With the merciful thou will show
thy self merciful; with an upright man thou will show thy self upright; With
the pure, thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will learn
frowardness.

The course of Gods Providence is to go along with men in their own ways, to
deal with them as they carry themselves toward that Rule of Life, which he
has laid before them; and to protect, or cast them out of his hands, according
as their Trust, or their distrust is in his providence. Therefore if we do but
unanimously apply our hearts carefully to observe his Will, and Act according
to the Laws of honesty and Religion, we have no Reason to doubt, but God will
not only preserve that established Government and Religion which are so dear to
us, but will moreover fix and re-settle both upon such sure foundations, that
we shall be once again the honor and envy of Christendom.

As far as I have observed, the whole History of England does not afford us an
instance of Gods providence that can come any thing near that account which
relates to our present Sovereign and his Royal Brother and Predecessor of ever
blessed Memory; unless it be that single story of King Alfred the Great. A
Prince of that Learning, Wisdom, Clemency, Sweetness of Nature, and other such
excellent Virtues, as really made him an Honor and Ornament to the Throne. And
yet that excellent Prince was once reduced to those miserable straights, partly
by the Invasion of Enemies from abroad, and partly through the treachery of
Rebels and Deserters at home, that he was forced to put himself into the
disguise once of a common Soldier, another time of an Herds man, and at last to
abscond for a considerable time in the West, in a poor Cottage among Woods and
Moors; a sad and woeful place for a Crowned Head to rest in: And yet, such was
his Religious dependence upon God, that though he was forsaken by his friends,
environed with his Enemies, and brought to those extreme and shameful
necessities, that his Mother and himself were hardly able to subsist, yet he
doubted not but providence would one day restore him to his just Grandieur. And
so it was, that in that very mean Condition, in that most Obscure Place he
began the Recovery of his Fortunes; and it is observable, that the Place was in
those very Moors in Somersetshire between Taunton and Bridgwater: There he
began the new foundation of his Kingdom raising it on still by degrees, till in
a little time he became the sole and absolute Monarch of this Nation, and made
it a most flourishing Kingdom, and gave many the most Excellent Laws that we
enjoy at this Hour. We know, too well, to what Miseries, Dangers, and
reproachful Necessities, the Sins of this Nation exposed the Offspring of that
Royal and Incomparable Martyr, King Charles the First, of whom the World was
not worthy. I need not speak of the Royal Oak, nor of the rest of those
straights, which were not unlike those of King Alfred. Notwithstanding all
those difficulties, the Providence of God has been over that our late, and
this our present Sovereign; so that he has not only preserved them Both out of
the hands of their bloodthirsty and barbarous Enemies, but has moreover
showed his Power in Exalting the Throne from so Low, to such a Lofty State, as
if Alfred the Great sat in it again: and this we owe to the singular
Providence of God in giving his Majesty this most memorable Conquest over His
and Our Enemies at King Alfreds quarters.

As we are to bless God for his unexpressible Mercy, so let us ever put our
firm hope and confidence in him; being careful still to act like good
Christians, and honest hearted Subjects, and then not doubting, but that all
things will work together (as hitherto they have done) for our Good.

I conclude all with those Triumphant expressions Apocal. 19. Hallelujah,
Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power be ascribed unto the Lord our God,
for True and Righteous are his Judgments. To him be given by us and all
Churches of Christ, all Honor, Thanksgiving, and Adoration for evermore: Amen.

FINIS.

