A THIRD LETTER TO A Person of Quality, Being a Vindication of the former, IN
ANSWER TO A LATE PAMPHLET ENTITLED A DISCOURSE Of the Use of IMAGES, etc.

LICENSED, August the 2 d. 1687.

LONDON, Printed for Ben. Griffin, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers Hall, 1687.

AN ANSWER To a late Pamphlet Entitled a DISCOURSE Of the Use of Images, etc.
SIR,
SINCE I sent you my Last, one of the Roman Communion has been Tampering with
it, as you may perceive by a late Pamphlet under this Title, A Discourse of the
use of Images in relation to the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
Vindication of Nubes Testium, against a Pamphlet entitled, the Antiquity of
the Protestant Religion concerning Images.

As Soon as I saw the Title Page, I fancied the Discourser had been tumbling
over a great many old Books, to discover, if he could, some flaw in the
Historical Account I sent you in that Pamphlet, because that is the whole
substance of it, nor can any man pretend to Answer it, but by taking that
course. But when I read it, I found some reason to mistrust, that
Church History is a thing quite out of the Discoursers way, and that he durst
not venture upon it lest he should Err, which would unbecome one that is Member
of a Church which pretends to be Infallible.

When he thought of writing against me, he should have Examined, whether the
little History I had written were True or False, as to matter of Fact: That (if
it were False) he might have told the World where my mistakes lay; or (if it be
True) that he might have found out some Artifice and Shift to clear his own
Church from the guilt of Innovation. For the Point is, whether the Veneration
of Images, as it is done in the Roman Church, be of Primitive Practice? I
undertook to show the Negative; against the Author of Nubes Testium; and in
order to it I proved, that in the first Ages of Christianity the Christian
Church had no Images at all; that it was for about the space of 400 years
before any Images were so much as Used; that though in after Times they came to
be used, yet it was a long time before they were used in Churches; that though
at last they were set up in some Churches, yet they were set up for History or
Ornament sake only; and that it was after St. Gregory's time (that is, above
600 years after Christ) before any Veneration or Worship was allowed to be
given to Images. For the making of all this to appear, I thought a more speedy
and effectual course could not be taken, then to prove it from those
Controversies which were of old, first between Christians and Heathens, and
then between Christians themselves about the business of Images. And this I did
with so much faithfulness, and you see with so much Caution, that this
Discourser has not one word to say against me, as to that; I am sure he has not
offered any thing against me in this his Discourse; nor is it a little pleasure
to me, that he has not meddled with it at all: It Is a sign his Conscience told
him, the Knot was too strong for him, when he durst not go about to untie it:
For as to the Evidence I produced on my side, the good man says nothing in
Contradiction to it; no, not a word of that in all his six pennyworth of
Infallibility.

Instead of that, he has used all his Wits to give me great store of hard
words, and to set me at odds with the Church whereof I am a Member, as if I had
not only given my self a blow over the face, but had struck the Church of
England in the face too, like a blind Combatant, and with a Have at all, as he
is pleased to express his thoughts. Truly I am so blind that I cannot see this.
As for my own face, I thank God it does not smart, nor do I so much as feel one
of my Cheeks burn. And as for the Church of England, if I have given Her the
least blow, I will make Her all possible Satisfaction when She shall complain:
At present, by what I hear from Her, I do not find that She thinks I have hurt
Her in the least, or that She colors at all; and by and by I hope to satisfy
the Discourser too, that instead of Injuring. I have done her Right: in the
mean time I must thank him for his singular Care and Tenderness of our Church.

I confess, upon my first Perusal of his Discourse I did not think my self
obliged to take any Public notice of it; because he does not so much as
endeavor to baffle any of my Evidence, nor denies matter of Fact as I have
related it; but manifestly declines the main Point under debate, and flies off
to other matter; like a Wise Combatant that strikes, not at all, but at nothing
at all, and wholly misseth the Mark, and what could any man have done more,
that gives up the Cause?

But upon second thoughts I was of another mind; not because provoked to it by
his Rudeness (which I am ready to forgive him) but because I am concerned for
Truth, and the Honor of our Church. For the man has the confidence to tell the
World, that our Church does agree with the Church of Rome in the lawfulness of
placing Images in Churches, and that an Honor or Reverence, or even Worship in
its kind, is necessarily due to them, Page 19. And that if I had examined the
Doctrine of my own Church, and understood what Catholics teach, I would have
soon discovered the vanity of my Engagement; for (says he, Page 20.) his own
Church is for an Image Worship too. This is a notorious Falsehood, and looks
like a malicious Insinuation, as if our Church would presently shake hands with
His, did not some blind Combatants keep them a sunder. The Discourser might
think that this would do something, especially in this juncture, by creating in
our Dissenters as ill an opinion of the Church of England as we have of the
Church of Rome; and he seems to follow the humor of some of his brethren, not
considering so much whether what he says be True, as whether it will serve a
Turn, and do them some good by doing Us mischief; though I hope our Dissenters
will be so wise as to consider, how deeply They are concerned as well as We, to
beware of Trap.

For this reason I shall bestow upon this Discourse a little time, which
otherwise would be lost and thrown away. And first I observe how he treats me
with Reproaches, that I have the misfortune to be of a Factious and Unchristian
Temper, a multiplier of needless Contentions, a blind Combatant, one that it is
uncertain what Church I am of, this being the only thing certain, that I am no
Papist; a Trifler; a Furious one; a singular Illuminate; whose admirable Talent
is in Buffoonry, and a great deal more of such language, as does well become
the mouth of one of the Hinds Calves. But you know, the strain of this
Generation is mightily altered since seven years ago, when they thought
themselves obliged by the singular Humanity of Church of England-men, to give
them far different Characters. That it seems is nothing now.

His great design is to show, that the Church of Rome and England agree in
three Points, concerning 1. The Historical Use of Images. 2. The Commemorative
Use of Images. 3. The Respect and Honor due to Images. Now though all this be
nothing to the History which my angry Adversary quarrels with (for that would
be True still, notwithstanding all this, could he prove it) yet I am content to
go along with him in his undertaking; and if I am not foully deceived, he has
undertaken an Impossibility; an Essay perhaps toward his undertaking to do a
Miracle next: Let us see a little by comparing the Sense of both Churches.

1. For the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome, we know enough of it,
and too much of all Conscience. She has Pictures and Images (he says) for the
Instruction of the Ignorant, that so they may be acquainted with those Sacred
Persons of Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles: It Is for this end (says our
Discourser) they are set up. And is this all? How comes it to pass then, that
She has too the pretended Pictures of the most Holy Trinity? Is it not that
people may be acquainted with the Invisible, Immaterial, Incomprehensible, and
Infinite Deity also? A Rare way indeed, especially for the Ignorant to conceive
Right and True Notions of the Divine Nature!

2. He says, the Church of Rome has Images for the Commemorative Use of them,
to excite people to give God thanks for his favors, and to admonish them to
Conform their Lives to such Examples. Well, we quarrel not about this, nor do
we blame any men for looking on the Pictures of Saints to this purpose,
especially if they find it has this power upon them. But yet I must tell him,
that this cannot justify their having such Representations as I mentioned
before. For when God the Father is pictured like an Old Man with a long Beard,
and all the Three Persons are pictured like Three Heads upon one Body, what
influence such strange Representations can have to excite any man to
Thankfulness and Conformity, does, I confess, pass my poor Trifling
Understanding to conceive.

3. But this is not all; for the Church of Rome has Images that they may be
Worshipped also. This is clear even from the Council of Trent, and the Roman
Catechism; nay our Discourser himself Grants it. But then to soften the matter
he says two things, which I must a little consider, that you may the better
understand the state of the difference between Church and Church. 1. He tells
us, That though the Church of Rome teaches, that due Honor and Veneration is
to be given to the Images of Christ, etc. Yet it is not for any Divinity or
Virtue that is Believed to be in them, for which they page 11.
are to be Worshipped; or that any thing is to be asked of them, or any
Confidence to be placed in them. But how does he know, that this is not
Believed? 1. I appeal to his own Conscience, if he does not think that
Thousands of his Communion do verily Believe it. For what else can be the
reason, that one Image is so devoutly and solemnly Adored, rather than another?
Or, why is it done in one Place, rather than in another? Or, why do so many
Pilgrims undertake such long and tiresome journeys to Loretto, and other
Oratories, rather than to others, for the worshipping of some special Images?
What is the meaning of all this, but that poor people are taught to Believe,
that there is a Divine Virtue in Images, and a greater Virtue in some Images,
in some Places, then there is in others? I know this Discourser speaks just as
the Council of Trent did; for 'twas there defined, that there is no Divinity or
Virtue in Images for which they should be Worshipped, etc. 2. But then I ask
him, Secondly, how he knows, that the Council of Trent it self was in good
earnest? Or, that their mind really was, that men should not believe any Virtue
to be in Images, especially if they be Consecrated? I am sure there is good
reason to believe, that their Definition was only a Copy of their Countenance,
to stop the mouths of a clamorous World. And for your satisfaction I will refer
you to a very Learned Author, whom this Discourser has done me the singular
favor to call my Good Friend, meaning that Eminent Person Dr. Stilling fleet.
I heartily thank him for entitling me to the friendship of so Great a Man, and
very thankfully own his friendship, sincerely acknowledging my self Beholding
to him, as for some private favors, so especially for his Learned Works,
whereby he has be friended us all; and I heartily wish that this Discourser
would suffer him in that respect to be a good Friend to Him too. To that
purpose, seeing he has singled out Dr. Stillingfleet as my good friend, I will
deal with him at present out of a Book of my Friends which I have by me,
desiring the Doctors leave, that I may mention him under the character of my
Good Friend. And as to the sincerity of the men at Trent in this particular, I
would fain see how my Adversary can defend it, after what has been said by my
good Friend touching the Public Acts of the Roman Church at the Consecration
of Images, especially Defense p. 640. and seg.
at the Consecration of a New Cross, and those little waxen Images called Agnus
Dei's. For, are not these Consecrations for the procuring of Virtues to those
Images, and that people may receive Benefits by worshipping of them, by means
of those Virtues? If this Discourser understands his own Church, he cannot but
know this to be True, and if he be ingenuous he cannot deny it. For at the
Benediction of a New Cross there is this Prayer in the Pontificale, and he may
find it Transcribed and Translated by my good Friend; We pray thee, O Holy
Lord, Father Almighty, Everlasting God, that thou would vouchsafe to Bless
this Wood of thy Cross (observe the expression, hoc Lignum crucis tuae, this
Wood of thy Cross) that it may be a wholesome Remedy to mankind, a strengthener
of Faith, an increaser of good Works, the redemption of Souls, a Comfort,
Protection and Defense against the cruel darts of Enemies, And again, let this
Wood be sanctified in the name of the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost; and let
the blessing of that Wood, on which the Holy Members of our Savior did hang,
be in this Wood, that such as Pray and Bow themselves down for Gods sake before
this Cross, may find Health of Body and Soul. Besides this, in the Ceremoniale
Romanum there is this Prayer, among others, at the Consecration of the Agnus
Dei's; Do thou vouchsafe to Bless, to Sanctify, and Consecrate them, that
being sanctified by thy abundant benediction they may receive the same Virtue
against all the Diabolical Wiles and Frauds of the Evil Spirit, that no Tempest
may prevail against such as devoutly carry them with them, that no Adversity,
no Pestilence, no Corruption of the Air, no Falling Sickness, no Storms at Sea,
no Fire, no Sin may have power over such, as carry these Images and Worship
them. Now can any man conceive after all this, that no Virtue is believed to be
in any Images, when it is so expressly prayed for, that it may be given to them?
Can we imagine, that the Council of Trent would have men be persuaded contrary
to what is said in the Public Offices of the Church concerning the Virtue of
these Images? Or that the Pope, who owns that Council, and whose business it is
to Consecrate these things after this manner, does believe it was the Councils
meaning to deny all virtue in Images?

To this I will add out of my good Friend an Admirable Piece of Infallible
Poetry, which Pope Urban the Fifth sent to the Greek Emperor with Three Agnus
Dei's; partly, because they show the Popes opinion of the wonderful Virtues of
these Images; and partly, because they are such extraordinary Verses for
Language, for Numbers, for Fancy, and for Rhyme too, that they ought to be kept
in some Thesaurus Poeticus among some Pia Hilaria in the Vatican, made by his
Holiness himself; for neither Virgil, nor any other old Profane Poet, no not
the Sibylls themselves ever did the like; and I will transcribe them in hopes
that for the Honor of it some Sanctified friend of the Hinds may attempt an
Imitation of them in English.

Balsamus and munda cera cum Chrismatis unda,
Conficiunt Agnum; quod munus do tibi magnum:
Font velut natum per Mystica Sanctificatum.
Fulgura de sursum depellit, omne malignum
Peccatum frangit, ut Christi Sanguis; and angit.
Pregnans servatur, simul and partus Liberatur:
Dona defert dignis, Virtutem destruit ignis;
Portatus munde de fluctibus eripit unde.
Morte repentina servat Sataneque ruira.
Si quis honoret eum, retinet super host Tropheum,
Parsque minor tantum tota valet integra quantum.
To all which my good Friend subjoyns a remarkable Passage out of Azorius,
their great Casuist, that it is not to be Questioned, but the Pope himself
having made Prayers over these Images, they will have the effects prayed for,
if they be used with that due Reverence and Devotion which is required. And
perhaps there is scarcely a true bred Romanist in the World that Questions it;
which is the Reason of that wonderful opinion and value they have of them, and
of those superstitious Uses they put them to; and if my Adversary be such, his
denying of Virtue to be in Images can be nothing but Art, to create in people
at this critical juncture a favorable and kind opinion of Popery, by softning
a matter that is so offensive, and by blinding men's eyes till they get their
Noses under their Girdles. But if he were in some foreign Parts, he might have
as little thanks, as Monsieur de Meaux has had, for putting a New Face upon
Holy Church, as if he were ashamed of the good Matrons Warts and Wrinkles.

2. To soften the matter more yet, this Discourser insinuates, Secondly, that
the Worship given by them to Images is nothing but an Honorary Respect and
Reveverence, which other Christians give to the word of God, to the Sacrament,
to the Communion. Table, etc. Wherein he says the Church of England agrees with
the Church of Rome; and therefore he blames me for running it down under the
name of Image Worship, without examining the doctrine of mine own Church.

For the clearing of this I shall briefly do these three things. 1. Show what
that Worship is which according to the Church of Rome is given to Images. 2.
How far the Church of England differs from them in this particular. 3. I shall
consider the Proofs he brings of this pretended Agreement: And when this is
done I hope you will be satisfied, that I have not spoken against Image Worship
without good grounds and consideration.

1. What that Worship is which according to the Church of Rome is given to
Images. For the right understanding whereof it is to be noted: 1. That there is
a great deal of difference between Worship, properly taken, and that which we
call Reverence and Respect. All mankind, especially Christians have ever made a
vast distinction between these things: And it deserves this Discoursers
consideration, that no less a man then Epiphanius, condemning those to be
Idolaters, who worshiped the Holy Virgin* expressly said, that Mary is to be
Honored, but God to be Worshipped, and that no man is to Worship the blessed
Virgin. The Second Council at Nice themselves acknowledged this distinction;
and so have all the Divines of the present Church of Rome, when they have
endeavored to prove, that Images are not only to be Honored, Respected, and
Reverenced, but to be Adored too. Therefore this doughty Divine, the
Discourser, is not a little out in Confounding things that are so evidently
Distinct: For that which all the World says is Worship, he says is only Honor
and Respect, the same thing by whatsoever Name it be expressed: and whether you
call it Honor, or Worship, or adoring; or whether it be said to be Honorary,
Religious, or Divine; or whether it be deemed Absolute, or Relative (worship)
it is it seems equally alike to Him: For in his opinion it is only wrangling
about Names, a Dispute about a Word; fine Notions, and pretty entertainments
for School-debates, but no concern of Religion or Conscience, as he tells us,
Page 24, 25. It Is pity the man was not born long ago to instruct the World
better: for we Trifling Protestants have ever thought with the Ancient
Christians, that to Respect the Picture of Christ is one thing, and to Adore it
is another; that to Bow down to it is more than to set it up, that to lie
prostrate before it is more then to keep it clean; and that there is a Medium
between tearing it in Pieces, and honoring it with Kissings and Bowings, and
Genuflexions, and Praying before it, and offering up Lights and Incense and the
like: We ever thought, that Divine Worship was to be given to God alone, that
it was no needless contention whether the Honor due to God is to be given to
the work of men's hands; and that this was a great case concerning Religion and
Conscience: but it seems all this is nothing upon the matter; it is but a little
sort of Respect; and you know what She is, that after she has been unfaithful
to her Husband, wipes her mouth as if she had done no harm; and so the lewdest
woman may excuse her self, that what some Folks calls Adultery, is nothing but
a dispute about a Word, a fine Notion, a pretty Entertainment, but no concern
of Religion or Conscience. 2. That Respect which is given to things Sacred
consists in a Decent regard of them, and in using them after a different manner
from other things. But Worship is quite another thing, viz. A professing our
subjection to the Object of our adoration upon the score of his Dominion and
Power over us as our Superior; and when either the Nature of such adoration, or
the Circumstances of it argue it to be Religious, it is then Religious or
Divine Worship, peculiarly belonging to God, because it is a Token of our
Absolute Subjection to him, as having Supreme and Absolute Soveraignity over
all. The greatest men in the Church of Rome have had this Notion of
Divine-Worship; and had this wonderful Discourser understood or considered it,
he could not have been so very Indifferent about this matter; because the
Dispute is, not about Words but Things, and things of very great Concernment;
viz. Whether such actions and gestures as are due to God, and by the Divine Law
are appropriated to God, and in the opinion of mankind, are Testifications of
Gods Supreme and Absolute Dominion, may be performed to and before a dumb
Image? Now this is that which we charge upon the Church of Rome, that there are
hardly any external acts of Religious Worship, but what She performs to God and
to Images in Common, and that according to Her doctrine Images are truly and
properly to be Worshipped, with Worship taken in a strict Sense, and as it is
distinguished from, and signifies a great deal more than bare Honor, or
Respect, or Reverence.

For the clearing of this, because it is a great Controversy between my angry
Adversary and Me, I shall at present trouble him only with some ready
observations out of my good Friend; and when he has answered them I promise
faithfully to furnish him with more.

These observations are 1. Concerning the Worship given by the Church of Rome
to Images in General. 2. Concerning the Worship given to the Cross of Christ in
Particular.

1. The Worship given by the Church of Rome to Images in general, is True and
Real Worship; Worship that is a great deal higher than Respect or Reverence;
Worship in a proper and strict Sense; Worship that does consist not only in the
External Acts of Divine Adoration, but also in an inward affection which
implies submission, as Cardinal Lugo does confess. This my Learned Author shows
to have been the thing intended both by the Second Council at Nice, and by the
men at Trent, who appealed to that Council; that the most eminent Divines in
the Church of Rome thought so, and accordingly maintained it as an Article of
Faith wherein all Catholics agree, that true and proper Worship is to be given
not only to the Exemplars represented by Images, but also to the very Images
themselves, as Suarez, Bellarmine, Tannerus, Ysambertus, and others do
positively affirm. And lest this should be thought to be the Sense of a few
private men only, he further shows that some great Divines, who were at the
Council of Trent, and could not but understand the Sense of that Council, say
the same thing. For so Dominicus Soto determines, that Images are not intended
by the Church only for helps to memory, but for Worship. And whereas our
Discourser would make us believe that this Worship is no more but that Respect
which is shown to the Bible, etc. Soto does utterly Reject this; for, says he,
We do not Worship the Scriptures or Names of Saints which call them to our
minds; but as to Images we ought to think otherwise, for they do not only raise
our minds to worship those who are represented by them, sed easdem ipsas
debemus adorare, but we ought to worship the Images themselves. So likewise
Naclantus another great Man at Trent, tells the World, that it is a needless
caution for any to say, that they worship before the Image, sed and adorare
imaginem sine quo volueris scrupulo, but men may say it roundly and without any
scruple, that they worship the Image. With these Ambrosius Catharinus agrees
too, that True and Real worship is required to be given to Images, and
concludes that Images are not merely for instruction, or memory, exciting
devotion, but that they are set up properly for worship. Therefore if any man
asks another, are Images to be worshipped, let him, says he, answer without
any fear, They are; because Images being set apart by the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost for such a Sacred use, do obtain such a degree of Sanctification,
that whoever violates them is guilty of Sacrilege and Treason against the
Divine Majesty; because God himself is most truly believed to be present in
them after a particular manner, and he shows his power and presence by them,
using them often for Oracles, etc.

If this be not enough to convince my Adversary of the vanity of his pretenses,
there is one observation more which deserves his consideration; viz. That
whereas some of the Roman Church, as Durandus, Holkot, and others taught, that
Images ought not to be worshipped with the same worship with the thing
represented, but were said to be worshipped improperly and abusively, because
at their presence men did call to mind the objects represented by them, which
are worshipped before the Images, but not properly the Images themselves; this
opinion was looked upon as Heretical; and therefore Suarez and many other
eminent men disputed hotly against that opinion, as being contrary to the
Catholic Faith of the Roman Church, which is, that an Image is not only the
occasion or sign exciting men to worship the thing represented, but even the
material Object to which the act of Worship, and the Intention of the
worshipper is to be directed and carried; and which ought to be worshipped with
the same worship with the Exemplar it self. And certainly Ariaga was in the
right, when urging this to be the sense of the Church he used this strong
Argument to prove it; because it is not credible, that if this had been all the
Councils had determined (viz. That Images are not the objects of Worship, but
only the occasions and means exciting men to worship the Exemplars) they should
never think of such an easy way to satisfy Dissenters, as the declaring of
this would have been. But, says he, the Controversy lay in another Point;
namely, that Images did not deserve immediate worship; and then he concludes,
that when the Fathers condemned those for Heretics who denied that worship,
they did not determine that Images might be used as a condition of worship, but
that True and Real worship was to be given to them.

2. Concerning that worship which is given to the Cross of Christ in
particular, it is notorious that according to the common received Doctrine of
the Romanists, not only Inferior Religious Worship, but that which they call
Latria, meaning Supreme, Divine, Sovereign Worship properly due to God himself,
is to be given to the Images of Christ's Cross. My Adversary is horribly netled,
and upbraids me with an hard Forehead in charging him with a notion of
Invocating Images, when he says he has no such word or hint (I suppose he means
in his Nubes Testium.) What notions he may have of this, or what he does in his
private Oratory I cannot tell; nor did I charge Him in particular with
Invocating Images. But this I do charge upon the Church of Rome in general,
that She does formally Invocate and pray to the Images of Christ's Cross, and
that the worship of Latria is, according to the Doctrine of her greatest
Divines, to be given to them. He cannot but know, that this form of Prayer is
used by that Church, and that it is directed to the Wood of the Cross, O crux
ave, spes unica, auge piis justitiam, reisque dona veniam, Hail O Cross, our
only Hope, increase Righteousness to such as are pious, and give pardon to such
as are guilty. For this Practice of the Roman Church was the true Ground and
Reason of that opinion, that Latria is due to the Image of the Cross. This my
good Friend has showed long ago, that it was one of the grounds which Aquinas
went upon, when he determined Latria to be due to the Cross, because the Church
in praying to the Cross speaks to it as if it were Christ himself; O crux ave,
spes unica, etc. And more Authors there are which say the same thing; as
Marsilius ab Ingen, who asserts that the Cross as a sign representing the
object of Worship, and as a Medium of it, is to be adored with Latria; and the
reason he fetches from the practice of the Church, O crux ave, spes unica,
auge, etc. So Catharinus says: That the opinion of those who say Images are
not truly and properly to be worshipped, but God to be worshipped before an
Image, is repugnant to the Practice of the Church, because we direct our
gestures, our words and signs of adoration to the Images, to which likewise we
burn Incense; and we worship the Cross, saying, O crux ave, spes unica, etc. So
likewise Dominicus Soto, we ought to worship the Images themselves; for the
Church does not say, we worship thee, O Christ, but thy Cross; and O crux ave,
spes unica, etc. In like manner Phil. Gamachaeus, a Doctor of the Sorbon says,
that the Cross and Image of Christ as they represent him, ought to be
worshipped with the Supreme worship of Latria; because Christ himself is the
reason of the adoration, and because the Church does so worship the Cross, O
crux ave, spes unica, etc, Besides all this we are told a remarkable Story of
one John Egidius Canon of Sevil, that he was forced to make a public
Recantation for denying the adoration of the Cross, because it was contrary to
the practice of the Church, when it says, O crux ave, spes unica, auge piis
justitiam, reisque dona veniam? And after all this let this wonderful
Discourser tell us, whether these things be not True? And whether these things
be not acts of Latria? And whether abundance of Divines more, both before and
since the Council of Trent, have not maintained this Latria to be due to the
Image of the Cross? And whether this Latria be not much more than common
Respect and Reverence? And whether any Church of England man, or any Protestant
ever pretended to give such a sort of Respect to the Communion Table, or to the
Sacramant, or to the Name of Jesus, or to the Bible, so as upon his knees to
pray to it, Spes unica, auge piis justitiam, reisque dona veniam? Either the
man understands not that which he calls the doctrines of Catholics so well as
We Protestants do, or else he is guilty of shameful disingenuity for disguising
and dissembling things thus out of a sinister design, and then for flying upon
Me, as if I had done the Innocent Papists wrong, by making more noise, and
raising more dust about their Worshipping of Images, then there ought to be.

2 Since he has so palpably misrepresented the sense of his own Church, it is
madness to conceive that he would rightly represent the sense of Ours; which I
shall now in the next place consider, to satisfy you that I have done our
Church no wrong, which is another thing he lays to my charge. Alas good man!
how careful is he, that the Church of England may not be injured.

For the clearing of this too, I shall refer you to our Book of Homilies,
because without all question it contains the public sense of the Church of
England, which he may be sure we well know, as blind combatants as we are, and
which we will with all our Zeal and Abilities defend, what Triflers soever he
takes us to be.

The particular Homily I intend is that against peril of Idolatry, consisting
of three parts. And because I am willing to prevent an objection which may be
made by this Discourser out of our Learned Mountague, viz. that he admitted the
Book of Homilies, as containing godly and wholesome exhortations, but not as
the public dogmatical resolutions confirmed of the Church of England,
therefore I shall offer these Five things briefly to your consideration.

1. That the former Book of Homilies in the time of K. Edward the Sixth was set
out as the Homilies of the Church of England, and as godly and wholesome
Sermons containing Doctrine to be received of all men, doctrinam ab omnibus
amplectendam, as appears by the Article concerning it, Anno 1552. 2. That the
Second Book of Homilies (wherein this against peril of Idolatry is one) was
also judged to contain godly and wholesome Doctrine, as well as the former
Book, and therefore was appointed to be read as the former was, in all Churches
diligently and distinctly: Which plainly argues, that it was set out also in
the name of the Church of England, and as containing Doctrine to be received of
all, as the other was judged to contain. 3. This particular Homily whereof I
now speak, was upon a point of National concernment, and in the judgment of our
Church about a most important case of Conscience: Besides, it was conceived and
penned upon the greatest consideration and judgment, as we find by that variety
of choice Learning in it, beyond what is to be found in all the Homilies
beside: And it is remarkable too, that 'twas intended not only for the
information of the people, but also for the instruction of Curates themselves,
and men of good understanding, as appears by the Title of the Third Part of it.
So that if any other may, yet this Homily cannot be thought a mere popular
Sermon (for it is not so popular) but rather the Decisive and dogmatical
resolution of our Church in this Case about Images. 4. As the Learned Mountague
does not deny, but that this Homily contains the public sense of our Church,
so he does rest in this, that it contains a godly and wholesome Doctrine,
necessary for those times; meaning the times in which, and for which, this
Homily against Images and the peril of Idolatry, was specially made: And if He
thought it godly, wholesome, and necessary, he could not but think it True. 5.
Therefore I shall conclude, that this Homily ought to be appealed to in this
Controversy with the Discourser, as the Homily that contains the deliberate
and settled judgment of our Church, and such Doctrines as are necessary for
these our times, as well as for those when it was first written.

Now in the beginning of the First part of this Homily our Church roundly tells
us, that the bringing in of Images into the Church in those latter days, has
nothing at all profited such as were wise and of understanding, but has
greatly hurt the simple and unwise, occasioning them thereby to commit most
horrible Idolatry. Then having noted that the words Idol and Image are of the
the same signification in the Scriptures, she proves by several Texts out of
the Old Testament and the New, that Images are neither to be Worshipped, nor so
much as used or had in Churches, for fear and occasion of worshipping them,
though they be of themselves things indifferent: for so she desires to be
always understood to speak not only against Idolatry and Worshipping of Images,
but also against Idols and Images themselves, in case men be stirred and
provoked by them to Worship them, and not as though they were simply forbidden
without such occasion and danger, as you may see in the beginning of the Third
Part of that Homily.

In the Second part she gives an Historical relation of the rise and progress
of Image Worship in the Christian Church; the sum whereof is this, That Images
and Image-worshipping were in the Primitive Church, (which was most pure and
incorrupt) abhorred and detested, as abominable and contrary to true Christian
Religion. And that when Images began to creep into the Church, they were not
only spoken and written against by godly and Learned Bishops, Doctors and
Clerks, but also condemned by whole Councils of Bishops and Learned men
assembled together; yea, the said Images by many Christian Emperors and
Bishops were defaced, broken and destroyed, etc. And I freely leave to all men
of knowledge and integrity to judge, whether in that Historical account I sent
you, there be any thing which is inconsistent either with the Doctrine of our
Church as to Images and Image Worship, or with the Historical account which our
Church her self gives us. I think indeed there is an observation which our
Church there makes, but I did not; That the Bishops of Rome, being no ordinary
Magistrates appointed of God out of their Diocese, but Usurpers of Princes
Authority, contrary to Gods word, were the maintainers of Images against Gods
word, and stirrers up of Sedition and Rebellion, and workers of continual
Treason against their Sovereign Lords, contrary to Gods Law, and the ordinances
of all humane Laws, being not only Enemies to God, but also Rebels and Traitors
against their Princes. These were the first bringers in of Images openly into
Churches. These were the maintainers of them in the Churches; and these were
the means whereby they maintained them, to wit, Conspiracy, Treason and
Rebellion against God and their Princes. As I remember I did not observe this,
at least not so fully; but if that be a fault, I suppose this Discourser will
readily forgive it: If not, it is an even lay, but some other time I may make
him amends.

In the Third Part of this Homily our Church does purposely answer those
allegations and pleas which are commonly used by the Romanists to excuse and
justify their practice in this point: as, that their Images are not of any
Heathen Idols, but of God, of Christ and his Saints; that the making of Images
is a thing in it self indifferent; that they exhibit Honor not to the Image,
but to exemplar represented by it; and that Images are laymens Books: And
throughout this long Sermon our Church declares her sense. 1. That the Images
of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are unlawful to be made. 2. That
though the Art of painting and Image making be not wicked of it self, and such
Images may be suffered, as are used for no Religion, or Superstition rather
(she means of none Worshipped, nor in danger to be Worshipped of any) yet
considering the great danger of Idolatry, and the strong inclinations of people
to it, Images are not to be publicly had and suffered in Churches: Which
danger she shows at large, because all Images publicly set up have been
worshipped, not by the simple sort only, but in conclusion by the Learned also;
and because she conceived it impossible that Images of God, Christ, or his
Saints can be suffered, especially any considerable time or space, without
Worshipping of them. 3. She shows, that the Saints neither desire nor ought to
be Honored by Images; that the distinction of Latria and Dulia is a lewd
distinction; that the pretense of honoring the Prototype by the Image is an
old Heathen shift; and that though it be said, that the Honor is given to the
Prototype, yet this is only to palliate the matter; for our Church evidently
proves that the Papists did Worship the Images themselves, not only by showing
their gross and Pagan-like Idolatry in that respect, but also by producing the
Authority of Jacobus Naclantus (an Eminent Divine in the Council of Trent) that
it is not only to be confessed that the faithful in the Church do worship before
an Image (as some peradventure do warily speak) but also do Worship the Image
it self, without any scruple or doubt at all; yea, and they Worship the Image
with the same kind of Worship, wherewith they worship the Prototype; wherefore
if the Prototype be to be worshipped with Divine Worship, the Image is also to
be worshipped with the same. 4. Having abundantly showed the Snares, and
dangers which Images draw people into, and the vast mischiefs and wickednesses
they occasion, instead of instructing men like Books, our Church at last
plainly resolves the point, That true Religion and pleasing of God stands not
in making, setting up, painting, guilding, clothing, and decking of dumb and
dead Images, nor in kissing of them, capping, kneeling, offering to them,
incensing of them, setting up of Candles, hanging up of legs, arms, or whole
bodies of Wax before them, or praying and asking of of them, or of Saints,
things belonging only to God to give; but that all these things, be vain and
abominable, and most damnable before God.

Had my Adversary considered all this, we might wonder how he could harden his
forehead and Conscience so, as to pretend to the World, that there is an
agreement between the Church of Rome and Oijrs as to this point; he might as
well have pretended to reconcile the most palpable falsehood to the clearest
Truth, such a Diametrical and manifest opposition there is between the two
Churches; the one allowing not only the setting up of Images, but the
Honoring, Reverencing and Worshipping of them too, and that sometimes with the
highest and supreme Worship; and the other professing solemnly, that they are
so far from being Worshipped, Adored, or Honored, that in regard of the
horrible dangers and sins they lead men into, are to be pulled down and
destroyed rather.

3. Let us now consider a little the proofs he brings of this pretended
agreement. 1. He tells us of some Figures in the Church at the Savoy, and of
some emblematical representations in the New Church at St. James's, and
especially of some Pictures in some of our New Common Prayer Books. (He means,
I suppose, not the large Liturgies on our reading Desks, but some little
Prayer-books in some private hands.) A stout argument! as if what is done by
connivance, and by some particular persons upon their own private Heads, ought
to be looked upon as the public act of our whole Church; or as if there were
the same danger of Idolatry in every age, which has been in some; or as if all
They who are for Decency and Ornament, were agreed with all others who are for
the most intolerable Superstition.

2. Then he tells us of an injunction given by K. Edward the Sixth to the
Clergy (when the Reformation, by the way, was green) that they should instruct
the people, that Images serve for Remembrance, etc. But here the man plays a
double Trick; first he renders the place wrong, for the words are --
admonishing their Parishoners, that Images serve for no other purpose but to be
a Remembrance: And besides he conceals a most material passage which goes
immediately before and after in the same Injunction, and it is this; That such
Images as they (the Clergy) know in any of their Cures to be or to have been
abused with Pilgrimage or offering of any thing made thereunto, or shall be
hereafter censed unto, they (and none other private persons) shall for the
avoiding of that most detestable offense of Idolatry forthwith take down, or
cause to be taken down, and destroy the same; and shall suffer from henceforth
no Torches nor Candles, Tapers or Images of Wax to be set before any Image or
Picture, but only two Lights upon the high Altar, before the Sacrament, which
for the signification that Christ is the very true Light of the World, they
shall suffer to remain still; admonishing their Parishoners, that Images serve
for no other purpose but to be a Remembrance, whereby men may be admonished of
the holy Lives and Conversations of them that the said Images do represent;
which Images if they do abuse for any other intent, they commit Idolatry in the
same, to the great danger of their Souls. And now is not here an admirable
agreement between our Church, and the Church of Rome?

3. As to the main point in Controversy between us, viz. concerning the Honor
and Veneration given to Images, Kissing of them, Kneeling, Praying before them,
and in one word, Worshipping of them, (which I have showed to be the practice
of the Romanists) my Adversary has the strange confidence to say, page 14. that
the Church of England seems to concur with the Church of Rome in all this
point. For proof of this most important matter he cites. 1. The 30th. of King
James his constitutions; about the Sign of the Cross, and (and not to repeat
the words at length) any man may see the meaning of that place to be this; that
though the Jews hated the name of the Cross, yet the inspired Apostles honored
it so far, as that they used the word equivocally, signifying thereby sometimes
Christ himself, together with the effects and merits of his Passion; and that
the name of the Cross was so honorable, that even in the Apostles days,
Christians had an honorable esteem of the Sign of the Cross. And what of all
this? Can this possibly argue any kind opinion in the Church of England of
Venerating, Kissing, Incensing, Bowing down to Images? Does it justify so much
as the superstitious use of the Sign of the Cross it self? Does not our Church
confess plainly a little after in the very same Canon, That in process of time
the sign of the Cross was grievously abused in the Roman Church, especially
after the stain and corruption of Popery had spread it self over it? What mean,
what miserable stuff is this, especially for such a discerning, such a
substantial Combatant as my Adversary would be thought, to offer unto the World
for an Argument. 2. But then mistrusting the weakness of all this, he lays his
chief stress upon a passage in our learned Montague, where he says, there is a
Respect due unto, and Honor given relatively to the Pictures of Christ, the
blessed Virgin, and Saints; and speaking in the Plural Number, he says, we give
it too, meaning as well as the Papists. And what then? does he speak of any
Public respect to Pictures in Churches? Or of any other respect then what the
Preserving of them amounts to, where there is no danger of Idolatry? If my
Adversary be so senseless as to imagine this, I will refer him to the beginning
of that Chapter which he cites; for there Mr. Montague tells his Enemies,
Appeal c. 21.
the Informers, that though they would make men believe, that he intended a
Religious respect and Pious honor to be due to Pictures, and so to draw on
unto a downright worship of them, yet this was not his meaning; no, he was in
that case as jealous of Gods Honor, as any gloyting Puritan in the Pack.

My Adversary may observe, that Mr. Montague does here distinguish (as I do)
Respect from Religious respect, and Honor from Pious Honor, and then
distinguishes both from Image Worship. And though he is pleased to call this
Cant in Me, yet Mr. Montague, to whom he appeals, gives it another name, he
calls it Idolatry: I do not (says he) I cannot, I will not deny, that Idolatry
is grossly committed in the Church of Rome. Cap. 19.
The ruder sort, at least, are not excusable, who go to it with downright
Idolatry, without any Relative adoration, worshipping that which they beheld
with their eyes, the Image of the blessed Virgin, S. Peter, S. Paul, the
Crucifix, as if Christ Jesus were present. This Idolatry is ancient in their
Schools. Thomas Aquinas does directly vouch it, that the same reverence is to
be given to the Image of Christ, and to Christ himself; whereas therefore
Christ is adored with the worship of Latria, it follows that his Image is to be
adored with the worship of Latria too: which is now an Article of Faith in the
Roman Church, and the opposite Doctrine flat Heresy: For so Cabrera upon that
place of Thomas writes; who alleges for his purpose and opinion, many Old
and Later Divines of their School. And Azorius the Jesuit tells us, it is the
Constant opinion of Divines, that an Image is to be Honored with the same
Honor, and Worshipped with the same Worship, that is given to the Object
whereof it is the Image. And hence Mr. Montague concludes, Cap. 22. That Popish
Practice, and Popish Doctrine fetches in all, and runs out into the
Extravagant, Idolatrous, Blasphemous Doctrine of Religious Adoration, either
primary or secondary, absolute or respective; to that of Thomas, Cabrera,
Vasquez, the Devil and all.

Sir, I hope, by this you are satisfied that the Church of England is not in
any the least measure for an Image Worship, as this Discourser has the
Confidence to affirm, page 20. And that in the account I sent you, I have not
abused mine own Church, nor exposed mine own Church, nor injured my Mother, or
any of my Mothers Sons; which was the Principal thing I was to convince you of.

And now as to what concerns immediately my self, I am in comparison
regardless: His ill Langague I can patiently bear, and take it for an Honor
from a man of his Kidney.

Yet there are some few things more which I must take a little notice of for my
Vindication. Whereas I told you, 1. That the first making of Pictures proceeded
partly from Heretics, the Gnostics. 2. That it came chiefly from the fond
inclinations of Gentile-Converts. 3. That there was no such thing as the use of
Images in the Primitive Ages. 4. That it is contrary to an express Canon of the
Council at Eliberis. And fifth that in the opinion of Epiphanius it is contrary
to the Authority of the Scriptures: This Discourser, not undertaking in the
least to Disprove all, or any thing of this, pretends only that I have shot
this bolt against the Church of England, and have disgraced Her, who (as he
supposes) is for Pictures, and so by the consequence of my Discourse must be
for that which came from Heretics, and Heathens; that which was not Primitive;
that which is repugnant to Canons; nay indeed, that which is contrary to the
Bible: This is his charge against me, page 9, and 10.

To which, I answer; First, That what he supposes he has not proved, nor is
it true, that the Church of England is fond of Pictures in Churches; the
contrary I am sure does plainly appear; nor has she allowed of them, as far as
I know, by any public Act of Hers, since the Reformation. Secondly, By looking
over the Homily I mentioned, against peril of Idolatry, by good luck I find
those very particular Arguments which this Discourser cavils at, to be used and
urged by our Church her self. The First, page 135, and 137, of the late Oxford
Edition. The Second She alleges at large, page 120. The Third She shows at
large throughout the Second Part of that Homily. The Fourth, She cites on her
side, page 128. And the Fifth, She urges and makes a large use of, page 116,
117. So that if my angry Adversary thinks fit to strike the Second time, he may
think it reasonable for him to turn his hand from Me upon our Church, who says
the same thing; let him strike at Her if he pleases; though I can tell him
beforehand, that such blows as His will do our Church no harm, let him do his
worst.

For several leaves next following, he says nothing but what I have already
considered. But then Page 20. He charge me for managing the controversy with
the Papists without ever stating the Question, or declaring what the Papists
hold, unbecoming a Scholar. But he should have considered, that my business was
not to enter into a Casuistical dispute about the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of
Image Worship, but to give an Historical account of matter of Fact upon a
Question, whether it be an Innovation, or No? And this was fairly stated; nay,
as far as I perceive by my Adversary, invincibly decided; and I should have
thanked him, if instead of giving me scolding words, and running off from the
Point, he had fairly considered and answered what I had written, like a
Scholar, and an ingenuous man, that is not apt to be angry with any one for
using Books.

In the next page he asks me, if it be lawful for Protestants and Catholics
(as he calls them) to have an interior Respect, Honor and Reverence for holy
Images, how comes it to be so unlawful and abominable for Catholics to
signify and express outwardly this same Respect, Honor and Reverence, which
is so comendable for all Christians, to have inwardly in their Souls? Certainly
that Honor and Reverence which in the Heart is Christian, cannot but be
Christian in the expression; and it is very Absurd to think, a Duty can become
Idolatry by professing it.

As to this; 1. I first observe a strange sort of Climax; for first he
expresses it is lawful to have an interior respect for Images; then he grows
a little, and calls it a commendable thing, and at last he calls it a Duty;
whereas if we consider what he means by Respect, Honor and Reverence, it is
neither Duty, nor commendable, nor lawful (as the case may stand) to have it
for Pictures, and Images; nor a Christian thing, either in the Heart, or in the
Expression. But Secondly, as to the point it self I must ingenuously and
plainly tell him, that I do not understand what substantial and solid grounds
any man has to have an interior Respect, Honor and Reverence for Pictures
(as Pictures, and as distinct things from other Furniture and Garniture of a
Church, where they are:) I am very confident, that the Ancient Christians had
no such interior Respect, but hatred rather; and that, not so much upon
Prudential considerations, but upon necessary reasons, because such respect was
thought to be contrary to Gods Law. 2. But then, if weak people will so far
comply with their own Natures, as to suffer their Affections to run out after
these things, does it follow that they may express their Affections as they
please? If the Divine Law requires me not to bow down to an Image; or if the
Reason of the thing requires me not to bow, because such Religious Bowing is a
Token of my absolute Subjection (which is due to God alone) am I not bound to
think my self abridged of this my fondly desired Liberty? I will put two Cases
which are somewhat like the Cases my Adversary puts, page 14. Suppose I had a
Reverence and Affection for the Popes Nuncio (which I declare, I have not)
would it be lawful for me, in the construction of our Laws, to kiss his hand
upon my Knee, to serve him upon my Knee, to crave Audience of him, and to show
him all the very same Respects, which I owe my Natural Prince? Would not this
look like a breach of that Allegiance which is due to the Father of my Country?
Certainly no Judges ought to excuse my Sin for being so Disloyal, nor would any
Prince pass me by uncensured, for acknowledging a Rival in his Country. Or
suppose my Adversary were a Married Man, and his Wife should have a kind
Respect for another person, and express that Respect after a lewd manner,
making this her defense and plea: It Is true, my dear Husband, I had an
interior Respect and Affection for such a man; it is true I did express and
show my Affection to him; but I did this, because he is your Friend, he is your
picture, he is like you for all the World: What I did therefore was out of true
Respects to you; I kissed him, and hugged him, and the like; but 'twas out of
honor and affection to you; all the Kindness and Love I showed him passed to
the Prototype, and 'twas for your sake. I hope you will not call this Adultery,
because I did it out of Respect to you; no, it is not Adultery; it is only Honor
and Veneration to your Image. What if a fellow in the Neighborhood calls this
Adultery? He is a man not to be believed, though he urges such a Commandment
in the Bible. He is one of a Factious Temper, a multiplier of needless
Contentions, a blind Combatant, a Trifler, a furious One, a singular
Illuminate, one that it is uncertain what Church he is of, and the only thing
certain is, that he is no Papist; he is no Papist, Husband; but a Canting man,
that disputes about a word. Adultery he calls it, but it is not so; it is
Respect, and Honor, and Affection to you. But he is no Papist; if he were, he
would be of another mind, because it was for your sake, and out of Interior
Respect to you, that this was done. Supposing this, I say, I will leave it to
my Adversary to consider seriously with himself, whether he would accept of
this as a fair and reasonable Excuse; desiring him to apply it, and to
remember, that Idolatry is compared in Scripture to Adultery, and Fornication;
if he has not quite forgotten the Book among so many Legends.

He taxes me for treating the Second Nicene Council with abusive Language,
because I said, they were a pack of Greeks, that were neither the Wisest, nor
the Honestest men in the World. Had I said this without sufficient grounds, or
could this Discourser prove I had Misrepresented them, I were to blame. But
whoever shall impartially consider the proceedings of that Council, I believe
will soon be of my opinion; for the thing proves it self. If my Language does
not please him, it is not half so much as the Three Hundred Fathers at
Frankford bestowed upon them, as he may see by the Caroline Books; out of which
the Church of England calls them an Arrogant, Foolish, and ungodly Council. If
I say they established Image Worship, it is no more then what Second Part of the
Homily against peril of Idolatry.
all the World knows, and Hinemarus said the same thing, who lived near that
time, and knew enough of the matter. And if they be Ridiculous, my Adversary
may thank Them for it; they made Themselves so. Some of their Arguments I
industriously concealed, because they are so very ridiculous, that I fancied my
Relating of them would not be Believed.

He pretends, page 31. That the reason why Images were not used in the
Primitive Ages was, because it was Inexpedient and Unseasonable, Christians
then living among Pagans and Jews. But if he pleases to consult Clemens
Alexandrinus, Origin, and other of the Primitive Writers (who knew their own
reasons best) he will find, that they insisted not upon the Vnseasonableness,
but upon the unlawfulness of having Images, because they thought it contrary to
Gods Commandments.

I wonder the man should so much as pretend not to understand (page 34.) how
Pope Gregory the Second contradicted Gregory the First. But now I think on it,
he is not apt to believe his Senses: For the thing is as clear as the Sun to
any one that can Read, and will trust his Eyes, that Gregory the First wrote
against Image Worship, and the Second of that name wrote for it. And though the
Latter endeavored to excuse himself and his party with this pretense, That
they did not worship Images as Gods, yet my Adversary knows that the old
Heathens said the same thing; and therefore this could no more acquit this
Pope, than it could the Pagans from the charge of Idolatry.

He pretends I am kind to the Heathens; as if my meaning was to excuse them
from Idolatry, so the better to fix this crime upon the Papists, and hereupon
he makes a long Harangue. The very truth is, I never intended to excuse either,
or take off the Load from one to lay it upon the other. But this I say, (and
the thing is manifest) that upon the same grounds that the Romanists justify
Their worshipping of Images, the old Heathens justified Theirs. And lest I
should be thought, a singular Illuminate, should I make a comparison between
both (as to that) I say further, that the Church of England her self has long
ago done a great deal more of that kind then I am willing to do at this time of
day. In the Third part of the Homily, I mentioned before, She has at large
compared the Idolatry of the one, with the Idolatry of the other, both as to
the Images themselves, and as to the manner of worshipping them. I refer you to
the place, beseeching you to read it, not for your Information only, but for
your diversion and pleasure too.

After this it is insinuated, page 37. That I have destroyed not only the
Credit, but the very Being of our Church in a manner, our Ordination, our
Succession, our Authority of Preaching; and all this, by my writing a poor
Pamphlet against Image Worship. A man of Sense would wonder at the consequence;
but the Reason it seems is, because our Church was once in Communion with the
Church of Rome, so that if the one be Idolatrous, the other must Cease. But my
Adversary knows our principle to be this, That the Church of Rome is really a
Church (as to the Essentials of a Church) though a very Unsound and Corrupt one
as to Her additions; and how our Communion with that Church could bring such a
Contagion as can Un-Church us, is a thing which we cannot understand. But this,
among some other mean considerations which are now objected against Me, have
been objected formerly against my good Friend, and have been abundantly
answered at the end of his Excellent Defense; and because I am not willing this
Pamphlet should swell with things, said over again, I refer you to that piece,
where you will find this, and some other cavils fully answered, which are
scatteringly thrown by this Discourser, about bowing toward the Altar, and at
the name of Jesus, etc.

Next follows (which I believe was the Principal thing intended by my
Adversary) a sly and artificial Application to our Dissenters; as if they had
the same reason to depart from our Church, as we had to depart from the Church
of Rome. Now the reason of our departure was, because we could not possibly
continue any longer in the Communion of that Church, without being knowingly
guilty of many damnable Errors and Sins. If this be the case between (...) and
our dissenting Brethren I will depart from the Church of England to morrow,
though not to the Church of Rome. But, God be thanked, all reasonable men are
convinced, that the case is not the same. And my Adversary is malicious and
vain in saying page 38. That Since the greatest part of those things upon which
the dissent is founded, are such as have been instituted and commanded by the
Church of Rome, why should the Dissenters receive them from the Church of
England, whilst these same Church-Guides, who press the observance, take so
much pains to prove those from whom they received them, to be Idolaters? What?
Did the Church of Rome Institute those things whereon the Dissent is founded? I
think they may be Idolaters to the Worlds end, and yet our Constitutions remain
unspotted. Was the Episcopal Government Instituted by the Church of Rome? Was
our Liturgy compiled by the Church of Rome? Was the Sign of the Cross, and a
few more of our observances Instituted by the Church of Rome? This is a vanity
to be despised; and upon this Point I will Engage in a Controversy with this
Discourser, when he pleases or dares. In the mean time I take the Liberty to
tell him, that his Trick will not Take; all of Us are sensible what the meaning
of this is, and who they are that stand behind the Curtain to inflame us, to
set us at further variance with one another, to drive on a Third interest, and
at last to laugh at our folly, if we can be made to serve it.

In the Conclusion of all my Adversary gives me a gentle lick: for reflecting
upon Me, and the Letter I sent you, he says, the Author is to be excused; the
whole is nothing more then a Letter: and every body knows, that a Letter,
however proper it may be to the person to whom it is directed, is many times
very absurd when it is divulged and made Common; we'll Excuse therefore the
Writer, but really he is to blame that Published it. To this I answer in a few
words; that if this Discourser and his Party will forgive me the writing of
that Letter, I know you will forgive him that Published it, and I believe all
considerate and honest men will forgive us Both, and as for this Discourser,
whatever his Sin is, he knows I suppose where to have a pardon too, if he has
but Money. I am, Sir

Your Most Faithful and Obedient Servant.
July 26th. 1687.
FINIS.

