A Practical Discourse UPON CHARITY, In its several Branches: And of the
Reasonableness and Useful Nature of this Great CHRISTIAN VIRTUE.

By EDWARD PELLING, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's, and Rector
of Petworth in Sussex.

LONDON, Printed by E. I. for W. Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar,
1693.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1. The Nature of Christian Charity, what it is, and how
it differs from Justice. 6 The Benefit that comes to ones Mind by a Charitable
Temper. 25 The Resemblance it bears to the Nature of God. 34 How it serves to
answer the Great Ends of the New Covenant. 47 How it fits and prepares us for
an Happy State hereafter. 61 How we are to express our Charity. 75 Several ways
of expressing it, according to the Characters given of Charity by St. Paul. 76
Charity must be expressed by not being Angry on a sudden. 79 Charity must be
expressed by moderating Anger. 82 Directions for the Government of this
Passion. 92 We must express our Charity by all manner of Kindness, p. 104. To
another's Soul, p. 111. To his outward Wants, p. 112. And to his Credit also,
p. 116 Charity forbids us to be Envious; and why. 119 Charity forbids us to be
Precipitant and Rash. 128 Directions to keep us from being Rash. 131 We must
express our Charity by our Humility, and why. Page 134 It Is inconsistent with
Charity to do any Thing that is Foul, or Indecent. 145 We must express our
Charity by seeking the Public Good, p. 157. Especially Peace, p. 162 Charity
forbids us to be Suspicious and Jealous-headed. 178 Charity forbids us to
Rejoice at other Men's Sins, p. 188. And at other Men's Calamities, p. 194.
Directions as to this, p. 195 We must express our Charity by our Zeal for the
Prosperity of true Religion, p. 200. Directions as to this, p. 203 We must
expsess our Charity by concealing other People's Faults, p. 209. And why, p.
212. Directions, p. 219 We must express our Charity by Believing the best of
others in all Doubtful Cases, p. 224. Directions as to this, p. 228 Charity
requires us to Hope well of others, especially as to their future State, 234
Christian Charity must be expressed by Patience in all Cases, p. 247. By
Patience in a Suffering Condition, p. 250. And in case of Difference in Matters
of Opinion, p. 261 The Conclusion. 275


A Practical Discourse UPON CHARITY.
THAT infinitely Wise and Beneficent Being that made the World, to communicate
himself to his Creatures, and to make them Partakers of his Goodness, has
given such Laws of Virtue to Mankind, as serve, not only to prepare us for the
endless Felicities of another Life, but also to make us in a great measure
happy in this. For those Virtues are Copies of God himself, Transcripts of his
own most Blessed Nature; and therefore they must necessarily tend to make us
happy, because God himself is happy in them. God's Happiness consists in the
admirable Perfections of his Nature; and the higher we rise in these
Perfections, the greater degrees of Happiness we must needs attain to, because
we approach the nearer unto God, in the resemblance of whom the true and solid
Happiness of Mankind does consist, though the corrupt part of the World does
evermore place it in other Things.

Those Virtues I now speak of are the Divine Perfections which are the Rule of
God's Actions toward Mankind: As, the Purity and Holiness of his Nature, by
means whereof he hates all manner of Iniquity; his Essential Veracity, by
reason whereof he cannot lie; his Faithfulness in the performance of all his
Promises, upon which account he is emphatically called, The faithful God, Deuteronomy.
7. 9. His Patience and Long-suffering toward the greatest Criminals, not
willing that any should perish; the exact Rectitude of his Will, by means
whereof he offers not the least Injury to any part of the Creation, but is
Righteous and Just in all his Proceedings: But above all his infinite
Compassion, (a God full of Compassion he is called, Psalm. 86. 15.) by virtue
whereof he is Gracious, Merciful, slow to Anger, and plenteous in Goodness.
These Perfections the ever-blessed God communicates to Mankind, according to
their Capacities; and in the exercise of these Virtues does our true Happiness
consist. It is not Riches or Greatness, or any Worldly Enjoyments, that make
our Minds or our Lives happy: Then are we happy indeed, when we are holy as God
is Holy; when we are Sincere and Upright, Constant, Patient and Just as God is;
and above all, when our Mercy rejoices over Justice, as God's does; when we
put on Bowels of Mercy; when we are Kind, and Good, and Tenderhearted toward
one another; when we forbear one another, and forgive one another; in short,
when we love one another, as God himself loves us all. This is our greatest
Perfection: a Perfection recommended to us in the Scripture under singular
Characters; above Faith, or Hope, or any other Grace: And in the practice of
this Virtue our truest Happiness must needs consist, because it carries the
greatest Resemblance of the Divine Nature. God is Love, says the Apostle, 1
John 4. 8. that is, the Perfection of Love, Goodness, and Charity is in him.

In discoursing upon this Subject, Charity, as it relates to Mankind, it will
be necessary,

1. First, To explain the true Nature of it. 2. To consider the Motives which
serve to make it Practical. 3. To show the Way and Manner, after which it is to
be expressed.
I.
1. As to the Nature of Charity: It is such a Principle of Kindness and
Benevolence, as does dispose us to do others all the good we can, over and
above that which is their due by the Laws of Common Justice. This is to be
noted carefully, that we may understand the difference between Justice properly
so called, and true Christian Charity.

The Office of Justice is to do those Things which a Man has a Civil Right
unto; Things which he can claim and challenge; Things which cannot be denied
him without manifest Wrong and Injury. Now this, even Irreligious and
Hard-hearted People are capable of doing; nor is this always a Virtue, because
it proceeds many times not from Choice, but Necessity. Charity is a
Tenderness and Goodness of Mind, which constrains us to do more than what
Humane Laws oblige us to. It Is a Virtue that stirs the Bowels, that moves and
works upon the Affections, that extends our Compassion, and enlarges our Hearts
beyond the common Limits: A Virtue that inclines us to be Benevolent unto all
Men; to wish them all the Good their condition calls for; to be Supplicants for
it on their behalf at the Throne of Grace; to aid and assist them toward the
obtaining of it; and for the Love of God and for Religion-sake to help them,
not only to those Things which are really due from Us, but to those Things also
which are necessary, fitting, and proper for Them, though they be not Debts in a
strict Sense and Construction. In a word, it is a Generosity of Temper, that is
apt to suit it self to the condition of others, according to the moving Nature
of their present Circumstances.

The Rule of Righteousness is, To render every Man his own; But this may be
without Charity; and therefore this alone is beneath the Generous and Noble
Disposition of a Christian; it does not come up to the perfect Law of Christ:
Charity, though it has a mixture of Justice in it, yet it is a great deal
more: and that it may be complete, as it should be, these two Qualifications
are very necessary.

First, That it be of the same Nature with that Affection which we have for our
selves.

Secondly, That it resemble that great Love which the Lord Jesus expressed for
us all.

First, Our Charity to others must be of the same Nature with the Affection we
have for our selves. This is the true Rule of Charity, especially as it is
heightened and improved by the Christian Religion, Thou shall love thy Neighbor
as thy self; that is, with the same good natured and kind Affection, though it
may be not in the same Measure and Degree.

There is indeed a sort of Self-love that is sinful, an Affection that begins
and ends at home too; when a Man is for pleasing himself only, when he seeks
his own only; when he makes himself the sole end of all his Actions; and would
fain engross to himself all that is good and desirable in this World,
begrudging his Neighbor any considerable Share or Proportion of it. Now this
is so far from being a Rule of Charity, that there is nothing of Charity in it;
nothing more opposite to the true Spirit of Charity, than such a selfish Temper.

But there is too an innocent kind of Self-love, which necessarily rises out
of a Natural Principle of Self-preservation; when a Man, notwithstanding the
greatness and largeness of his Mind, does consult the Good of others so, as not
to neglect his own, but takes a due Care of himself in the first place. This
Natural Affection every one has for himself; and it is attended inseparably
with these two Properties;

First, Every one loves himself Unfeignedly and Sincerely. To be sure, there is
no Flattery, no Pretense, no Compliment in this case. Our Affections may be
believed and trusted, when they speak favorably on our own side; for no Man
ever yet hated his own flesh: We cannot but wish our selves well, and those
Wishes always come from our very Hearts. And according to this Rule the
Christian Law obliges us to measure out our Charity to others: It must be Love
without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. Love unfeigned, 2 Cor. 6. 6. Love, not in
word, or in tongue only, but in deed, and in truth, Jam. 3. 18. Under color of
Affection to contrive or help one another Misfortunes, is like the Charity of
him, who betrayed the Lord Jesus with a Kiss. People are not wont to be
Traitors to themselves after such a manner: Though in the Consequence and Event
they many times prove their own Enemies, and the worst Enemies they have; yet
no Man betrays himself with Judas his Purpose; the Intention on which we all
act is still levelled at that which we believe or suppose to be good for us:
And this is properly to love our Neighbor as ones self; to be as really
solicitous for his Welfare in all respects, as for ones own; to have the same
reality and sincerity of Purpose; to be influenced and animated with the same
quality and truth of Affection, though the Case may admit of a difference as to
proportion.

Secondly, Another Property that attends all innocent Love of our self is, that
it is firm and constant. Because it flows from an innate Principle of
Self-preservation, it must of necessity hold and continue as long as Nature it
self lasts; nor can any Circumstances, Events, or Disappointments alter any
Man's Temper so, as to render him fickle and unsteady to himself; much less
dissolve the strict Band which ties his own Heart to him, faster than that
which was between the Souls of Jonathan and David. Why thus too must Brotherly
Love continue, Hebr. 13. 1. because the Reasons of Charity are ever the same,
viz. The Obedience we owe to the Law of God, and the common Wants among
Mankind, which always call for our mutual Pity and Assistance; there is a
constant necessity for our Minds to be always benevolently and tenderly
disposed. And though Resentments may and oftentimes do unavoidably happen, by
reason of the Ignorances of some, the Passions of others, and the Hereditary
Infirmities of us all; yet no Provocations or Injuries must affect Men so, as
to harden their Spirits, or fill their Bowels with Gall and Wormwood: Since the
fixed Rule is, that we must Love our Neighbors as our selves, we are no more
permitted to be weary of our Charity to other Men, than we permit our selves to
be weary of doing good to our own Souls.

But there is a higher and nobler Rule of Charity yet; and that is, to Love one
another, as the Lord Jesus himself has loved us. Because the Love even of ones
self may be defective, imperfect, and mixed with some Alloy; therefore the
great Lover of all our Souls has made his own Charity to be the Standard and
Measure of ours. Upon which account he calls it, A new Commandment: A New
Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you,
that ye love one another, John 13. 34. In respect of the Matter of it, the Law
of Mutual Charity is an old one; for it has been written in the Hearts of Men
from the beginning, and it was expressly given to the Jews, Lev. 19. 18. It is a
New Commandment in respect of that High and Eminent Degree, to which our
Blessed Savior has raised it. Men's Charity now must bear a Resemblance of
his; Love one another as I have loved you: This is the thing which makes it a
New Commandment indeed.

The Scripture speaks of three Things especially, which were peculiarly
remarkable in the Love of Christ.

1. That he extended his Love to open and declared Enemies. The Old Commandment
which required the Jews to Love their Neighbor as themselves, permitted them
to Hate an Enemy; nay, in some cases bound them to express all manner of
Hostility against such as were Aliens to the Faith, and to the Commonwealth of
Israel; But says the Apostle, God commended his Love toward us, in that while
we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us; and when we were Enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, Romans 5. 8, 10. And again, when we
were alienated, and Enemies in our Minds by wicked Works, Col. 1. 21. That is,
this was a stupendous, a most amazing Expression of Christ's Love, that he
undertook the great Work of Redeeming a profligate World, wretched Creatures
that had bid God defiance, that were Haters of all that is Good and Holy, and
thereby had brought themselves into a lost and damnable condition: And yet this
he did voluntarily, and of his own accord, when there was nothing in the World
to move him to it but his own infinite Compassion, and Tenderness only.

2. The second thing that was Peculiar and New in the Love of Christ, was, that
he was beforehand with his Enemies in these Expressions of his Goodness to
them. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, John 15. 16. And, Herein is
Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, 1 John 4. 10. Meaning, that
this is a clear and astonishing demonstration of his Goodness, that in
transacting the mysterious business of Reconciliation, he was pleased to have
the first hand; that he prevented us with his own early Offers; and surprised
us with Terms of Peace and Happiness, when no such thing was either desired, or
expected, or so much as thought of by the World.

But Thirdly, That which was most peculiar of all, most eminent and wonderful
in the Love of Christ, was his Dying for his Enemies: There is not in the Old
Commandment a Syllable of any Obligations to such an high degree of Charity as
this is, of laying down their Lives, no not for their Brethren. And one Reason
of it is, because length of Days, and Temporal Felicity was the great Reward,
that was plainly and expressly promised under the Law to such as kept it: And
therefore they were not bound by any Principle of pure Charity, to part, for
any Man's sake, with that, which was the greatest Blessing the Law could give
them. So that Christ's dying as he did, the Just, for the Unjust; was the
sublimest act of Love that could be; for greater Love than this has no Man,
that a Man lay down his Life for his Friends, John 15. 13. Only our Savior's
own Charity was far greater, in laying down his most precious Life even for his
Enemies.

His Commandment therefore, that we should love one another as he himself has
loved us, is altogether a new one, such Charity was never before required of
the World; such Charity was never heard of before: Charity of such a vast
height and measure was quite a new thing. Scarcely for a Righteous Man will any
one die; says the Apostle: Though peradventure for a good Man some would even
dare to die. Yet God commended his Love toward us, (it was infinitely beyond
all the Charity that ever had been among Men) in that while we were yet
Sinners, Christ died for us, Romans 5. 7, 8.

By what has been thus briefly spoken, we may now easily discern the true and
genuine Nature of that Charity, which is properly called Christian: It is such
a benevolent and tender disposition of Soul as inclines us to do, not those
Things only which the Laws of Common Justice require us to do, but moreover all
such kind and obliging Offices as becomes Creatures of the most compassionate
Hearts, and God-like Tempers: To be affected with the sense of other Men's
Wants, as well as our own; to pity them as our selves; to wish and promote
their Good with such unfeigned Desires, and unwearied Endeavors, as if our own
Welfare were concerned: And because the Lord Jesus vouchsafed to express a
common Love to us all, we are to follow his most blessed Steps, in expressing
our Charity to Mankind, as long as we live in the World; to Bless and Pray for,
and to do good to our very Enemies; to offer them Terms of Accommodation; to
give them Testimonies of a Reconcilable Temper; to encourage and provoke them
to be Reconciled by our own Example; by showing them our own Bowels, and by
letting them see how kind, humble, meek, long-suffering, and patient we our
selves are; and how ready to forgive them. Briefly to have such ardent
Affections unto all Men, and especially to those who are of the Household of
Faith, as to serve them willingly, not only with our Wishes, and Labors, and
Substance, but (when need requires) with our very Lives also. Though Life be so
dear a matter, that Skin after Skin, and all that a Man has he will give for
it; yet upon great Occasions, and in pressing Circumstances, and for weighty
and noble Ends, to be ready as the Lord Jesus was to die for others, after all
other Services done for them; this is to have that fervent, and perfect, and
true Charity, which the Christian Religion recommendeth to us above all Things.

II.
2. The Quality and Extent of Christian Charity being thus summarily Explained,
I proceed now in the second place, to consider those Motives and Reasons which
serve to make it Practical.

Now to digest this Matter into as clear a Method, and under as few Heads as
may be, I shall propose these four Things in general to be considered.

1. What great Good a Charitable Temper does to a Man's own Mind. 2. How
effectually it helps us to answer the Ends of the New Covenant. 3. How near it
brings us unto God even in this World. 4. How it prepares and fits us for the
Everlasting Happiness of another.
1. What great Good a Charitable Temper does to a Man's own Mind; Though a
Crown of Righteousness (a Glorious and Perfect Reward) be laid up and reserved
for us against the Day of Judgment; yet all Virtue brings us something of a
present Reward. As it cleanses the Spirit from the Corruptions of the World,
and from the Filthiness of the Flesh, so it replenisheth the Soul with the
greatest Satisfaction and Pleasure; and by these means, as well the Holiness,
as the Joy of a future State, begins here. Now of those Graces which at once
purify, and delight the Mind, a Spirit of Charity is One, and perhaps the
Greatest. It rids the Soul of several Vices which affect the Conscience with
the greatest Guilt, and therefore must of consequence bring the greatest
Plague; Vices which Crucify the very Soul, and make every one his worst
Tormentor; as Pride, Envy, Malice, and such like. These are peculiarly called
the Sins of the very Devil; and therefore it is fit they should carry a Hell
with them. It is impossible for such scurvy Qualities, to reign in a Breast
where a Charitable Heart lies. Kind Spirits are not wont to be Haughty,
Imperious, and Tyranical; especially toward those they really love: Much less
are they wont to be grieved, and afflicted at their Prosperity; or to seek
their Hurt. Such Vices are altogether inconsistent with Charity; and they
always grow out of illnature, like Nettles out of a Dunghill; and methinks Men
should shun them the rather, because they always sting the very Mind that is
their Nursery. Hearts that are the proper and kindly Soil of Virtue, are never
sensible of this Smart; because they are free from the Causes of it; and were
the insides of Men to be thoroughly discovered, I am confident it would be
found, that none are so easy and quiet within, so satisfied in their Minds, as
those that have generous Affections for all Mankind: If in such Breasts there
be any Dissatisfactions, it is because their kind Endeavors are not
successful; or else because they are not able to do all the Good they would.
Uncharitable Wretches know not the Pleasure of doing Good; nor what Peace and
Complacency returns into ones Bosom by every Charitable Action; nay sometimes
by a bare Charitable Purpose and Design, when some cross Accident hinders the
Execution of it. Indeed, these inward Comforts cannot be sensibly known, but by
Experience; and therefore Arguments of this kind may seem very feeble and
impertinent to those who love themselves only, and delight themselves in ways
of Frowardness.

Yet the most unexperienced People may observe very much to this purpose, from
two palpable Instances we find in the Holy Scripture; the one in Haman, the
other in St. Paul: Setting aside the Story of Joseph's Advancement, we meet not
with such an Account as that of Haman; of his Riches; of his Honor, and of his
great Power, as well over Ahasuerus himself, as over all his Subjects. And yet
his Pride, Envy, and Malice (the Vices I mentioned before) over-top't, and bore
down all this Greatness: One Thing he wanted still, and that was the Compliment
of Mordecai's Knee; and for want of that, nothing would satisfy him but the
Destruction of poor Mordecai himself, and all the Jews; Rancour and Revenge in
the highest degree, and that which argued Pains, Griefs, Agonies, and Tortures
in his Mind, of the highest degree too. So that though the miserable Wretch
boasted of his Wealth, Glory, and Authority over all the King's Princes; yet,
said he, all this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew
sitting at the King's gate, Esth. 5. 13. Strange Torment surely, that Nothing
could allay; that all his Splendour was nothing in comparison of; that neither
the Gallows he had provided for Mordecai was any thing, if compared with the
Rack in his own Breast.

A Spirit of Charity would have saved him all that expensive Vexation, which
his ill Nature put him to, amidst all his Honors: Half that Charitable Temper,
which was such a great Blessing to St. Paul amidst all his Troubles; no mere
Man ever loved the Souls of People more than he: None was ever more
Compassionate toward a needy World. None that fled over Land and Seas, with
that vigorous Zeal to serve Mankind, as St. Paul did; none that suffered so
much for his great Charity. A short Inventory of his Hardships he himself gives
us, 2 Cor. 11. In Labors abundant, in Stripes above measure, in Prisons
frequent, in Deaths often; of the Jews five times received I forty Stripes save
one: Thrice was I beaten with Rods, once was I Stoned, thrice I suffered
Shipwreck, a Night and a Day I have been in the Deep: In Journeying often; in
Perils of Waters; in Perils of Robbers; in Perils by my own Countrymen; in
Perils by the Heathen; in Perils in the City; in Perils in the Wilderness; in
Perils in the Sea; in Perils among false Brethren.

Throughout this whole Series of Hardships, we never find the Apostle cast
down, or disconsolate; but on the contrary, always Glorying of his Sufferings,
and of his Sufferings only; as Sorrowful, (said he) yet always rejoicing, 2
Cor. 6. 10. And the Ground of his Rejoicing was this, the Testimony of his
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity he had had his conversation
in the world; 2 Cor. 1. 12. The comfortable Consideration, that with an upright
and honest Heart he had endeavored to serve Mankind; and to express his great
Care of the Churches, which were committed to his Charge.

Plutarch could observe, That neither Riches, nor Honor, nor Power, (...).
nor any thing else, can bring a Man such Serenity and Divine Pleasure, as a
pure Soul: A Soul from whence good Actions flow, like a gentle and limpid
Stream from a clean Fountain. Though Misfortunes from abroad may affect such a
Man, yet comparatively they are not sharp, and right Reason can help to take
away that little Acrimony that is in them. It is (says Plutarch) an evil
Conscience that is truly dolorous and galling; it is this that creates Griefs
from within; Griefs that are more heavy and afflictive than any Accidents from
without: As a Feavour in the Blood is far worse, and much more troublesome, than
the Heat of the Sun. And therefore the true way to have solid Peace within, is
to have Minds full of Probity; and in stead of entertaining any dishonest
Purposes, to be always Virtuously disposed; and above all, to be kindly, and
benevolently inclined, and to do all the Good that lies in our power.

2. One great Reason, why a benign and gracious Temper brings such Advantage to
ones own self is, because it is a Ray of the Divine Nature; so that by
searching into his Heart, the Charitable Person cannot but be comforted with an
humble and modest Assurance, that he has much of God himself in him. And this
is the second Thing we are to consider, for the exciting of a Spirit of Charity
in us; how near it brings us to the ever-blessed God, even while we stay in the
World. God is Love, says the Scripture, 1 John 4. 8. Not only because all Love
is of God, as the Origin and Fountain of it; but because it is one of the
infinite Beauties, and Glories of his Nature; so essential to him, and so
perfect in him, that he is the most transcendent and excellent Exemplar of
Love; made up of it so, that he may be well called, Love it self. By reason of
this Love, God extends his Goodness to all his Creatures, and especially to
Mankind; intending and ordering all Things here for their Good: Threatening and
Admonishing, Commanding and Forbidding, Assisting and Strengthening, Cherishing
and Chastizing them, in order still to that great End, their own Good; and in
all the Methods and Dispensations of his Providence, expressing his Mercy and
Tenderness toward us, as it is most agreeable to his Wisdom, and as far as it
is consistent with the Honor and Authority of a Lawgiver. Nor are the
wicked'st Men denied a Share and Portion of his Goodness. For though by the
Rules of strict Justice, he might without any more ado consign them to
everlasting Misery, and cut them off in the midst of their Impieties; yet he
offers to all Peace and Reconciliation in, and by, and for the sake of his Son,
whom he sent into the World to seek and to save that which was Lost, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life: And,
to express the sincerity of his Desire, that none should perish, but that all
should come to Repentance; he daily shows the Riches of his Goodness, and
Forbearance, and Long-suffering; that thereby he may lead Wicked Men to
Repentance, not to be repented of. Nay, they have their Portion, even of the
Things of this Life too; the the Rebel, and the Runagate, is taken care of, as
well as the Heir; nor are any cast out of the hands of that Provident and
Supreme Governor of all Things, who causes his Sun to shine upon the evil and
upon the good, and sends Rain on the just and the unjust, Mat. 5. 45.

This great Goodness of God toward us all, our Savior himself makes use of,
as a powerful Argument and Motive for our Charity and Tenderness toward one
another. And truly, if we consider the infinite Perfections of God, by reason
whereof he stands not in the least need of any, nor of all his Creatures; the
infinite Greatness of his Majesty above us, and its Distance from us: By reason
whereof, he might look down upon us with Scorn and Contempt; His infinite Power
over us, by reason whereof, he might easily cast us down into the bottomless
Lake upon any Provocation: His infinite Holiness and Excellency, by reason
whereof every Provocation comes to be of infinite Demerit; and together with
all this, if we consider the infinite disproportion that is between the Sins
acted against him, and the Faults we commit against one another, who stand all
of us upon the same Level, and need all of us each others Assistance; nor have
we any Power over one another, but what is given, and precarious: Nor provoke
one another but with Offenses that are Reciprocal: And after all our mutual
Follies, are beholding to one another too, as well for asking, as for accepting
each others Pardon; If, I say, we consider all this, we must needs discover a
great deal of Force in this Argumentation, that since God so loves us, so
pitieth us, so forbeareth us, so expresses his Mercy and Compassion to us;
certainly we ought also, and the rather by much, to Love, and Pity, and forbear
and show Compassion and Kindness unto one another. Love and bless, and do good
even to them that hate you; that you may be the Children of your Father which
is in Heaven, says the great Exemplar of Charity, Matthew. 5. 45. By the
Children of God are meant, (according to the usual Scripture Sense of the
Phrase) such People as partake of the Divine Nature; such as resemble God, and
are like-minded; such as express a Similitude of those imitable Perfections,
which are most eminently in Him: For, as our Dispositions and Tempers are, so
is our Alliance. Thus our Savior told those wicked Jews in John 8. 44. Ye are
of your Father the Devil; And the Reason was, because they did the Deeds, and
the Lusts of the Devil, were of Devilish Spirits and Inclinations, resembled
the Devil himself by their Wickedness. Some Sins (as I told you before) are
ascribed unto the Devil after a more peculiar manner; as Pride, the Sin that
cast him out of Heaven: And Lying; for which reason he is called a Liar, and
the Father of it, Joh. 8. 44. And so Slandering; for which reason he is called
the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12. 10. So also are Envy and Malice the
Devil's Sins; for which reason he is called a Murderer from the beginning, John
8. 44. And is compared to a Lion that walks up and down, seeking whom he may
devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Now, though People that are of such wicked Spirits, may
flatter themselves with a Persuasion that they belong to God; yet in God's own
account, you see, they are of the Devil's Family, the Devil's Children, and
consequently Heirs of the Devil's Damnation; because their Minds are of the
same Venomous Temper, and of the same ugly Hue and Complexion, as if they had
been Cast in the same Mould.

For the same Reason, they whose Souls are pure and upright, full of Grace and
Goodness, are called the Sons of God, because they communicate of his Divine
and Perfect Nature, and resemble him in the Qualities and Dispositions of their
Minds, as Children are wont to resemble their Parents, in the Features and
Lineaments of their Bodies. Nor can any Man resemble him better, than by a kind
and benevolent Disposition. Because the Scripture does up and down, represent
this as one of God's chief and most glorious Perfections; a Perfection wherein
he himself seems most of all delighted: And therefore our Savior discoursing
of Mercy, Charity, and an Universal Love, Matthew. 5. singles out this as the
strongest Argument to enforce the Practice of it; that we may be the Children
of our Father in Heaven; and that we may be perfect, even as our Father which
is in Heaven is perfect. It Is not any formal Professions that bring us near
unto God; it is not any dry Superstitions, or empty Performances; much less is
it a furious Zeal for Notions and Opinions, (alas! all this may be consistent
with a Devilish Temper and Mind:) No; it is a God-like Temper; a Divine frame
of Heart; and chiefly, a kind, charitable, and beneficent Disposition: It is
this, this, that ties us into a strict Relation to God, into such a close
Fellowship and Communion with him, as makes us his indeed: As that Disciple
observes, whom the Lord Jesus particularly loved, and who breathed nothing but
Love himself: 1 John 4. 7. Love is of God; and every one that loves is born of
God, and knows God: And again, V. 12. If we love one another, God dwells in
us, and his Love is perfected in us. And again, V. 13. Hereby we know, that we
dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit; (meaning
that Temper and Affection which is so eminent in him. And again, V. 16. God is
Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him.

Here then Men should lay their Hands upon their Hearts, and examine how they
beat; what they are full of; and how they are affected: If Wrath and
Bitterness, Malice and Rancour, Spightfulness and Uncharitableness, dwelin
them; If Self-love, Unmercifulness and Cruelty hardens them; if the Wants and
Miseries of others make no, or very little Impressions upon them; these are
very bad Symptoms, plain Signs, that there is very little, if any thing at all
of God in such Hearts; nothing but what savours of a narrow Spirit, of a mean,
sordid, and brutish Nature. Humane, Rational Souls should have more exalted
Faculties; Souls that are of a Noble and Heavenly Extraction; Souls that are so
many Rays of the Divinity; What can so become such Beings, as Thoughts that are
beneficial like the Sunbeams? Affections that are as large as the Universe?
Motions and Operations, like his who was the Redeemer of Souls; whose whole
Life was, to go about doing Good? His Miracles, as well as his Sermons and
Laws, were Charity: And by those Charitable Works he showed himself to be the
Son of God; Nor may we think, we can give the World, or our own selves, any
satisfactory Evidence of our Relation to his Father or him, but by Works of
Charity as his were; by doing Good to every Man as it lies in our power,
without Discrimination; by Entreating them gently; by bearing Wrongs and
Indignities with meekness of Spirit; by putting our Cause into God's hands
without Self-revenge; by blessing and wishing well to our very Enemies; and by
expressing our sincere Affections to all Mankind.

3. These Things do naturally carry a great deal of Force with them: So that if
no Obligations were upon us from any Laws to this purpose, the Divine
Excellence of these Actions would Recommend them to our Practice, because they
are God-like Actions; and therefore must needs be of the highest Excellence in
their own Nature. But besides this, we are to consider yet, in the third place,
how helpful a Spirit of Charity is to us, in answering the great Ends of the
New Covenant. The grace of God (or the Gospel) that brings Salvation, has
appeared unto all Men, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, Tit. 2.
11, 12. Which shows, that the design of the Evangelical Covenant is, to reclaim
Mankind to the Love and Practice of all manner of Virtue. Because God is a most
perfect Being himself, of infinite Goodness and Rectitude in his Nature; his
blessed Purpose is to imprint upon our Souls his own Image, according to the
Capacity of our finite Faculties. And in order hereunto he has given us by his
own Son, (the brightness of his own Glory) not only the most excellent
Promises; all confirmed and sealed with his Blood upon the Cross; but moreover
the most perfect Example, and the most perfective Duties. Now of these Duties,
this of Universal Charity and Love is the Chief. For Love being such a Divine
Affection, the Fruits of it must needs be Divine too, if it be sincere and
zealous. As for Instance; If our Love to God be pure and hearty, it cannot but
move us to a solicitous Care, of doing nothing that is repugnant to God's Will
and Holiness; because this Affection is naturally attended with an earnest
desire to please and imitate its Object, or the Party we entirely love. So
also, if a Man's Love to himself be Rational and Regular, it must needs put him
upon doing himself all the Good, especially all the Spiritual Good, he can;
because his Spiritual Part, the Soul, is to live for ever, and therefore
requires his tenderest Care, that it may be everlastingly Happy. The same
Inclination does true Charity work in us toward all other Men; to be
beneficial to them likewise, for it always operates according to the nature of
the Thing, and according to the condition of the Object. It cannot possibly be
of any advantage to our Maker, because he is out of the reach of our Charity,
and too high for it. Can a Man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may
be profitable unto himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art
righteous? Or is it gain to him, that thou make thy Ways perfect? Job 22. 2,
3. And again; If thou be righteous, what give thou him? Or what receives he
of thy hand? Job 35. 7. No; all our Goodness extends not to him, Ps. 16. 2.
He neither needs it, nor is he capable of being benefited by it; because he is
infinitely perfect and happy in himself. But our Love to God has this Effect;
it makes us admire and adore him, serve and worship, and endeavor to please
him, and to be like unto him; and so, it is an Instrument of Godliness, as well
as of Sobriety and Righteousness. In this respect it may be said to be a
Fulfilling of the whole Law, even the first Table of it; though indeed it
serves most directly to Fulfill the Second. And thus the Apostle argues, Romans
13. 8, 9, 10. He that loves another, has fulfilled the Law: For this, Thou
shall not commit Adultery; thou shall not Kill; thou shall not Steal; thou
shall not bear false Witness; thou shall not Covet; and if there be any other
Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, viz. Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self. Love works no ill to his Neighbor; therefore Love
is the fulfilling of the Law. We cannot be Injurious to our own Souls, or to
the rest of Mankind, or to God himself, but it must proceed from the want of
those enlarged Hearts, and those fervent, and tender Affections, which the
Gospel requires of us all. Here then we should employ our greatest Pains, and
use our utmost Endeavors, to kindle in us a true Spirit of Charity: For it is
the end of the Commandment, 1 Timothy 1. 5. And because it is the most Perfective
Grace, the Scripture sets it above all Things, even above Faith and Hope; 1
Cor. 13. 13. Now abides Faith, Hope, Charity, these three; but the greatest of
these is Charity. The greatest, not only because it is most profitable to
others, which the other two Virtues are not; for Faith and Hope keep at home; a
Man believes for himself, and hops for himself; nor is ones Neighbor the
better for them: It Is this, that is the active, the dispensing Grace, that
walks about doing good, and every one fares the better for it:) But it is the
greatest Virtue too, because of the three, it is the most beneficial to ones
self also: It gives him solid Reasons for his Hope, which otherwise would be
groundless; and Perfection to his Faith, which otherwise would be fruitless,
and consequently unprofitable even at home: The Hypocrite's Hope shall perish;
And his Trust shall be as a Spider's Web; Job 8. 13, 14. A sorry weak Thing to
bear ones Heart up, especially on a Deathbed. For Hope, if it be right, must
be built upon some Promise, nor can it go further than the Promise it self
goes; for if God has not promised me his Mercy, how can I reasonably hope for
it? Now it is plain, that there is no Promise of that Nature, but on condition
of Charity on our part. The Texts are so clear, that they need no Comment: 1
John 3. 10. In this the Children of God are manifested, and the Children of the
Devil: whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves
not his Brother. And again, V. 14. He that loves not his Brother, abides in
Death, (or is in a deadly State.) And again, V. 15. Whosoever hates his
Brother, is a Murderer; and ye know, that no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding
in him. Nay, to show how extensive our Charity must be, for our hopes of Mercy
at God's hands, our Savior himself has passed this Decretory Sentence, That
there is no Mercy for us, unless we show it our selves, and that even to our
Enemies; Mat. 6. 15. If ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your Trespasses.

As for Faith, great Things indeed are spoken of it in the Scripture; but
withal we are told, that without Works it is dead; such a spiritless, empty
Thing without a Life of Virtue, that it no more deserves the Character of a
saving Faith, than a dead Carcass deserves the Name of a Man. Faith, as it is
distinguished from Works, signifies here an Act of the Understanding, whereby a
Man owns the Authority of Jesus Christ, and assents to his Doctrines. Now this
Assent of the Mind is required, in order to the Practice of Christ's Religion,
because it is not imaginable how People can be brought to obey his Laws
sincerely and universally, unless they be first persuaded in their Hearts, that
he was the Son of God, the very Christ, sent by his Father from Heaven to help
Mankind thither. This puts a Divine Stamp upon the whole Christian Religion; it
gives it an unquestionable Credit, and renders every the most difficult Article
of it worthy of all Acceptance, because it came from God, and was revealed by
the Son of God; and therefore must needs be infallibly true. Upon this account,
the belief of Christ's Authority and of the Truth, and certainty of his
Religion, is the first thing necessary: And for this Reason it was, that his
first Disciples took such pains every where to prove him to be the very Christ,
and inculcated the necessity of Faith in him: For this was the ready way to
bring the World in Obedience to him; and nothing but this could prevail with
Men, to observe Christ's Institution with such strictness, as the Primitive
Christian did, and for the sake of it to venture and undergo upon all Occasions
the utter loss of all.

Faith then being required to produce Obedience, as the proper Means in order
to this noble End, cannot possibly stand us in stead, if it be only a Notion in
our Heads; if it be a liveless and unfruitful Persuasion; if it be naked and
alone; if it has not that effect and power upon our Souls, as to bring on the
Love and Practice of those other Virtues and Graces, for the Production whereof
it has been all along intended. Now of those Virtues and Graces, Charity is
the very chiefest; this must accompany our Faith, to make it as it should be,
such a Faith as we may safely rely on; and therefore St. Paul describing that
Assent of the Mind which avails indeed, calls it, Faith which works by
love, Gal. 5. 6. Or, as some Learned Critics would rather render it, Faith
which is consummate and perfected by Charity. The truth is, all our Notions are
very imperfect Things without this; and though these Notions be never so right
and Orthodox, yet are they vastly short of our true Duty till they reach our
Hearts, and make us to open our Bowels toward other Men, and to exercise our
Hands in Offices of Love. And therefore, since without a Spirit of Charity
nothing will avail us, nor answer the great Ends of Christ's Religion, no not
our very Faith, (according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. Though I have all
Knowledge, and all Faith, and give away Goods, Body, Life and all, and have not
Charity, it profits me nothing: Since, I say, it is thus) it is of infinite
Concernment to us all, so to subdue our Minds and Passions, as to approve our
selves in this respect the hearty Disciples of a meek and charitable Jesus.
Many Voluminous Disputations have been written, which might have been better
spared about Faith, and Works, and Justification, whether we are justified by
the one, or the other, or by both; and great Endeavors have been used to
Reconcile St. Paul and St. James upon this Point: Rather I might say, to set
them at Variance; for their Sense is the same touching the necessity of Works
Evangelical; as Piety, Humility, Meekness, Patience, and the like; and very
plainly and particulary upon the Point of Charity. Here the most vulgar Eye may
see their clear Agreement: In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love, says St. Paul,
Gal. 5. 6. And, He shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no
Mercy, says St. James, Jam. 2. 13. Therefore in a Case, that is so positively
and fully decided, we should leave Controversy, and fall to Practice; and
study how to be fruitful in good Works, rather than how to make our Brains
Prolifick: This is the right way of performing the Conditions of the
Evangelical Covenant, and of bringing Peace and Comfort to our own Minds. I am
sure when we come to die, it will turn to far better account for our poor
Souls, than all the Disputes, which we shall leave behind us; and which we
shall leave too, with this great Question which perhaps will never be
determined, Whether Men have managed them with as much Truth as
Uncharitableness?

4. Fourthly, A Charitable Temper serves to prepare and fit us for the
Everlasting Happiness of another Life. Many Virtues are required to dispose us
for the Enjoyment of that Happiness, to make us capable of it; to render us
meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1. 12.
Neither will the Decrees, nor the Power, nor the Mercy of God, bring us to that
Fruition, without due Qualifications on our part; because there can be no true
Happiness but where there is a Correspondence and Suitableness between the Mind
and the Thing; if a Man be not pleased with what he Enjoys, nor finds any
delightful Relish in it; it is impossible for him to be happy by enjoying it;
nor can Heaven it self be a place of Pleasure to those, whose Minds have as
little Taste of those Divine Satisfactions, as a vitiated Palate has of the
most pleasant Meats and Drinks.

To prepare our selves for those Delights, it is necessary to transform our
Souls into the love of them now; and to accustom our selves now; to the
familiar and delightful Practice of those Virtues, wherein the Felicity of
another Life does really consist: Of which Virtues, a charitable Disposition is
one, and a very great one; because we shall be sure to carry that Disposition
with us out of this World to continue with us everlastingly, and to make us
happy indeed in the enjoyment of a suitable Society of Blessed Spirits which
are all made up of Love. Charity never fails, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.
8. Whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be Tongues, they
shall cease; whether there be Knowledge, it shall vanish away: But Charity
endures for ever; it is an inseparable Glory of the Souls of just Men made
perfect. And this is another Reason, why Charity is set above Faith and Hope,
because it is of infinite Duration: As it is the most beneficial, so it is the
most lasting Virtue. Faith is the Evidence (or firm Persuasion) of Things not
yet seen, Heb. 11. 1. And when we come to behold God Face to Face, it will be
no longer Faith, but Vision. And so Hope is the expectation of Things that are
future; and when we come to the actual Possession of them, it will be no longer
Hope, but Fruition or Enjoyment. But Love is of an unchangeable Nature, nor
will it ever cease, because it is a Ray of the Immutable and Everlasting God.
This is the Happiness of Heaven, that though there be different Ranks and
Orders of Angels; different States of Beautified Spirits, different Degrees of
Glory: And though God himself be infinitely exalted above all; yet Love is the
Universal Principle and Perfection, which unites God, and all his Glorious
Creatures with him, into one inviolable Communion.

This being the State of the other World, how can we be prepared for the
Enjoyment of it, or be fit to take pleasure in it, unless we be Connaturaliz'd
to it by a correspondence and agreeableness of Temper? Some thoughtful and wise
Philosophers among the old Heathens went upon this Principle, that all
Happiness consists in the Perfection of Nature. And they did not only
believe, That the Soul is Immortal, and shall find the Rewards of Simptic. in
Epicte^.
Virtue, after its departure from the Body; But believed too, That its Felicity
after Death lies in such a perfection of its Faculties, and Powers, as is most
suitable to a Rational Being: That is, in perfectly knowing every Thing which
it is capable of knowing; and in perfectly loving and doing Things that are
most Excellent. These are great Notions from Men that had not the benefit of
Divine Revelation: Nor do we find any thing in them, but what is highly
consistent with the Christian Philosophy, for when that which is perfect is
come, we shall be like God himself in the Rectitude and Perfection of our
Nature, according to the Capacities of Created Beings: And Charity, being the
greatest and most God-like Virtue, every perfected Soul must needs be
conformable to the Divine Nature by it; which yet is not possible for any Soul
to be, but by exercising in this Life all those good Acts, which serve to form
it unto a Charitable Temper. For this Temper is acquired as other Habits are,
by the constant Repetition of Actions; which are therefore to be our Care and
Business in this World, because Heaven is a place not for the beginning, but
for the consummating of a Life of Virtue: Nor can Death so alter and change a
Man's whole State, as to furnish his Soul with Inclinations and Qualities,
quite contrary to those it contracted in the Flesh; so that if we be not
charitably affected now, we do but flatter our selves with vain and lying Hopes
of a Blessed Eternity.

Though I have the Gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and all
Knowledge, and though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and
have no Charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my Goods to feed the
Poor, and though I give my Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it
profits me nothing; says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13. 2, 3. For as it is God's
Will and Purpose, that Uncharitable Souls shall not by any means come into his
Presence, so the very Nature of the Thing renders their Access impossible;
because they are not fit to be Partakers of those Pleasures, which are at God's
right hand for evermore. Hatred and Malice, Rancour and Revenge, Spightfulness
and Envy, are the Works of Hell, and the Dispositions of those who are going
apace thither; nor are they fit to be in any Society, but that of Devils and
damned Spirits, to whom they are already akin by Vice, and into whose Company
they are prepared to be gathered by an assimilation and likeness of Nature.
Upon this account it concerns us as much as our Everlasting Happiness is worth,
by all possible Acts of Charity to bring our Minds to such a loving Frame and
Genius, as, when we die, may be suitable to the State and Condition of Heaven.

It Is true, some particular Branches of Charity will cease there, because there
will be no need of them among the Blessed. There will be no need of
Almsgiving, because in Heaven there are no manner of Wants. There will be no
need of Mutual Forgiveness, because in Heaven there are no Injuries and
Affronts: Nor will there be any need of bearing with one another's Infirmities,
because in Heaven there is neither Sin, nor Error: However, these and the like
Acts of Charity must be performed and repeated by us here on Earth, because in
their kind they all serve as Means in order to the main End; to cleanse the
Mind from all Leaven of Malice and Naughtiness, to raise and improve the Soul
by degrees, to perfect it insensibly by an Universal Love, and to produce in it
a true, Heavenly Temper, though they be of no further use to us, when once we
come to the actual Possession of an Heavenly State. To illustrate this a little
by a familiar Similitude: In the training up of a Youth in the ordinary course
of Learning, many lesser Rules are necessary in the beginning; a long Method,
great Readings, many Observations, and various sorts of Exercises, are
necessary in the Progress; and all these help in their kind to improve ones
Parts insensibly, and to make at last a complete Scholar, though in the course
of his Studies some of these Things are apt to drop out of his Memory: And when
he comes to be a Man, and a Man of great Knowledge and Judgment, many of them
are quite forgotten and lost; because they cease from being of any further use,
the Practice of them is no longer necessary; but yet the Noble Effect, which by
the former Practice of them was produced, does remain to the last; namely, an
Understanding now polished and perfected to a very high pitch by an Universal
Knowledge: The subservient Rules and Method are laid aside, and gone, many of
them; but the Perfection of the main Faculties, and the Improvement of his
Parts, holds as long as his Life continues. It is much after this manner, that
a Man is trained up, and disciplined into a perfect Saint. Several sorts of
Charity are required of us now, which are proper to a Militant State, to a
needy, suffering Condition; and therefore they must cease of course, when we
come to a State of Bliss and Glory.

Nevertheless they are at present wonderfully Advantageous to us, because they
do more or less all contribute toward Perfection; they all serve in their
kind, and in some measure, to bring the Soul to an habit of Universal Love, and
so to fit it for that blessed Place above, into which nothing that is
Uncharitable can enter.

By the Cooperation of every Charitable Act, the Soul is bettered by degrees,
though we may not perceive its gradual Proficiency every moment: It is the more
and more improved and heightened toward Heaven; and the more and more
accomplished for it still; so that when it departs out of the Body, a State of
perfect Peace, and perfect Harmony, and perfect Love, is the most proper for
it; nay, (if I may so speak) the only Natural State for it to be in: And then
the Soul finds the Noble Effects of every Work of Love; the Divine Habits which
every Work helped to produce, and the Unspeakable Perfection every Work did
prepare it for; though in its flight to Heaven it droppeth some Works, and
leaves them behind it, as the Prophet did his Mantle.

Men talk at random when they speak of going to Heaven without a Charitable
Temper: they may as well speak of seeing the Lord without Holiness; for Charity
is one great part of Holiness. And therefore our great Care must be, to mould
our Hearts into such a Frame and Condition, that we may be fit and agreeable
Company for the Glorious Family of Love. And this is not to be done, but by
using and accustoming our selves to the constant Practice of Universal Charity
now. For Habits are gotten by many Repeated Acts; and to perform the several
Offices of Charity is, both the effectual Means of gaining a Spirit of Charity,
and a plain Argument and Token too, that there is such a Spirit in us,
especially when those Performances and Acts are more and more abundant.

III.
3. Which brings me to the third Thing, that in the beginning of this Discourse
I proposed to show; namely, the Way and Manner after which our Christian
Charity is to be expressed. For those Expressions are manifold and various; and
those People are mightily deceived, who restrain and limit all Charity to
Almsgiving.

That indeed is one Expression of Charity, when our Alms come from a Charitable
Heart; for if that be wanting, all our Alms loses the Name of Charity. Though
I give all my Goods to feed the Poor, and have not Charity, it profits me
nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 3. You see, that in the Apostle's account, Alms-Deeds may
be without Charity; that is, when Vanity or Ostentation is the Principle from
whence they flow. But though they come from a right Principle, from a kind and
compassionate Heart, yet are they but a little part of Charity; as we find by
St. Paul's Description of its several Branches in the place abovementioned.

Now because we cannot follow a better Guide than St. Paul, I shall proceed
upon this Subject according to those Noble Characters which he himself gives
there of Charity; intending as I go along to discourse of those Things after a
particular and distinct manner; which the holy Apostle has laid together
within the compass of a few, but very significant and comprehensive Expressions.

1. And there are two Characters given of Charity, in reference to Anger. The
first teaches us to be very Slow to Anger-Charity (says St. Paul) suffers
long; Meaning, that a Charitable Man is not presently moved out of a calm and
composed State.

2. The second teaches us to moderate our Passion, that it may not swell
beyond a due measure, when there is any just and sufficient cause of
Resentment, Verse. 5. Charity, (...), is not easily provoked; so indeed it is
rendered in our Common Translation; but rather it should be rendered, Is not
highly provoked, or exasperated; Meaning, that for Charity-sake no Man must
suffer, no not any just Anger to turn into Fury, so as to make him either to
meditate Revenge, or to fall into indecent Rages.

Now though these be two distinct Subjects, the one touching the Rise, the
other touching the Progress of this Passion; yet because both may easily fall
under one Consideration, I shall speak of both at this time, and in this place,
as far as they relate to the Subject Matter of Christian Charity; leaving some
other Things more particularly to be considered, when I shall have opportunity
and leisure to form some Practical Discourses more upon other Christian
Virtues, and upon that of Meekness among the rest.

Anger is not Universally Evil; for the Apostle's Direction is, Ephesians. 4. 26. Be
ye angry, and sin not: Which shows, that all manner of Anger is not sinful. But
there are three sorts which are inconsistent with the Law of Charity, and very
displeasing unto God.

First, Rash Anger; when a Man is apt to be soon offended, and to let his
Passions take fire presently, not fairly examining the Nature and Circumstances
of the supposed Provocation, nor considering thoroughly, as he ought, whether
there be just and reasonable cause for Displeasure. This is a wicked
Disposition, that proceeds from Pride, Capriciousness, and ill Nature; and it
looks as if the froward Creature watched for his Neighbors Haltings, and
wanted only an opportunity of Quarrelling; and took Delight and Pleasure in a
Life of Contention, and in rendering himself uneasy and vexatious to others.
This is far from favoring of the true Spirit of Charity, especially as it is
raised by the Law and Example of Jesus Christ, whose Love to us ought to be the
Standard, and Measure of our Charity to one another. But besides this, the
Effects which follow our unreasonable Passions are very hurtful and injurious,
when Things are taken amiss rashly, and with such a quick hand. For we are all
apt to be mistaken, and then most likely when Men's Actions are not permitted,
to fall under our due Consideration: But we run away headlong, and in great
have upon indeliberate Apprehensions. In this case Innocence it self too often
suffers; by reason that the Merits of the Cause are not calmly inquired into at
the first, and Men are hardly persuaded to examine them afterward, because few
care to be thought guilty of an Error. By means hereof, a long Train of
Mischief follows; Passion still growing higher and hotter than at the first
kindling. And therefore, when our Passions begin to be warm, we should have an
Eye to the Fuel; consider the Cause which blows the Spark; give our selves
time to think, and to think as heartily and favorably as we can, lest we go on
to punish Men quite contrary to the Laws of Charity, and Justice too, not so
much for their Crimes, as for our own false Presumptions; and if we would do
this very carefully, that is, give room for Thought and favorable
Consideration, before we lift up the hand, it would both lessen the Passion,
and either stop, or moderate the Effects of it.

Secondly; Though Anger be Just, in respect of its Cause; yet if it lasts a
longer time than it should, it is Sinful. The sooner our Resentments go out,
the better it is for our selves, and others: And best of all when they die
presently after they are conceived; when a Man's Anger is like the Fool's
Mirth, which Solomon compares to the crackling of Thorns on a Flame, that
vanishes in a few moments; for glowing Coals are very dangerous; the longer
ones Displeasure continues, the more averse he is to Purposes and Expressions
of Charity; the stiffer in his Resentments, the more inflexible, and the harder
to be Reconciled. That which should have been but a transient Fit, precipitates
in time, and setleth into a fixed Habit; and that ranckles and frets inwardly,
and eats so deep, and so venomously into the Bowels, that it proves a deadly
Ulcer; and then it ends, as in the case of the Spleen, which was once a natural
and innocent Infirmity, but at last becomes a very painful and mischievous
Disease. The Apostle therefore gives us all this Noble Rule of Charity; Let not
the Sun go down upon your Wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26. This looks as if it were a
Branch of the Law of Nature: For Plutarch tells us of those ancient Pagans the
Disciples of Pythagoras, Plutarch de Frat. amore.
That if there happened any Differences or Brawlings between them in the Day,
their custom was to shake hands, and salute one another before the setting of
the Sun. Anger is such a brutish Thing, that they thought it unbecoming Men
and Philosophers, to carry it in their Bosoms to Bed. But St. Paul's Reason was
of a higher Nature; for the Evening was ever a time of Devotion; and we must
part with our Passions before the close of the Day, lest a mixture of Hatred
pollute our Evening Sacrifice, and infect our Prayers, so as to turn them into
an Abomination. The Learned Grotius looks upon it as a Phrase, that was usual
among the Hebrews, when they meant the putting any Matter off to a longer time:
And so indeed we find it in Deuteronomy. 24. 15. At his day thou shall give the
Hireling his hire, neither shall the Sun go down upon it. Which is otherwise
expressed, though to the same effect, Lev. 19. 13. Thou shall not defraud thy
Neighbor, neither rob him, the Wages of him that is hired, shall not abide
with thee all night until the morning. Well, though we suppose the Apostle's
Expression to be Proverbial, yet Grotius reckons it an Application of that Law,
Deuteronomy. 21. 23. That the Body of every Criminal that was hanged, was to be buried
before night. And then St. Paul's Argument is the stronger still: For if
Punishments inflicted by Public Authority were not to continue till the
Evening; much less may any Private Differences or Grudges hold till Sunset.

Anger is for the most part a Criminal, and too often proves an Homicide; and
it is good to throw it aside, and to commit it unto the Grave betimes: If we let
it sleep with us, and not rid it quite out of the way, the next day's Sun will
give it a new heat, and make it outrageous.

For Thirdly, This Passion does many times grow and swell to such a bulk, that
nothing will satisfy it but Revenge: It rises by degrees, if not quelled in
time, from Rash to Inordinate; from Inordinate to Implacable; from Implacable
to Revengeful: And then is Anger sinful in the highest degree of all; when it
breeds Gall and Choler to that extremity, that the Stomach will not be
satisfied without a Glut of Revenge. This chiefly is that Bitterness and Wrath,
which the Holy Scripture so severely condemns: For it works not the
Righteousness of God, Jam. 1. 20. It carries a Man beyond a possibility of
doing Things that are right in God's Eyes; for its Designs and Actions are
still mischievous, and therefore it is direct Enmity against God and Man.
Charity is quite forgotten, though the Wretches own Pardon can never be sealed
without it. Justice is not heard, though it cry never so loud; The violent
Creature considers not what is Just, but what may be Hurtful. The Laws of
Christ are trampled under foot, though they were intended to sweeten all our
Tempers, to smooth and soften our Spirits, to render us Humane, Meek, Patient,
Gentle, Courteous, Merciful and Benign. The Revengeful Man stands in sturdy
Opposition against all; nor is there any Mischief against his Inclinations, if
it be within his power; especially if he can act it with safety. Neither are
ones Fortunes, nor ones Credit, nor ones very Life secure, if within the reach
of a Revengeful Arm. Nor do I think, that Humane Nature is capable of a more
Wicked Disposition than this is; because it sticks at nothing which lies in its
way, though never so Mean and Base, never so Dishonorable and Scandalous,
never so Barbarous and Cruel.

Therefore, to beget in our Hearts a Spirit of true Christian Charity, to
Nourish and to Express it also, here we should begin to Subdue our Minds, to
Tame and Govern our wild Passions, and to bring our selves to a due Temperament
and Composure: Considering what a crowd of Business we are in here, and what a
justling World this is, we must not expect, but that there will be Offenses.
But then we should remember, that we are all of us one Man's Children; made of
the same Flesh and Blood, subject to the same Follies and Infirmities, and for
that Reason are equally obliged all of us, to take Pity and Compassion upon one
another. There is not one of us, but stands in need of an Atonement: And the
right way of making it is, not by Sacrificing our Charity; (that will increase
our Guilt, in stead of being an acceptable Oblation;) but to serve the brutish
part of our Nature, our Unreasonable Passions, as the Ancients were wont to
serve their Cattle; to bring them to the Fire, and make them Victims. But to
speak more particularly: You see how many ways Anger becomes Sinful; and to
keep our selves Innocent, we must be very careful to express our Charity, by
ordering and behaving our selves Charitably in every respect.

First, Govern the Beginnings of Passion, after a Charitable manner. Do not
presently give up Reason to Spleen; nor cease to be Men, because you conceive
your selves affronted. But Pause a while; Consider, Think, Examine, Argue in
your Minds with Calmness, with Deliberation, and with Candor. Before there be
an Eruption of Choler, I wish People would attentively repeat the Lord's
Prayer; it might be a good means of teaching them to be Charitable unto others,
by being Charitable unto themselves; and by begging God's Pardon for their own
Trespasses, to forgive those that Trespass against them. It was the Advice of a
Philosopher to Augustus, That when he was moved, he should Read over the Greek
Alphabet before he spoke, or did any thing. For Men seldom do any thing in
Anger, but what they do amiss, and aftewards repent of. Passion is an ill
Councellor, and a worse Executioner: And therefore before the Foot or the Hand
stirs, it is good to Delay, and to take Time: In that Time, ask your selves a
few Questions; Whether the Provocation be Just? Whether it be not
Inconsiderable, and beneath the Cognizance of a Rational Creature, that ought
to have a great Mind, above the reach of every Trifle? Whether the Offender be
not a good Man in the main? Whether he himself had no Provocations? Whether he
did it not through the Infirmity and Weakness of Humane Nature? Whether it was
not Undesigned? Whether Ignorance, Imprudence, or Inadvertency, was not the
Cause of it? Whether your Folly will not be as great as his, or perhaps
greater? Whether he does not Repent? Whether you do not intend to Repent your
self? Why your Repentance should be considered, and not his? Whether your
Patience, Lenity, and Greatness of Mind, will not oblige him, and make him love
you? And, Whether the poor Man may not have one time or other a fair
opportunity of making you Amends? It Is odds, but by that time these Things are
well considered, your Blood will cool, and be brought to a Temper; and then you
will have gained a Brother: Nay, you will have gained your self; you will have
the better of your self; you will be a Winner in both respects; you will go off
with the Comfort and Honor of a double Conquest, and each gotten with a very
gentle Hand.

If, for want of due Consideration, the Fit continues some hours, you must,
Secondly, Govern the Fever so, as to keep it from being Hectic. There is a
time for all Things under the Sun, and then it is high time for you to express
your Charity when the Sun is ready to set. Cool Thoughts should be for the
Night; and when the Hurries of the Day are over, we should leave off Wrath, and
let go Displeasure too. An Implacable Temper is very Offensive to the Divine
Being, because it is utterly void of Charity, and true Religion. By the Laws of
Christianity, every one has a Right to his Neighbor's Mercy; especially if he
be sorry for his Faults, and desires Forgiveness. That indeed every Offender is
bound to do; and the least he can do, is to ask Pardon; yet that is enough,
where the Injury is not so great, as to require Satisfaction. Repentance and
Entreaties are Satisfaction sufficient in common and ordinary Cases: And when a
Man has gone thus far, he has acted like a Christian, and may safely put his
Cause into God's hand, who is an Avenger of all that are oppressed with Wrong.
But the Wretch that hardens his Heart, and stops his Ear against Christian
Application, contracteth Guilt intolerable: His own Sins are all bound; no
outward Acts of Religion avail him, for want of a Charitable Spirit within; his
very Prayers are stopped; for how shall God hear him, that hears not his
Brother? He heapeth daily such a Load of Sins upon himself, as makes him
incapable of the Mercy of that good God, who expects no other Satisfaction at
our hands, for the Affronts against his own Majesty, but our Repentance and
Prayers.

Let us hear our Great Lawgiver, Luke 17. 3, 4. Take heed unto your selves; If
thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him:
And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day
turn again to thee, saying, I Repent, thou shall forgive him. Nay, I very much
question, whether a Christian may stay for an Offender's Repentance in every
Case. For St. Matthew delivers us that Law of Charity without that Condition,
Matthew. 18. And if our Savior's Love to us, be the Rule and Standard of our
Love to one another; it seems to be our Duty, and that which best becomes the
Generous Spirit of a Christian, to be beforehand with our Enemies, as Christ
was with his: And even for the Offended Party to endeavor for Reconciliation
as He did; though but in hopes of their Repentance.

But, Thirdly, Let a Provocation be never so just, and Resentments never so
long-lived, we must above all Things beware of all Actions, and of all
Intentions that are Revengeful. For Proceedings of this kind are a most
horrible Violation of the Laws of Religion, Charity, and Humanity also. They
are for Mischief and Hurt only; and therefore Savor of the Devil's Temper, and
Seal a Man up to Eternal Flames. It is a dreadful thing to want Bowels, I may
call it, a great Curse; for a Man seldom comes to that high pitch of
Inhumanity, as to have a hardened Heart, but by the Judgment of God, though the
Work be a Man 's own; yet so it is, that a Trade of Uncharitableness draws on
Cruelty: So that by putting off the Christian, People learn by degrees to throw
aside Man too; whereas the Design of our Religion is, rather to make us Angels.
To this purpose we are strictly commanded, not to Avenge our selves; not to
Recompense Evil for Evil; but to overcome Evil with Good; to be Patient,
Merciful, and Kind; if an Enemy Hunger, to Feed him; if he Thirst, to give him
Drink; and thus to heap Coals of Fire upon his Head; not to hurt, but to
in-tender and melt him.

I do not deny, but great Prudence and Caution may be used in Treating such as
have done us considerable Wrongs: For though we are bound to forgive them, and to
wish them well, as sincerely as we wish our selves, and to do them good
Offices; yet we are not obliged to love them in an equal degree and proportion,
nor to take them again into our Bosom, (at least not presently) who have
already wounded us to the quick. However, all manner of Revenge is utterly
unlawful. Revenge is, not when a Man punishes an Offender justly, moderately,
and with a charitable Purpose of doing him, or others Good, (so Parents punish
their very Children, and Magistrates a Delinquent;) but when he thirsts to
wreak, and execute his Hatred, only, or chiefly, to satisfy an enraged Mind,
and with a cruel Design, to grieve, afflict, or torment his Neighbor. This is
extreme Wickedness in a Christian; a Thing that was Condemned even by the wiser
Heathens: Nay, that which was not permitted, the Jews themselves to do with
their own private Hands, though some Things were permitted them for the
Hardness of their Hearts: They were allowed indeed to require an Eye for an
Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth; but this was to be done by the Magistrates Hand;
the rest of the Jews had a common standing Law given them, Lev. 19. 18. Thou
shall not avenge (thy self,) nor bear any Grudge against the Children of thy
People.

All manner of Revenge is now sinful, though it be sought even of Public
Authority; and that too under another Name, and with specious Colors.
Christianity is the highest Improvement of Virtue; and the Laws of it are so
strict and perfect, so sublime and pure, that all Tinctures of Malice and
Ill Will are a Violation of them. The Spirits of Christians should be above all
such base Alloy; they should be refined and raised to that high and noble
Pitch, and true Greatness, as to pass by Affronts with Meekness and Charity,
and (if it be possible) with Slightings and Disdain. This is that true
Greatness and Nobleness of Mind, which becomes us all. For it is rightly
observed by Plutarch, and other old Moralists who have written against our
Unreasonable and Foolish Passions, That Desires of Revenge proceed from a
Defect in Nature, from Infirmity and Weakness; from something that is Little,
and Mean; and therefore those Creatures are most addicted to it, which are most
Contemptible: Bees and Wasps, and those Infects among Mankind too, which
therefore bite, and sting, and vex, and wound, because they are of low and
fordid Spirits. Wrath (says Plutarch) does some Things that are terrible, and
some that Plutarch de ira cohib.
are ridiculous: And therefore of all the Passions we are subject to, this is
the most hated, and the most despised. A plain Argument, that this Passion is
of the meanest Extraction; that it proceeds from the most abject, degenerate,
and fordid Natures; from Slime and Dirt that is utterly inconsistent with the
Purity of Religion.

That Holy and Just One, who descended from Heaven to cleanse, raise, and
perfect our Nature, took great care to rid us of all this Filth, by the noblest
Precepts, and by his own (the noblest and most perfective) Example. The
Infinite Excellence and Dignity of his Divine Nature, made all Offenses against
him swell to infinite degrees of Guilt, and consequently rendered the Actors of
them liable to all the degrees of Punishment, which infinite Justice might have
inflicted. And yet, with what evenness of Mind did he endure all Reproaches,
Contumelies, Disgrace, Stripes, Buffetings, Wounds, Nails, and Cross too? He
bore all, though from the rudest, the vilest, the most malicious Hands, with
Patience and Lenity; with Meekness and Self-denial; with Humility and
Resignation; with Candor and the highest Charity to the last Gasp. When he was
reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 23. And what was
this for? Why (says the Apostle) Christ suffered for us, leaving us an
Example, that we should follow his Steps.

IV.
4. Having thus discoursed of the two Characters of Charity relating to Anger,
and showed how we are to express this great Christian Grace in each respect; by
Commanding, Governing, and Moderating that mischievous Passion, I proceed now
to the Consideration of the next Property, which is called Kindness; Charity
suffers long, and is Kind: Meaning, that a Charitable Person is
Compassionate, and Beneficent, both in Disposition and Actions; ready in every
respect to do all the Good he can. By giving us a Description, St. Paul shows
us a Duty; and he opens it particularly in another place, which seems to be an
Explication of this whole Verse; Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. Let all Bitterness, and Wratb,
and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking, be put away from you with all
Malice; And be ye kind one to another. The Greek Word in both places is in
effect the same; and the Apostle's meaning is, that in stead of hating and
maligning one another, we should be tenderly affected, and useful to each
other, ready from our Hearts to do one another all the good Offices which lie
in our Power. Now for the due Practicing of this Matter, the Laws of Charity
require of us these following Things.

1. That we have a true inward Sense of other Men's Wants and Afflictions. This
is that which the Holy Scripture calls Tender-heartedness, Ephesians. 4. 32. Bowels
of Mercy, Colos. 3. 12. And, Having Compassion one of another, 1 Pet. 3. 8. By
which Expressions is meant, that we should Sympathize with all that are in
Distress, and have a Fellow-feeling of one another Afflictions. For where
Men's Hearts are so hard, and crusty, that their Brethren's Calamities make
little or no Impressions upon them, there it is impossible for Charity to be so
Kindly, Free, and Generous, as the Laws of Christianity do require. Whosoever has
this World's good, and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up his Bowels
of Compassion from him; how dwells the Love of God (or of Man) in him? 1 John
3. 17. It holds true in all Cases, as well as in that of Almsgiving; for the
Heart is the Spring of all our Actions: And it is as hard for Charity to take
its due course and scope, where the Bowels are shut up, as for a River to run,
where the Fountain is quite dried up: Rocks many times yield a Stream, but a
Stony Heart never; to be sure, not that Liberal Supply of any kind, which the
Necessities of miserable Objects call for. Therefore those Old Philosophers
were cruelly mistaken, who, though they were for outward Offices of Humanity;
yet thought it unbecoming Reasonable Natures, and inconsistent with a Man's
Happiness, to be moved with Compassion in the Mind, and to be pierced with a
sense of another Misfortunes. This is to commit a Rape upon all Mankind; to
Ravish them of their Bowels. Nay, it does not only stifle the very Principle of
Charity, but it prepares a way too, for the greatest Injustice and Oppression:
For how can he stick at any thing, though never so hard, that has no sense of
it? As long as the Affliction touches not himself, he feels no more his
Neighbor's Smart, though he himself gives the blow, than a Flint, or an
Adamant; and at such Hands neither is Mercy nor Justice to be expected. This
was one great Reason, why the Son of God was pleased to take Humane Nature upon
him; that he might be sensible of those our common Miseries, whereof a Spirit
is not capable of feeling. In all things it behoved him to be made like unto
his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, Heb. 2. 17.
We have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities, but was in all Points tempted (that is, tried by Afflictions,
acquainted with Sorrows and Griefs,) like as we are, Hebr. 4. 15. His own
through-sense of the Hardships of the World, made him the more willingly go
about doing good during his abode in the Flesh, and the more merciful to
Mankind now, since all Power in Earth and Heaven has been put into his Hands.
And this will be in us the Principle of right Christian Charity to one another;
to be painfully affected with the Sufferings of others: And to this end we
should use all possible means, to mould our Hearts rightly, to supple them into
a very soft, tender, and compassionate Temper; and to let all moving Idea's
sink deep into them, because we are the Body of Christ, and all of us Members
of it, knit together by the same Ligaments of Faith and Hope; we should be all
animated with the same Spirit of Charity too; we should have, as St. Paul
speaks, 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26. The same Care one for another; so that if one Member
suffer, all the Members should suffer with it.

2. But, Secondly, This is not enough, if it be all. It Is poor kindness just to
be troubled for another, and to say, God help him. Grief, and Sorrow, and
Anguish, and good Wishes, must break out into Action; else, all the rest is but
good natured Compliment. The Laws of Charity bind us, not to be Barren, or
Unfruitful, but to be full of Good Works, according as our own Capacities, and
according as the Wants and Necessities of other People are.

First, To do their Souls all the Good we can. This is the noblest Work of
Charity, because it is done to the noblest Part of Man: And because there is a
necessity for the Soul, upon its parting from the Body, to pass into an
Everlasting, Unchangeable State, either of Happiness, or Misery: Greater
Charity there cannot be, than to minister such Helps and Means to it now, as
serve to prepare it for a Blessed Eternity: As, to instruct it in the right
sound Faith; to teach it the true Fear of God; to subdue its Sinful and
Inordinate Lusts; and to bring it to an habitual Practice of all manner of
Piety and Virtue. He which converteth a Sinner from the Error of his way, shall
save a Soul from Death, Jam. 5. 20. Such a Man saves several Souls at once;
his Neighbor's, and his own too. A most Honorable Office certainly; the most
Excellent Work, that is Crowned with a Reward so Glorious, so Infinite.

Secondly, Charity obliges us to express a tender Regard to the Worldly
Necessities of others also, according to our Abilities. God, who has ordered
all Things in Number, Measure, and Weight, has of his great Goodness and
Wisdom, made variety of Conditions among Mankind, and has so suited Men's
Capacities, Fortunes, and Abilities, to their several States of Life, that
every one is to be useful in some respect or other to the rest. And because no
Man can possibly live alone, or support himself in a State of utter Separation
from all others; Common Necessity ties us all together, like so many Limbs and
Members into one Body, that each may minister its Assistance toward the
Maintenance of the whole. Now so far as any one wants, and becomes feeble, so
far it is disabled and hindered from lending its own help to its Fellows: So
that were nothing else to be considered but the Preservation, and common
Interest of Humane Society, that alone would be enough to set all Hands at
work, upon extending themselves in Acts of Charity.

But our Obligations to it are the greater still, because the Divine Being, who
cares for us all, has made that which is a Civil Duty, to be a part of our
Religion too; that which the Necessities of Humane Society call for, he himself
requires as necessary in order to our Eternal Interest. Upon both accounts
therefore, as we are Men, and Christians also, we must be very careful to
express the Benevolent Disposition of our Hearts, by all outward Acts of
Beneficence, according as our Stations and Capacities are, and according as the
Needs and Sufferings of other People require our helping Hand; as, to save
Life, when it is in danger; to deliver Captives; to relieve the Oppressed; to
take care of the Sick; to help the Infirm; to feed the Hungry; to cloth the
Naked; to cherish the Comfortless; to lift up the Head that hangs down; to
visit the Fatherless and Widow in their Affliction; and to send up to the God
of Comfort, our Charitable Intercessions for all. It was a Pious and Noble
Reflection, which Job made upon himself, in the midst of his own Distress, Job
29. from Verse. 11. to Verse. 18. When the Ear heard me, then it blessed me; and
when the Eye saw me, it gave witness to me: Because I delivered the Poor when
he cried, and the Fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The Blessing
of him that was ready to perish, came upon me, and I caused the Widow's Heart
to sing for joy. I put on Righteousness, and it clothed me; my Judgment was a
Robe, and a Diadem. I was Eyes to the Blind; and Feet was I to the Lame. I was
a Father to the Poor, and the Cause which I knew not, I searched out. And I
brake the Jaws of the Wicked, and plucked the Spoil out of his Teeth.

Thirdly; Besides our doing Good to the Souls and Bodies of Men after this
manner, we are bound to express our Charity by being kind to their Reputation
also. Interest, Fortune, Comfort, Peace, Life it self, depends upon this; and
it is the more necessary to be preserved with Care, because it is easy to be
lost, and the hardest Thing to be recovered. Nay, in some cases, the common
Welfare, and the very Honor of God depends upon it too. For if the Persons,
whose Credit is wounded, be placed in any public Station either in Church, or
State, it will be impossible for them, as long as the Wound remains, to do the
World that Good, or God that Service, which is the end of their Office; and by
this means the Blow strikes very deep, and affects in some measure the whole
Community: And therefore for the Love of God and Man, we should always
endeavor either to prevent, or heal. If the Persons reproached deserve it not,
it is but Justice to be their Advocates; if they do, it is Charity however: But
what ever it be to them, to be sure it is Charity to the Public; and perhaps an
Effectual, as well as Charitable Way, to shame and reclaim the false Accusers
themselves, whose business is, not to convince or mend others, but to expose
them. Besides, rarely does any one's Reputation bleed, but the first Drop is
drawn by those Backbitings and Whisperings, which St. Paul mentions, 2 Cor. 12.
20. by Artifices in private, where the greatest Innocence cannot stand upon the
Defensive; and then it is like the breaking in upon the Dead, that cannot help
themselves: In which case Common Charity should move every Man to be for a
Rescue, Alas! even Crimes should be buried, and lie quiet in the Grave; because
they cannot appear above Ground without Scandal.

V.
5. Having showed you that Office of Charity, which consists in Kindness, or
in doing others Good in every respect, I proceed now to the next Character the
Apostle gives of it; Charity envyeth not: That is, will not be disturbed or
grieved at another's Happiness; or at any Thing, wherein another excels. The
Scripture calls this Passion, An Evil Eye, Matthew. 20. 15. And Plutarch compares
it to a Disease in the Eye, by means whereof it cannot endure to behold any
splendid or bright Object.

Of all the Distempers of the Mind, there is none that proceeds from a worse,
nor yet from a weaker Cause; for it is not grounded upon any Personal Crime,
but upon a Wicked Opinion of Partiality in Providence, and upon an Abusive
Conceit of ones own Deserts. Where is any Injustice or Blame in the Man, if God
pleases to bless him with outward or inward Gifts above his Neighbors? Yet
this is the Original of Envy, that for Great and Wise Reasons, God does
dispense his Goodness to some with a more Liberal Hand, than what he extends
unto others. And can any Thing be more wicked, than to quarrel with the Divine
Being for his Bounty? Or can any Thing be more unreasonable, than to find fault
with a Man, because he is happily made a Partaker of it? For Anger, and Hatred,
and some other Vices, there might be some Tolerable Pretense; did not the Laws
of Religion forbid them. This Vice is the most unfortunate of all, that it has
no Covering, but an Evil Heart.

But I am not now to consider so much the Unreasonable Nature of Envy, as how
contrary and opposite it is to a Spirit of Charity; for, whereas a Charitable
Person wishes well to all, and endeavors, as far as in him lies, to do Good
to all; the Envious Wretch grieves and pines, murmurs and complains, frets and
rages at his Neighbor's Happiness. Such a Wretch is not so much as Charitable
to himself; because his great (I had almost said, his only) kindness is to a
Vice, that is his cruelest Enemy; to a Vice, that cuts and pierces him to the
quick; to a Vice that eats daily upon his Vitals, and into his Heart; and in
return for its Entertainment, gives him nothing but Gall and Wormwood. And how
can it be expected, that a Man so embittered should be Charitable to any other.
If you have Envying, and bitter Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the Truth. This Wisdom descends not from above, but is Earthly,
Sensual, and Devilish: For where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion, and
every Evil Work: Jam. 3. 14, 15, 16. There is Meaness of Spirit, Covetousness,
Detraction, Hatred, Lying, Malice, Fraud, Oppression, Partiality, Cruelty, and
too often Blood-guiltiness it self. The first Blood that ever was shed upon the
Earth, was shed out of mere Envy; because the Lord had respect unto Abel, and
to his Offering, Genesis 4. 4. Yet how was it a Crime in Abel, or why was he to be
blamed, that God loved him?

An Envious Spirit being so inconsistent with Charity, so repugnant to it, so
utterly destructive of it, we should use all possible means to pluck out of our
Souls this poisonous Root of Bitterness: Then shall we be Charitable indeed
when we unfeignedly desire, not only the Eternal, but even the Temporal
Prosperity of all Men, and strive according to our Ability to Promote it. Then
shall we express our Charity indeed, when we seek not our own only, but
consider the Cases, and suit our selves to the Circumstances of others, as if
they were our own too; when we bless God for them, and are satisfied and
pleased to see our Neighbors sit at Peace under their Vines, delighted and
cheerful with their Milk and Honey about them. Then are we Charitable to all
Men, when in stead of fretting against any, we take Compassion upon the worst,
lamenting and pitying their Infelicities, as well as Sin, when they abuse and
misapply the Mercies of God to them. Then are we Charitable indeed, when we
rejoice for those Gifts which the Divine Bounty bestows, especially upon Good
Men; when we are Thankful for them, and make this Christian Use of them, as to
become our selves the Wiser and Better for them. Then are we Charitable indeed,
when we are contented with our own present Portion, and satisfied with other
Men's, entirely submitting to the Will of God, with this comfortable
Persuasion, That in the several Acts of his Providence to them and us, he does
that which is best for us all; if not that which we most Covet, yet that which
we most Need. Briefly, to Acquiesce in his Goodness and Wisdom, considering how
much we Enjoy above what we really deserve, how many Thousands that deserve as
well come vastly short of us, and how little short we our selves comparatively
come of those who deserve better; to put a due value upon every the least
Blessing of God, and with all modest Resignation to leave our selves, our
Fortunes, and our Brethren, to his Government and Disposal: This is at once to
be Wise, Patient, Pious, and Charitable also.

VI.
6. The next Character which St. Paul gives of Charity, as a Rule for us to
express it by, is not so readily understood as the former, because it admits of
various Interpretations: The Expressions which the Apostle uses, is no where
else to be found in the Holy Scripture. Very probably it is a Latin word made
Greek, as some other words in the New Testament are, and therefore it is no
wonder, if it bears a very doubtful Sense; especially considering, that it is
no very common Word among the Old Latins neither: (...), is the Expression;
which our Translation renders, Does not vaunt it self: But this is included in
the following Character of Charity, that is, it is not puffed up.

If that Construction be right which Dr. Hammond mentions (though without any
Credit) out of Phavorinus, it should be rendered thus, Charity flattereth not;
and certainly Flatterers are the most Uncharitable People in the World; for
they carry a Feather in their Hands with a design to do soft Execution, and
therefore are to be avoided as base and cursed Fellows, as Destroyers and
Pests, says Plutarch, (De Lib. Educ.) To which purpose, that wise Heathen has
written a large Discourse; (Plut. de Adul. and Amici. Discrimine.)

Some Divines render the Apostle's Expression thus, Charity is not Inconstant;
Others, Charity is not Pretending, Feigned, and Hypocritical; in which sense,
Clemens Alexandrinus and St. Basil seem to agree.

There are no less than nine or ten Interpretations of the Phrase: But the
fairest, and that which is most followed by the Learned, is that of St.
Chrysostom and Tertullian; Charity is not Precipitant; or, a Charitable Person
does not run headlong; does not act rashly, boisterously, and without due
consideration.

That Noble Faculty the Understanding, being planted in the Soul by Almighty
God, to direct us in all Cases, Reason ought to be the Principle and Rule of
our Moral Actions: We should first propose to our selves a good End in all our
Undertakings, and then make choice of such good Means, as right Reason tells us
are fit and proper for the attaining it. Unless we do manage our selves thus
considerately, we do not act like Rational Beings, but like Madmen, Fools, and
Brutes.

Therefore when we are about to deal with one another, we should strictly
Examine beforehand, Whether the End we drive at be Charitable, or consistent
with our Neighbors Good and Welfare; and whether the Means we would use be
Charitable in like manner. For if either the End, or the Means, be contrary to
the Law of Charity, the Action it self must needs be very sinful, and defile
the Conscience; and therefore it should be well weighed and considered
beforehand. Men should not do Things, especially Things of this Nature, in an
hurry; nor suffer their Passions to carry them violently on, before Right
Reason has had Audience; because when an Action is done hand over head, it is
a very great Chance if it be not Evil. The Thing Intended may be Evil, for
ought the Man knows; for he considers it not; and the course he takes to bring
it about, may be Evil too, and seldom is an Action unadvisedly done, but it is
so: And then Mischiefs unavoidably follow, and some too that perhaps were not
designed at the first. It Is St. Chrysostom's Observation, That Charity makes
one Prudent, Cautious, Grave, and Condescending, and by bringing the Mind to
Temper and Thoughtfulness, preventeth Rash and Injurious Proceedings. But if
Spleen make head against Reason, and Inconsideration gets the Mastery, Power
strikes at every Thing that stands in the way, which in that case is as a Knife
in the Hand of a Madman.

Therefore in the whole intercourse of those Offices, which usually pass
between Man and Man, we should deliberate about our Actions in good time; and
how Alluring soever any Thing appears, we should narrowly look into the Nature
of it, in stead of viewing the Face; and consider thoroughly first, whether it
be Just, then whether it be Charitable also, consistent with that Goodness and
Kindness of Mind which becomes a Christian. If the Thing be contrary to the Law
of Love, and such as we would not have another to do to our own selves, we must
with a very quick Hand lay the Bridle upon our Passions, lest the Beast should
prove Heady, and by running away with us at all adventures, rush us headlong
into a great many Sins. We should sit down a while and consider, how short our
Life is at the best, and what little time in comparison we have to do Good in
the World; and how suddenly many drop into the Grave, before they have done any
at all. We should consider, what base Vices Hatred and Malice are; what
Dishonorable and Wicked Purposes they tend to; what Mean and Hellish Arts Men
are driven to, for the putting of them in execution; what Disorders they make
in the World; how Prejudicial they are to the Interest of Mankind, to the Peace
and Comfort of Humane Life; and what Irreparable Mischiefs arise from them
naturally, not only to Single Persons, but to Bodies, to Families, to Public
Societies, nay to the whole Church and State, when once they come to break out,
as very often they do, into Epidemical Outrage. We should consider too, what
Rewards they bring to the Actors themselves, after all these Dreadful
Consequences; Vexation and Anguish of Spirit, a Polluted Conscience, a lost
Credit, an abbreviated Life, and in stead of any solid Satisfaction in the
Course, or at the End of it, Eternal Damnation at last, both of Soul and Body.
What Fruit will Men have then of those Things, whereof they ought even now to
be Ashamed? I am persuaded, if People would but Deliberate thus beforehand,
and suffer their Minds kindly to entertain these, or some of these
Considerations, it would be impossible for half so much Folly and Storm to be
in the World: Such an excellent way this is, not only to express, but to
increase Men's Charity to one another, and to keep them from tumbling
precipitously into a vast Complication of Wickednesses and Misfortunes, which
one day Uncharitable Wretches will repent of; though perhaps not till it be too
late; till they have Sinned the time of their Peace away.

VII.
7. The next Character of Charity is, that it is not Puffed up; allows not
People to be Proud and Arrogant, to be Haughty and Supercilious, to have an
immodest, lofty, and over-high Conceit of a Man's own self; or to behave
himself with Contempt and Scorn toward those, whom he looks down upon at a
distance as his Inferiors.

There is hardly another Vice that is more Foolish, more Hateful, than Pride
is; none that is so like to the Devil's Temper; I am sure, none that stands in
more direct opposition to all the Laws of Charity. An humble Mind stoops to
all, though the meanest and lowest Offices; nor is there any Act of Love, which
it is not willing to reach out a kind Hand unto, though it be to the washing of
Feet: And the Reason is, because a truly humble Man has so modest an Opinion
of himself, and so high an Esteem of others, that he is apt to reckon all good
Offices to be a kind of Debt to them, and a very necessary, though a poor
Tribute of Honor to the Meek and Lowly Jesus. But Pride sets Men so remote
from their Neighbors, that to desire their Friendship, looks like
Incroachment; and for themselves to offer it, seems to them a Transgressing the
Rules of Greatness; and so in that distance and interval between State and
Meanness, many Acts of True Charity are wanting, many Blessed Opportunities of
doing Good drop to the Ground, and are quite lost, and perhaps too when the
Necessities of Poor Wretches are most pressing. Seldom do Proud Men think of
God himself, They care not for God, neither is God in all their Thoughts, says
David, Psalm. 10. 4. They think not of him as their Maker and Benefactor, by
whom they live; or as their Lawgiver and Judge, by whom they must be Sentenced
to Eternity; at least they think not with that Gratitude, Reverence, and depth
of Thought, which should swallow up all their vain Imaginations. And if God be
not in their Minds, it is no wonder if Men be not there, and if they be full of
nothing but Themselves. But this is not all: The Case would be better though
they did no Good, if they did no Hurt neither. But Pride is such an Injurious
and Imperious Vice, that where it Rules, it admits of no Bound but those of
its own setting, and those are as uncertain, as precarious Privileges under an
Arbitrary Power. Pride commonly has Covetousness for its Factor, to Toil and
Drudge for its Maintenance; and when those Vices go hand in hand, nothing is
safe that is within reach, though it be Naboth's Vineyard. Ahab was sick at
Heart for it, and to recover his Content, the Poor Man's Blood was sought for
too, as the speediest Remedy. Men of such Tempers are so bloated with an
Opinion of their own Deserts, that they fancy themselves to have a kind of
Right to every Thing, especially if it be judged necessary and convenient; and
how then can we hope for Charity, when there is no room for Justice? Fraud,
Rapine, and Oppression, are the usual designs of an elated Mind, and it is the
harder to stop them, because Proud People are ever apt to overlook their
Actions; think it a Diminution to obey such a Thing as Conscience; are too Big
to be taken to account; too High to ask themselves; is there not Iniquity in my
Right Hand?

Indeed People who are thus puffed up, have not always power to hurt others
much in their Fortunes; but then they seldom fail to oppress them in their
Fame; which is another Thing utterly inconsistent with that Candor and
Goodness, which evermore attends a Charitable Temper. Pride is always very
Censorious; though many times there is no other Reason for the hard Character
it gives, but this only, That it may have a Foil, to set off it self. The
greatest Innocence is often Reproached, because Proud People care not what
others deserve, but would have you know how Singular their own Merits are; by
exposing a Neighbor, they hope you will think the better and the more highly
of them: By throwing Dirt upon others Faces, they think their own will appear
the more Beautiful; like the haughty Pharisee in the Gospel, who thought to
Recommend himself to God, by making Reflections; I am not as other Men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, nor even as this Publican, Luke 18. 11.

By this Injurious and Uncharitable Practice, many Mischiefs befall Mankind; as
Strife, Railings, Animosities, Violence, and all manner of Outrage. So that
Solomon says, Prove. 13. 10. Only by Pride comes Contention. It Is the only
Natural Mother of Contention: There are Accidental Causes of it, as
Drunkenness, Passion, Revenge, and the like, which bring forth Strife upon
preceding Heats and Provocations; but Pride is the only Vice, that has a
constant, natural Inclination that way; a Principle that tends to Strife,
whether there be just Provocations or no; the Vice that loves it, and delights
in it; and indeed that Signalizeth it self chiefly by it; for had we not Reason
to beware of Quarrels, and to be afraid of them, for the mischievous Nature and
Consequence of them, very little notice would be taken of Proud People; they
would be the most Slighted and Scorned, as now they are the most Hated
Creatures in the World.

Therefore that we may beget in us a right Spirit of Charity, and be able duly
to express it, we should Learn of our great Lawgiver and Exemplar, to be very
lowly in Heart, Matthew. 11. 29. We should first lay our selves low under an
awful Apprehension of God's Greatness, and under a just Sense of our own
Vileness and Unworthiness, to be sure in comparison of Him; of whose
Perfections and Glory there is no End. Then we should consider, with what
admirable Wisdom God has ordered the World; that as all Things depend upon
him, so under him one Thing depends upon another, and ministers Help to
another; and in this respect or that one Thing excels another too: That Man
himself, though he struts upon the Earth with such Pomp and State, is beholding
to the meanest Creature for Succor and Assistance: That the most Valuable
Things any Man has are all borrowed, and that but for a little time too. That
though the Righteous be more Excellent than his Neighbor, yet it is God that
makes the difference, and that we have nothing of our own but our Follies and
our Sins. Few think it reasonable to be proud of these; and because all the
rest are Debts, there is no reason for any to be proud of them neither. Upon
these accounts we should prick the Bubble in our Minds, which has nothing in
it but Air, nothing about it but Fantastical Gaiety, to please Children and
Fools. The business of a Man is to do Good; and in order thereunto, we should
Prefer one another in Honor, Romans 12. 10. Condescend to Men of low Estate,
Verse. 16. Do nothing through Strife or Vainglory, but in lowliness of Mind
each should esteem other better than themselves, Philip. 2. 3. Because how
great soever one Man's Gifts may be, those of the most inferior Rank have in
some respect or other greater Gifts than he has. Briefly we should imitate the
great Humility of the Lord Jesus, as a sure way of expressing his great Charity
too; who though He was in Form of God, and thought it no Robbery to be Equal
with God, yet made himself of no Reputation. As he laid aside his Glory for the
Form of a Servant; so he laid aside his Garments for the lowest Ministration,
to wash the Feet of his Disciples with those most holy Hands, which had wrought
so many Miracles, nay to wash the Feet of Judas himself, that was now going to
betray him. But I shall speak no more at present of this Virtue, Humility,
because it will require a particular Discourse by it self.

VIII.
8. The Eighth Character of Charity is, That it does not behave it self
Unseemly; does nothing to others that is Indecent, Foul, or Unsuitable, to the
Excellence and Honor of Christ's Religion.

One great Reason is, because disorderly and disgraceful Actions are not only
Evil in their own Nature, but are Evil in their Effects, Scandalous and very
Hurtful in their Consequences; they carry a strong Infection with them, which
is of Evil Operation; they serve to taint the Minds, and corrupt the good
Manners of other People, that behold them; and so are apt to draw a great many
more to the Practice of them. This is that which the Scripture means, when it
speaks of making Men to Sin; of laying a Stumbling Block in their way; of
wounding their Consciences; of Offending, and giving Offenses; as those two
wicked Sons of Eli did, Hophni and Phineas, when they abused Women in that
shameful manner, 1 Samuel 2. And so it is always, when People are allured into
the Communion of any Guilt; when they are encouraged and tempted to do an Evil
Thing by seeing others do it. Nothing is more Natural than Imitation,
especially in bad Things. Such is the Corruption of our Nature, that every one
is of a soft, waxy Disposition on that side, apt to receive deeper Impressions
from one ill Example, than from many good ones. There is a Contagion in Vice,
which insensibly goes from one to another, till the Disease becomes General. A
Disorderly Master teaches his whole Family Licentiousness and Irreligion. An
Unjust, Malicious, and Dissolute Neighbor, is a Plague to a whole Society, and
shows others the way how to be so too. A Seditious Subject emboldens many more
to disturb the Public Peace; and one Factious Preacher is enough to raise
Animosities, Quarrels, and Schisms in a whole Church; when once the Infection
spreads, God knows where it will end; the Sin and Mischief runs on, and is
still propagated with the Example.

Upon this account every Scandalous and Shameful Action is utterly Repugnant to
the Rule of Charity, because it is Injurious, and Injurious in the highest
degree; Injurious to the Souls of Men, to those Precious and Immortal Spirits
of Men, for which the Lord Jesus was pleased of his own mere Goodness and
Charity to die. This is a Sin of a very high Nature, a Sin against Christ,
faith St. Paul, 1 Cor. 8. 12. that does after a more peculiar manner, and with
a particular sort of Spear, wound that infinite Lover of Souls.

For the opening this Matter a little further, it will be very useful for us to
consider two famous Cases, that were in the beginning of Christianity, even in
the Days of the Apostles. Then there were two hot Controversies in the Church;
and it is observable, that in each Case the Controversy was about a Thing that
was purely indifferent; no particular Law, whether from the Nature of the
Thing, or from God, or from the Church, binding People to act the one way or
the other: And yet in both Cases, Charity was the great General Rule, which the
Apostles ordered Men to go by, for fear of tempting others into Sin; which
plainly shows, that to give a Scandalous Example, by any shameful or foul
Action, is a most abominable Practice.

The first Case related to those Jews, who were newly brought over to
Christianity. Many of them were so weak in their Faith, so uninstructed as yet
in the Doctrine of Christian Liberty, that they thought it still necessary for
them to observe the old Jewish Sabbath, and other Solemn Days, which Moses had
appointed, and to abstain totally from some sorts of Meats, which had been
forbidden by Moses: Others again made no scruple about these Things, but looked
upon those Days and Meats as Indifferent now under the Gospel; and accordingly
they used their Christian Liberty as to both. Now though St. Paul gave this
Rule to each Party, Romans 14. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not; and let not him that eats not, judge him that eats. Yet the
Apostle seems most inclined (as Charitable Men are apt to be) to the weaker
side; and that Charity might have the casting Hand in the whole Controversy.
He directed those who were thoroughly Instructed, not to use their full lawful
Liberty in the presence of a weak Brother, lest he should be tempted, either to
do as others did, though against his Conscience, or else to forsake the
Christian Communion; either of which would have been a deadly Sin. Judge this,
(says the Apostle) that no Man put a stumbling Block, or an occasion to fall,
in his Brother's way, Romans 14. 13. And again, If thy Brother be grieved (or
scandalized) by thy Meat, now walk thou not Charitably; destroy not him with
thy Meat, for whom Christ died, V. 15. And again, For Meat destroy not the Work
of Gods; all Things indeed are pure, but it is evil for that Man who eats
with Offense. It is good neither to eat Flesh, nor to drink Wine, nor any thing
whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak; V. 20, 21.

The other Case related to those Proselites, who had been brought over to
Christianity from Heathenism. Whereas there was an old General Custom among the
Heathens, to eat part of those Sacrifices, which had been offered to their
supposed Deities, many of them, though they had received the Christian Faith,
continued this Custom nevertheless; believing still, that the Things they
Worshipped were Real Beings, and that they themselves were better by much for
partaking of those their Sacrifices. Others knew, that these were grossly
mistaken; and were convinced, that those Idols were nothing but Fictitious and
Imaginary Deities: However these too resorted to the Idol-Feasts for
Compliance-sake, yet believing them not to be Religious, but ordinary Friendly
Meals. Now this was a very Shameful and Evil Practice: For though the eating of
those Meats, abstractedly and simply considered, was a Thing indifferent, yet
the Scandal it gave, made it utterly unlawful, because it was a Violation of
Charity; it confirmed others in their old Heathenish Opinion, and encouraged
them to go on still in their old Heathenish sinful Course. To rectify this
Matter therefore, St. Paul discourses in 1 Cor. 8. showing, that though he and
others had a very vile Opinion of the Heathen-Idols, yet it was a most shameful
and wicked thing to lay a stumbling Block in their Brethren's way, (that is the
Expression again;) that is, to Minister unto them any occasion of falling into,
or of continuing in a sinful Practice. Meat commends us not unto God; for
neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the worse.
But take heed, lest by any means this Liberty of yours become a stumbling Block
to them that are weak. For if a Man see thee, who have knowledge, sit at Meat
in the Idols Temple, shall not the Conscience of him that is weak, be
emboldened to eat those Things which are offered to Idols? And through thy
knowledge shall the weak Brother perish, for whom Christ died? Verse. 8, 9, 10,
11. And at the close of that Chapter he declared his own Peremptory Resolution;
That if Meat made his Brother to offend, he would eat no Flesh while the World
stood, lest he should make his Brother to offend. Here then is a noble Rule of
Charity for us all to go by, viz. To be very careful that we do not at any time
encourage others to do Evil, by our Indecent and Scandalous Examples in any
case: Not so much as in the use of Things purely Indifferent, much less by
doing Things that have a Moral and Natural Turpitude in them: Such Things are
of a most shameful Nature, and of very dangerous Consequence; and therefore we
should always beware of them, lest we be answerable for other Men's Blood and
Ruin, as well as our own.

St. Chrysostom understands the Apostle thus, Charity is not ashamed, and he
instanceth in our Blessed Savior, who was not at all ashamed, when the Harlot
washed his Feet with Tears, and wiped them with the Hairs of her Head, kissed
his Feet, and anointed them; nor when he was spit upon and abused by base
Fellows, nor when he carried a Thief and Murderer with him into Paradise. The
meaning of that great Man is, That true Charity does not permit one to do a
foul Thing, a Thing which he has just Reason to be ashamed of. The Lord Jesus
did all Things with a Charitable Purpose, and to Charitable Ends: And we that
are his Followers, should follow him in this, To win as many Souls to him as we
can, in stead of Discouraging or Offending any; to gain all that are about us,
at least to endeavor it. This is Christian Charity indeed, to become ones
Brother's Keeper; to lift him himself out of the Pit, whatever becomes of his
Ox or Ass; to save his Soul from Death; to be tenderly concerned for that
Immortal Part; to Convert him from the Error of his Way; to take him up like a
wandering Lost Sheep upon the Shoulders; and by a Good Example and Charitable
Directions, to show him the Way to Everlasting Life.

IX.
9. The Reason why Charity requires these and the like Offices at our hands is,
because it is a publick-spirited Grace. And that is another noble Character the
Apostle gives of a Charitable Person, that he seeks not his own; not his own
Private Advantage only, but the Profit of others too; and especially the good
of the whole Community, to which he stands related. This is included in the
very Notion of Charity; for it is a kind, benevolent Disposition, that makes us
lend an helping hand, wherever it is wanting. The truth is, this is Charity to
ones self too, as well as to others, if you consider the Matter rightly. That
we may be tied, and linked, and bound close together by mutual Love and
Kindness, God has so ordered the State of this World, that all Men have a
necessary Dependence one upon another; nor would there be such a shiftless,
pitiful, miserable Creature in the World as a Man, were he to live alone, and
by himself. Every one of us stands in need of the Society and Help of others,
as much as we need Food or Air. He needs the Magistrate, to Protect him under
God; the Statesman, to Consult and Advise for him; the Divine, to Instruct him;
the Tradesman, to Supply him with a World of Necessities; the Soldier, to Fight
for him; the painful Husbandman, to find him Bread; the poor Servant, to Work
and Sweat for him; nay, the Greatest and Richest Man on Earth needs the very
Beggar to do him good too: He needs even the Blind, and the Lame; the Hungry,
and Naked; the comfortless Mother, and her sucking Child: For what? Why to lay
up his Treasure in Heaven for him; for these are God's Receivers; by their
Hands it is that Men lend unto the Lord, that they may receive themselves Ten
thousand fold at the hands of Christ. Every one's Good is lodged more or less
every where, just as his Necessities are; some part in one hand, some in
another; and the greatest part in the Common Good, in the joint Stock of the
Community, in the Prosperity and Good of the whole Kingdom. It Is a great
mistake for a Man to think, that all his Interest lies at Home, in his Family,
and in Himself, and within the compass of his own Propriety. There indeed lies
his particular and private Interest: But what is that worth, if his public
Interest be destroyed? If the Welfare of the whole Nation be destroyed, and
gone? Every Man's particular Happiness is bound and wrapped up in that, and
depends on that; nor is it possible for the Body to suffer, but each Member
must suffer in proportion. And hence it follows, that he is a Fool, as well as
an ill Neighbor, that seeks his own private Welfare only, neglecting and
overlooking the Common Good, which is the main, and which Supports and
Preserves all the rest. It is sinful Self-Love that looks at Home only, and is
busy altogether within its own Walls. The Office of Charity is to look abroad;
to see how the Public fares; to consult and mind the public Good; to lend a
helping Hand in all public Necessities; and with all possible care to avoid
every Thing that is directly Injurious to the Common Happiness, and destructive
of it.

To express our Charity therefore in this respect also, as every one should
seek not his own, but another Wealth, 1 Cor. 10. 24. So all of us are obliged
after an especial manner, to study and provide for the Peace of the Society,
whereunto we all belong. Peace is the greatest Happiness upon Earth; as it is
the State of Heaven; the Blessing that gives a Relish to all the rest; that
makes all other Enjoyments sweet and delightful; and for that Reason the Holy
Scripture is wont to express all manner of Happiness by the General Name of
Peace. To destroy or disturb this, is to be a public Enemy; and where a Spirit
of Contention reigns and striveth, the War must be very dangerous to the
whole Body, because it is in the Bowels. 'Twere better living in a Desert, and
to wait for ones Food, as Elijah did, by the ministry of Ravens, than with a
Generation of People, that are Enemies to Peace; Restless, Froward, Troublesome,
Malicious, ready for any opportunity to Vex and Scourge one another. In such a
case, Society, which should be ones great Comfort, is his greatest Plague, for
Men are thereby the stronger to hurt him; Spleen works till it raises a
Confederacy, and then Mischiefs run with an Inundation; like Calamities in a
Civil War, where Force carries it, and Armed Enemies consider not what they
should, but what they can do.

To prevent the Plagues of this Life, as well as the Torments of another; the
Laws of the most Holy and Charitable Jesus require us to be Peacemakers, Matthew.
5. 9. To live in Peace, 2 Cor. 13. 11. To follow Peace with all Men, Hebr. 12.
14. To seek Peace, and ensue it, 1 Pet. 3. 11. To keep the Unity of the Spirit,
in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. If it be possible, as much as lies in us, to
live peaceably with all Men, Romans 12. 18. And, To follow after the Things that
belong to our Peace, Romans 14. 19. And certainly, if it be Charity to wish
others, and to do others all the Good we can, it must be the greatest Charity
to seek that which is the best Thing in the World for them, in what Capacities
soever we consider them, whether as Inhabitants of the Neighborhood, or as
Members of a Church, or as constituent Parts of a whole Kingdom; and when our
Charity is thus Large and Extensive, it will in some measure resemble the
Goodness of God, whose Mercy is over all his Works.

1. First, We are to express our Charity, by seeking and ensuring Peace in the
Neighbourhoods we belong to. How great a Comfort is it when Neighbors sit
quietly and contentedly under their Vines and Fig Trees, Loving and Kind to one
another, each reaching out his Clusters to the rest, all rejoicing together in
the Innocent and Friendly Participation of God's Mercies; and all Blessing God
for them? What a Good, what a Beautiful, what a Delightful Thing it is, when
People thus dwell together in Love, Unity, and Peace? What an Heavenly State is
this, in comparison of their wretched Condition, among whom Envy and Strife
rages; where Hatred seeks continually, how it may Grieve and Oppress, where
Ishmael's Hand is against every Man, and every Man's Hand against him? Where
one Tormenteth another, as if there were not Crosses enough in the World, but
they must make new ones to Crucify one another? Is this consistent with the
Nature and Laws of Charity? Is this to be Long-suffering, to be Kind? To behave
our selves seemly, and as it becomes Brethren? Is this to love our Neighbors
as our selves? And to love one another, as our Blessed Savior has loved us?
No, no; there is no more Charity in this, than there is in Hell. If we bite and
devour one another, whom do we resemble but that wicked One, who was a Murderer
from the beginning? If ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory
not, and lie not against the Truth. This Wisdom descends not from above, but
is Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish. For where Envying and Strife is, there is
Confusion, and every Evil Work. But the Wisdom that is from above is, first
Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, easy to be Entreated, full of Mercy, and good
Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy: Jam. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17.

2. We must express our Charity also, by an orderly and peaceable Temper, as to
Church Communion; not seeking our own Satisfaction, our own Ends, our own Ways,
but the General Good of that Mystical Body, whereof Christ is the Head.

Seeing it is impossible to order all Church Matters so, as to answer the
Opinion, and to gratify the Desires of every individual Member, Charity should
teach us all to consider, whether the Circumstances which vary from our own
private Fancies, be not really for the Public Good, for the Common Profit, and
in some measure and respect for the Common Peace and Edification of the whole
Body. This is easy to be seen, if Men would attentively behold the whole
Structure, and examine the Usefulness of the several Parts; especially if they
would consider Things with Hearts prepared to make Candid and Charitable
Constructions. Charity alone would stifle many Hot Controversies, without the
use of some other Arguments, which for the most part help to Fan the Fire, in
stead of Quenching of it. In lesser Matters, where my own Judgment chances to
differ from the Public Judgment of my Superiors, Charity should teach me to
submit my Private Sentiments, and set them aside from being an hindrance to
Unity and Peace.

Give none Offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church
of God, says St. Paul; Even as I please all Men in all Things, not seeking my
own Profit, but the Profit of many, that they may be saved; 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33.
He had a most difficult Task (though he was an Apostle) to please all Men in
all Things: But his meaning is, that he took a ready way to please them if it
were possible; by suiting himself to them in every thing he could do for them
without Sin. And thus are we bound in Charity to our Fellow Christians, and in
Duty to the Church of God, as far as it lies in our power to Comply in all
Things, especially in Things Established by Public Authority: Because
differences in Religion are highly Scandalous, hurtful greatly to the very
Souls of Men; accompanied with a world of Rancour and Uncharitableness, and
always tending to Confusion, and to all Evil Works, which naturally go along
with Schism from the Church. Therefore for mere Charity and Peace-sake (were
there nothing else) we should be all of the same mind; and if unhappily there
be some difference in our Conceits, we should nevertheless, whereunto we have
already attained, all walk by the same Rule, all mind the same Thing, in hopes
that in time, by some means or other, God will Reveal to us the Truth and
Reasonableness of those Matters, about which we are as yet differently
persuaded, Phil. 3. This is a sure Rule in such cases; Have thou Faith? have it
to thy self before God, Romans 14. 22. That is, rather than occasion the least
Sin, or Scandal, or Mischief in the Church, keep thy Persuasion private if it
be singular.

3. A Thing which we should be the more careful of, because Differences which
begin in the Church, are commonly carried off into Corners; there to be
fomented and ripened, till at last they break out into the State, and sometimes
into the open Field, to the great Disturbance of the Peace and Government of a
whole Kingdom. It is the Will of God, that under Kings, and all that are in
Authority, we should lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and
Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. And to this end we are commanded, to study to be quiet,
and to do our own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. Here then we must express our
Charity in the third place; by seeking, not our own, but the General Good of
the Civil, as well as Sacred Community, we belong to. Great are the Obligations
which Nature it self has laid upon Men to their Country; insomuch, that St.
Paul wished himself accursed from Christ for his Brethren, his Kinsmen
according to the Flesh, Romans 9. 3. Meaning, not that he might be Eternally
Damned, (that Charity, if yet it be true Charity, is unnatural, and too much
even for a Christian,) but that he might be cut off from the Body of Christ
here, and from all the present Privileges of Christians; and if this were not
enough, that he might be delivered up to Satan, in this World to inflict upon
him all the Temporal Calamities he was capable of Suffering, Persecutions,
Miseries of all sorts, Death it self, and whatsoever is most Grievous on this
side Hell; if thereby he might become an Expiation for his Countrymen. Like
Zeal of Charity to that of Moses, Exodus 32. 32. where he prayed to God to
forgive the Sin of his People; or, if not, to blot him out of his Book; That
is, not out of the Book of Eternal Life, but out of the Book of this Life; that
he might not behold the great Punishments which should come upon them. These
two noble Instances of Charity show, what Fervent Affections we ought to have
for a whole Nation, that is, after a more peculiar manner, Bone of our Bone,
and Flesh of our Flesh; and how Passionately we should wish for, as well their
Temporal, as Eternal Good; and consequently seek it, much rather than our own.
A very Learned Casuist and Prelate of our own calls this, Allegiance to our
Country; Bishop Sander. Case of the Engagem.
whence the Allegiance we owe the Sovereign Prince arises Originally, because
he is the Head of the whole Community: So that it is with respect to the whole,
and in relation to the whole, that the Duty to him becomes necessary by the
Laws of Nature. And hence it follows, that Men's first Care should be, for the
Peace and Prosperity of the Community, where the Original Reason of it lies.
The Truth is, a Christian's Charity can hardly be extensive enough; Prince and
People, and the whole World, ought to have a Share of it: Nor is any Thing more
mean and unbecoming, (not to say Irreligious) than a Narrow, Sordid, Hateful
Spirit, which seeks its own Private Good only.

X.
10. Another Character of Charity that follows now is, that it is not easily
Provoked, or highly Exasperated. But having already spoken of it, I shall
proceed to that which is next at hand; it thinks no Evil. Some Learned
Divines think the Apostle's meaning to be, That Charity does not permit a Man
to impute another's Faults and Miscarriages to him, so as to upbraid him with
them, and to design him Evil, or Hurt for them. And indeed this is a Virtue
very becoming and suitable, to the Generosity of a Mind, that is truly
Charitable and Great; and it is the more Laudable, because it is not very
common. For such is the Temper of most People, that they Treasure up
Provocations against a Time of Wrath, so that the Offender shall be sure to
hear of them, and to smart for them another day. Nay, it often happens, that
let a Man's Merits be never so considerable in other Respects, they are
forgotten or disregarded for one distastful Action: No Allowance is made for
Humane Infirmities, and diverse Circumstances, which might well be pleaded in
Abatement and Excuse of the Fault; but the Memory of it continues, and
returns still, like the Pains of an old Sore against foul Weather. All his
Righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned so as to come into
Account; but for that one thing wherein he has sinned, he shall feel the
weight of an Avenging Hand, whether he Repents and Retracteth or no; that is
all one to the Uncharitable Person that meditateth Evil.

But with Submission to better Judgments, I conceive, this cannot be the
Genuine Sense of St. Paul here; because it does not come up to the Spirit and
Height of this Christian Grace. Not to design Mischief, though it be an
Essential Part, yet it is no such great Commendation of that Charity which is
properly Christian; for Heathens themselves, upon a Principle of common Virtue,
and Humanity, have condemned all Mischievous and Revengeful Intentions. And
besides, this is a Thing, which has already fallen under another Head, that
relates to the moderating of Anger: And to bring it in here again, would be
Tautology; which we may be sure the Apostle did industriously avoid, especially
where he Treats after such a concise and distinct manner of the several
Properties of Charity.

St. Chrysostom's Interpretation seems the most Apposite and Natural; that
Charitable Men are not Suspicious of Evil Designs at every turn; are not
Jealous-headed; are so far from working Evil themselves, that they are not apt
to entertain a wicked Mistrast of others working Evil against them. A
suspicious Temper must needs be contrary to true Christian Charity, because (as
St. Chrysostom rightly observes) it is the Original of Anger; and consequently,
the Original Cause of those manifold Mischiefs which follow that wild and
outrageous Passion. Not only Families and Neighbourhoods, but whole Churches
and Kingdoms also have suffered in an high degree, by reason of Jealousies; and
those too sometimes very Unreasonable and Groundless.

Therefore to express our Charity in this respect too, we should always judge
of Men with all possible Candor; put as favorable Constructions as we can
upon their Actions, and conceive such a kind Opinion of them, though the Action
be somewhat hard, as we are wont to have of the Miscarriages of a Friend, which
we are willing to call so many Slips, Errors, and Indiscretions only. Every
Thing (says Epictetus) has two Handles; and ill-natured People are evermore
apt to lay hold of the wrong one. When a Fault is done, they are ready strait
to think, the Injury or Affront was intended, and that maliciously; whereas a
Man of Thought, and Temper, and of a Christian Spirit, would take the Thing by
the other Handle; and call it Human Weakness, or Inadvertency, or by some other
such soft Name, which Charity might easily find out, to cover the Nakedness of
a poor Man, like unto ones self. Sometimes indeed Malice cannot be hid under
all its Pretenses and Disguises. When a Man comes into David's condition, who
speaking of his Enemies, says, They have privily laid a Net, to destroy me
without a cause. False Witnesses rose up, and laid to my Charge Things that I
knew not. They whisper together against me. Their Words were smoother than Oil,
and yet they be very Swords. They daily mistake my Words; all that they imagine
is to do me Evil: They hold all together, and keep themselves close; and mark
my Steps. They encourage themselves in Mischief, and commune among themselves,
how they may lay Snares. They have Rewarded me Evil for Good, and Hearted for my
Good Will; and the like. I say, when there is such Overt Acts, the inward
Wickedness is plain and palpable; and yet even in such a case there must be
Charity, though mixed with Caution; The Wisdom of the Serpent, with the
Innocence of the Dove. But till the blackness of the Heart appears clearly, we
must not judge of Men with such Severity, as if we had God's Omniscience, and
were able to discover the Malignity of the very Intention. Favorable and
candid Interpretations from Unsuspicious Hearts, are always the safest and
best; and the true way to bring us all to that Temper is, to be sincere and
simple-minded our own selves, as we would have all others be; free from Arts,
Guile, or Sinister Purposes. For certainly, none are so Jealous of other Men,
as they who are Conscious to themselves of their own Guilt; they that Practice
the Arts of Dissimulation, and Dishonesty; they that leave the plain and easy
Methods of Sincerity, to deal in the Intricate Mysteries of Subtilty and Craft,
without regard to a Good Conscience. In the most ancient Times, People for the
most part deserved Jacob's Character; Plain Men; Honest and Good; Free and
Innocent in their Conversation; Ingenuous in their Friendship; Open-breasted in
their Promises; Faithful in their Contracts; without Evil Designs; without
Hypocrisy. Fraud and Treachery, Lying and Tricking, increased in the World as
the World degenerated, and as the Manners of Men became more and more corrupt,
and these brought on Evil Jealousies; and it was a sad Age when the Insidious
and False Disposition of the Jews made our Savior give his Disciples that Rule
of Common Prudence, to beware of Men, Mat. 10. 17. In the first Ages of our
Religion, it was the Noble Character of Christians, that they did Things in
Singleness of Heart, in Sincerity, and Godly Simplicity; keeping the Mean
between two Extremes, neither turning Simplicity into Folly, nor Prudence into
Craft. And in those Times, Conscience was Law enough to them; they were not
afraid, nor suspicious of one another, no more than some Indians are now, who
use neither Sealing nor Signing in their Dealings with one another, unless the
Dishonesty of some Christians has taught them of late the Necessity of taking
such Securities. Where Men live innocently together, there cannot be suspicious
of Evil, because there is no occasion for them; they have as little reason to
be afraid of one another, as Parents formerly had to be afraid of their
Children, when the Sin of Parricide was not so much as heard of in the World.
The Laws which were made against it after a long Tract of Time, were shameful
Monuments of some Children's Impiety: And so are Laws against Dishonesty now;
Upbraidings of Corrupt Manners; Public Testimonies of the World's Degeneracy;
and of the Miseries of Mankind. For the Ends of Human Society are lost, where
Truth and Simpleness of Mind fail; and that Confidence which supports
Conversation and Commerce is gone, where Hearts and Tongues are of different
Pieces; where Civilities are Traps; where Promises are only to draw Men in;
where a Smile is an Artificial Gloss upon a Treacherous Mind; where Contracts
are Methods of Oppression; where fair Pretenses are Flattering Ways of Robbing
in the Dark; and where shows of Friendship are to do the Work of an Enemy, but
with greater Safety, and with more certain Success. Where there is such
Falseness, such Hypocrisy, and Deceit, People must needs be as shy and fearful
of each other, as if they were in danger of Wolves and Bears. And for the
curing of all Jealousies, nothing is so necessary, as that Simplicity of Heart
I am now speaking of; Sincere Meanings, Openness in Traffic, Plainness in
Speech, Innocence in Society, Veracity in Expressions, Ingenuity in Promises,
Fidelity in Covenants, Truth in Friendship, Honesty and Peaceableness in
Designs, Sweetness in Behavior, Good Nature in our Mutual Offices, and all
other possible Expressions of a pure, harmless, and undisguised Religion: And
this is the Great Work of Christian Charity.

XI.
11. The Eleventh Character of Charity is, that it Rejoices not in Iniquity:
Which may admit of a Twofold Interpretation, and each very consistent with the
other. The one is, That Charitable Men are far from taking Pleasure in the Sins
and Impieties which a Neighbor commits. The next is, That they are far too
from being delighted in the Calamities which a Neighbor suffers by another's
Iniquity. Whether St. Paul intended both these Things here, I cannot tell;
perhaps he might mean both in a few Words: However, because both are great
Properties of Charity, and the latter is not distinctly mentioned elsewhere in
this Chapter, I shall here take occasion to speak something of both in their
Order.

1. The first and most received Interpretation is, That Charity teaches us, to
be far from being Pleased and Delighted with the Sins and Iniquities we see
other Men commit. There are some of that Base and Inhumane Disposition, that
what to all Pious Souls is a Torment, and a kind of Hell, is to them a
Paradise; to hear ill Things of other Men, especially of those they have no
Kindness for; that they may have a colorable Pretense to Defame and Depress
them, to bring them into Dangers, and to use them Contumeliously; and that they
may render themselves the better Men (as they think) in the Esteem of the
World. Such were those Jews, Jer. 20. 10, I heard, says the Prophet, the
Defaming of many; fear on every side: Report, say they, and we will report it:
All my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he will be
enticed, and we shall prevail against him; and we shall take our Revenge on
him. Meaning, that they wished and sought for ways how to discover some
Miscarriages or other in him, that they might proceed against him, and punish
him in the Sanhedrim. People of such a Temper are most highly Uncharitable, and
resemble the very Devil, who makes it his business to tempt Men to Sin, and
delights to bring the greatest Evil upon us, the Hurt and Ruin of our Souls;
nay, to have God himself Dishonored by us.

A Spirit of Charity teaches us to Grieve and Mourn at another Sins, though
he be an Enemy; because every Soul God has made, is Precious; and the more
Precious, because it is Immortal; and its Case is thereby the sadder when it
drops into the Pit, where the Worm dies not, nor is the Fire to be quenched.
This we should consider, and lay seriously to Heart, when we see or hear of any
of those Iniquities; Fornication, Adultery, Theft, Covetousness, Drunkenness,
Revellings, Strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, and the like; of
which St. Paul expressly tells us, That they who do such Things, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 21. None are so to be pitied as such
Workers of Iniquity, how prosperous and flourishing soever their Condition may
seem to be here; even for that too they are to be pitied, because God sets
them in flippery Places; and when they fall, they fall into Perdition, without
God's immediate Help; which yet he has no where promised without their
Repentance. And when Men are just going, Repentance is commonly too late,
because it has no time to be fruitful, and is seldom true. Considering
therefore that our own Charity to such will then be too late also, we should
show it them in time; do them Good while we have an Opportunity; while it is
called to Day; while it is yet our Hour, and the Day of Salvation. Our Bowels
should yern upon a Brother, as Joseph's did upon his Brother Benjamin, Genesis 43.
and we should retire, as he did, into our Chamber, and weep there: Weep and
Mourn for the Sin now acted, and earnestly Pray for the Pardon of it; and with
the United Assistance of an Holy Example, Kind Reproofs, and Charitable
Counsels, we should endeavor to recover the Miserable Wretch out of the Snares
of the Devil; if peradventure God will be pleased to give him Repentance in
time. Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? Said
that great Lover of Souls, St. Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 29. This is fervent Charity
indeed, to be Passionately Afflicted, to be on a Fire, for the Crimes and
Offenses of others; it is like the Charity of the Tenderhearted Jesus, that
melted him into Tears, when he beheld that perverse and bloody City; O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as an
Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not, Luke 13. 34.

2. But (as I said) there is another Interpretation yet of these Words,
Rejoices not in Iniquity: It is St. Chrysostom's; and I like it the rather,
because it is his; viz. That Charitable Men are far from Rejoicing at the
Calamity of those that Suffer, especially that wrongfully Suffer by means of
another's Iniquity. To Triumph and Dance upon a Ruined Neighbor, to Laugh at
his Adversity, to express Delight, as those Men did at David's Misfortunes,
There, there, so would we have it: This is a sore Evil, a very horrible
Violation of Charity, which obliges us to Rejoice with them that Rejoice, and
to Weep with them that Weep, Romans 12. 15. That is, to Sympathize with our
Brethren in every State and Condition.

This carries its own Light with it. Now, for our Practice of this Matter, we
must be careful to do two Things.

First, We must construe the Dispensations of Providence after a fair and kind
manner. This is not a Place or Time for Rewards; those are laid up for us in
Heaven: The present Life is for Trials and Discipline, to Train us up, and to
Prepare us for a Blessed Eternity, by such ways as God sees best, and fittest
for us. Many times Good Men fare Ill in this World, as well as the Bad, and
sometimes worse; because in some cases they can do themselves and others much
more Good by their Hardships, than it is possible for them to do by any other
means. Therefore we should not look upon the ill Usages Men meet with here as
Arguments, either of Displeasure in God, or of Wickedness in his poor Suffering
Creatures; But as so many Dispensations of God's Wisdom and Goodness, who
acts after his own way, which is always for the best. Consequently, to
trample upon one in Distress, and to exult over him, as if he were out of the
Divine Favor, because his Case is hard; is both Uncharitableness toward the
Man, and Irreligion toward God too; whose Proceedings are always Wise and
Good, though many times Mysterious, till the Event opens the Meaning of them.
God does nothing in vain. As he is Good, and never grieves the Children of Men,
but for good Purposes; so he is Just and Righteous too, and never spares the
Workers of Iniquity but for good Purposes also: For their Repentance, if they
will be led to it; if not, for the full manifestation of their Sins, and for
his own Honor and Glory in the end, by making them Examples to the World.
Therefore, says our Apostle, judge nothing before the time, till the Lord
come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of Darkness, and will make
manifest the Counsels of the Hearts; and then shall every Man have Praise of
God, 1 Cor. 4. 5.

The Second Thing we are to be careful of is, To help those who want the
Assistance of Charitable Hands; those that Suffer by the Hand of Iniquity;
those that are Oppressed with Wrong. When the Apostle says, Charity rejoices
not in Iniquity, or in Men's Sufferings by Iniquity, there is much more
intended, than what is Literally expressed. Charitable Men must show their
Grief for those Sufferings, by Relieving and Aiding the Sufferers. Prosperity
has Friends enough; if we may call them Friends, who Congratulate and Caress
us, while we are able to Reward them, or to do them Service. But if Job be cast
upon the Dunghill, or Christ be brought near the Cross; the one is forsaken of
his Acquaintance, and the other of his very Disciples. It Is Adversity that
shows the real, the fast Friend; and then is our Time to express our Charity,
when another wants it, whether Friend, or Enemy; by endeavoring to Relieve him
that Suffers by Iniquity: For if we use not our Endeavors for his Deliverance,
it is to be supposed, that we are well enough pleased with his Condition; well
enough satisfied, though he continue in it. And is this Charity? That Active,
Generous, Restless Virtue, that knows no Bounds, but Impossibilities? That
Christian Grace, which is ready to offer up Life it self? That Godlike Spirit,
which is made up of Goodness, Mercy, and Love? No, no: Charity Befriendeth all,
does Good to all, extends Relief and Compassion to all; to him that Suffers,
and even to those that do the Wrong; to those that seek Counsel against the
Just, and gnash upon him with their Teeth, Psalm. 37. 12. Their Case is to be
Pitied indeed, because their Day is coming; the Day, when God will render to
every Man according to his Works: To them who by patient continuance in well
doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, God will give Eternal Life.
But to those who are Contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey
Unrighteousness, he will render Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and
Anguish, upon every Soul of Man that does Evil, Romans 2. 6, 7, 8, 9.

XII.
12. But I must hasten to the next Character St. Paul gives of Charity; which
is, That it Rejoices in the Truth. The best Divines take the Word here, not in
a strict, limited Sense, as it signifies Truth in Speech only, in opposition to
Lying; but in a very large Notion, as it signifies Probity of Heart, Sincerity
in all Things, Universal Uprightness, and Rectitude of Life, in opposition to
all Iniquity. Charity is of no narrow Spirit; but as diffusive as the Ocean, as
wide and spreading as the Universe; and therefore it is not fit to bound it up
here within a narrow Sense. In short, it signifies the Entire and True Practice
of Religion; and so the Apostle's meaning is, That Charitable People are
overjoyed when Religion prospers and increases; when Truth and Righteousness
take Place, and gain Ground; when the Power of Godliness appears in
Christians Lives; when they perform their respective Duties truly, uprightly,
and sincerely, as it becomes their Profession, and is suitable to their high
Calling.

This is peculiarly Applicable to those of St. Paul's Function, who cannot but
be passionately affected with Joy unspeakable, when they find their Labors
successful; when the Work and Pleasure of God prospers in their Hands; when
they see of the Travel of their Souls, and behold the Fruit of it to their
Satisfaction: Nor can there be any such great Encouragement to Men of that
Sacred Office, as to be able to call their several Charges, as St. Paul did the
Thessalonians, their Joy and Crown of Rejoicing, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19. Or to say as
St. John did in the like case, 3 John 4. I have no greater Joy, than to hear
that my Children walk in the Truth: That is, as becomes the Truth; in Holiness
and Sobriety, in Humility and Meekness, in Peace and Love; and in all those
Virtues which Adorn the Doctrine of God their Savior.

But this Matter does not only concern Ministers of the Gospel. All People
should be their Assistants in their respective Stations and Degrees, to forward
the true Interest and Advancement of Religion. This is the most Zealous
Expression of our hearty Love toward God; the most significant Argument of
Charity toward our Brethren; the truest Testimony of an Enlarged and Noble
Mind: To take Pleasure in seeing Virtue and Holiness thrive, and the Kingdom of
Christ advanced in the World. In order thereunto, every one should be Zealous
in his Place and Capacity in Encouraging the Growth of true Piety, and in
helping to Promote the Ends of the Gospel: So that Vice and Irreligion may be,
not only out of Fashion, but out of Countenance too. This is the greatest
Charity in the World, because on this depends the Salvation of Souls, which
every particular Member of the Church is obliged to help on, and set forward,
as much as in him lies. Begin at Home, and Encourage your Families to be truly
Religious in the first place. The holy Psalmist sets you a great Example, Psalm.
101. from Verse. 2. to Verse. 8. I will walk in my House with a perfect Heart. I
will take no wicked Thing in hand: I hate the Sins of Unfaithfulness; there
shall no such cleave unto me. A froward Heart shall depart from me; I will not
know (or countenance) a wicked Person. Whoso privily slandereth his Neighbor,
him will I destroy: Whoso has also a proud Look and high Stomach, I will not
suffer him. Mine Eyes look upon such as are faithful in the Land, that they may
dwell with me: Whoso leads a Godly Life, he shall be my Servant. There shall
no deceitful Person dwell in my House; he that tells Lies, shall not tarry in
my sight. Our great Business in this Life, is not to raise our selves Fortunes,
but to do God Service, and to do the greatest Good we can to those about us:
And the true way of doing both is, by our Examples, Councels, and Authority; to
Encourage all under our Care, to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this
present World.

And next to our Private Families, the Neighborhood we belong to, must have a
due share of our Zeal also. As we go about, we should sow Righteousness,
especially where we find the Soil good: Weed out the Cockle and Thistles;
Suppress every Thing that is Scandalous and Hurtful; Mend Breaches; Reform
Manners; Reprove Immorality; Cherish Honesty; Countenance the Meek and Gentle;
Teach Men to be Humble and Peaceable, to be Orderly and Pious, to be Just and
Charitable; to go to their Prayers, to live in Unity, to submit to those who
have the Rule over them in the Lord; we should teach Men how to Love, and how
to be Beloved: In a word, we should make it our business to Direct and Assist
one another, so that in this World we may all lead Quiet and Peaceable Lives,
in all Godliness and Honesty. This is the way to serve the Truth, to promote
the Truth, to advance its Interest and Honor, to make it spread, flourish, and
prosper so, that we may have cause of Rejoicing indeed; what Joy had St. Paul
to see Religion propagated, though it was sometimes by the help of those, who
were spurred on chiefly by Emulation, that they might outshine him, and lessen
the Glory of his Zeal and Success? Phil. 1. Some indeed preach Christ even of
Envy and Strife, and some also of Good Will: The one preach Christ of
Contention, the other of Love. What then? Why notwithstanding every way,
whether in Pretense, or in Truth; Christ is preached, and therein (says he) I
do rejoice; yea, and I will rejoice. Some Portion of this Joy shall every one
have, that helps to serve and advance Truth in his Place and Vocation, and
according to his Abilities. Christ is thereby served in some measure, and the
Comfort of it will return into the Charitable and Good Man's Bosom, though he
does no more than what a good Example comes to. I am sure, that when we come
to lie upon our Deathbeds, where Conscience uses to speak plain and home, a
greater Joy and Comfort there cannot be, than to reflect upon the good Examples
we have given our Brethren, and the many good Offices we have done them; and to
consider, that in doing to the very least of these, we have done them unto
Christ, and served Christ. Then there will be room for that Prayer of Hezekiah,
Isa. 38. 3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee
in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight. What Joy and Comfort those will then have, who hinder the Progress of
Religion, by disseminating Evil Principles, by somenting Dissentions and
Animosities, and by other Antichristian Practices, that Day at farthest will
show; when every one's Conscience, (if he has any left) how drowsy soever it
may be now, will be sure to awake, and tell him his own.

XIII.
13. The Character of Charity which follows is, That it bears all Things.
'Twere more agreeable to render this place thus; Charity covers or concealeth
all Things, (which are done amiss;) for this seems here to be the most natural
Sense of the Greek Word; the other Notion of it, which concerns the bearing
or suffering all Things, belonging rather to the last Character of Charity.

To lay Things to ones Charge, which he is not Guilty of, is very Unjust; to
blame him upon mere Suspicion, is very Rash; and to divulge every Fault, though
we certainly know it, is very Uncharitable.

In order to our due Practice as to this point, we are to note by way of
Caution; That the Laws of Charity do not oblige us to conceal the Crimes of
another in these five Cases:

1. Where the Criminal himself has made the Fact Notorious.

2. Where the Interest of an whole Society is nearly concerned.

3. Where Public Justice ought to be done.

4. Where Charity to the Offender requires the taking notice of it.

5. Where the discovering of a Sin is absolutely necessary for ones own
Vindication.

In all Cases the greatest Charity must take place. But where the End of making
another Faults known, is not Good, Necessary, Just, or Charitable, but Mean,
and Hurtful rather, we should be as tender of a Neighbor's Fame, as of our
own; and no more speak of his Crimes, than we durst discover Secrets, which in
Conscience and Honor we are bound to keep in the dark.

There are two great Reasons, for which Charity requires us to to be very
careful of this.

1. That the divulging of another's Offenses is so far from doing him any Good,
that it is a probable way to harden him in a course of Wickedness. Shame is
sometimes the strongest Bridle, to restrain People from Things that are of bad
Report: If you take off that Check, there is no staying them; but they turn to
their Course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle, Jer. 8. 6. Nor is there a
more ready means to make them Shameless, than to expose those Miscarriages to
open view, which they cannot but like the less, because they are afraid of a
Discovery: Private Admonitions, if kindly and discreetly tendered to them
themselves, often prove a successful Method of Reclaiming those who have as yet
a Brow; because those Admonitions are an Argument of Friendship, which makes
the softest and deepest Impression: For which reason, says our Savior, Matthew.
18. 15. If thy Brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between
thee and him alone. This is the most likely way to gain (or Reform) him;
whereas to proclaim, or whisper out his Faults, especially to Persons
unconcerned, and that too with Pleasure, and as a sort of Entertainment, is the
ready means of rendering his Heart obdurate, and of making all Councels recoyl,
as from a Flint: Because in this case, it is not Charity that speaks, but ill
Nature, and a designing Mind. Many times it happens, that while a Man's Sins
lie close under Covert, he is brought to a Sense and Reformation of them, by
the private Convictions of Conscience, and by God's Blessing from the Pulpit.
There is the greater Encouragement to amend, because he fears not Reproach.
But if he be brought upon the open Stage, and exposed to the Scoffings of the
Multitude; like a Deer hunted with a public Cry, and brought at last to the
Bay, it is odds but he will adventure upon any Dangers, the Clamors of the World
will make him desperate; so that in stead of Reforming, he will pursue his Sins
the more greedily, presuming that the future Pleasures, or Gainfulness of them,
will pay something for the loss of his former Reputation.

2. Besides the Mischief done to the Actor by Uncharitable Detections, no
little Hurt is done to those to whom the Sin is told; which still confirms that
of the Wise Man, Prove. 10. 12. Love covers all Sins. By hearing of ill
Things, People learn insensibly to do them; because there is a Contagion in all
Wickedness; whereby the Minds of those to whom it is discovered, are infected
by degrees, if there be not a very strong Antidote to keep out the Pestilence,
which is rarely provided in those cases. For it is not usual with us to lend an
Ear, but to Things we are very willing to hear of; and by this means an Evil
Report does naturally cast the stronger Influence, and does naturally make the
deeper Impression, the Mind being disposed for it beforehand. Upon which
account, it is necessary for every good Man with all possible care to preserve
his Ear from Infection, lest it pass through that to the Heart: For a Relation
many times becomes an Example; so that by being made acquainted with the Faults
of others, People are much the worse themselves. The Sin is proposed for
imitation, which the Talebearer seems to reprehend; it is like the opening
of a Plague Sore, which a Charitable Hand will be tender of doing, for fear of
propagating the Disease. Our Minds are apt to be strangely wrought upon by
every Thing about us, because there is not in our Nature that strong defensive
Faculty, which is in some other Creatures. Fish indeed retain their fresh
Taste, although they swim in the saltest Waters; but Humane Nature is apt to
participate of the Temper of the People, and of the Condition of the Climate
where we live, and our Dispositions alter accordingly; just as Waters, which
pass through the Channels of the Earth, vary their Savor with the Veins of the
Soyls through which they slide. In a corrupt Place, it is an easy thing to be
corrupted; and one great Reason is, because the Knowledge of a Neighbor's
Vices is apt to breed in another an Inclination to the same Evils; it works
in another presently and insensibly, if not a full Approbation, yet a less
Dislike of those Corruptions, which their Eyes and Ears are used to the Sense
of: So that when one comes to be familiarly acquainted with the Irreligious
Courses of bad Neighbors, he is in a great Hazard; and it is great odds, if he
does not in time make those Courses his own Choice; because this is a great
Encouragement to Vice, that it wants not a Precedent.

Therefore to express our Charity in this case, let us carefully observe that
Advice of the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 19. 7, 8. Rehearse not unto another what
is told unto thee, and thou shall fare never the worse. Whether it be friend or
foe, talk not of other Men's Lives; and if thou can without Offense, reveal
them not. For Charity-sake every Story is not to be told; for though it be
true, it may be hurtful; though it be not hurtful in the first Report, it may
be so in the consequence; because Fame is like the Cloud which the Prophet's
Servant saw, 1 King. 18. 44. the further it spreads, the greater it grows, till
there be no more comparison between its Original, and its Increase, than there
is between the breadth of a Man's Hand, and the Dimensions of the Firmament;
and who can tell how Mischievous and Terrible the End will be? The Tongue is a
world of Iniquity, says St. James, chapter 3. v. 6. And for the preventing of a
great deal, let me recommend these few Things in short to your Charitable
Practice.

With all possible Art and speed, stop the Mouths of those, who, like the old
Athenians, spend their Time in nothing else, (for the most part) but either to
tell, or to hear some new Thing, Act. 17. 21. In spite of good Neighborhood,
and Religion too, some will wander about from House to House, Tatlers,
Busiebodies, speaking Things that they ought not, 1 Timothy 5. 13. The only
Business of such idle People is, to lay open the Lives of others, to stain
their good Name, and to spoil the Savor of that which is better than precious
Ointment; by casting in such dead Flies, as turn the Perfume into a Stink. And
what Injuries come by this Evil Practice, not only to particular Persons, but
to whole Societies, is too too manifest. The least is that which Solomon
mentions, (though that is too great, and sometimes irreparable,) a Whisperer
separateth chief Friends, Prove. 16. 28. A good Remedy in this case is, to turn
the Ear aside, and not suffer it to receive any hurtful Informations. Such
Stories are not wont to be told People that are deaf, because there the Ends of
the Whisperer cannot be answered. 'Twould be an Effectual and Charitable Means
of destroying those Works of Darkness, to discourage the Authors of them, by
letting them see, how Unprofitable their Works are in the first Practice.

If another's Sin chance to fall under thine Eye, express your Charity, by
laying a Mantle over it with a quick Hand, that it may not endanger the rest by
being exposed to public View. It is thy Brother's Nakedness that is seen; and
where there is such a shameful Spectacle, Love should imitate the Piety of
Noah's two Sons, Shem and Japhet; who, that they might not cast the least
glance upon their Father's Nakedness, went backward with a Garment upon their
Shoulders; venturing rather their stumbling at his Feet, than they would behold
his Shame. Cursed was Cham, that not content to have been an Eyewitness of the
Indecent Sight, Scoffed at it too, and became the Proclaimer of it.

If the Sin be so manifest that it cannot, or so foul that it must not be hid,
express your Charity by speaking of it (and that with Prudence and Kindness
also) to the Criminal himself, who is the Party concerned to Repent, and to
mend his Life for the future. The way to cure a Flaw, is not to run to such as
are whole, but to dress the Side where the Wound lies. Though it be Oil and
Wine too, which you pour in there, the Smart is tolerable, because the
Operation is proper; and the Hand that works, is Charitable and Friendly. Other
Methods are to be avoided, because they always Fret, and very rarely Heal.

After all, in stead of discovering other Men's Faults, it is necessary for
every one to look into his own. And if People would but turn their Eyes
homeward, they would find so much Employment for them there, that they would
have neither Need, nor Leisure to look abroad. There is in every Breast so much
Nature, whatever there be of Grace, that our continual Care is necessary to
Cleanse our selves from the one, and to Increase the other. Nor is this
possible to be done, but by searching narrowly into ones own State; which if
all Inquisitive People would do, they could not but discover presently this one
great Fault of their own, that by prying curiously after others, they have all
along overlooked themselves.

XIV.
14. So far is Charity from delighting to reveal the Failings and Miscarriages
of others, that St. Paul gives this further Character of a Charitable Person,
that he believes all Things; that is, all Things that are Good, and all Things
that are Reasonable for a Good Man to believe. Credulity at large is no Virtue;
or, if it be, it is no safe one; because it is so easy a matter to be deceived;
especially in Men, which upon the Weights are the most deceitful; and because
it is sometimes such a woeful and calamitous Thing to be deceived indeed. There
are many Dangers, which Religion does not require us to run into, by Trusting
without Reserve; and the Question may be Undeterminable, which of the two is
most to be blamed, He that believes every Thing; or he that believes Nothing
that is told him? On each hand it is not Charity, but Folly that is the
Ascendant. The Apostle's meaning therefore is, That in Cases which are not
plain and clear beyond just Reason of Doubtfulness, true Christian Charity
inclines one to believe favorably, and to Err rather on the right Hand, by
entertaining a kind Opinion even when it is not apparently deserved. St. Paul,
who so well understood the Operations of Virtue, was sensible what good Effects
this is apt to produce; and how naturally it tends to make the Minds and
Lives of People easy; and, on the contrary, how hurtful it is to the Peace and
Comfort of particular Men, and whole Societies, to take up hard Conceits
without sufficient and plain Grounds; to run away with them, and to act upon
them. Hatreds and Mischief follow in the end; witness those Outrages which he
himself committed, upon his own groundless Apprehensions. He believed once,
that Jesus Christ was a Deceiver; and that his Disciples were a very Dangerous
and Heretical Sect. Upon which false and groundless Principle, he verily
thought with himself, that he ought to do many Things contrary to the Name of
Jesus of Nazareth, Act. 26. 9. And how fatal and mischievous was that one
Thought to the Church of Christ? What a world of Vexation and Misery did it not
put them to? And yet all the while the People he Persecuted were Innocent; and
the Persecution was bottomed upon nothing, but his own unreasonable and wild
Presumptions. Thus it is, when Men believe without Judgment and Candor; believe
Evil Things upon Evil Surmises, and side with Sinister Notions, as their first
Imaginations and Passions sway them. Havoc, and Outrage, are the usual
Consequents; Peace, and a good Conscience, and Charity, and whatsoever else is
desirable, all goes to wrack in the Storm, which sometimes cannot be allayed
without a Sacrifice of Blood too.

Now for the increasing in us a Spirit of Charity, and for the due expressing
it as to this Point, this General Rule must be carefully, observed; To take
Things always in the best Sense; and never to give way to Hard Thoughts, where
there is room for kind or favorable Constructions. Many times indeed Men's
Guilt appears so foul and open, that the Evidence is too strong for those
that are willing to be Scepticks in that particular. In which case, Charity no
more requires you to believe contrary to your Experience, than it binds you to
discredit the Testimony of all your Senses. As, where People act maliciously
every Day, in spite of all the Charity in the World; you cannot but look upon
them as very ill Men. But where the Matter is doubtful and uncertain, Charity
should always set it in the fairest Light; or rather I should say, in the
darkest Corner, to blind the Guilt as much as is possible, and to hide it even
from our own Eyes. Remember the Charity of the Lord Jesus upon the Cross, when
his Blood-thirsty Enemies had now done their very worst against Him. One would
have thought, their Malice was open enough: For Pilate himself was satisfied of
his Innocence; He knew (says the Evangelist) that for Envy they had delivered
him, Mat. 27. 18. And yet to cover their Sin in some measure, He himself
pleaded their Ignorance in that Charitable Prayer for them; Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34. Had it been possible, he
could have found in his Heart to have concealed their Guilt from his Father's
view. But God sees the very Secrets of the Heart; all Things are naked and
open to him, with whom we have to do. But this is one of God's incommunicable
Attributes. We see at best but through a Glass; a dark and dim View; and our
Sight is much the dimmer, when we would look into Men's Breasts, where we have
no Glass at all to look through. Therefore where we are left to Conjecture, our
Opinion should be on the Charitable side, because our Eye can have a direct
Stroke upon the Principle of another's Action. Perhaps it was Inadvertency;
perhaps it proceeded from Ignorance; perhaps from common Humane Frailties: Many
Excuses Charity will help us to find out, before we need charge it upon the
Heart.

This General Rule, of putting the best Sense upon Men's Actions, being laid
before you, I shall add these few Particulars for the better Practice of it.
Not to be easy in believing the first Representations. By our daily Experience
we may find, that the first Account of Things is commonly the Falsest, because
it is usually attended with Partiality, to possess the Minds of People with a
Prejudice beforehand; it is so in Men's relating Things of others, especially
of their Superiors in Church or State; Partiality is never wanting there. Some
have a sort of Itch, both in their Minds and Tongues, to speak Evil of those
they care not for. Upon which account, when an ill Thing is offered to our
Belief, before Credit be given to a foul Story, we should consider, Whether the
Suggestion may not proceed from Hearts which are touched with a Disease
somewhat resembling the Botch of Egypt, Many are apt to take up hard Opinions
upon Trust; which is not only Uncharitable, but Unrighteous too: Because the
Party is thereby rifled of his Reputation at all adventures. If the Story be
false, the Injustice is manifest; if it be but probable, there is Probability
against it too; if it be altogether uncertain, it is not Judgment, but
Partiality, that Governs the Belief of it: And after all, if Accusations be
enough, every Man must lie at Mercy for his Innocence, though his own
Conscience acquit him. It Is necessary therefore in all ill Reports, to suspend
ones Persuasion till the Truth appears; and rather to be for the Charitable
Sense, because to be sure no Wrong is done in that case; whereas Judgment is
Iniquity when it passes upon Surmise; and he that Suffers by the Sentence,
Suffers not for his own, but for another's Fault; that is, for another's too
quick and rash Judgment.

In short, That Charity may make us believe all the Good we hear, and hardly
any thing but what is Good; let it teach our Hearts to be in Love with Peace.
Reports, whether they be true or false, are disquieting, and whatever the first
Design of them be, the End is Quarrel; a Mischief that is attended with such a
Train of ill Consequences, that we cannot be too careful in using our utmost
Endeavors to choke the Original Cause. Study to be quiet, and to do your own
business, says St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. If Men's Hearts and Hands were thus
honestly and wisely employed, it would be a concise, but a very effectual way
of setting their Ears and Tongues much more at rest.

XV.
15. The Fifteenth Character of Charity is, That it hops all Things. As by
the former Description St. Paul shows, how we are to think as to Things
present, or past; so by this he directs us, what Thoughts we are to entertain
as to the future. However Men be represented, or may appear, we must not
despair of them, or give them utterly for gone, as Reprobates and Castaways;
undone and lost to all Eternity. The Reasons of this are taken from the Office
of Charity; which is, to do all the Good we can in every respect.

1. Now, first, to account a Man past all Recovery, is the ready way to
supersede the use of those Means, which in ordinary Cases are thought fit and
proper to bring People to Repentance. Charity is a most Active and Zealous
Grace, especially when it is concerned about a Soul. No good Methods are
wanting there, as long as there are Hopes. True Charity is apt to use
Reprehensions, Reasonings, Counsels, Warnings, Prayers; every Thing that the
miserable Creature needs; and sometimes the greatest Pains are little enough; I
am loath to say, too little. But all is thought superfluous, and to no purpose,
in a Case that is judged desperate: All Endeavors, as well as Hopes, are given
over; because none will undertake a Task, which he verily believes impossible:
It would be all one, as if he should Preach or Pray over a Rock, with a vain
Design to remove it out of its Place with his Breath. It is a great
Discouragement even to a Charitable Man, to have to do with those, whose
Spirits and Courses are wicked, though they make great Professions of Religion:
And their Case is the more deplorable, if they trust in themselves that they
are Righteous, while their Hearts and Souls are out of frame. Yet an Hypocrite
may be Reclaimed, though with much difficulty. The Shame of the World, or the
Gnawings of Conscience, or the Melancholy Circumstances of a Sick Bed, or the
Frightful Prospect of Hell, or some outward extraordinary Judgment, may in time
bring him to a sense of his sad Condition. Captivity and Chains humbled
Manasseh himself; and one day God will be too hard for the sturdiest Sons of
Belial.

Now, as long as there are some, though but faint and glimmering Hopes, there
are some Encouragements, such as they be. But for Labor, which Men think will
be certainly and utterly lost, they can find no Reason; and this is one great
Mischief which comes by Uncharitableness of this kind, that it damps the Minds
and Endeavors of Men, and violently hinders the carrying on of the Cause of
the Son of God.

2. But, Secondly, more than this; such desperate Persuasions touching the
forlorn State of others, are a most powerful Temptation to those Uncharitable
Wretches, to Treat them with the extremest Outrage, who have the ill Luck to
fall under their deadly Sentence. Witness those Cruelties which have been acted
by some Romanists, as they have had the Power in their Hands over such as they
are pleased to call Heretics. How false soever the Premises be, the
Consequence is Natural. For how can any gentle Dealings be expected by those,
who are presumed by these Zealots to be in a Damned State? If God has Cursed
them, why may not they? If God has consigned them to Eternal Flames, why may
not such as think so, cast them into the Fire here? This they believe, is but
the beginning of God's Work; and where is the Fault, if they do like God? It is
thus in all Cases, where Men have the confidence to Usurp Christ's Authority,
and to Judge before the time; whom they will, they Save; and whom they can,
they Punish; with this Difference, That in the midst of Wrath, they think not,
as God does, upon Mercy.

Alas! what becomes all this while of the great Christian Rule, Charity hops
all Things? And the best it can of all Men? Charity requires us to do others
all the Good Offices which lie in our Power; and when all is done, the same
Charity does bind us also to leave every one to stand or fall to his own
Master. Lord! that any Men should proceed to that sinful degree of Immoderation
and Insolence, as to confine all true Religion within a Party; and to make
another's Dissent the Infallible Mark of an Apostate and Reprobate. It Is well
for us all, that a Good God governs the World; that he has the Custody of our
Souls; and that he is to be the Judge, who was the Redeemer of them: For were
we to determine one another's final Lot, who is there almost that could be
saved? Suppose there were Five hundred Parties in the World, after this rate it
would be Five hundred to Nothing, but every Man would be Damned, because each
Party would Damn all but it self; and if that were Damned too by Four hundred
ninety and nine, it would be very great Fortune for it to escape. Now, what is
all this, but to thrust the Lord Jesus out of his Throne, and for us to leap
upon the Bench, who must our selves be Arraigned at his Tribunal? In the Name
of God, let us all walk by the same Rule, and hope the best of all Men. Perhaps
we may be sometimes mistaken in our Hopes; but an Error of that kind has an
easy Pardon, if it stands in any need of it: I am sure we can be no Losers by
our Charity. Our Case may be desperate for want of it, especially if our
Uncharitableness drive us on to kindle Eternal Fires for our Brethren: There
the Loss is likely to be Infinite, without any escaping. We shall perish our
selves by the Flames which we have raised; as the King of Babylon's Servants
did, Dan. 3. 22. when they threw Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, into the
burning fiery Furnace. Judge not, says our Blessed Savior, that ye be not
judged: For with what Judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what
Measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7. 1, 2. St. Paul
himself, though he had such abundance of Revelations; yet he durst not take
upon him to pass Sentence, no not upon professed Infidels: What have I to do to
judge them that are without? 1. Cor. 5. 12. They and all Mankind must be left
to God's Tribunal, who is the only Searcher of Hearts; the only Judge that
knows Infallibly who is, or shall be his. His Mercies are infinite, his Paths
are as yet past finding out: His Ways are not as our Ways, nor are his Thoughts
as our Thoughts: For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are his Ways
higher than our Ways, and his Thoughts than our Thoughts, Isa. 55. 8, 9. He
has indeed affixed a dreadful Penalty to his Laws, especially under the
Gospel: But whether he has not reserved to himself a Power of Remitting the
Penalty, in some special and extraordinary Cases, is to us a Secret. There is
indeed but one ordinary and strait Path to Heaven, by Faith and true
Repentance; yet who can tell, but that the Wisdom and Providence of God may
bring it so about, that some little Bypath, wherein People of good and honest
Minds, though of different Persuasions, do go now, may in the end fall into the
ready Road? There is indeed this Doom annexed to the Promulgation of the
Gospel, He that believes not, shall be damned; and yet Charity will not suffer
us to pass the Sentence of Eternal Ruin, either upon those Children which die
Unbaptized; or upon that vast Number of poor well-meaning Heathens, who never
heard of Christ; and therefore lived and died in Infidelity. For ought we know,
God may have some secret Ways of applying the Merits of Jesus Christ to the
Souls of some People, whom Censorious and Uncharitable Wretches look upon now,
as utterly lost and gone. In all Cases we should judge Charitably of others, as
hoping for a favorable Judgment our selves: And if in our Charity we chance to
err, it is an Error on the Right Hand however; and rather to be ventured on,
than a rigid Truth, if it be uncertain. In Heaven there are many Mansions; room
enough to hold us all, if all of us will make it our business to get thither.
But the loss of my Neighbor's Glory will not make any addition unto mine; and
therefore we should wish, that the whole World may be saved. Till we are better
acquainted with the Counsels of God, we must take heed, how we determine the
Bounds of Men's Habitations to Eternity, or set out their Lots. Remember they
are your Brethren; Men for whom Christ died, and for whom God may have Mercy in
store, whatever others rashly think. And certainly you may well afford them
your Charity, whom God himself, for ought you know, may youchsafe with
Everlasting Salvation.

To express then our Charity aright as to this particular, we should never
quite despair of any Men, nor give over all Endeavors for them, as if their
Condition were altogether desperate; but use such Means, as are necessary and
proper to bring the most miserable Wretches to a Sense of their true State. For
who knows, but one time or other God may give a Blessing to our Labors? Who
knows but peradventure he will give such Souls Repentance to the
acknowledgment of the Truth, that they may recover themselves out of the Snare
of the Devil? These are true Expressions of Charity indeed, to be always one
the Working hand; to be still upon applying Means, upon using Endeavors, to
let our hearty Wishes and Prayers accompany our Endeavors, and so to leave the
Success of all to God; and all Mankind, especially our Brethren in the Common
Faith; to God's merciful Judgment; hoping and thinking the best we can of them
to the very last.

XVI.
16. This being sufficiently considered, I come at length to the Sixteenth and
last Character, which St. Paul gives in this his Description of Charity; that
it Endures all Things: That is, it teaches and helps us to be Patient under
all our Sufferings. Howsoever we fall into a Suffering Condition; whether by
the particular Providence of God, for our Trial and Correction; or by the Rage
and Power of Tyrants, for Truth and Righteousness-sake; or by some Infirmity,
or Distemper in our Nature; or by some outward Contingence; or by the
Wickedness of private Men; by their Pride, Covetousness, Revengeful Tempers,
and the like; or by means of the different Persuasions, which others entertain
about Matters of Religion. Whenever, and howsoever any Things happen to us,
which are Grievous and Afflictive, we should endure them; so as becomes Men
trained up under a Suffering Savior, with Temper, and Fortitude, and patient
Continuance in Well-doing.

The Apostle has very fitly placed this Character of Charity last; for
Patience is a Virtue that follows others in the Rear. Notwithstanding all our
Virtues, our Lot may be to Suffer at last; and therefore we have need to be
armed with Patience after all. Ye have need of Patience, that after ye have
done the Will of God, ye may receive the Promise, Heb. 10. 36.

The Truth is, it is a Virtue that is attended with a great Retinue; as, with
Meekness, Humility, Self-Denial, Charity, Modesty, Peaceableness of Mind;
Christian Magnanimity, Constancy, Piety, Prudence, and the like: For without
these, it is impossible to be Patient after a Christian manner, especially when
Injuries and Indignities are beyond the common Size. But at this time, I shall
discourse of it only as it bears relation to Charity.

Now any one that duly considers the various Injuries which are done by Men of
Unquiet and Stormy Tempers, may easily discern how perfective of Charity this
Virtue is.

1. Impatient People are not so much as Friends to themselves. Though one would
think they were secure of their own Affections; and their Unquietness seems to
argue, that they have very little Affection for any else; yet in Reality they
are their own most hurtful Enemies. Every cross Accident puts them upon the
Fret; and the more active and busy their Thoughts are, the greater still is
the Fermentation: Either Pride, or Envy, or Covetousness, or Intemperance; nay,
many times bare Imagination, helps to raise the Distemper of the Mind to such
an high pitch, that it terminates in Frenzy, or in a Symptom that is very like
it: And what Comfort can there be in such a ones Life, where there is so much
Uproar? Or what Peace and Complacency can there be in a Mind, which upon every
Breath of Air falls into an Agitation, and is Rolling and Restless, like the
Waves of the Sea, which in a Tempest yields nothing but Noise and Foam, besides
the danger of Shipwracks? Patience keeps a Calm upon the Coast; so that there
is either a perfect Serenity, or, at worst, but a little Cloud; which upon
deliberate Thoughts does soon vanish: And by this means, the rest of the Divine
Graces continue in an indisturbed Condition, and the Soul becomes every day
more and more fruitful in Good Works; like the Halcyon, (to which some Divines
have compared the Church) a Sea-Bird, whose only Breeding-time is in a great
Tranquillity.

2. It were the better, if Impatient Spirits did injure none but themselves:
That Wrong they are bound to bear, if they will bear any thing. But the
Mischief of this Vice is, That it loves to be Vexatious and Hurtful to all that
are round about it. A petulant, froward piece of Carnality; that is ready at
hand to Avenge the Quarrel of every other Lust, and to be an Executioner in its
Cause. Hence come Malicious Designs; Uncharitable Constructions; Opprobrious
Speeches; Revengeful Arts; Studied Oppressions; Unnecessary Suits at Law;
Sanguinary Proceedings; and most of those Wicked and Mean Things, which are a
Disgrace to Humane Nature, as well as Religion; and a Nuisance to all Societies.
The Patient Man does not lay and throw about him after a spightful manner, or
to base Ends, or with vile and lewd Purposes; because there is a Principle of
true Generosity, and a Spirit of Fortitude and Constancy which he acts upon.
This makes his Mind great, and sets him much above those Odious and Low Methods
which are plain Arguments of a Mind that is Sordid and Degenerate. It Is
infinitely Greater to bear a Wrong, than to do it. The Poorest and most
Contemptible Creature can annoy; but it is the Man only, and the Christian, that
passes it by, disdaining to be moved out of himself; especially by those
ordinary and common Provocations, which are rather Imaginary, than Real
Injuries. I instance in Words; which are wont to make as deep, if not deeper
Impressions, than the Hand: Yet they neither impoverish Land, nor break the
Skin; no not that about the Ear: So that thus far there is no Real Harm done.
And if they touch the Soul, (as some times they do to the very Quick) the Fault
is indeed in our selves; because it is our own Passion that sharpens them, and
makes their ready way to the Heart; Which, were it fortified with Patience,
would turn it off with an easy and safe Hand; as a Bolt shot from a weak Man's
Mouth; and then there would be no harm there neither. These Things are Obvious;
and were it only for want of Philosophy, that People know not how to avoid
Nettles, there would be some Excuse for those, who have not been blessed with a
Liberal Education. But the common Reason of all Mankind can tell us, that when
we are Affected by a Foolish Expression, the Sting comes rather from our own
Fancy, than from a few Syllables; and that the Hurt we feel, is in the
Imagination, that Works powerfully, but too rashly upon the Brutish Appetite,
to seek Revenge and Satisfaction for Trifles. In Patience possess ye your
Souls, says our Savior, Luke 21. 19. It is a certain way to be Easy in the
World, and to the World; which I am sure is no little piece of Charity.
Considering the vast Disadvantages which come to Mankind by our Boisterous
Passions, and the Common Hurt which one single Person may do to a great many by
them, hardly can any particular Man endure too much: Even a Real Injury to
himself is to be born with Patience, till great Charity requires him to seek
for some Redress, and that too must be done with a Charitable Mind, and after
as just and as kind a manner as may be. And after all, it should be considered,
that the Reparation gotten may not answer the Damage, wherein a Man involves
himself and others, for want of Patience at first.

3. There is yet a third Reason, why Charity should teach us to endure all
Things; and it is taken from the Kindness we owe even those our Enemies, that
bring us into Affliction, and perhaps designedly. As Unjust as they be,
Christian Charity obliges us to do our best, to bring them to a Sense of their
Wickedness, that so they may be led to Repentance. Now Patience is a very
probable means of bringing this about, because it is a most amiable Virtue; and
the Sight of it is very moving, very apt to work upon the Affections. It is
enough to make a deep Impression upon any Hearts, that do not consist of Iron,
or Flint, to see Men take it patiently when they do well, and yet suffer for
it. Compassion is many times a much stronger. Thing than Argument; and it has
often made the Spirits of Cruel Men relent, when hardly any Thing else could.
It is indeed a common Saying, That by bearing one Injury, you do invite and
encourage wicked People to load you with more. But such Instances are very
rare, where there is a true Sense of Religion, or Humanity; and those Natures
must needs be very foul and dreggy, which take Delight and Pleasure in heaping
up Injuries upon Injuries: Yet even in that case, Time and Patience do
Miracles; because Conscience, if it stirs once, is a very troublesome Thing to
a Wicked Man, and that which makes the pursuing of Mischief a very troublesome
Work; so that many times base Intentions tire of themselves, when the Patience
of an Innocent Oppressed Person holds out; and they tire the sooner by it.
Witness the great Changes which were made in the Minds of Persecutors, chiefly,
if not merely, by the wonderful Patience of Christians in the Primitive Ages.
Tiberian the President of Palestine sent the Emperor Trajan word, That he was
weary of his Proceedings Usher Append. Ignat. p. 9.
against the Galileans; (as Christians were then commonly called:) Their
Invincible Courage, and Constancy, and Calmness of Minds, notwithstanding all
their sharpest Sufferings, made multitudes of the Heathens, not only weary of
Persecuting them, but weary too of their own Principles; for they concluded,
that Religion was from God indeed, for which such vast Numbers of Men and Women
did suffer the most exquisite Torments with unshaken Minds, and evenness of
Temper; without any Transport, unless it were of Joy for their Tribulations.
Justin Martyr confesses, that it was the Thing that Converted him to
Christianity, Apol. 1* p. 50.
For (says he) when I saw the Christians go to their Torments and Deaths so
Undauntedly, I thought it impossible that such People should live in
Wickedness, and the Love of Pleasures; because it concerns all Vicious and
Voluptuous Persons to avoid Death. Their Unconquerable Patience was an Argument
that Truth was on their side; and this made Proselites even of their Enemies;
so that in times of Persecution their Numbers increased. For which reason that
Politic Emperor Julian, that hated Christianity so, many times hindered its
Professors from being put to Death, because their Patience wrought such
wonderful Effects upon the Hearts of the very Pagans. Where Patience is, there
is God; the Power and Spirit of God: And who knows how soon, and how
powerfully that Holy Spirit may work upon the Hearts even of the Children of
Disobedience.

I told you before, That the Law of Charity ties us to endure all Things with
Patience; however Troubles come upon us, whether by the Injustice and Enmity of
some; or by means of the different Persuasions of others, concerning Matters of
Religion: And before I shut up this Discourse, it will be necessary for me to
say something upon that Point of Charity.

Any one may see, how vastly Prejudicial it is to the Peace and Interest, not
only of particular Persons, but of the Public State, that even those whom we
may reasonably presume to be Pious and Sincere Christians, cannot differ in
their Judgments as to some Opinions that are in Vogue; but on each side, they
are very hardly thought, and very hardly spoke of. Nay, as if the Persecutions
of the Tongue were not keen enough, the Uncharitableness of Heady People has
proceeded to Confiscations and Flames also.

Before I go on upon this Theme, I must lay down these two Cautions:

1. That I do not take upon me to Prescribe to the Civil Magistrate, whose
Office it is to look after the Good of the whole Community; what is most
Necessary or Prudent for him, whether to permit, or to prohibit Differences of
Opinion, I do not presume to Define here. Nor,

2. Is it my Meaning, That all Opinions should pass abroad without Let or
Contradiction, though they directly tend, some of them, to Subvert the
Foundation of the common Christian Faith, or to corrupt Good Manners, or to
destroy or injure Humane Societies.

But when Men are not Legislators for others, but Judges for themselves only;
when Points are knotty and Disputable, and hard to be clearly determined; and
when Opinions are harmless enough, especially while they lodge in the Minds of
peaceable and modest Men; we should express our Charity to each other, by
allowing every one the Liberty of his own private Judgment, without denying
those of a different Persuasion from us, either our Communion, or our
Affections. It Is unreasonable to make Opinions Arguments to set up strait a
separate Party; and to use them as the Men of Gilead did the word Shibboleth,
Judge. 12. 6. for a Note of Discrimination between a Friend and an Enemy.
Opinions should keep their own proper Station in the Brain, without Tainting
the Heart; and though in some Points we have various Persuasions, as the Members
of the Body have various Uses and Offices; yet Christian Charity should be like
one Common Soul, to Animate, to Influence, and to Comfort the whole. The
Reasons of it are many; but I shall mention only these Two, as sufficient
Grounds for our Mutual Charity in this case.

1. There are a great many Doctrines, which are not ordinarily necessary to
Salvation; and consequently we cannot suppose them to be Revealed to us after
such a clear manner, as necessary Things are: Yet these are for the most part
those Doctrines which have made so much Noise, and done so much Mischief in the
World. The Way to Heaven is obvious enough, and easy to be discovered; viz. By
believing the plain, common, and standing Articles of Christianity; and by
leading a Godly, Righteous, and Sober Life. But there are diverse By
Speculations that are Intricate, and some of them hardly worth the Time and
Pains bestowed on them; because the Enquiry is after Things, that are not only
remote from our Faculties, but very distant too from our great and necessary
Business. And what do we get by all our Enquiries after Matters that are thus
Foreign and Dark? Truly very little: Perhaps a slight Transitory Glimpse at the
long run, which brings something of present Pleasure to the Fancy, but nothing
of real Advantage to the poor Soul. It Is pity indeed that Men should trifle
away their precious Time thus: But if they will be at so much Pains for nothing
but a little Delight for the time, methinks it is pity too, that other wiser Men
should be so Uncharitable, as to begrudge them that after all their hard
Labors: Nor is there any Reason for those Heats and Animosities about Things
that are out of our way to Everlasting Rest. For why should I Condemn or Hate
another, because I conceive he Erreth in such and such Points, when God has
not peremptorily required either him or me to know them at all; but both of us
may be ignorant of them with safety? Many fierce Disputes, and hot Words, have
passed between Lutherans and Calvinists abroad, and between many of our selves
here at home; and that about Things not necessary to Salvation. And what have
Men gained by all this, but the Vainglory of having been very warm Disputants
on each hand? Charity would give us all a far better Title: I am sure it would
Entitle us to a far better Place, which we are concerned to strive how to gain,
infinitely more than to turn Digladiators about Logic and Metaphysics, and to
run the hazard of Sacrificing all in a foolish Quarrel, who has the best Skill
in managing the Sword's Point; where there is no need at all of any such
Weapon. Where a Thing is doubtful, we should fairly propose our Thoughts, and
offer the Reasons for them; and so let it rest, with Hearts full of Charity on
both sides. I doubt not but many good Christians have arrived at the Gate of
Paradise, notwithstanding some slight Errors they happened to entertain by the
way. As long as an Error does not hurt the Foundation, nor gives Encouragement
to a Wicked Life, nor destroys Charity; I do not understand, but a Person so
erring may well be saved; though he suffers the loss of the Hay and Stubble,
which through Ignorance and Unskilfulness he built upon the right sound Faith.

2. As all Doctrines are not equally necessary, and manifest, so all Men's
Apprehensions are not of an equal Capacity, nor their Opportunities and Means
of Knowledge equal neither. I will not enter into that nice Dispute, whether
all Souls are equal? This is certain, that the more or less the Advantages of
Education are, the more or less is a Man's Judgment and Faculties improved.
Some Men may live in more Learned Times, or be blessed with more Skilful
Instructers, or be furnished with more useful Books; or may find out a better
Method, or may be encouraged with greater Rewards, or may search after Matters
with more Impartiality, and freedom of Thought. Diverse ways it happens, that
as one Man exceeds another in Stature, so one Man excels another in
Knowledge too. And would it not be monstrous Impatience, not to endure to see
another's Bulk? And to fall foul upon him, because he is not of an equal Growth
with his Neighbor? Or because he is not of the same Aspect, of the same
Features and Lineaments with his Neighbor? Why, the Uncharitableness is such
when one quarrels with another, because he has not the same pitch of
Understanding with his Neighbor; and because he is not of the same Measure in
his Capacities, and of the same Judgment in all Things. He may truly love God,
and God may everlastingly love him; though his Sense in a Controversy be
different from another, who loves, and is beloved of God too: At best we see
but through a Glass; and our Sight is very dim in comparison. It may happen
that ones Eye may be naturally very weak, that he cannot, no not by the help of
the Glass, see Things so well as another does: Or perhaps there may be a little
Habitual Prejudice in the case, which like an Eye troubled with the Jaundise,
may discolor the Object, and present it to the Understanding with a little
Tincture upon it: Or though the Sense it self be sound and clear, yet there may
be some Specks in the very Glass. And the Result of all is this; That we are at
the very best but Men, subject to Errors and Misapprehensions: And why should
you be Uncharitable to another Man, and not bear with his Infirmities, because
God has made him a Man, and not an Angel? In short, one Man sees more, and
further than another, and to Persecute him for this, to be Impatient and
Uncharitable for this, would be such Cruelty, as if I should cut off his Head,
because it is higher than mine own.

Before I let this Consideration go, I cannot but Reflect upon the Wretched
Uncharitableness of those, who are so out of patience at all Dissentings in
Religion, that they even kill Men for Heresy, whatever Gensures such deserve,
they ought to be Spiritual; and such Censures are Charitable. I will add, that
whatever a Prince may do in such a case, to secure the public Peace, which he
is bound in Conscience to provide for; yet for Heresy alone, and if it be not
aggravated with any Criminal Actions, he ought not to inflict upon any the
Punishment of Death. The first Instance we find of this Nature, was the killing
of Priscillian and his Accomplices about the Year 385: But it was done by
Maximus that Cruel Prince, that destroyed some Heretics, and Catholics too,
without Discrimination. And Sulpitious Severus gives this Account of the Fact:
Hoc modo homines Luce indignissimi pessimo exemplo necati sunt; Though the Men
deserved not to see the Light, yet the killing of them was a most Evil Example.
An Example that in latter Ages has been scandalously followed by the Church of
Rome; and it is the more to be Lamented, because some furious Protestants
followed it too. The Burning of Servetus at Geneva was a Fact, which the best
Men of the Reformation would never go about to Justify: And the Author of the
History of the Council of Trent tell us; It was to the Admiration of many, that
the First Reformers did shed Blood in the Cause of Religion. The Truth is, such
is the Spirit and Genius of Right Christianity, that it savours of nothing but
what is Pure and Desirable; such as Meekness, Patience, Humility, Goodness:
And with these most amiable Virtues; Love, Charity, Peaceableness, Moderation,
Gentleness, Mercy, and great Tenderness of Temper. Though Charity it self may
sometimes hold out a Rod, to terrify People from those Scandalous Disorders,
which Kindness alone cannot many times put a stop to; yet to Vindicate even the
true Faith with the cutting Arguments of Steel, or by the Torments of the
Stake, is a Sign rather of a Barbarous, than a Religious and Christian Mind.
Such Burning and Flaming Zeal as this, the gentle Spirit of Christ does not
kindle.

I have now ended the Consideration of those things, which I proposed at my
Entrance upon this Discourse concerning Charity, and in the most Useful
(because the most Practical) Part of it; I have, as near as I could, trod in
the Steps of St. Paul himself, who left us no less than Fifteen several
Characters of Charity, as a particular Direction for us, how to express this
most Necessary, Christian, and Comprehensive Virtue. It is one great Argument
of the Truth of Christianity, that as its Doctrines are Reconcilable unto, so
the Duties of it are Founded upon the best Reason; and are for the most part
adapted to the Necessities and Interests of Humane Societies. This particular
Duty of Charity is one, without which Societies cannot possibly subsist; not in
that happy Condition, to be sure, which Christianity has an Eye upon in the
Duties it lays before us; if we were so wise, as to consider and see where our
Real Good lies, even in this World. The Motions whether or Virtue, or Vice,
carry a great Stroke with them; and affect not our selves only, but those also
that are round about us. And when the Apostle delineated this Virtue, Charity,
it was upon great Consideration, both of the Good Effects which attend it, and
of those very Evil Consequences which follow the several Vices to which Charity
stands in opposition, and they to it. Hence it was, that in showing you the
several ways of expressing your Charity, I was concerned of course, and
necessity, to take some Notice of those Operations and Consequences, which
Argue the great Reasonableness of your Practice as to this particular. And
hence too it was, that in speaking of those Operations, I have used all
possible Plainness for every ones Conviction; and this, in pursuance of St.
Paul's great Design, to bring all our Hearts to a right Christian, and
Charitable Temper; the Thing that is above all Things; the Thing that we must
mind very diligently, if we expect ever to be saved.

We must not think to prescribe to our selves the Way to Salvation; but we must
take the Conditions of it at the Hand of God, who alone has a Right and Power
to propose them; and who alone knows which is the best way for us. And
Charity is the Way that he has laid out before us in the Holy Scripture: The
same Jesus Christ, that has brought Life and Immortality to Light through the
Gospel, has also revealed this as a Means of bringing us to that Life
Immortal: So that we must take the whole Revelation as it is; and as well make
the one part of it the Measure of our Practice, as we make the other the Ground
of our Faith and Hopes; because the very same Revelation which gives us
Authority to believe a future Blessed State, shows us likewise the Necessity of
a Charitable Temper in order to it. There is one and the same Warrant for both;
and for that reason we must believe both, or neither.

Indeed it is very Suspicious, that Uncharitable People believe very little of
God, and a future State, (whatever they pretend) at least that they think not
of these Things with that Seriousness and Intention of Mind, which is necessary
to prepare them for the Practice of Charity: For such Divine Thoughts could not
but affect them, and work powerfully upon them, did they really believe, (what
is most certainly true) that by wanting Charity, they must needs come short of
Heaven.

Charity is as indispensably necessary as Faith, or as any other Act of
Religion. And that we may apply our Hearts in good earnest to the Study and
Exercise of it, let us at the close of this Subject consider briefly this one
Thing only, besides those Motives which have been considered already: Namely,
What an Uncomfortable Condition People of Uncharitable Spirits involve
themselves in continually. How great soever their Health, or Strength, or
Fortunes, or their other outward Enjoyments may be, they are the most miserable
People in the World; because all this while they are in an Unpardoned State:
They go about with all their Sins bound, and in danger of Eternal Damnation
every moment; for God is their Enemy, and they his. The Words of our Savior
are plain, Matthew. 6. 15. If ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will
your Father forgive your Trespasses. And to the same purpose says the Disciple
of his Bosom, 1 John 3. 14. He that loves not his Brother, abides in Death.
Hence it follows, that the Ordinances of God, though they be the standing Means
of Grace and Salvation, do such Uncharitable People no manner of Good, but Hurt
rather; which is a great addition to their Misery. The Hearing of God's Word
does but increase their Guilt. The Sacraments of Christ's Body and Blood are
like Poison to their Souls; and their very Prayers, which of all People they
have most need to send up unto Heaven day and night, are so far from availing
them, that they are turned into Abomination, Prove. 28. 9. And what if Death
should surprise such People unawares, such Accidents do commonly happen; nor is
any Man secure, but his Turn shall be the next, to drop into the Grave on a
sudden. And what a desperate Condition does he drop into, who falls thus
unawares with his Conscience burdened with such a heavy Sin, and in a State of
Enmity against the Laws of God, and against the Savior of the World? It had
been good for that Man, had he not been born, Mat. 26. 23.

But it is more than probable, that Uncharitable Wretches seldom think of Dying,
much less of dying a sudden Death; though Apoplexies, and unexpected Accidents
happen every where, and are Daily Monitors to us all. Let them presume then,
that some Lingering Disease will seize them at the last, and allow them some
Time, to prepare for another Life. But what if they have not an Heart to
Prepare themselves duly then, though they may have Time? It Is possible for Men
to Sin away the Grace of God, and the Day of Salvation. It Is possible to harden
the Heart so, as to render it Incapable of Good Impressions. It Is possible also
to provoke the Holy and Just God, to such an high degree, as that he will
refuse to Soften and Intender it, and to listen to their Cries, that would not
call upon him while he was near. They are dreadful Threatenings, Prove. 1. from
Verse. 24. to Verse. 30. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched
out my Hand, and no Man regarded it. But ye have set at naught all my Counsel,
and would none of my Reproof. I also will laugh at your Calamity, and will mock
when your Fear comes. When your Fear comes as Desolation, and your
Destruction comes as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes upon you.
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me: For that they hated Knowledge, and did not choose
the Fear of the Lord. This I fear is the usual Result of Habitual Wickedness;
and especially of Men's living in a course and habit of Uncharitableness;
because it is a Sin (or rather a Complication of Sins) so Diametrically
opposite to the Laws of Jesus Christ, and to the Spirit of his Religion, that
of all others now, it seems to come the nearest to the very Sin against the
Holy Ghost.

But suppose such People should at last express some Grief and Sorrow for their
Wicked Temper, and for those manifold Injuries and Mischiefs, which are the
usual Effects of Uncharitableness; yet who can tell, whether this Sorrow
proceeds from the Love of God, and from a true Sense and Hatred of the Sin;
or whether it does not come merely from an Apprehension of those Torments
whereof their Consciences are now afraid? If it be only the Fear of Punishment
which extorteth those Expressions, this is very consistent with an Evil Mind;
that would act over the same Sins again, could they but renew their Lives. And
therefore this Sorrow is no better than Nothing in God's Account; because it is
not such a Godly Sorrow, as works Repentance unto Salvation not to be
repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10.

Let it be granted, Lastly, That the Sorrow is Genuine and Sincere, yet little
Comfort can come by it to the Dying Person, because he has no Time now to try,
whether his Mind be changed indeed, and whether he be become a New Man, and a
New Creature. So that at the best, his Case is very bad, because, though he be
a True Penitent, yet it is more than he knows; and consequently neither can his
Comfort be solid, nor can his Hopes of Pardon be built upon a sure Foundation.

In such a Labyrinth of Misery does an Uncharitable Temper plunge every
inconsiderate Wretch, that the Pleasure he takes, and the Profit he gets by
Acts of Malice and Revenge, does not countervail the Thousandth Part of those
Calamities and Dangers he exposes himself to unavoidably.

Therefore it deeply concerns us all, to be Wise in time, to mend in time, to
Subdue and Rectify our Dispositions in time, and to new-mould our Hearts into
a Resemblance of that Holy and Excellent Being, who is a God of Compassion, the
Father of Mercies; the Author of Peace, and the Lover of Concord. Men may fancy
what they please; but I take it for a certain Truth, that according as our
Tempers are, either Good or Evil, so God loves or hates us; and so our Portion
will be at the last. If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, (that is, the
Disposition and Temper of Christ) he is none of his, faith St. Paul, Romans 8. 9.
And what was Christ's Spirit, but a Spirit of Love? His Doctrines tended to
Peace and Charity. His Miracles were Charitable; he showed his Power, as God
does, in doing Works of Pity and Compassion: He went about doing Good. And when
his Hands and Feet were now Nailed to the Cross, and hindered from doing any
more, he employed his Tongue and Heart in a Work of the greatest Charity of
all; in sending up a Charitable Prayer for the Pardon of his Enemies.

Here then is the Pattern that we must follow, if we expect any Benefit by his
Crucifixion: As often as we look on him, whom they pierced, we must have an Eye
upon his Temper, as well as upon his Blood; and we must make the one our
Example, as well as lay hold on the other for our Peace. In stead of seeking
the Hurt, or intending the Hurt, or wishing the Hurt of any; we must apply and
set our Hearts as the Lord Jesus did, to do every one all the Good we can; and
then are we his indeed. To sum up all then in the Words of St. Paul; Let all
Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking, be put away
from you, with all Malice. Be ye Kind one to another, and Tenderhearted. Put
on (as the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved) Bowels of Mercy, Goodness,
Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering; forbearing one another, and
forgiveing one another: If any Man have a Quarrel against any; even as Christ
forgave you, so also do ye. And above all these Things, put on Charity, which
is the Bond of Perfectness. And let the Peace of God Rule in your Hearts, to
the which also ye are called in one Body. Amen.

O Lord, who have taught us, That all our Doings without Charity are nothing
worth; send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our Hearts that most excellent Gift
of Charity, the very Bond of Peace, and of all Virtues; without which,
whosoever Lives, is counted Dead before thee: Grant this for thine only Son
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, give unto us the Increase of Faith, Hope, and
Charity; and that we may obtain that which thou do Promise, make us to Love
that which thou do Command; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty Father, who have Given thine only Son to Die for our Sins, and to
Rise again for our Justification; Grant us so to put away the Leaven of Malice
and Wickedness, that we may always serve Thee in Pureness of Living and Truth;
through the Merits of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, who have knit together thine Elect, in one Communion and
Fellowship in the Mystical Body of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord; Grant us
Grace so to follow thy Blessed Saints in all Virtuous and Godly Living, that we
may come to those Unspeakable Joys, which thou have Prepared for them that
Unfeignedly love Thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

