A New Years Gift FOR YOUTH. Being the Substance of a SERMON, Preached at the
Funeral of MRS. Elizabeth Bell, (Aged Sixteen Years, odd Months) AT St. M.
Overies, in Southwark, December. 1. 1686. Upon those Words (chosen by her) of
Solomon's.

Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the Evil
days come not. By Samuel Peck Minister of Popler.

skull and crossbones

Printed by Alex. Milbourn, for J. Blare at the Sign of the Looking-glass on
London Bridge.

Imprimatur.

Ian. 4. 1686.

Guil. Needham R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Willielmo Arehiep. Cant. a Sacr.
Dom.

The Substance of a Sermon, Preached at the Interment of MRs. Elizabeth Bell,
etc.
Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the Evil
Days come not.
SAint Paul, who knew by experience the great disadvantage of losing the Prime
of our Age in the ways of Sin, commands Titus to use his utmost endeavors, to
persuade Men to an early Piety, betimes to mind the best things, and lead a
Life becoming the Gospel of Christ, saying: Young men exhort to be sober
minded; ( Tit. 2.6.) using such a word, [(...)] as implys a continual
Consultation with a Man's self, for the due government or well-ordering of his
whole Course, that Wisdom, Virtue, Religion, and Piety, may shine forth in all
his words, ways, and actions; or prevail upon him, (as the Apostle expresses
it) To deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lust, and to live soberly, righteously,
and godlily in this World. (Ver. 12.) An Exhortation, or Caution, not unlike
this of the Wise Man's: Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth,
while the Evil days come not. And indeed Youth have need, great need to be
often thus admonished; for the sooner Satan takes possession of any Soul, and
the longer he keeps it, the harder it is to dispossess and cast him out; which
makes him so diligent and desirous to corrupt Youth, and to steal away the
hearts of young Persons, from their Maker; hoping, that if he be first served
by them, he shall at last serve himself upon them: Therefore, if any Motive, if
any Wile, Stratagem, or Argument will prevail, he will see that shall not be
wanting. He will watch, and wait all opportunities and occasions, make large
and fair promises of Profit, Honor, and Pleasure: and allures them to smaller
Sins first, thereby making way for Temptations to greater; sticks not to
allege and pervert the very Word of God, to draw them to, and encourage them
in a licentious Course, or sinful Liberty, saying: GOD himself makes an
allowance for your Years. Rejoice, O Young Man, in thy Youth, and let thine
Heart cheer thee in the days of thy Youth: walk in the sight of thine Eyes,
and in the ways of thine own Heart. As if God gave young Persons a Liberty to
Sin: But in the mean time conceals from them the following Memento of the
Wiseman; But know, that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment;
Eccles. 11.9. And therefore Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth.

From which words, two things offer themselves to our consideration; (Viz.)

1. There is in Young Persons a proness to forget their Creator, and their Duty
toward Him. 2. That GOD requires and looks for Service from young Persons. Of
each of these, I shall speak somewhat briefly.
Prop. I.
THere is in Young Persons a natural proness to forget their Creator, and their
Duty toward Him.

This appears by the Advice frequently given in Scripture, to, and concerning
Youth; sometimes by Solomon, who speaking to Parents and Governors, advises,
that they Train up Children in the way they should go, (the way of Piety and
Religion,) and when they are Old, they will not depart from it. For Young Ones
like new Vessels, Quo semel est imbuta recens sevabit Odorem, testa diu. --
long retain the relish of those Principles or Instructions, that are first
poured into them. Sometimes again the Wiseman directing his Discourse to young
Ones themselves, says, My Son, be wise, hear Instruction, and incline thine
ear to Understanding: my Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not; Prove.
1.10. Seek Wisdom, and lift up thy voice for Understanding; Chap. 2. and 3.
Seek her as Silver: dig for her as for hid Treasure: she is more precious than
Rubies; all things thou can desire, are not to be compared to her; length of
days are in her Right Hand, and in her Left Hand Riches and Honor. And in the
Text he counsels thee to Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth; That
is, Be mindful of thy Duty toward him; Shun and avoid with all thy care, the
Sins, the Vices, and Vanities of this Age, and devote thy self to God by an
Early Repentance, and an Holy Life. In like manner David calls upon Young Men
and Maidens to praise the Lord, or to live his praises, Psalm. 148.12. And St.
Paul exhorts young persons to be sober-minded, Tit. 2.6. Which implys
Evangelical affections, or an holy frame and temper of mind.

Now, I say, such frequent Exercitations and Calls, as these, to young persons
in the Word of God, does imply a proness in them to forget God, and their Duty
to Him, in their Youth, to be regardless and unmindful of Religion, and the
serious practice of it. Yea; and daily experience gives us but too sad a proof
of the Truth of this. Look abroad into the World: consider the generality of
our Youth in this Age, what they are, what manner of Lives they lead, how vain,
lewd, and debauched the most are in their Conversation; how rare it is to find
one amongst many that is solid, sober, and religious, that makes real
Conscience of avoiding all known Sin, and of performing Holy Duties, or of
exercising himself to Godliness, as becomes his Christian Profession. Nay, do
not many of them walk, and act, and talk more like Atheists, or Infidels, than
Christians, as if they believed no future State, no Judgment, no Punishment, or
Reward to come? And what is the ground of all this irreligion and profaneness,
but an utter forgetfulness of the God that made them, and will shortly judge
them? A forgetfulness of their own Mortality, and approaching Dissolution,
which (when ever it comes) will make them as happy as Angels, or as miserable
as Devils, for ever? I know (Young men) you have sometimes some Convictions
wrought in you by the Word of God, and thereupon promise fair, talk of
returning to God, and of forsaking your youthful Lusts and Vanities, yet set
not about this great and needful Work in good earnest; but this your goodness
is as the Morning-Cloud, and early Dew, which quickly passes away. Sirs, as in
the Presence of God, ask your Consciences if this be not Truth. Do you not
always find something in your hearts ready to stifle all your purposes and
promises of Repentance and Amendment of Life, so that you are delaying from
this day to another, and still delaying, hoping for a time at last: till God
take you away with his stroke: till you drop into your Graves, and all your
thoughts perish? And what is the reason of this procrastination, but an
Oblivion of your Creator? The sooner you repent and are pardoned, Is it not the
better? The sooner you are reconciled to God, are in the way to Heaven, and
obtain a well-grounded Hope of Gods saving-love in Christ to your Souls, Is it
not the better? What is the ground then of your delay to be religious, of your
forgetfulness of God, and of your Duty to him and your own Souls? Why,

1. Solomon tells you, one Reason is Sloth and Idleness: ( Prove. 6.10.) You are
loath to buckle to the Yoke of Gods Commandments; you look upon him as an hard
Master; account his ways too strict and holy; his Injunctions and Institutions
unreasonable and grievous, and so are unwilling to submit and conform to them.

2. Another may be excessive Love to youthful Lusts and Pleasures; These stolen
Waters are sweet to your Souls; so that though you hear you Sins Reproved, and
think of forsaking them, yet (God knows) that is all, you do but think of it:
for your immoderate love to, and delight in them, obstructs your doing it.

3. Confidence of long Life, and that you have time enough before you, and
Repentance hereafter will do as well as now. God, upon true Repentance,
forgives all; Let the Wicked forsake his way, and the Unrighteous man his
thoughts, and turn unto the Lord, he will have Mercy upon him: and to our God,
He will abundantly pardon; Isa. 55.7. This is Gods promise, and it holds good
to the Old as well as Young Penitent or Convert. Since therefore my Sins may be
pardoned, and my Eternal State secured by repenting any time before I dye, as
well as now, why should I imbitter my youthful days with the unpleasant
severities of Religion, and sour acts of Repentance and Mortification? Not I;
Old Age suits melancholy and sorrow much better than Youth; then I may hearken
to your Advice, but not before.

4. The many Escapes that young persons have from Dangers and dangerous
Sicknesses. Nature is strong and vigorous in them, and they wade through all:
and when the Danger is over, they forget the vows and promises their Lips have
made in the day of their distress: and that Reformation and Holiness which they
were so forward to put on and engage in, in their Adversity, they are as ready
to forget and put off again in the day of their prosperity. Well, but remember
what Solomon says here: The Evil days will come; Sickness and Death will come,
and how soon you know not. You have here an Example before your Eyes, that
Death lays his cold hand upon Youth; And daily experience tells you, that For
One that dies in his Old Age, there are Hundreds dye in their Youth; therefore,
says he, Now in thy Youth, remember thy Creator, while the Evil days come not.
And this brings me to the second Observable in these words. Namely;

Prop. II.
THat God expects and looks for Service from young persons: That these should
set their Hearts and Affections upon Him, honor, glorify, and serve Him, by
doing his Will, and keeping his Commandments; for so this Phrase (Remember thy
Creator) imports Affection, Practice, Love, and Obedience. That of Moses may
serve for a Comment upon this Text of Solomon; Beware that thou forget not the
Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandments, his Judgments, and his Statutes,
which I command thee this day. ( Deuteronomy. 8.11.) Mark Sirs, to Remember thy
Creator then, is, to keep his Statutes, and to obey his Commandments, and that
in your Youth, whilst all the Powers and Faculties of thy Body and Soul are
strong, active, and vigorous, and most fit for his Service. Under the Law, God
called for the first Fruits, and for the Firstling of the Flock; the Gospel of
it is this: That so soon as we come to years of understanding, to dispose of
our hearts and affections, we should offer them first to God. And you have many
Examples of this in Scripture; Josiah, at Eight years old, did that which was
right in the sight of God; Samuel heard and obeyed Gods Voice when a Child;
Timothy, of a Child, knew the Scriptures; And the Children of the Elect Lady
were found walking in the Truth, (2. Epistle of St. John.) And why may I not
propound to your imitation, this young Gentlewoman, (not full 17. years of Age)
whose Remains lie yet before you, who (doubtless) Remembered her Creator, and
had a Sense of God, and of Religion, upon her mind in her Youth? I confess, I
knew her not in her life; but being twice with her in her last Sickness, I
perceived that in her (that strong love to God, those vehement desires after
Him, and unusual consolations from Him, to her Soul, before Death) as wrought
in me a persuasion, that she walked with God in her life; Her sweet and inward
peace of Conscience, her hearty and holy Ejaculations, her pious and Heavenly
Discourse, her freedom from the fears of Death, her contempt of this Life and
World, and all the Vanities of it, her impatient longings to depart, and to be
with Christ (insomuch, that she begged of me not to pray for her life or
recovery,) that she might enjoy him more fully in Glory: I say, these are rare
to be found in a person so young; or in any indeed, but those who have kept up
a close Communion with God, and have walked in Christ, as they have received
him. And if that saying be true, Qualis vita, finis ita: As is the life, so is
the death; we may believe her Life was Holy, whose End was so Heavenly, joyous,
and full of comfort; and consequently, that she is arrived at the Haven of all
Joy and Felicity, in the Morning of her Age. O what a support must this needs
be to you, who bewail her loss, or rather the loss of her! for your loss is her
gain! And, O that all you young Ones, who knew her, would follow her in this,
to Remember your Creator in the days of your youth! Considering, That,

1. It Is most reasonable, That He who made you, should be first served by you;
that all the affections and motions of your hearts and minds, all the works and
actions of your lives should be primarily toward Him, in whom you live, move,
and have your Beings, the Father and Fountain of all your Mercies in this Life,
and whose love in Christ Jesus is the only Foundation of Hope, for Mercy and
Glory in the Life to come.

2. The time of Youth is the most seasonable time for Gods Service; you lose
the best part of your life, if you lose your Youth; Optima queque dies miseris
mortalibus avi prima Fugit. --
now you are most capable of any thing that is good: most capable of divine
Instructions, of performing holy Duties, of keeping Gods Commandments, and of
discharging whatever is incumbent upon you in your Christian Calling. Remember
this, young men, if you forget God, and neglect your Duty toward God now, you
cannot imagine what an hard matter you will find it to buckle to the Yoke, and
sustain the burden of a Gospel-Obedience, and to frame your lives to godliness
hereafter. If Christ's Yoke be easy, and his burden light, it is so to them
who bear it in their Youth. If you are Satan's Scholars young, you will be his
Soldiers when you are old; if you follow him now, you will fight for him then.
For though you now think it an easy matter to repent, that it is in your own
power, and you can forsake your Sins, change your Course, and become new
Creatures at your pleasure: yet let me tell you, this is only a Diabolical
Delusion: you will (when you come to it) find it very difficult, and next to
impossible; often Read that of the Prophet: Can the Ethiopian change his Skin,
or the Leopard his Spots? Then may you who are accustomed to do Evil, learn to
do well. Jer. 13.23. Here God sufficiently declares the difficulty of it, as
easy as the Tempter makes it; And whom will you believe, God or the Devil, the
Author of all Truth, or the Father of all Lies? Again,

3. The time of Youth is the most acceptable time; the Service you now do for
God, is the most pleasing. What the Apostle says of the day of Grace, in
respect to God, that may I say of the day of Youth: Behold, now is the accepted
time. The Evening or Noontide of thine Age may be; but to be sure the Morning
will be accepted. Now to seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, before
Satan and the World have captivated your affections, and ravished away your
hearts to Sin and Vanity: now to dedicate them to God by an Early Piety, and
the Power of godliness, will be as a reasonable, so an acceptable Sacrifice or
Service; ( Romans 12.1, 2.) And this you may be sure of; the rather, because God
calls for, and commands it in the Text, saying, Remember now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth. O then Sirs, if God requires and expects Service from you,
it is high Disobedience in you to deny it; yea, and prodigious Folly in you to
refuse or delay it. God commands, his Spirit strives, and his Ministers
entreat; but young Ones will not hearken, they will not obey, they will not
learn to fear an Oath, to flee the impurities, excesses, and follies of a
wanton Age, and youthful inclinations. Certainly, Friends, you must needs see
the folly of this, if you would give your selves so much time, and do your
souls so much right, as to consider after this manner,

1. That all the time you spend in Sin, or out of Gods Service, is utterly
lost, or spent to no purpose, nothing of the great Work done, which you came
into this World for: which is to glorify your Maker, and make your Eternal
Salvation sure. Now, what folly is it to lose that time, which well improved
and employed, may be as much worth to you as Heaven and endless Happiness?

2. The longer you defer your Repentance and turning to God, the longer do you
put off true Peace, Joy, and Happiness from your selves. Peace, Joy, and
Happiness are very desirable, and you think you have more of these in the ways
of Sin, than you ever expect to find in Gods Service. This is also your Folly:
for The Service of God is perfect freedom, and his Ways are pleasantness, and
his Paths peace. O what is the enjoyment of a vile and beastly Lust, to the
fruition of the Chiefest Good, GOD, blessed for ever! What is carnal Peace and
Joy with the World, to the Joy and Peace of the Holy Ghost, which Joy is
unspeakable and glorious, and the Peace such as passes all understanding? Or,
What are the pleasures of Sin for a moment, to the pleasures at God's Right
Hand for evermore? What the Smiles of the World, to the Light of God's
Countenance, the Sense of his Love, better than Life it self? All which
Spiritual Joy, Peace, Happiness, and Pleasure, you put off from your souls, so
long as you forget your Creator, and decline his Service: and (like the
prodigal Son) are eating Husks, when you might be feeding on the fatted Calf;
and are gathering of Onions, while you might be gathering Heavenly Manna; And,
Is not this Folly?

3. If ever you do intend to serve God, or become Religious, it is great Folly
not to begin betimes, because there is no reason can be given for doing this
hereafter, which is not a reason for doing it now. As for instance.

1. Will this be the way to please God hereafter? So it is the way to please Him
now. 2. Must you perish if you do it not hereafter? So you must now, if you dye
in your Sins, without Repentance. And what Assurance have you of your life for
a day longer? 3. Will the assurance of Heaven, and the hoped-for Glory, be
desirable and comfortable to thy Soul hereafter? So it will now; it will put
more Joy into thine heart, than when thy Corn, Wine, Oil, or Riches increase.
So that, whatever may be an Argument or Motive to Repentance and Holiness
hereafter, is, and ought to be an Argument and Motive to it now. Lastly, 4.
Consider the Motive in the Text; The evil days will come, and the years draw
nigh, wherein you shall say, I find no pleasure. Come they will, Sickness,
Death, and Judgment, that is certain, these are unavoidable: And whether in thy
Youth, Manhood, or Old Age, is altogether uncertain. And you do but gratify
your Enemy, by putting these evil Days far from you; You harden your hearts
more, and render this Work, if ever it be done, (as done it must be, or you can
never be saved) much more hard and difficult. Satan, no doubt, will tell you,
You have time enough, for you are young, and shall not dye yet; all which he
would do, if he knew you should dye to morrow, or this night before the next
morning; for he is the Father of Lies, and his Work is to go about, Like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; as St. Peter tells you, and bids you
Resist him steadfast in the Faith: (1 Pet. 5.8, 9) That is, by believing the
written Word of God, which advises you, That whatever your hand finds to do;
to do it with all your might, for there is no Wisdom, nor Knowledge, nor
Working in the Grave, whither we are all a going; ( Eccles. 9.10.) For Man
knows not his time, as the Fishes taken in an evil Net, and as Birds that are
caught in the snare: so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil time, when it
falls suddenly upon them. ( Ec. 9.12.)
Therefore let me entreat you, (and, O that I might prevail with some of the
Youth, who hear me this Evening) to take the Wiseman's counsel, to be wise for
your Souls betimes, to Remember now your Creator, before the Evil days come;
wherein the Silver Cord shall be loosed, the golden Bowl broken, the Keepers of
the House tremble, the strong men bow themselves, the Almond-Tree flourish, and
those that look out at the Windows be darkened. O! before these evil days come,
wherein you shall find no pleasure, Remember your Creator: By doing those
things, by walking in those ways which shall prevent much sin and sorrow to
your selves, promote the glory of God, and peace of your own souls here, and
secure to them a Blessed and happy Eternity hereafter.

To which Eternal Felicity God of His mercy in His due time bring us All,
through the merits of Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Father, and Holy Spirit,
be praise, honor, and glory, World without end. Amen. FINIS.

