A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, December 13th. 1691.

By Edward Pelling, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for John Everingham at the Star near the West End of St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1692.

A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN.
Acts XXIV. 16. And herein do I Exercise my self, to have always a Conscience
void of offense toward God and toward Man.
THESE were the words of the Great Apostle St. Paul, when he was Arraigned at
Caesarea; when Ananias and the Elders were Parties to accuse him; when the
Eloquent Tertullus was Counsel to prosecute him; when Felix was the Judge, and
many desperate Witnesses were ready to depose the falsest things against him;
in Circumstances so dangerous, that no way seemed open for Innocence to escape;
this was the Apostles Defense and Comfort, the Testimony of a good Conscience.
This (said he) I confess, that after the way which the Jews call Heresy, so
worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the
Law and the Prophets; and have Hope toward God, which they themselves also
allow, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead: And herein do I exercise
my self, to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward Man.

That we may rightly understand this matter, we must consider a little, what it
is to have a Conscience void of offense, which was the ground of the Apostle's
Plea.

Conscience in general, signifies a Man's Judgment or Opinion, as it relates to
Action. That Noble Faculty of the Soul; the Understanding, when it looks and
enquires into things, whether they be True or False, is fuly called the
Speculative Judgment: But when it is employed about something that is to be
done, and examines will them in he Good or Evil, it is called by Moralists, the
Practick Judgment; and by Divines Conscience. And the Office of Conscience is
twofold; to direct one in acting, and then to pass a Censure up on his
Actions: Before the thing is done, Conscience serves as a Tutor to advise and
teach; and after the Fact is over, it serves as a Judge, either to acquit, or
to condemn him for it.

So that to have a Conscience void of Offense, is in the Apostle's sense, to be
powerfully governed by one's Conscience in the faithful discharge of his Duty;
and so to follow the Light which is in his Understanding, as not to fall into
any known Sin, nor to act any thing which will gall and wound his Mind in the
consequence. When a Man is conscious to himself, that according to the best of
his Endeavors, he has been careful to express his Duty to God and Man; when
his Conscience governs him rightly, and makes him cheerful; when it gives him
true Advice, and Spiritual Comfort; when it is Honest in it is Directions, and
Delightful in it is Rewards; then he may be rightly said to have a Conscience
void of Offense.

This the Apostle protested now in open Court, was his constant Exercise: But
this must be understood chiefly of the time after his Conversion, to
Christianity. For while he was yet a Jew and a zealous Pharisee, his Conscience
was not void of all Offense: We know what his Sins were, and with what
Penitence and Freedom he lamented them afterward. Yet this is to be said on
his behalf, that for ought we find, he was a Man of sincere Intentions all
along. Though he was zealous for the Law, and persecuted Christianity, and was
guilty of the Blood of the Proto-martyr St. Stephen, yet in all this he
followed his Judgment at that time. His great fault was not so much in his Will
as in his Understanding: His Prejudices were strong and powerful; his Education
carried a mighty hand over him, and the concurrent Zeal of the Priests and
Elders did very much help to inflame him still; so that he thought in his
Conscience he was bound to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus, as he
seriously and solemnly professed, Act. 26. 9. He was a sad Example of Humane
Infirmity: And as we learn by it, to extend our Charity and Compassion to those
whose Consciences are mis-lead after that manner; so He himself became a great
Object of God's Compassion; his Errors served to lessen his Guilt; and he
obtained Mercy, because he sinned ignorantly in Unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

But when he came to be thoroughly enlightened by the Son of Righteousness, and
his Conscience was set to rights, it was his steadfast Resolution and fixed
Endeavor to keep it more in Charity than the Apple of his Eye: As a Man that
has once broken his Bones by chance, is very careful lest he slip again; so was
the Apostle after his Conversion, industriously bent upon keeping his
Conscience from every the least Wound or Blow. He valued no Stripes, as long as
they did not touch that tender Part. Defamations, Imprisonment, the grimest
Dangers, the greatest Difficulties, Death it self with all its ghastly and
frightful Retinue; all was welcome to Him, as long as he could keep that
Darling in his bosom, his Conscience, void of Offense toward God and toward Man.

And this shows us all what ought to be the great Care and Business of our
whole Life; in every particular still to have a very tender Regard and Care of
our Consciences; and whatever we neglect or forget amidst the Hurries of this
troublesome World, never to let this great Care slip out of our Minds. For
whether Conscience be well or ill kept, a Man shall be sure to hear of it at
last; he will certainly find the Issues and Effects of it at home; let him take
what course he pleases, his Conscience will bear him Company, and in the end
prove his Comfort, or his Plague.

It Is true, a Man's Conscience may not accuse him or fly upon him presently:
How Evil soever it be, it may lie quiet for a time. Perhaps he may not for some
considerable long space feel any throes, any luctations, any rufflings within
him, but his Land may seem to be at rest. Either he may not enquire at all into
his State, or he may abuse and delude himself with a false account of his
Condition, or he may harden his Mind with loose Atheistical Principles, or he
may bear down his Conscience with a violent Hand, and so for a time it may be
still and quiet, like a Clock that stands when the Weights are down; but one
time or other the Hand of God will wind it up again, and then every Wheel and
Movement will stir to purpose: The Eye will mourn, the Forehead will blush, the
Heart will bleed and be very sore; and yet perhaps the sense of what he has
done will not lead him to true Repentance, but throw him at last into the very
Gulf of Desperation. And therefore we should never be so confident of our own
Selves as to do an ill thing: We should not trust, no not our own Hearts;
because in the end our worst Enemy will be that in our own Bosom.

But there are three Cases especially, wherein it highly concerns Men to have a
Conscience void of Offense.

I. First, in case of Public Dangers, when the Face of the World looks
uncomfortable and dismal. Seldom do the things of this Life continue at a stay:
The state and condition of the World ever and anon alters, either by means of
the different Interests and Designs of Men, who labor still to turn the Wheel
about, or by the just Judgment of God for Peoples Wantonness and Ingratitude in
times of outward Prosperity. Now when Circumstances are full of Threats and
Terror, they will soon show what the inside of Men is: Conscience, which in
such a Case is apt to tell Guilty Wretches their own, will possess them with
fearful apprehensions that God is their Enemy, and that they have no just
reason to hope for Protection from Heaven. And what does this naturally tend
to, but to put them on the Rack, when their Fears and their Sins both haunt
them? Whereas an inoffensive Conscience gives a Man all the Peace and Security
imaginable. For these are the sure Principles on which he builds his
Satisfaction, that God presides over the World, superintending and governing
all Affairs here below; that not so much as a little Bird falls to the Ground
without his Permission; that the very Hairs of a good Man's head are all
numbered; that though here we meet with Tribulations, yet Christ has overcome
the World; that he will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able; and
that though Extremities should happen, yet if we suffer with Christ, we shall
also reign with him together.

However some are so hardy, as to scoff at Religion, and strive to wear out of
their Minds the sense of God, yet nothing can carry a Man out in the Day of
Trial, but such Principles as these. And whoever he be that Relyeth upon these
Principles, and upon Examining his Actions, finds good Reasons to believe that
his Heart is sincere and upright, he must needs be danger-proof in a very high
degree. You have an instance here in St. Paul, though the Jews had bound
themselves under a Curse that they would kill him; though Ananias used his
Authority, and Tertullus his Eloquence against him; though Men and Devils
conspired to destroy him, yet his Rejoicing was this, that his constant
exercise was to have a Conscience void of Offense toward God, and toward Man.

It Is true, such evil Days and times of Danger every one of us is very apt to
put far off from himself, by reason of the uncertainty of them: For as they
may, so perhaps they may not happen; and every one out of fondness to himself,
is willing to hope they will not come, at least in his time. But then,

II. Secondly, there is another Case, which every day occurs, against which a
Wise Man will be well provided, the Case of Sickness; when we should have
little else to do, but to trim up our Lamps, and exercise our Graces, and so to
repose our selves in the bosom of a faithful God and a merciful Redeemer. Now
he that makes a Conscience of his ways, and studies to carry himself without
offense toward God and Man, will at that time have nothing in comparison to do
but to wait God's Pleasure: For as he foresees that such a day will come, so he
prepares for it beforehand. He is wiser than to leave the Great and Heavy Work
of eradicating sinful Habits, and of changing the whole Frame and Inclination
of his Heart, to be done upon a sick Bed; but takes an early care to die to the
World and to himself daily. Upon this account, though a Disease may be very
troublesome and painful, and parting of those old acquaintances; the Soul and
the Body, may be attended with violent Natural Struglings; yet his Spirit must
needs be full of Peace; it being impossible that a Course of Virtue and
Holiness should bring in any bitter remembrance at the last.

It was the Prayer of Hezekiah, when he was bid to set his House in order,
Isai. 38. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before Thee
in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight. What unconsionable Man is there in the World, that dares say to God in
his Languishings? It cannot be, unless his Conscience be utterly feared, but
his Heart must ache, and his Bowels must be full of Gall and Wormwood, and his
Soul must be ruffled with many dismal apprehensions of a Judgment to come;
because his Conscience, which will then awake, and will speak loud and home to
him, must needs tell him, that if he dies, he is undone to all Eternity.

Tertullian has rightly observed, that God has tinctured all Wickedness with a
Natural Shame and Fear: And certainly there is nothing like to an Evil
Conscience, to make a Man a Coward, especially when he is in danger of
appearing before the just Judge of all the Earth, to whom Vengeance belongs.
It is no marvel, if when a Man is troubled with the Qualms of a sourc
Conscience, he is more sick of his Sins, than his Disease: If when he sees Hell
open before him, he turn his Face away from that frightful Spectacle, and if he
be brought to that miserable pass, that though he must not stay any longer in
this World, yet he knows not how to venture into another.

These are the necessary and natural Rewards of an Ill Man; though in time of
Health and Gaity, he may drink down mellancholly Thoughts, or roar his
Conscience into Silence, or endeavor by lewd Principles to confirm and harden
his Mind against Religion, yet when the Hand of God comes and touches him to
the Quick, that busy Thing in his Breast will stir and rage, and give him a
very bitter Dose and uneasy Pillow.

III. There is another Case yet, which I must mention, because from the Highest
to the Lowest, we must every one of of us come to it in our order, for it is
appointed unto all Men, once to Die, and after Death to go to Judgment. And
would we were so Provident, as notwithstanding the Splendor and Charms of this
World, to call our Thoughts home every Day, and to sequester some time for such
serious Considerations as these: What is it to Die? Of what infinite Importance
is it to die well? What will become of us when we are dead and gone? What
Eternity, that great thing Eternity means? How unalterable every one's State
will be? And how impossible it must be for us to live over our Lives again, to
rectify those Miscarriages we are such Fools to be guilty of now.

Such Religious Meditations would prove very powerful Restraints, to keep Men
within the compass of their Duty; according to that of the Son of Sirach; Think
on thy latter end; and thou shall never do amiss. What admirable Effects of
such Retirements will you not find, when your last Hour shall come? For how
slightly soever some have spoken of Mortality, I am confident no Man ever yet
repented of it on his Deathbed; nor can any thing be a greater Comfort to a
Man at the last, than to consider that the care of his Life has been to keep a
Conscience void of Offense: It Is a Comfort that will stick to him to endless
Ages.

Some of the Primitive Writers have mentioned a few Occasional Expressions of
our Blessed Savior, which we do not find recorded in any part of the Sacred
History of his Life; how they came by them, is not material for us to enquire:
But Justin Martyr tells us, this was one of his Sayings, (...). According as I
find you at your Death, so I shall judge you. It Is like that of Solomon,
Eccles. 11. 3. In the place where the Tree falls, there it shall be. If a Man
does diligently endeavor to perform his Duty in that manner, and to that
extent which the Laws of Religion do require, his Works will bear him company
to Heaven, and Crown him with unspeakable Comfort to all Eternity.

A good Conscience is part of that Banquet upon which we shall feast with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God; and so is a guilty Conscience
part of those Torments which are the sad Portion of the Damned. For there is no
halfway House between Hell and Heaven, for Men to shift themselves from those
pollutions wherein they die; nor does Death so alter the State of a Man as that
the sense of Guilt and sting of Conscience does therefore cease: No, the Powers
and Capacities of the Soul are raised and enlarged upon it is Separation from
the Body, and Conscience becomes more Quick and Sensible than while it was
srifled and immured in a heap of Flesh; so that instead of being lost or
abated, the Torments of Conscience are aggravated and heightened; and were there
no other Fire in Hell, yet that in ones own Breast would yield a Smoke that
would ascend for ever and ever. There the Worm dies not, says our Savior;
which may be understood of the Gnawings of Conscience, as well as of the
fearful Visitations of an Angry and Just God.

These things being duly considered what can be so advisable for us, for the
securing of our best and dearest Interest, our Peace in this World and in the
next? What can be so necessary for us, as to have a Care of our Consciences,
and in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity to have our Conversation in the World?
Alas! we have no abiding place here: The Things of this Life will soon slip out
of our Hands; that little Good there is in this World we shall lose in a short
time; nor can we carry hence any thing with us, but the Remembrance of what we
have done. And that the Remembrance thereof may not be painful, I crave the
liberty to offer briefly these few things, the Point being altogether Practical.

1. That we give all Moral Diligence to inform our Consciences rightly of the
Lawfulness of all we do. This was the fault of St. Paul before his Conversion,
that he took things upon trust, and went upon Presumptions. Had he diligently
examined the Christian Institution, and considered all the Reasons and
Arguments on its side; he might have been convinced of the Truth of it without
a Miracle from Heaven. But he took for granted, that the Mosaical Law in all
its parts was to continue for ever; and so he Persecuted the Disciples of
Christ as Apostates from the Law; not looking upon all this as injurious
Dealing, but as condign Punishment. He verily thought himself bound to do those
things: And what a chargeable thought was that to the Church of Christ? What an
expense of Blood did it put them to? What Imprisonments and other Sufferings
did it not cost them, that one Thought of his?

Therefore to have a Conscience void of Offense, it is absolutely necessary to
use all proper means for the removing and curing of Mistakes; such as
unprejudiced Meditation, reading of good Books, conference with skilful and
upright Teachers, and the like. For though we are all subject to mistakes, by
reason of our Nature; and though there be few who are not at all mistaken in one
particular or other; yet as long as a Mistake is not wilful, proceeding from
the Neglect of proper means, the Man is acquitted though he be Erroneous. God
himself the searcher of Hearts, and the Judge of all the Earth, does pardon
involuntary Ignorances upon a general Repentance. And this should ever be a
fixed Rule for our Charity to one another, where our Opinions are different, to
bear like Brethren with each others Infirmities, as long as there are tolerable
reasons to believe that Men's Hearts are sincere and honest, and their Errors
involuntary. However, though we live in an uncharitable and censorious World, yet
we shall be sure not to miss of Peace and Satisfaction in our own Minds, if we
be not wanting to our selves in our endeavors to inform our Judgments rightly.
A good Conscience and an Error are not things inconsistent. I am sure our
Apostles Errors were in some measure wilful, and yet he obtained mercy, because
what he had done he did through Ignorance.

2. Our endeavors being thus honestly employed, the next way to have a
Conscience void of Offense, is to follow its Dictates. Great is the Power which
every one's Conscience has over him; and those who speak so slightingly of its
Obligations, either have no Conscience themselves, or else understand not what
the Office and Power of it is. It has by the appointment of God himself, the
immediate Government of us; so that the very Word of God does no otherwise
guide us, than by the Light which it affords the Conscience. Though the Divine
Will be the Supreme Rule, yet Conscience is the inward and immediate Measure of
our Actions; and on that account the Command is so peremptory, that every one
is to be fully persuaded in his own Mind; and the determination is so
possitive, that whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. Hence it evidently follows
that Conscience must be obeyed: For if it be a sin to Act without some
conviction of the Lawfulness of the Action; what a sin is it to Act quite
contrary to one's Conviction, against one's Judgment and Persuasion, and in
spite of all the Dictates and Outcries of Conscience, touching the direct
unlawfulness of what a Man does? All agree that this is utterly inconsistent
with a good Conscience; nay, some learned Casuists tells us, that he is far
less a Criminal, who commits Evil when he thinks it to be Good, than he is
who does Good when he thinks it to be Evil; for in the former Case the
Intention is good, but in the Latter the Heart is obstinate and perfectly
Malicious, as well as the Conscience erroneous.

III. To despise the World when it stands in competition with our Duty, is
another sure way to keep one's Conscience void of Offense: Because nothing is
more apt to corrupt Men's Minds, and to rifle them of their Integrity, than the
Lust of the Eyes and the Pride of Life; though in the Judgment of our Blessed
Savior, it would be the most foolish Exchange, to part with one's Soul, though
to gain the whole World, were an Acquest of that nature possible.

IV. And so, to resist the first Temptations unto Sin; to get such a Mastery
over our own Wills, as to arm our selves with firm Purposes and Resolutions
against it: To pray daily and heartily unto God not to lead us into Temptation:
And above all to have God always before our Eyes; to possess our Souls with a
true fear of Him; to entertain Reverend and Awful thoughts of his Omniscience
and Justice; that he is a Spectator of all our Actions; that He searches the
very Reigns; and that He looks into all the recesses of the Heart; and that a
time will infallibly come, when He will Un-case us and lay us open, and reward
every one according to his Works, and judge even the secrets of Men by Jesus
Christ: This alone would be an excellent Means to make Men keep a Conscience
void of Offense. For they would not dare to presume in any kind, did but the
true Fear of God rule in their Hearts kindly: Because this must be granted by
all who have any sense of God, that though they may deceive themselves with lying
Hopes, and the unthinking Populace with a specious Outside; yet it is
impossible to deceive the God of Heaven: Nor can we suppose any Man to be so
careless of his own Safety, and Self-Preservation, as to damn himself, if he
does verily believe that Damnation will be the end of his Evil Works, and that
for all those things God will bring him to Judgment.

In short, Whatsoever things are Honest, whatsoever things are Just, whatsoever
things are Pure and Lovely, and of good Report; if there be any Virtue, if
there be any Praise, let us think of those things.

And the very God of Peace sanctify us wholly, that our whole Spirit, Soul and
Body may be preserved blameless unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; to
whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, now and ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

