A SERMON PREACHED On January 30th. 1683. IN Westminster-Abby, Before the
REVEREND and HONORABLE, the KINGS JUDGES, and Printed at their Request.

By Edw. Pelling, Praebendary of Westminster, and Chaplain to his Grace the
Duke of Somerset.

Omnis quidem sub Rege and ipse sub nullo, sed tantum sub Deo; non est inferior
sibi Subjectis, non parem habet in Regno.

Bracton. l 1. c. 8. A Deo Rex, a Rege Lex.

LONDON. Printed by H. Hills Jun. for William Abington, next Door to the Wonder
Tavern in Ludgate Street. 1684.

To the Right Honorable Sir George Jefferyes, Knt. and Bar. Lord Chief Justice
of England, and one of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
I Do heartily wish, that your Lordships desires had not been so Earnest and
Pressing as they were, to have this Discourse made Public, which I assure Your
Lordship was not in the least by me designed to be sent abroad into the World.
Your Lordship knew those Obligations I lie under to Your Lordship as my Kind
and Noble Friend, and the Principle I go upon of submitting to Authority; so
that Your Lordship had me under a double tie, both of Gratitude and Obedience.

I expect to bear a great many more hard Censures and Invectives for this,
though I have done no more then what I think was my bounden Duty to do: But
those things I have been so accustomed to hear, that I am now Clamour-proof; I
had almost said, that mine Ears are somewhat like a Traitors Conscience, past
all feeling. But (if I may have leave to express my Real thoughts) I cannot but
pity Your Lordship and your Reverend Brethren, for Causing this Sermon to be
Printed; because hereby you have made it your own, and are Obliged in Honor to
undertake for it, and to be my Defendants, if ever I should be Threatened to be
brought upon my Knees, or to ho^^ up my hand at the Bar for this, as I have
been threatened formerly for things of the like Nature.

And this I may think to be Security good enough. But the mischief is, that if
ever tho^^ Canicular days should come again, Your Lordships will be in greater
Jeopardy then my self and then God help my Advocates as well (...) Your Client.

Let times be as it shall please God: It is, my Lord, your Honor that you are
true to you^ Duty; and it is my satisfaction, that I can in any thing Obey your
Commands: And I do it with the more readiness, because it is observed how ready
your Lordship and the rest of the Judges are to stand by the Interest of the
Church, and upon all Occasions publicly to Vindicate the Honor and Integrity
of the Conformable and Loyal Clergy.

That the God of peace, for whom you Judge, will Vouchsafe to preserve you in
your Great and Honorable Station, and support your Courage, and Bless your
Labors in the Ministration of Justice, and Eternally Reward your Faithfulness
to the King, to the Church, and to the whole Nation, is, My Lord, the hearty
Prayer of

Your Lordships most Obliged, and Obedient Servant, Edw. Pelling.

Romans 13. 2. Whosoever therefore Resists the Power, Resists the Ordinance
of God; and they that Resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.
WHen the Christian Religion began to be planted in the World, there were four
very Evil Men, which in their turns Succeeded Augustus in the Roman Empire;
Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius and Nero, (the latter of whom was the Man, that
raised the first Persecution against Christians.) I do not know, but the
Providence of God might order it thus, that all men might have the most early
notices of their Duty to Princes, and that together with the true Faith, they
might receive the necessary Doctrines of due Obedience and Subjection, to their
Lawful Governors, whether good or bad. It was under Tiberius that Christ (the
Great Bishop of all our Souls) gave that Command of rendering to Caesar the
things that were Caesar's, Matthew. 22. 21. It was under Claudius, that St. Peter
(the Great Apostle of the Jews) taught the dispersed Converts, to submit
themselves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake; whether to the King
as Supreme, or unto Governors sent by him, etc. 1 Pet. 2. And (as it is
generally conceived) it was under Nero, that St. Paul (the great Apostle of the
Gentiles) gave this so strict a charge: Let every Soul be subject to the Higher
Powers: Because there is no Power but of God. Had not this thing been a prime
part of the Christian Religion, we cannot conceive why such great care should
have been taken to inform the whole World of it, especially in times which
afforded not any common encouragements thereunto.

Were it not a sad Truth, that some will believe no more of the Scriptures,
then what serves their present Turn, we might wonder how it is possible for a
Christian to be an Undutiful Subject. For, (as that great Christian, and
Divine; the Learned and Incomparable Dr. Hammond) has Of Resisting the Lawful
Magistrate.
rightly observed; In the New Testament, especially in the Epistles of the
Apostles, (which were all Written in time of the Reign of Wicked, Heathen,
Bloody Adversaries of Christianity, and can refer to none but those) there is
no one Christian Virtue, or Article of Faith more clearly delivered, more
effectually enforced upon our Understandings and Affections, to be acknowledged
by the one, and submitted to by the other, then that of Obedience unto Kings.

So that it is not either Ignorance that can excuse, or any allowable principle
of Christianity that can encourage Resistance; nor is it Zeal or Conscience
that does it, though that has been pretended by some puling and ill natured
Hypocrites; but it is either an haughty and unmanageable Spirit, or an hankering
after Spoil, or an Aching Tooth after Government, or a Furious Rage for
disappointments, or Personal Spite, or hopes of Revenge, or the fear of
Justice, or a Restless, Factious Humor, or direct Devillishness and Atheism
under the Bonnet of Religion; some or all these things have ever been the true
causes of those Riots, which have been so Vexatious, so Fatal to Sovereign
Powers: It being otherwise impossible, that Men whose Consciences are so
Enlightened by Gods own Word; should be so Blind, Wicked and Foolhardy; as to
Rise up against their Prince, at the manifest hazard of the Greatest and most
Intolerable of all Evils: For that is the Rebels portion, if St. Paul may be
credited, That they who resist shall receive to themselves Damnation.

Yet I do not intend to declaim, though the World might well bear with me, and
with all others, should our mouths be full of the very Quintessence of
bitterness; especially when we reflect upon that most Horrid and Execrable
Murder, which was acted about this time upon the person of that Great Monarch
and Martyr, of whom the World was not worthy, and perhaps will hardly ever see
the like of him again. It would be a pitiful and woeful thing indeed, should
not such a superlative piece of Villainy stir at least an honest man's Choler,
and provoke him to spit some of it in the Rebels face. I hope things will not
come to that pass yet, but that we who then had not hands to rescue a good
Kings blood, may now be allowed the use of our Tongues to Revenge it, and I
trust in God our honest Posterity will think so too.

But I will charm my self, as much as 'ti^ possible, and instead of breaking
out into such declamatory speeches as this occasion does justly require, I
shall insist upon the natural Sense and Importance of my Text, and with what
brevity I can, handle such truths as may be easily discovered by any Eye that
is not blood-shot, or that does not look asquint upon our Government.

In order hereunto we are to note, 1. That by resistance here is meant in
general all undutiful, disobedient and contumacious behavior, and in
particular all open, forcible and violent Opposition. 2. That by the Power in
my Text is meant, not only the Governors Authority, but the Governor himself,
the Person of the Chief Magistrate who is vested with the Supreme Authority.
This is well to be observed, because the Traitors of the late times proceeded
upon a nice distinction between the Kings Natural and Politic capacity,
cheating the World into a belief, that his Power was Lodged not in his Person,
but in the Two Houses of Parliament, and that 'twas not the Man in the Throne,
but the Regal Authority which was virtually in the People, that was the thing
sacred. According to this sophistical pretense, the King was against himself;
and such as stood for him, were understood to Resist his Power in defending his
Person: So that in the upshot 'twas his Majesty that was looked upon as the
Traitor against the King, and they who destroyed him, did not destroy their
Sovereign, but did only cut off Charles Stuart: No, the Rebellious Juncto at
Westminster were (in their own Language) the Kings most dutiful and most Loyal
Subjects, even when they pulled off his Crown, when one damned Faction held him
by the Hair, and the other Godly Reprobates cut off his Head.

After this rate was not the Apostle, a very Heterodox Malignant, an ill
Commonwealths-man, in not dividing the Kings Authority from his Person, but
joining both together? For he calls the Person of Nero, and other Princes
(...), the Supreme, or Highest Powers, v. 1. And by his following discourse
it is plain, that by the Power he does mean the Person of the Magistrate that is
in Chief, the person that presideth over all, the person that is the Head of a
Nation. For at the 3d. 4th. and 6th. Verses he calls him expressly the Ruler,
the Minister of God, the man that bears the Sword, the Revenger* pointing all
along to the person himself, that is to receive Tribute, to the person that is
Gods Substitute and Deputy, to the person that is to praise them that do well,
and Execute wrath upon evildoers. Shall I take leave to give you a paraphrase
upon my Text? Why, you shall have it, not out of any single Commentator that
may be looked upon as an Arbitrary or Prerogative man, or onePopishly affected,
but out of an honest Statute of this Realm, which makes St. Paul's Divinity to
be Law too; the Act declares, That it is not lawful upon any pretense
whatsoever, to take Arms against the King, and that the Position of taking Arms
by the Kings Authority against his Person, or against those that are
commissionated by him, is a Traiterous Position. Nay, there is another very
significant word yet, which commands every Subject to be an Abhorrer in this
point, for faith the Law, it is a Traitorous position, to be Abhorred.

The Text being thus opened, there are three grand Truths which it offers to
every man's conscience, and which cannot but stare in that Rebels face, whose
conscience ^s not seared with an hot Iron, though I think, there are few Rebels
in the Land whose consciences are not feared to a very Crust.

1. That the Supreme Power, or the Authority which is seated in the Kings
Person, is the Ordinance of God himself.

2. That because the King is Gods own Minister, ordained Supreme by his
Commission, no man must dare upon pain of Damnation, to use any violence
against him.

3. That considering what Princes were, who were the Supreme Powers in St.
Paul's time, it is by no means lawful to resist even wicked and Heathen Kings.
And when these truths are a little laid open, Duty and Allegiance will further
oblige us all to consider the sin of the Day.

1. First, That the Supreme Power, or the Authority which is seated in the
Kings Person, is the Ordinance of God himself: Whosoever resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God, says the Apostle: And so this point passed all
along uncontradicted through all Ages, till some counted it (...) greater
virtue to be Politicians, then to b^ Honest; I do not know one Christian Write
for 1600 years together, who ever denye^ that the Power of the Civil Magistrate
is of Divine Institution; though Jure Divino is now looked upon by some either,
Fanciful or Ill Men, as a betraying of the Peoples Liberties and Rights. And
yet does not the Apostle positively tell us, that there is no power but of God?
v. 1. And to prevent a mistake; for fear we should interpret this of Gods
Permission only, he tells us in the next breath, that the Powers that be, are
Ordained of God: And that is much more than Permission. He has permitted
Oppressors and Usurpers, Bradshaws, Cromwels, and such like Excrements of
Nature: But he never appointed, or Ordained them as he does every Lawful
Prince. No; the Commission, the Authority of a Lawful Prince is from above; so
that he is, Homo a Deo secundus, and quicquid est a Deo consecutus, and Solo
Deo minor, as Tertullian (and all Christians then) believed; a Man next unto
God, holding all his Regalities of God, Inferior to God alone. And indeed how
could St. Paul call Kings, the Ministers of God (as he does Thrice for failing,
in 2. Verses of this Chapter) were not the Authority of Kings by Divine Right,
or Designation? All the Apostles expressions are so clear, so significant, so
full on the Kings behalf, that I should be loath to see the Tithe of so much,
for a Chairman in a Commonwealth, or for a Parish Pope, or for a Lay-Elder:
Nay, did the Scriptures speak but the Hundredth part so much on their side,
what a Noise, and Dust should we have about Jus Divinum then?

Many men do not understand what we mean, when we say that this or that thing
is de Jure Divino: many dangerous and mischievous Errors have been occasioned
through men's Ignorance in this particular. Therefore for the right
understanding of this matter, we must know that a thing may be said to be Jure
Divino either in a strict, or in a larger sense.

1. In a strict sense, when we find it in the Word of God to be Ordained by
such an express Command, as that the neglect thereof becomes Sinful. Now when
we speak of the Divine Right of Monarchy, we do not mean that God did institute
it so, by his Express Command, as if all other Forms of Government were
absolutely Unlawful, or as if it were unlawful for a Monarch to Contract his
Power, or set Limits to himself in the Use and Exercise of his Power. No;
Princes may tie up their own hands themselves, tho it be not Lawful for their
Subjects to force Manacles upon them: Kings may Abate much of their Greatness,
if they will: it is lawful for them to do it pro re nata, though it be
Impolitick and Unsafe for them and for their Subjects too, to do so at every
Turn. Therefore there is no ground for those Odious and Base Reflections which
of late have been made upon the honest Clergy of this See Mr. Hunts Postscript,
Church, as if they were Friends to Arbitrary Power, and Tyranny, and the like,
for asserting the Kings Power to be of Divine Original. These are Lewd and
Unjust censures: But so it is, that if any dirt can be raked out of the Kennel,
the Clergy shall be sure to have store of it thrown upon their Faces.

2. A thing is said to be Jure divino in a Larger sense.

1. When the Scriptures declare it to be Ordained of God, though we cannot show
the Original Command, or the precise time of its Institution:

2. Or Secondly, when we have strong and highly Probable Reasons to believe it
(tho there were no Declarations on that behalf.)

1. Partly from the great Congruity of the thing, by reason whereof it seems to
be Morally and Humanely Necessary;

2. Partly from several Insinuations in Scripture, which render the thing very
Credible:

3. And partly from the General practice of all Mankind, who would not (as we
can suppose) have consented in the Universal Observation of the thing, had not
God given some Law or other for it in the beginning.

Now then to apply this matter to our present purpose;

1. Those places of Scripture which I have alleged already, do abundantly
declare, that the King has his Power and Authority from God. And this is
enough to satisfy any Sober Man, who has any Reverence for the Scripture,
that Kingly Government was instituted by God (as the best of Governments)
though we could not Trace the Institution of it clearly to the Fountain Head.
For in a matter of so Remote Antiquity, it is not easy to Salve all doubts, or
to take away all occasion of Cavil from every Witty and Inquisitive Sophister.
As long as God has declared, that Kings Reign by Him, it is Reasonable for us
to rest in that, should we not be able to answer that Impudent Question, which
has been ask't us of Late, Where is the Charter for Kings? It Is in the Bible,
we see: And that must satisfy me, though I could not tell when, or where, or
how it was first Signed.

2. But then, 2ly. It has been found by the certain Experience of all Ages,
that Monarchy is so Excellent, so Incomparably beyond all other Forms, so
useful for the Ends of Government, and in many Cases so extremely necessary for
the public Good; that it is reasonable to conclude from the very Congruity of
the thing, that Kings were Ordained of God; because it is Reasonable to believe,
that in the Beginning God did Order every thing for the Best, did Institute
that Government which is most for the good of Prince and People too, and made
the World for us all not to plague one another, but to be Happy in, as long as
we stay in it.

3. Besides this, Thirdly, the Scripture gives us such plain, such pregnant
Insinuations touching matter of Fact in this point, as do abundantly justify
the Jus Divinum of Regal power, to be no Idle, no Groundless Notion. Go to the
Creation, and you will find, that God Invested Adam with a plenitude of power
over all Creatures, over his very Wife, and by consequence over all her Issue.

This the Apostle calls, a Law 1. Cor. 14 34. and as the Law which God gave
to all his Works was to hold and last to the World's End; so this Law touching
Superiority and Subjection under one person, seems as if it was intended to
continue, and to descend from Father to Son by Right of Primogeniture. And this
I take to have been the True Reason of that deadly Quarrel which Cain had
against his Righteous Brother. When he saw that God had a particular respect to
Abel and his Offerings, he was afraid lest Abel should go away with the Regal
power; and so he contrived to be rid of him, not so much out of Envy, as out of
Ambition, for fear he should lose his Birthright. To quiet his mind as to that,
God told him, that if he did well, he should have the Excellence; that his
Brothers desire should be subject unto him, and that he should Rule over him
(which was the very Form of words, whereby the Protoplast was invested with
Authority over his Wife.) And St. Chrysoston Rightly observes, that though God
was displeased with Cain, yet he did not presently deprive him of his just
Authority and power, but allowed him still (...) the Privileges of
Primogeniture.

Thus it was in the Times before the Primo geniti per Patris aut Mortem aut
absentiam, paternam quodammodo auctoritatem in fratres habebant: Sed hoc jus
Peccato amitti poterat. Gr^t. Annot. ad Genesis 4. 7.
Flood: Right of Dominion was ordered by God to Descend by Inheritance; and so
it did actually descend, where God himself did not cut off that Right which he
had given, for some Important Reasons.

In the times after the Flood, Government went in the same Channel. So Reuben
was called the Excellency of Dignity, and the Excellency of Power, because he
was the Firstborn. And Esau should have been a Lord and Prince over Jacob, had
he not Sold his Birthright; and because he Sold it, he is called a Profane
person for Selling that which was not his own; it was a Sacred thing, a
Donative from God; therefore he was Cursed for Selling it for a mess of Pottage.

But here we must note, that when Families increased, so that they were forced
to part into several Colonies for want of Room; by the grant and Donation of
the Father each Son became a distinct Prince, having a distinct Empire over his
own Family; and by such Divisions and Subdivisions it came to pass, that so
many Monarchies were set up in the World in a short time. Hence it was that
Nimrod had a Kingdom of his own: And the Scripture calls him a Mighty Hunter,
not because he was a Monarch, but because he was a Violent Encroacher; because
not content with his own Empire, he Invaded the Rights and Royalties of others,
who were Sovereigns within their Territories, as well as himself. Hence it is
too, that upon that ^ee Mr. Med^s ^iatrib. in Genesis 10.
Orderly dispersion of the Sons of Noah, the whole Earth was by degrees divided
into a great many Kingdoms; so that of Noah, Issue there were I know not how
many Kings in a short time. They were divided after their Tongues, after their
Families, after their Generations, in their several Nations and Countries, as
the Scripture often tells us, Genesis 10. Thus all the Monarchies in the World
were Founded; not by Peoples choosing their Leaders and Governors, but by
Princes going out with their Respective Families, and using a Sovereign Power
over them, pursuant to Gods Institution and Ordinance, that the Head and Chief
of a Family should have Dominion and Authority over the rest.

Hence also it was, that we read of Twelve Princes out of the Loins of Ishmael;
and of several Dukes which Sprang out of the Loins of Esau. For every Head of a
Distinct Great Family was by the Divine appointment a King in his Nation; and
his Kingdom was of greater or less Extent, as his Family was more or less
Numerous. And hence, lastly, it was, that we Read of many Kingdoms in one
Country (as in Canaan, for Instance) because their Territories were according
to their Numbers: So that Anciently Principalities were but small, till by the
Union of many Great Families (either by Conquest and Force, or by Voluntary
Submission) Great Monarchies and Empires came to be Erected.

4. And this brings me to the last Observable, to prove the Jus Divinum of
Kingly Power; viz. The Universal practice of all Nations. For nothing can be
more plain, than that Kingly Government was the only Government (we know of) in
the whole World for some Thousand Years together. The Greeks were under
Monarchs all along, till such a Frenzy possessed some of them, as has possessed
some Bedlams among us, to change their Old Government for a New nothing: But
their Madness did cost them very dear in the End; they were Undone and Ruined
by it, as we should soon be by our Innovations. In the most Ancient Times there
was no such thing as an Aristocratick or Democratick State: And the Reason why
the Jews would needs have a King (though thy were under a Theocracy) was,
because they would not be Singular; therefore they would have a King to Judge
them, as all the Nations (all other Nations) had, 1 Samuel 8. 5. Now, Lex currit
cum praxi; the Universal Practice of the World is a strong argument to prove,
that there was some Antecedent Law, which (as they supposed) did lay some
Obligation upon them; because people are not very forward to fall under
Government of themselves (supposing them to be in a State of Liberty:) Nor is
it conceivable that all Men in the World should be of one mind, or that one
Form of Government should please all; especially that Government which is in
the hands of one Man: We may as soon believe, that all parts of the World did
fall asleep at once, and then all on a sudden did awake into so many Formed and
Settled Monarchies.

By this time, I hope, it does appear, that there are stronger Reasons for the
Doctrine of the Jus Divinum of Regal Power, then that it should be looked upon
as a State Heresy of a Modern date, and of dangerous Consequence. The
sutableness thereof to Humane necessities, the Concurrence of
Scripture-history, which does plainly Insinuate the Institution, the Original,
the Usage of Monarchical Dominion, together with the Suffrages of all Mankind,
who for a long Tract of Ages submitted unto it, as if it were Entailed upon
them from the beginning: All this, I say, does clearly argue as well the Truth
as the Reason of this Proposition, that the Kings power is Gods Ordinance.

Which serves also to baffle those Wild and groundless conceits which our
Republican Spirits are so very fond of; that there was once a State of Nature,
wherein all Mankind were Free, under their own Power, and at their own choice,
whether they would have Government or no Government; and whether they would
have this Form or another. These and the like are no other then the Lewd and
Idle conceits of Factious Brains: For there never was such a State of Nature,
but in the Imagination of such Brainsick Men who have fancied a World in the
Moon: Whosoever has come out of the Womb has been Born under Government; nay,
under Kingly Government, till Rebellion, or Faction, or the Love of Novelty
altered the Natural and Regular course of affairs. I do not blame Aristotle,
and other Old Infidels, for not hitting well upon the True Original of
Government, considering they were not well acquainted with the Scriptures, but
spoke for the most part by guess.

But I wonder at the confidence of Hobbs and other such Modern Politicians
(though in truth even they are for the most part Infidels too) for talking so
idly and unphilosophically, as that Kings have their Authority by Compact and
Covenant, and the pleasure of the people; so that they may Crown them, or
Un-king them, as they think fit; Doctrines, which cost King Charles the 1st, of
Blessed Memory, no less then his Crown and his Head too. Whereas! for many Ages
after the Creation, Regal Authority descended by Inheritance; and as Nature
gave a Man the Father-hood, so the Authority which went along with it, was Gods
Donative; people did no more choose their Kings, then Children do choose their
Fathers. As for Commonwealths, and Aristocracies and Elective States, the
World formerly was unacquainted with them; nay the very Names of them were
unknown: No, they are only so many Usurpations, Degenerate and Bastard sorts of
Government: The Monarchical Form as it is far the best, so it is incomparably
the Oldest, and of Gods own Institution: The rest are but Upstarts and
Mushrooms of yesterday in comparison; and I think, it is nothing but the
necessities of some few places in the World, that makes them either Tolerable
or Lawful.

2. I have done with the first point, That the Kings Power is Gods Ordinance,
and it brings me to the 2d, That because the King is Gods own Minister,
Ordained Supreme by his Commission, no man must dare upon pain of Damnation, to
use any Violence against him, they that Resist, shall receive to themselves
Damnation. For, if God will Judge the Open and the Secret Actions of men
according to the Gospel, and reward every man according to his Works, what less
can the bold Rebe^ expect, then the Severities of Judgment, that presumes in
spite of all the Outcries of Conscience, to act that which is so contrary to
the Ends of Government; so Reproachful to the Gospel, so repugnant to the
Spirit of its Author and its Laws? Did not Christ suffer for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps? 1 Pet. 2 21. Did not his Peaceable and
Submissive deportment all along Teach us, that all Undutifulness and Violence
must be utterly forborne? Did he not pay Caesar his Tribute with a plain command
that every Disciple of his should pay him his due? Did he not Rebuke those, who
would have called for Fire upon the Heads of the Samaritanes? Did he not
recommend to us the Practice of his Humility, Meekness, and Patience under the
Cross? Was he not angry with Peter for drawing his Sword upon the Chief-Priests
Servants? Did he not own Pilates Power to have been from above? Did he not
submit to it, when he had at his Command 12 Legions of Angels? Did not every
Instance of his Life show us, that it is better far to Die, then to Resist? Why,
this was Christ's Religion; and this is Christianity, that we should be
Conformed to the Image of Christ, Romans 8. 29. That Is the Substance, the Power,
the Life of Christianity: That Is the business and Office of every Christian:
And though Men please themselves with other popular Names, and call themselves
the only true Catholics on the one hand, and the only true Protestants on the
other; yet as long as they are Disloyal on either hand; as long as they are
Gunpowder Catholics, or Cutthroat True Protestants; as long as they shoot at
Government either with Bulls, or with Ordinances, as long as Consults or
Covenants are in Fashion with them, and the King cannot be safe for them
neither in the Field, nor at Home; as long as they Act after this Devilish
rate, they do but abuse themselves into a State of Damnation, for all their
fine Names; they ought not to be called Christians; or if they will wrongfully
Usurp that Name too, there are as good Christians as they with Korah and Judas;
and I had rather be a mere Philosopher, or an honest Heathen, then such a
Christian.

And does not the Gospel strictly Command us, not to Strive, not to Resist
Evil, but to be Charitable, Patient and Peaceable, to obey Magistrates, to
Honor the King, to Submit to our Rulers, to be Quiet, to do our own Business,
and to be subject for Conscience sake? many Commands more we meet with up and
down which hallow the Authority, and immure the Throne of the Chief Magistrate.
And does not my Text award Damnation to every Rebel? Why, one would think, that
such Men did use some other Gospel, since they have no benefit by this, nothing
but Damnation by the Gospel of Christ. Certainly they have a Gospel by
themselves; Evangelium Armatum, a Gospel that is covered in Armor and dipped in
Blood: For by ours, there is no Salvation for them, without such a Stinging
Repentance as St. Paul describes in 2 Cor. 7. 11.

But I shall not need to proceed further upon the proof of this Matter, because
the clearing of the 3d. Point will serve a Fortiori to confirm this. Only give
me leave, before I come to it, to note how the Apostle in my Text does Limit
Non-Resistance. He forbids Resistance against the Governor in Chief, against
him that is the Fountain of all Authority in the Kingdom. Let every Soul be
Subject (but) to the Higher (that is, to the bighest, or Supreme) Powers. And
so in my Text, he that Resists the Power, meaning the same Power, that is the
Power, the Authority, the Magistrate that is over all: Whether it be King as
Supreme, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Supremacy was in the Crown in those
days; there the Highest Power is Lodged, and that is the Power we must be
subject unto for Conscience sake. Other Usurping and pretending Powers Men may
be forced sometimes to be subject unto upon pain of Plunder and Sequestration;
but the Supreme Power, the King is he, whom we must not Resist upon pain of
Damnation. There is in every Kingdom the Supreme, and a Subordinate Magistracy.
So St. Peter does distinguish between the King that is Supreme, and Governors
that are sent by Him. The King is Gods Representative, other Subordinate
Governors are the King's: And as long as those Governors Act Regularly, and
according to their Commission, they are to be obeyed too. But I will speak a
blunt Truth, whatever be the Issue of it, should our Nation be so unhappy again
as it was in 42. when Inferior (or rather, Usurping) Powers forsook their
Allegiance, Levied a War, Raised Arms, Issued out Commissions, and turned the
points of their Swords against the Supreme (and only Lawful) Power, it would be
not only allowable and Lawful, but 'twould be the Peoples Duty, and in point of
Conscience a necessary Duty to Resist such Power even unto Blood, though Ten
Thousand Houses of Parliament (were there so many) should pretend to it.

Perhaps I might have spared that Hint in this Age, when our former sufferings
on each side, should be enough (one would think) to make all Men Wise, and for
their Interest (if not for Conscience) sake to be Dutiful for the Future. But I
could not baulk it well, without baulking something in my Text which forbids
all Resistance against the Supreme or Sovereign Power.

3. That Power is priviledg'd from all Resistance, though the King should
happen to be a Wicked, or an Heathen Prince; which is the 3d. and last point,
and it is concluded from the Consideration of what those Princes were, when the
Apostles were planting Christianity: For when St. Peter wrote his First
Epistle, wherein he Charged Christians to Submit to the King as Supreme, and
unto Governors, his Ministers of State, Christians were so hardly dealt with,
that they were forced to Flee up and down into places where they could best
shift, into Pontus, Galatia, and diverse Provinces more, as we find at the
beginning of that Epistle. And Claudius himself, who probably was Emperor at
that Time, was a Man of a Cruel disposition, Zealous for Heathenish Idolatry,
Severe to all of a Foreign Religion, so that he would not suffer the Jews to
meet together (says Dio;) and at last he Expelled the whole Body of Jews out of
Rome (Believers, and Unbelievers too,) and that upon Christ's account, says
Suetonius, such was the Emperor, and such were his Ministers, that they would
not allow Christians neither the exercise of their Religion, nor the Liberty of
their Native Countries, nor the protection of their own Houses; and yet, both
Claudius and his Deputies must be submitted unto. After Claudius immediately
came Nero to be Emperor: A man called a Lion by St. Paul himself, because he
was of a Savage and ferine mind, especially after he had got a taste of Blood
(that I may save Seneca's credit in his Book de Clementia:) A Man that killed
his Tutor after all his Courtship of him; that dispatche his Wife and Ripped open
the Bowels of his Own Mother. A man that had a spite against every thing that
was Good (says Tertullian,) and that some Christians took to have been the
Antichrist spoken of. For he was the Man that raised the first of the Ten
Famous and General Persecutions, that inflicted punishments upon Christians,
says Suetonius; put them to the most exquisite Torments, says Cornelius
Tacitus. For he Crucified some, and others he Burned. And as before, he set
Fire on Rome, that he might please himself with the Resemblance of the Burning
of Troy, so after that he burnt Christians in huge Heaps and Piles, that the
light of the Fires might direct Passengers in dark Nights (says the
Historian:) and not content with all this Cruelty, many Christians he dressed up
in the Skins of Wild Beasts, that they might be Torn in pieces by Dogs, as the
same Tacitus Relates further. It was in the Reign of this Monster of Men, that
St. Paul lived, by this Token, that he caused that Apostle himself to be
Beheaded; and it was in the 2d. Year of Nero (as it is probably conjectured by
Baronius out of Origin) that St. Paul wrote this Epistle to the Christians in
and about the Imperial City: And though St. Paul knew enough of the Man
already, and the Spirit of God foresaw a great deal more, yet you see what was
written touching Subjection even to him (who was a shame to all Princes) even
this, Let every Soul be subject to the Highest Powers; for there is no Power
but of God: The Powers that be, are Ordained of God: Whosoever therefore
Resists the Power, Resists the Ordinance of God, and they that Resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation.

Against this that has been spoken there is one popular objection which I must
take notice of, and it is this: That where a Kingdom has adopted the True
Religion, so that it is Established by public Authority (as God be Blessed it
is in this Kingdom) and the Laws of the Country are on its side, there
Resistance is not unlawful, if a Prince does endeavor the Destruction or
Alteration of the True Faith.

In answer hereunto these things in short are to be considered.

1. First that the true Religion was Established in the Jewish State by the
Municipal Laws of that Nation, and that by the Authority of God himself and
yet, though several Kings did attempt the introduction of Idolatry, nay did
actually introduce it, the Jews Resisted not nevertheless, and if they had
Resisted, such Resistance had been sinful notwithstanding.

2. It is very hard and unjust, that Princes Favors should be made use of
against themselves, that their Prerogatives should be prejudiced for their
having received the Faith, and for the Kindnesses they have showed to the
Church of Christ. Because Constantine was a Zealous Protector of the true
Religion, it would have been highly Unreasonable, should this have redounded to
the Violation of the Imperial Dignity of his Son Constantius. The Primitive
Christians had the Laws of Constantine on their side: And yet they did not
think Resistance Lawful, though the Son was an Enemy to that Faith, of which
the Father was the Defender.

3. No Laws ought to be pleaded beyond their plain Design and Meaning. Now the
intent of our Laws is to secure our Religion against Schismatics, and
Heretics; but not to Arm Subjects against their Prince. For the same Laws
which are the Stabiliment of the Church, do manifestly and Roundly declare all
Resistance to be unlawful and Treasonable, and do Agnize the power of the Sword
to be in the King, and in the King only: So that no Law is on our side as to
matter of Resistance.

4. Should our Laws be so bad, as to allow of Resistance in some Cases, yet
this could be no Bar against the Laws of God which forbid Resistance in all
Cases. For it is not in the power of men to give us leave to Sin; nor can any
Humane Authority give us the liberty whether we will obey the Commands of
Christ or no. I may not in any wise Hurt my Prince, had I his own leave for it,
because the King of Kings has commanded me under pain of his high displeasure
to do the Contrary.

5. Nay I will be bold to say, in the last place that supposing Lawgivers
should be so Impolitick as under pain of Death to require, and by a Formed Law
to command us to Resist the Sovereign power, it ought not in any wise to be
done however. For it is a standing Rule in Christianity, that Authority is not
to be obeyed in things that are Unlawful, now Resistance is simply and in its
own Nature Sinful; and all Casuists will tell us, that rei illicitae nulla est
obligatio, an Unlawful Command cannot bind, unless it be to Sufferings; such a
command would be Null and Void of it self; the matter of a Law sometimes taking
off its Obligation, when it is contrary to the Laws of God and Nature; and such
would a Law for Resistance be, should the Authority of the whole Kingdom
consent to it.

I have done now with the Consideration of my Text, and come at length to the
day: but am at a great loss, how or where to begin, or in what Language to
express my Sense of that Superlative Villainy Acted at this time; which has
stained the Consciences of Rebels with Blood, which has dyed the Faces of all
Christians with shame, which has brought upon all English Men a perpetual
Reproach, which was an astonishment to all Nations, a blow to all Thrones, a
wound to the hearts of all Princes, a Contumely to Heaven, and such an horrid
Affront to the great God, that I am afraid, whatsoever Judgments and Plagues we
have labored under since, or do labor under still, have fallen upon our Heads
as the Returns of that Cry, with which the Sacred Blood of the Lords Anointed,
his late Majesty, went up to Heaven. I pray God our Land may be once thoroughly
cleansed from the Guilt of it. The Blood of Christ can, and nothing but Christ's
own blood can purge us. And I am of the opinion, that if the blood of any
Prince or Martyr could be so valuable and precious, as never to be atoned for
in this World, it would be that Royal, that Sacred, that Innocent blood, which
was so barbarously shed upon the Earth, as at this time.

As often as I cast my thoughts upon the consideration of this most Horrid
Fact, I cannot but think on those Memorable words of David, to the Amalekite
upon the death of Saul. Part of the whole Story we have in 2 Samuel 1. Saul
indeed had killed himself with his own Sword, at least, had given himself his
Deaths-wound. This Amalekite took off the Crown from his Head, and the Bracelet
from his Arm, and brought both unto David, pretending that he had slain Saul.
Very probable it is, that he hoped for some good reward at David's Hands (which
has sometimes been the Traitors Fortune;) and he was the first I read of, that
counted King killing a Meritorious Act: But instead of reaping his expected
Booty he obtained not so much as a Para^^, but received his Final and deserved
Doom. David stood amazed and astonished at the Villainy How wast thou not afraid
(says he) to* stretch forth thine hand, to destroy the Lords Anointed? 2 Samuel
1. 14. It was a Formidable and dreadful Crime in David's account: And yet there
are some Circumstances in that Story, which those Accursed Regicides in 48
would have used to have Justified their Fact, had the Case then been Parallel.
For first, as for this Villain; he was no Jew, nor, (by what we find of him)
any sworn Subject of Saul's: I am, says he* the Son of a Stranger, an
Amalekite, v. 13. 2ly, as for Saul Himself, he was a Man that had been Rejected
of God for his Disobedience: A Man full of spite and causeless Revenge; a Man
so wicked, as that he consulted with the Devil, when he applied himself to the
Witch at End or? And yet for all this you see, David called him the Lords
Anointed. Besides, he was a Man so implacably set against David in particular,
that he pursued him like a Partridge upon the Mountains, and would gladly have
been at any Labor or Ghost to have made him away* notwithstanding all his
Honorable Achievements even for Saul's sake. Nevertheless though David was
sure to* Succeed him (...) in the Throne, and so was little Concerned (in
comparison) in point of Interest, either to have spared him himself, or to have
Revenged his Blood being shed by another; yet be did not only himself let him
go, when he had him in his Power (nay, his Heart smote him, when he only cut
off the skirt of his Mantle,) but as soon as this Amalekite had owned that he
had slain him, he straight ordered him to be Executed, with these upbraiding
and wrathful words* How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to
destroy the Lords Anointed?

And what a fearful sin was that then* which was at this time acted? 1. By
persons, that were the Kings Natural and Born* Subjects, Members and Children,
as it were, of his Family; such as he had a natural interest in, such as lay
under all those obligations, which God and Nature ever laid upon Men, to Obey
and Honor, to Revere and Love the great and common Father of the Country, who
was no more accountable to his Subjects, then Parents are punishable by those
of their own Household. So that the sin of this day was not only Murder, but
Parricide too. A crime, which the very Heathens of old did not dream, that it
could enter into any Man's thought to meditate, therefore neither Numa nor Solon
made any Laws against it. But when Hostius and Malleolus had once taken the
heart to kill their Parents, then it was provided, that all such Unnatural
Wretches (or Brutes rather) should be burnt alive, or drowned in the Sea with
Dogs, or be cast to the wild Beasts, or be tumbled headlong from the top of
some tugged Precipice. And yet, Secondly, besides these natural obligations,
there were voluntary and Adventitious ones, which those persons laid themselves
under; the most sacred ties in the World, and therefore called the Oaths of
God; I mean the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which no Man can break, but
must be in danger of Hellfire. We thought once, that the devilish stratagem of
dispensing with Oaths, and of Absolving Men from their Allegiance, had been the
work of the Pope only; to prove whom to be Antichrist, one of the best
Arguments is this, that he exalts himself above all that is called God, that
is, above the Kings of the Earth.

But it seems, some who were great pretending Enemies to Popery* could Dispense
with themselves, and Absolve themselves, and that at a cheaper rate too: So
that in spite of Honor, Nature, Religion, and all the most strict and
inviolable bands upon the Conscience, they took the unparalled boldness, not
only to invade his Prerogative, to divest him of his Regalities, and to number
him among Traitors (even beneath themselves, the very Worst and Rankest of all
Traitors,) but after they had cut off his Locks, and taken off his Crown, they
proceeded yet further, even to stretch forth their hands to destroy the Life of
Gods Anointed, than which nothing under Heaven could be secured with a more
sacred Fence.

And yet behold a greater than Saul was here: A Prince, for Intellectual and
Moral virtues, for Natural and Acquired accomplishments, for Wisdom, Eloquence,
and all kinds of Literature, for his sincere Piety, for his Christian and
well-governed Zeal; for his Exemplary Temperance, for his Unspotted Chastity,
for his Invincible Patience, for his Inexhaustible Clemency, for the Tenderness
and Compassions of his Heart, for his most Condescending and Gracious Spirit,
for his Love to God, to his People, to the Church, for his Courage, Constancy,
and singular Christian Charity even to his Enemies, and to his last breath; for
all necessary and admirable Endowments, becoming a Man, a Christian, a King, a
Martyr, he was a Prince by the confession of the World so Heroic, Singular,
and Incomparable, that even a Romish Priest gave this character of him, that he
was the greatest of Men and of Kings, nisi quod Haereticus, only he was an*
Heretic (in their account,) that is, in truth, he proved a Defender, Reigned a
Confessor, Lived a Sufferer, and Dyed a Martyr for the True, Ancient, Catholic
and Apostolic Faith and Government of Christ's Church.

The whole and only design of this Discourse is, to make Men thoroughly sensible
of the Foul and Horrid nature of this days sin; that if any chance to hear me,
who were either Actors, or Accesseries in it they* may join with us in such) a
sincere and hearty sorrow for the Excerable Murder, as may both answer the ends
of all those judgments which we have already felt; and may be a means to
prevent those further Scourges which we have reason yet to Fear.

Before God and the World I confess my self abundantly satisfied, that Popish
Jesuits were in that Horrid Plot, to execute which some Protestant Jesuits
were the Instruments and Hands. That Roman Priest and Confessor is known,
(says my Author) Answer to Philanax, p. 58.
who when he saw the fatal stroke given to our Holy King, flourisht with his
Sword, and said, now the greatest Enemy that we have in the World is gone: And
when the news of that Horrible Execution came to Roan some Jesuited persons
there told a Protestant Gentleman (of good credit) that now they were Revenged
upon the King of England, for not re-establishing the Catholic Religion: And
much more to the same effect we have in the answer to Phila^a^.

But yet it is too too manifest, who they were and what they professed, who were
the actual Regicides. And I will take this just occasion from hence to warn all
well meaning persons who profess the Reformed Religion, that they take great
care, how they suffer themselves to be Abused for the future, or be drawn into
the guilt of Disloyalty or Resistance. For I am persuaded, when our late
troubles were upon breaking out, many (even Hot) Men did not look as far as the
Scaffold, or dream that it would be built for the King at his own Palace door,
but would have abhorred the very thoughts and suspicion of it. Many specious
and popular pretenses ran up and down the Kingdom, and those set on foot by the
Jesuits themselves; that innovations crept into the Church, that the Prelates
were Popishly-affected, that there was great danger of Arbitrary Power, and the
like. All the Histories of those times do bear witness to the truth of this.
But would to God all Sober and Honest Men would consider, whither those things
came at last. Did they not end in the slaughter of the best of Kings? Was not
that the Period and sad conclusion of all? Did not all the clamours and
strivings of the people end in that? all actions and proceedings, however
otherwise intended by some; all was at last unhappily Sealed up* with that
blood, which ever since has cried aloud for Vengeance upon this Nation. Men
ought to be careful and wary for the future, and endeavor to choke the
beginnings of Mischief.

For if once the bank be cut, who can tell how far the Deluge will run? In the
late times, it was not the First Intentions, but the subsequent designs of Men,
which took place so, that after the effusion of so much Heroic, Noble, and at
last Royal Blood too, God plagued people strait for their First Resistance; he
suffered the Basest of Men to ride over our backs; he brought us under the very
Faeces and Scum of the Nation; and permitted such to be our Lords, as a Man of
Honor would have disdained to have set with the Dogs of his flock, as the
expression is, Job 30. 1. And what was the end of this? Why, nothing but
Tyranny, Hypocrisy, and Oppression. To uphold Religion they introduced
Atheism: To promote Arbitrary Power they banished our Laws; and to preserve our
Liberties, they made us Slaves, and the very worst of Slaves, Slaves to the
vilest of our Fellow Subjects. In a word; it may deserve to be considered,
whether all those grievances which People have complained of all along under
the Kings of England (putting them all together) since the Conquest, do amount
to half the value and number of those Cruelties, Miseries, and Oppressions,
which within the compass of a few years were brought upon us, by those few
Carrion Members, of that one Rake-Hell Parliament of cursed Memory.

Thus it is, when Men will be Arbitrary, and despise the Laws. To affirm (says
my Author) that the Kings Power is separable from his Person, is High Treason
by the Law of this Land. And he observes out of the case of the two Spencers in
the Reign of Edw. 2. that to cover their Treason, they went upon three
principles; 1st. That if the King do not demean himself by Reason in the right
of his Crown, his Subjects are bound by Oath to remove him. 2ly. That seeing
the King could not be reformed by suit at Law, that ought to be done by Force.
3ly. That his Lieges are bound to govern in aid of him, and in default of him.
Jenkins Rediv. Vindic. Page 74.

These Principles were condemned as Execrable and Detestable by two several
Parliaments in those days: And yet these were the Fundamental Principles on
which that Lewd and Profligate Party did rely in 41. Then, what had been
adjudged to be Execrable before, passed for Law and for Gospel too: Then
Treason was their Conscience, Resistance was their Creed, V^^es and Ordinances
their Magna Charta, the Sword was their Judge, and hence it followed, that so
many of the Representatives of our Nation was our greatest Grievance.

God would not stay till Doomsday to reckon with us; but his Judgments pursued
us close at heels: We had Wormwood for loathing Manna, and a Yoke of Bondage
upon us, for a Stubborn and Ungovernable humor under a Light hand.

This was part of our Reward in this World; and should God add weight to our
Burden yet, Rebellious people must confess (if they will ever speak Truth in
earnest) that they have deserved the most intolerable of all Evils* if our
Apostle be in the night, that They that Resist, shall receive to themselves
Damnition.

To prevent the Execution of this sad sentence, (...) all such as have a Real
and True value of their Souls, and desire to live so in this world, as not to
he miserable in another, let such account Subjection to the King, both an
Honorable and a Necessary part o^ Religion, and not suffer themselves either
to b^ wheadled out of their Loyalty by Flatteries, or to (...) husst out of it
by Fears. Methinks it is something odd, that when we all agree in the Premises,
we should differ in the Conclusion. That Kings ought to be submitted unto, is a
Truth assented to by all sober Christians in the World; This is owned in
general. The mischief is, that when we come to Particulars (whether Things or
Persons) either prejudice, or passions, or interests of Men, start Evasions,
and Conditions, which were never heard of in the World among Christians before.
Some are for the King, as long as he is Rich, Powerful, and able to maintain
their Interest; that is the Loyalty of the Leviathan. Others stick to him, as
long as he sticks to their Religion; that is, the Loyalty of the Conclave, and
the Kirk. But the Faith of the Church of England is this (which I am sure is
consonant to the universal sense and practice of the Ancient, Apostolic
Church, that let Princes be (as it shall please God) either a Blessing, or a
Rod to a Kingdom, in all things Lawful they are to be Obeyed; and where we
cannot Obey them, but by sinning against God, there their Authority is to be
submitted unto; so that whatever their Practices, or their Faith be, yet their
Prerogatives, their Persons, their Lives must be Sacred: though they be Saul's,
yet it is a most fearful thing to lift up ones hand to destroy the Lords
Anointed. I shall conclude all with that of the wisest of Monarchs and Men,
Prove. 24. 21. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change. Amen,

Soli Deo Gratia.
FINIS.

