Tulce Major.
Martis XVIII. Die Martii, 1683/4. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi Angliae,
etc. XXXVI.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Pearson to Print his Sermon, Preached at the
Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday last before the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen
of this City.

Wagstaffe.

THE STUDY OF QUIETNESS Explained, Recommended, and Directed, IN A SERMON
Preached before The Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR and Court of Aldermen, At
the GVILD-HALL CHAPEL, March 16. 1683/4.

And now Published, as the Heads were, elsewhere, more Enlarged upon, in
several Discourses.

By RICHARD PEARSON Rector of St. Michael's Crooked-Lane, LONDON.

London, Printed by P. H. for Henry Bonwicke at the Red-Lyon in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1684.

To the Right Honorable, Sir HENRY TUICE, Lord Mayor of the City of London.
My Lord,
IN Obedience to your Lordship's Order, I have now made this plain Discourse
public. That which I beforehand most assuredly expected, has since accordingly
befallen me, upon my Preaching of this Sermon; which has brought me under the
gentle Discipline of the long-ago-erected Phanatick-Office* that is, (if there
can be any need to explain my meaning) I have been bitterly Cursed and Railed
at, and both my Self and my Discourse vilely aspersed, with an hundred Lies and
Slanders, and most ridiculous and malicious Misrepresentations. And, indeed,
since I must needs be venturing to tell these Men their own (though out of
never so charitable a Design) how could I expect to escape that, which has been
the neverfailing Portion of all others, who have yet done the like? or think to
come off, without having a Cast of their Office? Nor have I now therefore the
least reason, to take it ill that I should be thus treated by them, according
to the constant Methods of their proper Trade and Mystery. For, to Rail and
Slander is the only way, which this sort of Men yet ever knew, of requiting
those Persons, who speak to them Home-truths, and give them sober Counsels.
This is their only significant and most substantial way of Commendation, in
these Cases. And under this Notion, I can assure them, I have now learned to
take all their present Treatment; which I do therefore not only readily
forgive; but, over and above, return them hearty thanks for the same;
professing withal, that I will still carefully endeavor (according to their
Rules of judging) never to deserve less, from their hands. If their Design,
herein, has been quite contrary, and they far enough from having any Intention
to gratify me, I cannot tell how to help their being defeated; they must even
bestow their Lies elsewhere, for the future. For for my part in these Cases, I
shall ever look upon such course Complements as the greatest Credit and
Courtesies, that these Men are capable of doing me, till I see they come once
to have a more real Kindness for their own Souls. In the mean time, in point of
Gratitude for what I have already received, I think my self obliged to acquaint
them, with this secret, viz. That, if they have indeed a mind most effectually
to shame, vex and disoblige me, their only way will be, to speak well of me.

As to the Discourse itself, I shall only say thus much; that though there are
now several things added, and more enlarged upon, yet there is nothing at all
omitted of what was delivered before your Lordship. And I must now leave it to
all impartial Readers, to judge, whether in the whole, there be any thing (of
my own) either so profane or ridiculous, as that any one, who is not himself
troubled with over moist a Brain, shall need (as some very gravely pretend they
did, at the hearing of it) to sweat for me.

My Lord, I have no more to add, but that no man shall more heartily Pray, for
your Lordships Happiness and Prosperity, for the successful Government, Peace,
and true Welfare of this City, than

Your Lordships most Humble and Obedient Servant R. Pearson.

1 THESE. 4. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own Business,
etc.
THough Peace and Quietness be a thing in it self so highly desirable, and
essentially conducive to the present temporal, as well as the future eternal
Happiness of men; and though Strife and Discord be constantly attended with
such Misery and Confusion, that any tolerably wise man cannot but stand amazed
at the prodigious Folly and Madness of those who make it so their only*
Business to disquiet the World, and themselves; yet (which is worst of all) no
Persons are ever more hardly persuaded to consider what they do, to be made
sensible of their folly, or willing to admit of any proper Remedy for their
Disease, than such turbulent factious Spirits. Who, whilst in the heat of their
Passion and Disorder, are commonly so far from hearing any Arguments of Reason
or Religion, which would tend to pacify and bring them to a better Mind, that
the very Proposal of any such Arguments does usually but so much the more
exasperate and enrage them, and make them become extremely furious also against
him, who does but offer to make any such charitable Applications to them.

Thus popular Tumult and Faction is apt at first, like a violent Torrent, to
carry all before it. And such men, whilst in their full Carreer, are as deaf to
all moral Arguments, as the very Bruits; till at last, when either they have
wearied out themselves, or come to be overpowred by Authority, and forcibly
restrained from proceeding, or are made a little to smart for, and feel the bad
Effects of their own Disorders; then, perhaps they may become more docible, and
ready to hear such sound reason, as may prevail upon them, for the future, to
betake themselves to more regular Courses, and a peaceable Behavior.

And now, as this Observation has generally proved true, as to the men of most
other Ages and Places of the World, and as the first part of it has been
already too sadly and notoriously fulfilled, by very many men of our own Time
and Nation; so it is to be hoped, that now the second part of it will also be no
less verified, in the future Temper and Behavior of the same Persons.

It Is but a very little while ago (if it be indeed yet over) since very
considerable numbers amongst us, were, by the wicked Artifices of some of the
worst of men, boiled up into such a height of Tumult and Sedition, so wholly
bent upon Faction, Disorder, and Confusion, that no sober Counsels or
Persuasions of those who sincerely endeavored to maintain Peace could find any
tolerable Reception. Men were grown far wiser than all their regular Teachers;
and only admired and betook themselves to such false Guides, as would first
suffer themselves to be guided and instructed, by their fond Disciples, how,
and what to teach them; such only as would be sure still to infuse into them
more and more unresonable Fears and Jealousies; make them more froward,
discontented, and seditious, and fire them on into an open Combustion.

As for those faithful Monitors (as, God be praised, there were many) who,
according to their bounden Duty, continued to preach to the People, Trust in
God, and Reliance upon the divine Providence, who sincerely inculcated to them,
the constant Doctrine and Example of the Apostles and Primitive Christians;
such men failed not to be mortally hated, scoffed at, and publicly derided,
for their pains, by many, who were not ashamed to give out, by way of answer to
all this; That we of this Age are but little concerned in what the Apostles
either said, or did; and that, had they lived in our Circumstances, they would
have preached and acted quite contrary to what they did; many times withal, not
obscurely insinuating as if they thought their own Teachers, now in this Age of
Light, far better acquainted with the true Christian Liberty, in these
Particulars, than the very first inspired Planters of the Gospel.

In short, for one to have taken such a Text as this but two years ago, and
solidly and pertinently to have discoursed upon it, according to the true
meaning and design thereof, was enough, without any more ado, to call a man's
true Protestantship in question, and to make him shrewdly suspected for, and to
give him the black Character of (that under which they comprehend all evil) a
Person Popishly affected.

But now at length, since by a wonderful Providence, the hellish Designs of the
accursed Promoters of our Discord, and wicked Ringleaders of the Faction have
been so clearly discovered and defeated; since so good Provision also is made,
by the watchful Endeavors of a Wise and Gracious Prince, that it may be no
more in the power of such men, by the same Methods to disturb the Public
Peace, or to bring Ruin and Confusion upon themselves, and others; since some
of them have likewise tasted the bitter Fruits of their former Disorders and
wicked Follies; I hope now, that all men will so far open their eyes and ears,
as not to be any more so enraged against faithful Admonitions, nor to think a
Discourse of this Nature unseasonable.

Now men are come a little more to themselves again, and grown cooler, I hope
that of the Preacher may be verified in them, Eccles. 9. 17. And the words of
wise men will now be heard in quiet, more than the cry of him that ruled among
Fools, that is (as the learned Grotius paraphraseth it) rather than the
Clamours of a factious Tribune of the People, or the Suggestions of any
seditious Demagogue of the silly Vulgar.

Now such men will be more at leisure to sit down a little, and soberly
consider, what it is they have gained, by their former Unquietness, Cabals,
Riots, Tumults, and unnatural Conspiracies; and may, perhaps, be contented
hereafter, to give St. Paul a patient hearing, and look upon it worth their
while also to think at length, of practicing his excellently Political no less
than Christian Advice, whilst he, here in my Text, most earnestly beseeches
them, That they would study to be quiet, and to do their own Business.

Which though it be to be looked upon as a complicated Exhortation, and there
are two distinct things which we are here pressed to; so that I might, and
shall also (so far as it may be thought necessary) handle them distinctly: yet
since the second is here recommended only for the sake of the first, and we are
called upon to mind our own Affairs, and to do our own Business, and keep our
selves within the compass of our own proper Callings, as one excellent means,
in order to the procuring and maintaining that Peace and Quiet, for which
mainly we are to study; I shall therefore content my self with endeavoring
these three General Things.

First, To show, What it is to be quiet, or who they are that may be truly
said, to study to be quiet.

Secondly, To consider, and briefly to demonstrate what absolute necessity
there is of the most earnest study and contrivance, of the most diligent care
and circumspection to be used by all those who would lead a quiet and a
peaceable life.

Thirdly, I shall endeavor to show how this study of ours may be best
directed; or, in what Particulars chiefly our care to this purpose may most
succesflully be employed.

And then, in the last place, I shall conclude the whole with some seasonable
Application.

First, I am to show, what it is to be quiet, or who they are that may be truly
said, to study to be quiet. Nor will this Enquiry (as some may be apt to think
it) be altogether unnecessary or impertinent: Since though it may seem easily
enough to be understood, yet (like several other plain things) it may be liable
to be mistaken. And, I fear, there are but too many who are no less Strangers
to the full meaning and true notion of the thing, than they are to the practice
of the Duty it self; as perhaps, 'twill better appear in my farther Explication.

Now Quietness here may be taken both Passively and Actively; and he is truly
quiet, who is neither himself restless and disturbed in his own mind, nor yet
any ways disturbs others that are about him.

First, To be quiet (in that which I call the passive sense) is no other than
to be of a calm, even, well composed Temper; to have a man's mind at rest and
ease, void of all Sowerness, Discontent, Peevishness, secret Murmurings and
Repinings at God's Providential Dispensations; not apt to be ruffled or
disordered, by any troublesome and inordinate Lusts and Passions, but full of
Love, Joy, Peace; well contented with that state and circumstances of
condition, which Providence has at present allotted the man; and far from
desiring any violent or irregular alteration.

And now this inward Peace and Tranquillity* of Mind is indeed the only true
Foundation of all other Quietness. Which, in the Second Acceptance, is no
other than a peaceable Temper and Behavior toward other men. In which active
sense of the Word (here mainly designed in my Text*) that man only can be truly
said to study to be quiet, who has such a special care over himself, over all
his Deeds, Words, and Thoughts, as never wittingly to Do, Say, or Design, nor
yet to countenance, or any way encourage any other in the doing, saying, or
designing any thing that is apt to create Hatred, Faction, or Discord, in the
Church or State; or may tend to the Injury, or Disturbance of that Kingdom,
City, Society or Family, of which he is a Member; but, on the contrary,
endeavors, in all Particulars, both so to demean himself, and (as much as in
him lies) to prevail with all others also after such a manner to behave
themselves, as may best comport with the Peace of mankind in general, and tend
to the Benefit and Establishment of that Lawful Government in particular, under
which he is a Subject. But still, in order to the Rectifying or Prevention of
several too common Mistakes, it may not, perhaps, be inconvenient for me
somewhat more particularly and distinctly to insist upon, and explain the
several Parts of this general Description.

And First then, all they who may be truly said to study to be quiet, will be
sure to have a special care over all their Actions, that they never offer any
Injury to, or do any thing that may justly offend, or tend to molest others;
but carefully endeavor to do as they would be done by, and to render unto
every one his due, according to those several Stations, either in Church or
State, in which others stand related to them: But more especially to be careful
to behave themselves reverently and obediently to the Supreme Magistrate, and
toward all those who are set in Authority under him, being subject to every
Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake; to pay Tribute and undergo the common
Burdens cheerfully; to suffer private Wrongs, where they cannot legally be
redrest, patiently, in order to the Public Welfare and Advantage: To be far
from doing any thing in contempt of, or opposition to Authority; but heartily
to pray for their Governors, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, and readily to
comply with all the Laws of the Land wherein they live, where nothing is
required of them inconsistent with any Law of God. In short, to do nothing that
is apt to breed Private Contentions, or Public Broyls, nothing that tends to
disturb the Public Peace, to change or subvert the Lawful Government
established; nothing that would hinder the Reign of their Prince, from being
safe, easy, and prosperous, or their Fellow Subjects, from leading under him,
a quiet and a peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty; but, on the
contrary, to do all they can to promote the same. All this care now, over his
Actions, must he have, who may be truly said, to study to be quiet.

And from hence now may appear how grossly they endeavor to impose both upon
themselves and others, who, tho they have been guilty of all the Sedition and
Disorders, which directly lead to downright blows, do yet call themselves the
most peaceable Persons, and would fain be thought as quiet as Lambs, merely
because they have as yet abstained from open Violence, and plain cutting of
throats; as if nothing were sufficient to denominate men unquiet, less than
being actually up in Arms, and in open Rebellion against their Lawful
Sovereign. Nay, time was, you know, and not so long since, when men of the same
Principles, and many of the self-same Persons too, even at the same time that
they were proceeding to all the highest Degrees of Outrage and Hostility, and
were actually swimming in a whole Sea of Innocent Blood of their own shedding,
could yet have nothing but God and Religion, and the Gospel in their Mouths,
and pretend to do all this as the greatest Lovers of Peace, and in order to
promote the Public. Welfare and Tranquillity; impudently styling themselves,
the King's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, at the same time, when they
appeared in open Field against him, and in despite of all their own Cannons,
loudly proclaiming to the World, and roaring them out the greatest Liers and
vilest Hypocrites, that, perhaps, were ever yet permitted to be the Curse of
any Nation. Now, if any pretenses whatsoever can make such Practices as these
consistent with a peaceable Temper, or not to argue indeed the greatest
Contradiction in Men to all Study of being quiet, then no Men in the World ever
yet were, or can study to be, unquiet. But certainly far less than this comes
to, may justly make a Man deserve this Charecter; and not only to be in open
Rebellion; but even to refuse to obey the wholesome Laws of the Land, or for Men
to promote Schism and Factions, Hatred and Animosities, by causelessly
withdrawing and unreasonably seperating themselves from the Publicly
Established Worship, wherein nothing is Prescribed or Practiced contrary to the
Word of God, this is as truly inconsistent with the Study of Peace, as any
thing; as generally, and almost necessarily laying the Foundation of all other
Unquietness, Sedition, and Confusion. Whereas all they who truly study to be
quiet, will carefully abstain from this, or any other Action, which they know,
will tend to destroy Peace and Charity, and sow the Seeds of Discord and
Contention among Brethren and Fellow Subjects.

But Secondly, This Study also implys a watchful Care over our very Words, as
well as Actions, of what we speak or write, as well as how we behave our selves
in other Particulars. For a Man may sit still and do nothing else, and yet so
employ his Tongue or Pen, as will no less effectually disturb the Public
Peace, set Men by the Ears together, and even turn the World up-side down, then
if in the Head of an Army, and actually making use of the most Warlike
Preparations, to the same purpose. The Words of a cunning Incendiary have a
strange kind of Force and Influence, to the Poisoning and Inflaming of Men's
minds; so that indeed, were it not for these, Men would scarce ever proceed to
Blows. Behold (says St. James) How great a matter, a little Fire kindles. The
Tongue is a Fire, a World of Iniquity [enough] to set on Fire the course of
Nature. All wise Magistrates have been so deeply sensible of the extreme Danger
which there is, from the Liberty of unruly Tongues, that they have ever thought
fit, in order to the securing of the Public Tranquillity, to lay Restraints
upon the same, by the severest Penalties, and to make Words as well as Actions
Capital. And David brings in his Enemies vaunting, and placing no less
Confidence in these, than in their very Arms, Ps. 12. 4. With our Tongues (say
they) will we prevail; and do our business, by the Force of Calumny. And the
same Royal Prophet complains, Ps. 57. 4. My Soul is among Lions; and I lie even
among them that are set on Fire; whose Teeth are Spears and Arrows (that is, as
contributing toward their Speech) and their Tongue a sharp Sword. And Ps. 64.
3. who whet their Tongue like a Sword; and bend their Bow, to shoot their
Arrows, even bitter Words. And indeed, Words there are of such a cursed Nature
and Effect, that they may be well looked upon under the Notion of most
Formidable Weapons; and as the very Files that serve to point all other
Weapons, and to set an Edge also upon the Minds of the Rebellious Persons that
make use of them. Insomuch, that what cruel Hatred Strife and Discords, what
Murders, Seditions, Wars and Desolations do not commonly, from hence, proceed,
as their true Cause, and unhappy Original? So true is that of Ecclus. 28. 14.
18. A Backbiting Tongue has disquieted many, and driven them from Nation to
Nation; strong Cities has it pulled down, and overthrown the Houses of great
Men. Many have fallen by the Edge of the Sword, but not so many as have fallen
by the Tongue. But we of this Nation have sadly been instructed, in the late
Civil Wars, and had now like once again to have Experienced, what sad Feats may
be Effected, by the Power of Licencious Tongues and Pens. For from the abused
Pulpits and Presses chiefly sounded the Shrilest Trumpets, and Effectual
Alarms, to that Cursed Rebellion; These were the main deadly Engines of Battery
and Confusion; these were the very Magazines, which furnished them, with all
that Hellish Artillery, of the most Horrid Lies, Slanders, and Calumnies, of
the most unreasonable Suspicions, Fears, and Jealousies, which made Men
perfectly Distracted, and fall to the Butchering so of one another, and at last
to the Barbarous Murder of one of the best Princes that ever swayed Scepter.
And indeed as long as Men are suffered still so much to make use of the same
Chavel'd Bullets, the like Poisoned unlawful Weapons, there can be no Hopes of
securing any lasting Peace or Tranquillity among us* Nor can any one be esteemed
other than a troubler of our Israel, who makes no Conscience of his Words, to
keep his Tongue from Evil, and his Lips that they speak no Guile. For the same
may be said of Peaceableness, which* St. James affirms of Religion in general;
If any Man among you would seem or be thought to study to be quiet, and
bridleth not his Tongue, that Man does but deceive his own Heart, and all his
Pretenses to Quietness are altogether vain.

Nay Thirdly, He that may be truly said to study to be quiet, must be careful
also over his very Thoughts, and Wishes, and most secret Designs; not to desire
or meditate within himself, any thing injurious, or which tends to the
Perjudice, or causeless* Disturbance of any of his Neighbors* much less any
thing which would unsettle the Government, or be Inconsistent with the Security
of the Public Peace, and Common Welfare. For it many times may, and does so
happen, that under a more strict Government, a man may be so overawed, through
the fear of Punishment, as to lay some Restraints upon his Words and Actions,
and to be careful of what he does, and what, and to whom he says anything,
merely for want of a safe Opportunity of behaving himself otherwise: Whilst
his Heart is full of that Treason and Sedition, which will be sure to break out
and openly show it self as soon as ever the Man supposes he has met with a
more secure Season. But they who are truly Peaceable, will be careful also to
have a Peaceable Mind, ready always most heartily to pray for the Peace of
their Jerusalem, and for the Safety and Prosperity also of all those lawful
Governors, whose Business it is to secure its Tranquillity; will be far from
cursing the King so much as in their Hearts; for let Men's Words be smoother
than Butter (as the Psalmist Phraseth it) yet whilst War is in their Hearts;
this is sufficient to denominate Men Enemies unto Peace; as being indeed, in it
self, a most direct Contradiction to all Study of being quiet.

Nor is it yet sufficient for a Man to take care of himself only, unless (in
the last Place) he endeavor, as much as in him lies, that all other Men also
may be alike Peaceably disposed and demean themselves. For it is possible for a
Man to sit still, and neither to do, nor say any thing himself, which may
immediately denominate him a Disturber of the Public Tranquillity, and yet
whilst, by any means, he willingly affords Encouragement or Opportunity of
Success, to those that are so, the same Man does no less effectually contribute
to the ensuing Disturbance, than if he had never so immediately busied himself
to the same Purpose. It Is much the same thing for one to do Mischief
immediately by himself, or through the means of some other third Person, by him
enabled and set on to do it. The main difference is only, that the one does it
usually more* securely, as to himself, and always more slily, Basely, and
Treacherously than the other.

And they who, as far as they dare, make it their constant Practice underhand
to favor and encourage others, in their Vile Misrepresentations of the
Designs, in their blasting the Reputation, and weak'ning the Hands of those
that are the true Lovers of, and Endeavourers after Peace; and, on the other
Hand, make it their Business, to conceal, stand up for, defend, countenance,
and excuse the Seditious Words and Actions of others, whose Design it is to set
all in a Combustion, such Favorers and Abettors are indeed no less dangerous
or Innocent, than the most open and declared Enemies to the public Welfare
and Tranquillity. Nay, in short, for a Man* to stand still only as a Sly
Squinting* Neuter, and not heartily to join with, help, and strengthen (as much
as he can) the Interest, Reputation, and Authority of all those who truly
endeavor to be quiet, and maintain Peace: or, on the contrary, not to do his
best to detect, discourage, and hinder the wicked Counsels and Attempts of all
those who evidently make it their Business to create Disturbance and Confusion,
either in Church or State, even this also, is wholly inconsistent with the Real
Study of being quiet.

And thus having done with the first Enquiry, I proceed now to the second
General thing I proposed, viz. to consider and briefly to demonstrate what
absolute necessity there is of the most earnest Study and Contrivance, of the
most diligent Care and Circumspection to be used, by all those who would indeed
lead a quiet and a peaceable Life.

Now there are these two Things chiefly, which, when they happen to meet
together, do always make it absolutely necessary for us, to bestow the utmost
of our Care and Diligence, about the Attainment of any Qualification; and that
is, when the Qualification it self is of great Excellency and of highest
Importance to be attained, and yet, it is most certain, cannot be attained,
without much Difficulty. But now both these Properties or Conditions are
eminently Conspicuous and Demonstrable in the present Duty which we are
discoursing of.

For First, as for the singular Excellence and high Importance of a quiet and
peaceable Behavior, the Scripture is every where so very plain and Pregnant to
this purpose, that none but a mere Infidel can, in the least, doubt of the
thing. David was so ravished with the sweet Contemplation of it, that he cries
out in perfect Admiration, Behold, how good and pleasant a thing it is, for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity! Nor indeed does God himself (who alone
best knows how both to value and reward our several Perfections) more highly
esteem of any thing, than of this blessed Temper; St. Peter assuring us, that a
meek and quiet Spirit is, in the sight of God, of great price, 1 Pet. 3. 4. And
are not these the very Words of him, who shall, at last, pronounce every Man's
Final Sentence either to Woe, or Happiness? Blessed are the Peacemakers; for
they shall be called (That is, esteemed and rewarded as) the Children of God?
Does not our blessed Savior himself likewise, make this the standing
Infallible Mark and dislinguishing Character of a Christian or Genuine
Disciple? By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one
another. And accordingly St. Paul, in like manner, could not desire Men to give
a better Evidence of their Walking worthy of the Vocation, wherewith they are
called, that is of their behaving themselves as Christians than by their
endeadeavouring to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace; as it
may appear, by the Connection of the First and Third Verse of the Fourth Chapter
to the Ephesians.

So we find Love and Peace reckoned up as the main Fruits of the Spirit:
Whereas Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, and Seditions are put
among the Manifest and Notorious Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 19. 22. And St.
Paul Appeals to those who give themselves up to such Vices, as Persons
self-condemned, for no better than mere Carnal-men, and such as are far enough
from having any thing of the true Christian Spirit and Gospel Temper, 1 Cor. ^.
3. Whereas there is among you Envying, and Strife, and Divisions, are ye not
carnal, and walk as men? St. James also tells us plainly, That where Envying
and Strife is, there is Confusion, and every evil Work, 1 Jam. 3. 16, 17.

In short, How frequently, and with what Earnestness are we every where called
upon, To follow after the things which make for Peace; to let the Peace of God
Rule in our hearts? How full are all the Holy Writings of the New Testament of
Precepts and Exhortations, to this purpose* And were there no other, methinks,
that of St. Paul might be sufficient, to all who in earnest believe a future
State; when he expressly assures us, from God himself, that, without following
after Peace as well as Holiness, in the General, No man shall ever see the
Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

So that, indeed, if all the Promises, or Threatenings, if all the
Commendations, Exhortations, or Commands of the Gospel be of force enough to
make a thing necessary; if it be of any importance to us, whether we be real
Christians or no; whether we be Spiritual, or Carnal; such as Christ will, at
last, approve of, or condemn; In a word, if either our present Happiness here
in this life, or our eternal Happiness hereafter be thought things worth our
looking after; it must then also be of highest Concern to us, that we be of a
quiet Temper, and be found such as behave themselves peaceably.

Nor can we possibly use too great Diligence about this. Especially if we
consider also, how many Rubs and Hindrances we are like to meet with in the
way, and how difficultly it is attainable.

Many indeed who are but little acquainted with themselves, and with the World,
may be apt enough to imagine, that to be quiet and peaceable is no such hard
matter, as that it should require in men so much Care and Study to keep
themselves so. For does not Quietness (may they say) consist chiefly in
Negatives? And is it not much easier, in the general, to sit still, and not to
act, than to be busily employed in Action? So that, after a man has but once a
mind to be quiet; what should hinder him from so behaving himself? or how
should there be any such great Difficulty in this Affair?

But yet when such men come indeed to the Practice and Experiment, they may
soon be convinced of their Error, and fully satisfied that all the Care and
Contrivance they can use, to keep themselves peaceable, is little enough. For
though indeed, but to have a mind to be quiet, will go a great way in the
thing, and though it be in it self also more easy, as well as more happy and
delightful for a man to be peaceable, than to be ungovernable and contentious;
yet such is the strange Corruption of our Nature, such, and so many are the
Hindrances and Temptations, both from within, and without us, that it seems
almost impossible for any one to be truly quiet, and much more that he should
long continue so, by chance, but, as the World goes, he that would indeed be
so, must be sure to take a great deal of pains to be quiet.

For First, Every Lust you are willing to harbor in your hearts, will
certainly prove a Makebate and Incendiary, which will never suffer you to be
long quiet: but, forcing you to break all your Resolutions for Peace, be sure
to engage you in endless Broyls and Contentions. But now how hard and laborious
a Task it is, and what great Care and Diligence must be used, to conquer and
subdue a man's own Lusts, all will easily acknowledge, who have been, in the
least acquainted with the Work of Mortification.

But still, besides this Treacherous Brood, of his own Household, which every
man has more or less Within himself, we are also continually surrounded from
without, with whole multitudes of such as are sworn Enemies unto Peace; who
will be sure, if possible, to hinder us from following it. The Devil and all
his wicked Instruments are always strangely busy, in sowing the Seeds of
Hatred, Discord, and Contention, and the World is every where full of such
Persons, who, as they are themselves extremely Peevish, Discontented, and
Ungovernable; so is it their very Study and Employment (as much as they can by
all means) to draw in, and make others become like them. And that good man has
found out a happy Dewlling Place indeed, whose heart finds not occasion
frequently to sigh out that Complaint of David; My Soul has long dwelt among
them that are Enemies unto Peace.

He that would keep himself quiet will be forced to be at the trouble of often
suspending his Belief, of stopping his Ears, of shifting his Company, and
changing his Acquaintance. And yet, when all is done, you must contentedly
expect to be mortally hated and slandered, to be injured and reviled, and looked
upon as strange Monsters, by the Sons of Wrath and Bitterness, merely because
you will not run, with them, into the same Excess of Riot and Sedition. For if,
with David, you sincerely endeavor to maintain Peace, you will be sure to meet
with those also, who, as soon as ever you speak to them thereof, will be so
much the more enraged thereat against you, as presently to make them ready for
Battle. In short, they who are the real Troublers of Israel themselves, will
not fail to call you, by this odious name, and to treat you as such, upon no
other account, but because you refuse to join with them, in being so indeed.

Nay, the Devil has of late, made use of one powerful Stratagem and Temptation,
which seems, indeed, beyond all others; and is such as, I Am persuaded, has most
startled and rendered it extremely difficult, even for several well-meaning men,
to keep themselves peaceable. And this he has effected, by inspiring a sort of
leading Hypocrites among us, who, whilst they pretend themselves the only
Zealots for, and Professors of the true Religion, have indeed set up a New
Gospel of their own, so directly opposite, in this, to that which our Savior
and his Apostles delivered, that, according to the Doctrine of these men; He
must presently be stigmatized, as an Enemy to the Truth, who is careful to
continue a Friend unto Peace.

Nor will their Gospel allow any one to be truly Religious, who is, at the same
time, truly Peaceable: but that study of Love, and mutual Peace, which our
Savior makes the mark of a true Disciple, they endeavor to turn into the
Character of one who secretly adores Antichrist; whilst what St. Jude
attributes to the first grand Heretics, The dispising of Dominions, and
speaking evil of Dignities, and refusing to be subject to any lawful Authority,
either for wrath or conscience sake, goes, with them, for the most substantial
Argument of an Orthodox Professor, and only true Believer. In a word, under
the pretense of Religion, they have done their utmost to destroy the very Life
and Soul of it; And, if what these men (as I shall hereafter show) have both
preached and lately printed, were indeed the Gospel, our Savior must then have
bequeathed to all his Disciples, not that blessed Legasie of Peace, but nothing
but War, Discord, and Confusion, from Generation to Generation; and have come
into the World only to turn men into Wolves and Tigers, to subvert all good
Order, and utterly* to dissolve all Civil Society, among the Sons of Men.

But now since such Doctrines as have this direct tendency are both taught and
maintained, by those who would be thought the most faithful Ministers of the
Gospel; and since there are also so many other Temptations and Discouragements
that render it so extremely difficult, for men to behave themselves peaceably;
how infinitely therefore does it concern every sincere Christian to arm himself
against them, and carefully to look about him? How highly necessary is it for
us, (...), that is, as the Word implies, to study and endeavor to be quiet,
with the same earnestness and solicitude, as the most ambitious Persons do, in
the pursuit after Honors and Preferment, or with the like Concern, which may
be observed in the most Covetous, to heap up Riches; that is, to endeavor
after Peace with the most Exquisite Care and Diligence imaginable.

And so I proceed now to the Third General thing, viz. To endeavor to show,
how this Study of ours may be best directed; or, in what Particulars chiefly,
our Care to this purpose may most successfully be employed. And now in Order to
this, let me, in the first place direct you, as the main Foundation of all
Peace and Quietness, to endeavor to be fully convinced of the Truth of
Christianity and to have also your Minds and Hearts fully possessed with the
continual Consideration of those Glorious Rewards and Happiness of that future
State, which the Son of God came into the World to acquaint us with, and
prepare us for. Seek but first, in good earnest, the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness; place your main Treasure and Happiness in Heaven, and in those
Qualifications which may fit you for it; and then where your Treasure is, there
will your Heart be also. And he that is thus sincere in Religion, and has once
got Heaven into his Heart; must necessarily so little value all else, as that
it will be impossible, he should fall out about any earthly things; the
excessive Love of which is always the Cause and true Root of all Quarrels and
Contentions. He that is fond of the World, or dotes upon any thing here below,
will never fail upon infinite Occasions, of being engaged, in endless Broiles
and Contests; whilst Heavenly-mindedness is the only thing that can render Men
contented, and effectually secure them in Peace. And our Savior is therefore
indeed the great Author and Promoter of Peace, among Men, not only in that he
has every where so strictly commanded them to maintain the same; but chiefly,
in that they who heartily embrace his Religion, are powerfully enabled, through
the firm Belief and Consideration of the life to come, to wean themselves from,
and set loose to the things of this; setting their Affections on the things
above, and not on the things beneath; otherwise all his Commands of following
Peace, would have been impracticable, and but to little purpose. Whilst now,
nothing is more easy or natural, than the Observation of these Precepts, after
once a Vigorous faith has plucked up out of Men's Hearts, that bitter Root of
all Contention, Worldlymindedness. And therefore it is not at all so strange,
that the Primitive Christians should live in such Peace together and blessed
Concord, as to be of one Heart, and of one Soul, when the full Persuasion and
Belief of the eternal Happiness of another Life, had so perfectly rased out of
their Hearts, (that very Foundation of all Discord) the love of Worldly things,
that they could afford to think nothing of the things they possessed, their
own, but to have all things common, selling their Goods, and imparting them to
all, as every Man had need, as we read, Act. 4. 32. 8. c. 2. 45. Which
extraordinary and miraculous Example of theirs, tho it does not hinder (unless
the like Circumstances should also require the same of us) but that Christians
now may both lawfully and conveniently maintain a Propriety in these temporal
Good Things; yet, as the same Belief will make us always ready cheerfully to
distribute to those that have need, as Christian-prudence may direct us, so
will it be sure to keep us from any such fondness toward Worldly Good Things,
as would engage us to sacrifice Peace; but we shall be far enough from
disturbing the World, or injuring any* Person, in order to the keeping or
increasing our Possessions. It Is nothing else but their Pride, Covetousness, or
Ambition, that makes Men Restless and Unquiet, and sets them so at difference;
for from whence come Wars and Fightings (says St. James) come they not hence
even of your Lusts, which war in your Members? These, these are the real
Pensioners that betray the Peace and Happiness of a Nation or Society; these
are the things that make Men first uneasy within themselves, and then
troublesome to others. Upon which account therefore, the Prophet, compares
wicked Men, to the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire
and Dirt. If. 57. 20. But let us take care only, by that purifying Hope, which
ought to be, and is in every real Christian, to regulate our corrupt
Affections, and mortify our Fleshly Desires, and then, when our Jonas-lusts are
once cast from us, all the former Storms and Tempests of Contention will soon
cease, and the rest of our Voyage besure to prove Calm and Peaceable.

He who so seriously believes the Gospel, as to place his Hopes, his Treasure,
and his Heart in Heaven, must needs have Active Peace with all the World. For
first, such a one, to be sure, can have no manner of Occasion, or possibility
of Temptation, either to Envy, Hate, or fall out with any other, upon the
account of spiritual Good Things; because he knows it is impossible that any
Man in the World, without his own consent, should either injure him in, or
hinder him of that Happiness, in the Hopes of which he can rest perfectly well
contented: And then, as for any temporal things, his Heart is too much engaged
else where, nor does he value them at such a rate, as that, for the sake of
those, he should become Quarrelsome, and Unpeaceable; especially, since he well
knows, that his so behaving himself about such Trifles, would most certainly
hinder him, of that future Happiness, for which alone, he is so mainly, and
heartily concerned. So that let Men color their Designs as they will, let them
endeavor to deceive others, and, perhaps, their own Hearts, as much as they
can, with the vain Pretenses of mere zeal for Religion; there can be no such
thing in the case, whilst Men are Peevish, and Quarrelsome, Seditious, and
Ungovernable; nothing but Mammon, nothing but Pride, Covetousness, or Ambition,
and what is most contrary to the Gospel, is really at the bottom of such Men's
Hearts, and that which indeed puts them upon such Practices and unquiet
Behavior; they are far from having yet believed or considered things, like
true Christians.

In short, if we look, not only on bare Names, but upon things themselves; a
Worldly minded Man, or an unpeaceable, or difloyal Christian, is no less
Nonsense and a Contradiction, than a Spiritual-sensualist, a just Robber, or an
innocent Murderer. Whereas he who does really believe, and endeavors still
more and more to strengthen and confirm his persuasion concerning the other
Life; he who has his Heart above, and makes it his earnest Study to mortify his
Lusts; that Man does also, in the same, most effectually study, and take the
most successful course in the World, to be quiet.

But Secondly, in order to this excellent purpose, have a special care what you
use to hear, and read, and with what kind of Company you enter into any
Familiarity: For otherwise, let a man be never so peaceably inclined, it will
he wholly impossible for him long to continue quiet. It Is natural for men to
color with their Company, and with the froward to learn Frowardness. Such as
thy Companions are, such will thou also soon be thy self. More men are
poisoned, by the way of the ears, and from what comes from other men's mouths,
than from what enters in at their own. And he who feeds upon nothing but
stinking Carrion, and takes in nothing but tainted and most unwholsom* Meat and
Drink, may as well expect to retain a sound and healthful Constitution, as that
man a quiet peaceable Mind; who can allow himself to be great and intimate only
with those that are of a factious turbulent Spirit, and of seditious
Principles; for by frequent and familiar converse with such Persons, it is
natural and necessary for a man insensibly to receive the like Impressions and
Apprehensions of things, to imbibe the same Hopes, and Fears, Jealousies and
Suspicions, and, by degrees, to be wholly moved and carried on by the same
Discontents, Prejudices and Disaffections. And what can be expected of any such
Person, whose Acquaintance or Relations hap'ning to be chiefly of those that
are notoriously Factious and Discontented, does, by his open ears and credulous
heart, give a ready entertainment to what they infuse, and make himself (as it
were) the Sink or Common Shore, of all the accursed Lies and Calumnies, of all
the false Stories and malicious Insinuations, and of the rest of that filth and
excrement of their cankred Minds, which the whole Party shall at any time think
fit to void, on purpose to cast in the Face of the Government, and to render
all those odious, who faithfully endeavor to uphold it? whither will not such
a Man be, at last, hurried, through the Influence of such ill Company, tho
otherwise, of himself, never so peaceably inclined? Nay indeed a Man runs a
very great Hazard in being intimate but with any one single Person, that is of
this sour leven. And therefore let the Courtesies Received, or to be Expected
from such a one be never so Considerable to thee, let his Reputation for Parts
or Piety be never so great; after the Man has evidently Discovered to thee, by
any one or more deliberate ill Actions, that he is not sincere, nor a real
Friend to Peace, but of a Restless Ambitious Temper, and a great Favourer of
those, who, in Pursuit of the like. Designs, would be glad to put all into
Confusion; and thou perceivest withal no likelihood of his being reclaimed by
thee; whatsoever it costs thee then, be sure to break loose from him, as soon,
and as civilly as you can: for such a one can no longer be safely made a Friend
or Familiar, by him, who would successfully study to be quiet.

Thirdly, As another excellent course to keep your selves quiet and peaceable,
Be sure to make Conscience of avoiding Idleness, and be careful to serve God
and your Country, by diligently employing your selves every one in his proper
and lawful Calling. Idleness is in it self a very melancholic discontented
thing, naturally apt to breed, in Men, many Lusts and great Poverty, to make
them need and desire more than other Men, and yet to have less; and so, prove
to put them upon any the most violent and injurious Courses, by a short and
easy cut, to make out their desired Fortune. And indeed, were there nothing
else in it, he that will not employ himself as he ought, will soon fall to
busy himself in doing Mischief. So true is that of the Son of Syrach, Ecclus.
33. 27. Idleness teaches much Evil. And accordingly, had not Pharaoh been
Tyrannical, in the unreasonable Tasks he imposed, he was not out in his
Politics, when, to secure his fears of the Children of Israel's making Head
against him, he thought it his best Course to take care, that they should all
be continually employed in Labor. And most Governments and Commonwealths have
wisely thought fit to provide for the Security of the Public Peace and
Tranquillity, by making Laws to prevent Idleness, under very severe Penalties.
Nor is it any other than a very obvious Observation, how such kind of Persons
generally are the main Instruments, both of more private Mischiefs, and of
Public Disturbances, whom Idleness, and her attendent Lusts, and discontented
Poverty, has first prepared for such wicked Undertakings. And what one of the
late Traitors also (who seemed to die more like a penitent than any of the
rest) does, in his last Speech, caution others to this purpose, is well worthy
the serious notice, and timely Consideration of several among us, who are but
too notoriously concerned in that particular. But thus much, I hope, may
suffice to make you sensible, how great an Enemy to Quietness is Idleness; and
on the contrary, how good a help and expedient is Diligence in an honest
Calling and Employment.

Which brings me now directly to the particular means, which we are here so
expressly directed to, in the Text, to this very purpose, Mind your own
Business. Which we are to understand as an useful Caution, in Opposition not
only to Idleness, but chiefly to that pragmatical Temper, or idle Business,
when men will not keep within their own proper Sphere and Compass; but intrude
themselves into other men's Affairs, and become busybodies in other men's
Matters, which they ought not any way to be so concerned in. Which Vice,
because it is so general and epidemical, and yet commonly apt to be thought
harmless enough and innocent; I shall therefore think it worth the while a
little more largely to show the several other great Follies and Mischiefs of it
in general, as well as its direct Repugnancy to all Peace and Quietness, in
particular. And this now I shall endeavor to perform, from these following
Arguments or Considerations.

First, He that busies himself in other men's matters, will be forced to
neglect his own proper Business and Calling, by the due following of which he
might be sure of being most happy and successful, and through the neglect of
which, he usually makes himself miserable for the present, and must be sure to
give a severe account, for such his neglect, hereafter. Every man has enough to
do, to acquit himself conscionably, and like a Christian, in the diligent
discharge of those several Duties required of him, in that particular Sphere
and Station, in which it has pleased God to place him. The mind of man is so
finite, and our Stength and Abilities so limited and confined, that scarce any
man is fit successfully to undertake, at the same time, many and different
Employments: But he that stands fixed in his own proper place, and diligently
applies himself to the following of that particular Employment only, which
God's Providence, in the direction of his own first Choice, and the Care of his
Relations, has called him to, seldom or never fails of very good success
therein. Whereas that man who intermeddles with every matter, and endeavors to
be somebody, in every thing, is very seldom extraordinary in any thing; and
many times is grossly defective, and unhappy, in that particular thing, which
is his proper Profession, and of which it is greatly both shameful and
inconvenient for him to be either ignorant or neglectful. And what can be
comparable to the Folly of those men, who incumber and distract their Minds
about many things, who wast their time and strength in vain, about what belongs
not at all to them, about such things, as they might both safely, and with much
Benefit both to themselves and others, let alone; and at the same time are
wholly careless of doing their Duties, in that particular Province, which yet
cannot, without their great Sin and Punishment, be so neglected? And when, at
length, by this mean's (as it usually comes to pass) such fond Pragmatico's
have greatly disturbed the Peace of the Community, and have brought Infamy,
Poverty, and Misery upon themselves and their Families, even in this World, and
come at the last day to give an account of their Talents and Behavior; What a
wretchedly ridiculous Plea will it be for them to allege, We were so very much
busied in instructing of our Teachers, and in correcting the Faults of our
Magistrates; so wholly taken up about State Affairs, and in directing of our
Superiors how to govern us, or the like, that we were forced to forget the
Obedience of Subjects, and could find no time for that necessary diligence
which we should have exercised in our own proper Callings? Thus, may not that
of the Son of Syrach, be justly applied, to all such self-conceited
busybodies in other men's Matters? Ecclus. 27. 19. There are those that are
wise, and teach many, and yet are unprofitable to themselves.

Secondly, Such a one usually mispends his time and strength to no purpose; in
busying himself about such things, as he cannot, ordinarily, understand, nor is
any way fitly qualified to manage. The different Birth, natural Parts, Custom,
and Education of men, and indeed (in all these) Providence it self seems so to
have designed some to one only, and some to another, this man to a meaner, and
that to a higher Office, in the Commonwealth, that it is ordinarily the
greatest wisdom and truest Interest, for each Person to keep close only to that
particular Vocation, which he at first pitched upon, and has, for any
considerable time, applied himself to. Whilst they who do otherwise, do
commonly but betray, and find, at last, sufficient cause to repent their Folly.
Every man is not cut out for every Employment, and yet it is a common Folly for
most men to think themselves better fitted, to do the Business of others, than
their own. And, O what a profound Divine, what an excellent Preacher could I
make? says the Mechanic; and how admirably well could I perform the Office of
a Judge, a Magistrate, Privy-Counceller, or Prince? says the inferior
Tradesman; for as to their own Profession, Experience has taught them, that
there are in it several Difficulties; whilst in those of other men, mere
Blindness makes them bold, and Ignorance confident; and when they are not able
to see the Difficulties, soon conclude, that there are none, but that all is
smooth and easy. Thus even the most dull and blockish Persons, who have ever
been no better than mere Bunglers in their own proper business, and have scarce
Capacity enough to understand or go through with the meanest Profession, are
yet many times the most pert and medlesome, in the Affairs of other men, and
apt to think themselves most fit to undertake such high and difficult
Employments, toward the worthy discharge of which, indeed, even the choicest
natural and best improved Parts, the largest Time, Diligence, Study and
Experience, are all little enough rightly to qualify and enable a man. How can
he get wisdom (says the Son of Syrach, Ecclus. 38. 25.) that holds the
Plow, and that glories in the Goad, that drives Oxen, and is occupied in
their Labors, and whose talk is of Bullocks, etc. The same incapacity likewise
he afterward affirms, to be in the Carpender, Graver of Seals, Smith, Potter;
concerning whom and the like Artificers, he concludes in the 31, and 33, Verse;
All these trust to their hands, and every one is wise in his own work; but they
shall not be sought for in Public Council, nor sit high in the Congregation;
they shall not sit on the Judges Seat, nor understand the Sentence of Judgment;
they cannot declare Justice and Judgment, and they shall not be found where
Parables are spoken. We might also instance in several other less considerable
Occupations, which though they may not be, perhaps, altogether unuseful (as the
same Author speaks) toward the maintaining the State of the World; yet it can
hardly seem possible, how the Professors of the same should ever, without
immediate Inspiration, attain to that wisdom of the Learned, which ordinarily
comes only through opportunity of leisure. Nor can I, for my part, very easily
discover (though always ready to submit to more discerning Judgments) what
great Kindred or Analogy there can be, between the skill of rightly composing
of a Brush, and that of ordering the Commonwealth; and I am very apt to think
it possible for one who has made this his constant business, to know well
enough how to make a Bird-cage, and yet be no very fit man to determine the
deepest and most controverted Points in Divinity, nor over well versed in the
Arcana Imperii. And, methinks, I cannot but fancy it to look a little
Ridiculous, that one who has attained skill enough conveniently to wire-in a
silly Parrat, and has got a trick, like it, to talk by roat, and without
understanding of Religion, should immediately esteem himself a Saint, take
heart upon it, and from hence conceit, that he has both the Skill and Call also
to bind Kings themselves in Chains, and their Nobles in Fetters of Iron.

Thirdly, Even where such Persons do happen competently to understand, and have
Skill and Parts enough to manage what they undertake, yet when, without any
regular Call to it, they so intrude themselves into other men's Affairs and
Provinces, which no way belong to them, they are seldom or never successful
therein. I readily acknowledge that some Persons one may observe, whose minds
may seem too great for that mean part, which Providence has given them to Act
here on this World's Theater; some, whose natural Parts are such as, to which
had there but been added the advantage of a suitable Education, might have
qualified them for any thing; nor can it be denied, that some, though, rarely
even in the meanest Occupations, make a shift to steal so much time, to attain
to such considerable Improvements of Nature's Stock, as may render them very
capable of no ordinary Station or Employment in the Commonwealth; and there
want not Examples, of such Persons, who when they have been regularly called,
by Authority, to such higher Offices, have proved singularly useful to the
Public: But yet let their Knowledge and Abilities be what they can, when men
who have all along professed a meaner, or much different Occupation, shall of
their own heads, busily intrude themselves to act in the Affairs of a higher
Station, there are these three things, that commonly hinder them from any good
Success in the discharge thereof.

First, Such Persons are sure to labor under no small Envy and Prejudice, and
very much to want that general Reputation and Trust, from others, without which
they can scarce have an opportunity of doing any great matters. Men are
naturally most relied upon and trusted for their Skill in that Art or
Profession, which they are known all along to have made their Business; Whilst
Upstarts and Intruders, are as generally presumed, without any more ado, to be
raw and unskilful, in their new Employments and Undertakings. So that the one,
having more Trust and Credit, though possibly less Skill and Parts, are more
resorted to, and better succeed than the other; who, though furnished sometimes
with greater Abilities, yet wanting the necessary Credit thereof, are therefore
commonly neglected and contemned.

Secondly, Though such Usurpers may have knowledge and Abilities, sufficient
for the discharge of those employments, into which they so unreasonably intrude
themselves: Yet they seldom have the Will or Desire sincerely to make use of
the same, toward the public Benefit, but only to the satisfaction of their
own particular Lusts; and as Pride, Covetousness, or Ambition, first puts them
upon the Undertaking, so they commonly behave themselves accordingly all along,
most unhappily and extravagantly. Lastly, God himself is so much a friend to
the Observance of that necessary Order, without which Government and humane
Society cannot be well maintained, that for the more effectual discountenance
of all Attempts to the contrary, he seldom gives a Blessing to those, who,
without any regular Call to it, impatiently leap out of that Rank, in which his
Providence has seen fit to place them; but such Persons are commonly
unfortunate, and very rarely suffered to be successful. And accordingly it was
the saying of Luther; That, He should be very loath to be a Soldier in that
Army, where Priests were Captains, because the Church, and not the Camp, is
their proper place; and going to War, they willingly outed themselves, of God's
Protection, being out of their own Vocation. To which I think, I may, with
Parity of Reason, add, that I should be no less loath to join my self a Member
of that Congregation, where the pretended Pastor, was never any regularly
Ordained Minister, but a mere Lay-Usurper upon the sacred Office, whether
Soldier (as such have been) or Tradesman, or illiterate Mechanic. However, I
am sure, that one of the most Remarkable Judgments, that God ever yet
inflicted, (for ought we read) since the World began, upon any Sinners, and
such as may well serve as a standing Warning-piece, to all other Persons alike
evilly inclined, was that old-new thing, which he created for the Punishment of
such, as only attempted to Usurp upon that Holy Office; when that Arch-Busybody
Corah and his Pragmatical Company, were swallowed up quick by the Earth,
commanded visibly to cleave in sunder for that Purpose. And though God does not
think fit, to repeat the like dreadful Judgment, upon all Offenders of the like
nature; yet such is the usual hazard and insuccessfulness of such Persons, that
the Wise Solomon saw cause enough, therefrom, to ground that general
Observation of his, with which I shall conclude this Particular, Prove. 27. 8.
As a bird that wandereth from her Nest, so is a Man that wandereth from his
place. That is, as the lesser Birds cannot depart from their resting places,
without becoming Obnoxious to Nets and Snares, and the Fury of Birds of prey;
so for a Man to keep close to his own proper Station and Calling, is always the
safest for him, by forsaking of which he usually exposes himself to many
Dangers and Misfortunes.

But Fourthly, though such Men do happen also to be successful, yet they cannot
do half so much good to the Public, by their particular Success, as they are
sure to do mischief to it, by the ill Influence of their Pragmatical Examples.
For if every Man himself may once be allowed to be the sole judge of his own
Parts and Abilities, there are few persons (howsoever really stupid and
incapable) will be found to conceit so meanly of themselves, as not presently
to think themselves sufficiently fit and qualified, for the undertaking almost
of any Office or Employment. And 'twill be natural from the Examples of some
other Successful Busybodys and Intruders, for every Man thus to discourse
within himself. Nature, I am sure, has been no less bountiful to me, nor have I
wanted as good Education and Opportunity of emproving my self, as such a
person; and why may not I also therefore presume of as good Success? If such a
one, who never made it his Business, is fit to undertake such an Employment,
why am not I as well qualified for, or may not, by the same right and justice,
attempt to discharge his Office, or any other Person's, which I most Fancy?

How natural it is for such Pragmatical Examples, to have this ill Effect upon
others, was wittily represented, in the sharp Reproof of an imprudent Action of
King Lewis the Eleventh of France; who having appointed a certain Bishop, to
take the general Muster of Soldiers at Paris, and Chabannes, one of his
Noblemen, taking this thing in ill part, desired of the King to give him the
Authority of censuring the said Bishop's Clergymen; to which the King
replying, that it was not fit to put ones Sickle into another man's Corn; Yes,
says the other, since the Bishop has made our Harvest, his own; why may not we
also as well make his, ours? Thus what can be of worse Consequence to a
Commonwealth, than for men to have such Occasions of Encouragement, in that
pragmatical restless Humor, which most are, of themselves, but too much
naturally prone to? And so, whilst neglecting the Duties of their own proper
places, this man, who perhaps never had Capacity enough to learn, shall be
prompted to set up for a Teacher and Instructor of others; and another man to
turn Statesman and Magistrate, who never knew how to obey; and another
intruding himself into another's Province, and so on: In a Word, whilst all men
will be every thing, and no man, at last, any thing he should be; must not all
be perfectly unfixt, by this means? or what else can ensue from hence, in this
Case, but lamentable Disorder, and the most absolute Confusion?

But still Fifthly, Were it not a thing of such considerable Damage, as it
really is, to the Public; yet such pragmaticalness is, in it self, a very
great Sin, and such as includes, in the very nature of it, many and grievous
Vices; as being evidently made up of a certain Complication, of Discontent,
Pride, Covetousness, Ambition, and Injustice; of the last of which especially,
it has apparently so large a Dose, that several Moralists know not how more
fitly to place it, than under the rank of a certain sort of Injustice. And
indeed, though it be not only just, but also an Act of Charity, for a man that
is able, out of mere good will, to lend his helping hand to another, when his
Advice and Assistance is either needed or desired, by the Person therein
concerned; and accordingly in this sense, some have understood (I inquire not
now how truly) that of the Apostle, as a Precept, to this purpose, Phil. 2. 4.
That we should not look only on our own things, but every man also on the
things of others: yet what can be more highly disparaging? what more contrary
to the Rules both of Charity and Justice, than the pragmatical Invasion of
another man's Office, against his own Consent, when our interposal in the
Affair, is neither needed, nor desired? nay, when we are neither able, nor
willing to do the Person any Courtesy; but indeed directly design the quite
contrary, thereby? How far is this from doing, as we would be done by? or who
would not take it grievously to be himself thus dealt with? And now, to put the
case more home, and render it more useful, by giving such a particular
Instance, in which men are apt, both most commonly and injuriously to offend,
in this kind; suppose then, that the King, or any of his great Ministers,
vouchsafing to cast an eye into any of your Shops, should, upon any slight
Hearsay or Information, presently determine, that such or such a man (though he
has all his lifetime made it his Business) does not, in my Opinion,
competently understand, nor is he fit to follow the Trade he does profess; I
will therefore take care to choose his Journey-men or Partners for him, and put
in some of mine own Followers, men of better Parts, to manage his Affairs for
him; Suppose, I say, His Majesty should proceed with you after this manner; How
patiently, do you think, you should be able to take it? would you not all
immediately complain of Tyranny and Arbitrary Government, and make the most
heavy Outcries, that your Liberties and Properties were invaded? And yet now,
I pray, turn the Scales a little; and consider whether it be not far more hard
and injurious, for any of you, forgetting your own Shop-boards, sawcily either
by Words or in your Behavior (so far as you dare) to intimate, That His
Majesty* does not sufficiently understand His Business; that either your
selves, or such a one, could Govern far better; that he is wholly lead aside by
Evil-Counsellers; and that you must endeavor to have such and such a Judge,
such a Privy Counselor, or Minister of State removed, or else nothing can ever
go well? What intolerable Insolence and Injustice is there is such kind of
Behavior? How come you, I wonder, so inspired to understand King-craft, far
better than that Person himself who was born and bred to it, who has had all
the Advantages of Nature, Education, long Experience, and the most singular
Opportunities, to be an absolute Master in his Royal Trade? Is this indeed to
be looked upon as a far less Mystery, and such as may more easily be learnt,
than any of your inferior petty Crafts? or can you think it more tolerable
and less injurious, for a Subject to usurp upon the Prerogatives of the Crown,
than it would be for the Prince to entrench upon a private man's particular
Calling? If all this be most ridiculous to imagine; then, for shame, mind your
own Business, and let State Affairs alone to whom they properly belong, and
cease any more so injustly and profanely to treat Majesty. If you should take
it so ill, that any should meddle in your Trades, or put your Journey-men, or
Partners upon you; be then entreated, out of common Justice, to let your
Sovereign also manage the State, and give him leave solely to choose and keep,
such Ministers and Assistants, as himself shall think best qualified for that
purpose. In short, however slight or innocent, general Custom and the Multitude
of Offenders may have made this Vice esteemed, by most men; we shall find, (if
we will take St. Peter's Judgment in the Case) that it is indeed to be looked
upon, as a Sin of the most heinous nature; insomuch that this Apostle plainly
supposes, both that such pragmatical Persons well deserve to suffer, and that,
let their Punishment be never so severe, they are far enough from suffering, as
Christians; Nay, he can afford to rank them with no better Company, than those
which they are indeed so near akin to, even with Thieves and Murderers, 1 Pet.
4. 15. But let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an
Evil-doer, or as a Busie-body in other men's Matters. To conclude, we may also
know what to think, both of the Guilt and Danger of all such Persons, if we
well consider the Grounds and Reasons of that excellent Advice of the Son of
Syrach, Ecclus. 11. 10. My Son, meddle not with many Matters, (that is, not
belonging to thee) for if thou meddle much, thou shall not be innocent; and if
thou follow after, thou shall not obtain; neither shall thou escape, by flying.
That must needs be a great Sin, which is complicated of so many others, and by
which we do so apparent Wrong, both to God, and man.

Which would bring me now to the Sixth and last aggravating Consideration of
it, viz. That this Pragmatical Temper is highly injurious to the Divine
Providence, and Government of the World; wholly inconsistent with all necessary
Order, and directly tending to obstruct the Peace and General Benefit of
Mankind, and to introduce the utter Ruin and Dissolution of all Humane Society.
But indeed all this is in it self, so very evident and notorious, that barely
to name things, may be sufficient; nor shall I therefore think it needful to
proceed to any more particular Demonstration hereof; especially, since I before
touched upon the same, under some of the former Heads.

I shall therefore here only add, That as this wretched Temper, wheresoever it
is suffered to prevail, is enough to turn the World upside down, so we of this
Nation have, by woeful experience, been instructed concerning the most cursed*
Effects thereof; in those horrid Disorders and Confusions, which have been
wholly owing to those among us, who call themselves by the Name of Dissenters.
In whom this Pragmatical Temper is so Notoriously Predominant, that it seems to
be as the very Evil Genius, with which they are possessed. For as their Guides
and Leaders, are the most Scandalous Busybodys and gross Usurpers, in the very
Office and Employment, which they have professedly taken upon themselves; so do
they likewise make it their very Design and Trade, to infect all their
Followers, with the same Humor; whilst they teach them (as a main point of
Godliness) to be continually Murmuring and Complaining, to quarrel and find
fault with, to be Meddling, and Endeavoring (as they call it) to reform every
Thing, and Person, but (what alone they can, and ought to reform) themselves:
In short, to be at every thing, besides that alone in which they should be
really Concerned; and in whatsoever State they are, never to be therewith
contented.

Now my hearty Prayer to God, and earnest Entreaty to all, and especially to
such Persons, is, that they would, at length, but diligently reflect upon what
has been, and must necessarily be the sad Effects and fatal Consequences of
this Cursed Temper; that they would seriously consider what has now been said
concerning it; How such Busybodies in other Men's matters must necessarily
neglect their own proper Business, by the due following of which they might be
most happy here; and for the Neglect of which, they are sure to be so sadly
accountable hereafter; that they meddle with what they cannot, ordinarily,
understand, nor are any way fitly qualified to manage; that if they did
competently understand the same, yet Providence seldom suffers such Intruders
to be successful in what they undertake; that though they should happen to be
Successful, yet their particular Success never does the Public half so much
good, as they are sure to do it Mischief, by the ill Influence of their
Pragmatical Examples; that this Pragmaticalness is in it self so great a Sin,
and Complicated of so many other grievous Vices; that it so highly affronts the
Divine Providence, and so directly disturbs the Order, Peace and Quietness of
the World.

If these men, I say, who* talk so much of Conscience, and pretend so great
Scrupulousness, where they need not, would but, in earnest, consider the great
Sin, which they are, hereby guilty of, and all these, and many more Mischiefs,
which they incur themselves, and bring upon others, by such their restless and
pragmatical Behavior; they would then see sufficient reason, to mind and
meddle with their own Business only; and so, better find in their hearts, To
study to be quiet, and to suffer others also, that are about them, to be so.
Then, might we, indeed, hope for true, and lasting Peace and Prosperity;
whilst, Living together like Fellow-Citizens, like Brethren and Christians, we
should all, in our several proper Places, make it our Business mutually to
serve each other in Love, and Blessed Concord. O, well would it then be with
us, and happy should we be!

Thus having competently finished the main things which I designed from this
Text, there is now nothing else remaining, but some more particular
Application. Which, I think, will most naturally be performed, by endeavoring
chiefly to Answer such common Objections, as I know many will be ready to make,
against my Discourse in General upon this Subject. What I shall say, (I must
tell them before hand) will chiefly Concern, and must therefore be Understood,
as more particularly directed to Dissenters, or their professed Favorers. With
whom I am resolved (let them take it how they will) to deal with all imaginable
Plainness and Freedom. And indeed, if it be not now high time to do so, (and
that, not without some Hopes too of better Success, than formerly) their
Disease must be altogether desperate and incurable; and I know not when this
charitable Office either will, or can be seasonable. And yet I cannot choose but
be heartily troubled for their sakes, to observe; how highly they are still
Enraged and Offended, at all Discourses of this Nature. For what then? Are they
still even at this time of day, so much Enemies unto Peace and Quietness, that
they cannot endure to hear a Man speak to them thereof, but they must be ready
to fly in his Face, and presently prepare themselves for Battle? I should have
thought truly, that after they and their Friends, had so long, and so much both
Said and Written, Acted and Contrived, in order to the setting this Kingdom in
a Flame, and to the utter Ruin of the present Government, that we, who were
designed by them as Sheep to the Slaughter, might now at length, after the so
plain Discovery and Defeat of their Malice, have had the Liberty, at least, to
have told them of their Bloody-Mindedness, and to endeavor (if possible) to
persuade them to Repentance.

But does not this kind of Behavior indeed Argue in them, the most Desperately
Malicious, obstinate Temper, and that they are still so far from any Real
Contrition, or the least thoughts of Reformation, that they have still as much
Mind, as ever, to be carrying on their Accursed Plots, and cannot therefore
endure, that what they have already done, should be spoken of or believed, for
fear it should hinder them of being Successful, in what they are ready to
design farther, upon the first Opportunity? That Charity must first put out its
own Eyes, that can make any more favorable Construction, of their so excessive
Rage and Impatience, upon these Occasions.

But yet as for mine own part, I confess I have not so much reason to complain,
as having hitherto (God be praised) fared better than some other of my
Brethren, who, perhaps, have not been more plain with their Party, than my self
neither. For several Ministers, even since the Discovery of the Phanatical
Conspiracy, have been Desperately threatened, and it is well known, how one
Reverend Divine was, not long since, knocked down in the open Streets, and
Miserably Bruised and Battered, to the no small hazard of his Life,
notwithstanding the Endeavors of several good People to rescue him; and all
this, at the same time expressly signified, by the Ruffian himself, to have been
done for no other cause, but only his Loyalty, and that he had shown himself
against the Designs of the Dissenters.

Now if this sort of Men can afford to show themselves such fell Creatures,
even whilst the Law and Civil Power is against them, and their hands are pretty
well tied up; then Judge, I pray, what absolute Tigers and Dragons they must
needs prove, were they but once loose, and had all (as they desire) under their
own Dominion? what could we else expect, but to be all flayed alive, and to be
torn by them (like the Archbishop of St. Andrews) into a hundred pieces? And
yet a man cannot open his mouth, to give good People warning, nor speak the
least word, of the horrid Practices or Principles of these men, but presently
some or other of their Favorers are ready to stand up for them, and slander
it, under the odious Name of (that which is indeed their general Character of
all such charitable Reproofs) down right Railing and Reviling.

And, What (say some) should we go to Church for? We should go thither to
profit; but truly we cannot benefit at all, by such kind of Preaching. Can they
not so, indeed? I am heartily sorry to hear it. But what is the reason that
they cannot benefit? I doubt the fault will be no bodies, but their own; and I
fear they will hardly ever believe themselves to benefit, by any Preaching, but
only such as really tends (if possible) to make them worse than they are
already, by still more confirming them, in their wretched Errors and
Iniquities. But I would fain know what such men mean, by their not benefitting.
If they were but rightly sensible of their own meaning, I am persuaded they can
understand nothing else, by it, but that they are not at all pleased, with what
they hear. And it is very grievous to them, to be told of, or to think of
amending their Faults. As for my own part, I am not conscious to my self, that,
in what has been now said, I have delivered any thing, but the Words of Truth
and Soberness. And if Truth, plain Scripture, and Reason will not go down with
them, I know not how to help it; they are not indeed so much offended with Us,
in these Cases, as (in effect) with Christ himself, and the Doctrine of his
Apostles. And there is no other Remedy, but they must even go seek out for some
other Gospel, that will better agree with their corrupt Lusts, that they may
profit by the hearing of it: for as for that of our blessed Savior, whilst
they resolve to continue thus affected, it will never be able to do the feat
for them.

But if such men do indeed believe the Scripture, and are willing equally to be
guided by it, as their Rule in all things; coming to these places with an
honest teachable heart, ready to forsake their Errors, and to do their Duty,
whenever they shall be made sensible thereof; then (I can assure them) that
such kind of Preaching will highly both please and profit them; far more,
perhaps, than all the Sermons put together, which ever they heard in
Conventicles, their whole lifetime. By which, I fear, they have profited
hitherto only backward, and the wrong way; whilst this kind of Preaching, if
practiced, will indeed benefit them, even to the saving of their Souls; which
are now so imminently hazarded, by their woeful Disobedience and horrid Contempt
of the Laws both of God and Man.

But again, (as some will object) is this the way to bring in Dissenters, to be
thus continually inveighing against them? Nay, is it not rather the ready way
to drive those out again, who are already a coming in?

In answer to which, I shall First consider, how the Generality of those, who
have yet made any Approaches at all, have hitherto showed themselves a coming
in to us.

Some, it is true, have come hither, and received the Holy Sacrament with us;
but (as themselves have given too just Occasion to fear) merely to serve a
Turn, or to qualify them for some Place, in which they might have an
Opportunity of doing the Church and State so much the more Mischief: for they
have received no more, nor scarce ever came to Church again, for a whole twelve
Month afterward.

Others again, awakened by the fear of Legal Penalties, have received here in
the Morning, and (as I am credibly informed) in the Afternoon, in a
Conventicle; as if they meant presently there to undo again, what they had here
done; or designed to make that which should be the Bond of Christian Charity,
serve only more to confirm them in their Schism, and most sinful Separation.

And their deceitful Guides (I find) have furnished them, with that more than
Jesuitical Distinction, of a Legal and a Necessary Receiving. The first of
which with us, stands for just nothing, but merely to satisfy the Law; whilst
the second with them, is that only which is to be accounted real and effectual.

Others there are who come hither usually, when Divine Service is either quite,
or almost done: and then sitting too all the remainder of it, as if they
scorned so much as to seem to join with us therein; and we have not wanted
Instances of running out again in a fury, before the Sermon was at an end.

In short, too many of them (for I charge not all) have hitherto so lamely and
awkwardly joined with us, and after such a manner, as would tempt one to think
they studied to have us believe, that they only played the Hypocrites in so
doing.

Nor let any one say, this is an unwarrantable judging of other men's Hearts;
for we may safely, and without breach of Charity, judge of men's hearts, from
the tenor of their Actions and Behavior.

And besides, some of them have been so very silly and altogether shameless, as
openly to declare and profess, that they would come to Church, only once a
Month, or so, to avoid the Lash of the Law, not out of any sense of Duty.
Whereas, by the way, let me tell such, that they may find, this will not be
enough to satisfy the Law neither, any more than it ought to satisfy their
Conscience.

This now has been (for the generality) the main of their coming in, which I
have been yet able to take notice of. But suppose, that, now at length, they
were indeed disposed, in more good earnest to join with us; why should such
Discourses of Peace and Quietness, of Loyalty and Obedience, and plainly to
mind them, wherein they have been hitherto notoriously guilty of the Breach of
these Duties, Why should this, I say, so presently again fright them away from
us? If they are resolved to become real Converts, how is it possible they
should be so very nice and squeamish? for how can they ever so truly repent,
unless they be first made thoroughly sensible of their Errors? or how should they
be so sensible of them, unless they be plainly told of them? or where can they
expect this plain dealing, if not in these Places? Methinks, after they have
been so long used to be soothed up, flattered and confirmed in their wicked
Follies, were they but now really disposed toward any Reformation of them,
they might be well enough contented, for once in their lives, to be roundly
told their own.

But if their Design be, so only to come hither and join with us, as yet to
bring with them and still keep all their former Pride, Prejudice, implacable
Malice, and seditious Principles; I must needs tell them, that our Church will
never be large enough long to hold them; and their Room will be here more
acceptable than their Company.

For if it be sufficient only to bring men's Bodies hither, without their
Minds; we needed not then to be so very solicitous about this Matter. It Is but
staying a little while, and Death will soon do this Feat for us. That will ere
long, not fail to bring in all Dissenters, to the Church or the Churchyard.
Their Carcasses will then conform, and lie peaceable enough here with ours, nor
will they scruple to mingle Ashes with those of them, who have been the highest
for the Church of England.

But in the mean time, our main Business is so to bring them in hither, that
our Souls may be united; to reform their Minds, and persuade them to lay aside
those unruly Lusts and evil Principles that have so long possessed them; and this
they will never do, till they can first patiently bear Reproof: and yet, till
this be indeed done, come here as often as they will, Light and Darkness may
as soon be reconciled, as they and we be really united.

In short, If they still desire to be flattered, and resolve never to have
their Consciences thoroughly awakened, by hearing of those Sins, of which they
are most guilty; Our Churches, I hope, will be no convenient Places for them.
There is no remedy, but they must even return (if they can) to their Old
Meeting Houses again; where it is the proper Work and Business, the very
Profession of the Masters of those Assemblies, to lull men asleep, and most
industriously to train them up, and confirm them, in their most pernicious
Errors: Their most notorious Sins are both the Food and Recreation of those
Pastors; who eat up the Sin of the People, are maintained, and grow rich by
their damnable Separation. These Guides will be sure to flatter and please
them, in their Lusts, that they may be followed and admired of them, and
themselves profit thereby. There indeed, such will never be reminded, of their
Spiritual Pride, Malice, or Hatred; nor yet of their Unquietness and
Pragmaticalness; of their Lies, Slanders, or most horrid Perjuries; nor of any
other of those most unsociable Vices, which make them become no small Plague,
both to themselves and the whole Nation. They may indeed continue long enough,
in those Places, and never hear so much as one word of those grievous Faults of
theirs, till they come at last to hear of them, at the day of Judgment.

But as for the Business of those faithful Ministers, who would indeed preach
Christ Jesus, and not themselves, it is of a quite opposite Nature and Design.
These are, and always will be so determined, as that they had much rather (if
it cannot be otherwise) by their plain-dealing, and telling men necessary
Truths, affright away such obstinate and incorrigible Offenders, than by a
cowardly silence, in these Points, be fawned upon and crowded after (as some
are) by never so great Multitudes of Hypocrites of all sorts. Nor will they
ever change their Minds, or forbear, sometimes, to tell such men roundly of
their Faults, till such time as they give some better and more substantial
Arguments, than yet they have done, of their Repentance and Reformation. Let us
but once see this happy Day, and then we'll all lay our Hands upon our Mouths;
they shall never hear one word more of their former Behavior: but all that is
already past, shall, by my consent, be buried in eternal Silence and Oblivion.
For, as for my own part, whatsoever some may think, I can assure them, that it
is, in it self, no such grateful Office to me, to be ripping up sore places.
Nothing in the World puts me upon this Employment, but the real sense of my
Duty herein, joined with the most unfeigned Charity toward the Souls of the
Persons so much concerned. For, if I have any acquaintance with my own Heart, I
think I could be contented to part with the last drop of blood therein, might I
but thereby secure the spiritual Welfare of any the worst Enemy I have, or can
have among them.

But whilst they continue to excuse, or deny the late notorious Crimes of their
Party; whilst they endeavor to make Martyrs, of those who have justly suffered
for their most damnable Treason; and go about to defend them as innocent, in
spite of their own plain Confessions, and the most Sunbeam Evidences to the
contrary: In a Word, whilst they cannot so much as endure to hear of this
Matter; I must needs tell them, that these are no such excellent Signs of their
Repentance.

But to this, perhaps, some may be ready to object; What are we concerned in
these things? or why do you tell us of Repenting? For, certainly, you do not
take any of us to have been in the late Plot; do you? Truly, no, I do not,
perhaps, believe them to be so guilty of it, as that the Law can take hold of
them: But yet, (to deal freely with them) I cannot but think the whole Body of
Dissenters, to have been in the general more or less, concerned therein; Nor do
I believe any thorow-paced Conventicler of them all, so wholly innocent in this
case, before God, but that they have great need to repent. For, if they had
either Eyes or Ears, they could not but be sensible, in the general, of a
Design on foot, among those of their own Party, for the Destruction of the
present Government. It is next to impossible that they should go constantly to
Conventicles, and yet be ignorant of thus much.

Nor do I speak this rashly, and without sufficient Grounds: For, what will you
say, If I give you some evident Demonstrations, even from their own late
Writings, both that the Phanatical Preachers were not ignorant of the late
horrid Conspiracy, and that they have also, all along, for several Years
together in their Public Preachments, made it their Business, not only plainly
enough to signify the same, but also to instigate and prepare their several
Congregations to do the bloody work of it?

Will they not then believe there was a Plot, when they hear it, even from
their Teachers own Mouths? I hope they do not know them to be such notorious
Liars, but that they will believe what they speak from the very Pulpit. And
though I confess, indeed, that ordinarily (to use the Psalmist's Phrase) Their
very Preaching is of Cursing and Lies; yet I know no Reason why they should not
be credited, in this Case.

Now what I have proposed, I make no question, but that I shall be able easily
to make out, to the full satisfaction of all, excepting only such as indeed
need no Conviction in the Case, and will therefore never seem to believe,
because they full well know the thing already to be most true, and themselves
also deeply engaged therein. All others, I doubt not, that have any Eyes, I
shall soon enlighten, by the help of some certain Jewels; which, (though, I
suppose, not very easy to be had, as being designed only for the particular
Comfort and Edification of the Saints; yet) happened, by good fortune, to
stragle into my hands. The first, of which I shall now make use, and show you
some Rays, has this Title or Inscription; A most useful Sermon, Preached in
London, one Fast Day, in the Year, 1670. By a most faithful Minister of Christ,
for the Support and Comfort of the People of God, in evil Times, opened and
pressed from Ps. 91. 11. Light is sown for the Righteous, and Printed in the
Year, 1676. For, or by whom, they durst not set. Now in this Discourse, page
35. there is this Inference, which you must be content to take, as all the
rest, in his own Words.

If Light and Comfort be sown for the Righteous; Why, then here is Comfort this
Day, for the Church of God in England; the Seed is in the Ground, and
Deliverance, in God's due season, shall spring up, etc.

Then follows some Lines after; I confess things here amongst us, as they have
a sad Aspect this Day, I would be sensible of your Condition. If we are not
sensible of God's hand, we cannot be humbled under it. I would be sensible of
it, gray hairs are here and there; sad Symptoms of God's Displeasure are upon
us; our Sins grow higher, and our Trading grows lower, etc. Yet, I say, in this
Day of Mourning, I would not have you mourn, as they without Hope. My Text
tells you, that Light is sown for the Righteous. There is a little Light, God
knows, it is but very little Light; we can scarce see it at the Keyhole; but
there is some Light sown for the Righteous. There are three Seeds of Comfort,
for this poor dying self-destroying Nation. First, God has a People in this
Land that fears him (he means, you may be sure, the Dissenters) and are very
dear to him; that is one Seed of Comfort; they are to him, as the Apple of his
Eye, they are the Glory of Christ; they are God's Jewels, all the rest of the
World are but Lumber. (Wonderful Charity and Humility!) God has a People dear
to him in England. Were the Godly removed, as it is the desire of some to give
them their Pass, to be gone; Why, God would soon make quick work with the
Nation; He would soon break up House in England, were it not for the Elect, he
would soon sink Ship and State; but for some Elect Jewels in the Ship, but for
their sakes, the Lord may reprieve the Nation. Then, after some other of his
Comforts, he comes in the 41. page to this Caution; But here I must insert a
Caution. And I beseech you to observe; Though there be some Light sown for the
Righteous, yet take this Caution; Expect an hour of Darkness. It is usually
dark before Morning. Things are like to be worse with us, before they are
better. Before Gospel-deliverance you must expect some sore Pangs; and the
reason of it is this (and let me beseeeh you to mind his Reason) here is the
Reason; because God has a great deal of work yet to do; there is much Rubbish
to be removed (you know his meaning, for he told you before, that all are
Lumber and Rubbish but themselves) much Rubbish to be removed, before God's
Spiritual Temple will be built; Sins must be brought lower; Superstition must
be purged away; the Devil must be cast out; and will not this, think you, cause
great Commotion in the Church, and Convulsion fits, before Light spring up?
therefore look for an hour of Darkness.

The most Prophetic man, it seems, could foresee; that we wicked superstitious
Wretches, when the Saints should come to attaque us, would not stand still, and
tamely suffer them to cut our Throats and swallow all, without making some
Busle and Resistance. Then he concludes in the 47. page with an Encouragement,
in these Words; The Mercies we are in expectation of, they are worthy waiting
for; The Mercies we have prayed for, and are in expectation of, they are worthy
waiting for; To see the Golden Fleet of Prayer coming home, with rich Returns;
Is not that worth waiting for? To see the Lilly and the Rose United, I mean
Truth and Peace; To see Wickedness discountenanced, and all its Forces
disbanded; To see the Beauty of Holiness shining in our Crystal, to see Jesus
Christ riding in Triumph, in his Chariots of Gospel-administration, etc. Now is
it not pretty plain, from all this stuff, that they had long ago, some hopes of
swallowing Bishops lands again, and getting all into their own hands.

But this, you must know, was a great while ago, and this Man saw Light only
through the Keyhole; and yet, not so much the time of his Preaching, but the
time of Printing this Sermon, is chiefly to be taken notice of; and this was in
the year -- 76. And even then you must also consider, that 'twas but early Days
with them; much about the time (if I mistake not) when Marvel's Growth of
Popery came out; and then the Masters of this fellow were but just framing of
their Popish Plot, (for theirs, I shall not stick to call all false Additions
to the Real one) for the setting up of Phanaticism, and the Destruction of the
present Government; then their among all, other seeds of Comfort, their Wild
Oats were but just a Sowing; or, at most, lay only a Corrupting; the Blade had
not yet appeared above Ground.

But all this is just nothing, in respect of what we may find in another of
their Sermons, which I have by me, bearing this Title; England's condition
Paralleled, in a Sermon, Preached by a Servant of the Lord's, learnedly Opened
and Pressed from Jer. 30. 7. London, Printed for J. Johnson, in the Year 1682.

Then their Plot was almost Hanging-ripe, and you shall hear how boldly this
Man speaks, as if they had concluded, that all was absolutely their own. I
shall need but barely to repeat some passages, without making any Reflections,
but leave you to be judges in the Case.

And First, it is Remarkable, how sadly he Alarmes his People with Fears and
Jealousies, P. 11. in these Words; I do say that the Churches of God, may meet
with Land-wasting, Houses-burning, Women-ravishing, Childkilling,
State-devouring, Religion-scorning, Ordinancescasting-down, Heart-trembling,
and Liberties-overthrowing-times. And I readily confess, for my part, so they
may, and will, if these Men come once again to prevail. But P. 19. he comes
most directly to his Business. Let me tell you, my dear Friends, That, upon
four Occasions, times will be Troublous. First, When Dagon and Baal is to go
down. No great or prevailing Evil can be cast down, without much Trouble and
Tumult. If Gideon cast down the Altar of Baal, and cut down the Grove by it,
the Men of the City keep a mighty stir about it. If the Goddess Diana be in
danger, what a Noise and Vproar is there in the City! And I further conceive
thus much; That England has many bad* Tenants, who have gotten Possession, and
can plead Prescription, tho no Scripture-Title for themselves, yet they are
resolved not to go out, without great Trouble; neither can it be imagined,
unless a Miracle be wrought by God, that so many Proud, dronish Ministers; so
many idle scandalous Non-residents; and so much Rubbish of humane Invention, as
are crept into God's Worship, will ever be cast down, or carried out, without
Troubles. Can you conceive that Satan will lose his Kingdom, and never wag his
tail! Believe it Brethren, There are many thousands in the Kingdom so set upon
Idolatry, Superstition, and ways of Formality, that they cannot be quiet, if
these things be taken from them. When the Temple is to be re-edified, no great
and good Work can be carried on, without much Trouble. This is certain, God
has brought us to Church-reforming-times, and these always have been
troublesome times.

After this, he proceeds to give them a great many other reasons why the times
must be troublesome, whereas, he might indeed have made shorter work, and
included all under that, with which he did begin; For the times must* be
Troublesome, because these Men are resolved to make them so; nor can they,
indeed, ever be otherwise, as long as their Seditious Conventicles are
suffered, and such vile Wretches as himself there permitted, to Poison and
Seduce the poor silly Vulgar. But still, afterward he falls to encourage them
again to the Work, by reminding them of their former Success. P. 27. Had we not
had our troublous times, we had not seen so many Wicked Men cast down among us.
What times have more discountenanced Enemies? What times have more discovered
Enemies? What times have more crossed Enemies! Nay, what times have been more
Destructive to Enemies, than the times of the Churches Troubles? These Winds
blow them no good. They always presage their downfall. And, for my own part, I
do verily believe, that all the Troubles in England, will end in the Shame and
Confusion, of many Powerful and Politic Enemies, etc. Out of the most troubled
womb came there greatest quiet: If there were no War, there would be no
Victory; though troubles Create not Mercy, yet they Occasion and Antecede. I am
verily persuaded, that England, which is now in great Troubles, is big with
Child of some extraordinary Mercy. We may not think, that these troubles shall
end without a Blessing; let the Consideration of these things stay your
thoughts, etc.

In the self-same Page likewise he cannot refrain from reviling, and
endeavoring to render both the King himself, and all his Ministers both in
Church and State, Odious to the People. Have we not amongst us (says he) all
Land-wasting, did Land-weakening sins. Most of our Pastors are either ignorant
and Blind, or Corrupt, or unsound, so far from reforming themselves, that they
are Enemies to the much desired Reformation. (That is, we would hinder People,
from Rebelling again as much as we can,) Many of our Rulers and great Ones, are
Idolaters, Adulterous, full of Pride and Idleness, leading many thousands into
Wickedness, by their evil Examples, following the Footsteps of Jeroboam, who
made Israel to Sin. And, O, how many Times-troubling Enemies have we Lodging
and Lurking among us; Men of no Religion, Men of a false Religion, a great
Popish Party, Men of no Rank and Quality; whose Mouths are full of Scoffs and
their hands full of Blood, (now he is at the Kings Gaurds) whose hope only lies
in this; that shortly they shall ravish our Virgins, Deflower our Wives, cut
our Throats, and divide our Estates. What means the Countenancing and
Maintaining those Vermin and Offscouring of the Land, but that troublesome
times are at hand? Certainly the Kingdom cannot vomit out these Frogs, or quit
it self of these Locusts, without much ado. (It seems they were resolved to
have the Guards down then.) I shall trouble you but with one passage more. P.
43. We must desire and further a National Reformation; there must be a Purging
of the Church from its Dross, and there must be a setting up the Power and
Purity of Ordinances. Every Man must strive to reform and amend, or else the
Kingdom (its greatly to be feared,) will fall asunder. And we must cast out the
endangering Enemies of the Kingdom. If you shall suffer (did he Preach to the
Oxford House of Commons, I Wonder, or to his own People?) If you shall suffer
Men of Cruelty, Enemies to God and Religion, and not do justice upon them, the
Kingdom cannot but be ruined.

And now, for the upshot of all, because this Man's own Conscience could not
but accuse him, as Guilty of the most horrid Treason and Sedition, that he may
clearly wipe off this Imputation, he tacitly supposes himself immediately
inspired of God, to say and do all this Villainy; and therefore for a
Conclusion, you must take his own bare Word for it, that they only who would
hinder themselves from putting all this in Execution, are to be looked upon, as
the Make-bates and Incendiaries of the Nation, whereas he, and those of his
Party, are, notwithstanding all this, no more the real Troublers of our Israel,
than holy Elias, was.

I might have transcribed much more, both out of these, and out of several
other late Discourses of theirs, to the same purpose; but it is high time to
have done; since this, I think, may be enough, in all reason.

And truly, I hope, that none of you will be angry at me, for this way of
Proceeding, or say that I might be ashamed, to bring such stuff as this is into
the Pulpit, when you consider, that it was there once before, or otherwise, you
had not had it here now. For ought I know, some here present, may have beard
the same at the Fountain's head, and if any of you did so, I make no Question,
but that you then thought your selves to profit, and were indeed wonderfully
pleased therewith. And truly I see no Reason, why you may not (unless it be
your own fault) more truly benefit by it now, thus at the second hand;
especially since you use to be so much for Repetitions. You will not suspect, I
hope, that I have made this for them; for fear you should thereby allow any of
us able to Preach, so exceeding well as this comes to; for it has their own
infallible Stamp and Shibboleth upon it; and besides, I have their own
Authentic Printed Copys by me, and much more of the like Nature, at
forthcoming for any that shall herein desire satisfaction. And I beg their
pardon only, that I have been forced a little to disgrace the Matter for want
of the right Twang and elegant* whining Tone, the peculiar set-off, by which,
usually, such Discourses are chiefly* recommended to that sober Party.

But however, as for all those who would indeed deserve this Name (and to such
chiefly I shall now direct the small Remainder of what I have to say) they may,
I think, (had they no other Evidence) sufficiently discover from what they have
now heard, what kind of Trade it is, that they drive, at Conventicles; and how
impossible it is, for those that have their Hearts set so upon going to those
Places, not to be utterly intoxicated and destroyed, by such deadly Poison.
They therefore who have any due Care either of their Souls or Bodies, may see,
if they will, what they are to shun, as they would avoid a Pesthouse, or
coming into the most dangerous Places of Infection. And you may easily enough
judge, by this time, with whom you have most reason to be displeased; whether
with those who sincerely Preach to you, the ever blessed and most peaceable
Gospel of our Savior, or with them who have coined and would intrude upon you
another, of their own, in direct opposition to it; whether with them, who make
it their Business to exhaust your Pockets, and corrupt your Minds; or with
those, who endeavor to rectify your Understandings, and to cure your Lusts,
desiring no other temporal Reward, for the same, but that standing Maintenance
which the Law allows them; whether with them, who contrive all they can, to
instigate you to those horrid crying Sins of Murder, Rapine, and Rebellion, and
would involve you, and your Country, in endless Misery and Confusion, or with
them, who do their best to hinder you from the Guilt of these heinous Crimes,
and to secure you from all these dreadful Mischiefs.

In a Word, Remember to what sad and shameful Ends the accursed Doctrines of
these men have already lately brought so many* of their professed Admirers; and
consider with your selves which of the two are really your best Friends; they,
who sincerely endeavor to secure your Necks here, and your Souls hereafter; or
they, who direct you the ready way, to destroy both* Choose your Friends, and
then follow them. And if you do indeed believe this to be any part of the New
Testament, and Word of Life, be then entreated, as you tender your everlasting
Welfare, (let others do what they please) to betake your selves to the Study of
being Quiet, and to do your own Business.

To which, that we may all, at length, most seriously apply our selves, the God
of all Peace and Love, of his infinite Mercy Grant, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, to whom, etc.
FINIS.
Books Printed for and sold by Henry Bonwick, at the Red-Lyon in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Late Voyage to Constantinople: Containing an exact Description of the
Propontis and Hellespont, with the Dardanels, and what is else Remarkable in
those Seas; as also of the City of Constantinople, wherein is particularly
described the Grand Seraglio and Chief Mosquees. Likewise an account of the
ancient and present State of the Greek Church; with the Religion* and manner of
Worship of the Turks, their Ecclesiastical* Government, their Courts of
Justice, and civil Employments, Illustrated with Curious and Exact Draughts* of
the Hellespont, Propontis, Constantinople, the Seraglio, Sancta Sophia, and
other Chief Mosquees, with* the several postures of the Turks during
Prayer-time, in fourteen Copper Plates, the exactness whereof is attested by
several Famous Travelers, published by Command of the French King, by Monsieur
William Joseph Grelot, made English by J. Phillips.

Certain Miscellany Tracts, Written by Thomas Brown, Knight, and Doctor of
Physic, late of Norwich.

The History of the late War with the Turks, during the Siege of Vienna, and
the great Victory obtained against them, at the raising the Siege; together
with the underhand dealings of France in that Affair, being the best and
fullest Relation that has been yet Published, Printed at Cologn, and reprinted
at London.

The Constant Communicant, a Diatribe, proving that Constancy in receiving the
Lords Supper, is the indispensable duty of every Christian, the second Edition,
to which is added a Sermon Preached at the Anniversary meeting of the Sons of
Clergymen, at St. Mary le Bow, on the seventh of December, 1682. By Ar. Bury
D. D. Rector of Exon Coll. Oxon.

A Discourse of the Repugnancy of Sin to the Principles of Universal Reason;
being a Diswasive from a Sinful Life, from Principles of common Wisdom, current
amongst all Mankind, save in the Concerns of their Souls.

A Discorse proving from Scripture and Reason, that the Life of Man is not
limited by any absolute Decree of God, by the Author of the Duty of Man, etc.

The Importance of Religion to young Persons represented in a Sermon Preached
at the Funeral of Sir Thomas Viner, Baronet in St. Hellens Church London, May
the 3, 1683.

A Private Peace Offering for the Discovery and Disappointment of the late
horrid Conspiracy against the King, etc. In a Sermon Preached July the 8, 1683.

A Sermon Preached before the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen at the Church of
St. Mary le Bow, September the 9, 1683.

All 3 by H. Hesketh, Minister of St. Hellens London, and Chaplain to his
Majesty.

Providence bringing Good out of Evil, in a Sermon Preached the 9 of September,
1683. By Richard Pearson Rector of St. Michaels Crooked-Lane.

FINIS.

