IMPRIMATUR.

March 28. 1679. Guil. Sill. R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.

ANCIENT and MODERN DELUSIONS, Discoursed of in Three Sermons Upon 2 THESE. 2.
11.

Concerning some ERRORS now prevailing in the CHURCH OF ROME.

By EDWARD PELLING, Rector of St. Martins Ludgate, London.

Etiamsi ingeritur oculis Veritas, amat and tuetur errorem: coargui non vult;
and in male caeptis honestior illi pertinacia videtur, quam Penitentia. Sen. de
ira, lib. 1. c. 16. LONDON, Printed by B. G. for Jonathan Edwin at the three
Roses in Ludgate Street, 1679.

ANCIENT and MODERN DELUSIONS, Discoursed of in three SERMONS Upon 2 THESE. 2.
11.
SERMON. I.
2. THESE. 2. 11. And for this cause God shall send them strong Delusions, that
they should believe a Lie.
I Think, there is not in all the New Testament, a Chapter which has been more
quoted by Protestants than this: And he, that shall read the former part
thereof, may be apt to conceive, that S. Paul, by a Prophetic Spirit, points
here to the Church and Bishops of Rome. And I confess, many Learned Divines
have thought so, because there are in this Chapter, so many notable Characters
which do become and fit that Faction so well; that though St. Paul did not
point to them directly, a man might easily and plausibly mistake in thinking
that he did. For, first, he tells us of a falling away (from the Faith) that
was to come, verse. 3. and it is notorious, that the Church of Rome has
departed, though not from the whole Creed, yet from many Fundamental, and
universally received Doctrines of Christianity. In the same breath, he speaks
of a man of sin, that was to be revealed, the Son of Perdition; which the best
Interpreters do understand not of a single Person, but of a whole Sect; as when
we say, the Jesuit is a Traitor, we mean the wholer Order and Society.
Moreover, the Apostle tells us, that this man of Sin opposes and exalts
himself above all, that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God
sits in the Temple (or Church) of God, showing himself that he is God. He
speaks of a Mystery of Iniquity that began to work then, whose coming was
after the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders. All
which descriptions, whosoever shall consider, and compare them with the Novel
Doctrines, the intolerable Usurpations, the monstrous Practices, and the
pretended Miracles of the Church of Rome, may be apt to think (as several
Doctors, both before, and since the Reformation, have thought) that the Pope
and his flatterers are here marked out unto us. Especially, if he shall
consider withal, how the Apostle says, verse. 10. That the coming of this man
of Sin would be with all deceivableness of Unrighteousness; meaning, with all
cunning Arts of wheadling people into iniquity, which Cornelius a Lapide the
Jesuit, reckons to be six, and all of them to be used Com. in Loc.
by Antichrist to draw men into Error and Destruction. 1. By courteous and
obliging Insinuations. 2. By specious pretenses of Holiness and Sanctity. 3. By
their Wisdom and Eloquence, and skilfulness in all Arts and Learning. 4. By
promising, and bribing them with money, the more readily to bring hungry
persons to their Lure. 5. By threatening such as are Refractory with Death and
Destruction, and by inflicting on them the terrible Torments of an Inquisition.
6. By working such Prodigies and Wonders before the Eyes of the World, as
ignorant and credulous People will be ready to admire and believe, and to take
for true Miracles. Now I am much deceived, if this Jesuit did not take his
Measures by his own Brethren; so exactly do these Arts and Methods agree with
the Tricks and Manners of that sort of Cattle, that when I read his Comment
upon the Place, I fancied my self to be reading the plain and perfect Character
of Ignatius's Disciples.

Yet, the great Hugo Grotius, and many Lib. de Antichristo.
Moderate and Judicious men besides, do not understand St. Paul, to relate here
immediately to the Romanists, though others have otherwise opined, whose zeal
might have transported them beyond themselves; such weak Creatures we are
naturally, that our Passions are apt to engage in the most weighty Disputes,
just as hot pated men are ready to thrust into, and bustle in the gravest
Councils. Very probable it is, that the Apostle in this Chapter (as in several
other places) points to a wicked Crew of Apostates, that prevailed in those
first Times of Christianity, as Simon Magus and his followers, who though they
were divided into several Sects and Factions (the Nicolaitanes, the
Corinthians, the Carpocratians, the Eucratitae, the Marcionites, and the rest)
some of our late Divines do comprehend (all of them) under the general name of
Gnostics. I will not contend about this matter, being little to my purpose:
This is certain, that whatever deceivers are intended in this place of
Scripture, it was a just Judgment of God, upon vile and wicked men, that they
compassed their Ends: They gained upon such or such only, as ran wilfully to
their own destruction; such as lived unrighteously, and loved not the Truth,
but dishonored it and the God of it, by their foolish, sensual and lewd
Courses, for this cause it was, that God sent them strong Delusion, that they
should believe a Lie.

So that my business is to handle this Text, with reference unto those chiefly,
who either are already, or are likely to be Deluded; if it be possible, to
redeem the one, and to keep the other sort out of that snare, which the Devil
spreads for unwary wretches, by as many Wiles and Instruments in these days
of ours, as ever he did in the days of the Apostle, or after. And in the
prosecution of this matter, I shall undertake to show you these two things, by
occasion of the words, which I have now read unto you.

1. How it comes to pass, that many people are led away by strong Delusions,
and believe that which is a manifest and notorious Lie.

2. That notwithstanding the great evidences, which have been given on the
behalf of Truth, yet multitudes of silly People are very fond of Delusions, and
Lies still; strong Delusions, gross and palpable Lies, which are taught them by
those, who are, if not the same, yet as like unto the deceivers, whom St. Paul
speaks of here, as one Impostor can be like another; and in the process of
this discourse, I shall show you, in particular, what some of those Delusions
and Lies are, and how they resemble those which were broached in the beginning.

1. How it comes to pass, that many people are led away by strong Delusions,
and believe that which is a manifest and notorious Lie. Certainly the History
of mankind is a very great wonder, that since Truth is so lovely and taking,
since men are generally so solicitous and inquisitive after it, since our
faculties are so excellently framed to find it out, and are naturally shie of
receiving any notions, which have not the species and color of Truth; since
men profess a willingness to buy it almost at any rate; and to value the
possession of it above the World, and even to sacrifice their Lives for Truth
sake; it seems strange, that there should be any such Anomalous Creatures and
Monsters among the Sons of men; as will care so little for it as to exchange it
for a Lie, and not only to plead and dispute, but moreover to suffer, and
become Martyrs for a Falsehood. O foolish Galatians, who have betwitched you,
that you should not obey the Truth? Gal. 3. 1. It Is such a senseless thing to
be in Love with Error, that none but mere Fools and Sots, and such Fools as are
bewitched too, can be thought capable of suffering themselves willingly to be
abused with wrong apprehensions, especially in matters of Religion. But he was
not much out that divided the whole World into Cheaters and Cheatees: There are
(...). Some that Deceive, and others that are Deceived, 2 Timothy 3. 13. It has
been so in all Ages, and yet all Ages have admired at it: and it is that which
we stand amazed at in these days, to see not only mean and silly People, that
are but as Mushromes of the Earth, but even Persons of Honorable Extraction,
of Parts, and Learning, and Generous minds, to be both the Disciples and
Patrons of a Religion, which, of all the Religions that ever were set up in the
World, is not only the most Bloody, but the most Ridiculous. But the Reasons
which may be given of it, are these chiefly.

1 Education, whereby men suck in mistakes with their first milk, and have
false Principles entailed upon them as part of their Inheritance. And
questionless, great is the power of Education, it being so difficult a matter
to raze those principles out of men's minds which cleave to 'em from their
Infancy, and grow up with 'em from their Cradle: especially, if either the
Tutor be not Faithful, or the Scholar be not Inquisitive, or Means be not
afforded for the enlightening of the understanding; as it is, we know, in many
places beyond the Seas, where Priests are either ignorant or dishonest, and the
Layety are nursed up in blindness, taking their Guides for so many infallible
Oracles, who deprive 'em of the Bible, and other useful Books, and breed 'em
up, as you would breed up Pyes and Parrots, to say any thing, which they do not
understand. No wonder if these miserable Souls believe a thousand things for
Truths, which we, who have the means of Knowledge, plainly find to be no other
than Impostures: and we doubt not, but God, who is rich in mercy, will Pardon
the invincible Ignorance of these deluded wretches, and require of them
according to what they have, and not according to what they have not. But God
be blessed, this is not the case of those Romanists who live amongst us. They
cannot pretend, that they are not, or may not be better instructed, such of
them especially, as have deserted our Communion: it is not through Ignorance
that They are deluded: but very probably it happens that they are brought to
believe a lie.

2. By the Love they bear to some base and sinister ends. For certainly nothing
does more corrupt and abuse Men's understanding, than their Affections. Either
the Hatred of a party, or the Hope of Promotion, or the Fear of great men's
frowns, or the Love of Riches, when they run greedily after the Error of
Balaam for reward; but above all, a desire of gratifying their Sensual Lusts
and Appetites, carries a mighty hand over their Reason, to make it receive
Falsehood for Truth, and to believe not that which is Rightest, but that which
is most popular, most pleasant, and most advantageous. Reason is either the
best or the worst Counselor. When it sits in the Throne, commanding the lower
faculties of the Soul, it gives True judgment and faithful directions. But
when it hearkeneth to the Oratory of Interest, and submits to the Empire or
flattery of the will, it is like the hand of a disordered Dial, that points
to any Figure; and it is impossible for that man to be free from mistakes, who
is guided and led away by his Lusts. For these do strangely paint every object
to make it lovely and beautiful; so that when it is presented to the
understanding, Reason is like an eye that is infected with the jaundies, or
that looks through a false Glass; and every thing seems to be of the same hue,
and complexion, and color with the Medium. Hence it comes to pass mainly,
that there are so many errors in Religion; because men are willing to comply
with those doctrines which are most consistent with their Inclinations, and
most suitable to their Appetities. And this is that, I fear, which has
persuaded so many to warp from the Protestant Religion, there being variety of
such Baits ministered by the cunning Anglers upon Tyler, as are very delightful
to every man's palate and Gusto, whether they be the Clergy, or Lay People. 1.
They of the Priesthood have by a thousand stratagems brought it so to pass,
that they are made privy to all men's secrets, and are become Masters of all
men's Consciences, and make both Peasant and Peer truckle to their commands, and
exact what Tributes they please as just offerings to the Church. Now by these
means they thoroughly secure themselves from that contempt and Poverty, which
with us (to the shame of us be it spoken) is the common reward of many a
Learned, painful and Honest Divine, especially when we have to do with people
of sordid and degenerous principles, who neither Respect nor Feed the Ox that
treads out the Corn. Now when a Religion is so advantageous, it is no wonder
that there are found men, who, for their Interest sake, both profess it
themselves, and teach it others too, though it be full of Impostures. We read
in Act. 19. that when Demetrius and his follow-crafts men saw, that their Trade
and their wealth was in danger, they strenuously opposed the Doctrine of St.
Paul, though it wanted neither Reasons nor Miracles to confirm it, Sirs, by
this crast, ye know, we get our wealth; and that was likely to be lost, if the
world should once be persuaded to believe, that they be no Gods, which are made
with hands: and therefore, for the sake of the Silver shrines, they cried up
Diana of the Ephesians, though it was but a sorry Puppet which they worshipped
all this while. I am afraid, that there are many Demetriuses now adays, that
merely for their profit and gain, cry up Diana of the Romans also: For by this
craft they get their Honors and Riches, and it is not strange, that men, who
aim at base and secular Ends, should first be persuaded to Admire, and then be
concerned to Defend a Religion that brings them such a large and plentiful
Dowry. The wonder is, that the Vulgar sort should suffer themselves to be
abused and cheated by men, who count gain to be Godliness: For, as the World
now goes, people are not easily to be fooled and baffled out of their Reason,
their Liberty, and their Money too: And yet, we see, there are some (and those,
of no mean extraction, or pitiful Parts,) who have been brought to subscribe to
many Delusions, which that Church teaches for Catholic Doctrines. But,
Secondly, even these, I fear, do it for their Interest too. Though it be not
for their Spiritual and Eternal Interest to give themselves up to believe a
Lie, yet for their Worldly and Carnal Interest it is; for the Interest of their
Lusts and sensual Appetites, which some are more fond of, than of a good
Conscience. For certainly, there is not a more easy Religion in the World.
For, of Good Works they reckon but three sorts, Alms, Fasting and Prayer: so
that let a man but show Mercy in some indifferent measure, let him but forbear
eating of flesh when the Church bids him; let him but hear the service, (though
in an unknown Tongue,) and run over the Rosary, consisting of 150 Ave Mary's,
and 15 Pater Nosters, and he need not much fear his future state. So likewise,
of Mortal Sins, they reckon but seven, viz. Pride, Envy, Covetousness,
Carnality, Gluttony, Anger, and Sloth: So that let a man forbear these Seven,
though he commiteth Seventy times Seven more, yet to Hell he shall not go. Or,
though he commiteth These too; yet if he do but confess to the Priest once a
year, or before he dies, he is Absolved at a cheap rate: and if he chance to
expire before all his Penance be done; it is but leaving behind him a good Legacy
for a Mass, and then the pains of Purgatory shall not hold him long. What an
Heap of Sophistry is here? and yet they call it Religion, and are willing to
believe, that it is the only True Religion, not because it is a Rational, but a
Pleasant Model: for it strains no Sinews, it breaks no bones; but saves them
the charge of mortifying their Lusts, of crucifying their Affections, of
subduing their earthly Members, of cutting off a right hand, or pulling out a
right eye: and as long as things go at this rate, it is a wonder to me, that
all lewd and vicious people in the world do not throw themselves into the bosom
of that Church, where they may live as merrily as they list, and yet if they be
not careless, or niggardly, or poor, may die as securely and happily as they
can wish.

I have been the longer upon this Subject, because I was minded to give you
some account of that, which at this day seems such a strange thing, that
every one is ready to lift up his hands in admiration, that when the world
generally is so knowing, some should be prevailed with, to forsake a Grave,
Serious and Excellent Religion, to embrace a Profession which is made up of
Fooleries, Chimaera's and Ridicules. It Is Interest many times, that opens the
gate, and lets out a Renegado, or an Apostate. And yet.

3. Thirdly, there is yet another account (and the weightiest of all) which the
Apostle gives of it in my Text; God does many times send men strong delusions,
that they should believe a Lie. For the right understanding of which words two
things are to be noted. 1. That the words are not so to be understood, as if
God did directly infatuate the minds of men, or actually blind their
understandings, by working so powerfully upon them, that they cannot but Err.
For as he does not Tempt, so neither does he delude any; but every man is led
away by his own Lusts, and by the wiles and devices of the Prince of darkness;
the place then is not to be understood in a Positive, but in a Negative sense
rather; viz. that God is many times pleased to permit men to be deluded; to
deliver them up to themselves, to let them follow their own imaginations, and
to suffer them to be deceived, by letting the reins loose to the Spirit of
Error, and by withdrawing from wicked people, though not a sufficiency, yet
that plenty of Grace, whereby they might have been kept out of the snare of the
Devil. God is said to have sent an evil Spirit between Abimelech and the men of
Sichem, Judge. 9. To have moved David to number Israel and Judah, 2 Samuel 29. To
have put a lying Spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 18. To have
poured out upon the Jews the Spirit of a deep Sleep, Is. 29. And to have given
them the Spirit of Slumber, Romans 11. 8. But all these Texts and expressions
must be understood, of Gods Permission and purpose of suffering Satan to use
his Arts and Stratagems, to close men's eyes, and to cast a mist before their
understandings, and to draw them into Errors. And so here, God shall send them
strong Delusions; that is, will suffer and permit the Devil and his Instruments
to delude them, that they should believe a Lie. 2. It is to be noted, that when
God is pleased to do this; it is not with an immediate design and direct
intention, that men shall be deluded, that they may perish. For he is not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance. But the
Apostle speaks of the event and issue of things, that the wickedness and
ingratitude of People would bring them to that pass and upshot, that they would
believe any thing in the End, though never so Romantic and Fabulous: And so,
the sense of these words being opened, the consideration which now lies before
us, is this; that however some are necessarily Deluded, through their
invincible ignorance; and others are willing to be Deluded for their interest
and advantage, yet that many are delivered up to strong Delusions, is a just
judgment of God upon them, as a punishment of their unrighteousness: Because
they received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved; for that
cause, says our Apostle, God shall send them strong Delusions, that they
should believe a Lie. An example whereof we have in King Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 18.
Because he would not credit the account, which Michaiah gave him concerning his
going up to Ramoth Gilead, the Lord suffered him to be deceived, and thereby to
be slain. The Lord said, who will entice Ahab King of Israel, that he may go up
and fall at Ramoth Gilead? And there came out a certain Spirit, and said, I
will entice him. I will go out, and be a lying Spirit in the mouth of all his
Prophets. And the Lord said, thou shall entice him, and thou shall also
prevail: Go out, and do even so. In like manner he dealt with the whole Nation
of the Jews, when they were in Love with Lies, and required the Prophets to
Prophecy deceit unto them, God chose their Delusions, and gave them up to the
ways and imaginations of their hearts, insomuch that the Prophets prophesied
falsely, and the Priests did bear rule by their means, and (which is observable)
the People did Love to have it so, Jer. 5. 31. And to the like purpose St. Paul
speaks of those, Romans 1. who held the Truth in unrighteousness; because that
when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, they
became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened; so
that professing themselves to be wise, they became fools; and were given over
to a Reprobate mind, and to be without understanding.

Now* this consideration, that God does many times, in Judgment upon wicked
people, send them strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie, serves to
these two good purposes (that I may not mention any more:)

1. It discovers unto us the Reason, why it is such an hard and very difficult
matter, to reclaim people that have once wilfully revolted from the Truth.
Every Age has found it true by sad experience, that it is much more easy to
convert that person from the Error of his way, who has been bred up in
Ignorance from his Youth, than to reduce that man who has turned aside either
to Atheism, or to Idolatry, and Superstition, albeit he may have been
instructed out of the Scriptures from his Childhood. Such a one sins against
greater light of Conscience, and so is infinitely more Criminal, in shutting
his own eyes, than he who never had his eyes open, nor had a Torch held out
unto him to find out the True way. Questionless a man may sin away Gods Grace
by degrees; and of all sorts of Sinners, the Apostate seems to take the
Largest step toward it: and therefore the Apostle speaking of Renegado's from
the Truth, tells us, Heb, 6. 4, 5, 6. That it is impossible for those, who were
once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly gift, and were made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the
World to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance.
For if any man quenches the Spirit, it is he. If any man treads under foot
the Son of God, it is he. If any man counts the Blood of the Covenant an
unholy thing, it is he. If any man does despite unto the Spirit of Grace, it is
he: And after so many sins, so much obstinacy, and so much standing out against
the clamours and snubbings of Natural and Enlightened Conscience, to recover
that man out of his Apostasy, by the gravest Counsels, by the most pathetical
Exhortations, or by the strongest and most convincing Arguments, though it be
not absolutely impossible, yet it is next door unto it; and the Reason of it,
is here in my Text; because he loved not the Truth, therefore has God sent him
strong Delusions, that he should believe a Lie. Let him therefore that stands
(as he valueth the favor of God, the comforts, and fellowship of the Spirit,
and the Eternal interest and felicity of his own Soul, let him) take heed lest
he fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12.

2. This Consideration of Gods sending some men strong Delusions, serves to
clear up that, which in our Age, seems to be a Miracle of wonders; how it
comes to pass, that many famous and learned Divines, in the Church of Rome,
have both believed those things themselves, and obtruded them upon others also,
as so many sound and Catholic Truths, which even unskilful Men and Idiots in
our Communion, can discover to be mere delusions, or falsehoods, as it were, of
yesterday. I remember, Tertullian said, Sapientis est, nihil admirari, That a
Wiseman will wonder at nothing; and, I think, we need not wonder at this thing,
if it be so; but rather we may make it a Question, whether it be so indeed?
Whether they have believed those points themselves, which they have offered
unto us, as Articles of Faith? St. Augustine tells of Varro, that learned
Pagan, that he affirmed, Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 4. c. 31.
That many things in Religion were true, which it was not fit that the Vulgar
sort should know; and on the other hand, that tho some things were false, yet
it was not convenient for the common People to believe otherwise. And so he
tells us of Scaevola the Roman High Priest in those times of Heathenisme, that
Expedire existimavit, falli in Religione Civitates. He thought it very
expedient for De Civ. Dei, lib. 4. c. 27.
Cities to be deceived in their Religion. And some others too (especially among
the old Greeks) have spoken to the same purpose. And it is not impossible, but
some Christian Romans Vid. Joseph. cont. Appion. lib. 2.
may have thought, as Varro and Scaevola did of old, that for certain Reasons
the Vulgar ought to be made believe many things, tho they be not true. I would
strain my Charity to think well of the worst; but yet I cannot for all my
Charity but fear at least, that some Popish Divines have acted quite against
their own Consciences, and used indirect Arts to gull the rest of the World,
teaching such Doctrines for True, which they themselves could not but know to
be false, and I shall give you two instances to confirm my opinion, that it may
not seem to be an uncharitable conjecture only.

When they procured a Commission from King Philip of Spain, to search for all
sorts of Catholic Books, and to purge out of them those passages which made
for the Protestants, and to note those passages in a Book by it self, called
the Expurgatory Index, there were notable Cautions inserted in the Commission,
that the Book so compiled should not in any wise be made public, Vide Diploma
praefix. Ind. Exp. Edit. Belg.
but committed to the trust of some certain faithful Prelates; and that those
Prelates should not communicate the matter to any, but such as they should
judge to be trusty, and by them to be kept very close, and not so much as the
sight of one Copy to be imparted unto others, tho they were Catholics. Now was
not this acting against Conscience? For if they intended to deal fairly and
upon the Square, why was this contrivance to be kept under the Seal of Secrecy?

Again; When the Censors of Doway were upon promoting of this design of purging
Books, and did light upon several ancient Writers (and perticularly upon
Bertram, who lived within nine hundred years after Christ, and wrote things
destructive of Transubstantiation) they resolved together not to burn those
Books, but either to bear with their Errors, or to extemiate them, or to excuse
them, and to give them as kind a sense as could be; and if the shoo pinched too
much, than their last refuge was roundly and manfully to deny the matter in
their disputations with their Adversaries: this is the English of their own
words, in their Censure of Page 13. Ind. Exp. Edit. Belg.
Bertram's Book. And if this be not in plain English down right dishonesty, we
are yet to seek; what the Nature of Cheating is.

From these two Instances it does appear, that there is reason enough for us to
suspect at least, that they have acted craftily, and against the light of their
own Consciences; and so, it is very probable that they do still, and that they
may know themselves the falsehood of those things, which they would fain have us
to believe, and perhaps for Varro's and Scaevola's reason, because it is fit
sometimes the People should be deceived in their Religion, for peace and
quietness sake.

But yet, What if the Rulers of these People be of the same Faith with their
Vassals? it is no argument of the truth of their Creed, because great and
learned Men have believed it, for great and learned Men may be, and have been
deceived. That great Philosopher Zeno, did question, whether there was any such
thing as Motion in the world; but what authority is this for me to disbeleive
my own eyes? And Scipio Tettus was such a Fool, that he denied the being of
God, and set up a School of Atheism, and died a Martyr for Atheism, and clapped
his hands too in the very flames. Now all that we can collect from these and
the like instances, is, that Man is a most senseless Creature, when God gives
him up to his own conduct and management, especially if he be blinded too by
him, that rules in darkness. Magnus Deus est error, as Luther said, Error is a
God, which the most admired Sophies are ready to adore, when the God of Truth,
Righteousness, and Peace shall leave them to themselves, and commit them to
their own hands. And that this is usual, the Instances are too many to be
insisted on, and the thing is too common to be wondered at. And so the first
thing I propounded is made good, that many people are led away by strong
delusions, to believe that which is a manifest and notorious lie, and how this
comes to pass: Partly by the power of Men's Education, partly by the efficacy
of their Lusts; but chiefly by the Justice of God, thereby punishing them for
their darling wickednesses; for this cause God does send them strong Delusions
that they should believe a Lie.

ANCIENT and MODERN DELUSIONS, Discoursed of in three SERMONS Upon 2 THESE. 2.
11.
SERMON. II.
2. THESE. 2. 11. And for this cause God shall send them strong Delusions, that
they should believe a Lie.
THE second consideration now follows, that notwithstanding those great
Evidences which have been given on the behalf of Truth, yet multitudes of silly
people are very fond of delusions and lies still; nay, even such as are of the
same, or of the like Nature, with those Delusions which St. Paul speaks of
here, which he says were to be sent upon that Generation, as a curse and
Judgment upon them, because they loved not the Truth, that they might be saved.

In the handling of this matter I must of necessity observe this Method; to
show you what those Pretenses were which prevailed in the very first ages of
Christianity: Then, that many pretenses which are in vogue now do resemble and
come very near to those which were broached in the beginning by damned
Seducers; and lastly, that these are mere Delusions and Lies, how specious
soever they may appear unto the vulgar.

1. Then it is observable and very certain, that in the most Primitive Times of
the Church, many Impostors did pretend to an Infallible Spirit. This is clear
to any man that has but enquired into the History and condition of that Age
wherein the Apostles of Christ lived. For Simon the Sorcerer (of whom we read
Act. 8. and whom the Ancients called (...) the Eldest Son of the Devil)
pretended, that he was that Divine Being, which framed both the Angelical and
Visible world. He persuaded many to believe, that he was the great power of
God; or (as it may be rendered) that he was that Power, Numen, or Divine
Majesty, which is called Great. He pretended to be more than Gods Vicar upon
Earth; for he gave out, that he was the very God, that appeared Epiph. Haeres.
21. Iren. l. 1 c. 20. Cyril. Catech. 5. Justin. Dial. in Tryph. Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. lib. 2. c. 13.
upon Mount Sinai, as the Father; that he was the Christ, that afterward
conversed with the Jews as the Son; and that he was the Holy Ghost, that at
last descended as the Paraclete, or promised Comforter. Eusebius tells us, that
he had a Demon always attending on him, which was called the Virtus (...),
whereby he Quod and de Marco. Annot. Iren. lib. 1. c. 9.
wrought such seeming Miracles, that he was worshipped as the Supreme and
Sovereign Deity, and it appears by the joint testimonies of Tertullian, Justin
Martyr, and other the most Tertul. Apol. c. 13 Justin. Apol. 2. Iren. l. 1. c.
20. Cyril. Catech. 5.
ancient Writers of the Church, that Claudius the Emperor erected a great
Statue in honor of him, with this Inscription upon it, Simoni Deo sancto, to
the Holy God Simon. Some learned Divines do conceive, that this was that Man of
Sin, of whom Saint Paul says, in this 2 These. 2. 4. That he opposed and
exalted himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, etc. This
is certain, that his Followers pretended to the most perfect and certain
knowledge of Gods Will, insomuch that they despised the Apostles themselves, as
much inferior to them in understanding the Divine Mysteries. And Epiphanius
relates, that when the Church appealed to Epiph. lib 1. Haeres. 14. and 34.
Iren. lib. 3. c 2.
the Writings of the Apostles, they urged the authority of a more infallible
Tradition, and affirmed themselves to be wiser than the Apostles, and to be
Preachers of greater Truths, than ever the Apostles were acquainted with. These
were those false Prophets, which our Savior foretold would come, Matthew. 7. 15.
He called them false Prophets, not because they pretended to foretell future
events, but because they falsely pretended to Divine Inspiration, and to an
Infallible Spirit. These are they which Saint Paul says, were puffed up with a
profession of Science, falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. These were they, whom he
called false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 13. And these are they, against whom he
cautioneth the Thessalonians in this Chapter, that they should not be shaken in
mind (...), verse. 2. by any pretenses of the Spirit, by a show of Inspiration,
Immediate Revelation, and Infallible Knowledge.

Now by what has been spoken you may easily observe, that the Fundamental and
Grand Pretense, upon which those monstrous Heretics went in the Apostles
Times, was This, that their Master was the Divine Oracle, the great Teacher of
all Truth; and that they themselves by being his Disciples had this Privilege
above other men, to be divinely and immediately inspired, so that they neither
did nor could be mistaken in their Religion. Like unto this is the modern
pretense touching the Infallibility of the Bishop and Church of Rome. What the
old Gnostics did claim by and under Simon Magus, that do the new Romanists
claim by and under Simon Peter, that their Teachers and Guides cannot Err. Tho
for above fourteen hundred years together the Popes judgment was not counted
infallible, yet now it is an undoubted Article, and the Fundamental Tenet among
them (especially among the Jesuits) that their Great Pontifex has this
Prerogative above all Councils, that in his quae ad fidem pertinent nullo casu
errare possit, as Cardinal Bellarmine affirms; in things pertaining to the
Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 4. c. 3.
Faith he cannot err in any case.

Now that this is a mere Delusion and a notorious lie. Our Writers have used
several effectual ways to prove. But because I do not intend to wade up to the
neck in such a senseless Controversy, I shall take this as a ready and
satisfactory course, by showing you briefly how Contradictory the sense of one
Pope has been to the judgment of another; and so by setting them together
against themselves, it will soon appear what a vain and silly pretense, that of
their Infallibility is. To begin: Saint Peter (as they reckon) was the first
Bishop of Rome: and he has left that behind him which does blast the
Infallibility of his pretended Successors; for he declared the King to have no
Superior: Though he himself was so great an Apostle, and all Kings then were
Pagans and Infidels, yet he taught us to submit our selves to every ordinance,
and to the King as Supreme, 1 Pet. 2. 13. But Pius the 4th. claimed that at the
Council of Trent, which Engenius the 4th. had lately defined at the Council of
Florence, that the Bishop of Rome holds the Primacy over the whole World
(Kings and Emperors not excepted.) And this they are so fond of still, that
whosoever among us shall ex animo, take the Oath of Supremacy, must lie under a
Curse as an Heretic and an Apostate from the Catholic See. Again; the Title
of Universal Pastorship over all the Bishops in the World, all the Popes have
claimed since the days of Boniface the Third; and yet Gregory the Great, while
he was Bishop of Rome, declaimed horribly against it, and in diverse of his
Epistles, calls it a Title full of Novelty, Vanity, Blasphemy, Pride, Madness,
and Wickedness, and said, that it was a Preparative to the Times of
Antichrist. Again, this business of Infallibility, which is now one of the
choicest feathers in the Old man's Cap, was formerly accounted by themselves, as
a New-nothing. For about 250 years since (no longer ago) Adrian the Bellarm. de
Romans Pontif. lib. 4. c. 2.
sixth did ingeniously and honestly declare, that the Pope might not only Err,
but might be an Heretic too, and might teach Heresy, and that some Popes
have, de facto, done so. And to make good what this Pope Adrian said, it is
further observable, that Liberius subscribed the Arian Heresy, and the thing
is so certain, that Cardinal Bellarmine himself does confess it, and produces
many Authorities to Hierom. in Catalog. Ballarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 4 c. 9.
prove it. Moreover, Honorius the first held, that there was but one Will in
Christ; and Vigilius denied, that Christ had two natures; and Anastasius the
second was a Photinian; and Marcellinus was more than an Heretic, for Melch.
Canus lib. 6. Gratian did. 19. c. 9. Council. Sinues. Tert. adv. Prax.
he Apostatized to Heathenism, and sacrificed to Heathen Idols; and Zepherinus
embraced the Prophesies of Montanus; and Rhenanus himself, in his Annotations
upon Tertullian, notes it on the Margin, as a thing to be observed, Episcopus
Romanus Montanizat, the Bishop of Rome is turned Montanist. And yet Montanism,
and Arianism, and Photinianism, and the other Sects I have named, were justly
reckoned by succeeding Popes, as so many Heretical Professions and Factions,
which yet these their Predecessors did embrance notwithstanding. And since this
is Pope against Pope, one contradicting and condemning the other, and that in
things pertaining to the Faith; How is it likely and possible, that every one
of them could be in the Right? Further yet; two things are observed of Pope
Galasius the first, that Magdeb. Cent 5. c. 4. de Caene Dom. and cap. 10. in
vita Gelasii.
he flatly affirmed the Elements in the Sacrament to remain in their own Nature
Bread and Wine; and that he called it a piece of Sacrilege, to administer the
Bread without the Wine: But how irreconcilable his Doctrine is with that of
latter Popes, who teach Transubstantion, and half Communion, any man may see
with half an Eye. Again, Caelestine the Third, taught Alphons. de Castro lib.
1. c. 4.
that Marriage was void and null, if either the Wife or the Husband became an
Heretic; and yet the quite contrary was taught by his immediate Successor
Innocent the Third, and so it has continued to be taught by the rest of the
Popes since. Further yet: The Papists are pleased to call Mr. Calvin an
Heretic, for affirming, that the souls of Saints departed shall not enjoy the
perfect vision of God until the Resurrection. Yet this Doctrine was taught by
Pope John the 22th. but (to see the Infallibility of these Men) some say, that
John himself recanted this before his death; however it is certain, that the
contrary was defined by Benedict, the Twelfth, John's next Successor; and so the
Popes teach still, that such Souls are perfectly happy upon their departure;
and this is the fundamental Principle upon which their Invocations of Saints
stands; and were it not for that, I believe John's opinion would have been
received as a certain Truth. But what shall we say of John the 23th. who denied
the Articles of Eternal Life, and the Resurrection of the Body? And for his
Heresy was accused, and condemned by their own Council of Constance? Either
he, or other Popes were grossly mistaken; and which of the two is most likely,
we leave to themselves to dispute it out.

To these I might add many instances more; as, that John the 12th. ordained a
Deacon in a stable, Magdeb. Cent. 10. c. 9.
drank healths to the Devils, and called upon Devils for help when he was at
Dice; that there was an Age (as Platina tells us) when Plat. in vit. Steph. 6.
'twas usual with Popes to make void all that their Predecessors had done;
that, when Formosus was dead, Stephen the 6th. made his body to be taken out of
the Grave, caused some Ballarm.
of his fingers to be cut off, and his Carcass to be thrown into the River;
that then Pope Romanus was set up, who condemned the Acts of Stephen; and then
came Sergius the 3 d. who ratified what Stephen had done, and nulled again the
Acts of Formosus. I might instance also in another of their pretended
Infallible Oracles, I mean that Female Pope, who turned St. Peter's into a
groaning Chair, and was delivered of a Popeling; and so cozened the whole
Church and her self too (notwithstanding her Infallibility;) but as to this, it
will be said, that it was not Error in Capite, a judicial Error, but a personal
slip only (an hurt in the Elbow or the Shin) or else they will deny, that there
was ever such a Pope, and with them it is a Rule, that Fortiter mentiri, to Lie
strenuously, and to swear to it, for the sake of the Catholic cause, is not
only pardonable, but meritorous too. I shall only add (what is very well known)
that Sixtus the 5th. set forth a Latin Translation of the Bible, and cursed
all that would not use that; and after him came Clement the 8th. and set forth
another and different Translation, and cursed all that would not use that; so
that let the Romanists turn themselves which way they please, they are all
accursed and damned, if it be so that their Popes be indeed Infallible.

But it is a wonder, that any Learned person should be of that opinion of men,
who have been so vicious, so ridiculous, and so inconsistent with themselves,
that the Italians themselves have made them the Subjects of the bitterest
Pasquils and Satyrs: only I do remember (what a Learned Writer has observed of
Aeneas Bishop Tailor lib. of Proph. Sect. 7.
Silvius) that before he came to be preferred to the Popedom, he laughed at
the conceit of the Popes Infallibility; and the reason why some did set him
above Councils, was this (as he ingeniously confessed,) because the Pope had the
disposal of all Spiritual Preferments, which Councils had not, and so the thing
fairly ends, that it is not the Love of Truth, but the Love of Interest, which
has made men to sweat, to defend this pretense of Infallibility. A pretense
which I have been the longer upon, because it is the grand Delusion on which
many others are built; and though many, who dare not believe their own Senses,
are so senseless and sottish, as to believe this fancy, yet I consider, that
thousands have been justly given up to believe a Lie. That great impostor
Montanus pretended that he was the Paraclete, or Comforter that was promised;
and that Delusion prevailed so, that the Acute and Learned Tertullian, himself
was at last persuaded of the Truth of it. Though it be a dangerous, yet it is no
New thing for the worst of men to say, they are Infallible. Those false
Prophets, and false Teachers, who seduced the World in the Apostles days,
pretended the same thing; and it was the grand Delusion which the Righteous God
delivered them and their followers up to believe, because they loved not the
Truth.

2. Another thing observable of those first Heretics is, that they taught the
worship of Images. S. John cautioned his little Children, to keep themselves
from Idols, 1 John 5. 21. And S. Paul spoke of some Idolaters that were in the
World in his days, 1 Cor. 5. 10. Now by these are to be understood, not only
those who worshipped the Pagan Deities, but those also who worshipped Pictures,
whether of God, or of Christ, or of Men. And that such there were in those
first times is very clear out of the Writings of many Ancient Doctors in the
Church; and though they called themselves Christians as the sincere Professors
of the Gospel were called, yet were they condemned, and prescribed by the
Church, as vile and abominable Heretics. Such were the Cerinthians, who
boasted of their immediate Revelations, and yet honored the Picture of Judas
himself, because he was the occasion of Christ's death. Simon Magus (of whom I
spoke Epiph. Haeres. 21. Iren. l. 1 c. 20. Augustinus. Eusebius.
before) delivered an Effigies of himself to his Followers in the shape of
Jupiter, and another of his Strumpet Helena in the shape of Minerva; and his
Disciples by his directions worshipped these with prostrations, with incense,
with meat and Drink Offerings. In like manner the Carpocratians had the
Pictures of Christ and of Iren. l. 1. c. 24.
Paul, and of others, to which they gave religious worship; and by so doing did
conceive, that they greatly honored Christ himself and his Apostles. Now all
these poisonous Branches of Idolatry proceeded from one bitter Root, that
wicked Sorcerer, who was the Author of all Cyril. Cat. 5. Vide Ouzel. in Min.
Faelic. p. 54.
Heresies: And the learned Dr. Hammond is of opinion, that Saint Paul points
to these Impostors, Romans 1. 23. where he says, that they changed the Glory of
the incorruptible God, into an Image made like unto a corruptible man, for they
supposed, that God himself was adored and worshipped in and by these Images and
Representations. Like unto this old abominable and heretical Practice is the
modern Practice of the Church of Rome, in worshipping the Pictures of the
Persons in the Holy Trinity, of the Holy Virgin, and of the Apostles and other
Saints: And tho they would come off with a nice and foolish distinction between
Latria and Dulia (which yet their Writers do not thoroughly agree in;) yet
suppose they do not pretend to give Divine worship to the Images themselves,
but to the Prototypes, that is to God and to Christ, who are thus Represented,
this is a very gross delusion and a Lie, in the Scripture sense of the Word,
that is, down right Idolatry. For they, who worshipped the golden Calf in the
Wilderness, are called by the Apostle Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10. 7. and yet they
were not so sottish as to think, that the Image which they had just formed with
their hands was the very True God; but looked upon it as the Symbol of Gods
presence, and worshipped it as Gods Representative; and their Worship was
ultimately directed, not to the Calf, but to God himself by the Image, and
under that Similitude; and so they were guilty of Idolatry in the Manner, tho
not in the Object of their worship; for they worshipped the True God after a
False way. And indeed this was the Idolatry of the very Pagans. For tho many of
the vulgar sort among them terminated their worship in the Images themselves,
yet the wiser sort did conceive and prefer, that they worshipped the Great God
by their Images, and not the Images themselves. So Celsus declared in his
Disputations with Origin, that he was no better than a perfect Fool, that
looked upon those things (things of Wood and Stone, of Brass and Gold) to be
Gods and not rather as Origin. cont. Cells. l. 7.
Images of the Gods. And the Pagans in Arnobius professed that they worshipped
Statues, only Arnob. l. 6.
because through them honor is given to the Gods, whereas the Images themselves
were worshipped only for their Dedication, and Relation sake unto the Deity. This
was the Plea of the Heathens, and this is the Plea of the Papists; so that
either they are guilty of Idolatry, or else neither Jews nor Heathens were ever
guilty of it: And whatever evasions they make use of to excuse their Image
worship, the same shifts any Learned man, may use to excuse the Idolatries of
the first Seducers, the Simonians, the Cerinthians, the Carpocratians, and the
Collyridians too, who offered up Cakes to the Virgin Mary's Image. For all
these did believe, that this Worship and Honor did chiefly and ultimately
redound to the Honor of God; and this was a Delusion, and a Lie, which they
were delivered up to believe; and I wish some pretended Catholics had not
raked up the same Delusions out of these Old Heretics Graves.

3. Of whom it is yet further observable, that they taught the Adoration and
Invocation of Heavenly Spirits, as Mediators between them and the great God.
This is expressly recorded by Epiphanius of Simon the Sorcerer, Epiph. Haeres.
21.
that he taught his followers, that no man could be saved, unless he did offer
up Sacrifice to the great Parent of the Universe, by those Principalities, and
Powers, and Intelligences which are above. And questionless, this is that
(...), or worshipping of Angels, which S. Paul condemns, 2 Col. 18. Let no man
beguile you of your Reward, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels.
That is, let no man rob you of that which is the peculiar honor of Christians
(who call upon God through the Eternal Word only, let no man beguile you out
of that way) by persuading you to an uncommanded piece of humility, to go to
God by many Mediators and Advocates, as if it were too much confidence and
rudeness to direct your Prayers immediately unto the Father of Spirits: And in
order hereunto, take heed, that ye be not tempted to worship and invocate the
Angels, who are thought to be Gods Ministers of State, to carry his Commands
down unto Men, and to convey men's Prayers up unto God. This was certainly the
foolish and evil Practice of many deluded people in those days; and very like
unto this is the superstitions and unlawful Practice of many deluded wretches
in our days, who do not only pray to their Guardian Angel to defend and to
direct them, but also to S. Michael the Archangel, and to all the (supposed)
Nine orders of Blessed Spirits; and to the Souls of Patriarchs and Prophets, of
Apostles and Martyrs, and to the Spirits of all Saints departed, to be their
Mediators and Intercessors at the Throne of Grace. But this is a mere Delusion
and a Lie, though they believe it to be an Act of great Piety and Devotion: For
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges Isa. 63. 16.
us not: Nor does our Savior himself send us to God any other way but by him,
nor direct us to pray in any other Name but in his; nor does the Scriptures own
any 1 Timothy 2. 5.
more then one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. To address
ones self to a plurality of Inferior Spirits, and subordinate Mediators, is
down right Heathenism, which Religion Christ came to destroy, and Matthew. 6. 7.
forbad us to Pray, as the Heathens did; and so we are not only to forbear all
Battologies and vain Repetitions, which the Pagans used; but also we must
declaim all Plurality of Intercessors, which the Pagans believed. And because
this is a useful speculation, I would observe unto you these four things,
touching the Religion of the Old Heathens, much whereof these Gnostics in my
Text did insert into their Religion, and upon which they grounded their
Practice of worshipping, and praying to Demons and Invisible Spirits.

1. They believed, as we all do, that there is but one Supreme, Sovereign and
Independent Diety, which presideth over the whole World, and orders all
things in Heaven and Earth. Yet nevertheless.

2. They believed, that between God and Men there were vast numbers of Inferior
Deities, and Deified Souls (as the Romanists reckon great multitudes of
Canonized and Reputed Saints) to whom the great God did commit the care of Men,
and the Government See Dr. Cudworths Intel. System.
of the World.

3. They believed (as the Romanists do also) that since God was a Being of most
transcendent perfection, it was not manners for men to address themselves unto
him, but by the favor and means of those middle Beings or Mediators: Even as
it is a piece of boldness to present a Petition to an Earthly Prince, but by
the hand of an Intercessor, or some Master of Request.

4. And so, lastly, it was the Custom of Heathens, to call upon some Demon,
Soul, or Spirit to solicit and mediate for them unto the supreme God, and to
depend upon them, as their immediate Patrons, and to expect all their Petitions
to be answered by their care, and all good things, both for them and theirs, to
be brought unto them by the hands of these Mediators, to whose Custody and
Protection they did solemnly devote and commit themselves. This is a short and
plain account of the Creed and the Religion of the Ancient Pagans; by what we
can learn from the most sagacious, dilligent, and inquisitive Writers.

And by this it will appear what a correspondence and likeness there is between
Popery and Heathenism in this particular, concerning their Applications unto,
and their Dependances upon certain Mediators, whose Interest they conceived, to
be so great in the Supreme and Sovereign Numen, that they rested confidently in
their Intercession and power, in all Cases, Circumstances, and Conditions of
Life. For (that I may give you some particular and known Instances:) the
Heathens were wont to engage certain Demons, or Spirits of the other world, to
be their Tutelar Deities, to take the Patronage of their Countries, Cities, and
Habitations; such was Bell to the Babylonians, Osiris to the Egyptians, Vulcan
to the Lemnians, Pallas to the Trojans, Minerva to the Athenians, Apollo to the
Delphicks, Juno to the Carthaginians, and the like. Just so have the deluded
Romanists engaged St. James to be the Tutelar Saint for Spain, Peter and Paul
for Rome, Denis for France, Martin for Germany, Nicolas for Moscovia, Ambrose
for Milan, Hulderick for Augusta, our Lady for I know not how many Cities and
Corporations; and every particular Child is taught to choose him a Guardian
Saint for his own Person, and to pray daily See the Child's Catechism printed
at Paris. 1672.
to him in this Form, Glorious Saint N. whom the divine Providence has
allotted for my Pattern on Earth and my Patron in Heaven; obtain (I beseech
you) for me, your poor Pupil, so to imitate here your Virtues, that I may be
made partaker of your Glory. Again: The Heathens had diverse inferior Deities
and Mediators belonging to their several Trades and Professions Husbandmen had
their Ops and Sylvanus; Mariners had their Castor and Pollux; Travelers had
their Hercules; Shepherds had their Pan; Scholars had their Apollo; Soldiers
had their Mars; and Thieves had their light-fingured Mercury. Even so have
these silly deluded wretches their peculiar Saints: Physicians have their
Cosmus and Damianus; Painters their Saint Luke; Potters have their Godrus;
Huntsmen their Eustacius; Seamen their Saint Christopher, Saint Clement, and
our Lady; Lawyers have their Juno; Smiths have their Eulogius, and Harlots
themselves have their Saint Magdalen and Saint Afra. Once more; they have (as
the old Heathens had) particular propitions Spirits, and Orators for particular
Diseases and Griefs; as Cornelius for the Falling Sickness, Barbara against
sudden Death, Liberius for the Stone, Apollonia for the Toothach, Otilia for
Sore eyes, Roche against the Plague, Petronilla for the Fever, Saint John and
Saint Bennet against Poison, Saint Antony for the Erysipelas, Romanus for
Demoniacks, and Saint Margaret for Women in Travel, and Faelicitas for such as
are Barren. Lastly they have particular Saints for the safety of themselves,
and their several sorts of Goods: They have Antony for their Swine, Wendeline
for their Sheep, Pelagius for their Oxen, Saint Gall for their Geese, Saint Loy
for their Horses, Urban for their Vineyards, Agatha against Fires, Saint
Michael and Saint George against all their Enemies.

These Instances I have collected, not so much out of a design to render their
Religion ridiculous, as to open the eyes of those ignorant People, who are
deluded by crafty and evil Men, and whom I pity with my Soul. Alas! miserable
were those Creatures in the Apostles time, who were taught by Heretics to pray
unto Angels, to invocate and conside in Angels, as their Mediators and Patrons
in the Court of Heaven: but (God help them) how miserable are those poor Souls,
I now speak of, who are taught to do this, and much more! Not only to adore and
depend on those that are indeed Ministering Spirits, but moreover to worship and
repose their trust (both for their present and eternal safety) in little (and
many times very naughty) Creatures, whose names they are pleased for their
Interest sake, and for some self ends, to enter into the Register and Catalogue
of Saints! But they have taken their Copy from the Religion of those, whom
Saint Paul speaks of in my Text, that had strong delusions sent them, that
they should believe a Lie, because they loved not the Truth, that they might be
saved. And yet I have more to say of them still.

ANCIENT and MODERN DELUSIONS, Discoursed of in three SERMONS Upon 2 THESE. 2.
11.
SERMON. III.
2. THESE. 2. 11. And for this cause God shall send them strong Delusion, that
they should believe a Lie.
FOR, Fourthly, there is yet another thing observable of those Deceivers in the
days of the Apostles, that they pretended to great Austerities of Life, in
mortifying their Flesh, and disciplining their Bodies, and abridging themselves
of that Liberty which God had allowed in the use of his Creatures. S. Paul
takes notice in two several places, that they forbad to marry, and commanded to
obstain from meats, 1 Timothy 4. 3. and that they neglected the body by observing
these humane Ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not, Col. 2. 21. They
pretended to be more perfect and Holy than other men, in using those severities
toward the Body, which others neither did, nor thought themselves obliged to
use. These things have indeed a show of Wisdom, says the Apostle, Col. 2. 23.
and 1 Timothy 4. 2. He gave these Deceivers this Character, that they spoke Lies
in Hypocrisy; abused the World by pretenses of extraordinary Sanctity and
Mortification, because they were so strict in these outward observances. And
are not the Modern Severities, which the Romanists lay so much stress upon, so
many Apish Resemblances of these Ancient Delusions? Their forbidding all
Monastic persons and Clergymen to Marry, as if it were unbecoming the
Sacredness of their Profession; their commanding certain Religious Orders, such
as the Benedictines and Carthusians, to eat no manner of Flesh all their days;
their General Laws touching the choice of meats at certain times, which are
imposed upon All as Religious ordinances, and necessary to be observed under
pain of Anathema; what is all this, but a reviving of the Doctrines of the Old
Gnostics, and a new Edition of those Cheats and Impostures, which were
condemned by the Church in its most Primitive Ages?

As near as I can I will do them no wrong in this particular. The Case, I
confess, in some respects is not altogether the same, and yet in other respects
it is not altogether different. It is not the same on this account, because
some Ancient Deceivers condemned Marriage as one of the Devils works, and
forbad the use of Wine and Flesh as a thing evil and unlawful in it self. So
Theodoret tells us of the followers of Simon the Sorcerer; and Irenaeus tells
us of Saturninus, Marcion and the Eucratitae: And Epiphanius relates of the
Iren. l. 1. c. 22. and 30. Epiph. Haeres. 30. and 42. and 66.
Ebionites and Manichees also, how they held Marriage, and the use of Flesh and
Wine to have been instituted by the Devil, and therefore was evil naturally and
intrinsically. This the Papists do deny as we do; and they are very proud of
this Evasion, and make use of it against us, when we dispute against their
superstitions; even as Tertullian did, disputing against the Church in his
book, de Jejunio, when he was a Montanist. This is agreed upon on all hands,
against the first Heretics, that Hierom. adv. Jovinian. l. 2.
every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received
with thanksgiving, as S. Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 4. 4.

But then it is to be noted, that in the Apostles days some were guilty, though
not of Heresy, yet of great Superstition in this particular. For they granted
the use of Gods Creatures to be lawful in it self; but yet they conceived the
forbearance of their Liberty to be a very meritorious Act of Self-denial, a
great piece of of perfection, and such a direct Act of worship as was very
acceptable and pleasing unto God. S. Paul, in 1 Timothy 4. 8. speaking of (...),
bodily exercise, as a thing of little profit, does plainly glance at the
fooleries of those men, who placed Religion in bodily castigatigations, in
abstaining from certain meats and drinks, and from Marriage; although they did
not look upon these things as (...), abominable in their own nature; but
refrained from them (as diverse did) (...), for Discipline sake, supposing this
abstinence to be an Exercise of Piety, and kind of Mortification and Humility,
that would purchase and merit the Divine favor. And, in Col. 2. 23. although
he calls this neglecting of the body, will worship and humility (as those
superstitious wretches did) yet he tells us, that these are only the
Commandments and Doctrines of men, (...), which tended to corrupt practices by
the abuse of them. These things had indeed in them a show of Wisdom, as being
borrowed of some Philosophers (for which reason he says, beware least any
spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, verse. 8.) but yet they were only
specious, not real or substantial services. And are not those little things, so
religiously practiced, and so wonderfully applauded by the Church of Rome (such
as wallowing on the ground, a Penitential shift, going barefoot to a Sepulcher
or a Shrine, whippings in the Time of Lent, the wearing of S. Francis his
habit, and especially the choice of some meats, as if it were a mortal sin to
eat others, and the forbiding of Priests marriage, because they that are in the
Flesh cannot please God (as Pope Siricius insolently affirmed) Siric. Ep. 1. c.
7.
I say are not these pettite and superstitions observations imposed upon the
Conscience as necessary and meritorious Acts, a perfect Copy and Transcript of
Ordinances, that were condemned of Old? Though many are such Fops as to receive
them for Catholic Traditions, and to confide and trust in them as a sure way
to Heaven; yet that the opinion of their merit or necessity is a gross and
palpable Delusion, may be easily evinced by observing what St. Paul himself
said in the beginning with reference to these matters. For: 1. Bodily exercise
profits little, in comparison of that Piety which consists in the
renovation of the heart, and the Crucifixion of the Old man. Christianity is a
grave and serious thing requiring the mortifying of our Lusts, and the inward
Sanctity of the Spirit: The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.

2. These frothy and insignificant Practices are so distant from the Rules of
solid Religion, that they are indeed the very scum of Heathenism, the Elements
and Rudiments of the World, as S. Paul speaks, Col. 2. 8, 20. For so S. Jerome
tells us, out of Cheraemon the S. Hierome lib. 2. Jovinian.
Stoic, touching the Priests in Egypt; and out of Eubulus, touching the
Priests of Mithras in Persia; and out of Philo and Josephus, touching the
Essenes (which some Chemnit. Eras. page 124. de Athen.
think that S. Paul points to especially,) out of Xenocrates, touching the
Athenians, and out of Euripides touching the Cretians, though they were
Gluttons: And the like we find related of several Heathens more by other
Authors; that they used bodily severities, especially before See Dr. Ham. in
Tit. 1. 12. Volateran. l. 13. c. 4. Anthrop. Alex. ab Alex. l. 6. c. 2.
they made their adresses unto their Gods; that they were wont to change their
garments, and lie upon the bare Earth, and for several days to abstain from
conjugal enjoyments, from Wine and Flesh, and even from Eggs and Milk as coming
of Flesh; and that when they took their Repast, they did it very moderately,
and upon very light diet, contenting themselves with bread, and herbs and
pulse, and things of the like nature; and all this, supposing, that by these
outward castigations and severities, they should make the Gods favorable and
propitious unto them.

3. And yet, S. Paul calls all this Hypocrisy, (or vain ostentation) 1 Timothy 4.
A character, which though it was given by the Apostle, of the Impostors in his
Time, those Spirits of Error, those Apostates from the Faith, who had their
Consciences seared with an hot Iron; yet it may become the generality of
Romanists at this day. For they make marriage unlawful to those, in whom
fornication is counted no sin: They call it fasting when they forbear Flesh,
tho they surfeit with the most delicate Fish, and the most generous Wines: And
so they have found out a very lucky way to fast, and yet to fare as
sumptuously, as any Scholar of Epicurus or Apicius could wish to do; to fast
until their girdles crack; to fast till they are as fat as Boars in a frank;
and to mortify their flesh till their sides are, succidiae Gehennae, as S.
Jerome speaks, like so many flitches to be smoked in Hell. This is far short of
the austerities of those Pagans and Heretics of old; for they fasted indeed,
and fared hard too, when their Fast was broken, and had greater Reason to plead
the Merit of their Works, and to call themselves so many mortified Saints, and
yet even these were Cheats and Deceivers, who abused silly people, that for
their sins were delivered up to strong Delusions, that they should believe a
Lie.

5. Tonching which Impostors there is yet a fifth thing observable; that
notwithstanding their specious and popular pretensions, they were given to such
licentious courses, and corrupted the World with such impious and damnable
doctrines as brought a Reproach upon Christianity, and made the Church of
Christ to be hated Justin. Mart. Apol. 2. and Dial. cum Tryp. Min. Fael.
and evil spoken of for their sakes. All the ancient Writers have observed over
and over; how addicted they were to lasciviousness, and taught men such
abominable kinds of uncleanness, as cannot be named without a blush. They
taught, that in Times of Persecution, men might worship the Heathen Gods, and
eat of such things Iren. l. 1. c. 23.
as had been offered unto Devils. They taught, that men might tell any lies for
their safety, and to avoid danger might equivocate, and deny the Faith of
Christ with their mouths, so they did not do it in their hearts. They taught,
that it was lawful to betray and persecute those Christians that were sincere
and steady, and that it was a piece of good service unto God, even to kill
them. They taught, that Incest, and Adultery, and Fornication were empty words,
and that the most villainous sorts of Lust had nothing of Sin or Impurity in
them. In a word, they did not stick at any thing that was evil, but were such
Patrons of all manner of wickedness, that in many places of Scripture they are
called, Wolves, Dogs, Blasphemers, Traitors, Lovers of pleasures,
house-creepers, and enticers of silly women laden with sins, despisers of
government, separatists, sensualists, filthy dreamers, scoffers walking after
their own lusts, turning the Grace of God into lasciviousness, and denying the
Lord that bought them. These are the plain Characters that were cut out upon
the foreheads of that ungodly brood, the followers of Simon Magus, in the most
Primitive Ages. And now to draw a Parellel between them and the modern
Romanists, a man might wonder, that they, who cry up Good Works to the Skies,
should be the Teachers of such things as are quite contrary to Godliness, and
utterly destructive of the Life and Substance of Religion. But here lies one
main piece of Sophistry, that by Good Works they mean, the hearing of Mass, the
mumbling over some Ave Maryes and Pater Nosters, abstinence from Flesh at
certain times, and such like Acts of obedience to the Laws of their Church. But
as for those Virtues which are morally, and eternally necessary, as Love,
Humility, Subjection, Charity and the rest, they lay so little stress upon
them, that they suppose them to be dispensable, and of no great moment. For
what says the great Cardinal Bellarmine. Why, even this, that men must
Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 4. c. 5.
acquiesce in the judgment of the Pope; and though he should chance to err in
commanding to that which is a vice, or forbidding that which is a Virtue, the
Church is bound to believe vices to be good, and virtues to be evil. And so he
says elsewhere, that Christ gave unto Lib. in Barklain, c. 13.
Peter (and in him to his Successors) full power to make that a sin, which is
not sin, and to make that to be no sin which indeed is a sin. I am very
confident, there never was a more devilish Principle taught by the most hellish
Impostors that lived yet in any Age of the Church. Yet this is the Principle
which the Romanists do go upon, and take for granted, that let their Popes
teach what they will, it must be true, let them forbid what they will, it must
be evil; let them require what they will, it must be good; and let them
dispense with what they will, it must be lawful, even in foro interno in the
Court of Conscience. Now, do but observe what are the things, which those
precious Infallible Guides teach? Why, that men may be saved by the Merits of
Saints, and so need not work out their own Salvation; that they are justified
before God, if they do but confess their Sins to a Priest, and undergo a slight
and a cheap Penance, when the Priest has absolved them; that if they die in
the guilt of any Venial Sins, they shall go no further than Purgatory, and
shall soon be sent thence into Heaven by a good Legacy, by a few Masses, and by
the Popes indulgence; and that the Pope has Authority and Power to Pardon,
judicially the sins of all men, past, present and to come, even to the Term of
ten thousand years. Again; what is it which they do forbid? Why, to be in
Charity with those whom they call Heretics, to hearken to their Counsels and
Arguments, to discourse with them about matters of Religion, to look into their
Bibles, and to examine the ground of their own Faith, and whatsoever else
tends to the prejudice of the Roman Cause, is utterly forbidden under the
pain of a Curse. But as the Old Heretics forbore that which they might and
ought to have done, but were very earnest for whatsoever was utterly unlawful;
so these, while they tie men up from things that are honest and laudable, do
not only let them loose, but drive them also to things, which the Laws of God
and of Nature have severely interdicted. They require them to resign up their
Senses, Reason and Consciences into their hands; to persecute all that are not
of the same Opinions, though of the same Faith with them; to subvert Kingdoms;
to compass Sea and Land to Poison and Assassinate Princes; and if by Providence
they be detested, to Lie strenuously, and to forswear the Fact, and to protest
their Innocence with the most bitter Execrations, even at the last minute, when
their Souls are immediately to appear before that righteous Judge, who is is
the searcher of the heart. And of the same nature are those things which they
allow and dispense with. Witness that Liberty they give men instead of Marrying
to Fornicate; to act the greatest Cruelties that the most Savage Wits can
invent; to equivocate and dissemble, and deal falsely, to break Oaths, though
never so strict and sacred, and if need require, to deny their Faith, and to
take the Sacrament, even against their Consciences, and for no other end but to
abuse and deceive the World. Briefly; witness those dispensations for
Adulteries, for Murders, for Killing ones Father or Mother, and for many
unnatural and most horrid impieties: of which we have Mr. Eganes Rates.
some account given us by one who was of their own Communion; and a more full
account may be seen in their Taxa Camera, a Book publicly printed, of which
their own Espenaeus Cited by Bishop Tailor, in his Disswasive, part. 1. sect. 5.
says, that it is a Book, in which a Man may learn more wickedness, than in
all the Summaries of Vice published in the World: and yet to them that will pay
for it, there is given to many a License, and to all an Absolution, for the
greatest and most horrid Sins. It is no wonder to me that the Romanists
generally are such vile, inhumane, and more than Barbarous creatures, having
Consciences seared with an hot iron; especially the Italians, who live near the
Receipt of Custom, and under the Nose of that monstrous Head of the Church,
who can make Villainy, Nothing. And I am confident, that no Leviathans, whether
of former or later Ages, have bred so many Atheists, as that Church which calls
her self Catholic, and takes upon her to remove all boundaries of good and
evil, and either to command or to allow whatsoever is contrary to Eternal
Reason, repugnant to Gods Word, injurious to all Civil Societies, shameful to
Mankind, scandalous to Religion, and destructive of its very Being and Nature.
Certainly that Character did never better befit any other Sect, which Saint
Paul gave of the old Gnostics, that they had the form of Godliness, but denied
the Power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 5.

6. And yet lastly, it is observable of those old Deceivers, that they
pretended Miracles, and vied with the Apostles themselves in working Wonders,
thinking to make their Delusions plausible by the same means and methods, which
served at first for the confirmation of the Gospel. All ancient Ecclesiastical
Writers have observed, that the first Impostors were Magicians; and that by
enchantments, and the help of the Devil, they did many things which past for
Miracles. We read of Simon the first Heretic, and the Father of those
Sorcerers, that he did fly in the air; that he made Statues to walk, and
Cyril. Cat 5. Chrysostom. Hom. 19. in c. 7. Mat.
move like men; and that he would cast himself into the flames, and yet come
off without being burnt. And so we find of Marcus, that he was wont to make a
long Prayer at his consecrating the Cup, and made the Wine to change its
color, and to look of a deep red; and then he pretended, that some of Christ's
blood had dropped into Iren. lib. 1. c. 9.
the Chalice. And many more instances might be reckoned up, had I but time to
search into Antiquity. It suffices, what Saint Paul says expressly of these
Apostates, that tho they taught Doctrines of Devils, yet their coming was after
the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, in this 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. (...), as St. Chrysostom notes; with such wonders, as either were
Impostures, or tended to confirm an Imposture. Had not our Savior Christ
foretold, Matthew. 24. 24. That false Teachers should arise, and show such great
signs and wonders, as would (if it were possible) deceive the very Elect: Had
not Lodovicus Vives told us, that in his time, some counted it a piece of Piety
to coin Lies for Religion: and were not the World fraughted with variety of
Legends, and thousands of Stories touching Miracles done at the Shrines and by
the Relics of Saints; it would be the greatest Prodigy to me, that in these
days, Men should have the confidence to talk of Miracles, since the Truth of
Religion has been so abundantly confirmed. Yet such is the Folly and Impudence
of the Church of Rome, that they are not ashamed to fill our ears with such
Comical Stories (many of them fabulous, many ridiculous, and all of them
impertinent) that were it fit to make this House a Theater, I would desire no
better Subject, whereby to expose their Religion. But my business is briefly to
show, that these are strong Delusions, however some credulous and silly people
do believe them as firmly as the very Creed.

In order to our proceeding two things must be premised.

1. That there are two sorts of Miracles. Some are properly so called, real and
true Miracles, such as cannot be wrought by any second Causes, but by the
immediate hand of God alone. Others again are improperly so called, rather
Prodigies than true Miracles, such as are not effected by any natural and
ordinary causes here among us, but by some invisible created Spirits, who, by
Gods permission, produce such supernatural effects, as do strike the vulgar
sort into astonishment, and serve to bring the Instruments thereof into
admiration: Of this sort was those wrought of old by the Egyptian Sorcerers, in
Exodus 7.

2. Miracles are not to be heeded without Consideration had of those Doctrines,
which they are intended to confirm. For if they serve to promote Idolatry, or
to rob God of any of his Honor (things plainly condemned by the Holy Ghost in
Scripture) they are to be rejected without further examination; it being not to
be supposed, that God will contradict himself, or set his Seal to a Lie; but
rather to be Believed, that he does only permit Angels or Devils to show such
wonders for the probation and trial of Men's Faith, or in vengeance for their
Sins. This is clear from Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. If there arise among you a Prophet,
and gives thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass,
whereof he spoke unto thee, saying let us go after other Gods, and serve them;
thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, etc.

These things being taken for granted we affirm,

1. That the signs and wonders, which the Church of Rome boasts of, are not
in any wise true Miracles, done by the power of God, wherewith Christ and his
Apostles were endued; but that they are either so many Lies and Forgeries, or
so many Diabolical operations at the best. For what do they pretend to do, but
in a corner and among themselves? Whereas true Miracles were acted before the
Sun, and before the eyes of those who were Enemies to truth; because a true
Miracle is always for conviction, and so must be public. And if these men are
armed with omnipotence, why do they not show Us the finger of God, who are
ready to resist their Doctrines and Practices even unto Blood? and besides it
is to be considered, that how great soever their pretended Miracles are, we
will show them as great, which have been done by unbelievers, not only by the
Egyptians, but also by Apollonius Tyaneus, by Vespasian and other Roman
Emperors, and by Accius Navius, a Pagan, of whom Apuleius, tells us, that
Miraculum cotis. Apul.
he divided a Stone with a Razor.

2. If these Miracles were more for number, and greater for the nature of them
than they are, yet are they to be exploded and hissed at by all Lovers of the
Truth, because they tend, not to the confirmation of the Christian Faith, but
to different ends clearly. It is observable, that when the Roman Doctors would
prove the verity of the Articles of our Common Creed, they talk not of
Miracles, but have recourse unto the Scriptures. But seeing they can find
nothing there, which countenanceth the worshipping of Relics and Images and
the like, they appeal always to strange and mighty works, pretended to have
been done by such and such a Saint, to give warrant to their Superstitions and
Idolatry. Now these things are repugnant to the Word of God, and to the
Doctrine of God our Savior; and therefore it is presumable, that they are
Impostures and Cheats put upon men by the Father of Lies, thereby to advance
the Interest of his Kingdom. For all these Miracles, so highly cried up, serve
to no good purposes, but to some pitiful, or sinful ends; either to bring their
Monasteries and Orders into veneration, or to encourage the Invocations of
Saints, or to bring honor to the Mass, or to promote the adoration of the
Host, or the Cross, or the like monstrous Innovations. So they tell us, that
St. Antony was heard at two miles distance, while he was preaching; -- That St.
Denis took up his own head, after 'twas cut off, and carried it in his arms; --
That St. Dominick was wont to plague the Devil, pulling off his Feathers when
he appeared to him in the shape of a Sparrow, and burning his toes when he
troubled him in the form of a Monkey; -- That St. Francis was transformed into
the form of our Savior, with his five Wounds imprinted upon him; -- That St.
Ignatius's picture quenched a fire in a Barn that was all on a flame, and cured
a Spaniard of Mendoza of the black Ague; -- That St. Xavier having dropped his
Crucifix into the Sea to allay a Tempest, recovered it again by the ministry
of a Crab-Fish, that carried it many leagues, and brought it a shore with a
great deal of reverence; -- That Saint Patrick, while he was yet in his Mothers
belly, heard the Irish Infants crying to him to come and set them free; -- That
Saint Nicholas fasted every wednesday and friday, whilst he was a sucking
Child; -- That Bartolomy of Durham confounded an Evil Angel, by throwing at him
a pot of Holy Water; -- That Saint Moedoc rode over a Lake in a Chariot, and
left upon the waters the print of the wheels; -- That a Mule was made to leave
his Provender to adore the Sacrament; -- That a Sheep was so devout, as to
attend the Mass, and to bleat before the Altar of the blessed Virgin, and did
humble obeisance at the elevation of the Host; -- That by the sign of the Cross
a Birds head was set on, that had been pulled off by the Boys, and great flakes
of Ice were turned into billets, and a sucking Child was made to speak, and
thousands have been healed of all manner of Diseases; -- That Devils have been
brought to confession by the virtue of the Ladies Psalter and the Rosary; and
that Evil Spirits have sneaked out of persons possessed by the Repetition of a
few Ave Maryes; and that at Saint Gervais his Monastry in Paris, a hive of Bees
were so Religious, as to build a Chapel of Wax in honor of the holy Wafer,
that was put in among them; and framed a Table, a Pix, and even Bells, all of
Wax; and observed the Canonical hours, and turned their hive into a Religious
House: Only there was wanting a Monastry of Drones. This is but a short account
of their great Miracles, a larger Collection whereof I have by me, and they
shall have it too, when they require it, and there shall be occasion for it. In
the mean while it suffices to see what trifling Miracles these are, which they
pretend to; and that they come so far short of those signs and wonders, which
the more cunning Gnostics did work of old, that the only great Miracle is,
that people should be so void of sense, and common Reason, as to give credit to
them. But yet I consider, that this is no very great Miracle neither, because
many have been and are delivered up to strong delusions to believe a lie.

From all that has been spoken upon this subject, we may see in short, what
little Reason these fine Christians have to call themselves Catholics, and the
only Catholics in the World; and for a what strange and sottish Religion it
is, that Cities must be fired, and Magistrates murdered, and Princes
destroyed, and Kingdoms divided, and the World turned upside down. Whereas he
is a true Catholic, that holds the Catholic doctrine, the Faith that once
was delivered unto the Saints, the Sum whereof is comprised in the Apostles
Creed, which is indeed the true Catholic Faith; these great pretenders have
added new Articles unto the Old number, and so have spoiled the Ancient purity
of Religion by ugly additions; and yet will be so insolent as to call these
corruptions by the name of Catholic verities; although it be made to appear,
that they have ransaked the graves of Old Heretics, and even raked Hell it
self, to patch up that goodly model, which they would obtrude upon the World.
Of the Simonians they have learned to pretend Infallibility, to worship Images,
to worship Angels, to call upon Mediators, to prohibit Marriage, to enjoin the
choice of meats, to debauch the World; and as a color for all their
Intolerable Usurpations, to pretend Miracles. To which I might add further,
that they have learned of the Marcaeta to call Wine Blood; of the Montanists,
to make Laws of fasting; of the Hierachitae, to make works truly menitorious;
of the Priscillianists, to make Apocryphal books equal with the Word of God: of
the Pelagians, to Preach up a possibility of absolute Perfection; of the
Collyridians to offer up Cakes to the Virgin Mary; of the Armenians, to worship
the Cross; of Petrus Gnaphaeus to make Prayers unto Saints; and of the
Gnosimachi, to applaud Ignorance, as the Mother of Devotion. They are apt
Scholars to learn any thing but what is good: and they have followed very fine
Guides, the very worst of Christians (if I may so call them) and such as the
Catholic Church has marked and condemned for Heretics. And now let God be
judge between us and them, where the Delusions lie, whether on our side or on
theirs: And so I end.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for and sold by Jonathan Edwin at the Three
Roses in Ludgate Street.
A Sermon preached on the Thirtieth of January 1673/9, being the Anniversary of
the Martyrdom of King Charles the First, of blessed Memory, and published at
the request of some Friends, by Edward Pelling, Rector of Saint Martins
Ludgate: in quarto,

The true Liberty and Dominion of Conscience vindicated from the Usurpations
and Abuses of Opinion and Persuasion: in octavo.

The Countermine; or a short, but true discovery of the dangerous Principles
and secret Practices of the Dissenting Party, especially the Presbyterians,
showing, that Religion is pretended, but Rebellion is intended, and in order
thereto, the Foundation of Monarchy in the State, and Episcopacy in the Church
are undermined: in octavo.

The Common Interest of King and People, showing the Original, Antiquity, and
Excellency of Monarchy compared with Aristocracy and Democracy, and
perticularly of our English Monarchy, and that absolute Papal and Presbyterian
popular Supremacy, are utterly inconsistent with Prerogative, Property; and
Liberty: in octavo.

The Project of Peace; or Unity of Faith and Government, the only expedient to
procure Peace both Foreign and Domestique; and to preserve these Nations from
the danger of Popery, and Arbitrary Tyranny: in octavo.

The Causes and Remedies of the Distempers of the Times, in certain Discourses
of Obedience and Disobedience: in octavo.

Two Sermons preached at the Funerals of the Right Honorable Robert Lord
Lexington, and the Lady Mary his Wife; by Samuel Holden, A. M. late of Lincoln
College, in Oxford, and Chaplain to his Lordship, deceased: in quarto.

A Sermon preached July 17. 1676. in the Cathedral Church of Saint Peter in
York, before the Right honorable Sir, Francis North, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas; and the honorable, Vere Bertie Esquire, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer; his Majesty's Judges of Assize for the Northern Circuit. by Thomas
Cartwright D. D. and Dean of Ripon, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty.

A Sermon preached before the King at Whit-Hall, January the 9th 1675/6. by
Thomas Cartwright, D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty.

FINIS.

