A SERMON, Preached Sept. 28. 1692. at a Primary Visitation Held at CHICHESTER
BY THE Right Reverend Father in God ROBERT Lord Bishop of CHICHESTER.

Published at the Bishop's Request.

By EDW. PELLING, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's, And Rector of
Petworth in Sussex.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1693.

Imprimatur,

October. 29. 1692. Guil. Lancaster, R. P. D. Hen. Ep. Land. a Sacris Domest.

To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Chichester.
My Lord,
COnsidering the long Happiness I have had at London, one While in your
Neighborhood, always in your Friendship, your Lordship will easily believe it
is no little Comfort to me, that in this part of the Kingdom my Old
Acquaintance is at last my Diocesan, and once again my Neighbor.

Your Lordship knows, that (were there nothing else to be considered) my
Affections to you are a sufficient Security for my Obedience to your Commands:
And for that Reason, I presume, it was, that your Lordship has been pleased to
command me, first to preach your Visitation-Sermon, and now to publish it. The
Veneration I have for your Character and Person, makes me ready to observe your
Pleasure in all Particulars; though I must confess, that in Publishing this
mean Discourse, I comply with your Lordship's Will with some Regret; because
there are many Censorious and Ill-temper'd People in the World, who are ready
to interpret that as an Accusation, which is only Advice; and to catch at any
thing which may serve them as an Handle to strike at Clergymen, though the
thing be innocent in it self, and be intended to quite different Purposes. It
is some Satisfaction to me, that your Lordship is obliged, in some measure, to
justify me; and that the Faults which shall be discovered in these Papers, you
have now made your own, by countenancing of them, and making them appear by
your own Directions. What Fortune soever this Discourse shall find abroad, I
hope you your self will be pleased to accept it this second Time, as some
(though a small) Testimony, that I am

Your Lordships, In all Duty and Affection, Edw. Pelling.
Petworth, October. 20 1692.
1 Timothy 4. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine.
NOT to dispute about the Time, when; or about the Place, whence, this Epistle
was sent by St. Paul; we may observe Three Things of the Person to whom it was
directed.

1. That he was entrusted with the Ministerial Office by the special
Designation of the Holy Ghost himself. St. Paul speaks of Prophesies which went
before of him, 1 Timothy 1. 18. meaning by Prophecies, Divine Revelation, whereby
Timothy was set apart for the work of the Ministry; (...), says St.
Chrysostom; Chrisost* in 1 Timothy 1. 18
by the particular Call, and immediate Appointment of the Holy Ghost. For, the
conducting of Souls being so great a Work, and the Ministerial Office so great
a Dignity, God was pleased in those Times to give special Directions by Divine
Revelation, who should have that weighty Trust committed unto them. So St. Luke
tells us, Acts 13. 2. that the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul
for the Work whereunto I have called them. And Clemens Romanus Clem. Ep. ad
Cor. p. 54.
tells us expressly, That the Apostles constituted Bishops and Deacons by the
Spirit's Approbation; and having perfect Foreknowledge (by Revelation) (...)
(for so I Page 53.
conceive the place should be read) they assigned to such as were Ordained,
their respective Cures Eusebius. Hist. Ec. Lib. 3. cap. 23.
and Charges Pastoral. And Clemens Alexandrinus relates of St. John in
particular, That as he visited the Churches in Asia, he made Clergymen of those
who were signified to him by the Holy Ghost. A power of Discerning Spirits, or
of knowing Men's Hearts, was a special Gift in the beginning of Christianity;
and then, for the most part, Men were admitted into Holy Orders by God's
special Appointment; which is meant by the word, Prophecy; and so was Timothy
chosen and set apart.

2. And yet, Secondly, it is observable, that at that time Timothy was but a
young man: Not one of the (...), a Novice lately converted to the Faith (for he
had been some considerable time an Assistant to St. Paul, and a Companion in
his Travels) but a Young Man in respect of his Age, and in comparison of other
Governors of the Church, who were generally Venerable, not only for their Holy
Lives, but for their Hoary Heads also; and so were sometimes promiscuously
called, (...), Elders; not because the same Authority, but because the like
Gravity was common to them all. For this reason St. Paul, who expressed a
particular* Care and Tenderness for this his Son Timothy, was in a special
manner concerned, that no Man might despise his Youth.

3. As young as Timothy was, he was placed at Ephesus, as in his Episcopal See.
Eusebius gives it us as a received Tradition, That he was the first Bishop of
that City; the Fathers at the Council of Chalcedon reckon so too; and indeed
the two Epistles of St. Paul to him, wherein he was directed to govern the
Church, to order Churchmatters, to Ordain Elders, and even to Judge and Censure
them, do very plainly import, that he was invested with the Episcopal
Authority; though it was (...) (to use the Expression of Ignatius the Martyr
concerning Dama, who was a Young Man, and a Bishop too) the Ordination of a
Young Man, Ordination granted before the usual time, by reason of his singular
Merits.

This, by the way, shows, that in the very beginning of Christianity, the
Episcopal Power and Office was a distinct thing from that of Presbyters, and
Superior to it. For if that were true, which some would make us believe, that
an equality of Power did originally belong to all Ministers of the Gospel, and
that in the first Ages, the Senior Presbyter was wont of course to succeed in
the Precedence over the rest, and was called Bishop by the Courtesy of the
College, though he was no more in Power than like the Chairman of an Assembly;
I say, if it had been anciently and originally thus, it is not likely that so
young a Man as Timothy would have been dignified with the Pre-eminence before
his turn.

But not to digress. These things, my Reverend Brethren, I have briefly
observed, that all may see what great Reason St. Paul had to direct Timothy,
how he should behave himself in the House of God, which is the Church of the
Living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, to uphold and Support it, and to
exhibit it to the World.

He, who was called to the weighty Office of Saving Souls, by the particular
directions of the Holy Ghost: He, who was made one of the Angels of the Church,
and had a considerable part of the Roman Empire for his Diocese: He, who was to
expect so much Contempt and Opposition on all hands, and in his Youth was to
encounter with the most formidable Wolves: He, who was to endure so many
Difficulties, and was to venture all in the most dangerous Times, and in the
most Idolatrous and Corrupt Place: He, who was to light many Families of the
Earth to Heaven, and was accountable for his own Soul, and for many thousand
Souls besides: He, who had no Comfort to depend upon, but the Testimony of a
good Conscience to bear him up in that His day, and in the day of God: He had
the highest reason, to look very carefully to his Steps; to make it his only
Study, how to Preach well, and to Live better; and to endeavor by all possible
means of wholesome Instructions, and an holy Example, to answer the Ends of his
high Calling; lest, when he had Preached to others, he himself should become a
Cast-a-way.

St. Paul therefore being uncertain when he should see this young Labourer
again, whom he had put lately into the Vineyard, sent him, by Letter, diverse
necessary Instructions for the due Performance of his great Work: That he
should keep Faith, and a good Conscience; that he should settle the public
Service of God, who was to bless his Labors; that he should ordain a Blameless
Ministry, to assist him in his heavy Employment; that he should provide against
Seducing Spirits; that he should be an Example to Believers; that he should
give Attendance to Reading, and not neglect the Gift which had been given him
by Prophecy; and diverse such like Directions more: All which seem to be summed
up briefly in these few Words, Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine.

Which Admonition does, indeed, principally concern such Churchmen as Timothy
was; such as move in the highest Sphere, such as cast the most powerful, and
the most spreading Influence: But yet we who are of a subordinate Rank, should
look upon it, as belonging, in a great measure, unto us also. For, though we
must not usurp that Authority and Honor which is the Right and Propriety of
our Fathers, yet are we strictly bound to take our share of that Duty and
Burden which is common unto us all. And that this Admonition may be of the
better use to us, for God's sake, let us, with all possible Care and Diligence,
observe both these Caveats in it. 1. Let us take heed unto our selves, as that
which chiefly concerns our own Souls: Let us see that our own Lives be such as
do become Ministers of God, and Preachers of Righteousness. 2. And then, Let us
take heed unto our Doctrine too, as that which concerns the Souls of our
Hearers: Let us see that it be such as may have a good Influence upon them, and
may serve effectually to build them up too in the most holy Faith. These are
the Parts of the Text, and of our Duty; and if we do persevere in a due Care of
these two Things, if we exercise our selves in them with Zeal, and employ our
Time upon them with Diligence, we may hope, notwithstanding all
Discouragements, that, by the Grace and Blessing of God, we shall save our
selves, and them that hear us.

First, Let us take heed unto our selves; For we tread as if we were walking
upon the very Ridge of a Church, where every Step we take is both visible and
dangerous; there is a Precipice on each Hand, and there are Eyes all round
about us, and some too that may long to see us fall. In this Case we cannot be
too cautious; and our only sure Way is, to let our Light shine so before Men,
that they may see our good Works; to be Examples to them, whether they will or
no, to do our Part however; and by our Prudence, Piety, and signal Virtue, to
cut off all Occasion from such as seek Occasion against us. There is not a more
odious, a more hurtful Creature in the World, than an Unconscionable and
Scandalous Clergyman: One that holds a Taper behind him, to light all Men but
himself: One that over-looks that Hell, which he pretends to show others: One,
whom neither the Sense of God's Honor, nor the Dignity of his Sacred Function,
nor the Interest of Religion, nor the Dictates of Natural and Enlightened
Conscience, nor the Preciousness of Souls, nor the Shamefulness of Sin, nor the
Terrors of a Judgment-day, can be sufficient to bring to a serious
Consideration of his Duty. Nor is any thing a greater Discredit to Religion,
than that such an unhallowed Mouth should blow the Trumpet in the Sanctuary; or
that such Salt should be used about the Sacrifices of the Temple, as is more
noisome and unsavory, than what is taken out of a Dunghill. It is impossible to
express such a Man's Guilt, or the Injuries and Mischief which comes to
Religion by it. One such Clergyman does the Church more harm, than perhaps
Twenty others may be able to do it good, by all their Cares, Pains, and
Watchsulness.

I would not have any uncharitable Man hope, that my Design is to cast a Stone
at any Reverend Person here. No, my Brethren; my purpose is, but to take the
modest Freedom of a friendly Remembrancer; to represent that to you, which is
in your own Religious Thoughts; to speak your own Sense, or something near,
though it be below it; and to lay before you some of those Considerations,
which I am obliged to believe, you your selves are careful to act upon.

Let us then take heed unto our selves, I beseech you:

1. For the Honor of our Profession. I need not tell you how full the Ancient
Christians were, and even profuse in their Encomiums of the Priesthood, and how
high they set it; some of them comparing the Sacerdotal with the very Regal
Dignity. It was venerable in those Times of Piety, and Christian Simplicity:
And though some went too far in their Notions and Expressions concerning this
Matter, yet so far we should, all of us, magnify our Office (in this Sense) as
to count it no small thing, that the God of Israel has separated us from the
Congregation of Israel, to bring us near to himself, to do the Service of the
Tabernacle of the Lord; as Moses told those Sons of Levi, Exodus 16. Of the
whole Mass of Mankind, none are segregated to be so near unto God, as the
Dispensers of his Word and Sacraments; and therefore they are called, by way of
peculiar Approbation, the Servants, the Ministers, the Stewards, the
Ambassadors of God. The Washings and Unctions under the Law, and the Imposition
of Hands under the Gospel, were so many Rites of Consecrating and Separating
Men to the special Service of God; and this State of Separation we call
Relative Sanctity, whereby Ministers of Holy Things become, after a more
peculiar and eminent manner, Holy unto the Lord. And should we, after all this,
defile our selves with the Pollutions of the World, or have any Fellowship with
the Works of the Flesh, and the Works of Darkness; what should we do, but
desecrate the thing which was solemnly hallowed, and bring our Souls under the
intolerable Guilt of Profanation and Sacrilege? Consider, I beseech you: Such
as ought to be the Use of Consecrated Things, such ought to be the Conversation
of Consecrated Persons; as the one is to be sacred, so the other is to be holy.
We condemn those who did formerly set up Heathen Idols in Christian Churches,
as Julian the Apostate did: We abhor those who did put the Blood of Toads into
the holy Chalices, and such other abominable Mixtures; as Epiphanius says the
Gnostics did: We detest the Memory of those, who, in Times of Persecution,
delivered up the Holy Bible to be burnt, as the Traditores did; and threw the
Holy Sacrament to Dogs; as Optatus says the old Donatists did: And what should
we think of our selves, if, after the solemn Dedication of our Souls and Bodies
to God's Use, and to the Ministration of Holy Things, we should prostitute our
own sacred Character, and abandon our selves to the common Lusts and Impurities
of the World? If any Man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy; for
the Temple of God is holy, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 17. This Temple we of the
Clergy are, after a peculiar manner; and something more: And what shall not we
deserve, if we should defile our selves, where Temple, and Priest, and Altar,
and Sacrifice should meet in One? Besides, we see with Sorrow how low our
Profession is sunk in the Esteem of some People; nor is there any Way to redeem
the Honor of it so effectually, as by that Gravity, and Exemplary Virtue,
which are the proper and certain Means of adorning it. You know the Story in
Josephus, of Alexander the Great marching to Jerusalem, Joseph. Antiqu. lib.
11. cap. 8.
when he saw the Priests meeting him in their Robes, and Jaddus the High Priest
in his Pontifical Habit, and with a Golden Frontlet on his Mitre, wherein the
Name of God was written, the King, though enraged at Jaddus, was so tamed by
Natural Conscience, and by the Natural Sense he had of Religion, that he
presently did Obeisance to God's Name, and showed Reverence to the High Priest
for God's sake. Jaddus took great heed to himself at that time: And truly, my
Brethren, we cannot take a better Course to soften the Spirits of some wild and
troublesome Men in the World, than by letting them see what we have of God upon
us; and by showing them, not the bare Name, but the Perfections of God, those
charming Virtues which resemble the Perfections and Glories of the Divine
Nature, and which are the true and lively Characters of the Divine Nature. This
(if any thing) must needs command Reverence from Men of Sense; I dare say, will
command it from all, who have a Sense of Common, Moral Virtue, though they have
very little of Revealed Religion.

2. Let us, I beseech you, take heed to our selves, not only to adorn our
Profession, but that we may be useful and beneficial in it. Though our great
Business be like our blessed Savior's, to go about doing Good, especially to
those unto whom we are sent; yet many times, and in many places, it is a very
hard matter to do it, though we use our utmost Endeavors; because it is no
easy matter to persuade Men, especially to their Spiritual Good; a thing which
does not fall under the Invitation of their Senses, as their Worldly Interest
does. Though we toil all the Night (as he said, who was afterward made a
Fisher of Men) yet many times we take nothing, unless it be Weeds, which,
comparatively, is as good as nothing. But I consider what the Lord said to his
Disciples at Sea, Joh. 21, 6, Cast the Net on the Right Side of the Ship, and
ye shall find; and then they were not able to draw it for the multitude of
Fishes. This is often our Case; we take nothing, when, for want of Advertency,
we cast not on the Right Side: But when we do that, our Labors are successful.
But if a Man be unskilful, or utterly unmindful of his Business; cares not what
he is, nor what he does; how can he hope to speed, on which Side soever he
casts his Net? How can he expect that God will hear his Prayers, or bless his
Pains, or in any measure prosper the Work which he does not duly regard
himself? The nature of the thing will not allow him to expect it, because
People are more apt to be influenced by Example, than by Instruction; the one
is more obvious, and sinks deeper than the other: And a good Sermon is lost,
and flung back upon a Man's Face, when his Life is irreligious. But if our
People see us our selves express the Power of Godliness, they will be the more
apt to count it a serious thing, and the more capable of receiving holy
Impressions from us. If they see us diligently attending the Worship of God,
grave, zealous, and devout at Prayer, they will be the more readily allured to
lift up their own Hearts, and to set their Affections on Things above. If they
see in us that Humility, that Meekness, that Patience, that Charity, that
Peaceableness of Mind, and those other Virtues and Graces which we would form
in their Hearts, and which are so amiable in the sight of God and Man; if, I
say, they behold the Beauty of them in us, they will be the more easily
solicited to the Love and Practice of them. In short; By God's Blessing, our
good Examples will not be lost, though our Exhortations may, what
Discouragements soever we may meet with in our great Undertaking; how deaf or
distempered soever the People may be, with whom we have to deal; and how little
soever our Hopes may be for the present, the Innocence and Strictness of our
Lives will, by God's Grace, one time or other, effectually work upon them: To
be sure, we shall have this great Comfort upon our Deathbeds, that we have
acted as became Conscientious and honest Pastors; when their Comfort will be
very little, to consider, that we have left them without Excuse. Whatever their
Condemnation may be, for Christ his sake, let us take heed that we be not
guilty of that which the great Exemplar of Holiness laid to the Charge of the
Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23. They bind heavy Burdens, and grievous to be
born, and lay them on other Men's Shoulders; but they themselves will not move
them with one of their Fingers.

3. These Considerations, my Brethren, affect the Conscience, and we know our
selves obliged in point of Conscience, to take heed unto our selves upon these
Accounts. Give me leave to add in the next place, that we must take heed to our
selves in point of Prudence too. Vulgar People are not wont to consider the
Consequences of things, but we should; we should look forward in all Cases, and
evermore consider what will follow if we be careless of our selves, and
unmindful of our Duty: We should lay every thing to our Hearts beforehand. And
what else, I beseech you, will be the Consequence, but this; that we shall
scandalize our Friends, gratify our Enemies, bring upon one another a common
Reproach, and in the End expose our whole Church to God's Judgments?

God be blessed, notwithstanding Faction and Vice, there are great Numbers of
good People, who love the Ways of this our Sion; especially where the Feet of
those who preach Salvation unto it, are beautiful. When they see (as it was
said of Origin) an admirable Harmony between the Doctrine and Life of a
Clergyman; when he is (...) (...), as St. Chrysostom speaks, a Representation
and Picture of good Living, and an animated Pandect of the Laws of Religion;
then is the Church's Face amiable indeed, in the Eyes of all her Friends; and
then every good Man, though he be illiterate, has the same Argument to offer
for our Church, that was anciently used in defense of Christianity, viz. the
good Lives of the Professors and Preachers of it. And this is sometimes a more
ready way to convince and confirm People, than Dint of Disputation. But when
they who should be Patterns, blot their own Copy, how can we hope to see a good
Transcript? In such a Case we should discourage even those that love us; we
should make them ashamed of those Affections which they see so ill placed, and
of that Confidence which they repose in Men, so contradictory to themselves:
And perhaps too we may occasion some secret Jealousy in our best Friends, that
we our selves are not persuaded of the Terrors of the Lord, when we express so
little Apprehension and Fear of them.

Nor is this all: For any Man may see how many there are in the World that look
upon us with an insidious Eye, and watch for our Halting* So that between
Irreligion, and Superstition, and Hypocrisy, we are still in danger. And what
an acceptable thing would it not be to such, to discover any Flaws in the Lives
of a Clergy, whose very Virtues they hate? And if we would stand only upon our
own just Defense, nothing can be a greater Satisfaction or Security to us, to
take heed unto our selves; this being a certain Way for us to keep a Conscience
void of Offense both to God and Man, and even toward our Enemies. And it is no
inconsiderable part of Christian Prudence, to cut off all just Occasion of
Quarrel, especially where Men seek it; and to minister no Grounds of Scandal in
an uncharitable Age, when Scandals are apt to be taken, whether they be given,
or no. What manner of Men ought we to be, when even our Righteousness, and our
good Works are an Eyesore? When Men will not be so just as to pardon (at least)
our Virtues, we cannot expect they will be so merciful as to forgive us our
Vices. Let us therefore behave our selves with such Caution, that if Men will
malign us, they may hate us for no other Cause, but for that we are Ministers
of True Religion; and then we need not be ashamed, or discouraged, because it
was upon that sole Account that the World hated our very Lord and Master before
us.

To this, let me add, that we should take heed to our selves in defense of our
Common Fame; for that always suffers by the Miscarriages of a few (sometimes by
the Faults of some one) whose Immoralities some will be sure to lay open, that
they may defame all the rest, whose Virtues and Merits they will as surely
conceal. You know how, in the early Times of Christianity, the Impieties of the
Simonians redounded to the prejudice of the whole Christian Cause; those
Wickednesses which they acted being, by the Heathens, laid to the Charge of the
whole Church, though (as Justin Martyr, in his Apology, tells us) they had
nothing common with them, but only the general Name of Christians. And so it is
with us at this Day: Let one of our Members suffer in his Reputation, and
(though it be unjust that, in this Sense, the whole Body should suffer with
him, yet) it is usual for the Reflection and Scandal to pass upon all, without
Discrimination; the Guilty and Innocent are slain together: And so it comes to
pass, that both the Injury which every particular Clergyman sustains by it is
of great Concernment, and the Damage which the Public sustains too is
irreparable.

But matter of Scandal is not the greatest thing to be considered, though that
be too great: There is something of a higher, nature yet. Since Ephraim is
against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah, we
ought to take very great heed, lest by our Sins and Neglects God be provoked to
be against us all. We have no reason to be confident that God will keep that
Candlestick safe and fast in his Hand, whose Tapers yield not their due Light:
And it is observable, that when those Messages, in Apoc. 2. and 3. so full of
Admonitions and Threats, were sent to the Seven Churches of Asia, they were
directed specially to the several Angels (or Bishops) of those Churches (and,
in all probability, Timothy was then one of them:) Which intimates to us, that
it lies very much in the Ministry of any Church, either to prevent, or to
further and help on those dismal Calamities, which are many times the Issue of
Carelessness and Irreligion. Therefore, my Brethren, for God's Honor sake,
whose Authority and Character we have; for our Fellow Christians sake, whom
Charity obliges us to regard, as Signets upon our Right Hand; for the Faith
sake, which was once, for all, delivered unto the Saints; for the Kingdom's
sake, in the Prosperity and Peace whereof every particular Man's Interest is
bound up; for the Churches Sake, which is the Mother of us all, and whom we are
bound to Obey, Honor, and, if need requires, to be Victims for: Upon all these
accounts, let us, the Clergy of this Church, give all possible diligence, that
we may be blameless and unreprovable; that we be Exemplars of Virtue and
Holiness to those, whom God has set us over; that we watch for their Souls,
and that we may Execute our Office, and give an account at last with Joy.

And before I shut up this point, I beg leave to recommend briefly to our
common Christian Care, these few particulars.

1. That we often peruse and consider seriously, those Solemn Promises and Vows
which we made at our Ordination; and look upon them as such Sacred Ties, as are
not to be answered, but by our faithful Performances, and by our utmost Cares
and Labors to the last gasp.

2. That we our selves be careful to walk, all of us, by the same Rule, and to
mind the same thing, and to be knit together, like Brethren in an inviolable
bond of Love and Friendship to one another; and all of us, to be inseparably
united in due Affection and Obedience, to our Learned and Conscientious
Diocesan.

3. That we feed the Flock of God, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind,
out of an Honest Heart, and a pure Conscience; and that we make our Charges
thoroughly sensible (if we can) that we Act upon Principles of Conscience and
out of sincere Love and Charity to them; and because the Love of our common
Savior constrains us. St. Chrysostom has well observed, that when our Lord
asked Peter, whether he (...). lib. 2.
Loved him, and commanded him to Feed his Sheep; it was not, that he might find
out Peter's Affections to himself (for he knew his Heart) but that he might
show his own Affections and Love to his Church; and that he might Teach all
Ministers of the Gospel, to express the same Affections to his Church, by his
own blessed Example.

4. That in the discharge of our Ministerial Office, for Love sake, we apply
our care and pains, as it is most suitable to particular Men's Necessities:
Instructing the Ignorant, assisting the Infirm, visiting the Sick, comforting
the Afflicted, admonishing Evil Doers; in Meekness instructing those that
oppose us, compassionate to the Needy, Patient and Merciful to Enemies, Candid
toward the Imprudent, Just, Kind, Friendly, Gentle, Charitable, and Tenderly
Affected toward all.

5. That God may prosper the great Work in our Hands; it is to be wished, that
we would daily open the Doors of our Churches, and invite our Parishioners to
meet us there constantly, for the Solemn Celebration of God's Service. There a
main part of our Business lies, to Catechize Youth, to Administer the
Sacraments of Christ's Body and Blood, and with one Mouth, and one Heart, to
invocate the Goodness of God for a Blessing upon us all. And the oftener these
things are done, the more shall we and our Charges be fixed in a course of
Virtue and Piety; and the more will their Hearts be knit to us, as well as our
Hearts to them.

6. To which let me, I beseech you, add, without Offense, that we use the
Prayers of the Church, with that Reverence, Decorum, and Zeal, which is
suitable to so solemn a Service. The Arguments against our Common Prayers are
trifling, and will appear so every day more and more, if we our selves do but
recommend them to others, by our own Devotion. It Is the slubbering of them
over, after a hasty, cold, and uncouth manner; and sometimes, with an affected
and ungraceful Tone (Voice I cannot so well call it) it is this that has made
our Service Book contemptible among some People, who consider not the Excellent
Contexture, and the True Christian Spirit which is in the Prayers themselves.
And we shall be the more to blame, if we take not heed to remove this
Objection, because it is an Objection out of our own Mouths. Briefly then; we
should be careful to Read the Public Prayers with that Gravity and
Concern'dness, with that Thoughtfulness and Deliberation, with that Attention
and Presence of Mind, and with that Fervency of Spirit, as if we were to give
up the Ghost the next hour: And were all of us but Zealously intent upon this,
I dare say there would be no need of further Arguments or Oratory, to bespeak
the Affections of People to our Service, or to render it Venerable.

Secondly, I beg the excuse of this Reverend Assembly, that I have been so
particular and prolix upon the former part of my Text, of taking heed to our
selves; because it is indeed the Principal thing; that which is a most
necessary ingredient to make our Doctrine operative and effectual; and
considering, that what has been said already, has taken up more time than I
thought it would have cost us, I must dispatch this next thing with a quick
Hand; Take heed unto thy Doctrine.

I must not take the Confidence here, to direct this Learned Body; and yet
there are some things to be borrowed of St. Paul, which may be of very great
use to us all, though Ministered by the unworthiest Hand.

1. First, That our Doctrine be such, as Naturally tends to promote a Good
Life; Doctrine, which is according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 3. (...), 1 Timothy 1.
10. wholesome, Sanatory Doctrine; such Truths as are Restoratives and
Preservatives of Substantial Religion. Unnecessary Disputes, lofty
Speculations, fine, airy Descants, and the like; though there may be Truth in
them, and profitable Truth too in its kind, yet they are quite out of our way,
whose Business is to Teach People to hold the Faith in a pure Conscience. Our
Discourses therefore, are to be in some measure or other Practical; and the
more Practical our Matter is, the plainer our Method, the easier our Style, the
clearer our Expressions, the more obvious our Arguments, and the more solid and
instructive our Notions are, the better shall we do the parts of Conscientious
and Skilful Preachers, and the more Profitable will our Discourses be; witness,
for all, that one Excellent Book, the Whole Duty of Man; the Book that has
done such Universal Good in the World; and that not only by the Gravity of the
Matter, but by the usefulness of the Style; the Contexture of that Book, being
ordered by the most Pious and Judicious Author so, that the whole is Practical,
Plain, Inviting, Adapted to every Man's Reason, easy to be understood by
People of all Capacities.

2. Let us take heed, Secondly, that our Doctrine be the True and Genuine
Doctrine of the Gospel; Incorrupt, found Speech, that cannot be Condemned, as
S. Paul directed Titus, Tit. 2. 8. Many Errors are abroad in the World, which
have Tainted the Truths of the Gospel, with a mixture of Humane Traditions, and
Private Fancies. To keep our selves and our Flocks from infection, these two
things, in short, are very advisable.

1. First, that in all Points we diligently consult, and have an eye upon the
Faith of the most Primitive Ages. There is a concise way (says St. Cyprian)
for Religious and simple minded Epist. 74.
Men to remove an Error, and to find out and discover the Truth. And what way
is that? Why, by going to the Spring, to the Head and Original of Divine
Tradition. As, if you would find where the fault lies, when the Water fails,
the readiest course, is to repair to the Fountain, to see whether the fault be
there, or in the Aquaeduct; so when Truth fails, or becomes uncertain, the
surest way, is to go to its Original, to the Gospel of Christ, and to
Apostolical Tradition. And certainly, the better Judgment we shall be able to
make in all material points, the nearer we go to the Fountainhead, and the
more narrowly we observe, what condition things were in Anciently, in those
Channels which were next to the Fountain. Had this course been well and
carefully followed, abundance of unhappy Controversies might have been
prevented, which in these latter times have made such vast disturbances in the
Church. 2. Next to the Doctrines of the Old Catholic Church; let us, for God's
sake, take great heed to the Doctrine of our own Church in particular, which
has with the greatest care followed the Ancient pattern. I mention this the
rather, because some have presumed to represent us to the unthinking part of
the World, as Friends to some Foreign Doctrines; Doctrines brought hither, some
from Rome, others from Irenopolis, An Accusation full of Uncharitableness; and
I am confident, of Falsehood; it being impossible for those, who are professed
Members of the Church of England, and have often Subscribed to her Articles and
whole Constitution, to entertain or favor such pernicious Errors, without such
horrible Hypocrisy, as no Man of Candor and Justice will suppose, so many
Guides of Souls can be guilty of. But sometimes there is no fence against
Calumny; and we must content our selves with the Answer of a Good Conscience in
such a case. Nevertheless, my Brethren, it is Prudential and Necessary for us,
to keep at a great distance from every Opinion* which in the Eyes of discerning
and good Men* looks like Heretical; and not to come within the reach of
Suspicion; for it is not enough for us to be Innocent, unless we appear so.

To conclude; let us take heed, that our* Doctrine be the True Word of God;
that it be agreeable to the Sense of the Ancient Church, where the Holy
Scripture is not plain; that it be a means to form in Peoples Hearts, those
Virtues, wherein the Life and Substance of Religion does consist, things which
are Honest, Just, Pure, Lovely, and of good Report; that it aim at those
Virtues chiefly, which are productive of many more; as, a Devout Temper,
Humility, Charity* Sobriety, and a peaceable Disposition; that it help to
promote the Practice of those Duties, wherein our Charges are most negligent
and most wanting: That it tend to the Public Good of the Church and State, to
which we all belong; that it Teach People to be orderly, quiet, and obedient in
all things lawful; that it be not mixed with any mean Designs of our own, but
that God's Glory, and the good of Souls, be the end of Preaching, doing the
work of God, as Faithful Servants of God, and as in the sight of God; that our
Doctrine be delivered with Gravity and Zeal, with Meekness of Spirit, with
Simplicity of Mind, with Application to those Sins which are most reigning and
infectious, with that impartiality and Honesty, which becomes Men who are
Stewards of God's Mysteries.

And as long as we addict our selves to Minister before God after this manner,
we shall have all the Reason to hope, that he will bless our Ministrations. Nor
should we be discouraged, if we presently find not the Success we desire. For
Grace and Virtue grows, like the painful Husbandman's Seed, by degrees, by
little and little, first the Blade, then the Ear, at last the full Corn, and a
good Crop. The Religion of our Lord Jesus is, in some points, so much above the
Carnal Reason of Unregenerate Men, in others, so contrary to their Corrupt
Inclinations, that it requires Time and Labor to bring them to the true Sense,
Love and Practice of it. If we be diligent and assiduous; God, whom we serve,
will be Glorified, our Church will rife in its Honor and Interest, our Charges
will be Edified, and by God's Gracious Assistance we shall Save our selves, and
them that hear us* Which, that every one of us may do, God of his Mercy grant,
for Christ Jesus his sake.

FINIS.

