A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITEHALL, December. 8th. 1689.

By Edward Pelling D. D. Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Somerset.

By Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1690.

Imprimatur,

Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
Dec. 31. 1689.
St. LUKE 1. 71. That we should be saved from our Enemies, and from the hands
of all that hate us.
THese Words of Zacharias do evidently relate to our Blessed Saviors
Incarnation: in Memory whereof, the Zeal and Wisdom of the Catholic Church
has set apart this time of the Year, that all Professors of Christianity may,
now especially, offer up to God their most solemn Thanksgivings, for that
inestimable Blessing to the whole World. It would be beneath the Piety of the
Christian Religion, should we pass over the Memorial of his wonderful Nativity,
without the most public Expressions of Devotion which the most sensible Hearts
can possibly give; since he was once usherd into the World, not only with the
Miraculous Birth of John the Baptist, to prepare his way as his Herald and
Forerunner, but also by a Majestic Train of glorious Angels, and by the whole
goodly Fellowship of the Prophets, which have spoken since Prophesy first began.

It was that which Zacharias now, nay, which our Savior himself afterward,
and his Apostles after him, took notice of especially; that in the Scriptures
of Moses and all the Prophets, there were things written which did plainly
concern Him; that those things which God before had showed by the mouth of all
his Prophets, he fulfilled in Him; and that to him give all the Prophets
witness. For this was a convincing Argument of his own Divine Authority, and of
the unquestionable Truth of his Religion, that every thing was accomplished in
Him, whatsoever was before spoken of the Messiah, by those extraordinary Men
whom God had raised up by his own immediate Power in all Ages, to foretell
things to come: When we read in the Old Testament such and such things,
Recorded of the time of the Messiahs coming, of his Birth, Parentage, Person,
Condition of Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension; and of the strange and sudden Propagation of his Religion that was
to be among Jews and Gentiles; and when we find in the New Testament how
accurately all was fulfilled in the Blessed Jesus, and in him alone: So that
the History of our Savior is a very plain Counterpart of the Prophets
Predictions; we have the highest reason in the World to believe, that This was
He who was to come, and that we are not to look for another.

But of all these Predictions, Zacharias here singleth out one, which is to be
the Subject of our present Meditations, viz.. That Promise made to Abraham,
Genesis 22. whereof this was a part, That his Seed should possess the gate of his
Enemies, V. 17. He says not thy Seeds, as if he spoke of many, but as of One,
thy Seed, which is Christ, says St. Paul, Gal. 3. 6. And so the Sense of the
Prediction is this, that God would in his due time most certainly raise up an
Eminent Person, the Messiah, of the numerous Posterity of Abrabam, that should
not only bless his People, by turning them away from their Iniquities, but
should moreover protect and defend them, by exercising his Victorious Power,
even over the strongest of their Enemies. And this is the very Sense of
Zacharias here, though he expressed himself in somewhat a different Form of
Words, speaking now of the Messiah, that was yet in the Holy Virgins Womb: God
has raised up an Horn of Salvation for us, in the house of his Servant David;
as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the World
began: that we should be saved from our Enemies, and from the hand of all that
hate us.

In discoursing upon which Words, it will be necessary for me to show, 1. What
those Enemies are, from whose Hand we were to be delivered by the Messiah. 2.
How the Prediction touching this Deliverance is fulfilled in the Blessed Jesus;
or how his Providence is showed in saving us from our Enemies. 3. And so in the
last place, to draw down this Consideration to our Christian Practice.


1. What those Enemies are, from whose hand we were to be delivered by the
Messiah; some understand it only of our Spiritual Enemies, as of Sin, which
without the Grace of Christ, must have Reigned in our mortal Bodies; of Death,
which without his Victory over the Grave, must have holden us to all Eternity;
and of the Devil, who without the Power of Christ, would have Captivated us by
his Wiles, and brought us into his Condemnation. Which is the Reason the Author
to the Hebrews gives of our Saviors partaking of Flesh and Blood, That through
death he might destroy him who had the power of death, that is the Devil, Heb.
2. 14.

And indeed these Deliverances are of the greatest consequence by far, and so
the fittest for the Messiah to accomplish, because they immediately concern our
Immortal Souls, and are in order to the endless; happiness of our Souls in
another World. But yet, by the Salvation spoken of in the Text, must be meant
also Deliverance from our Temporal Enemies, or from such as visibly and
forcibly oppose the Kingdom of the Messiah, and the Truth of his Religion.

1. For, first, Zacharias now spoke like a Jew, as one that might expect, as
the rest of the Jews, nay as the Apostles themselves for some time did, a
Glorious Temporal Deliverer, that should set up his Throne upon the Earth, and
go in and out before them after a Pompous manner, as David and other of their
Kings had done. Though as to this particular Circumstance they were mistaken,
because the Kingdom of Christ was not of this World; yet those Predictions on
which these their Expectations were grounded, do plainly argue, that the
Messiah was not wholly to shut himself out of the World, but that how
Inglorious soever his suffering State might be, yet being once exalted to the
Right hand of God, he was to be enstated King of Kings, and all Power in Heaven
and in Earth was to be given unto him. Hence it follows, that his Office was to
be, not only to make all due Provision for our Souls, but moreover to take care
even of the outward State of his Church; by Exercising his Sovereignty over
all; by watching all Affairs here below; by directing all Occurrences to the
Interest of his Kingdom; by subduing his and his Churches Enemies; and by
Defending his Faithful Servants; so far at least as it serves for their Good
and for his own Glory; because the power of Defending is a very necessary part
of his Sovereign Authority.

2. For, Secondly, were it not thus, what fair Construction can we make of a
great many Prophesies relating to the Messiah? that all his Enemies should be
made his Footstool; that they should bow before him, and lick the Dust; that he
shall Rule in the midst of them; that he shall strike through Kings in the day
of his wrath; that he shall judge among the Heathen; that he shall fill the
Places with dead Bodies; that he shall wound the Heads over many Countries;
that he shall break the Heathen with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces
like a Potters Vessel. It were too great force upon Scripture to interpret
these, and a great many Places more of the Messiah's vanquishing our Spiritual
Enemies only, when the natural sense of them is so plain and obvious, touching
the subduing even of Powers on Earth, the greatest and strongest Powers, that
endeavor the destruction of Christ's Kingdom; from the Hand of such Enemies he
was to save us.

3. There is yet a third thing which leads us to the belief of this matter; and
it is the consideration of the nature of that Religion which the Messiah was to
Plant in the World. A Religion so Holy and Spiritual in it self; so opposite to
Men's unreasonable and outrageous Lusts; so destructive of all worldly and base
Designs; so inconsistent with the Pride and Ambition of designing Men; such an
utter Enemy to Flesh and Blood, that it is impossible to conceive but Flesh and
Blood must be an Enemy to it: A Religion that lays before us such strict Laws
of Humility, Meekness, Self-denial, and Patient suffering for Righteousness
sake; In a word, a Religion that leaves us so naked and defenseless, that
without the overruling Providence and powerful Hand of Christ, we should be of
all Mankind the most miserable, as to our Fortunes here below. 'Twas necessary
therefore that Christ, who was to found his Church upon such discouraging Laws,
should take care to Preserve her in the faithful discharge of her Duty; because
we cannot think, that God should choose out to himself a peculiar People, only
to expose them to the Hardships and Persecutions of the World. However for wise
Reasons he may for a time assign his Church such a Condition as her present
Lot; it is unbecoming the Notion of an infinitely Good, Just and Provident
Being, to conceive that he has Entailed it on Her as a perpetual Inheritance.

2. This therefore being laid down, that the Messiah was to save us even from
our Temporal Enemies, let us proceed to the Second Consideration, How this
Prediction is fulfilled in the Blessed Jesus, or, how his Providence is showed,
in saving us from our Enemies.

And here it is to be noted that Christ saves us from our Enemies, not by a
total and actual Destruction of them. For his Providence is in order to the
Interest of his Kingdom; and that interest is served by suffering evil Men to
try and exercise the Virtues of his Followers, their Zeal, Patience, Constancy,
and the like. By this they are the more and more fitted for the Inheritance of
the Saints in light, and the Glory of his own Wisdom, Goodness, and Power
throughout his whole Economy, is the more discovered. Therefore he will not
bring all Enemies under his Feet, by a total destruction of them, till the time
comes that he must deliver up the Kingdom of his Mediatorship, when he shall
put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power. In the mean while he shows his
Providence, in saving us from our Enemies, these five ways chiefly.

1. Sometimes by defeating their Designs, and by bringing their wicked Counsels
to naught. This was one of his first cares after his Ascension into Heaven, to
guard with his own hand those few Disciples he had left behind him, and to keep
a very watchful Eye over that united force, which resolved to Extirpate his
Religion before it Propagated in the World. Had not Christ himself blasted
their Devices, by his special and overruling Providence, it had been
impossible for such a small handful of Men, to have kept their ground, when on
all hands there were such Formidable, and to Human appearance, such unavoidable
Preparations against them.

From that Age down to this, the strange and unaccountable Protection of the
Truth, in spite of all Attempts against it, by ways and methods which no human
Eye could possibly foresee, and in the most threatening and dangerous Junctures,
is an amazing Argument, that the Son of God sits not in Heaven a mere Spectator
of this Sublunary World; but that with an Invisible and Almighty hand, he does
Govern all Occurrences; and how furious soever the drivings of Men may be, he
still holds the Rein, and not only checks them in their full Career, but spoils
and ruins all their Designs in the very heat of their Expectations.

2. Sometimes he does not only stop our Enemies Proceedings, but moreover turns
their Designs to distant and quite contrary Purposes, by making that
subservient to the Advantage, which was intended for the Destruction of the
Truth. This is a Glorious and astonishing Instance of his Power and Wisdom
both, that he draws Good out of Evil; that in the most uncomfortable and
afflicting Circumstances, he makes every thing to work together for good, and
directs the most wicked Contrivances to the noblest Ends. Thus his Providence
has been for the most part employed, to wrap up in Men's Designs glorious Ends
of his own, which nothing but the Event could discover. When the Mystery of his
Providence has come to be opened, his wonderful Conduct has been made
manifest, and that secret and overruling Hand has been evidently seen, which
makes even his Enemies such Instruments to carry on his Purposes, and to bring
his Ends to pass, as if they themselves had designed and studied to serve them:
Who could have thought, that the malice of the hardened Jews should help to
establish Christianity? Who could have thought, that those long and continual
Persecutions from the Heathens, which were intended in the Primitive times to
destroy the Faith, should serve as means to confirm it, to make it spread, and
thrive, and flourish in the World? Yet this the Ancient Christians boasted of,
that the more they were harrassed and cut off, the more they increased still,
like Grass that is mown, (to use Tertullians Similitude) the more the Church
suffered, like a Vine fed with Blood, the more it prosper'd; the Thicker, the
Fairer, the better were the Clusters. And though in the Peaceable times which
followed next under Christian Emperors, many pestilent Heresies, as that of
Arius, and others, started up, which were more mischievous to Christianity than
the former Persecutions had been, yet the Orthodox Faith was never since the
Apostles days so strictly Examined, so convincingly Defended, so abundantly
Confirmed, as it was in those Times. They were indeed the Learned times of
Christianity; and that which made them so was, the continual Opposition of
subtle and learned Heretics, who intended to undermine the very Foundations of
the Catholic Faith; but by the overruling Providence of Christ, were the
means of settling it the firmer upon its true Bottom. And in later times,
especially in these last Ages, this has been the lucky effect of
Controversies; that whereas through the Ignorance, or the sinister Designs of
some Men, Religion had been covered over with much Falsehood and Superstition,
like a Jewel blended in an heap of Dust, by continual stirring and sifting of
the Rubbish, the Truth has been fortunately restored to its native Luster and
Brightness. The issue of those Conflicts has still been Good, wherein our Lord
was pleased, for wise Reasons, to suffer us to be engaged, not only for the
discrimenating of Good Men from Bad, but also for the clearing of True
Doctrines from False; and notwithstanding all the Arts of our most powerful
Enemies; by the Blessing of Christ we have been more than Conquerors, through
him that has strengthened us, and has turned the worst Purposes to the best
Events.

3. Christ shows his Providence in saving us from our Enemies, sometimes by
making them signal and public Monuments of his Justice. And this is usually in
Cases, when either the wickedness of Christ's Enemies is Prodigiously and
Scandalously Great, or when the Salvation of his Followers is not so easily to
be wrought in an ordinary way. Then Destruction is necessary, partly to render
the Punishment of those that hate us Exemplary and Notorious as their Sins
were; and partly to give the more abundant safety and confidence to such as
love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity. Thus he dealt with the Bloody and Obstinate
Nation of the Jews, who not satisfied with this, that with barbarous Hands they
had slain the Prince of Life himself, resolved to make havoc of all his
Followers too. To rescue these, and to make the great Mass of their Enemies the
most astonishing Instances of Divine Vengeance; after Forty years Patience and
Long-suffering he brought that Solemn and Pompous destruction upon them; when
their Temple and the City of Jerusalem was Consumed; their Government in Church
and State was utterly Dissolved, and the Generality of them that had escaped
the fury of the Romans, were made Outcasts and Vagabonds over the Face of the
whole Earth, without hopes of ever being Re-established in that Land, which
they and their Fathers had polluted, and so abandoned to a Cursed and Reprobate
state, that (as some of the Ancients tell us) as often as a Remnant of them
endeavored to repair their City, they were immediately consumed by Fire from
Heaven. The like exemplary Vengeance Christ executed upon the Romans themselves
in process of time, when the Ripeness of their Sins, and the Safety of the
Church required again a Sign from Heaven. The Metropolis of these Romans was
sacked too; and that by barbarous Nations, who were Instruments in the hand of
Christ, as they themselves had formerly been, to avenge that Innocent Blood
which had been shed upon the Earth; and as they had assisted and communicated
with the Jews in their Villainies, so they shared with them in their Punishment
also. I will not speak of the exemplary destruction of particular Persons in
the Primitive times who fought against the Truth, as well Persecutors as
Heretics: 'twere endless to make a just Collection of such Observations; and
later Ages have given us Instances of this kind abundant which our Fathers and
our selves have seen; nor do I doubt, but we or our Posteririty shall in Gods
time see some more.

4. Fourthly, The good Providence of Christ over his Church is never more
discovered, than in saving her from her Enemies at nice and critical Seasons.
Every day is not a fit time for him to show the Greatness of his Power: there
is a day in the course of Affairs, which he in his Infinite Wisdom foresees
will be the most Proper, Necessary, and Convenient Day of Salvation; and in
that appointed time he is wont to make bare and stretch out his Arm, to gain
himself the Victory. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion, (says the
Psalmist) for it is time to have mercy upon her, yea the set time is come, Psam
102. 13.

And though we cannot search into the Counsels of Heaven, nor foretell exactly
at all times when that set and appointed Juncture will be, yet St. Chrysostom
somewhere excellently observes, that it is usual with God to show his own
Extraordinary Power, when there is Extremity of Danger, when Evils are grown to
a very critical Pitch, and when ordinary means of escaping seem to be out of
our reach and power. And, as I remember, he instanceth in that very dangerous
case the Church was in, under that crafty and resolute Emperor, who had
revolted from the Christian Faith; though he dissembled it for a time, till he
had power enough in his hands to endeavor the extirpation of it. The truth is,
what by his restoring the Heathen Idolatries, what by his encouraging all sorts
of Factions, what by his letting loose upon the Orthodox Christians, especially
upon the Bishops of the Church, all the Enemies they had on each hand: and what
by many other fly, but hateful Methods which he used, the Faith of Christ was
like to have failed in the Roman Empire in a short time, without the Miraculous
protection of Christ himself. In that critical Season he showed his Almighty
Power beyond expectations; for in the Engagement with the Persians, that
Emperous was providentially slain; all grant, by an unknown hand; some thought,
by the hand of an Angel; but the Emperor himself seemed to confess, it was by
the immediate hand of Christ: for finding himself mortally wounded, he threw up
(as we are told) some of his Blood into the Air, with this expression, which he
uttered in a rage, Vicisti Galiloee, thou have been to hard for me, O thou
Galiloean. This was Christ's set and convenient time of showing Mercy upon Sion
then; and the like Mercy he has showed in innumerable Instances more; when the
Enemies of Truth have been impatient, till they brought Affairs to a Crisis, to
Extremity of Danger: by driving furiously they have only hastened to be undone.
By precipitating their Designs with a quick hand; by making Evils to grow to a
high degree, and swell to a full head, they have in a great measure
necessitated the Savior of his Church Miraculously to interpose.

5. Lastly, Christ shows the greatness of his Salvation, by delivering us from
our Enemies after a surprising and sudden manner, and by making quick work.
Thus he has promised to deal with that Mystical Babylon, Revel. 18. Though the
Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication with her, and the Merchants of
the Earth wax Rich through the abundance of her Delicasies, yet her Plagues
shall come in one day, Verse 8. In one Hour shall her Judgment come, Verse 10.
In one Hour shall her great Riches come to naught, Verse 16. In one Hour shall
she be made Desolate, Verse 19. Nor is this unusual with the Divine Justice, to
visit wicked Men with sudden and speedy Destruction. It was the Observation of
Job; The Houses of the wicked are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God
upon them; they take the Timbrel and the Harp, and rejoice at the found of the
Organ; they spend their days in wealth: But then it follows, in a Moment they
go down into the Grave, Job 21. 13. It was the Observation of the Psalmist; O
how suddenly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful end? It was the
Observation of St. Paul; They say peace and safety, and then sudden Destruction
comes upon them. It Is a thing commonly observable, that a day brings forth
strange Alterations; that Men are oftentimes surprised in the depth of their
Security; that Vengeance comes, as the Sentence upon Belshazzar's Wall did,
unexpectedly in a Night; or as our last Change shall come, in a Moment, in the
twinkling of an Eye. And this is a demonstrative Argument of the watchful
Providence of Christ, that after a long Series and Train of Contrivances
against his Church, when Men's Hopes are the strongest; when their Expectations
are most confident; when their Designs are at their full ripeness; when the
Success of them seems altogether unquestionable: Then, by some unforeseen
Accident or other, the Snare is all in a trice broken, and that, after a secret
and unaccountable manner; so that in that very Self same Net which wicked Men
had laid for others, their own Feet are providentially taken.

3. From this whole Consideration, (that I may now in the Third Place render it
Practical) there are Two things which naturally follow.

1. That, as in all Cases, we are with the most Humble and Devout Hearts, to
implore Christ's Protection, and lift up our Eyes to him from whom all our help
comes; so we must, in all difficult Cases especially, depend still upon his
Providence with all modest Assurance, possessing our Souls in Patience, and
casting all our Cares on him who cares for us, and committing our selves to
him in Well-doing. Every hour he is preparing new Mercies for us, if we do but
so order our ways, by the assistance of his Grace, as to make our selves
Receptive of them. He has worked hitherto, and does still work; nor will his
Providence give over working, till the Final and Eternal Salvation of his
Church be accomplished.

Whatever it be therefore that we desire and hope for at any time; whether it
be the Deliverance of our selves in any dangerous Cases; or whether it be the
Preservation of the Church when it may seem to shake; or whether it be the
Enlarging of the Borders of Christ's Sanctuary; we may safely and with full
Trust rely on him, who has assured us, that he himself will be with us, even
to the end of the World.

Many Predictions relating to our Savior, were plainly fulfilled upon his
coming into the World; and more have been fulfilled since his Ascension into
Heaven. But as a Learned Divine of our own Dr. Scot Christian Life, Par. 2.
Vol. 2. page 490.
has of late particularly observed, there are diverse more which are yet
unfulfilled: Some which speak of Christ's Confounding, Scattering, and Subduing
those his Enemies, the Eastern Infidels; that his Kingdom may be enlarged over
that great part of the World; and some too which speak of the universal
Reformation of Christendom it self; and the restoring of all Churches in this
Western World, to that admirable Purity of Faith and Worship, which the Ancient
Churches of Christ were so Renowned for. According to the Tenor of these
Predictions, or at least according to the probable Construction that is given
of them, before this Universal Reformation, which I now speak of: That Faction
which in some Places of Scripture is called by the name of Babylon and
Antichrist, will employ its Power by Wars and Persecutions, to extirpate out of
these Parts the present Pure Profession of Christianity; and of this God knows
we have already seen, and daily see too much. But the account which follows,
is, That many Kings and Princes, even those who have hitherto been partakers
with that Faction in its foul Impostures and Corruptions, shall all on a sudden
turn their Swords against it, and Conspire to root it out utterly from off the
Face of the Earth. This indeed gives us a Comfortable Prospect of the Glorious
state of Christ's Kingdom that shall be; and though the Completion of this Part
of the Prophecy be still to be expected; yet I will presume to say, that were
we of this Age but capable of so great a Blessing, methinks it would not be
against Reason to hope, I am sure it is not beyond the Rules of Piety to wish,
that that happy day may even now be approaching,; and that the present Juncture
of Affairs may be the Dawning of that Day; there is at this Critical time a
Providential concurrence of such Circumstances, as methinks seem at least to
Promise a fulfilling of this Prediction in a short space, and that the day of
our Common Salvation is not very far off. Let me here again use those devout
Expressions of the Holy Psalmist; Arise, O Lord, and have mercy upon Sion; for
it is time that thou have mercy upon her; yea the set time seems to be
coming. But for this, and all other Blessings, we must depend on the good
Providence of him, whom the Father has made the Prince and Captain of our
Salvation, to exercise and show his Sovereign Power, when the set, the
appointed Time shall actually come.

2. To make way for it, as much as lies in us, it is necessary for us, in the
Second Place, to express all possible Thankfulness to the great Bishop of our
Souls, for the Blessings we already enjoy; and particularly for the Blessing in
my Text, Salvation from our Enemies, and from the hands of those (would to God
I could say from the hands of all) that hate us. What Demonstrations of his
Almighty Power and Overruling Providence, has Christ given at any time, in
any Nation, which he has not given unto this? Whether it be the defeating and
frustrating wicked Men's Designs; he has done it here: Whether it be the
Turning and Directing of their ill Designs to the best Purposes; He has done
it here: Whether it be the making designing Men Public and Exemplary Monuments
of his Justice; he has done it here: Wheit be the stretching out of his Arm on
a sudden, and at nice and critical Seasons; he has done it here; by delivering
us in one Age from Tyranny, when the Armado that should have landed it, was
just ready upon our Coasts; by delivering us in the next Age from Ruin, when
the Fire was just ready for the Sulphur; and by delivering us in this Age from
Servitude, when the Yoke was just ready for our Necks; and all this with a
quick hand, after a strange and mysterious manner; and let me add, without
Bloodshed for the most part; nay, which is more, without any Stream of Blood of
our very Enemies. Never was the Truth more Owned, more Attested, more
Miraculously Defended and Preserved, in any Countries since the Primitive Ages,
then it has been in this: And God forbid that we, who of all Nations are most
indebted to the special Providence of Christ, should at last prove the most
Unthankful People in the World. How divided soever we be in other Matters, God
forbid but we should unanimously join in this; I mean in a deep sense of the
wonderful Mercies of God, and of the unspeakable Miseries which the Horn of our
Salvation has delivered us from. As it is in Point of Nature; though the
Constitutions of particular Persons be different, yet all of us agree in one
common Humanity; and as it is in point of Religion, though the Opinions of
particular Persons be different, as to unnecessary Matters, yet all of us agree
in one common Faith, so it ought to be in this Point of Gratitude; though the
Sentiments of Particular Persons may be different as to some things, yet God
forbid but we should agree in one common Acknowledgment, of the wonderful
Providence of Christ in saving us from our Enemies hitherto. Let us be Thankful
for the Blessings we have; this is the way for us to obtain more. I am sure
Ingratitude never was the way to obtain any. I Pray God open our Eyes, that we
may see the things which are for our Peace, before they be hid from us. And
Christ of his Mercy grant us a continuance of his Protection; that as he has
delivered us, and does deliver us, so he may be pleased to Deliver us still. To
him, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Praise, World
without End. Amen.

FINIS.

