David and the Amalekite Upon the DEATH of SAUL. A SERMON Preached on Jan. 30.
1682. Being the Anniversary of the MARTYRDOM OF King Charles I. Of Blessed
Memory.

By EDWARD PELLING, Rector of St. Martins Ludgate, and Chaplain to his Grace
the Duke of Somerset.

Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of Askelon, etc.

2 Samuel 1. 10. LONDON, Printed by J. Redmayne, Jun. for William Abington at the
three Silkworms in Ludgate Street. 1683.

To my most Honored Lord, Charles Duke of Somerset, Marquess and Earl of
Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, and Baron of Trowbridge.
May it please your Grace,
IT is no small part of your Honor, that you are descended of such Noble
Ancestors as have been Great and Eminent, both for their Alliance to the Royal
Family, and for their continual Fidelity to the Interest of the Crown. He that
shall peruse only the History of the Late Rebellion, and the Letters which did
pass between his Late Majesty and the Queen, may easily see how Confident that
Blessed Prince was of the Loyalty, and how Faithfully he was served all along
by the Wisdom, and Courage of your Noble Grandfather the Lord Seymour, and
your Great Uncle the Marquess of Hertford, who was the First General of the
Kings Forces against the Parliament; and lived to see the happy times of
Restitution, and Dyed Duke of Somerset (full of years and Honor) since the
Restoration of his present Majesty. But that which greatly adds to your
Honor is, that as you inherit the Titles, so (God be blessed) you inherit the
Loyalty of all your Honorable Predecessors: Which I say (My Lord) not by way
of Complement, but to do you Justice: And I must beg your Graces Pardon if that
Expression seems to Derogate from your Virtue, in making your Loyalty to be,
not a thing of Choice (as all Virtue is) but a Principle cleaving to your very
Nature, which cannot be overcome. It is this that has indear'd you to the
King; who has given you an Earnest of his Favor, in Reposing in you so Great a
Trust, in the North, for Conducting your affairs with so much Judgment and
Integrity, as soon as ever Providence brought you to bear such a great Figure in
the World. It is this, that has made you to lie so deep in the Hearts, and
Affections of Good Men, wbo take Heart and Courage by seeing your Grace to act
so in all things like a good Subject, notwithstanding those Temptations which
have Misled some, whose longer Experience should have taught them Wisdom. It
is this (My Lord) which I must crave Leave still to put you in mind of, that
above all things you be careful to have a most Tender regard of your Virtue,
and to be ever (as you are) Faithful and True to your Prince: For hereby you
will do right to the memory of your Honorable Progenitors, you will maintain
your Honor Clean and Unspotted, you will be useful to the King, to the Church,
and to your Country, you will be an Honor and Comfort to your Friends, and an
Excellent Example to the World. It is for these Ends (My Lord) that I take upon
me to present to your Grace this following Discourse, begging your Lordships,
Kind acceptance of it, and beseeching God (whose Providence has been so
Gracious to you hitherto) to Guide, Govern and Preserve your self and Noble
Consort, and to Bless Both your Graces with the long Happiness of an undivided
Heart, and with a Numerous and Flourishing Issue; which is the Hearty Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Grace's most Humble, Faithful, and truly Affectionate Servant
and Chaplain, Edw. Pelling.

2 SAMUEL 1. 14. And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine hand, to destroy the Lord's Anointed?

BEfore we enter upon the consideration of this place of Scripture, we must
come fairly to it by making our way through the Context, to which the Text does
relate; and thus it was. There had been now a War between Saul and the
Philistines; a War that was founded on the Law of God, whereby the Children of
Israel were forbidden to make any Covenant with the Inhabitants of Canaan, or
to show them mercy, Deuteronomy. 7. 2. This War ended in the Death of Saul; and the
overthrow of his People though he was made King by God's own appointment,
though he was God's own Vicegerent over God's own Inheritance, and undertook a
quarrel pursuant to God's own Will, yet in the Conclusion both He and his
Forces (Good Jonathan himself not excepted) are routed upon Mount Gilboa by the
Uncircumcised Philistines: To show, that Success in War is not an Argument of
the Righteousness of a Cause, or of the Righteousness of a Party, but of the
unsearchable Wisdom and Righteousness of God.

Saul being defeated was full of Horror and Desperation, and resolved to hasten
out of the World since he had fled before the Philistines; and because his
Armor-bearer could not be entreated (by reason of that Awful regard he bore to
Majesty) to befriend his undone Sovereign with a Mortal Blow, Saul gives
Himself his Deaths-wound with his own hands.

An Amalekite happening to be there, took off his Royal Diadem and Bracelet,
and with great Speed carried them to Ziklag to David, who by Common Fame was
known to have been Anointed next Heir to the Crown of Israel.

David received the news of Readiness and Jonathan's Death, with excess of Sorrow:
But hearing that this Amalekite had had an hand in Readiness destruction, his
Heart was struck through with Amazement and Indignation. Though Saul had been
his Bloodthirsty Enemy, yet his Soul was on a Flame, at the sad Tidings of his
being Murdered and though this young man was not one of Readiness Subjects, but a
Stranger, yet for the Sake of God, whose Impress the Unfortunate King bore, for
the Honor of Majesty, and out of respect to Readiness Divine Unction and
Character, he was resolved to revenge the Kings Death with every drop of this
Amalekites Blood; and this was the Preamble to his just Sentence, How wast thou
not afraid to stretch forth thine hand, to destroy the Lord's Anointed?

In which words we are to consider, by way of Explication,

1. First, the matter of Fact, which this Amalekite owned himself to have been
guilty of.

2. David's deep Resentment of the Relation which this Amalekite made of the
matter.

1. The matter of Fact was, that he had stretched out his hand to destroy the
King of Israel; this he acknowledged, and seemed to boast of, as a Meritorious
office, which he had done for David, who was to be Readiness Successor in the
Throne. Now, it has been a great doubt both among Jews and Christians, whether
this was a Reality, or only a Pretense. Many of the Hebrew Doctors affirm
(which is also the general sense of Sunt apud Hebraeos qui putant hunc
Amalekiten adulatorum more, mentitum fuisse, quando se dixit Saul interfecisse.
Munster. Antiquit. Judaic. lib. 6.
Christian Writers) that Saul killed himself, and that the Amalekite was a Liar
as to that particular. Nor does this opinion want its Reasons. For in the last
Chapter of the First Book of Samuel (where the manner of Saul's Death is
related) no mention is made of the Amalekite, but the Text says, that Saul
took a Sword, and fell upon it, v. 4. On the other side, Josephus and some more
tell us, that Saul had not the Only hand in the case, but that the Amalekite
was the Principal actor. Nor does this opinion want its Reasons neither. For
the Amalekites were as much Enemies to Israel, as the Philistines were; and
this Amalekite was on Mount Gilboa when Saul fell; and he did not only post
away to David as a Messenger of the Fact, but persisted in the story as an
Agent that had been concerned in it; and persisted to the end too, without
owning his Folly, or excusing his Lie (which probably he would have done) when
he saw, that a Sentence of Death against himself, was the Only Welcome and
Reward, that he was to receive.

Now for the Solution of this doubt, there seem to be some grounds for a Third
opinion yet, which will make the whole story to Agree, viz. that Saul and this
Amalekite did (Both of them) jointly Concur in the carrying of this Sad
Tragedy on. For that Saul fell upon his Sword, and so gave himself his
Deaths-wound, is clear. That his Armor-bearer might look upon him as Dead
(though indeed he was not) may be Probable. That being incumbered with his Arms
and So some understand that place (agreeable to what we find in the Margin of
our Bibles, v. 9. Inclusus teneor vestibus and Armis, ut gladius in quem rui
non potuerit me perdere.
Coat of Mail, he did not dispatch himself Fully, is not incredible: And then
it is likely enough, both that Saul did beg a Bloody Kindness of the Amalekite,
for fear of falling alive into the hands of the Philistines, and that this
Amalekite did readily gratify him, in hopes of a Richer booty, than the price
of the Crown and the Bracelet came to.

But it is not much material, whether this Amalekite was Really Guilty, or had
a mind only to Father the action. We will now (as David did) take his own Word
for it, and Suppose him to have spoken Truth. For none can be better believed,
then he that confesses against Himself. Every man will be sure to make the
best of his own story; and though an Evidence may Swear away other men's Lives,
he will be tender of his own, and beware of being his own Accuser, though he
deposes to a Lie. We will not therefore contrast the Credit of his own
Testimony, but acquiesce in what he said, and look upon him as a Criminal; and
proceed to

2. The second thing (which is most pertinent to the business of this day)
David's deep Resentment of this Amalekites relation; it was a Dreadful story, a
most Horrible and Fearful thing in the account of this good man, How wast thou
not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the Lord's Anointed?

Had it not been a Sin of a most Horrid nature and a clamorous voice, He who
was so near the Throne, would at least have forgiven the man, that did so
readily help him to the actual possession of it, especially being an Heir that
had waited with so much Suffering, and been provoked by Saul with so many
Indignities. But King-Killing is a Crime that is Odious and Abominable in the
eyes even of those, that fare well by the Regicide. To which purpose the
Learned Grotius has rightly observed out of one of the Roman Tacit. Hist. lib.
1.
Histories, that when the Emperor Galba was Murdered, Vitellius, though
(Humanly speaking) he had reason enough to be glad of the Fact, having thereby
got the power into his hands, yet out of a due sense he had of the Horridness
of the Villainy he commanded those Traitors, who had served his turn, to be
slain all of them, when they had the confidence to Address for a Reward.

An instance not much unlike King David's dealing with this Amalekite, when he
brought Readiness Blood upon his own head; because he had stretched forth his hand
to destroy the Lord's Anointed.

Those Words, the Lord's Anointed, denote the great, nay the Sole thing, which
we find here and in other places to have made such a deep and continual
Impression upon David's Spirit: So that when he had cut off the skirt of Readiness
robe, his Heart Smote him: When he was tempted to Kill him in the Cave, he
abhorred the very thoughts of it; when Abishai would have destroyed him at one
blow as he was asleep, David withheld him with a strong hand: When Abner was
so careless of his Masters safety, as to let him fall into David's power, David
reprehended him: And at last, when this Amalekite had smote him (him, who had
so long hunted after David's Soul) He presently smote the Amalekite; all this
was grounded upon this Great and Weighty consideration, that Saul was the
Lord's Anointed.

A King is said to be the Lord's Anointed in a Twofold respect.

1. In respect of that outward, Ceremonial Unction, whereby for Sate-sake he is
by the Priest separated from the People, or rather Declared, Notified, and
Acknowledged to be a Sacred person. Now this is not the great thing
considerable, because it is but a Rite and Form that is not absolutely
necessary: For many Princes at this day are not thus Anointed at all; I know
not whether this Unction was ever used to Pagan Kings, who yet were Gods
Ministers, and had Gods Authority, as well as others; it was a long time before
it came to be used even in the Christian World; anciently and originally it was
a rite peculiar to the Jews alone; and among them it was not used constantly
neither, but when the Succession was broken, or a dispute arose about a
Successors Title; commonly one of a Family was Anointed for all his Posterity
and Issue; and even then the man was not made King because he was Anointed, but
he was Anointed because he was King. Though there be neither Horn, nor Cruse of
Oil in the case, yet he is Gods Anointed nevertheless, and that upon an Higher
and more Noble account, viz;

2. In respect of that inward and essential Unction, which he receives at the
very first minute of his Kingship, and by which he is Sanctified and set apart
and above all others in that very Article of time, and which from that day
forward is inseparable from his Person. Now this Unction consists in that
Supreme Power which is given unto him, in that Sacred Authority which is vested
in him, in that inviolable Majesty which is inseparable from him, in that
Divine Image and Impress, whereby he bears a different and singular Character,
and becomes Hallowed. And because he receives all this at the hands of God
alone, because he owes all this, neither to Priest nor People, but to God
alone; because this Power, Authority, Majesty, Image, and Character is given
him by the Lord only, therefore he is called, The Lord's Anointed, that is, a
Person made so Sacred by God by the Communication of his own Authority, that
now he cannot be treated with rudeness or violence, without Dishonouring God's
own Majesty and striking at the Face of God himself.

To this purpose we are to observe, what God said of King Cyrus, an Heathen, an
Infidel, a Foreigner, no more related unto him than a Philistine, or an
Amalekite Prince, yet all this notwithstanding he calls him his Anointed, Is.
45. Thus says the Lord to his Anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have
holden (or strengthened with Power) v. 1. -- I have even called thee by thy
name; I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me, v. 4.

This was Prophetically spoken, for at this time Cyrus was not so much as Born:
And when he came to be King of Persia he was no more Anointed there, than Nero
was at Rome; and yet, as the Prophet calls the former God's Anointed, so the
Apostle calls the latter the Minister of God, the Ordained of God; and both
Isaiah and St. Paul spoke so upon these grounds, because all Lawful Princes are
endued with God's Power and Authority, whereof the Material and Ceremonial
Unction among the Jews, was a Signification and Argument only.

Now do but compare all this, with what is recorded of Saul, whom David speaks
of in my Text, and styles him, The Lord's Anointed. Not very long after he came
to the Crown, out of Timorousness and Infidelity, he offered up Sacrifice
himself in Samuels 1 Samuel 13.
absence, and therein he was an Usurper of the Priestly Office. Afterward, he
spared the King of Amalek, c. 15.
and the best of the spoil, contrary to what he was required to do; and therein
he was a Rebel against Gods Commands. After this, he sought the life of c. 18.
David (the best Subject, that ever any Prince had) and would have struck him
to the wall with a Javelin, and all this for David's good Service; therein he
was a Tyrant. After this, he unjustly Kills at once 85 of the Lord's Priests,
besides the Men and Women, Children, c. 22.
and Sucklings that were in Nob; and therein he was a Murderer. After this, he
forsakes the Lord for the Devil, and consulteth a Witch at Endor; and therein
c. 28.
he was an Apostate. And after all this, last of all, as if he could not perish
by any impurer hands than his own, he rusheth on the point of his Sword,
endeavors c. 31.
deavours and attempts his own final Destruction; and therein he was a
Self-Homicide.

Notwithstanding all these Sins, he was the Lord's Anointed still; and David
owned, treated, revered and in the end vindicated him, as the Lord's Anointed.
He distinguished between the Sinner, and the Prince; He looked upon his
Personal Crimes with one eye, and upon his Holy Unction with another. And if
the Scripture may be allowed to bear us out in any conclusion, we have warrant
enough to infer hence that the Worst of Kings (supposing him to be a Lawful
King) has a Divine and Indelible Character, for the sake whereof, he ought to
be accounted and Honored as the Lord's Anointed, and consequently as a Sacred
and Dread Sovereign.

Nor will it avail us to consider, how or by what means he came to his
Sovereignty, whether by Inheritance, or otherwise. A Lawful Prince is the
Lord's Anointed ever, beholding to God alone for his Power and Authority.
Succession, or Conquest, or Election may be the Instrument to convey the Title,
but the Deed is Gods, and the Sovereign Power is a Donative and Estate which
the King holds in Fee of God, and of God alone, whether it be by Nature, that
the Man is brought forth; or whether it be by the Sword, that he cuts his way;
or whether it be by the Consent of Men, that he is pitched upon, still these
are but the means, the ways, and the methods of a Nation, whereby a Prince is
brought to the Throne: It Is God that gives him his Commission to Reign in it;
the Right of Governing, the Authority he has over his People, the Power of
Life and Death, the Crown and Scepter, the Regalities and Prerogatives of a
King (however he may diminish or give some of them away) they are owing only to
the Courtesy of Heaven.

In this case it is necessary for us to distinguish between the Power it self,
and the Choice, or Application of the Person to that Power. Now, the Power is
God's, by whom Kings Reign: But under God there may be diverse Subordinate,
Instrumental, and Ministerial hands to give a man a Right to that Power.
Anciently and first of all, Monarchical Sovereignty went by Lineal Descent, and
Proximity of Blood; and this was the Regular and best way. But in after Ages
the Wickedness of a few Nations altered this course, and Monarchies came to be
Elective. And though a Prince be chosen by the Suffrages of the People, yet
this is but a Qualification of him to use that Power, and to exercise that
Authority which is given by the King of Kings. Nay, though they Anoint and
Crown him, yet in all this they are the only Masters of the Ceremonies, to
declare their Obligations to Obey, and to Assist in the Prince's Investitures;
still the Authority whereby he acts, the Substantial and Essential Unction,
is from above. They may put on his Robes, and gird him with the Sword, and
place him in his Imperial Chair, and cover his Head with a Royal Diadem; but
when he is in his Throne, it is by a Superior Authority that he strikes with his
Sword, and by a Divine Commission that he Commands, Governs, and Ministers
Justice unto the People which he is set over: And so Valentinian told his
Soldiers when they had chosen him Emperor, and asked him something which he did
not like; It was in your Power to choose me to rule over you (said he) but since
you have chosen me, what you desire depends not upon yoru pleasure, but mine.
Your business is as my Subjects, to obey me; and my business is as your Prince,
to order what you are to do. Though Valentinian was taken from among the
Soldiery, yet his Power was not derived from the Camp, but it was from God, as
King Soul's was, when he was fetched from among the Stuff, 1 Samuel 10.

Things are best understood when they are illustrated by familiar Instances.
Take then 1. an Instance in an Ecclesiastical matter: Judas the Traitor being
Dead, the Eleven think of Substituting some other in his Room, and by lot they
Elected Matthias, Act. 1. But Matthias was not their Delegate, nor did he Act
by their Commission, or in their Name, or by their Power; but his Authority was
from Christ, as the rest of the Apostles was: They indeed pitched upon the Man,
but his Apostleship, his Ministerial Character, his Power to Preach, to
Administer Sacraments, to Bind and Loose, this Power was from Heaven. 2. Take a
second Instance in an Oeconomical matter: Say a Servant chooses his Master, or
a Wife her Husband, each of theft pitch upon the Man, but neither of them gives
him his Authority, but both consent to submit unto it; his Power of Governing
his whole Household is from Nature. 3. Take a third Instance yet in a
Political matter: Say a Parish do choose their Constable, or a City their Mayor,
or a County their Sheriff; these indeed determine upon the Person but they give
them not their Power, nor do they act in the Names of the Electors; but their
Authority to keep the Peace, to Distrain Goods, to Seize and Execute
Malefactors, is from the King, and the Kings Officers they are. Why, much like
hereunto is that other Instance when a People choose their King (though it would
be better for the World, if no People did so, Haereditary Government being the
best:) After a great deal of Clamor, Disorder, Animosity, Strife, Confusion,
Distraction, and perhaps Bloodshed, at last Necessity brings them to agree upon
the Man: But the Kings Authority comes not from the dirty hands of a Rout, nor
does he act in the name of a Sovereign multitude, but his Power is from God: By
his Command Kings are constituted, by whose pleasure Men are born; God appoints
Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and Reges constituuntur, apti his
qui in illo tempore ab ipsis regantur. Iren. lib. 5. adv. Haeres. cap. 24.
them, and fits them according to the condition of the Times, says Irenoeus.
And so Tertullian affirms, that the Emperor is thence, whence the man was
before Inde est Imperator, unde est homo antequam Imperator. Inde Potestas
illi, unde and Spiritus. Tertul. Apol. c. 30.
he was Emperor. He receives his Power from the same hand which gave him his
Spirit. And elsewhere says he, We (Christians) worship the Emperor so Colimus
Imperatorem sic quomodo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit, ut hominem a Deo
secundum; and quicquid est, a Deo consecutum, solo Deo minorem. Tertul. adv.
Scapul.
as it is lawful for us, and expedient for himself, as a Man next unto God; as
one that has received all that he has from God; and as one that is inferior
to God alone.

Now, if the case be thus, where a Monarchy is Elective (as the Roman Empire
was, whatever is suggested to the contrary) the Plea is much the Stronger for
the Divine Authority of a Prince, where the Crown descends by Inheritance
(as, God be blessed it does with us, and for the good of the Kingdom, may it
descend still in that Natural and Peaceful course to the Worlds end.) In this
case, the Consent of the People is neither Essential nor Accessory; as they are
not capable of conferring the Authority, so they are praecluded the liberty of
disputing about the Person (where there is an apparent or undoubted Heir) for
God and Nature have already determined the Controversy. Men may Recognize his
Right, (and in point of Conscience are bound to do so) as the Men of Israel did
Recognize Readiness Right, after he had been Anointed; but where a Kingdom is
Hereditary, ones Right takes place upon the voidance of another's Possession;
which is the ground of that Maxim in our Law (which is the sharpest Dagger in
the Republican's Heart) that the King cannot dye.

I have been the longer upon clearing the account of the Divine Authority of
Kings, because it was the only consideration which David had in his thoughts,
when he was moved to proceed so severely against this Amalekite, for offering
violence unto Saul. Quare non Timuisti? How came it about that thou wast not
afraid, that thy Heart did not sink, that thy Soul could suffer thee to stretch
forth thine hand to destroy the Lord's Anointed?

And hence we may fairly proceed to Two Conclusions.

1. That it is a Fearful thing, even to Resist the Lord's Anointed. A Fearful
thing indeed (according to St. Paul's Divinity) if it be a Fearful thing to be
Damned. For Opposition tends to Destruction; and there is no more difference
between Resisting and Killing, then there is between the means and the end, or
between putting a Sword to a Princes Throat, and direct, Cutting it. If he be a
Murderer (by Interpretation) who Hates his Brother, he must be a Regicide (in
the intent,) who draws out his Artillery against his Prince; and Rebels are
beholding to our Charity alone, in this as well as other cases, if we do not
say, that never any Subjects drew the Sword against their King, but with a
Resolution (if there was no other remedy) to sheath it in his Blood.

I do not intend (for the Time will not give me leave) to handle the case of a
Defensive War against a Rightful Sovereign (a case, that never was maintained,
but by an Atheist, or a Papist, or a Protestant-Jesuite.) When our Savior
commanded us, Not to resist evil, Math. 5. 39. we must suppose him to teach us
to suffer Indignities with Patience, as well from the hands of a Superior, as
from the hands of an equal. And when St. Paul affirms, that whosoever resists
the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, Romans 13. 2. we must conclude, that a
War against Lawful Authority is a War against Heaven. And when St. Peter
requiring us to Honor the King, presently Subjoined, Servants be Subject to
your Masters with all fear, not only to the Good and Gentle, but also to the
Froward, 1 Pet. 2. 18. we must look upon him to have taught us the necessity of
Passive Obedience in the State, as well as at Home; for otherwise it would
follow (what is unreasonable to conceive) that Princes have not so much benefit
by the Gospel, for the securing of their Authority, as every Ordinary and
Private Man has.

And in saying thus much, God is my Witness that I aim at no other end, but to
vindicate the Doctrine of the Cross, which diverse lately have endeavored to
expose to Contempt and Derision. But (to return to David's practice in
reference to Saul) because David's having of an Army, has been pleaded by
Rebels to justify Resistance, for the removing of this Objection, many things
are to be considered. 1. That David's case was Particular; for he was already
Anointed unto the Kingdom, and was Haeres Viventis not only Lawful Heir, but as
sure of the Crown as if Saul had been dead. 2. That the little Army which David
had, was not of his own Raising but they resorted unto him of their own accord;
partly for Refuge-sake (for they were Indigent and Discontented Persons) partly
to show David their best respects; partly out of Pity and Compassion to a
wronged Prince (and the Hearts of Men are generally Pitiful and Compassionate
in such a case) and partly to endear themselves to David, and to make their
Fortunes by him when he should come to the Crown. 3. That when the Men were
come, David used them rather as a Friendly Retinue, then as a Formidable Army,
to secure his own Life from the hands of Pick-thanks, who otherwise might be
ready to shed his Blood to curry favor with Saul, and without Readiness Order and
Commission. 4. That when David employed his Retinue to Military purposes and
after a Military manner, it was against those People who were Enemies to
Israel, and who by the Command of God were to be destroyed; and even then too
David acted under King Achish, as his chief Commissioner and General. 5. That
from the beginning to the end of the whole matter, though David had so many
Swords at his command, yet he never once Resisted his own Dread Sovereign, but
only Fled from him, and Fled with more security then he could have done
otherwise. Nay, though David had two the fairest opportunities, of making Saul
his Prisoner, and of taking away his Life, one in the Cave at Engedi, 1 Samuel
24. and another on the Hill of Hachilah, 1 Samuel 26. yet still he forbore all
manner of violence, at both times using this Heroic and Loyal Expression, The
Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lord's Anointed, to
stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord.

2. Whence I proceed to the next conclusion, that the Destruction of the Lord's
Anointed, the stretching forth the hand to Invade his Life, is of all other
acts of violence the most Fearful and Horrid Crime. The Lord forbid that I
should do this thing, says David; for who can stretch forth his hand against
the Lord's Anointed, and be guiltless? As he said to Abishai, 1 Samuel 26. 9. For
Subjects to draw Blood out of the Sacred Heart of their Prince, to cut his Head
off, as though he had not been Anointed with Oil, to Invade the Life of Gods
Vicegerent, and especially to do it, as did the Regicides of this day, not in
a Cave, but before the Face of the Sun, and at his own Palace door, and all
this with the utmost Pomp of Villainy, under color of Justice, by formal
Proceedings, after a Judicial manner, with an unheard of Pageantry of
Conscience and Religion: After they had taken off his Crown, and as it were,
cut off his Hands; after they had Hunted him from his House to the Camp; and
from Field to Field, at last to Arraign the best of Kings as a Malefactor, to
Condemn him as a Tyrant, to Dragg him to the Scaffold as a Traitor, and there
to cut off his Neck as a Dog; Blessed Jesu! Since the foundations of the World
were laid, the like instance, with all its circumstances was never known; no
Humane History can afford us a Parallel; nothing that can come near it, unless
it be that instance lately observed of Conradine the King of Naples, who after
such a manner (but upon different pretensions) was Dr. Turners's Sermon before
the King, 1680/1.
Arraigned and Murdered in his own City upon a Scaffold: And as that was done
by pretending Catholics, so this was done by pretending Protestants: They set
the Copy, and these took it out, and in as Bloody a Character; so true is that
observation, that there was hardly so much as a pair of Sheers between the^; no
more difference indeed than between Judas and Iscariot.

When David had privily cut off the skirt of Readiness robe (though it was only
with a design to let him see that he had been in his Power) his Heart soon
Smote him, as if he had made a Breach upon Gods Law, and had been guilty of a
very Unworthy and Disloyal Act (for the Oil upon a Kings Head (like the
Ointment upon the Head of Aaron that descended upon his skirts) makes even his
Vestments Sacred.) But with what Agonies and Convulsions would his Soul have
been Tortured, had the King of Israel been mocked by such a Juncto of Jews, as
on this day Butchered the King of England, and in the name of the Lord vied for
Wickedness with all the Devils in Hell?

The story of Readiness Death is a very sad relation, all the Parts and
Appurtenances thereof, together with Readiness own Guilt, and the Sin of his
Armor-bearer, and this Amalekite being rightly considered. But yet there are
some passages in the story, which it may not be amiss for us to observe:

1. Concerning the Armor-bearer. Saul Commanded him to draw his Sword, and to
thrust him through therewith, being desirous rather to Dye by the hands of his
own Servant, than to be Abused by the Uncircumcised Philistines. But
notwithstanding the Kings own Command, the Armor-bearer refused to hearken in
that particular; he durst not obey the King to the Destruction of Majesty; he
was sore afraid, says the Text, 1 Samuel 31. 4. Read on now to the next v. and
you will find, that this Armor-bearer feared not to Kill himself, though he
was sore afraid to Kill his Sovereign. By which instance it is clear, not only
that he valued his Prince his Life far above his own, but also that he thought
it much a more pardonable Sin to be a self Murderer, than to be a Regicide,
though tempted to be so by his Sovereigns Command. Doubtless, for a Man to Kill
himself is a very Horrid Sin, because it is his last Act, whereby (in Humane
probability) he hurryeth himself off the Earth into Hell. Yet this
Armor-bearer chose rather to Dye with the Guilt of his own Blood upon his
hands, than to Live Guilty of the Blood of the Lord's Anointed; and before he
would be such a Traitor, ran a sad venture of being Damned for ever, by being
Felo de se.

2. And then as for the Amalekite, that did effectually help on the Destruction
of Saul, though he did it not of Malice, but upon Readiness entreaty; though he
did it when Saul was now half breathless, and when he was sure otherwise to be
Killed by the Philistines, though he did it to rid him of his present Fear and
Pains, and struck him more like a Friend, than an Enemy, doing no other than
what Saul himself had already done in part; yet this Regicides Conscience seems
to have been troubled presently at an excessive rate: His breast was filled
with Remorse, and Anguish, and Bitterness of Spirit, so that he could not but
put on a Mournful and Penitential Habit; for he ran to David with his Clothes
Rent, and with Earth upon his Head, Confessing by his Actions, that he had
committed an Abominable Crime, when his Lying Tongue pretended that he had done
a meritorious Act.

And yet (which is observable) this Regicide was no Subject of Readiness, but a
Stranger, an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, an Amalekite. Lord! What
Soul is able I do not say to Aggravate, but to Measure the Guilt of the
Regicides of this day? Regicides, that acted not only without any pretended
Commands or Allowance of Just Authority (though all the Powers on Earth could
not have made a Law competent or tolerable in this case) but shed the Blood of
the Lord's Anointed, contrary to all Law of God, of Nature, and of the Land
too. Regicides, that were Amalekites indeed, as to Faith, Religion, Conscience
and Inhumanity, but otherwise the Kings own Natural and Born-Subjects, that
owed him Fealty and Loyalty from the Womb, that had often renewed their Natural
Obligations by several voluntary and the most Solemn Professions, Promises and
Vows, that had many times repeated the Sacred and Strict Oaths of Supremacy,
and Allegiance; and besides all this, that in a Solemn League and Covenant of
their own had Sworn Article 3.
to Preserve and Defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, that the
World (said they) may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and
that we have no Thoughts or Intentions to diminish his Majesty's just Power and
Greatness: Regicides, that Vowed and Swore all this, and that with respect to
the Glory of God, to the advancement of Christ's Kingdom, to the Honor and
Happiness of the Kings Majesty, and his Posterity, and with Hands lifted up to
the most High God, as says the Preamble to that Covenant. But never do
Hypocrites hands fall more heavy, than when they have been lifted up in Gods
Worship: A Traitor is then most Formidable, when he has been at a Test, or at a
Sacrament, or at a Prayer (Judas was fullest of Mischief, when he had been at
the Dish and the Sop.) To answer all these Declarations, Vows, and Oaths, as at
first they lifted up their Hands to the most High God, so at last they
stretched forth their hands to Murder Gods Anointed, and they Murdered him in
cold Blood, and after Deliberation, and Council, and Fasting, and (as their
Phrase was) when they had been seeking the Lord too.

This very Amalekite will one day rise up in Judgment against those Regicides,
and will condemn them; for he seemed to Repent when he had done the Fact, he
Rent his Clothes, and put Ashes upon his own Head, for the violence that he had
offered to the Anointed one. But these Regicides instead of Relenting or being
Smitten in their Hearts, were of Reprobate Minds, and of Seared Consciences,
being past Feeling any thing but the Fire of Hell: They persisted in hardness
above that of Judas, or of Cain: They owned the Villainy, and endeavored to
Justify that as a Noble, Heroic and Godly Exploit, which made all Churches
abroad (but Rome) to be ashamed, and all Foreign Nations, not only the
Christian World, but even Infidels and Barbarians to Abhor all English men, as
so many Savage Dogs.

Nor was this the Wickedness of Dathan's and Abiram's only, but Korah's and
Sons of Levi were found also, some that to Poize the Vessel had a great hand in
casting the Pilot over board, some that intentionally Preached off the Crown
from his Majesty's Head; some that drove him to the Block; some that were upon,
or not far off from the Scaffold; and some too, that made the Sound of the Blow
to Echo in the Temple, and did not stick with hands lifted up too, to
Sanctify the Fact in the very Pulpit. And I cannot but take notice of one
singular Instance, out of due respects to a certain Doctor still Living, and in
great Vogue, that on Jan. 31. 1648. the very day next Jo. Owens Sermon Jan. 31.
1648. dedicated to the Commons. page 7.
after the Murdering of the King, as he was holding forth to the Regicides
(whom he complemented, as the visible Instruments of the Work of the Lord) and
speaking with reference to the things that had been found in England, he
insisted much upon the Sins of Manasseh Son of Hezekiah King of Judah, spoke of
his false Worship, Superstition and Cruelty, and of the Apostasy of those who
flattered him in his Tyranny for ibid. p. 5.
their own advantage, and positively asserted, that when Kings turn Seducers,
both the Blind Leaders, and Blind Followers Justly fall into the Ditch; and
that, when Kings Command unrighteous things, and People suit them with a
willing Compliance, none doubts, but the Destruction of them both is Just and
Righteous.

Come thy ways now, my Honest Amalekite (Honest in comparison) who, though thou
wast not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the King of Israel, yet,
for ought we know, did never suffer thine Heart to swell against thine own
Sovereign; did never trample Faith and True Allegiance to thy Natural Prince,
under thy Feet; did never break Covenants, nor violate Oaths, nor any ways
further or abett the Bloudshedding of the King of Amalek; nor did ever harden
thy Heart to that Desperate State of Impenitence, Deadness or Reprobation, as
to Justify and Vindicate the most Horrid Act of Treason, with hands stretched
out and lifted up before the most High God, as did those Sons of Belial, the
Regicides of this day.

And yet behold, a Greater Prince than either the King of Amalek or Saul, was
here: Greater for his Lineage and Extraction; Greater for his Wisdom, Faith,
and Constancy to the Truth; Greater for all Virtues Divine, Moral, Political;
Greater every ways, but in the esteem of Men and in the Hearts of his own
Subjects, and only too Great by being too Good for a most Unthankful and
Improvident Nation.

To draw now toward a conclusion, The design of this discourse is not so much
to expose the Traitors, as to Represent the Excessive Sinfulness of the Treason
of this day, to the End that we and our Posterity may see what reason all of us
have to be truly Humbled under the Sense of it. For murder is a Crying Sin,
that fills Heaven with its Noise and Clamor: And one reason of it is,
because it is not only an Injury against the Man but moreover a Contumely
offered to the Majesty of God, whose Image the Man bears; and therefore Philo
the Jew calls it (...), Philo de Spec. Leg.
Sacrilege, and the Greatest of all sorts of Sacrilege. Nay, it is of such a
Staining nature, that it polluteth a whole Land; as God himself said, Blood it
defiles the Land, Number. 35 33. And an Instance hereof we have upon Readiness
killing the Giheonites: He slew them indeed in his Zeal to the Children of
Israel and Judah; but though 'twas His Fact and Cruelty, yet a Three years
Famine came upon the Land for it, 2 Samuel 21. 1.

And if all Innocent Blood staineth a Nation so, how much more the shedding of
Blood Royal, the Blood of Kings, who in respect of their High Office and
Supreme Authority Represent God above all others, and bear his Image and
Impress after a Peculiar and Eminent manner.

I must confess, that I cannot but still own my Fears, that our Land is not yet
thoroughly cleansed from the Blood of that Innocent, Virtuous, Religious,
Matchless Prince, who was so Barbarously murdered among us on this day. For
though we may believe, that the merciful God will not require that Sacred Blood
of us, so as to make us smoke under that Wrath which is the vengeance of
another life, (Us especially, who cannot Read, nor so much as Think of that
Dismal Tragedy without the deepest Sorrow, Hatred and Abomination) yet we have
too great Reason to suspect that the Sin is not Forgotten in Heaven, that there
is no such Act of Oblivion There, but that as we have Smarted for that Sin
already, so we may Smart still under those Plagues and Judgments which are the
Discipline of this life. We are to distinguish between a Sin and its
Punishment. The Sin may be forgiven, and upon true Repentance is certainly
forgiven, so that it shall not Rise up in Judgment against the Sinner at the
last day: But seldom does the Cry of a Vocal Sin cease before God lets loose
some Temporal Judgments upon it; either for the warning and Admonition of other
Men, or for the Correction and Reformation of the Sinners themselves, or for
the exercising of their Patience, or for the like Holy and Gracious purposes.
The thing is clear from that Instance concerning David, whom God visited with
the Death of his Child, and with other Sharp and Poynant Evils, for the
Wickedness acted upon Bathsheba and her Husband, though the Sin it self was
forgiven him. The Lord has put away thy Sin, thou shall not die, said Nathan;
Howbeit, because by this deed thou have given great Occasion to the Enemies of
the Lord to Blaspheme, the Child that is born unto thee shall surely die, 2 Samuel 12.

Nor is it a just Ground for our Confidence and Security to consider, that the
Sin of this day was acted by a Few (in comparison) and that several years ago
too.

For, the Sin of One Man (and much rather of an Army) may be so Odious and
Abominable in Gods Account, that by Occasion thereof he may visit the
Iniquities of a whole Nation. Let us go to Achan for an Instance: Upon the
Destruction of Jericho Achan found a Babylonish Garment, a wedge of Gold, and
two hundred Sheckles of Silver; and because He took of the Accursed thing, the
Anger of the Lord was kindled against the whole Body of the Children of Israel,
so that at the very next Battle, they were all Routed by their Enemies, Josh. 7.

2. Again, God is not wont to punish a Nation to the Full as soon as the Sin is
committed, but usually leaves a great part of the Burden, many Talents of
Judgment to fall down in aftertimes, to put Men still in mind of that Guilt,
which otherwise they would bury in perpetual Oblivion. Let us go for an
Instance hereof to the Jews in the days of Moses. At Shittim they join
themselves to Baal-Peor, and a Plague ensues thereupon. But, though for
Phinehas his Zeal the Plague was soon stayed, and the Wrath of God was turned
away from Israel for that time, yet afterward in the days of Joshua, when the
Israelites had been Possessed of the Holy Land, Phinehas himself Remembered the
Iniquity of Peor, and told the People that they were not cleansed from that
Iniquity unto that day, Josh. 22. 17.

Now (to draw down this Consideration to our selves) if God be wont by way of
Discipline to chastize Evil Men as a Governor, even after he has taken away
the Guilt of their Wickedness as a Judge; if by Occasion of One crying Sin,
committed by a Few, or perhaps by One only, he does sometimes bring Calamities
upon a whole Nation; and if this be often done some Considerable time, some
years after the Sin was acted: Then truly, we of all People living have most
Reason to call to mind the Calamities we have groaned under, and to Interpret
Providence the Right way, and not only to mistrust that God has visited us,
hitherto, but moreover to Fear that he will visit us still (especially, if we
Repent not from the bottom of our Hearts) for that Loud and Clamorous Sin of
this day, the Destruction of the Lords Anointed (and a Man according to Gods
own Heart too) though he was Destroyed and Murdered, not by our own Hands, but
by the Hands of a Few Amalekites, and that above Thirty years ago.

To come a little closer yet: Of all the People of this Land, You of this City
are very deeply concerned, to lay your Hands upon your Breasts, and your Mouths
in the Dust, and the Sin of this day to every one of your Hearts. For, though
(God be blessed) we can truly say and Boast, That this City (nay this Kingdom)
was never more Happy than it is this day, for that great Number we have here of
Brave, Heroic and Right Loyal Spirits (witness their Generous, and Successful,
when they were thought Desperate Adventures of Late, to stop that Torrent of
Wickedness which was coming in afresh upon us, and God alone Knows how far it
would have gone, and how many it would have swept away, had it not been stopped:
Yet all this notwithstanding, it is necessary for you to Remember the days of
old, and the years that are past and not suffer the Horrid Sin of this day, or
the Judgments which God has executed upon this City, to slip out of your minds
or to be past over lightly, without a due Sense and Application thereof.

Now, what if we should conceive, that when this City was turned into a Flaming
pile, the righteous God came to purge it from the Blood of his Anointed? When
the Jews of old were in any sharp afflictions, the business of the Golden Calf
usually came fresh into their Minds, and on every turn they mistrusted, that
God afflicted them for the iniquity of their Fathers in making a Golden Calf.
The story of it you have at large in Exodus 32. the People would have some
Representation to go before them instead of Moses their proper Captain and
Leader; they prevailed with Aaron to consent and concur with them, and they
contributed their Riches, their Gold and their Earrings to carry on the Work
of the day; and at last out came a Calf, a little Similitude of the Great Idol,
which was Worshipped in the House of Bondage, whence they had now been
delivered, so that, though they had escaped out of Egypt, yet they espoused the
Egyptian Religion. To Accomodate this story a little: We must acknowledge, that
God had marvellously delivered us too out of Our House of Bondage (changing
only the names, Rome for Egypt) we had a Moses too set over us, Meek and Good,
and one that was Learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians: But the People
were Sick, to have an Idol of their own making in the room of their Moses; and
some that waited at the Altar had a Stomach that way too; and the Zealots of
this City would not fail of their utmost help, but brought their Riches into
Guild Hall, their Money, Plate and Rings, and even their Thimbles and Bodkins;
and what came of this at last? Why truly out came a Calf, a Golden Calf, a
Dainty thing that had cost great Sums but yielded no Milk, a Religion like that
Idol which we had been Delivered from, full of Superstition and Jesuitism in
the belly of it, and differing no more from Popery, than a Calf differs from
an Ox.

And why should we not think now, that when God visited us with his Judgments,
he did not remember Peoples Ingratitude to him and his Anointed? Or why should
we not Fear that he will remember us again, and that with more Sore and more
Dreadful Judgments, if People persist in their Ingratitude still? For this is a
Sin of no ordinary rate, but one of the First Magnitude; the Kings Authority
being a Donative of Heaven, and a Ray of Gods Majesty, and his Power to Govern
and Punish being given by Gods own Warranty, the Sin of Rebellion must
necessarily be of a Da^^^^g Nature, and of a Clamorous Tongue, however form
(whose Consciences are Armour-proof against all Arguments from Scripture and
Antiquity) have begun again to speak of the Lawfulness of Resistance, as if
their hands were already laid upon the Hilts of their Swords.

Take heed therefore (you especially of this Great City) that ye join not in
the Confederacies of Korah, lest ye utterly Perish in his gainsaying. Is the
Iniquity of Peor, and the Sin of the Golden Calf too little for us? Are not the
Judgments, which we have groaned under, heavy enough yet, but do we solicit
God to add more Talents to the weight still? Assure your selves, that if People
Repeat their Sins, God will not fail to Repeat and Double his Blows; and he
has more Judgments in Treasure besides the Plague and the Fire; and the
Posterity that comes after us will (as we our selves have done) see the
Follies, and smart greatly for the Impieties of their Fathers; for as Ezra said
upon the Return out of Captivity, After all that is come upon us for our Evil
deeds, and for our Great trespass, seeing that God has punished us less than
our iniquities deserve, and has given us a Deliverance (a miraculous
deliverance out of our Thraldom) should we again break his Commandments, and
join with the People of these abominations, would not God be Angry with us till
he had Consumed us, so that there should be no Remnant, nor Escaping?

For the preventing of the worst of Evils it is our great Concernment, and
ought to be our great Care, and 'twill be found to be our best Interest, when
all is done, to lay aside all Unnatural Animosities and Heart-burnings, which
Evil Men make use of to Distract this Kingdom, and to tear all our
Establishments in Church and State into pieces; and to be filled with the True
and Primitive Spirit of Christianity; to be Meek, and Gentle, and of Humble
Minds; to Act according to that Wisdom, which is Pure and Peaceable; to Study
to be Quiet; to endeavor by all possible means to keep the Unity of the Spirit
in the bond of Peace; to be Tractable and Honest in Heart; to be subject to the
Higher Powers, and that not for fear of the Laws only, but readily and
ingenuously, and for Conscience Sake, to Fear God, to Honor the King, and to
Love the Brotherhood; to be in perfect Charity and Unity among our selves, as
becomes Brethren; and so, in all manner of well-doing to commit our selves to
God; to whom be Glory, Dominion and Praise. Amen.

FINIS.

