A LETTER TO A FRIEND, OCCASIONED By the late Reprinting of a JESUITS BOOK.
ABOUT SUCCESSION TO THE Crown of ENGLAND, Pretended to have been written by R.
Doleman.

My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change, Prove. 24. 21.

LONDON, Printed for W. Davis and J. Hindmarsh, at Amen Corner, and at the
black Bull in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange, 1682.

THE Apostate Protestant.
SIR,
I Received your Present, and if I thank you for it, it is purely out of
respects to the hand that sent it; I mean a Book bearing this Title, A
Conference about the next Succession to the Crown of England, pretended to be
written by R. Doleman. Yet considering what you write, that you was startled
and astonished to see in it such Horrid and Traitorous Assertions, and
Principles so destructive not of Monarchy only, but of every Form of
Government; I am apt to mistrust that you parted with it chiefly out of Fear of
keeping such a Lewd and Dangerous Companion in your Closet, especially since
you confess, that 'twas brought to your hands as it were by stealth, being
happily seized on by one of his Majesty's Officers. It Is a dangerous Book
indeed, and without doubt is published and handed up and down to serve a Turn
in these Ticklish times, when some Ambitious men have taken Pepper in the Nose,
and to be Revenged for their disappointments endeavor to make another strong
Pass at our Government, and would sain hurl the world into Confusion.

Since you have lodged the Knave with me, I Will take care that for me he shall
not go abroad to do mischief. But yet I cannot answer your Commands, unless I
give you some account both of the Author, and the Book.

As for the Author; it was not R. Doleman, (that is but a Counterfeit) but
Robert Parsons was his Name; a notorious and violent Jesuit in the days of
Queen Elizabeth; a fellow born at Stockersey in Somerse^shire, Fa. Watsons
Quodlibets Page 236.
and a Bastard it seems: which possibly might be an Omen, that afterward he
would own for his Mother that Church which is an Whore, and (as much as in him
lay) prefer Bastards to a Crown. Id. p. 109.
A man of whom the Papists themselves in those days gave this Character, that
he was filius populi and filius peccati; one born to be a Plague to the world,
restless, seditious, turbuleu^, cruel, imperious, treacherous, and in a manner
the very Epitome of all wickedness. They who knew him and his Dealings at
Oxford, Id. p. 217.
have told us, how seditious, wanton, and factious this lewd Bastards
Conversation was, and how for his Libelling and other misdemeanors he was
thrust out of Baliol College, having been so infamous there, being then Master
of Arts, that they hissed him out with hoo-bubs, and rung him out with Bells.

In those days, says my Author, England was made the main chance of
Christendom, Id. p. 30^.
the only Butt, Mark and White that was aimed at. And indeed, such was the
strength of the Romanists, their Conspiracies so frequent, and their endeavors
so great for a Successor for their turn, that affairs were in a very uncertain
and tottering condition; so that it was expressly given out, Id. p. 305.
That England should be made an Island of Jesuits. But to promote the Plot,
none was more industrious than this Parsons. 'Twas He chiefly that wrought with
Pius Quintus to excommunicate the Queen. 'Twas He chiefly that stirred up the
King of Spain to invade our Country. 'Twas He chiefly that solicited her
Majesty's Subjects to abandon their Allegiance. Nay, 'twas He chiefly that that
occasioned those Severities the Government was forced to use upon the Papists:
For the Secular Priests did acknowledge, that her Majesty used them kindly for
the space of the first Ten years of her Reign, Id. p. 265.
so that their condition was tolerable, and in some good quiet: It was the
Principles and Practices of this Parsons, that were so injurious not only to
our Religion, and our Government, but to the Interest even of his own Party
too. You may take this Character, as I find it given (and very deservedly) by a
Popish Priest then living. This (says he) is that same Parsons, whom Pope, Id.
p. 236.
Prince and Peer with all true English hearts have cause to hate. This is he of
whom his own General reported, that he was more troubled with one English man,
than with all the rest of his Society. This is he of whom Cardinal Alan held
this opinion, that he was a man very violent, and of an unquiet Spirit, and of
whom Mr. Blackwell (now his Darling) said, that his turbulent and lewd life
would be a discredit to the Catholic Cause. In short, the general conceit of
all that ever have thoroughly conversed with him, is this, that he is of a
furious, passionate, hot, choleric, exorbitant working humor, busy headed,
and full of Ambition, Envy, Pride, Rancour, Malice and Revenge: Whereunto,
through his latter Machiavilian Practices, may be added, that he is a most
diabolical, unnatural, and barbarous butcherly fellow, unworthy the Name (nay,
cursed be the hour wherein he had the Name) of a Priest, nay, of a Religious
Person, nay, of a Temporal Layman, Jesuit, nay, of a Catholic, nay, of a
Christian, nay, of a Humane Creature; but of a Beast or a Devil; a violater of
all Laws; a contemner of all Authority; a stain of Humanity, an Impostume of
all corruption, a corrupter of all Honesty, and a Monopoly of all mischief.

This was the man, Sir, whose Book you sent me; and had I never looked into the
Book, yet considering who and what the Author of it was, I could not but blush
and be ashamed to think, that any in our days (especially Pretenders to the
Protestant Religion) should be such Enemies to Truth, to Religion, and to
Common Honesty, as to bring such a wicked man's Issue to light again, and to
dress it and set it out afresh for a Tool. What good can the indifferent world
conceive of them, who of all Principles, espouse the Principles of the Jesuits,
who are the worst of Papists; and of them, do especially Admire and Recommend
to our reading the Writings of this Parsons, who was one of the worst of all
Jesuits?

As touching the Book it self, Sir, there are diverse things which are worthy
your observation, and which may be of good use to you, and to every man in
these times who is a zealous, impartial, and honest-hearted Protestant.

First, That it is so full of Principles that are apparently false, pestilent,
and scandalous, that in Queen Elizabeth's days when it was first Printed, it did
not only exasperate our English Government, but did likewise give such offense
to the very Popish Faction, that several of them wrote Books on purpose in
confutation of this Counterfeit Doleman, so ashamed they were of it: Nay,
Parsons himself finding his Party so offended, and himself so rated and
condemned upon the coming out of this Book, Quodlibet, p. 286.
though he was shameless enough, endeavored nevertheless to shift and wash his
hands of it, as if he had not been the Author of it, though 'twas notorious
that he was.

Secondly, it is to be noted that in the fatal year 1648, when that blessed
Martyr King Charles the First was so barbarously Murdered, the several Articles
brought in charge against him were all grounded upon Principles taken out of
this Jesuits Book; nay, a great part of the very Book it self (so much as
served the turn of those cursed Regicides) was Reprinted under another
counterfeit Title, viz. Several Speeches delivered at a Conference, concerning
the power of Parliaments to proceed against their Kings for misgovernment. They
were forced to be beholden to this Jesuit for Principles to defend that
Unnatural War, and that Unjust Sentence: For could the Protestant Religion
(which they pretended to maintain) have born them out, it is not credible; they
would have brought upon themselves so much Infamy, by raising up a Jesuits
Ghost to speak for them. The sending of that Book abroad, did clearly
demonstrate what they and their designs were.

And I would sain know, whether an unprejudiced man will not conclude, that
there is some ugly design on foot now, when this very Book is brought upon the
Stage again? For, you must observe, in the next place, that the Present you
sent me, is the very same Book, now lately Printed the Third time; the very
same Book, that was first intended to tear the Government into pieces, and to
turn this Land into a field of Blood: the same Book, that laid the foundations
of the late Rebellion: the very same Book, that served to bring the best of
Kings to the Scaffold: the very same Book, that helped them to justify that
villainous and most horrid Fact. And what can we gather hence, but that some
extraordinary Intrigue is in hand* which needs the help of this old Jesuit
again? There are so many Knaves in the world already, that men need not fetch
Father Parsons from the dead, only for a show: And the world is so abundantly
stockt with Books, that Doleman would not have been Reprinted for nothing.

For, be pleased to observe too, what the state of Affairs was then, in the
days of Queen Elizabeth, when this Book was published first under that Title. A
zealous and wise Protestant Monarch was then Reigning; but she being not likely
to have any Issue, the discourses of men were (as they are now) about the
Succession. James King of Scotland was the next Heir by Blood, but his Religion
did not please the Jesuits.

For this reason they laid their Noddles together, to defeat him of the Crown,
if it were possible; and that matchless man at mischief, Father Parsons, wrote
(among other Books) this, which he called by the name of Doleman: wherein he
endeavored to persuade the World, that all Monarchies are de jure Elective,
and that Proximity of Blood was not sufficient to entitle any man to the
Imperial Crown of England, without the Peoples Choice, Approbation, and
Consent, (which by reason of the Numbers, Interest, and Policy of the Papists
then, he did hope would never be given to King James.) As the ground of all
this, he had the confidence to place the Plenitude of power, and all Absolute
Sovereignty in the hands of the People; so that (according to his Principle,
owned in this Doleman) the Commonwealth may Lawfully and at their pleasure
fore-close and hinder the next Heir, if on the account of his Religion, or in
any other Respect, they judge him unfit to Succeed; nay, that they may, without
sin, Depose and Destroy a Prince, though actually vested and possessed of the
Throne, if in the administration of the Government he answer not that Trust,
which was reposed in him by his Lords and Masters, the People. In fine, He told
the Queens Subjects, that the Descent and Disposal of the Crown did depend
wholly upon their pleasure, and that they had an unlimited power at any time to
determine upon this or that form of Government, and might alter it when they
thought fit, and choose whether they would have a King, or no, and turn the
Monarchy into an Aristocracy, or Democracy, as they saw occasion, and judged it
best.

By these Popular Principles, this Jesuit and the rest hoped to serve these
Ends; either to prevent the Succession of the King of Scots, (which was the
first and Grand design) or in case he should Succeed, to prepare a ready way to
Ruin him, and indeed to ruin his Family too, and to subvert his Government,
if they did not answer the expectations of the Church of Rome. Nor did they
fail of their ends in every particular. For though King James came peaceably to
the Crown, yet these Principles did work so powerfully, that they laid Barrels
and Trains of Gunpowder under the Parliament House, and afterward made stirs
in the Parliament it self, and in Forty One raised a Bloody and Unnatural
Rebellion, and in the end changed the Government into a Republic, and caused
the Monarch and the Monarchy to be cut off together. Haec Ithacus voluit; these
were the natural effects of this Book, called Doleman, which some now have
thought convenient and necessary for their Turns to set out again in a new and
more polished Edition.

These things being observed touching the Author, and of the Design in Printing
and Reprinting of this Book, I cannot fancy my self to have paid you all those
Respects which are due from me, till I take a few steps further, and show you a
little, first, what Use has been made of this Book and these Dolemanian
Principles of late; and then what those Reasons are on which these Principles
are founded. For affairs are Uncertain now, as they were when these Principles
came first into the world: The Book is admirably well Calculated for our
Meridian (otherwise it might have lain still in the dark, and no more regarded
than an Almanac out of date:) Methinks I see in it some of Lilly's
Prognostics, or Hopes at least, of some change of weather: and therefore it is
necessary, that to preserve our Peace and good Government, we look a little
into the Nature and Strength of the aforesaid Principles.

And the rather, because I see they are very Pleasant and Taking with the
People; their bare Popularity, though they have no Reason or Sense, is enough
to recommend them to the favor and kind embraces of the Vulgar, who love
dearly to be meddling with Government, and cannot but be Tickled at Heart when
they are told, that they have a Sovereign Power in them which they did not
dream of, that they can Make and Unmake Kings, that Crowns and Scepters lie at
their Worships feet, that Princes must make court to them for Succession, and
that they can, if they will, bar them out, and come like the Tribunes of the
People of Rome, with an uncontrollable Veto. These are fine and delicate
Doctrines, and beyond the Fawnings of some others, who tell us, to please us,
that we have power to choose all our Bishops; though I confess we may think it
fitting, that we should have power in both points, as well as in one; and as
the world goes, Kings and Bishops way well expect to fare alike.

But in good earnest, Sir, I am grieved at Heart (and it is enough to raise the
Indignation of every Honest man) to find, that so many among us do
inconsiderately (not to say, maliciously) run altogether upon this Jesuits
Principles, and that in these times, when we are all so afraid of Popery, that
one would think we should be most especially afraid of Jesuitism. Yet if you
please to give your self the trouble to peruse those seditious Pamphlets which
have been published of late, you will find what I note to be true; that
generally they borrow large portions out of this most wicked Libel, written by
a most wicked Wretch, on purpose to ruin the interest of the Protestant Cause:
Nay, that the Authors of them have so exactly followed the Scope, the Tenants,
the Arguments, the Examples, and the very Phrase (many times) that we may well
believe they had old Doleman open before them as they were writing.

I shall give you Proof and Instances of this by and by. In the mean while we
may conclude, that these men were not so straightned, as to be Constrained to
do this. For they might have been abundantly furnished with Anti-Monarchical
and Republican Principles out of other Authors, such as De jure Magistrate. in
subdit.
Ficklerus, Vindiciae cont. Tyran.
Stephanus* Junius Brutus, Knox, (...), and some more of that Age, who were
main good Friends to the Jesuits in this point. But because Fa. Parsons has
made great Improvements of those Principles which others had vended a little
before, and because his great design was to bar all Succession to the Crown of
England by Natural Descent and Inheritance, and to that end has used all the
most plausible Arguments; and because all this is serviceable to the Designs of
some Now, who consider more what is Expedient than what is Just, therefore they
do willingly choose to make this Author (though a Jesuit) their Guide, and do
take all their Measures from this Libel, rather than others.

How they will answer this to God, to their own Consciences, and to the sober
World, I do not know; but that the Truth of what I say may be manifest, I shall
instance in some of the Principal Pamphlets, which have been written of late.

And I shall begin with that which has made the greatest Noise, viz. the
History of Succession, which the Author says is Collected out of the Records,
and the most Authentic Historians. But had he said, Collected out of Doleman,
he had spoken a more Ingenuous Truth, than perhaps he has told us in the whole
Book besides. For, though he has adorned his Margin with div^rs Quotations out
of Records and Authors, (which I suppose he consulted to conceal his Theft, or
to put a fair Color upon it at least) yet the Matter is taken out of that
Authentic Historian, Doleman. However he came by the Fringe and the Lace,
'twas his Friend, honest Fa* Parsons that furnished him with the Stuff.

I do not intend to examine the Candor, the Sincerity, or the Logic of this
Collector, because it is a thing besides my Purpose, and for the consideration
of those things I refer you, Sir, to that Learned and Solid Answer called, The
great Point of Succession discussed, etc. and to that excellent Tract
entitled, Religion and Loyalty supporting each other. For my business is only
to show matter of Fact, that this Collector has filch'd his Pamphlet out of
that Jesuit, who to cheat the world gave himself the Surname of Doleman.

In this blessed History we are to consider, first, the Design; Secondly, the
Principles of the Author; And thirdly, the Examples he uses to serve his Ends.

I^ Now the Design is to prove, that the Government of England is not a settled
Hereditary Monarchy; that Succession is not Title enough to make the next Heir
King, but that the Election of him ought to be before his Coronation; that the
Succession is wholly under the Control of Parliament, and that they can limit
it, and subject it to Conditions, and alter the Course of it as they please.

Now, this is the very Sum of the First, and the sixth Chapter in Doleman,
Part. 1. For in the first Chapter he tells us, That Succession to Government by
nearness of Blood is not by Law of Nature or Divine, but only by Humane and
Positive Laws of every particular Commonwealth, and consequently may upon just
causes be altered by the same, page 1. And in the sixth Chapter he affirms,
That though Priority and Propinquity of Blood in Succession, is greatly to be
honored, regarded, and preferred in all affairs of Dignity and Principality,
yet are we not so absolutely and peremptorily bound thereunto always, but that
upon just and urgent occasions that course may be altered and broken, page 104.
He founds Regal Power in Succession and Election both, page 105. And being to
answer that Question, What interest a Prince has by Secession alone to any
Crown, before he be Crowned or Admitted by the Commonwealth? He says, That an
Heir Apparent before his Coronation and Admission by the Realm, has the same
(and no more) interest to the Kingdom, which the King of Romans, or Caesar has
to the German Empire after his Election and before he be Crowned; and to use a
more familiar Example to to Englishmen, as the Mayor of London has to the
Mayoralty, after he is chosen, and before he be admitted, or have taken his
Oath. For as this man in rigor is not truly Mayor, nor has his Jurisdiction
before his Oath, and Admission, nor the other is properly Emperor before he be
Crowned, so is not an Heir Apparent truly King, though his Predecessor be dead,
until he be Crowned and admitted by the Commonwealth, page 106. In fine; He is
Positive, that Heirs Apparent are not true Kings, until their Coronation, how
just soever their Title of Succession otherwise be, and so, that no Allegiance
is due unto them before they be Crowned, page 108.

To make these things out, is the Grand Design of Father Parsons and his
Plagiary, the Author of this History of Succession. And though you well know,
that all this is contrary to the Laws of our Realm, which recognize all
Succession to this Crown to be by Inheritance, and allow of no Interregnum, but
say, that the King never dies, because the next Heir is actually King that
very minute after the breath of his Predecessor is gone; yet you see, how
closely this Collector has followed the steps of Doleman, all our Laws to the
contrary notwithstanding.

II. As touching this Collectors Principles. 1. He is clearly of opinion, That
the Commonwealth has Power to change the direct order of Succession, for
otherwise the Government would want power to defend it self, by making such
alterations as the variety of Accidents in several Ages may make absolutely
necessary, p. 15. That in Parliament a Supreme Uncontrollable Power is lodged,
Ibid. That a Nation (in excluding a Successor) is to be excused for executing
Justice Summarily, and without the Tedious Formalities of Law, when the
necessity of things requires haste, page 19. And that the People are bound in
Conscience to obey (the Parliaments) Laws, and must not pretend to enquire
whether they were made upon just grounds, ibid.

Now such simple men as you and I, have ever thought, and do think still, that
all Humane Power is subordinate to Gods, under the Correction of it, and
Controulable by it: That Lawgivers ought to take their measures according to
the rules of natural Justice, and Equity; That m^ns Laws do not oblige, if they
be contrary to the Laws of God or Nature; That Parliaments have not that Power,
which Bellarmine (another Jesuit) gives the Pope, to make Good Evil, and Evil
Good; That common Honesty ought to Govern the whole world; That Necessity
cannot be pretended to justify an Evil Action; that no Commonwealth has a
Sovereign Power over the Commands of God and Nature; and that diverse Statutes
and Acts have been judged ipso facto void, and without need of Repealing, being
contrary to Divine or Natural Laws.

But you see, that this Collector is of another Faith, telling us, That a
Commonwealth can do any thing, what they please, without any Control. But the
reason is, because he takes Father Parsons for his Great Apostle. For he,
speaking of a Commonwealths Power to Exclude a Successor, though contrary to
the ordinary course of Law, says, That our Common Law must needs have further
consideration than of the bare Propinquity of Blood only, for that otherwise it
would be a very imperfect Law, that has not provided for accidents so weighty
and important, as these are, for saving and conserving of our Commonwealth;
Preface to Doleman, page penult. These are the words which the Collector has
in a manner Transcribed and copied out. Moreover the Jesuit tells us, Though
it is hard that the same men should be Parties and Judges too.
That the Commonwealth has Authority to judge of the Lawfulness of the Cause
(for putting back the Prince;) That God does allow for a just and sufficient
cause in this behalf, the only Will and and Judgment of the Weal Public it
self: And seeing that they only are to be Judges of this case, we are to
presume, that what they determine is Just and Lawful for the Time; and that
they being Lords and Owners of the whole business, it is enough for every
particular man to subject himself to that which his Commonwealth does in this
behalf, and to obey simply without any further inquisition, etc. page 159, 160.
part. 1. Now do but compare this passage in Doleman with that cited above out
of the History of Succession, and judge whether this Jesuit was not that
Collectors Guide.

2. Another of the Collectors Principles is this, That though Government is of
Nature, and derived from God; because nothing is more Natural in man than the
Desire of Society, and without Government Society would be intolerable; yet it
cannot be proved from hence that the Government cannot be molded into several
Forms, agreeable to the Interest and dispositions of several Nations, and may
not be varied from time to time, as occasion requires, by the mutual consent of
the Governors, and of those who are Governed, page 16.

This is right Father Parsons all over, and so exactly, that as I was comparing
the Books, I was like to have mistaken Doleman for the History of Succession.
For thus says the Jesuit, Albeit Sociability or Inclination to live together
in company, man with man, be of Nature, and consequently also of God, that is
Author of Nature; and though Government in like manner, and Jurisdiction of
Magistrates (which does follow necessarily upon this living together in
company) be also For without Order there is nothing else to be hoped, but
Horror and Confusion, Doleman, Pa. 6. ca. 1. part. 1.
of Nature, yet the particular Form or manner of this or that Government, in
this or that Fashion, as to have many Governors, few, or one: or that they
should have this or that Authority, more or less, for longer or shorter time,
or be taken by Succession or Election, themselves and their Children, or next
in Blood, all these things (says the Jesuit, agreeably to the Collector) are
not by Law either Natural or Divine, but they are ordained by particular
positive Laws of every Country; Doleman, part. 1. cap. 1. page 2, 3. I have
seen many an Harmonia Evangelica; but never shall I see a fairer Harmonia
Politica than between these two Brethren in iniquity, Parsons and the Collector
of the History of Succession.

3. Especially if we add another Principle of his, viz. that it is no matter of
what Stock or Lineage a Successor to the Crown is, or whether next Heir or not,
if he does but pass for one that Promises well, and is likely to make a good
King. And to let us know his mind in this, he tells us a remarkable Story,
which I beg of you, Sir, to observe, because it is word for word in Doleman. I
cannot (says our Collector) forbear reciting the Speech, which Ambassadors
sent from the States of France, made to Charles of Lorrain, when they had
solemnly rejected him (though he was Brother to Louys d' Outremes, and next
H^ir to the Crown) and had Elected Hugh Capet for their King. They told him,
that every one knew that the Succession to the Crown of France belonged to him,
and not to Hugh Capet. But yet (say they) the very same Laws which give you
this right of Succession, do judge you also unworthy of the same; for that you
have not hitherto endeavored to frame your manners according to the Prescript
of those Laws, nor according to the Usages and Customs of your Country, but
rather have allied your self with the German Nation our old Enemies, and have
loved their vile and base manners. Wherefore seeing you have forsaken the
ancient virtue and sweetness of your Country, we have also forsaken and
abandoned you, and have chosen Hugh Capet for our King, and put you back; and
this without any scruple of Conscience at all, esteeming it better and more
just to live under him, enjoying our ancient Laws, Customs, Privileges, and
Liberties, than under You, the Heir by blood, in oppression, strange Customs
and Cruelty. For as those who are to make a Voyage at Sea, do not much consider
whether the Pilot be Owner of the Ship, but whether he be Skilful and Wary, so
our care is to have a Prince to govern us gently and happily (which is the End
for which Princes were appointed) and for these ends we judge this man fitter
to be our King. Hist. of Succession, page 15.

There is a mistake in this Story: for Charles of Lorrain was Son to one Louys,
and Uncle to another. However thus our Collector sets it down, and quotes
Gerard for it, when he ought (but that he would not betray himself) to have
quoted his Father Parsons, who relates the same Story in the same words, and
directed him to Gerard.

I think it not amiss (says the Jesuit) to put down here some part of the
Oration or Speech, which the Ambassadors that were sent from the State of
France unto Charles of Lorrain, after their Election of Hugh Capet, and
Charles's Exclusion, did use unto him in their names, which Speech Gerard does
recount in these words: Every man knows (Lord Charles) that the Succession of
the Crown of France, and so on, to the very Similitude of the Pilot, which our
Collector uses, being of the same mind with the Jesuit, who speaking of a
Successor to the Crown of England, says, I for my part do feel my self much of
the French opinion before alleged, that so the Ship be well and happily
guided, I esteem it not much important of what Race or Nation the Pilot be.
Doleman. Part. 1. Cap. 8. Page 139, 140, 143. Father Parsons moreover observes,
For remarques upon this Story see the Answer to the History of Succession, p.
25.
That this Hugh Capet had that Surname given him when he was a Boy, for that he
was wont to snatch away his Fellows Caps from their heads, whence he was termed
Snatch-cap, which some did interpret as an Abodement that he would also also
snatch a Crown from the true Owners head in time, as afterward it fell out.
But this our Collector would take no notice of, lest Hugh Capet should be looked
upon as an Usurper, as indeed he was, notwithstanding the Election and
Approbation of the Realm.

4. It is an avowed Principle in Doleman, that it is both sinful in an high
degree, and against all Wisdom and Policy to suffer a Prince of a contrary
Religion to come to the Crown; Part. 1. Cap. 9.

And thus much our Collector insinuates, when he says, He will not dispute how
far the difference of Religion, which will also necessarily draw on a change of
the Gocernment, does justify men in seeking to preserve the two dearest things
on earth in an orderly and lawful way. Page 19.

5. But he does confidently insist on this, that the Crown is not a bare
Inheritance, but an Inheritance accompanying an Office of Trust, and that if a
man's defects render him incapable of the Trust, he has also forfeited the
Inheritance. ibid.

This, if it be true, equally holds against the King himself, as well as
against his Heir. For faileur in point of Trust may be (and has been) pleaded,
for the Deposing of the King, as well as for the Exclusion of his Successor.
And so Parsons reckons; who affirms likewise, that the Princes power is
Potestas Vicaria, or delegata, that is to say, a Power delegate, or by
Commission, given (by the Commonwealth) with such Restrictions, Cautels, and
Conditions, as if the same be not kept, but wilfully broken on either part,
then is the other not bound, etc. Doleman, part, 1. Cap. 4. page 59. And from
this Principle he concludes, that even a true King may be deposed when he
answers not that Trust which the People has reposed in him: Id. part. 2. page
48. cap. 4. This Jesuitical Doctrine did not long ago cost one of our Kings his
Throne and his Life too; I pray God it may not be so chargeable to another; but
it is ominous, when Pretending Protestants will be nibling at such Jesuitical
Principles, which under color of keeping back an Heir, naturally and
necessarily strike at the very Crowned Head.

III. Having hitherto instanced in some of this Gentleman's Principles, to show
you that he has carefully written after the vilest of Men, and the worst of
Books, I shall now for your further satisfaction instance in those Examples
which he makes use of (and has borrowed out of Doleman) to prove, that
Succession to the Crown (and even to the Crown of England) depends upon the
Pleasure and Courtesy of the People.

If you compare the History of Succession with this Book of the Jesuit Parsons,
you will find it to be nothing but a little Improvement of the eighth Chapter
of Doleman, Part. 1.

For that Jesuit and this Collector undertaking to prove, that the Commonwealth
has power to alter Titles of Succession, as public Necessity or Utility shall
require, do both of them show, what the Realm of England has done, and what
Alterations they have made formerly, and their Instances are alike, as you may
see by casting your Eye upon the two following Columns, (for it will not be
amiss to set the Thief just over against the Knave.)

Thus says Doleman, the Jesuit. And thus says the Collector of the History of
Succession, the Protestant. King Egbert came to the Crown by Election, though
he were not next by propinquity of Blood, Doleman, page 144. Egbert himself,
the first English Monarch, came to the Crown not by Succession, but Election,
being no ways related to Bithricus. Hist. of Succession. Page 1. Athelstan,
illegitimate Son to to King Edward, was preferred to the Crown before his two
Brothers, the Princes Legitimate. Id. page 145. Athelstan, though a Bastard
succeeded his Father, and was Preferred to his Legitimate Brothers, Id. page 1.
King Edmond left Two Lawful Sons, but for that they were young, they were both
put back by the Realm, and their Uncle Eldred was preferred before them. Id. p.
146. Eldred, the younger Brother of King Edmond, was advanced to the Throne,
though the deceased Prince had two Sons, Id. ibid. Canutus was admitted for
King of England by the whole Parliament and consent of the Realm, Id. p. 149
Canutus had so great an Interest, that by an unanimous consent, in a full
Council, he was Elected King, Id. page 2. After the death of Canutus, all the
States of the Realm met together at Oxford, to consult whom they should make
King, and at last by the more part of voices was chosen Harald, the first Son
of Canutus by a Concubine, etc. Id. p. 149. Immediately upon the death of
Canutus, there was assembled at Oxford a great Council to determine, who ought
to succeed, and Harald Harefoot, Canutus his Bastard, was Elected, etc, Id. p.
2. After the death of Harald, Hardicanutus was received with the great good
will of all, and by common consent made King, Id. p. 150. Harald died in the
fifth year of his Reign, and then the People were content to accept of
Hardiknute for their King. Id. p. 2. Haraicanutus being dead, the States of the
Realm determined to choose Alured for their King, Id. ibid. After the death of
Hardiknute the People proceeded to elect Alfred, Id. ibid. Alfred being
traitorously murdered by Earl Godwin of Kent, Prince Edward was chosen King,
Id. ibid. Alfred being murdered by the treachery of Earl Godwin, they choose his
Brother Edward, commonly called Edward the Confessor, Id. ibid. Nor had the
State herein any respect to antiquity of Blood, for that before Alfred were
both his own elder Brother Prince Edward, and before them both were Edmond and
Edward, the Children of their elder Brother Edmond Ironside, Id. ibid. Nor were
these Elections of theirs made with any respect to nearness of Blood; for
Edmond Ironside, their Elder Brother, had a Son then alive, whose name was
Edward, Id. ibid. The Confessors Title by Succession cannot be justified, for
that his eldest Brothers Son was then alive, to wit, Prince Edward, who in this
Kings Reign came into England, and brought his Wife and three lawful Children
with him. But yet was not this good King Edward (the Confessor) so scrupulous,
as to give over his Kingdom to any of them, or to doubt of the right of his own
Title, which he had by Election, etc. Id. p. 151. And though this Edward had an
undoubted Title to the Crown, if Proximity of Blood could have given it, yet
the Confessor was so far from suspecting any danger from such a Title, as that
he invited his Nephew into England, and welcomed him when he came with the
greatest expressions of Joy, and entertained him with the greatest confidence,
Id. ibid. This King Edward being dead, Harald, Son of Earl Godwin, had also the
approbation of the Realm to be King, Id. p. 152. Nor had the People any regard
to this Royal Blood upon the death of the Confessor, but elected Harald, the
Son of Earl Godwin, Id. p. 2. All this is before the Conquest; but if we should
pass any further down, we should find more Examples than before, viz. of Kings
made in England, by only Authority and Approbation of the Commonwealth,
contrary to the ordinary cours^ of Linc^l Successi^n by Propinquity of Blood,
Id. p. 53. These few, among many other instances which may be given, will show
plainly enough, how men entitled themselves to the Crown in those days, and
that then it was no strange thing to hear of a Parliaments meddling with the
Succession. -- Let us go on more particularly to observe, what has been done
since the Conquest, Id. ibid. After the Conquerors death, William Rufus was
chosen King, though younger Brother to Robert Duke of Normandy, to whom the
most part of the Realm (he means the Normans) was inclined, to have given the
Kingdom presently* as due to him by Succession, notwithstanding his Fathers
Will to the coutrary, Id. p. 153. William Rufus had the consent of the Nobles
and wise men for his Title; and the English Interest was so great at that time,
that it k^pt the Crown upon William Rufus's head, in spite of all that the
Normans could do in the behalf of Robert, though they universally joined with
him, Id. p. 3. By like means got Henry his younger Brother the same Crown
afterward, to wit, by fair promises to the People, etc. Id. p. 154. It was by
the full consent and Counsel of the whole body of the Realm, that the
Conq^erors Third Son Henry was Elected for their King, Id. p. 3. King Henry
dying left a Daughter behind him named Mawd, which being married first to the
Emperor Henry V. he died without Issue, and then was she married again the
second time to Geoffry Plantaginet, Earl of Anjou, to whom she bare a Son,
named Henry. -- But for that Stephen, Earl of Bologn, was thought by the State
of England to be more fit to govern, he was admitted, and Henry put back, Id.
p. 154. King Henry died, leaving no Issue but Mand his Daughter, who had been
married to the Emperor, and afterward to Geoffry Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou.
No dispute can be made, but that she had all the right which Proximity of Blood
could give; yet Stephen, Earl of Bologn, stepped in before her, and prevailed
with the Estates of the Realm to Elect him King, Id. p. 3. The States some
years after in a Parliament made an agreement, that Stephen should be lawful
King during his life only, and that Henry and his Offspring should succeed him.
Id. p. 155. Afterward Stephen came to an Agreement with the Empress and her
Son, and a Parliament (who alone could give a Sanction to such Agreement) was
assembled to confirm it, and then Stephen publicly adopts Henry for his Son,
and with their full consent declares him his Heir, and with the same consent
Henry gives Stephen the name of Father, and agrees that he should continue to
be King during his Lise, etc. Id. p. 4. After King Richard, John, younger
Brother to Richard, was Admitted and Crowned by the States of England, and
Arthur Duke of Britain, Son and Heir to Geoffry (that was Elder Brother to
John) was against the ordinary course of Succession Excluded, Id. p. 155.
Richard dying without Issue, Arthur (Son of Geoffry Duke of Britain,) the next
Heir to the Crown ought to have Succeeded. But John, younger Brother to
Richard, without regarding this divine right of his Nephew, applies himself to
the People for a more sure, though but a Humane Title, who being summoned
together Elected him King, Id. p. 5. Some years after, when the Barons and
States of England misliked utte^ly the Government and Proceeding of this K.
John, they rejected him again, and chose Lewis the Prince of France to be their
King, and did swear Fealty to him in London; depriving also the young Prince
Henry, King John's Son, that was at that time but eight years old, Id. p. 156.
When King John gave over to dissemble his Nature, and went about to change his
Religion, and discovered himself not to be that worthy man, which the People
supposed him to have been, they remembered whence he derived his Title and
proceeded, Observe, that the power of Deposing a King naturally follows from
the Doctrine of the Peoples power to choose one.
upon the same reason they had chosen him, to make a new Election, choosing
Lewis Son of Philip King of France, who coming to London, was there Elected,
and Constituted King, Id. p. 5. Upon the death of King John, the People
recalled again their former Sentence, and admitted (Prince) Henry to the Crown,
by the name of King Henry the Third, and disanulled the Oath of Allegiance made
unto Lewis Prince of France, Id. p. 156. King John happening to die very
opportunely, the Great men of the Kingdom were called together, and Prince
Henry then an Infant, placed in the midst of them; and the whole Assembly cried
out unanimously, Fiat Rex; and acordingly they Crowned King Henry the Third,
and soon after compelled Lewis to renounce all pretenses to the Crown, Id. p.
6.

The Jesuit Parsons goes no further upon particulars, in Chap. 8. Part. 1. than
Henry the Third. But says, Should we enter (into the contention about the
Crown, between the Two Houses of York and Lancaster, which took their beginning
from King Henry the Third) we should see plainly, that the best of all their
Titles, after the deposition of King Richard the Second, depended on the
Authority of the Commonwealth, for that as the People were affected, and the
greater part prevailed, so were their Titles either allowed, confirmed,
altered, or disanulled by Parliaments; Cap. 8. Part. 1. Page 156.

This hint the Collector of the History of Succession took to proceed upon more
particulars still, and picked them up and down out of other places in Doleman,
to which Book he was mainly beholden for the History of the Pretenses, Claims,
Titles, and Fates of those Princes he names since Henry the Third.

The doubt, whether Edward the First, or his Brother Edmond were the Elder, he
fetched clearly out of Doleman, Part. 2. Cap. 2. page 25. and both Parsons and
this Collector say, that Edmond was believed (by some) to have been put by the
Crown for his Deformity. The Story of the deposition of Edward the Second is in
Doleman, Part. 1. cap. 3. p. 46, 47. The instance of Edward the Third's being
chosen and Elected by the People, you find it ibidem, and in part. 2. cap. 2.
of Doleman. The instance of King Richard the Second's being deposed, is in
Doleman, part. ^. cap. 3. and part. 2. cap. 3, 4. That of Henry the Fourth's
being Elected by the People (as he pretends) is in the same place. And what our
Collector says of Henry the Fifth, is all taken at large, and word for word
(in a manner) out of Doleman, part. 1. cap. 6. page 108, 109.

Not to trouble you with every little particular, when you have already so much
of a Specimen, I dare say, that let any man carefully peruse, observe, and
remember the Contents of Doleman, and he will easily discover, that this Book
is the Forge, out of which the Collector of the History of Succession has
taken all those Irons, which he has sent abroad to set this Kingdom on Fire.

But I must observe unto you, that as he has followed the Jesuit over hedge
and ditch in his Examples, so he has followed him exactly too in dealing
basely with the world, by downright Falsities in some things, by gross
Partiality and disingenuity in others, and by Illogical Consequences in the
rest, forcing out such Conclusions as the instances do not really yield him, to
serve his turn. But for this I must entreat you to consult well those two
excellent Tracts which I recommended unto you above. And so much for that
Gentleman.

From whom we could not expect any other Notions, than what are serviceable to
his secular Ends, because his Book argues him to be one that is a mere
Politician, regardless of the Laws of Religion, and governed only by his
Interest: and he must thank your Charity, if you do not think him to be much of
the mind of a Gentleman, famous now for his zeal (whether for his Country or
himself you may judge it) who said once upon a time, That he is a Fool who has
any more of Religion than what will serve his Interest. And if that be true, I
must give him that due Character, which he has been meriting for above these
40 years, that he for his part is one of the wisest of men.

But of all men living, I wonder at Mr. Hunt; a person whose name I cannot
mention without due respect, because in his Argument for the Bishops Right,
etc. he has showed a great deal of good Learning in the Laws, and has expressed
his just Zeal for the Interest of the Church, and that deep sense (which I am
persuaded he has) of the Calamitous condition which this poor Nation is now
in. So that I should have taken no notice of his writings, but what would have
been entirely for his Honor, but that his Personal Worth (which I love and
value) may probably give a Reputation to some Foreign and Groundless Opinions
which he runs upon in his Postscript, and which the Jesuit Parsons has
furnished even him with.

I have heard say, that when our Government was lately in a fair way to be run
down, he was prevailed with to write that Postscript partly by Fear, and partly
as Penance and Satisfaction (to a Party) for the Argument which he had written
before. This is clear, that the Bishops are more beholden to him than the King
is: for he owns their Authority (as Bishops) to be Divine; but as for the Kings
title to his Crown, he believes it, as Doleman (alias Parsons) did, to be a
mere Human thing.

If any of our Clergy deny this, I see no reason Mr. Hunt has to be so very
angry with 'em; for they hold no more than what all good Christians have ever
held, no more than what the Church of England has declared, no more than what
the Laws of our Country do own and will bear them out in.

I have been told by many of them, that Mr. Hunt has done them wrong, and that
he may convince himself, if he will but look into their Sentiments well, and
consider them with an Indifferent and Candid mind: but where he pretends to
Vindicate and to be Concerned for them, there he accuseth'em, and the charge is
unjust, and, had another drawn it up, I would have said malicious, designed on
purpose to render the Clergy odious for being steady and true to the established
Government, in a time when so many are longing for a Change. Those Fancies and
Dreams of his, that the Clergy of England are for a Popish Successor and no
Parliaments, that they allow of Arbritrary Power, that they are ready to abett
any Extravagancies in a Prince, and the like, are idle, evil and unworthy
insinuations; and if Mr. Hunt please to enter the Lists, I will find him one
that shall undertake the Cause in this point, out of that Veneration which we
all ought to have for that Sacred Function, and out of just and due respects to
our present Clergy, than which perhaps this Nation was never yet blessed with a
better.

But, Sir, my business is to show you, that Mr. Hunt has been foully imposed
upon by the Jesuit Parsons, as to Principles and Doctrines, which concern the
State. And for evidencing thereof, you may please to remember, that it is a
fundamental Principle in Doleman, That all Power and Authority to Institute, to
Modifie, or to Change the particular form of any Government, and to admit or
exclude a Successor in Monarchy, is wholly and uncontroulably in the People.

Now this is taken for granted by Mr. Hunt, as if it were as clear as a
Postulatum in the Mathematics; and so he does not so much as offer at any
solid and just proof of it, only now and then touches upon some notions in
Doleman, which at first sight may seem to look a little that way.

Sir, I would not willingly and knowingly do this Gentleman any the least wrong
or unkindness; nay, I have that respect for him, that I could strain my Charity
to believe, that he himself has not borrowed of Doleman, but some body else
for him.

But that there has been borrowing in the case, you may easi^y perceive by the
following account.

The Jesuit says, And Mr. Hunt says, That though Government and Jurisdiction
of Magistrates be of Nature (and consequently also of God) yet the particular
form or manner of this or that Government, is not by Law either Natural or
Divine, but is ordained by particular Laws of every Country. Doleman, part. 1.
page 2, 3. That Government is from God, as he has made Governments Necessary
in the General order of things, but the Specification thereof is from men.
Postscript, p. 38. Father Parsons tells us, that particular Forms of Government
are not determined by God or Nature, for then they should be All one in all
Nations, seeing God and Nature are one to All. Doleman, part 1. page 7. 11. And
Mr. Hunt tells us, that no man intends by any thing in the Scripture, that All
Mankind is obliged to any One Form of Government, and therefore All men are
left to their own. Posts. p. 39. It is left unto every Nation or Country to
choose that Form of Government which they shall like best, and think most fit
for the Natures and Conditions of their people. id. p. 7. 10. Civil Offices are
of Humane Original, id. Argument. p. 241. The Government is de jure such as it
is, ibid. God never made any Commonwealth but one by his Directive Will, and
that only for One Nation: for in these things he has left men ordinarily in
the hands of their own Councils, and to their own Prudence. ibid. God approves
what a Realm determines in choosing or changing its form of Government.
Doleman, page 10, 11, 58, 118. Such Governments which men make God approves,
and requires obedience to them, Mr. Hunt in Postscript. p. 38. The Commonwealth
has power to choose their own fashion of Government, as also to change the same
upon reasonable causes. Doleman, par. 1. cap. 1. page 10. No Civil
establishment but is Controulable and Alterable to the public weal.
Postscript, p. 42.

Though many Learned and Great men have believed (and for good Reasons, as I
may show you hereafter) that Monarchical Government came into the World by Gods
own Grant and Appointment.

Yet Doleman says, that Monarchy was commonly chosen by the people in the
beginning. Part. 1. page 12, 21, 66. And Mr. Hunt asks, where is the Charter
of Kings from God Almighty to be read or found? Postscript, page 36. The Jesuit
alleges, that St. Peter calls Kingly Authority a Humane Creatu^e, for that by
man's free Choice this particular form of Government (as all others also) is
appointed in every Commonwealth, and that by Man's Election and Consent, the
same is laid upon some particular Man or Woman, according to the Laws of every
Country. Doleman, part 1. cap. 2. page 14. And Mr. Hunt alleges in like
manner, that Saint Peter styles Kings, as well as the Governors under them,
the Ordinance of Man, which cannot have any other sense, but that Men make
them, and give them their Powers. Postscript, page 37.

Whereas an Objection was foreseen, that God said to Solomon, By me Kings
reign, Prove. 8. 15. and that St. Paul told the Romans, that there is no Power
but of God; the Powers that be, are Ordained of God; whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, Romans 13. 1, 2. And whereas
the Apostle does there speak not only of Authority in General and in the
Abstract, but points also to the very Person of the chief Magistrate (to Nero
himself) stiling him, the Minister of God, a Revenger, one that bears the
Sword, meaning plainly the Man;

To this the Jesuit answers by a Jesuitical evasion, that all this is to be
understood of Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction in itself, according to the
first institution. Doleman, part 1. cap. 1. page 7. And Mr. Hunt answers to the
very same effect, that this is meant of Government in the General, which is
called Gods Ordinance for this reason, because in general God approves of
Governments. Postscript, page 37.

Yet this reaches not the point, nor is it any answer at all. For the
Scripture there speaks of the Person and Power of a Monarch, and of
Government by a Monarch; and so it follows, that Monarchy is of Divine
Institution, the Ordinance of God himself. To evade which, the Jesuit and Mr.
Hunt do equally hold, that Regal Government is by Gods Permission; that Kings
are said to Reign by God, because they Reign by his Permission; and that their
Power is the Ordinance of God, because Gods Permission goes along with the
Peoples Choice. Doleman, part 1. c. 6. page 99, 100. and Postscript, page 36.
Both of them do interpret it, not of Gods Directive, but his Permissive Will;
which is not pertinent, nor home to the purpose, because Gods General
Providence is over all things: He suffers even Sin to Reign; he permits Thieves
to Steal, and Murderers to Kill; and yet who will dare to say, that by him
Thieves R^b, and that Murder is his Ordinance?

As to the point of Succession to a Crown by Descent, Inheritance, and Birth,

Thus says Father Parsons. And thus says Mr. Hunt. It was ordained by the
Commonwealth, that the elder and first in Blood should succeed. Doleman, part
1. cap. 6. page 106. The Succession to the Crown is Hereditary, because the
People so appointed it, would have it so, or consented to have it so.
Postscript, page 43. Some other conditions must needs be requisite for coming
to Government by Succession, besides the only propinquity or priority in blood
-- and yet it seems they are not prescribed by any Law of Nature or Divine, for
that then they should be both immutable, and the self same in all Countries (as
God and Nature are one and the same to all, without change) where
notwithstanding we see, that these conditions and circumstances of Succeeding
by Birth, are diverse or different in different Countries; as also they are
subject to changes, according to the diversity of Kingdoms. Id. par. 1. c. 1.
p. 2. The Succession to the Crown is of a Civil Nature, not established by any
Divine right: several Kingdoms have several Laws of Succession, some are
Elective, others are Hereditary, under several limitations. -- The several
limitations of the Descent of the Crown, must be made by the People, in
conferring the Royal Dignity and Power, which is more or less in several
Kingdoms. Id. ibid. page 42. As the Commonwealth has Authority to choose and
change her Government, so has she also to limit the same with what Laws and
Conditions she pleases. Id. p. 10. If the Royal Family be extinct, it belongs
to the People to make a new King under what Limitations they please, or to make
none. Id. ibid. p. 43. The Commonwealth gives the King his great power over
them -- and prescribes Laws unto him -- and all Limitations of the Princes
absolute Authority, do come from the Commonwealth, as having Authority above
their Princes. Id. part 1. c. 2. It is evident, that the Succession to the
Crown, is the Peoples Right. Id. ibid. Both the one and the other of these two
points, were ordained by the Commonwealth, to wit, that the Elder and First in
Blood, should succeed, and that he should be such a Person, as can and will
govern to the public weal of all. Id. page 106. For Princes are subject to Law
and Order, and the Commonwealth which gave them their Authority for the common
good of all, may also restrain or take the same away again, if they abuse it to
the Common Evil. Id. p. 58. Though the Succession to the Crown is Hereditary,
because the People so appointed it, would have it so, or contented to have it
so; yet in a particular case for the saving of the Nation, the whole Line and
Monarchy it self, may be altered by the unlimited Power of the Legislative
Authority. Id. Postscript, page 43. If one of a false Religion, or some other
notorious wicked man or Tyrant should be offered by Succession, or otherwise to
govern among Christians, in these cases every man is bound to resist what he
can. Id. page 16^, 169, 172, 173. What unreasonableness is there in shutting
the door upon him, making it fast against him by an act of State, who has
excluded himself by his Principles and Designs. Id. Postscript, page 45.



Now if you ask, by what Law or Power a Commonwealth can pretend to keep a
Prince back from succeeding? The Jesuit and Mr. Hunt will tell you, that the
Will and Pleasure of a People in this Case is Law enough; that they have an
Unlimited and Arbitrary Power lodged in them, and that we ought to submit to
their determinations, without calling their proceedings into question, or
disputing about the Lawfulness and Justice of them.

Thus says Father Parsons. And thus says Mr. Hunt. The Realm or Commonwealth
has power to admit or put back the Prince or Pretender to the Crown; and the
same Commonwealth has Authority to judge of the Lawfulness of the Cause: it is
their own affair, and a matter that has its whole beginning, continuance and
substance from them alone, I mean from the Commonwealth, for that no man is
King or Prince by institution of Nature -- Therefore it is enough for every
particular man, to subject himself to that which his Commonwealth does in this
behalf, and to obey simply, without any further inquisition. Doleman, part 1.
page 160. It is Criminal, and dangerous to the being of any Polity to restrain
the Legislative Authority, and to entertain Principles that disables it to
provide remedy against the greatest mischiefs that can happen to any community.
No Government can support it self without an Unlimited Power in providing for
the happiness of the People. No Civil establishment but is Controulable and
Alterable to the Public Weal. Whatever is not of Divine Institution ought to
yield and submit to this Power and Authority. Mr. Hunt in Postscript, page 41,
42. And a little before; if any Law should exceed the declared measures of the
Legislative Authority, though in such a case men may have leave to doubt of the
lawfulness of such a Law, yet if it be not against any express Law of God, they
will upon a little Consideration determine it lawful, if it be necessary to the
Commonweal, for that nothing can be the concerns of men united in any Policy,
but may be governed and ordered by the Laws of their Legislature, for Public
good: for by the reason of all Political Societies, there is a submission made
of all Rights, especially of the common Rights of the Community, to the
Government of its own Laws. Id. ibid. page 32, 33.

According to these Principles, the Power of a Commonwealth is so unlimited,
boundless and extensive, as that it can overruled matters which are naturally
just and right, and justify any thing that is intrinsically evil, if it be for
the public good. And whether this be not against the tenor of Christianity,
and clearly repugnant to the Apostolic Rule, that we must not do evil that
good may come; and whether it be not perfectly introductive of a more Arbitrary
Power in the People, than can be feared in any English Prince, I leave to such
Honest and Indifferent Persons as your selves to judge.

It has been a Doctrine hitherto received by all rational and sober men, that
Dominion is not founded in Grace, and that men do not hold their Estates and
Civil Rights by their Religion. And I am confident, there is no Dissenter from
the Church of England, but would think himself hardly and unjustly dealt with,
should he be bound to forfeit all he is worth in the World for his
Nonconformity. Now one would think that Princes should have the same
privilege, at least which all Ordinary and Private men have. But in this point
some are very Partial, and would vary and alter the case, where a Successor to
the Crown is concerned.

For thus says the Jesuit Parsons; of all other holds, I esteem the tenure of
a Crown (if so it may be termed) the most irregular and extraordinary -- Men
may not judge of this as of other Pleas of particular persons, nor is their
trial alike; nor the common Maxims or Rules always of force in this thing as in
others: For if a Private man have many daughters, and die seized of Lands in
Fee-simple without Heir Male, his said Daughters by Law shall have the said
Lands, as Copartners, equally divided between them; but not the Daughters of a
King, for that the Eldest must carry away all, as though she were Heir Male;
Doleman, part 2. page 72. And thus says Mr, Hunt, as he had written just after
Doleman, The descent of the Crown is governed according to the presumed will of
the People, and the presumption of the Peoples will is made, by measuring and
considering what is most expedient to the public good, whereas Private Estates
are directed in their descent according to the Descendents. And this is the
reason that the descent of the Crown is governed by other Rules than Private
Estates: Only one Daughter, and not all, as in Private Estates, shall succeed
to the Crown, Postscript. page 42.

I did not think to have found so much of old Father Parsons his Paw in a New
Book set forth for the preservation of the Protestant Religion: For who could
dream, that any man should make use of a Woolf to save and secure the
Sheepfold? Yet I am willing to believe that Mr. Hunt in all this has no Design
which he thinks to be Evil, and am heartily sorry, that so zealous a Protestant
has so unfortunately run upon Jesuitical Principles.

But Mr. Hunt in page 33. of his Postscript directs us to a Pamphlet called,
The great and weighty Consideration considered. And good Reason he had to
recommend it, the Book is so very like his own, that a diligent Reader would
believe them both to be the Offspring of one Father, and as near of kin as
Simeon and Levi. Old Father Parsons can never die, as long as he has such an
hopeful Issue, so like him in Lineaments and Spirits: And I begin to wonder,
why some of late would be at the Expense to set out Doleman in a New Edition,
since in this and the two former Pamphlets a true Protestant (so called) may
find matter enough to compile a Dolemanian Catechism, were old Doleman utterly
lost; at least he might extract enough again to do the job of 41. and 48. and
that, I suppose, is as much as some in the world do desire.

Sir, you must well remember, that these are the Articles of Doleman's Creed,
That though Government, in the general Notion of it, be of Natural and Divine
Institution, yet the particular Forms of Governments depend upon the Consent
and Good will of the People, that Kings are their Creatures; that Succession to
the Crown is at their disposal, that they can alter Government and Succession
if they please, and even Depose the King himself, if they judge it needful; and
all this by a Boundless, and unlimited power of right belonging unto them.

Now this Considerers Faith is just of the same piece for all the world. For he
holds, That though God commands us in our Nature, to form our selves into
Governments, for that Mankind cannot tolerably subsist without them (which is
Dolemans very Reason;) though Government, because it makes men equal and
Reasonable, etc. seems to be the most principal Institution and Appointment of
God in Nature, yet the Forms of Government, the Persons of the Governors, the
Order of Succession, their respective Powers and Ministries, are of Man's
appointment, and an Humane Creature, page 8. exactly agreeable to what Doleman
delivers, page 2, 3.

If you urge, that Sovereign Power is called in Scripture the Ordinance of God,
Doleman will tell you in answer to it, that it is so called, because Gods
Approbation and Concurrence goes along with the Peoples consent. And this is
our Considerers very Notion, That Gods doing a thing is only the course of
Natural and Second causes, to which because God gives the Direction and Motion,
he both does, and is said to do all that is done, page 13. Whence he proceeds
to tell us, That every Form of Government is of our Creation, and not Gods,
ibid. That the King has his Authority from the Consent of the People in the
first constitution of the Government, page 20.

It Is upon the strength of this Principle that he tells us, with the same
Confidence as Doleman does, That no Laws of Men are so fundamental, but that
they are Alterable, Consider. p. 4. That a Government made by Men is not to be
left merely to Chance and the contingency of Birth, But is not that Right of
Power which a Father has over his Child, and an Husband over his Wife, by
Divine appointment?
page 5. That all rights of Property are of Positive and Civil appointment and
institution, p. 7. That no man can have, or is entitled to any thing, but what,
and as the Laws allots it to him, Ibid. And that (just according to Dolemans
Notion) every Form of Government was never intended unalterable, or at least
inflexible, but was intended and made under Reservations, reasonable Exceptions
of unforeseen Accidents, and rare Contingencies in Humane affairs, page 13.

Now to prove all this, That every Form of Government is of Humane Institution,
etc. Doleman offers and insisteth upon but one Argument, and it is this, viz.
That had Forms of Government been prescribed by any Law of Nature or Divine,
then they should be both immutable, and the self-same in all Countries, as God
and Nature are one, and the same to all, without change, Doleman part. 1. page
2, 3.

Now this is a very weak Argument; for God and Nature have been one and the
same to all, because Anciently every Form of Government in all Countries was
Monarchical: And it will no more follow, that this one Form of Government was
not settled at first, because several other Forms of Government were set up
afterward, than it will follow, that one sort of Religion was not instituted
at first, because so many sorts of Religion crept in afterward.

However, this poor Argument of Dolemans is made use of by our Considerer, For
(says he) Nature has made no Laws about Property, nor about Governments;
otherwise all Laws of Property and Right, and all Governments would have been
the same; for what she makes are Universal, as the Nature of man: Answer to a
Letter, p. 29.

It Is an avowed Principle in Doleman, That it belongs to the Commonwealth to
order all Succession to the Crown. And this is our Considerers Principle, That
Succession is properly the Right of the Community, p. 20. That Succession to
the Crown is the Peoples Right, the Right of the whole Community, their
Appointment, their Constitution, and their Creature; Answer to a Letter, page
32, 33.

Whereas it is urged well, that the King is by Nature, that he is our Natural
Prince, our Natural Liege Lord, etc. this Considerer calls this, Loathsome
Pedantry; Answer to a Letter, p. ^9. And in like manner says Doleman, When men
talk of a Natural Prince, or Natural Successor, if it be understood of one that
is born within the same Realm or Country, and so of our own Natural blood, it
has some sense: But if it be meant as though any Prince had his particular
Government or interest to succeed by institution of Nature, it is Ridiculous,
Doleman, part 1. page 11.

If you ask, What power a Commonwealth has to deprive a Successor without such
Causes and Reasons which in the Eye of the Law seem Just? Doleman will tell you
up and down, That the Peoples Power is Boundless, Uncontrollable, and
Unquestionable; and that it is to be presumed and owned, that what they do in
this case is just, because they do it. And at the same rate our Considerer
speaks, That no Government can want a power to preserve it self, (whether it
be by Right or Wrong means he considers not) page 4. That no private Right but
what is governable, and may be ordered as to the Legislature shall seem
necessary to the preservation of the whole, page 20. That the King and his
great Council, in providing for the establishment and security of the
Government, in their Proceedings are not tied up to the Forms of Judicial
proceedings; but are to act upon such inducements, and in such methods, whereby
the wisest men govern their affairs, in which they are at perfect Liberty, and
not under the restraint of Laws: And that they cannot do Unjustly, whatever
Methods or Means they use, that are Prudentially and Morally necessary to this
End, Ibid. p. 21.

It is justly demandable, How a Commonwealth came by this Prodigious,
Omnipotent, and Ungovernable Power, so as to be under no Laws of Religion or
Natural Equity? In answer whereunto Father Parsons says, (what I noted before)
That it would be a very imperfect Law, that has not provided for accidents so
weighty and important, as some are, for saving and conserving of a
Commonwealth, Preface to Doleman, part 1. Answerable whereunto is that Question
of our Considerer, Can we imagine a Government, which is of Humane contrivance,
to be without a Power to Preserve it self, and an Authority in cases that
threaten its Ruin, to interpose with apt remedies for its Preservation?
Consider. p. 5.

If by apt Remedies he meant Honest and Lawful means, we deny it not. But we
cannot yield, that any men have Authority to do Injustice. They may have Power
and Force enough to do so; as some upon Shuters-Hill have Power to take away my
Purse, and as the High-Court of Justice (so called) had to take away the late
Kings Life; but this is not Authority, or Lawful Power, or Lawful Proceeding.
No private man ought to lose his Estate, but for Legal Causes, and by Legal
Proceedings: To evade the force of this Argument, Parsons the Jesuit says,
That the Tenure of the Crown is irregular and extraordinary. Men may not judge
of this as of other Pleas of particular persons, nor is their trial alike, nor
the common Maxims or Rules always of force in this thing as in others. To prove
which he tells us, That only one Daughter of a King (though he has many) is to
go away with the Crown; whereas Private Estates are Divideable among all the
Daughters for want of Issue Male, Dolman, part 2. page 72. It seems there is
Law and Justice for Private persons, but not for Princes. And so this
Considerer reckons too, That the Right of Succession to Government is not
placed in the same rank with Private Inheritances, nor to be governed by the
same Rules. That there is one Rule for the Succession of the Crown; and another
for the Succession of Private Estates: For the descent of the Crown is governed
and directed according to the presumed will of the People, and this (says he)
gives us the Reason, (the very Reason in Doleman) why one Daughter or Female of
the next degree shall succeed to the Crown, and not all, if more than one;
whereas a Private Inheritance is equally divided amongst them all, Consider. p.
32.

Heirs Apparent are not true Kings until their Coronation; nor is Allegiance
due unto them before they be crowned, says Doleman, page 108. No Allegiance is
due to any Prince, but whom the Law appoints, and as the Law appoints, says
this Considerer, page 30.

But Doleman is Positive that Princes may lawfully be Deposed; and he observes
too (as a Remarkable Circumstance, as he calls it,) That God has wonderfully
concurred (for the most part) with such judicial Acts of the Commonwealth
against their evil Princes, not only in Prospering the same, but by giving also
some notable Successor in the place of the deposed, Page 26. and Chap. 3. Had
Father Parsons been alive in our days* perhaps he would have instanced in that
blessed Bird Oliver Cromwell, among the rest. But I leave it to you and to
other Honest men to judge, whether our Considerer had an eye to that passage
and observation in Doleman, when speaking of the Exclusion of the D. of Y. he
says, we know, and are most assured of the justness of the undertaking, and we
have good Hope in the Goodness of God, that he will Succeed it, p. 7.

Yet I do not much wonder at this, considering that he goes higher still, even
from the Successor to the Possessor of the Crown. For thus his Politics run,
The Crown does not lie in Dominion, but in Trust; not in Property, but in Care,
page 31. This is exactly Dolemans Notion, that a Princes power is, Potestas
Vicaria, or delegata; a power Delegate, or power by Commission from the
Commonwealth, given him as their Trustee, or Proxy, part 1. chap. 4.

Upon this Doctrine he builds that Position (and it naturally follows) that
true Kings may be Deposed, ibid. and part 2. cap. 4. wherein our Considerer
follows the Jesuit at the heels, owning that the People may recall their
Letters of Attorney, and exauctorate their lawful King, p. 6. where he says,
(and with base abusing Dr. Falkner, when he seems to commend him) I will hope
there are very few in this Nation so ill instructed, that does not think it in
the power of People to Depose a Prince, etc. Here the Gentleman speaks out and
home; and insinuates, that for a man to be a Martyr, or to bear the Cross of
Christ, is to be ill instructed. According to this Jesuitism is the only true
Orthodox Principle; and so this Considerer has lastily con'd Doleman thanks
for all his Orthodox instructions.

For, says Doleman, the Commonwealth has Authority above their Princes, page
19. And this Considerer calls the Commons, the Greatest and Best part of the
Nation, p. 6. which is plainly meant with respect to their Authority, because a
King cannot be deposed but by some that are supposed to be Greater and Better
than Himself. And so you see in the end what it is which this Gentleman and
others of his Party and Persuasion would fain be at. They pretend the
Preservation of Religion, and at the same time ven'd such Principles as
overthrow the very foundations of our Government; so true is that common
observation, that these Pamphleteers begin with his Royal Highness, and end at
last with his Royal Majesty.

I need not say any thing of this Considerer's short Historical Collection
touching the Succession of the Crown. For you and every body may easily see,
that it is taken out of Doleman. And so, let this Considerer and his Father
Parsons go together.

The next that comes to my hands is that Sir Positive Statesman, the Author of
Plato Redivivus, who was so well pleased with the Comical Preface to Doleman
(where the Jesuit, after a Poetical manner, brings in two Lawyers at Amsterdam,
discoursing about Succession to the Crown of England,) that he could not but
imitate the Poetical Fancy himself, bringing in a Noble Venetian, an English
Gentleman, and a Doctor at London, all discoursing about the present Government
in England: So that it is but altering the Scene, and the Quality of the
Interlocutors, and then the Dramatick Farce is in a manner the same.

I confess this Gentleman is not Doleman all over from Head to Foot, but seems
to have only the Guts and Garbage of the Jesuit; I mean, his most
Carrion-Principles, For in two respects Doleman seems to have been the better
man of the two: 1. First, in respect of that Regard and Esteem for Religion,
and for the Church, which the Jesuit expresses with so much zeal, that he
would have all other Interests to truckle to this: Whereas this Gentleman seems
to own no Apostle but Machiavil the Divine (as he often calls him) but
Ridicule's things Sacred, Scoffs at Ordination, maliciously Depraves our Church
Constitutions, and makes use of his best Rhetoric (that is, Buffoonry and
Scurrility) to reproach all our Clergy, speaking plainly thus, ( page 98.) The
truth is, I could wish there had never been any Clergy; the purity of Christian
Religion, as also the good and orderly Government of the world, had been much
better provided for without them. Had the Bookseller been well advised, he
might have been so respectful to the memory of the Divine Plato, as not to have
put a Jewel of Gold in a Swines Snout, but should have entitled this Book
rather, Lucianus Redivivus.

2. Then as touching Monarchy, even Doleman is so fair, that he allows it to be
the most Excellent, most Perfect, and most Ancient Form of Government, page 12.
But this Gentlman looks upon it as the very worst, and to have proceeded from
the Corruption of better Governments, page 33. Therefore he admires the
Venetian Government, as the only School in the world at this day, page^4. and
prefers a Democracy before all, as a Government which is much more powerful
than an Aristocracy, page 46.. And speaking of the Democratical Government of
Rom^, (which he extols as the b^st and most glorious Government that ever the
Sun saw, page 45.) he is pleased to observe, how truly we are not to examine
now) That in the most turbulent times of that Commonwealth, and Factions
between the Nobility and People, Rome was much more full of Virtuous and
Heroic Citizens, than ever it was under Aurelius or Antoninus, p. 43.

By the way, I do not wonder, that this Gentleman should endeavor, as he does,
to persuade the King (as if he could Cully him out of his Rights) to share
those four great Branches of his Prerogative among the People, The power of
making War and Peace, the disposal of the Militia by Sea and Land, the
appointing of Officers of Trust, Civil, Military, and Ecclesiastical, and the
Employing of the Revenues of the Crown, page 2^6, 257, 258. For if these things
were done, the Ends of this Gentleman, and of his Party, would soon be served,
and His Majesty would shrink into a Duke of Venice strait, and we should have
an Imaginary Prince indeed (as he calls the King, page 43.) were but our
Government new modelled according to this Platonic Idea.

But not to digress. Though Doleman and this Gentleman differ in some Points,
yet they agreein the Main; viz. That the Foundation of Government, and the
Power of making Princes, is in the People. This (says Doleman, p. 11.) is the
ground of all the rest that I have to say: Meaning, that if this Power be once
allowed, the rest of his Book must be granted, and the Peoples power to change
their Government, to fore-close a Successor to the Crown, to Depose, Chastise,
and Proceed against their King, to renounce their Allegiance, to forsake their
Oaths, and the like; all this Power will Naturally follow. So that all
Rebellions and Treasons are grounded upon this prime Jesuitical Principle,
touching that Sovereign and Absolute Authority supposed to be lodged in the
People, of making Kings, and of making choice of them a^ their Proxies and
Trustees.

And is not this the Faith of the Author of Plato Redivivus? For, page 32. He
slights the Plea of a Monarchs Divine right to his Crown, as a piece of
Court-Flattery; just as Parsons does in answer to Belloy, Dolman, part. 1. cap
6. He tells us, That the frame of Government was first made by the Persuasion
and Mediation of some wise and virtuous person, and Consented to by the whole
number, p. 30. That our Ancestors made choice of this sort of Government
(Monarchy,) p. 113. That the burden of the Government is divided between the
King and his Subjects, p. 116. That the Kings share in the Sovereignty is cut
out to him by the Law, p. 120. That our Prince has no Authority of his Own,
but what was first Entrusted in him by the Government, of which he is the Head,
p. 125. He looks upon these Notions as mere Pretenses, that the Kings Power
came from God, that his Subjects cannot dispute it, and that he ought not to
give an account of his Actions to any but God. p. 178. He excuses the taking
Arms by any People in opposition to their Prince, from their claim to a Lawful
Jurisdiction or Co^ordination in the Government, by which they may judge of,
and defend their own Rights, p. 215. He tells us (as if it were nothing but
lawful) that all People in the world that have Property, will drive out a King
that does reign injussiv populi, and exercise the Government Tyrannically, p.
71.

Besides all these Principles, exactly agreeable to those in Doleman, he has a
fine Similitude, That as in some distempers in the Body, when the Head is out
of order, though the distemper may begin from the disease of some other part,
or from the mass of Blood, or putresaction of other Humors; yet since that
noble part is so affected by it, that Reason and Discourse fails, therefore to
restore this again, Remedies must be applied to the Head, and Humors and
Vapors must be drawn from the Head, that so it may be able to govern and reign
over the Body as it did before, or else the whole man, like a Slave, must be
ruled and guided ab Extrinsec^, that is, by some Keeper: So (says he) it isnow
with us in our Politic disease, where granting (if you please) that the
distemper does not proceed from the Head, but the corruption of other parts,
yet in the Cure, applications must be made to the Head, etc. p. 231. Now as I
was reading Doleman, I found such another Similitude, in part. 1. cap. 3. where
he says. As the whole Body is of more Authority than the only Head, and may
cure the Head if it be out of Tune, so may the Weal public cure or cut off
their Heads, etc. page 31.

How admirably well do good wits many times jump? I remember now, that a friend
of ours dreamt about two years ago, that a great Consult was held somewhere at
the Sign of the Nags-head, which afterward adjourned somewhere else to the
Sign of the King's Head, and that there Father Parsons the Jesuit sat Chairman,
under the name of R. Doleman.

Among other things, my Friend dreamt too, that a wicked Political Catechism
was a making there. But I looked upon that as an Idle Fancy; for who could dream
that such a seditious Pamphlet should come abroad at this time of day? But I
perceive I was mistaken; for yesterday I happened to read a new Assemblies
Catechism bearing that Title, A Political Catechism: And I found it as full of
the Jesuits Venom, as if it had been spitten out of Dolemans own mouth. For
these are some of the Principles in it, word for word; That the Government
being a regulated Monarchy, the King is not above the Law, but is accountable
to the Law, and not to God only, p. 1. 2. That whatsoever is done by the King,
without and beyond the limits of the Regulation, is not Regal Authority, p. 2.
3. That to resist the notorious Transgressions of that Regulation, is no
resisting of Regal Authority, ibid. 4. That it is so far from being a resisting
of the Ordinance of God, that it is not so much as resisting the Ordinance of
men, ibid. 5. That the King has not his power, solely, or immediately by
Divine-right. But 6. That the immediate Original of it was from the People. 7.
That in questioned cases the King is to produce his Grant (for he has no more
than what was granted) and not the People to show a Reservation. 8. That the
good of the Subject is ever to be preferred before the greatness of the King,
p. 5. 9. That it is lawful for the Two Houses to raise Arms to defend
themselves in case an Army be raised against them, p. 7. 10. That They are the
Legal Judges, when there is danger of Tyranny, and that they have Legal Power
to command their Judgment to be obeyed. 11. That they have Power to dispose of
the Militia* to Levy Moneys, Horse, Arms, etc. even without or against the
Kings Consent. 12. That of their Power they are the Legal Judges, and that all
the Subjects of this Kingdom are bound by the Laws to obey them herein. Ibid.

Sir, you cannot but remember, that the late Rebellion was raised and
maintained upon these Principles. And if there were no new Rebellion intended
again, for what Reason can you imagine is there a Revival of these Principles,
which serve for no other end: The Author of Plato Redivivus, who does confess,
( page 172.) That we are to this day tugging with the same difficulties,
managing the same debates, and giving the same disgusts to the Court, and Hopes
to the Country, which our Ancestors did before the Year, 1640. might have added
too, if he had pleased to speak truth to the full, that we are acting to this
day upon the same Principles, on which they acted in 1641. All which Principles
are of their Fathers the Jesuits (who are of their Father the Devil) and are
so manifest, that he that runs may read them all in Doleman Redivivus.

If now you chance to read the Character of a Popish Successor, you will find
it there Asserted, ( page 21.) That in the Infancy of time, and in the first
Original of Nations, Monarchy came by the Peoples Choice, who frequently in the
beginning of the World, o^^ of the natural desire of safety, for the securing a
peaceful Community and Conversation, chose a single Person to be their Head, as
a proper Supreme Moderator in all differences that might arise to disquiet the
Community. Now this is utterly false: but yet it is directly Dolemans very
Notion, page 12.

And in the Vindication of that Character you will find another of Dolemans
Pleas, viz. That the Succession of Kingly Government has not been so sacred,
but upon some Occasions it has been changed by Divine as well as Lawful
Authority, page 14.

And in the Vox Populi the zealous True Protestant speaks after the Jesuit,
saying, That the King has no Power, but what the Law gives him, page 2. (And
yet I ever thought, that the Law has no Power but what the King gives it; and
if the Law be His Creature, how can it be His Creator?) And again he tells us,
That the Kings share in the Sovereignty is cut out to him by Law; and not left
at his disposal, page 9. and that the King has no Prerogative, but what the Law
gives him, page 13.

Now, Sir, the Books and Pamphlets hitherto mentioned, have been all Printed
since the beginning of the Year, 1680. B^t I must observe to you, that these
Anti-Monarchical and Seditious Doctrines have come so thick into the World, by
the Midwivery of a certain Speech which was made five years before, and which
was Fathered upon a Noble Peer, who was then very active in the House of Lords.
In which Speech you find these Positions, That the King is King by Law, and by
the same Law that a poor Man enjoys his Cottage: that to say, this Family are
our Kings, and this particular frame of Government is our Lawful Constitution,
and obliges us, is owing only to the particular Laws of our Country. Where
the Author confesses also, That he cannot find that ever the Jesuits or
Popish Clergy, only some of our Episcopal Clergy, owned Monarchy to be of
Divine Right.

Of all this we had heard no N^ws for a long time, 'till some turned
Mal^contents, by being turned out of their Honors and Offices at Court: Then
the World began to turn too, and old Doleman, who had been so serviceable to
Faction all along, was brought again above-board.

You see the Gentleman does own, that he had been Dealing and Consulting with
the Jesuits and Popish Clergy; for he matches them against our Episcopal
Clergy, and declares himself plainly on the Jesuits side. But had he held his
tongue as to that, yet such as had Parsons his Libel in their Studies, clearly
perceived whom he had been Trucking with; for what he says in that Speech, is
the very substance of the first Chapter in Doleman. Our Clergy do not deny, but
the King is King by Law, if he means, according to Law: for the Law does
Recognize his Sacred Authority; our Laws give him his Due, they Own and
Acknowledge that Right of Sovereign Power which he has by the Laws of God, by
Natural Claim and Inheritance. But the Law does not Found his Right to the
Crown, as it does the poor man's right to his Cottage. For Kings were Kings
before there were Laws; and our King would be our Rightful Sovereign, were
there neither Statute-Book nor Magna-Charta in all England. For the Authority
of Kings does not originally depend upon the Laws, or Consent of the People,
any more than it depends upon the Consent of my Children that I should be
their Father. The Kings Power is Antecedent to Law, which has its force from
Him; as my Being is Antecedent to the Being of my Children, which have (under
God) their Life from me.

I hope it will appear ^'re long, that our Episcopal Clergy ar^ but just to
their King, in owning their Principles, which every knowing Man may justify
for them, if he will but obey his own Reason.

That the Jesuits and Popish Clergy should be otherwise persuaded, is not to
be wondered at, because being engaged by their Interest to pretend, that the
Popes Supremacy is of Divine Right, they are forced in defense of his pretended
Power over all Princes, to lay their Authority very low, as if it were a
Mushrome of the Earth, a little Creature of yesterday, depending for its Being
upon the Peoples Courtesy. They therefore are not to be wondered at: but the
wonder is, that any among us, that are Protestants, Zealots, Patriots, should
fetch their Principles from Dow^y or St. Omers. We are like to have good work,
when an Israelite must go to the Philistines to sharpen his Coulter, and for
Heisers to ^^ough with.

Really, Sir, I am quite tired with looking into Libels of this nature; and
shall only add, that if you have Time and Patience enough to read over as many
of them as I have done, you will find, that the most Considerable Writers of
Sedition, have taken large Collops out of Dolemans sides, and that every little
Pamphleteer has come in for a Snack; so that could Father Parsons now peep out
of the Earth, he would bless himself to see what Filching and Kidnapping work
has been made of his Principles.

But I must not forget to tell you of one very lewd Tenent, which Father
Parsons had the Impudence to Publish to the World, to the great dishonor and
scandal of Christianity. For speaking of the Primitive Christians Passive
Obed^ence, under Julian and other evil Princes, he was not ashamed to give this
as the Reason why they suffered so patiently and resisted not, because they
wanted Arms to maintain their Quarrel, and had not Strength, Power and Force
enough to cope with their Governors.

Indeed I do not remember to have met with this Tenent in Doleman: but you may
find it in another Book written by Parsons, which he called Philopater, though
I have it not by me at present to refer you to the particular place.

I confess too, that it was not Parsons single conceit for that notorious and
swinging J^suite, Cardinal Bellarmine says, Quod si Christiani olim non
deposuerunt Neronem and Diocle^ianum, and Julianum Apostatam, and Valentem
Arianum, and similes, id suit quia deerant Vires. Bellar. de Romans Pontif. 1. 5.
c. 7.
That if Christians in the Primitive times did not Depose Nero and Diocletian,
and Julian the Apostate, and Valens the Arian, and the like, it was because the
Christians had not strength enough.

In like manner another Jesuit, Azorius, giving a Reason why the Ancient Popes
dealt not roughly with Princes, Azor. instit. Moral. par. 2. 1. 10. c. 2.
^^ith, It was because they wanted strength.

I own too, that Buchanan spoke at the same rate in his Book de jure regni apud
Scotos: and whether Buchanan did borrow this Notion of the Jesuits, or the
Jesuits borrowed it of Buchanan, others are concerned to dispute it out. This
is evident^ that it is a Jesuitical Notion; and I will add, a Notion which
others even of the Popish Clergy did detest when it was first broached, as
being utterly against the constant sense of the whole Catholic Church.

Yet the late angry Author of Julian the Apostate confidently runs upon this
very Notion. For speaking of the submission of Christians under Julian, he
says, What would men have a few Defenseless Christians do, when they had lost
all their strength, and so many of their Numbers? p. 94. Have they never heard
a West-Country man say, Chud eat Cheese an Chad it.

By applying which Boorish Proverb to his Purpose, our Author does seem to
intimate, that if the Primitive Christians had had Strength and Numbers
sufficient, Rebellion would have been as welcome to them as their very Food, and
that they would as gladly have resisted, as they would have relieved their
Hunger: but it seems they wanted Cheese, and could not do what they had a mind
and stomach to do. A most Monstrous expression from the Pen of a Christian, of
a Protestant, of a Clergyman!

For, first, nothing can be more false: because it is notorious, that Julians
own Army consisted for the most part of Christians, (if their Religion and
Consciences would have given them leave) could soon have done the Emperors
work, when their Swords were in their hands, and Julian was at the Head of them
in the Field. In those days the Numbers of Pagans were inconsiderable in
comparison. For Christianity gained ground every day at such a strange rate,
that (before Julians time) St. Cyprian tells us, the Heathens were Overmatcht
by Christians: for (said he to the Proconsul of Africa) None of us resists,
Nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur, reluctatur; nec se adversus injustam
violentiam vestram, quamvis Nimius and Copiosus noster sit populus, ulciscitur.
St Cypriar. ad Demet^ian. p. 257. edit. Pamel.
when he is apprehended, nor revengeth himself against your Unjust Violence,
although the men of our side be Numerous and more than enough to revenge
themselves. And before St. Cyprian, Tertullian boasted of the great Numbers and
Strength of Christians. Of which, (to omit other pregnant instances) that
passage in his Apologetick is a clear Demonstration. For says he to the
Emperor, Had we (Christians) a mind to do like Enemies, could we want Numbers
or Armies? such Foreigners as we are accounted, we have filled all that belongs
to you, your Cities, Islands, Castles, Towns, Camps, Tribes, your Palace,
Senate, Courts: we have left your Temples only to your selves. We who are thus
willingly killed, what War were we not fit, not ready for, but that by our
Religion it is permitted us rather to be killed, than to slay? We could have
fought against you even without the help of Arms, and without being actual
Rebels, only by standing out, and holding off from your Assistance, out of
spite for being severed from your Fellowships and Societies (for so I
understand those words, solius divortii invidia.)

These Testimonies alone do plainly show the horrible falsehood of that
Jesuitical Notion, which this Author has entertained, and is pleased to
revive. And were this all, it would not be so much.

But I add, secondly, that it is a pretense which casts such a Disgrace, such
a reproach, such a scandal upon Christianity, and the Christian Church, that
you can hardly find any thing to compare with it (unless it be the lewdness of
a certain virulent scribler, that pretending to write a Church History, has
Calumniated the Christian Bishops, as if they had been a Race of the most
Blood-thirsty and wicked men in the world,) what would not a Celsus, or a
Porphyry, or Julian have given for a Clergyman in those days, who would have
given it under his hand, that Christians were a sort of men, that wanted only
strength and opportunity to be Rebels? such a man would have done most
rema^kable service to all sorts of Infidels and Blasphemers: For then they
would have had some Reason and Authority for such Di^bolical sugg^stions as
these. 1. That when Christ said to his Disciples. Render to Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, he was nevertheless Caesar's Enemy, being supposed to mean,
T'ill you can help your selves, and can be able by force of Arms to be revenged
upon the Emperor. 2. That when the Apostles commanded Christians to Honor the
King, to Obey Magistrates, to be Subject to the Higher Powers, and that not
only for Wrath, but also for Conscience Sake, yet nevertheless they Disse^bled
and played the Hypocrites, being supposed to mean, that Christi^ns should be
Civil to the Government for the present, and till time served, and for fear
only, and that they should be subject till they were ^ble to Rebel, and that
they should be damned for resisting, unless they could resist to some purpose.
3. Whereas the Ancient Christians universally acknowledged, that the Emperor
was the Vicegerent and Minister of God himself, that he was inferior to God
alone, and that Julian himself reigned by Gods Authority, as well as
Constantine; the Pagans would have looked upon all these Professions to have
been gross falsifications and lies, had a Churchman but insinuated, how that
it was the sense of the Church, that they could lawfully Fore-close or Dethrone
Princes when they had Power; and nothing could have served more ^ffectually to
render Christians odious, and Christianity it self Abominable. 4. Whereas the
simplicity of Religion was so much Preached up, and the simplicity of its
Professors was so much admired, that '^was the great Honor of the Church in
those days, they would have been hated as mere Parasites and Hypocrites, should
they have doubled in this particular, and the Heathens would have scoffed and
steered at their Profession of Loyal^y (as this Author does at the Doctrine
touching Prayers and Tears, page 30.) as a piece of Quackery and
Mountebank-craft.

I doubt not but all those in this Age who have no kindness for Religion, will
make a great use of this Authors insinuations, and hereafter upon his credit
believe, that the Primitive Christians were in their hearts so many Cutthroats
and Rebels, whatever they pretended to the contrary while they wanted strength:
and if this be not a scandal thrown upon the Catholic Church, a reproach cast
upon Religion, and an horrible reflection made upon the very Founder and Author
of it, I know not what is.

And since this Person has been pleased thus to disparage Christianity, and to
ridicule the Doctrine of the Cross, by Drolling with the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, I do not at all wonder that he h^th taken the confidence also, to
fall so foul upon Dr. Hicks, as to bring both his Integrity and his Learning
into Question.

1. First his Integrity. For he plainly intimates his suspicion, that when the
Doctor in his Sermon on the 30th of January Preached the Doctrine of Passive
Ob^dience, he might have a secret design to wheedle men out of their Lives:
that he taught such Doctrine as is fit to turn a Nation into shambles, and
enough to tempt and invite Tyranny and Cruelty into the World, page 88. Nay, he
declares his fears, that this Doctrine was calculated and fitted on purpose
for the use of a Popish Successor, and to make us an easier prey to the Bloody
Papists, page 89.

In such times as these, when it may soon cost any man his Life to lie under
the displeasure of the Rabble, could this Author have any but a Black and
Malicious design, in thus exposing a worthy Person to their Hatred and Fury?

Dr. Hicks is better known than to be suspected by any but ill men, and yet I
do not see what Reason even such men can have to suspect his Integrity for that
Sermon. For, is not the purport of the day enough to excuse and justify him?
Or could a man Preach upon the point of Passive Obedience more seasonably than
on that day? If you please to consult the Office appointed for that day, you
will find that the Epistle ordered to be read contains and inculcates that very
Doctrine; and I wonder how it should escap^ this Authors Observation, if he
uses to be at Church on the Anniversary of the Kings Martyrdom.

The Doctors business was to Preach submission to our lawful Governors. This
every Clergyman ought to do, and every honest Clergyman will do, that loves
and regards his Flock, and is careful to give them wholesome food, and to keep
them from the Bane, (for it seems the Sermon was Preached a year before in his
own ^arish, where he Resides.) Now, could the Doctor pursue this good Design
better than by showing what the Doctrine and Practice of Christ himself was as
to this matter, and how agreeable thereunto the Doctrine and Practice of the
Primitive Christians was? Since therefore that Blessed Prince was Resisted and
Murdered by men, whose Principles and Practices were of a far different nature
and utterly inconsistent with Christianity, how could the Doctor choose (unless
he would have been a Tergiversator) but take notice thereof, and show the
difference by making a Comparison?

And why should this be construed, as a Design to serve the turn of a Popish
Successor? Surely the Doctor had no need to look so far: For I am bound to
believe, upon this Authors Principle, what some would be doing even now, had
they but opportunity and Power: They have plainly shown their Teeth, and we may
read the West-Country-Proverb on their Grinns, Chud eat Cheese an chad it. But
whatever these are for, the Ministers of the Gospel ought to be for Obedience
and Peace; and I wish that the C^nstitution of our present times were such, as
that they might think it an Unnecessary and Impertinent thing, to preach
against Resisting even a Protestant Prince.

2. Besides this, he is pleased to disparage the Doctors Learning, as if he
were better versed in the Dissenters Sayings, than in the Histories of England
and had been behold^n to the Dissenters Sayings for a great part of his Sermon.

Truly I think this Gentleman may well forgive the injury, if he be abused with
this complement, that he may compare with the Doctor for his Readings. But I am
apt to think, that what Books soever he has been poring into, he has not read
(at least, not considered) some of the Doctors. For in the Dedication of that
Controverted Sermon, he tells that excellent good man, the pr^sent Lord Mayor,
that he had made it a year ago, (before the Dissenters Sayings came abroad) and
that since he had made that Discourse; New Collections had been made (meaning
those Sayings) but, says he, I have added very little, contenting my self with
what I had before provided out of their Originals. He seems to have mentioned
the Dissenters Sayings, not upon his own account, as having been beholden to
those Collections himself, but rather for the Readers sake, to direct him where
he might find many more of the same nature with his own.

Besides, Dr. Hicks his several Citations in his Peculium Dei, which was not
only framed, but Printed before the Dissenters Sayings, do sufficiently show,
that the Doctor had no need to consult them.

Into the bargain there was Printed about three years ago a very Useful Book
(which I would recommend to you) whereof Dr. Hicks is on all hands taken to
have been the Author,) it is called, The Spirit of Popery, etc. And the
Animadversions up and down in that Book upon the Speeches of Kid and King, give
abundant Evidence, that the Doctor had been long conversant with the Phanatical
Originals, and the Histories which give an account of them.

I believe the Author of the Dissenters Sayings will not think himself
dishonored, should it be said, that this Book furnished him with some
Materials. But suppose (which is common among Writers) that Dr. Hicks had
borrowed some Hints from Mr. L' Estrange, and that Mr. L' Estrange had borrowed
others of Dr. Hicks, yet this is no more, than for one honest man to borrow of
another; and that is far more Reputable than for a true Protestant to borrow of
a true Jesuit, and then to be ashamed of his Creditor and Friend.

For the Doctor had justly Arraigned the Author of the History of Succession,
for having stolen his Pamphlet out of Doleman (the Book which you sent me, and
which the Doctor in his Sermon calls, The most pestilent and dangerous piece,
that ever was written against this Government, p.28.) Julian took snuff at
this, that a seditious Pamphleteer was discovered to have been trading with a
wretched Jesuit. And yet he confesses it to be possible to write an History of
the Succession without borrowing from Doleman, p. 60. Very good: And why then
did not that Pamphleteer do it? Why, was he so Ill-advised, as to be beholden
to a Jesuit at all? Or why was he so Immodest, as to borrow his whole stock? Or
why was he so disingenuous, as not to own his Benefactor, in whose Book he had
run a Tick thus? Or, why was he so Impudent, as to pretend, that this Pamphlet
was written by a Protestant hand, when 'twas taken out of the Closet of Father
Parsons? All that Julian says to it, is, That it is impossible to write an
History of the Succession, without having a great many passages which Doleman
has got into his Book ibid. But, by his good leave, it is possible to write one
History without stealing out of another. It Is possible to imitate a Book,
without Transcribing it. It Is possible to observe another man's Method, without
running upon his Principles. It Is possible to treat of his Matter without using
his Fancy, and to pursue his Design without using his Phrase: This is as
possible, as it is possible for me to follow a Leader though I do not tread in
his very steps. But let an indiff^rent person compared Doleman with the History
of Succession, and he will find such an exact agreement, not only between the
Method, Matter, and Scope of them both, but also between the Principles,
Expressions, Arguments, Instanc^s, and the like in b^th, that though the world
be full of Histories, yet you shall not find any two, that do so exactly jump
together, as Doleman and the History of Succession do unless they be
Abridgments or Transcripts.) So that a man may well say, that the Pamphleteer
had a design, not to write a new piece, but new Vamp an old one; and to put a
damned J^suit into such a new Dress, that he might appear in the world like a
true Protestant.

All these things considered duly, I may Infer, that since there is now adays
such Fresh Trading and Trucking with the Jesuits, it is high time for every
honest man in this Kingdom to make a Pause, and consider seriously whose hands
we are in, etc. p. 27.

It is high time for all the honest men in the Kingdom to consider whose hands
we are in: And I am glad, that you begin to consider what a sort of men these
are, who out of a pretended zeal for the Protestant Cause, take such an
extravagant course as they do. What, is there no way to prevent Popery, but by
planting Jesuitism? Is this the way to uphold the Church of England, to fetch
Shoars and Buttresses from the Church of Rome? Have we not good store of
wholesome Lews on our side? Is not the Genius of the Nation so set against
Popery, that they may as soon be persuaded to turn Turks? Is not our Church so
firmly Established, that if we be but Faithful to Her, it is impossible for that
Scarlet Whore (with whom so many Princes have committed Forni^ation) ever to
have again Jointure or Dower in this Kingdom? Besides, and above all this, are
we not sure, that the good hand of God will be over us, if we be but careful to
commit our selves to him in well-doing? But it is observable, that these men in
all their Writings take so little notice of the Providence of God, that a sober
man may Reasonably suspect, that God is not in all their thoughts. They begin
at the wrong end, and thinking that all must be done by Humane Arts and Policy,
even rake Hell and scum the Devil, as if that were an effectual course to
preserve the true Religion and Church of God.

Setting aside the Romish Faith, and the Vow of blind Obedience, tell me
wherein these men differ from the Disciples of Ignatius Loyola? Why, only these
are Popish, and they Protestant Jesuits.

"Of all Sects and Religions (says Father Watson) the Jesuit and the Puritan
come nearest, Quodlibets p.27.
and are fittest to be coupled like Dogs and Cats together. And so he goes on
comparing them, and making both of them equally alike for their Hypocrisy, for
their Conspiracies, for their Schismatical humor, for their malice against
Bishops, for their Insolence and Disobedience to Government, for their
violation of Oaths, for their Commonwealth-opinions, for their Tyranny and
Usurping a Power over Princes, for their Conforming to the Laws sometimes to
serve a Turn, for their Dispensing with one another in case of Occasional
Communion and Occasional Perjury, etc. He instanceth in no less than twenty
four points; a full Double Jury (if that would do any good) by which if you try
both Factions, you will find, that as they came into the world much about a
time, so they have been sworn Brethren from the Womb.

But he abuses the old moderate Puritans, for 'twas only some Rigid men among
them that were so Ill-natured, so Imperious, and such Thorns and Goads in their
Governors sides. However, one Faction has hither so shifted it self into
another, that the old Puritan, that was peaceable and fair-conditioned, is
quite gone out of the world; he has been long ago lost in the Presbyterian, and
the Presbyterian too is upon the matter lost in the Independent, and all of
them are so lost in the Jesuit, that if you go to unkennel the Fox, it is an
even Lay whether you hunt a Jesuit or a Whig.

What an odd thing is this, that men should turn Jesuits for fear of being
Papists? As I am an honest man, it is matter of great Astonishment to me, and a
most horrid scandal to Religion, that people should pretend such zeal for the
Protestant Faith, and yet infect themselves with such Jesuitical Principles.

We Rusticks are wont, when we plant an Orchard, to observe this Rule
generally, to graft a better sort of fruit upon a worse, as we use to graft an
Apple upon a Crab. H^d these men taken this course, and have studied
Melioration (as our term of Art is) they would not have grafted the Jesuit upon
the Protestant, but the Protestant upon the J^suit: Then they would have ^hewn
their good Husbandry, and good Fruit would have come of their Labors.

But they do not go according to the Rule: And then they say, they act
according to their Consciences. Now Cons^ience, if it be Right and Honest,
observe, the Laws of the great Husbandman: But when men overlook the directions
of God, and act according to their Humors, or according to the Humors, or
seeming Interest of a Party, then Conscience makes m^d work, and proves a mere
Ignoramus, for it ever grafteth the Crab way.

Hence it comes to pass, that there is such a D^mn^ble deal of sour fruit
among us, as has set the teeth of all honest men in the Kingdom on edge. For
when once men are Jesuited, they will never stick at any manner of wickedness.
Lying, Libelling, Sedition, Dishonesty, D^faming of Government, Disobedience to
Laws, Obstruction of Justice, Hypocrisy, Perjury, and I know not how many
Vices more, they have now lost the name of Sins, and are made the Honorable
Characters of some, who are pleased (by a figure) to call themselves True
Protestants.

For you may easily observe, that men's Scruples now lie one way only, viz.
about Ceremonies, and little things pertaining to Order and Decency in the
Church; but there is little or no scruple about Immorality; they Protest
against Conformity, but not against Knav^ry. They will condemn Kneeling at the
Sacrament as a damnable sin, and yet be guilty of it themselves to serve an
End: And I cannot but tremble to consider, that the blessed Sacrament of
Christ's Body and Blood should be used only as a Politic Tool, to capacitate
men to be Potent Villains.

Are not these Dainty Conscientious men, who can thus play fast and loose with
their Consciences? And who have got such a perfect mastery over them, that they
can set them a whining, or put them to sleep at their pleasure, so that if a
friendly job be to be done at Guild Hall or the Sessions House, poor Dame
Conscience is commanded to lie quiet behind the door; and when the business is
over, then she is taken up again to Pewk the next Sunday at the very sight of a
Surplice.

Sir, if you think me somewhat sharp, I must desire your Excuse, because
nothing is more hateful to me, than a Conscience that is Tender in Part only; a
Conscience, that is much like an Animal in your Garden, which you call a
Tortoise; a Creature that is so very Nice and Tender in some parts, that it
shrinks up it self presently, if you touch it with a Straw; but yet is wrapped up
in such a deadly hard, crusty shell, that you may drive Horses and Carts over
it, and not hurt it. And really, Sir, as I was considering with my self, how
mighty shy and scrupulous some are in things which are of an inconsiderable
nature, (but Straws in comparison) and yet what little impression the weighty
things of the Law make upon them, I thought presently of your Tortoise; and was
minded (but that I do not care to give Names) to call that a Tortoise
Conscience, which some call a Tender, a True-Protestant, and an
Ignoramus-Conscience.

You need not wonder at all this, since (as I said) they have grafted the Crab
upon the Apple, I mean the Jesuit upon the Protestant: For no good can ever be
expected, where Dolemans Principles are sucked in.

But you may see, how basely Partial these Folks are in their ordinary
Censures: For let a man be a true Friend to the King and the Established
Government, and presently (forsooth) he is a Papist. Let him Kneel at the Rails
in a Chancel, and he is a Papist. Let him be for the use of the sign of the
Cross, or for reading part of the Communion-Service at the Communion Table, and
h^ is a Papist. Let him refuse to do evil that good may come though that was
St. Paul's way) and he is called a Papist. Or let him be for Subjection to a
Lawful Prince, and (when time serves) for Passive O^edience, and he is a Papist
with a witness. But let these men profess the Faith and Doctrines of the
Jesuits; let them Lie and Equivocate like the Jesuits; let them violate Oaths,
or Conster them in the^r own sense like the J^suits; let them Dispense with one
another in doing any wickedness that is serviceable to their Cause (as the
Jesuits do) yet who but they the True Protestants? The only Patrons of their
Country? The brav^ Assertors of Religion, Liberty, and what not?

That Learned and great man Bishop Sanderson has in one of his incomparable
Sermons this following passage: Sermon. 12. Ad Aulam, p. 166.
I remember (says he) to have read long since a Story of one of the Popes (but
who the man was, and what the particular occasion I cannot now recall to mind)
that having, in a Consultation with some of his Cardinals, proposed unto them
the course himself had thought of for the settling of some present Affairs to
his most advantage, when one of the Cardinals told him, He might not go that
way because it was not according to Justice; he made answer again, That though
it might not be done per viam Justitiae, yet it was to be done per viam
Expedientiae. The Pope thought, that any thing was lawful for him to do, that
was but expedient for his Turn and Interest.

Are not our Factious men now clearly of that Popes Persuasion; (goodly
Protestants, as they are!) Do they not break over all bounds of Justice, when
it is expedient for them? Do they not Plead or Contemn the Laws, according as
it is expedient for them? Do they not Obey or Disobey, as it is expedient? Do
they not cry up or cry down Parliaments, as it is most expedient? Do they not
go to a Church or a Conventicle, as it is expedient? Do they not Receive or
Refuse the Holy Sacrament, as it is expedient? Do they not avoid or stickle for
Offices, as it is expedient? Do they not observe or violate Oaths, as it is
expedient? Do they not shake hands with the Jesuit, or give him a kick, as it
is expedient?

And yet these men would persuade us, that there is no Plot on their side,
though Doleman be brought to life again: just as the Jesuits pretended, that
there was no Plot on their side, though they played the like Pranks, and
disseminated the like Principles, when Doleman saw the light first.

I accuse no particular Persons, but if the Faction have no villainous Design in
hand, they are damnable Fools to make such broad signs, and have damnable ill
luck to have so many ugly Marks upon them. For what courses have they omitted,
which a cunning Achitophel would think necessary to be taken, supposing that
there were a design to subvert our present Government?

As little a Politician as I am, yet were I a great man, and could I suffer my
self to be an Ill Subject, I know not what more effectual course could be taken
to rend all into pieces than this: First, I would make my self Popular, and
would curry favor with City and Country, by pretending to be a very
Conscientious man, and a zealous Protestant, whether I had any thing of
Conscience or Religion in me, or no. My next care should be, the Populace
having entertained a great opinion of me, to tell my Fellow Subjects and
Admirers, that Kings are not such great men, nor Kingly Government such a great
matter, but that Monarchs and Monarchy it self ought to truckle to the
Conveniences of a Kingdom. Thirdly, my business should be to possess the People
thoroughly with this Opinion, that all Power is derived from them, that a Crown
is a Donative and Gift of theirs, and that they have an Unlimited Power either
to continue a King and his Government, or to lay aside both, as shall be most
expedient. My fourth care should be to lay open my Princes Infirmities, to
disparage his Judgment as Weak and Impolitick, to render his Authority
contemptible, to Reflect upon all miscarriages in his Government, and to make
his Person vile and hated. But then, for fear of falling into open Treason, my
next care should be to traduce and accuse his Counselors, and to make the
world believe, that they were all Papists, and perfectly designed the
introduction of Arbitrary Power, that so I might wound the Prince himself
through the sides of his Ministers. Sixthly, Under pretense of securing
Religion, Liberty, and Property, I would make my Interest and Party strong, and
gain over as many considerable men as I could, and persuade them to enter into
a Mutual League, and throw the Government into the hands of such, and such
only, as should subscribe and enter into the Association. After this, I would
work so with my friends, that if one of our Allies and Confederates should be
found out and Indicted, a Panel should be packt of such True men to the Cause,
as would stretch their Consciences a little to bring off a poor Brother, and
keep him out of the reach of the King and his Laws. Besides, I would load all
the Kings Friends with Reproaches, and odious Characters, and call'em Tories,
Rogues, Popishly-affected Rascals, Enemies to their Country, and the like. And
at last, if a Parliament should happen to be called, especially to Oxford, I
would endeavor that our Party should go in a Formidable mann^r, and with a
numerous train of such true Protestants as Stephen College; and should be
strongly guarded with Men, Horse, and Arms, so that nothing should be wanting
but the sound of the Trumpet, and a Rendezvous. Now, should I do thus, would
not you think that I had a base Design and Plot in my head? Would not any man
think, that I had a mind to set things on a flame, when I had thus laid the
Fuel together, and had blown the Coals, and was stirring up the Fi^e? Sir, I
do not say, or mean, that my Conscience can suffer me to do these things; but
whether these things have not been done, let the world judge.

Yet truly I do not believe, that there is a Protestant-Plot, nor would I have
it called so; for the Principles of our Religion are such, that we dare not be
seditious; we dare not be ungovernable; we dare not be Enemies to the King; we
dare not endeavor to pull down a Government that is so admirably well
established; we dare not be dishonest, unless we will be Hypocrites; nor be
Rebels, unless we will be damned. In a word our Religion is such, that we can
lay no Plot, but this, How to be quiet while we live, and how to go to Heaven
when we die. This is the business of a Right Protestant.

Nor do I believe, that there is a Presbyterian-Plot neither (properly so
called.) For that is such an odious, such an Ill-natured Sect, that the Genius
of the Nation is set against them; and we have had already such abundant
experience of their Hypocrisy, Knavery, and Tyranny, that it is not credible,
that any man of Consideration will Plot, or venture his neck for them.

Neverth^l^ss, the late Loyal Addr^sses from all parts do show, that it is the
general opinion of the Kings good Subjects throughout the Nation, that there is
another wicked Design on foot, besides that horrid Popish Conspiracy, which was
discovered about four years ago.

Indeed we cannot say, it is managed by any one single Party or Faction in
Religion, but rather that it is a Motley, Pie bald Combination of many Factions,
somewhat like that Army we read of 1 Samuel 22. which was made up of men that
were in distress, of men that were in d^bt, and of men that were discontented.
In like manner the Factions which threaten our Peace now consist of a Farrago
and a Medley: you miy call it the Confusion-^ot, not only because it tends to
the utter (...) ^n of our Laws, Liberties, Prop^r^ies, Peace and Gover^^^^t
both in Church and ^tate, but also because it is carried ^n by a confused
mixture, such as th^s^ viz. Some that have lost their Preferments at Court, and
would fain be Revenged* some that never d^served any P^^ferments, and would
fain be scrambling; some that have inr^ched themselves by the Kings favor, and
are therefore ungra^^ful, because they are unfatiable; some that want Money,
some that want Wit, and some that want nothing b^t Honesty and Religion; some
that are A^heists and Hobbists; some that have been old Rob^^s, Republicans,
Rumpers, Cromwelians, Committee of Safety-men, Levellers and Sequestrators; or
the Heirs and Children of such; some that have an aching Tooth after Crown and
Church Revenues, some that are notorious for Dishonesty, and become Bankru^^'s
and some, that have been Infamous for Vice; some that have been Catechized in a
Wine-Cellar, and made Maudlin-C^^^e^ts at the Tap head; some that have been
Illuminat^d on a sudden in Moor-Fields, and been Dipped in Cornelius his Tub;
s^^e pretenders to Conformity that have been unfortunately hook't in unawares;
and diverse Ringleaders and Abettors of Schism, who would gladly have another
run after that Breathed Puss, the Good Old Cause, which we were apt to think,
when a most Graciour Act of Oblivion came forth, would have died quietly in its
Form.

Of this Design we had evidence abundant by the late famous Association, which
opened the eyes of so many honest Royalists in the Kingdom. That alone gave a
clear Demonstration of the matter, though we had reason enough to suspect it
shrewdly before.

For it was observed, that upon the Discovery of the Popish Plot, when the
Church of England-men unanimously and vigorously fall upon the Church of Rome,
the Dissenters at the same time fell foul upon the Church of England. You know
how maliciously active and zealous Mr. Baxter and the rest have been in that
Cause, and in that Cause only. This we were amazed to see, and could make no
other Construction of it, but that they took an early care to destroy the
established Church themselves, as if they believed not, that the Papists could
be able to do it. For the Church of England being the only impregnable Fort
against Popery, we could not conceive, that Protestants would endeavor to
remove, or weaken, or pull down that, if they did believe really that the
common Enemy had a Plot against it. How can this be, that men should fear an
Enemy, and believe him to be under the Walls, and yet at the same time open the
City Gates, and with a pretended Design to keep the Enemy out too? this is as
unlikely, as that men should believe and fear that the Kings Life and Person is
in imminent danger, and yet at the same time endeavor to remove his Guards and
leave his Palace naked, pretending to preserve Him. How, I pray, can these
things consist?

Besides, we see how zealous the Factious have been and are, in stickling for
Offices of Trust, which in quiet and settled times they studied as much to
avoid, as being only vexatious, troublesome and chargeable, but of no use than
for the disturbance of a Profound Peace.

We see how readily they themselves have confuted their own pretenses, touching
the sinfulness (forsooth) of complying with some Laws, and Conforming to the
Church of England. For rather than stand out of play, when the Old Game is
going again, they will (for once) abju^e the Covenant, and take the Test, and
seal all this by receiving the Holy Sacrament according to Law, even when their
own Consciences tell them (unless their Tongues lie) that it is Damnable to do
so.

Add to this, that the world rings of Ignoramus-Juries, when Full, clear and
plentiful Evidence has been given by men whose Credit in other cases has
passed unquestioned. By which means Justice has been obstructed, and the Law
has been overruled, or the edg of it has been turned on one side only, so
that the King himself has been denied the benefit of it, and men that were
notorious for Dishonesty and Sedition have been Protected against him.

Now, it is not credible, but that all this is in order to some very evil
Design, which cannot be carried on but by these very evil means; because it
cannot be supposed, that men would dare to be Hated by the Government, to be
Obnoxious to the Magistrates Sword, to mock Heaven, to forfeit their
Reputation, and to play handy-dandy with their Consciences, did not some
desperate Plot require such desperate Courses, as they cannot but know will one
day rise up in Judgment against them even in this World, if the established
Government holds.

The Consideration of these things is enough to convince all thinking Persons,
that there is a Monstrous Intrigue in hand against the Government. But, to deal
plainly with you, all these Arguments to me seem to be over and above.

For, as I mistrusted something of an extraordinary nature above three years
ago, when Pamphlets came every week abroad full of unworthy and base
reflections upon the King, upon his Counselors, upon the Bishops and all the
Clergy, upon the Offices and Rites in the Service Book, upon the Long Loyal
Parliament, and indeed upon the whole Frame and Constitution of our excellent
Government (which reflections, had they been just, were surely altogether
needless then, if nothing but an engagement against the Popish Interest was
intended) so when I saw the Jesuits Principles brought upon the Stage again,
and found it confidently Asserted, and by many Believed, that Monarchy is a
mere Human Ordinance, that Kings hold their Crowns by the Consent of their
Subjects, that all Power is Originally in the People, that this Power of theirs
is Unlimited and Uncontrollable, and many the like Positions more, which
overthrew the Government once; then all my doubts vanished strait, and what I
mistrusted before, then I firmly Believed, that an Alteration of our Government
was intended again, and that these Principles were vended about to prepare a
way thereunto: for to what other purposes could these Principles serve?

But now at last, when I saw that evil men were not contented to Skim and Retal
these Principles out of Doleman, but moreover have reprinted Dolemans whole
Book at large, it is impossible for me to force my Charity to believe
otherwise, than that they have such a black Design against the whole Royal
Family and the present Government, as I am loath to mention. For Books are not
wont to be sent abroad into the World, but with a Design; nor are Booksellers
willing to run the hazard of a whole Impression, unless there be strong
probabilities that it will do either Good or Mischief: and the Reprinting of
Doleman at this ticklish juncture, when the affairs of England are in such an
U^certain and Tottering Posture, is a plain Argument, that 'twas done with a
Design to possess the People of England with such Notions, that they might be
ripe for a Rebellion, and ready ^or a total change of our Government, either
according to the State of Venice (which is the drift of Plato Redivivus) or
according to the Model of Holland (which other Factionists are generally more
inclined unto.) Consider the thing well, Sir, and then tell me your thoughts,
whether that might not be the intent of putting that Pestilent and Villainous
Book again into the Press now, which at the Kings Restoration, and for many
years since, was hardly valued so much as waste Paper in comparison.

Men and Books rise or sink in their price according to the condition of Times.
Twenty years ago it was Hony-moon in England, and, under God, nothing was so
dear to our Souls then as our King and our Government: and had Doleman appeared
abroad then, as he does now, we should have thought that Oliver Cromwell had
sent the Jesuit from Hell, and he would have been Executed at Tyburn by the
Hangmans hands, before he had done any further mischief. But now the Case is
altered, and the smart of Rebellion and Innovation is quite out of some men's
fingers; and such as are for playing the Old Game over again, think it their
best course to use the same Cards that were so lucky to 'em once before; and
Father Parsons is called for to help 'em Deal.

Sir, I will not give you any further trouble now, though when I first set Pen
to Paper, I thought it necessary to Examine those Principles in Doleman, which
are so Popular in these days. And because I find, that the Doctrine of the
Kings Divine Right to his Crown is become odious to many, who look upon it to
be full of dangerous Consequences, as well as unreasonable in it self: and
because the Clergy of our Church are hated for that Doctrine sake; and the
ashes of that Learned, Loyal, and Honorable Person, Sir Robert Filmir, have
been of late polluted with a great deal of dirt out of the Kennel, for no other
Reason but because he was such a Fatal Enemy to that Jesuitical Principle, that
the Original of all Power and Government is in the People; therefore I judged
it proper and seasonable to show you, what is meant by the Jus Divinum of
Monarchy, and what strong Reasons that Doctrine is founded upon, that so I
might vindicate the Integrity and Honor of the Assertors of it. But I am not
willing that this Letter should swell into a large Discourse. However, if it
may be an acceptable thing to you, to be acquainted with my thoughts on that
Subject, you know you may Command me, as my business shall give me leave. In
the mean time I own my self, Sir,

July the 6. 1682. Your faithful Servant, etc.

FINIS.

