A SERMON PREACHED AT St. Mary Le Bow, November. 27. 1682. Being the Day of the
Wiltshire-Feast.

By EDWARD PELLING, Rector of St. Martins Ludgate, and Chaplain to his Grace
the Duke of Somerset.

We have no King, because we feared not the Lord, Hos. 10. 3. For the
Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof, Prove. 28. 2. (...)
Conspiracies, Combinations, and Associations, do not at all consist with
Monarchy. Dio. Cited by Bishop Usher, Of the Power of the Prince, page 67.
LONDON: Printed for John Crump; at the Three Bibles in St. Paul's Churchyard;
And William Abington, at the Three Silkworms in Ludgate Street. 1683.

To my Worthy FRIENDS and COUNTRYMEN, Mr. John Davies, Mr. Cornelius Dyer, Mr.
William Cleeve, Mr. John Hunt, Mr. William Davies, Mr. Edward Odell, Mr. Thomas
Jones, Mr. Stephen Palmer, Mr. Anthony White, Mr. Tho. Fitz-Rudell.

Stewards of the late Wiltshire-Feast.
Gentlemen,
WHEN you Requested of me to Preach before you at your Solemn Meeting, I
thought my self Obliged to Answer your desires, by that Natural Affection I
bear to my Native Country, and by those Respects I owe to all my Country men,
and particularly to your selves.

And having received Payment of that Debt which was due on my part, you will
acknowledge, I presume, that you have contracted a Debt to me, by prevailing
with me to Expose the Sermon to the view of a Censorious World; for a strong
Obligation lies upon you to Defend that, which now you have made your Own.

The Design and Scope of this following Discourse is, to encourage Men to be
Heartily and Firmly Loyal: A Lesson, which though some are pleased to Despise,
others to be Incensed at, and many now a days care not to hear of, yet is so
absolutely Necessary to be taught, that the Kingdom cannot prosper, nor the
Government stand, nor Christianity it self be duly practiced without it.

If this Discourse serves to Contribute any thing hereunto, I have obtained my
Ends, and am only to desire your kind Acceptance thereof from

Your Faithful Friend and Servant, in Christ Jesus, Edw. Pelling.
December. 2d. 1682.
PROVE. 24. 21. -- Meddle not with them that are given to Change.
MAximus Tyrius the Platonist speaking of Three Sorts of Government, (...).
Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, (the Last whereof He calls by way of
Reproach, (...), that is, a Rabbleregiment; the Basest of all others, being
both Sordid in its Constitution, and the most Arbitrary and Tyrannical in its
Administration: This Philosopher, I say,) though he was so Wise as to prefer an
Aristocratical before a Popular Government; yet he was so Just too, as to
prefer Regal Government before Both: Happy (...).
is that City, says he, which has a King for its Governor.

But the Best Constituted form in the World cannot be either Effectual to the
Ends of Government, or Happy in the Management thereof, unless there be such a
good posture of affairs, that as the Supreme Authority is Seated in the Head of
the Kingdom, so due and regular Obedience be paid by the Inferior Members. It Is
Harmony (as the Philosopher (...). Max. Tyr. ibid. (...). l^. ibid.
says) and Order that preserves Societies, when all men that are in a
Subordinate State, do readily yield to Him who is the Supreme according to
God's Law. This was the Wisdom even of a Pagan.

And agreeable hereunto is the Tenor of that Wisdom which is Revealed from
Heaven. For one end of Religion is to be Serviceable even to the Political and
Civil interests of Mankind; and because there can be no Temporal Felicity
without Peace, nor Peace without Loyal and Dutiful Subjection; and because the
Contempt of Majesty is the Mother of Disobedience, and Disobedience is
productive of Confusion, and where Confusion is there is every evil Work;
therefore that Wisdom which is from above, and which is Pure and Peaceable,
does here in my Text call upon all such as would be truly Happy, in the first
place to Fear God, the great Sovereign of the whole World; and in subordination
to Him, to pay that Filial Reverence and Subjection unto the King, which is his
Right and Due, as he is the immediate Deputy, Vicegerent, and Commissioner of
God himself. For if men would be once persuaded to this, every thing then would
be in its proper Chanel, Peace would flourish upon Earth, and God would Bless
us; those Calamities would be removed which are the Natural consequences of
wicked Associations and Conspiracies, the Malice of Devils would be Edgless,
the Designs of Evil Men would be Baffled, Quietness would be our Portion, the
Kingdom would Prosper, and we should be where we would be, in as Happy a
condition as we can be in this World. It Is for these great Purposes, that the
Spirit of God gives us this Excellent advice, That we fear the Lord and the
King, and meddle not with them that are given to Change.

That I may enter Fairly, and proceed Methodically upon the consideration of
this place of Scripture, there is a Twofold Precept to be observed in the whole
compass of it.

1. An Affirmative Command, in the former part of the Verse, that we express
that Humble and Universal Fear which is due to God's Majesty, and that becoming
Reverence which is due to the King's Majesty for God's sake; My Son, fear thou
the Lord and the King. Now as touching this matter, as I shall not wave it
altogether, so neither shall I employ my Meditations upon it at Large; not that
I think it either unbecoming my Place, or unsuitable to this Solemnity, or
unseasonable for the Times, or a Subject that is in any wise Improper or
Unnecessary, especially since True Loyalty has been so lately reproached for a
Crime, and esteemed a kind of Treason against the People to be Dutiful to the
King; and to Dishonor the Prince has been thought a branch of that Liberty,
Right and Privilege which belongs unto the Subject; and all this by some who
have professed themselves most Loyal and most Dutiful; like some of old, who
threw Stones at their God Hermes when they pretended to Worship him. Upon These
accounts indeed it might not be amiss for me to show you, what the Laws of God
require in this case, and how Religion and Allegiance, the Fear of the Lord and
of the King, go hand in hand. But because this would take up all the time I
have to spare, and a great deal more, for that Reason (and for that Reason
only) I shall Postpone this consideration, and take notice of it toward the
Close of this Discourse, and proceed to treat immediately and chiefly of.

2. The other part of the Text, the Negative Precept, in the Latter words; that
we have nothing to do with Them, who when things are well, under pretense of
Mending would fain Mar all, and alter every thing, whether it be Religion, or
Laws, or Government, or whatsoever lies in their way, as an Hinderance to
their base Designs; Meddle not with them that are given to Change.

About the genuine Meaning of Solomon in this place, there is some difference
between Expositors, though most of them do render it much according as it is
rendered in our Translation. And I humbly conceive, that the best way of finding
out the Full meaning of that Wise King in this place is, to observe well the
state of those times wherein David and He successively reigned over Israel. And
if we carry our Eye upon some Occurrences in those times, upon which King
Solomon in all likelihood does Reflect here, it will appear, that though One
Interpretation may be Preferable to another, yet All Interpretations may be so
Consistent, as to deserve a share in our Meditations.

1. First then, some Learned Critics render it Thus, Ne commiscearis cum
Iterantibus See the Large Critics.
iniquitates suas; Meddle not with them that act their Iniquities over again,
them that are Disobedient and Disloyal afresh; them that Repeat their Old Sins
against the King and his Regalities; them that are for a Change, but not of
their own Principles and Courses; them that would fain change the state of
Affairs, but will no more change their own Minds, than the Leopard changes his
Spots, or the Ethiopian his Skin, as the expression is, Jer. 13. 23.

Now if This Interpretation carries it, we may conceive some Intimation to be
given us here, that there was a sort of evil men in Solomon's days, who had
born his good Father and Him an inveterate Grudge, which for fear of the Sword
in the King's hand, they Smothered and kept Secret for a while; but when
opportunity began to Smile, and the Waters were like to be Troubled, and the
Peace of the Kingdom was in some Danger, then they showed the World, that the
King's Kindness and Mercy had not Reclaimed nor wrought any Repentance in them,
but they were the very Same men still, and as ready as ever to strike at the
Government, and were only Emboldned by Indulgence, and acted so, as if
Clemency, which is reputed a Virtue in every Prince, had been a kind of Hurtful
Vice in the King of Israel.

I cannot be Positive, that this was the Direct meaning of Solomon in my* Text;
and yet out of respect to the Judgment of those who have given us their Sense
to this purpose, I am loath to Lose this Interpretation, or slightly to pass it
by. For if we go back as far as the days of Solomon, we may see that by what he
had found by his own woeful Experience, He had great Reason to Caution all the
World for the future, to have nothing to do with those Intractable and
Ungrateful men, who Repent not of their Disloyalty to God and the King, but
persist and go on in their Wickedness, fond of the Same Principles, Longing for
the Same Opportunities, Hankering after the Same Successes, and treading in the
Same Steps, which they trod in Before.

If we look into the Second Book of Samuel, and the First Book of the Kings,
wherein the End of David's Reign and All Solomon's is contained, we shall find,
that the whole House of Saul (a very few excepted) did bear an Inveterate
Hatred against the House of David for the sake of the Crown. For Saul had been
a Protector of Israel, but a very Wicked one; and his Family and Friends were
deeply galled at the Heart, when they considered how the Scepter was departed
out of their hands, and they were Cashiered the Court, and had no share in the
Government. This was such a Trouble and Vexation to Readiness Adherents, that
though David had spared their Lives, and given them the quiet Possession of
their Lands, and by many Acts of Grace had endeavored to make Himself and his
Government Easy to them all; yet the most Princely favors could not Oblige
nor Cure them of their Venom; but when Absalom's Disturbance happened, they
discovered the Old Sore that had been Wrankling so long, and Labored to be
Revenged for the loss of the Throne, and to Recover it if it were possible.
What was that act of Shimei's but an Expression of the most incurable Malice?
in 2 Samuel 16. For when the King was now flying out of the Land, and was in his
greatest Distress, to add Affliction to Misery, Shimei Cursed him, and cast
Stones at him, as a Bloody man, as an Arbitrary, Tyrannical and Cruel Prince.
And do but observe the after-carriage of this Wretch; upon the King's
Restoration he throws himself at the King's feet, and obtains his Pardon, 2 Samuel 19. And who would not have thought that Shimei was a Convert? But yet,
when Solomon was settled in the Throne, this same Shimei makes light of the
King's Commands; and as he Hated the Father, so he Disobeyed the Son, insomuch
that the King found there was no way left him but to put him to death, 1 Kin.
2. This was one of those Many (whom I cannot stay to instance in) that did.
Iterare iniquitates suas -- like Ungrateful persons act over their Wickedness
again, and showed the King what he was to look for at their hands, when
Strength and Opportunity should suit to their Minds, and favor their
Intentions.

Observe, I pray, that I give you only an Historical Account of things out of
the Scriptures; it being my business to show what Reason some Expositors have
to understand my Text of Such, as in spite of all Clemency and Favor are ever
and anon expressing Fresh acts of Disloyalty, and betray the Dear Love they
have of their Old Sins: And withal, that You may see that if Solomon did not
mean Such here in my Text, yet he had Reason enough to mean them, and to give
Warning, as to all Wise Kings to Beware of Such, so to all good People and Sons
of Wisdom to beware of Meddling with Such, as will not be held Sure by any the
Strongest cords of Love, nor prevailed with by any the Greatest acts of
Kindness, to change the base Temper and Disposition of their Hearts (though
That be the thing which needs the greatest Change of all) but are so
perfectly set upon Undutifulness and Disloyalty to the Crown, that though they
Dissemble their Purposes for a Time, yet when a fairer Opportunity shall offer
it self, will Iterare iniquitates suas -- Sin over Former Sins, and do as
Before, violate Promises, break Oaths, revile Dignities, pull at the Established
Government, and change Loyalty for Faction, a good Conscience for Filthy Lucre,
Order for Confusion, and an Happy Peace for Uncertainties, and for Issues which
they themselves cannot Foresee, nor are able to tell what times of Confusion
will bring forth: My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and take an especial
care that thou meddle not with Such.

2. But then, Secondly, other Expositors do not Restrain the sense of the Text
so, as to understand it only of This sort of men whose Old Scores are still
upon the File, but interpret it in General and Indifferently of All that are
given to Change, though some of them for a considerable time may have kept
touch with the Government. Meddle not, cum mutantibus, with them that Change
their good Principles. Cum diversum a praeceptis Dei and Regis facientibus,
with them that act otherwise than God's and the King's Commands do require. Cum
aliter agentibus, with them that Warp from their Obedience, and take a
different course from what they did, when the fear of God, or of the King, or
of Both, kept them in Order. Cum variis, with them that are Unsteddy and
Inconsistent with themselves, that observe the Pulse of the Times, that shift
and move according as the Weather shifts its point, like things that turn with
the Wind. Cum declinantibus and deficientibus, with them that Start aside out
of the Right path, that Shrink from their Duty, that shake off the Yoke of due
Subjection, that make a Party to Trouble Israel, that Raise or Encourage
Disturbances, and make a Defection from their Lawful King or his Government.
Thus several Divines have taken several ways of expressing their thoughts upon
this place of Solomon, but the Sense of them all is in a manner to the same
effect, viz. that men should be Quiet and Dutiful, and Contented with their Lot
when things are well and in their right Chanel, and not abet the practices of
those who cannot be easy till the Mire be stirred, and the Wheel be turned
upside down.

To stop the mouth of Malice, I hope you note still, that I am endeavoring
only to find out King Solomon's meaning; and that being cleared, it may not be
amiss for us to enquire a little into those Reasons which Solomon grounded this
his Excellent Advice upon.

Now every man that has Eyes may see, that the Changes here spoken of are
always attended with a Retinue of the most Mischievous Concomitants and
Effects, as War, Bloodshed, Confusion, Rapine, the Subversion of Laws, the Ruin
of Families, the Destruction of the whole Kingdom, and with such an Army of
intolerable Miseries, that perhaps a Fickle people can hardly groan under any
Plague that is Greater and Heavier to them than their own Desires, or be Cursed
with a greater Curse than their own Option.

And when all is done, a well-setled Nation never makes an Exchange but for
the Worse; like Weak people that are Cullied into a Willingness to change their
Old and Tried Friends, for others whom they get nothing by but this, that they
Learn at length by their own Costly Experience to Repent of a Foolish and
Unfortunate bargain.

But besides the consideration of these Evils which are the Effects of
Innovation, King Solomon, it is likely, did now bethink himself of those Causes
which he found have given birth to an Innovating Humor in His time; and so
from his own Observations he might charge us to be very careful how we Trust,
or Meddle with those that are given to Change.

It Is Rare that any Change of Governors or Government is attempted, but under
some cleanly Disguise, and popular Pretense, or other. When Monarchy was
destroyed by the Greeks and Romans, the Peoples Liberties was the Pretense. And
when the same thing was acted here among Us, Liberty and Property, and Religion
too was the Cloak: And indeed as Change of Government was never yet introduced
in Any Nation, but some Specious Artifice was a Preface to the Introduction.
Popular States have been erected by the Popular Tricks of men, who have in all
Ages Abused the Undiscerning and Unthinking Vulgar, and have employed the
Weakness, Passions, and Hands of the Populace as Instruments to Concur with the
Pretensions of the Ringleaders, who had nothing all the time, but Love of
Empire, or some such Wickedness at the bottom. There is no new thing under the
Sun, says Solomon, Eccles. 1. 9. For even This was an Old Artifice in the days
of his Father, as any man may see, that will but consider the History of those
Times: And thus it was,

Three very considerable Disturbances there were which afforded Trouble unto
King David, and which were like to have caused great Alterations in the
Kingdom. The First was raised by Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. The Second by Sheba, 2 Samuel 20. And the Third (which happened in David's Old Age) was begun by another
graceless Son of His, Adonijah by Name, 1 Kings 1. Now, whatever these men
Pretended as a Cloak for their Rebellion, it was nothing but an Evil Design
that was under the Mantle; and the Reasons on which they acted were
Unjustifiable and Base, as well in the Heads of the Parties, as in others who
were Accomplices in the Association; which Consideration serves much to clear up
the Sense of Solomon in my Text, and (by Arguments drawn from the Experience he
had of his Father's days) to render this his Advice Just and Rational, that we
meddle not with them that are given to Change.

For, First, the Reason of Absalom's Conspiracy was Ambition. Indeed other Sins
were the Concomitants of his Treason; as 1 His Ingratitude (which is always one
of the Rebels Sins.) 2. His Aspersing of his Father's Government, as if men had
not Justice done them; O that I were made Judge in Israel, etc. said he, 2 Samuel
15.

3. His Hypocrisy For to accomplish his wicked ends he pretends Religion, and
deceives People with an Appearance of singular Sanctity. When he designed to
set up his Standard and to blow the Trumpet in Hebron, he desired leave to go
thither under color of paying a Vow, to make good a Sacred Promise, an Holy
Covenant that he had made unto God. Rebellion was the Design, and the Free
exercise of his Religion, a little Liberty of Conscience was the Mask; and no
sooner had the King granted his Humble Petition, but an Insurrection was up,
and the noise of Trumpets was in his Ears. Here was a whole Complication of
diverse abominable Crimes; but Ambition was the Mother-sin that brought forth
the rest. 'Twas This that made him Ungrateful; and his Defaming of the
Government and seeming Zeal were the common Arts which Mutineers and Traitors
ordinarily have used, only to serve the Interest of Proud, Factious, and
Ungovernable Spirits.

2. And what was it, but the like Ambitious Emulation in Adonijah, that made
Him also to endeavor a change, the King his Fathe being yet alive? Dominion
and Government was the thing, which he had such a Licorish desire after; and
rather than miss of that he was resolved to hurl the whole Kingdom into
confusion, and venture Gods everlasting displeasure.

3. But Sheba's reasons were of somewhat a different Nature, when he
endeavored a change and gave that formidable Alarm, Every man to his Tents, O
Israel, 2 Samuel 20. upon the Kings Restoration, the men of Israel said, we have
Ten parts in David; and because they thought themselves slighted, presently
Sheba and his Associates Rebel, using this upbraiding language, these
expressions of Discontent, We have no part in David, neither have we
inheritance in the Son of Jesse. Though these men had been unfaithful to David,
and had set up an Usurper to rule over them, though the men of Judah had the
greatest honor and hand in bringing their Banished King home, and the men of
Israel had made his Restoration matter of some Debate (whether it was for fear
of smarting for their Disloyalty, or that they would Tie the King to
Conditions, or the like;) and though they complied upon some Constraint, and
upon a kind of moral necessity: Yet nevertheless they expected to fare well, by
their perfidiousness, and nothing would satisfy them unless they Appropriated
the King to themselves and the Kings must be their own at last. And because
they could not be the only men at Court, to go away with all the Honors and
Rewards, to be at David's Right hand, to Influence and Rule him at their
pleasure; therefore they are Malcontents presently, and study to be Revenged
for their disappointments, though Thousands of poor Souls suffer in the
Quarrel, and though the whole Kingdom be turned into a Field of Blood.

Still I do but do the part of an Historian, to relate matter of Fact, and to
show you what those Real (but Base) Motives and Inducements were, upon which
King Solomon remembered that these Factious men Acted in the Reign of his
Father. They would have thrown every thing off the Hooks, pretending this or
that to deceive the unskilful Vulgar, but designing only to satisfy an
Ambitious and wicked Appetite, or to be Even with the Government for Crossing
their unreasonable Humors; so that Solomon had great Reason to warn the World,
to mistrust such Factious pretenders, and not to meddle with them that are
given to change.

Let us now go on a little further, from the grand Conspirators to their
Confederates, such as entered into a Covenant and Association with them. And
were not the Reasons upon which These acted too, such as Good men ought not,
and Wise men need not be swayed by? Look a little into the History of those
times again, and you may observe that these Confederates were notorious, either
for a Foolish Credulity, or for Guilt of Conscience, or for Love of Innovation,
or for deep Malice, or for a strange kind of Levity and Inconstancy of mind.

1. Some of them were Foolishly Credulous. For the Text tells us expressly, that
there went with Absalom two hundred men out of Jerusalem, and that they went in
their Simplicity, and knew not any thing. 2. Sam. 15. 11. They did not dream or
Imagine any other, but that he went to Hebron to perform his Vows only, and
that 'twas nothing but Religion and point of Conscience that led him thither,
not mistrusting that his designs were so Black, as to put himself into Arms
against God's anointed and his own Father. This I say was a Foolish Credulity,
because his Popular Carriage and Insinuations against the Government were
enough to make discerning men very Suspicious, that he had an Aspiring and
Disaffected mind; and so, that there might be some Further end of his journey,
than what was pretended: Tho we may yield, that the making of Piety a Cloak for
wickedness was not such a Common and Prosperous trade in those days, as it has
been in these latter times, since the Art and Trade has been so improved.

2. Now these had Guilt upon their Consciences, which made them Pertinacious.
For having been once obnoxious, they thought there was no way to Retreat, no
Remedy but to venture all their Fortunes in the Cause they had undertaken; like
ill men, that having once adventured to draw the Sword against their Lawful
Prince, are led on further by the Devil to think it Necessary, First to throw
the Scabbard away, and then (if they can) to embrue the Weapon in their Princes
Blood.

3. And then, as to the Generality of Absoloms Confederates, they were men that
Loved and Delighted in Faction, in run as it were in the Blood of the men of
Israel, especially in the Vulgar and baser sort, which commonly are desirous to
break a State into pieces, not that they can find any considerable fault in it,
but because Plunder and Pillage, and Sequestration is sweet, and (as they
think) the most Probable and Speedy course to make, or to mend their Fortunes.

4. But the Reason of Ahitophels Confederacy was of somewhat a Higher Nature;
for it seems to have been perfect Malice and spite against the Kings Person.
For though he had been one of David's Counselors (and a Shrewd man too,
especially at Mischief) yet having joined in the Confederacy, he offered to go
himself after David, desirous to kill none but David (who was the most sacred
person of all;) The people that are with him shall Flee, and I will smite the
King only, said Ahitophel, 2 Samuel 17. 2. Nay so maliciously was he bent upon
it, that when it was not yielded, that he should go into the Field to kill the
King, he went to his own House and hanged himself: a sin which (if I mistake
not) there are but two that we read of in Scripture, who were permitted by the
Just Judgment of God to commit, and they were both of them Traitors; this
Ahitophel that betrayed his King, and Judas that betrayed the Son of God.

5. Besides these already mentioned, some in Salomons times were given to
change out of a strange kind of Levity and Inconstancy of mind, and therefore
some Expositors render the place thus, meddle not, cum inconstantibus, with men
that are Fickle and Unsteady in their Loyalty. Would we not think it Strange,
should men who have showed their Fidelity all along; men who have Acted,
Fought, Suffered, and ventured their very Lives for the sake of Majesty; should
such, I say, start aside, and suffer themselves to be wheadled into Faction at
last? Truly we might wonder at it the Less, when we consider that it was the
case of several men in the Reign of David, and especially Two very Eminent
persons, Abiathar the Priest, and Joab that brave Commander; the Former had
been David's secret and sure Friend, and the Latter had not turned after
Absalom: Both of them had been Faithful hitherto; but when Adonijah usurped the
Kingdom, both of them were concerned in that Plot the Priest turned an
Apostate, and the General a Renegado; upon what Provocations, I do not know,
nor can I gather any Reason thereof, unless it be that I now have mentioned, a
strange Inconstancy of Spirit in men, who in David's old Age thought it their
best cunning, to take up the Persian custom, and worship the Rising Sun.

By this time I hope you clearly see the Sense of Solomon; and what just
Grounds that wise Prince had to Caution us not to Meddle with those that are
given to change; it being possible, that as it was in His time, so it might be
in after-ages, and evil men might be troublesome to Government, pretending,
perhaps, fairly to cheat the Populace, when in truth it is either Ambition that
is at the bottom of their actions, or Discontent, or a sense of Guilt, or
Malice, or an unaccountable kind of Fickleness, or such other provocations,
which render themselves Criminal, and the Concurrence of their Accomplices, Rash
and Unadvised.

If it be expected now, that by way of Application I should reflect upon some
in these times, who are presumed to be much of the Temper and Spirit of those
in Solomon's days, truly I shall not answer any such expectations: it is besides
my purpose, therefore I shall so far observe my Text my self, as not to meddle
with such Men, no not in this Sense.

My business is, Beloved, to Minister some hints unto you, that in this giddy
and staggering Age you may not be abused and imposed on; but may learn to
distinguish between the Saint that pretends Religion, and the Incendiary that
aims at Government, and would fain turn the State of things with the Heels
uppermost, and bring us to that which the old Romans observed in the Feasts of
Saturn, when the Master waited at Table on the Servant. Macrob. Saturn. lib. 1.


Nothing can be more uncertain, than what the end of things will be, when once
a change is begun, this only we are sure of, that in such a case we should be
very miserable; it being impossible to Force a Kingdom into a New Model, but by
Forcing it into pieces first; which cannot be done, but by bringing upon it
such Throws, Pangs, and intolerable Convulsions, as will endanger the very
Being of the Body Politic. Of this we saw enough in the late Bloody and
Unnatural War; and to speak freely unto you, My dear Countrymen, perhaps no
Men in the Kingdom have greater reason to remember the Calamities of those
times, than we; we whose Pleasant and Fruitful Country was so long exposed to
Harassings and Outrage; we whose Loyal Parents suffered to that degree, that
many of them had little to leave us at the last, but the Sense and the Smart of
their Sufferings; we, who at the very minutes of our Birth were in danger of
being hurried out of the world, as naked as we came into it; we, whose Infancy
was spent in the midst of Arms, and were trained up, as it were, at the point
of the Spear, and at the mouth of the Gun; we, whose Friends feared not to roll
in Blood for the King and the Church sake, that had the Honor to be Martyrs
for Loyalty, and made us happy in this respect, that even we were Confessors
from the Cradle.

And shall we now, who ought to Inherit the Zeal and Fidelity of those brave
Spirits, entail misery upon a Third Generation, by being led away our selves
out of the old paths of Righteousness and Peace, by the Popular wiles of some,
who would quit scores with Majesty for one Act of Oblivion, by standing in need
of another? For Gods Love let us beware, that we be not trick't out of our Duty
and Allegiance, but seriously consider, whither those Acts which some
Beautifeus would have us think to be expressions of Zeal for Religion, be not
rather the Methods of those in Solomon's time, who were given to change merely
out of Ambition, or Discontent, or Malice and Revenge, and the like.

In the Reign of King Henry the 8th, the Dr. Burnets Hist. of Ref. part 1. page
229.
Papists in the North raised a most Formidable Rebellion, which the Rebels (who
were forty thousand strong) had the Impudence to call A Pilgrimage of Grace.
And (says my Author) all that joined to them took an Oath, that they entered
into this Pilgrimage of Grace for the Love of God, for the Preservation of the
Kings Person and Issue, for the Purifying of the Nobility, and for the driving
away all base born and ill Counselors. Here was High Treason under a specious
Title; and an Insurrection, which of all others then did most threaten the
King, the Government, and the ruin of Religion, was styled, forsooth, A
Pilgrimage of Grace,

It is not long ago (not so long ago that we should forget it) that another
Rebellion was raised by pretending Protestants; and that had a specious
character also; for it was the Old Pilgrimage of Grace in a New Edition; only
the Title was changed, and 'twas under the pretense of an Holy League, a
Blessed Covenant, which some then had the confidence to compare to The Covenant
of Grace.

And how do we know, but an Association of Grace may come next? But, if after
all those palpable cheats which have been put upon the world, we suffer our
selves to be abused again, especially we who have had the happiness to be born
in the Loyal County of Wilts; if we too be Sheepishly led away, truly the world
may well say, that we were born and bred vervecum in patria, among silly
Creatures that are apt to go astray; and we shall make our Country famous for
another Wonder I (...), an innumerable company of Block.

To (...) the Honor of your Country, and to prevent the ruin of a whole
Kingdom, let me beseech you to carry my Text in your Hearts, and meddle not
with them that are given to change. And in order hereunto give me leave to
recommend these three things unto your Practice.

1. First, that direction which you find in the Front of this Verse, the Fear
of the Lord. Without the true fear of God on the Subjects part, the Kings
Throne must needs stand in a slippery place, and an Unstable Condition, and all
Respects and Duty to him must be Precarious and Arbitrary. He cannot be Secure
of any but Their Loyalty, who dread and Reverence him for Conscience sake, and
for the Lords sake: nor is any Confidence to be placed, but in Men who act upon
the Right Principles of Religion and Honesty. Some may regard Majesty for the
Loaves at his Table, who yet when they have eaten to the Full, may be ready to
strike him on the Face. And some may Complement him only for want of Power and
Ability to hurt him. It Is Religion and the Fear of God only, that can ensure
our Affections and Fidelity to him, that can keep Men Right and Steady,
especially in ticklish and distracted times: That Is a sure Band, that will
hold, when all other ties will prove as weak as Sampsons Withs were, when the
Philistines were upon him. For true Religion teaches us, that we shall be
damned if we resist; that we must obey Magistrates, and be subject not only
for wrath, but for Conscience sake; that we must study to be quiet, and to do
our own business; that we must give Honor to whom Honor is due, and that we
must not do evil that good may come, but commit our selves to God in
well-doing. These are the standing commands of God, and the sincere keeping of
them is a necessary Branch of that Fear which is due unto him, and there could
not be such a thing as Treason in the world, were these commands observed;
because they carry such an Awe over the Spirits of all governable Men, as will
keep them from being Receptive of those Dangerous and Licentious Principles,
which we find in the Jesuits, and Leviathans, and Republicans Gospel.

2. Next to the Fear of God, the Fear of the King is Coercive of Obedience: my
Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King. By which is meant, not a Servile fear,
such a Base and Lowspirited Passion, as is in a Slothful and Unfaithful Slave,
who stands in fear of his Lord not for Conscience, but for Punishment Sake, and
is not so much afraid to do Evil, as he is to Suffer and Smart for it. But such
a Fear is meant here, as a Tender and Dutiful Child has of his Father, whose
Displeasure he values more than his Blow; such a Fear as is mingled with
Affection and Love and Hearty good Will; which the Father of our Country has a
greater right unto, then our Natural Parents. Now, did this Fear reign, as it
ought to do, in men's Hearts, State- Protenses would be as Rare, as they are now
Mischievous. For Here those Monsters begin, to Lower Majesty, to render the
King Vile, Contemptible and Mean, and to spoil him of his Prerogative, to get
at his Head by degrees and inches; That being the only Popular way of
destroying the Man, to Strip and divest the King first.

3. Meddle not with men that are given to change; that is, Avoid their Company,
have no Fellowship with them, come not near their Cabals, enter not into their
secrets. The reason why some shrink from their Leialty is, (as one has rightly
observed) cum defectoribus consortium, because they Herd and Mingle themselves
with those who are Disaffected to their Prince* And he instanceth in those who
joined in Absaloms Conspiracy: they had no original design against David, no
black intentions at the first, but were wheadled and wiredrawn into a
downright Rebellion by Assoeiating with designing Men. For the Conversation of
a Rebel is like the Plague, it carries Infection along with it, and exposes a
Man to open danger of being Poisoned with the same Principles, and of being
brought into the same Condemnation. For by this means the Devil, draws him into
Engagements, and gets the Hank over him* so that he, who at first was Unwary
only, at last becomes* wretchedly Wicked: upon which account Solomon (...)
Well-meaning Man this safe advice, (...) not to Combine, not to Converse over
familiarly with them that are given to Change.

I have no more to add but my earnest Prayers unto the God of (...) and (...),
that he would endue all our hearts with that (...) Wisdom from above which is
Pure and Peaceable; that he would bless us with the long continuance of the
best of Governments, and the best of (...) that he would open our eyes to see
the things (...) be long unto our peace, before they be hid from (...) this
world may be so ordered by his governance, that we may all lead quiet and
peaceable* lives in all godliness and honesty, through Jesus Christ our only
(...) and Redeemer, to whom with the Father, and, (...) Spirit be all Honor,
Glory and Praise.

FINIS.

