A DISCOURSE OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE Lords Super.

WHEREIN THE FAITH OF THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH Concerning that Mystery, Is
explained, proved, and vindicated, after an intelligible, Catachetical, and
Easy Manner.

By EDWARD PELLING, Chaplain to His Grace the Duke of SOMERSET.

LONDON, Printed for B. Griffin, and Sam. Keble at the Turks Head in
Fleet Street, and Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar,
and Jac. Tonson at the Judges head in Chancery lane. 1685.

To Her Grace THE Most Noble and most Virtuous LADY, ELIZABETH, Lady Duchess
of Somerset.
May it please your Grace,
IF there be any room for Books amidst our common and deep sorrows for the
death of that excellent and most beloved Prince, the late King Charles the
Second of ever blessed Memory, I am willing to hope, that this little piece may
not be altogether unwelcome to the World, because the subject of it is of
standing and most necessary use, especially in Times when we are most apt to
recollect our selves, and can find no such solid and substantial Comfort, as at
Gods Altar. And since I have presumed upon your leave, to prefix your great
Name to this following discourse, I am in all justice and duty bound to give
your Grace an account of this undertaking.

Among many great Calamities, which were the effects of the late intestine War,
this was one, That the Holy Communion was in some places so sparingly used, in
some so wholly neglected, in most so little considered, that we seemed to be in
danger of quite losing a main part of Christianity. The unity of the Church
being broken, variety of pernicious opinions about the Sacrament was
introduced, to disparage and abolish it; which took such Root in peoples minds,
that for these five and twenty years last past, it has been a matter of no
small difficulty to restore it to its due Esteem and Observation in some
tolerable measure. Controversies either with Papists or with other Sectaries
took up the greatest part of Men's time and pains: And though some Books of
Devotion have been written upon this subject; yet 'twas impossible to conceive
how this Mystery could be restored to its right use, till Men were thoroughly
informed of its Nature and Ends; which popular Men in the late times seemed to
have very little understood, or very superficially to have looked into.
Therefore to serve the World in this particular, diverse have lately labored
hard; but none seem to have done it with greater solidity, or better success,
then that excellent Divine and Truly good Man, Dr. Simon Patrick, now Dean of
Peterbourgh; to whom even the learned part of the World is much indebted for
his pains upon this Subject; which indeed have been so abundant, that to write
after him may be thought to be only the doing of the same thing over again,
which was better done before. However considering how scandalously great the
Ignorance and mistakes of many People are still concerning this matter, and
finding that the Government has been awakened at the sense of those dangers
which Church and State both are in by reason of men's straglings from this
weighty Ordinance; I thought it necessary for me, in the execution of my Office
to bestow some considerable time upon the Subject of the Sacrament, to treat of
it purposely, and as fully as I could, and to accommodate my self to the
Apprehensions of those that are of the most vulgar and ordinary understandings,
by discoursing upon this Theme after a plain Catechetical manner. This could
not well be done, but by going over the whole, and by discoursing first of the
Notional or Doctrinal part: in the prosecution whereof; as I thought it proper
for me to observe the same instructive Method which others had taken, so I
thought it necessary to look narrowly into two things especially, which the the
Generality of men have not thoroughly examined and searched into. First to look
into the nature and use those Ancient Sacrifical Banquets, which some few
Writers of late have very luckily taken notice of. For, in regard that this
Christian Feast does bear a great Resemblance to those Feasts which all Mankind
did anciently celebrate upon part of their Sacrifices, I did conceive that to
give a plain and full account of them, would be the best way both to open the
meaning of this Feast, and to remove many great Errors which diverse
Opinionators, especially the Socinians, do entertain concerning this Mystery;
who have corrupted and debauched the minds of of men, by those mean and unsound
Notions, which they have vended abroad in the World. Secondly 'twas necessary
to look into the genuine meaning of the Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood
in the Sacrament. For in this point abundance of poor people are at a loss,
being not able to understand it so fully and clearly as they ought. And having
to do in that particular with the Romanists, who are wont to cheat men into the
sin of Apostasy by urging those words of our Savior, This is my Body, and this
is my Blood; it was absolutely requisite for me to give such a fair account of
the meaning of those expressions, as might consist with the Faith of the
Catholic Church, and serve to satisfy the minds of men fully and clearly. For
tho enough has been saidagainst Transubstantiation, and most people among us
are convinced of the falsehood and absurdity of that Doctrine, yet it requires
a great deal of pains to open and unfold the right Faith concerning the real
presence, so as to render it intelligible and clear; because it is an easier
matter to overthrow an Error, than to establish a Truth. And although in the
explication of this matter I have adventured more than many of our Divines have
done, yet am I sure, that I have followed herein the sense of the Ancient
Church, which is enough to justify and bear me out; however, I am not so vain
a person, as to pretend to be mine own Judge in this, or any other case.

And now, Madam, since these papers are committed to the Press, if any shall
wonder at the publication of them, I hope no man will think it strange, that I
presume to lay them at Your Graces feet, and entitle them to your Noble
Patronage; if they will but consider, that there are no Expressions of
Dutifulness and Honor due from the Lowest Servant to so great a Personage, but
Your Grace may lay just claim to them from me.

It may perhaps be matter of some discourse, that I should offer this to your
Grace singly, without begging the Patronage of him too, who is your Noble
Husband, and my Natural Master and Lord. And, I confess, I can hardly think
what to say to the World, that in the Dedication of a little Book I do not join
Both your Graces together, who are (Blessed by God) in Interest, and Affection,
and Religion, and in all respects, Undivided. The truth is, his Grace has
often given me the Honor to address my self to him after this manner: and if
my Desires now are to Express this my Duty to your Grace alone, I know such is
my Good Lords Affection to Your Grace, that he will not think it a Fault in me,
or (if the World shall think it so) will easily pardon it, if your Grace will
be pleased to forgive my presumption.

Madam, I have no more to add now, but to beg that your Grace will favorably
accept of my humblest Acknowledgements; and to beseech* God whose good
Providence has knit both your Graces together, that the fortunate Band may
prosperously continue, neither dissolved nor weakened, through the long
Succession of many the most happy years: That those mutual Affections which are
so Eminently between You Both, may Vigorously Hold to a good old age, and make
your Graces equally Examples of the sincerest Love, as of Virtue and Piety.
That your Grace may be a fruitful Mother of a great Race of Noble Children, to
inherit your Fortunes, Honor and Virtue, and to perpetuate your Names to the
Worlds end: That my Young Lord, that is now in the Arms of your Love, may long
live a Blessing to his Parents, and to the whole Nation: That in the midst of
those Uncertainties, which the Course of this World makes us subject unto, the
Goodness of God may ever Rest upon your Graces, and on your whole Family: That
God will vouchsafe to protect, guide, prosper and preserve you, and bless you
with all the blessings of heaven and earth; which is the sincere and Earnest
Prayer of,

Madam, Your Graces most Humble, most Obedient and Dutiful Servant and
Chaplain, EDWARD PELLING.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Introduction page 1 Chap. 1. Of the Nature of this Sacrament. That it is a
sacrifical Feast. Sacrifical Feasts used both by Heathens and Jews. The Analogy
between those Ancient Feasts, and This: Especially between This and the Paschal
Supper. The usefulness of this observation against the Socinians. p. 9. Chap.
2. Of the Ends of this Sacrament. First, it is a Memorial of Christ's Love;
proved from Christ's own words: From its Analogy to other sacrifical Banquets;
and from the Proctice of the Ancient Church. Two inferences, the one against
Romanists, the other against our Dissenters. p. 31 Chap. 3. The second end of
the Holy Sacrament, to be a Covenant Feast. The Ancient and general use of
Covenant-Feasts. That this is such proved from its Analogy to those Ancient
Covenant-Feasts, among Heathens and Jews, and from the Words of Christ at the
Institutions. Two conclusions. p. 53 Chap. 4. A third end of this Sacrament is
to engage us to observe the Laws of that Religion to which it does belong.
Proved from the Notion of the new Covenant: From the design of of Mysteries in
general: From its Analogy to Mystical Banquets in particular both among
Heathens and Jews; especially the Paschal-Supper. The sense of the Church
touching this matter. p. 78 Chap. 5. It is to be a Pledge and a Token of Gods
favor. Proved from its Analogy to the Ancient Feasts both among Heathens and
Jews; and from the words of St. Paul. Two Conclusions. p. 104 Chap. 6. Of the
blessings we receive by a due use of this Ordinance. First, we Mystically
participate of Christ's Body and Blood. What that Mystical participation is.
Secondly, that we receive the Pardon of Sin Proved from the correspondency of
this Feast to the Ancient Sacrifical Banquets in general: And from its Analogy
to those Feasts which were used after Sin Offerings in particular; and from the
words of Christ at the Institution. p. 128 Chap 7. Thirdly, We really
communicate of Christ Glorified. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation condemned
as utterly contrary, to sense, Reason, and the Holy Scriptures. p. 152 Chap. 8.
The Doctrine of Transubstantiation inconsistent with, and contrary to the
Doctrine of the Primitive Church. Proved by five Observations touching the
common sense of Christians in the most ancient times. A short account of the
Doctrine of the Church in succeeding Ages, till the twelfth Century. p. 188
Chap. 9. That though there be no Transubstantiation, yet Christ's Body is really
in the Sacrament. A distinction between Christ's Natural and Spiritual Body.
What is meant by his Spiritual Body, Why so called. That such a Spiritual Body
there is. And that it is received in and by the Sacrament. p. 224 Chap. 10.
That Christ's Spiritual Body is actually, verily, and really taken and received
by the Faithful in the Lords Supper. Proved from the Analogy thereof to other
Sacrifical Feasts among Jews and Heathens. From S. Paul's Discourse, 1 Cor. 10.
and from the sense of the Catholic Church. Several advantages gained by this
Notion. p. 252 Chap. 11. Other Blessings which we receive by the Sacrament. As
the Assistance of the Holy Spirit. Proved from the Words of Christ, and S.
Paul, The Confirmation of our Faith. An intimate Union with Christ. What that
Union is, explained and proved. Lastly a Pledge of an Happy Resurrection. p.
275 Chap. 12. Two Practical Conclusions from the Whole Discourse. p. 306
A DISCOURSE OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SUPPER.
The Introduction.
COnsidering the wretched state this distempered Age is in, beyond the
condition of former Times; how many Spirits among us are infected with Atheism,
how Debauchery of all sorts prevails over our Land, how negligent and supine
some are that talk of Religion, how hypocritical others are, who make use of
Religion only as a Tool to further their Factious and Seditious ends, how
miserably we are divided into several Parties, how each Party struggles for its
own preservation, as if the pangs of death were come upon all, how the interest
of our Religion is hereby weakened, and its honor blemish't, how the Peace of
the Kingdom is endangered, and ho^ mischeivous these evils are likely to prove
to our established Government in Church and State; I say, considering these
things, I humbly conceive, that the most effectual way to reform and recover
us, is, by all possible and justifiable methods, to bring men to a right
Christian use of that solemn Ordinance, commonly called The Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. For to this Ordinance Men are bound to come with all gravity and
seriousness, with minds possessed with a deep sense of virtue and true Piety,
with humble and holy Souls, with Spirits that are ingenuous, candid, and
tractable, with hearts void of all rancour and baseness, and full of
Peaceableness, Goodness and Charity; so that were this Ordinance duly and
regularly used, and with a real design to do our Souls good by the use of it,
it would prove a blessed Restorative of the Life of Religion, a certain
instrument of Concord and Love, and a most excellent means of making us all
what we should be: Good men would be at ease in their thoughts, and the evil
part of the World would be under a necessity of being brought to Repentance,
and we should soon find a new heaven and a new earth wherein Righteousness, and
Peace, and whatsoever is desirable by rational Creatures, would then dwell
among us.

To give you the sense and words of a Bp. Tailor grand Exempl. p. 483.
learned and good man, If we consider how this Sacrament is intended to unite
the Spirits and affections of the World, and that it is defusive and powerful
to this purpose (for we are one Body, says St. Paul, because we are partakers
of one Bread) possibly we may have reason to say, that the Wars of Kingdoms,
the Animosities of Families, the infinite multitude of Law Suits, the personal
hatreds, and the Universal want of Charity, which has made the world miserable
and wicked, may in a great degree be attributed to the neglect of this great
symbol and instrument of Charity.

It is upon these accounts, that our wise and watchful Governors have taken a
very Christian and strict care, that this Sacrament may be universally received
by all who are capable to receive it; presuming, that if any Remedies can do us
good in a Case so sad and desperate, the Bread of Heaven by the blessing of God
will do it. And to promote (as much as lies in me) so noble a design, I am
resolved by Gods assistance, to discourse largely by degrees upon this whole
Subject, in the plainest and most Didactical manner I can, and to endeavor to
lead teachable persons into a clear Understanding and full Knowledge of this
Mystery.

For, as well the neglect, as the abuse of This Sacrament, does greatly proceed
from several mistakes, and errors which deceived people entertain about it, the
removal whereof is very necessary, though it will cost a great deal of labor
and Consideration.

Diverse of our Enthusiasts are persuaded, that Christ instituted this Ordinance
only for the Apostles, and for Believers in the Apostles days; which vile
conceit renders the use of this Solemnity altogether needless now.

Those Blasphemous Heretics the Socinians, though they allow it to be a Sacred
rite that is at sometimes, and in some measure necessary by virtue of Christ's
Command, yet they deny it to contain any thing that is mysterious or Opus
nostrum est, nibil prorsus miri in se continens, aut prae se ferens. Socin. de
cana Domini.
admirable, or to be effectual toward the increase of Faith, or pardon of Sin,
or other benefits which we ascribe unto it, or to be any ways Instrumental for
the conveying of Christ Body, no not after a Dico, in sumptione illa panis and
vini, quae fit in caena Dom in nihil praeter panem ipsum and vinum, sive a
credentibus sive a non credentibus accipi, nec corporaliter, nec Spiritualiter,
id. ibid.
Spitual sort; but they look on it only as a thankful commemoration of Christ's
Love. Now this conceit serves both to make men slack to receive, and to make
their minds very flat, and their hearts very cold, or very little affected at
the receiving of this Sacrament.

As these ascribe too little, so others there are who ascribe too much to this
Sacrament, being confidently persuaded that the very Natural body of Christ, in
which he ascended into Heaven, is actually communicated unto all, however they
be inwardly qualified or disposed. Now this opinion is as mischievous as it is
senseless; for it takes men off from preparing themselves after a due manner,
upon a groundless presumption, that they shall receive our Saviors body
whether they repent heartily or no.

Many among us look upon receiving to be not so much their Duty, as their
privilege, taking it for granted, that they are the precious Vessels of
Election, chosen by God from all eternity, and absolutely ordained to Eternal
Life; and imagining too, that this solemnity is only a kind Treat on Gods part,
at which they are admitted to eat as men that are supping with a Friend. Now
this fancy serves, not to humble or mortify their Spirits, but to fill their
Souls with uncharitableness, with conceitedness and Pride when they do
approach, and to make them rude an Irreverent at the time of Receiving.

Some again think, that if they be but unprepared (that is, if they live in a
course of Sin) their case is well enough yet, if they do not come to the
Sacrament; at least they believe, that they may be saved without coming, and be
saved with the greater certainty and ease. And this principle emboldens men to
live in a continual breach of Christ's Law, and opens a gap to all Wickedness
and immorality.

I have also known diverse who have thought, that the work of preparation is not
theirs (unless as Patients) but a work which belongs only unto God to do for
them: And this Principle infused into them by Ignorant or ill men, encourages
many to be idle, and to Sleep, waiting for the good hour when God shall touch
them from Heaven, and presuming that when he sees his own time he will stir
them, and fit them for himself by an immediate and irresistible power.

There are some too, who though they be convinced that their own endeavors are
necessary as workers together with God, yet look upon the thing it self to be
impracticable, supposing that when they have done all they can, they cannot be
prepared sufficiently, and so as to be worthy Communicants.

And besides many well meaning people are afraid to come to the Lords, Table
being scared away either through a sad remembrance of some Crimes past, or
through a great mistrust of themselves for the time to come, or through false
notions of that Preparation which is necessary in order to the Sacrament, and
of those Obligations and Ties which it lays upon us; and generally I have
found, that mistakes concerning the Covenant of Grace have withheld persons
(who otherwise have been well-dispos'd) from the use of this most Solemn and
weighty ordinance.

Seeing then that Errors about this matter are so various, and of such evil and
deadly consequence, it follows that it is greatly for the interest, not of
particular persons only, but of the Church in general, that people be rightly
and fully instructed in all points relating to this Sacrament, for were we all
so rightly informed and so unanimous, as to meet together like friends and
Christians at the Altar of God, we should be the most happy Nation under the
Sun.

For the compassing of these ends, I cannot think of a more profitable way then
to discourse fully and purposely,

1. Of the Nature of this Christian Banquet. 2. Of the ends whereunto it was
instituted 3. Of the Benefits we receive thereby. 4. Of the necessity that is
upon us all to participate of it. 5. Of the Preparation necessary in order to a
due participation. 6. Of that deportment which is requisite at the time of
Receiving. 7. Of that care which is to be used afterward: and this method I
hope, will take in the whole Compass of those things, that are fit to be spoken
of upon this Subject.
CHAP. I.
Of the Nature of this Sacrament. That it is a sacrifical Feast. Sacrifical
Feasts used both by Heathens and Jews. The Analogy between those Ancient
Feasts, and This: Especially between This and the Paschal Supper. The
usefulness of this observation, against the Socinians.

THat we may fully and clearly understand the Nature of this Mystery, it is
necessary to search into the foundation and bottom of the whole matter; by
neglecting which search many have spoken at random or very Superficially of
this Sacrament. Now to me it is very plain, that in instituting this Rite, our
Savior did not institute a Rite that was altogether a new thing to the World;
but rather that he ordained a Sacred Feast which was very like and near of Kin
to those Religious Feasts that were Customary and Common in all (or most)
places of the World for many and many Ages before; and by so doing, did Certe
non in hoc tantum sed and in Baptismi Sacramento videtur omnino Christus se non
Hebraerum tantum sed and Gentium in idem foedus cooptandarum captui
accommodasse: Grotius in Matthew. 26. v. 27.
accommodate himself, and adapt this Solemnity to the ordinary and vulgar
apprehensions of Mankind. Hence it is that we have such a little account given
us of this great Ordinance in the Scriptures, for the three Evangelists, St.
Matthew. St. Mark, and St. Luke, have given but a short Historical Relation of
its Institution. St. Paul indeed has occasionally said something of it in one
of his Epistles to the Church of Corinth; but the rest of the Apostles and holy
Writers have said nothing: Because (as I conceive) by that Analogy, which
People saw it to bear to other the like Mysteries, which were every where used,
they could easily inform themselves of the Meaning, of the Ends, and of the Use
of it; they might readily conclude, that 'twas intended to be a Religious,
Foederal Banquet, proper indeed to Christianity, but answerable to those
Religious Foederal Repasts, which did belong both to the Religion of the Jews,
and to the Superstition of the Gentiles.

For our better understanding of this matter, we must know, that it was
customary of old, both among the blind Pagans and among the People of God, when
they offered Sacrifices, to reserve some part of their offerings, and then to
Feast together Religiously upon those remains. The careful observing and
remembering of this thing will very much help us to apprehend the meaning of
this Christian Banquet, as in the process of this disconrse will appear. In the
mean time it is necessary for us to note.

1. First, that Feasting after Sacrifice, and upon part of the Sacrifice, was
very usual anciently even among such people as were strangers to the Common
wealth of Israel. This is clear not only from So Alexander ab Alexandro
speaking of the Religious Rites that were used in honor of Hercules says, In
sacris Herculis servatum legitur, ut sedentes epulis vescantur solennibus, quum
in caeteris stantes and saltabundi vesci soleant, Geneal. dier. lib. 2 c. 14.
And a little after, In templo Hecrulis juxta Tyberim ex decimis sacrum fit, ubi
duae arae, exque earum altera mulieres degustare, ex altera viros tantum vesci
fas erat, ibid. Elsewhere he speaks of this custom more largely; Thissetae in
Asia and Argini, ossa victimae tantum in ignem mittunt, and deflagrant; ipsi
autem vescuntur carnibus, lib. 4. c. 17. And speaking (as I conceive) of the
old Egyptians, he says, Ex reliquis Hostiae membris coenam apparabant, quibus
qui sacris interfuere, vesci licebat, Ibid. -- Graeci satis habent femora a
hostiae in duo frustra concisa igni subjicere, ut ex his holocaustum, fieret,
vesceribusque super prunas assis, pro jent aculo, mox carnibus veru decoctis,
discumbentes vesci, ibid. -- Apud Lacedaemonios in publica visceratione primi
Reges erant, quibus duplum quam caeteris dabatur, privilegior, honoris praeter
libamina, immolatorum quoque animalium coria debebantur, etc. -- Hostiaque
immolata, and mysteriis peractis, qui sacris intererant, visco (leg. vino) and
far opposito, cum rotundis paniceis, quas in honorem deorum adhibebant,
stantes vescebantur. Siquidem in aedibus deorum and epulari simul, and sacrum
fieri servatum est: Nam Mensae in sacris aedibus ararum vicem praebebant.
Quibus quidem extis and carnibus sacrificalihus, nisi rite sacrificio perfecto,
vesci non licebat, Delphis vero assuetum est, ut immalantes victimam, exclusis
caeteris, vescantur. Ibid. -- Interque vescendum lauds diis canere assuerant
his, quibus sacrum sieret. Ibid. And elsewhere, In Ludorum Apollinarium
celebriate Matronas spectatae pudicitiae in propatulo epulari, omnique
caeremoniarum genere festum diem agere produnt, etc. lib. 5. c. 26. In like
manner Macrobius cites the Annals of L. Accius, concerning the Feasts of
Saturn, Maxima pars Graium Saturno, and maxim Athenae Conficiunt sacra -- --
Cumque diem celebrant per agros vrbesque fere omnes
Exercent epulas laeti, famulosque procurant
Quisque suos; nostrisque itidem est mos traditus illinc
Iste, ut cum dominus famuli tum epulentur ibidem. Saturnal. lib. 1. c. 7. And
speaking of the Furniture of the Heathen Temples, Principem locum ( says he)
obtinent Mensa, in qua epulae, Libationesque and stipes reponuntur. Whence he
clears Virgil for saying, Aeneid. 8.
In mensa Laeti libant, divosque praecantur; Quia quod recte fieri noverat, ab
omnibus simul in templo epulantibus and u^i Sacratae assidentibus mensae factum
esse memoravit, Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 3. c. 11. The learned Dr. Cudworth has
collecteth out of Homer and some other Heathen Authors, several passages more
to the same purpose, True Notion, cap. 1. To which I only add that the Pagans
objected against the Primitive Christians, that they did, Praecerptos cibos,
and delibatos altaribus potus abhorrere; Caecilius in Minut. Fael. page 12.
Edit. Lug. Bat. in quem locum vide Comment. Elmenhorsti. See also Gyrald. de
diis Gent. Syntagm. 17. And after him Stuckius, Antiquit. Convivial. lib. 1.
cap. 33. where he treats at large of this matter.
Humane Writers, but also by the Testimonies of Sacred Scripture. And the first
account we meet with touching this matter is in Exodus 18. For though it be
probable, that these Religious Feasts I now speak of, were of as ancient
institution as Sacrifices themselves, yet in this place of Scripute we find the
first express mention of them among Idolaters. For at ver. 12. of that Chapter
we read, that Jethro Moses Father in Law, took a burnt-offering, and Sacrifices
for God: And Aaron came, and all the Elders of Israel to eat bread (or to
Feast) with Moses Father in Law, before God. This was an Eucharistical Feast,
whereby they gave Praise and thanks to God for the deliverance out of Egypt.
Now, whatever Jethro himself was as to his Profession, if he was not an
Idolater (as some conceive he was) yet he was the Priest of the Midianites, who
were an Idolatrous people. For so we find that they and the Moabites called the
people (of Israel) unto the Sacrifices of their Gods, and that the people did
eat (meaning of their Sacrifices) Number. 25. 2. There are very many places in the
Holy Scripture which show, how addicted the Children of Israel were to eat and
drink before the Heathen Idols, and to participate of those offerings (which
were made by the Heathens to their Gods) being tempted and led thereunto by the
General practice of those Heathen people they conversed with. But for brevity
sake I omit those instances, because they are subject to men's common
observation and view, and because the thing is very plain from that great
dispute in the ancient Christian Church, which was occasioned by this general
practice. The things which the Gentiles Sacrifice they Sacrifice to Devils,
says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 20. And yet it seems, many raw Christians in those
times did go and eat of those Idol-Sacrifices; some with Conscience of the Idol
( i. e. believing those Idols to be true Deities, and those Idol-Feasts to be
available unto them) unto this hour eat it, says he, 1 Cor. 8. 7. To stop this
evil course, a Canon was made at the Council of Jerusalem, that Christians
should abstain from Meats offered unto Idols, Act. 15. And Vide Grot. Tom. 3.
page 5 1. a.
the reason was, because by sitting at meat in the Idols Temple, they made
themselves partakers of the Table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 21.

Now this does sufficiently show, that Feasting upon Sacrifice was generally
used of old even among Heathen nations; and the observation hereof together
with the Knowledge of the meaning and ends of those Heathen Feasts, will very
much help us to understand the full meaning and reason of this Christian-Feast.
For this Religious Banquet does resemble, and is Analogous unto those Religious
Banquets which all people were wont to celebrate after the offering up of their
Sacrifices: For as they Feasted upon a Sacrificed Beast, so we feast upon a
Sacrificed Jesus: But with this twofold difference; first, that our Sacrifice
is not repeated (as theirs was) but was offered up once for all upon the Cross.
Secondly, that whereas they did eat the Remainder and the very substance of
their Sacrifices, we do not Feast upon the very Numerical Flesh of the Holy
Lamb of God, but instead of eating after such a Gross manner, we partake of
Bread and Wine, which are substituted in the Room of our Saviors Natural Flesh
and Blood.

It is uncertain indeed how the Heathens came by this Custom of using
Sacrifical Banquets, whether they had Apud Graecos aliasque Gentes usurpabatur,
ut qui victimas offerrent de earum carne epularentur: sive id ab Hebraeorum
exemplo originem traxit, seu, quod est probabilius a communium parentum
institutis, Grot. in Matt. 26. ver. 26.
it originally from Noah and his Sons, or whether they imitated the Jews in
this Observance. But this is certain and plain, that Feasts of this Nature were
very usual among the Jews. And for the right understanding hereof, we must know
that there were three sorts of Sacrifices, which the Jews were wont to offer.
1. Holocausts or burnt Offerings, (which they presented unto God, as the
Creator and Lord of all things.) 2. Piacular Victims, distinguished into Sin
Offerings and Trespass-Offerings, (which by way of Atonement they presented
unto God, as the Judge and Avenger of all iniquity.) And 3. Peace Offerings,
which were either by way of thanksgiving for Mercies already received, or by
way of Prayer for the obtaining of more Mercies still, (which they presented to
God as the Author and Giver of all good things.) Now these Peace Offerings were
divided into three parts: The Blood and the Fat were offered upon the Altar, as
See examples hereof in Stuckius ubi supra. Whence it is, that (...) is is
thought by some to be derived from (...) as it signifies retribuere; and ht
sacra de salute facta (...) appellata judicant, quia ex hoc sacrorum genere
Deus, Offerentes and Sacerdotes suam quisque partem habuerant: Outram. de
Sacrific. lib. 1. c. 11. who adds a little after; quinetiam ut sacra salutaria,
quia prosperis de rebus facta erant, (...) appellari solent: ita, quoniam ab
ipsis offerentibus ad sacras epulas adhibita erant, (...) quoque passim dict a
sunt, nempe victimae ad Convivia caesae.
Gods portion: The Breast and Shoulder was allotted to the Priest, as his
portion, and the Remainder of the flesh was given to the Owners themselves, as
their portion; and this they were religiously to eat of before the Lord, as
apears from the third and seventh Chapters of Leviticus compared with the
twelfth of Deuteronomy.

I have hitherto noted matter of Fact, because I conceive it necessary for
every one, that would rightly and fully understand the Nature of this our
Christian Feast to observe well the ancient practice of Heathens and Jews, as
to actions of the like Nature.

That the Christian Church did look upon this Feast as Analogous to those
Sacrifical Solemnities which have been now spoken of, I am sufficiently
convinced of by observing one general Custom wherein Pagans, Jews, and
Christians did all Correspond: And it was this. Among the former it was usual
(nay, it seems, there was a Scholiast Aristophan. in Plut.
Law in that case) among them, that when they had eaten of their Sacrifices in
the Temples of their Gods, they did send some parts thereof to their absent
Friends, as a pledge of their Love. These were called (...), Portions; and
sometimes they were so considerable; Ethnici ex reliquis hostiae partibus
caenam apparabant, quibus, qui sacris interfuissent, vesci licebat. Hae parts
sive portiones a Graecis (...), a Latinis interdum missae fuerant appellatae.
Festus quoque testatur omnium carnium sacrificatarum parts strobula Umbronum
lingua fuisse appellatas. Has autem cum praesentibus distribuere, tum
absentibus quoque mittere consueverunt. Stuckius, Antiq. Convivial. 1, I c. 33.
that people were wont to sell them publicly in the market. To which thing
those words of St. Paul do refer 1 Cor. 10. 25. whatsoever is sold in the
Shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience sake. In like manner the
Jews were wont to do at their Sacrifical Banquets. A very pregnant instance
whereof we have 1 Samuel 1. 4, 5. where we read of Elkanah, that after he had
Sacrificed, he gave to Peninnah and to all her Sons, and her Daughters,
Portions; but unto Hannah he gave a double portion. And the same-custome is
pointed to, Nehem. 8. 10. where Nehemiah said to the Jews, go your way, eat the
Fat, and drink the sweet, and sent portions unto them for whom nothing is
prepared; for this day is holy unto our Lord.

Now this very custom was observed in the Primitive Church of Christ (to be
sure in Justin Martyrs time) when the holy Sacrament was done. For so that very
ancient Writer tells us expressly, that the distribution and participation of
the Holy Bread and Wine being ended, the remainders were sent by the Deacons to
those Christians (the Sick and Infirm) that were Just Martyr Apol. 2.
absent, which Conformity of their with Pagans and Jews in point of practice,
does plainly show, that they reckoned this their Solemnity to be Analogous, and
like to those other which were used by Pagans and all the Jews over world; Viz.
a Sacrifical Feast.

But St Paul's discourse does seem to put the thing beyond all manner of
controversy, in 1 Cor. 10. where he argues against the lawfulness of
participating of Idol-Feasts, from that plain Analogy which the Lords Supper
bears thereunto. And thus he demonstrates the point. First, that they who did
eat of the Jewish Sacrifices, did profess to be in Communion with the God of
Israel; Behold Israel after the flesh: Are not they which eat of the Sacrifices
partakers of the Altar? ver. 18. Secondly, that in like manner they, who did
participate of the Heathen-Sacrifices which had been offered unto Demons, did
profess to be in Communion and to have fellowship with those Demons, ver. 20.
Thirdly, the Apostle infers, that the Christian-Feast being the participation
of the Body and Blood of Christ (as he showed, ver. 16.) it is impossible for
men to partake of meats offered unto Idols without renouncing Christianity;
these two things being so utterly incompatible, that we cannot drink the Cup of
the Lord, and the Cup of Devils; we cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and
the Table of Devils. ver. 21. As the Idol-Feasts were Sacrifical Banquets
proper to the Heathens: and as the Mosaical-Feasts were Sacrifical Banquets
proper to the Jews; so this our Feast is a Sacrifical Banquet proper to
Christians, and we may no more dare to eat of this, and the other Feasts too,
then we may dare now to be Circumcised and turn Pagans after Baptism. This is
the meaning and argumentation of St. Paul; and it plainly shows, that there is
a great Analogy, likeness, and resemblance between this, and those other
mysteries, as to the nature thereof, though the reasons, the uses and respects
are far different and utterly irreconcilable. It is indeed a Sacrifical Feast
as the others of old were; but such a one as was instituted for the Disciples
of Christ, such a one as is intended for our participating of Christ, for the
tying of us to Christ, such a one as immediately Refers to Christ, such a one
as directly tends to the Worshipping of Christ, and of God in Christ.

But then we must note, that of all the Sacrifical Banquets under the Law, the
Paschal Supper was that, which this Christian Feast bears the greatest
Analogy unto. This appears several ways. 1. Because the Holy Jesus is called
Our Passover, the Lamb that was slain to this purpose (among others) that we
might Feed on him with all manner of inward, Spiritual purity. Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the Feast, not with old
Leaven, neither with the Leaven of Malice and wickedness; but with the
unleavened Bread of sincerity and Truth, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. 2. Because this
Banquet was instituted at the close of the Passeover-Supper, Dr. Hammonds
Annor. on Joh. 13. 26. (...), Chrysoft. T. 5. p. 559, edit. Sav.
when our Savior and his Disciples had done their meal, after he had washed
their feet, after he sat down the second time, and probably before the Traitor
Judas was gone out of the Room. St. Luke and St. Paul both expressly affirm of
the Cup, that Christ took it after Supper. 3. The material parts of this
Christian Feast are the same with what were used at the Paschal Supper,
excepting such things as were either Typical, or of peculiar signification to
the Jews. For the bitter herbs were in memory of those bitter afflications they
endured in Egypt, and so they were of Proper and Peculiar use to the Sons of
Israel. In like manner, the Lamb was a figure of Christ to come, and the
roasting of the Lamb upon a Spit was a representation of Justin Martyr Dial.
cum Tayph. page 259 edit. Par.
the Passion of Christ upon the Cross, which being accomplished once for all,
there was no further need of any Figure. But the other parts of the Paschal
Feast, the Bread and Wine, Christ continued the the use of them, and ordered
them to be used still by his Church in all places, and to all Ages. 4. The
manner of celebrating the Paschal Feast was very like to that after which this
Banquet was celebrated; and that in two respects (besides that of distribution.)

1. First in respect of those Benedictions See Godwyns Antiq. 1. 3. c. 2.
which the Jews then offered up to God, for creating bread and Wine, for their
present Festival, for their deliverance out of Egypt, for the Covenant of
Circumcision, and for the Law. According Christus hoc loco non pro veteri
tantum creatione, sed and pro nova, cujus ergo in bunc orbem venerat, preces
fudit gratiasque deo egit pro Redemptione humani generis quasi jam peracta.
Grot. in Matthew. 26. ver. 26.
unto which, our Blessed Savior consecrated the Materials of this Feast, with
eyes lifted up blessing God over the Bread and Wine, and adding no doubt, such
other Praises as were Proper for the occasion, for the recovery as well as for
the Creation of the World, and for the Redemption of Mankind, which was then
(in a manner) actually accomplished.

2. Secondly in respect of those Solemn Commemorations which did attend the
eating of the Passover. For this peculiar Ceremony the Jews used at that time,
that the Master of the house, where the Lamb was eaten, did instruct the rest
touching that Solemn Mystery, and did open unto them the meaning of it;
declaring unto them, that the Lamb before them was called the Passover,
because God passed over Godwyns Antiq. lib. 3. cap. 4.
the houses of their Fathers in Egypt, that the bitter Herbs were in memory of
those hard usages, whereby the Egyptians made the Lives of their Fathers
bitter, and that the Unleavened Bread was in token of the great haste their
Fathers made out of Egypt, by reason of which their Dough was not leavened: and
this Rite was called Haggadah, that is, the annunciating, the declaring, the
showing forth of the Passover. In like manner this Christian Ordinance is a
standing Memorial of the Divine Philanthropy, at which the Love of God in
giving his everlasting Son, and the Compassions of Jesus in giving up himself
to die for us are solemnly Agnized, and the Redemption of the whole World
publicly Celebrated; and therefore St. Paul calls it, the Annunciation, the
Declaration, or the showing forth of the Lords death. 1 Cor. 11. 26. alluding
manifestly to the Haggadah at the Jewish Passover.

By this that has been spoken, it does plainly appear, that this Holy Solemnity
is Analogous and answerable to those Religious Feasts which were used of old,
and especially to the Paschal Feast, which observation will help us, not only
to understand fully the purport of this Mystery, but also to baffle the
pretenses of those Monsters of Heretics, the Socinians, who give a very mean
and contemptuous account of the Lords Supper. For they take no notice of any
strict engagements it lays upon us to an Holy Life: they believe not the
Sacrament to be a Seal of Gods favor and Grace; so far are they from owning
this, that Socinus had the confidence Multo praestantior sine dubio respectu
veteris faederis fuit sanguis ille pecudum, quam respectu novi sit panis ille
and vinum. Socin. ad Epist. Niemojevii.
to say, that the blood of Beasts under the Law was of Greater efficacy and
value, than the Bread and Wine in this Ordinance. They utterly deny that we
hereby Receive any thing at the hands of God; nor will they endure us to say,
that Gods Spirit is here given, or that our Faith is here increased, or that
pardon of sin is here tendered, or that we receive here any Pledge of a blessed
Resurrection and a glorious Immortality. No; they explode all doctrines of this
nature, and teach Is finis est vitus istius usurpandi, ut beneficium a Christo
nobis praestitum commemoremus seu Annunciemus, nec ullus alius. Cat. Eccles.
Pol.
that the proper end for which the Lords Supper was instituted is this, that we
may Commemorate the Lords Passion: Nay Socinus was of opinion, -- In caena
Domini ne ipsam quidem mentionem Christi corporis pro nobis traditi, and
sanguinis fusi disertis verbis faciendam necessariam plane esse. Socin de usu
and fine Caenae Dom.
that it is not necessary so much as to make express mention of Christ's Body
being delivered, or of his blood being poured out for us; which yet is
inconsistent with his own Principle; for how can we Commemorate the Death of
our Blessed Savior, without making mention of it? Briefly, these Blasphemous
Heretics look upon this Holy Ordinance only as the memorial Vide Excerpta ex
ore Socini in fine disputationis de usu and fine caenae Domini.
of a Friends kindness: This is all they will allow; and so they conclude, that
we may Celebrate it either sitting, or standing, or with our Heads covered; or
with Water, if we will instead of Wine; but to kneel, or so much as to sigh
with eyes lifted up at the Celebration, is, in their account, a kind of
Idolatry.

I confess, these ill conclusions do for the most part follow from that unsound
Principle, that the Supper of the Lord was intended only in Commemoration of
him. But what reason and ground have they for this Principle? Why, Non ullus
alius, praeter hunc a Christo est indicatus finis. Cat. Eccl. Pol.
because (say they) at the institution Christ mentioned only this end, Do this
in remembrance of me. But this is not a reason and ground sufficient. For the
mentioning of one end is not the excluding of others. though Christ in express
terms had said no more, yet it does not follow that no more was intended. The
very Analogy which this Feast bears to other the like Sacrifical Feasts of
old, and especially to the Paschal Feast, is enough to show us the several Ends
of it, had our Savior mentioned no end at all. And this is the Reason, that I
have now taken notice of that Analogy. For if such Feasts were commonly reputed
to be Covenant-Rites between God and Man, then we may reasonably believe, that
this is to be reputed so too. If to eat the body of a roasted Lamb, was a
Pledge of Gods favor to the Jews, then we may infer, that to eat Bread,
instead of Christ's body, is a pledge of Gods favor to us Christians. If the
use of other Sacrifical Feasts did entitle the partakers to all those Benefits,
for which the Sacrifices were offered; then we may conclude, that the use of
this Sacrifical Feast does entitle the Communicants to all those benefits, for
which Christ our Sacrifice, offered up himself, and which he purchased for us.

Therefore the Socinians do but trifle, and are very vain in pretending to
teach us the full meaning of this Rite, when they take no notice of that
correspondence and Analogy which is between this and other ancient Rites of the
like nature. For this is a principal thing to be taken notice of; and we cannot
easily conceive, what else it was which satisfied the Apostles touching the
purport of this Ordinance, when it was instituted first. For, that they
presently discerned the meaning of it, is clear; because we do not find, that
they desired of our Lord any explanation at all of this mystery. In other cases
they were very inquisitive, and sometimes about matters which we think had
little need of explication, being obvious to Men of common and ordinary
capacities. And yet at the institution of this Holy Sacrament, tho it
contains some things so difficult and dark (to us) that they have occasioned
Quarrels in all parts of the Christian world, yet the Disciples were who ly
silent, being very sensible what such Sacred Feasts did mean in those days, and
what the general sense of Mankind was about them. They could not but know, that
by eating of things which bad been offered at the Altar, men undertook to
observe that Religion to which that sacred Rite did belong, and whereof it was
a part. They could not but know, that by such an action they had a right to
those benefits, which the Sacrifice had been offered up for, and so they became
very nearly related to God as his Favorites, and Family. And when they found,
by our Saviouts discourse, that he would offer up himself a Sacrifice for them,
and heard him now say of the bread in his hands, this is my Body, they might
easily apprehend him to mean, that they were to eat of Bread in the Place and
Room of his flesh, and instead of feeding upon his Natural Body. Considering
that the Lamb which was dressed for the Paschal-Supper was usually called the
Body of the Passover, no sooner did Christ call the Loaf, His Body, but they
did instantly conceive, it was appointed to be eaten for his Body, and in liew
of it, especially since he had told them before, that they were not to feed on
him, as they were wont to feed upon the Lamb, after a carnal and cross manner,
because the Flesh profits nothing, Joh. 6. 63. Hence they saw presently, that
this institution did very much resemble the Sacrifical Banquets which had been
observed of old (only it was of a more Noble importance and signification) and
so they troubled not the Lord with enquiries, being sufficiently satisfied of
the Nature and meaning of such solemnities.

And this we may suppose to have been the Reason too, why we find so few
directions in the Scriptures of the New Testament about preparing our selves
for a worthy eating of this Blessed Sacrament. For there is little, or nothing
said upon this Subject, setting aside what Saint Paul once occasionally said of
self examination in 1 Cor. 11. 28. For the thing was not so very needful;
because such directions might easily be drawn even from the consideration of
the Nature and ends of this Holy Banquet, and men already had great impressions
and apprehensions of their duty in order to a due celebration of those
Solemnities, to which this Mystery was Parallel and Analogous. With what
Religion did the very Heathens prepare themselves, by washing their Bodies, and
by abstaining from worldly and Carnal Pleasures, before they addressed
themselves to the Tables of their Gods? And with what care and curiosity did
the Jews pick every Crum of Leaven out of their houses, and use other
observances, before they presumed to eat of the Passover? The very resemblance
and Analogy between this Mystery and that, is enough to minister directions,
about preparing and purifying our Spirits in order to it, and whatsoever is
necessary in that point, may be easily gathered and concluded from the
consideration of the Purport and reason of this Holy Rite. All which is lost,
by men's taking no notice of that Analogy which it bears to other Sacrifical
Feasts; and therefore it is no wonder, that the Socinians speak so coldly of
this matter, and that they are as superficial and slight about the business of
preparation, as they are slovenly, Rude, and irreverent at the Celebration of
this Mystery.

These things being laid down as the Foundation and Groundwork of what I have
to say upon this subject, the task I have undertaken will be attended with the
fewer difficulties, the true notion of this Sacrament will be the more readily
conceived, the great errors about it will be the more easily removed, the
truths concerning it will be settled with the greater firmness and solidity,
and every thing will be apprehended (I hope) with the greater perspicuity, and
clearness; which is the thing that I much aim at in this whole matter.

The sum briefly is this; that this Christian Rite is a Sacrifical Banquet,
which bears some proportionable likeness to those Sacrifical Banquets, which
were Religiously Celebrated of Old by the generality of mankind: So that as
Jews and Heathens were wont to feed upon a Sacrificed Beast, so we Christians
do feed upon a Sacrificed Redeemer: after a Corporeal manner we feed upon the
Figure of him; that is, we partake of Bread instead of that his Flesh (which is
his Natural Body;) but after a Spiritual manner we feed upon him Himself; that
is, we partake of his Virtues and Divine nature (which is his Spiritual Body.)

CHAP. II.
Of the Ends of this Sacrament. First, it is a Memorial of Christ's Love; proved
from Christ's own words: From its Analogy to other Sacrifical Banquets; and from
the Practice of the Ancient Church: Two inferences, the one against Romanists,
the other against our Dissenters.

THe Nature of this Mystery being unfolded, proceed we in the next place to
consider the Ends and Purposes for which it was appointed.

1. Now one great End is readily granted on all hands; only some differ a
little about rendering the word (...), which is the expression in the Original.
1. Some render it, Recordatio; as if this solemnity was intended to put men in
mind of Christ's passion and to bring his Love to their remembrance. Nor have
the Socinians sufficient reason Nisi quis antequam illuc accedat, non modo
recte mortis Christi meminerit, sed ejus efficaciam and fructumjam interiore
animo gustet ac sentiat, indignus plane est, qui eo accedat. Socin. ubi Supra.
to quarrel with this interpretation, because (as they argue) men ought to
remember the Lords Passion before they come to the Lords Supper. It Is true, we
ought to do so; and it is as true that this solemnity is a proper means to
excite us to do so, to engage us to sequester some time for antecedent
Meditations, to consider of the Divine goodness, and of our own unworthiness
before hand, to view the several parts of our Saviors Life and sufferings, and
to observe the greatness of his love throughout the whole, that we may come to
the Holy Table with souls possessed with a deep sense of God mercies, and with
hearts full of zeal, of thankfulness, of repentance, and of Devotion; which we
are apt at other times not to be so solicitously careful of. At the institution
of the Passover, the Jews were commanded to take the Lamb into their houses on
the tenth day of Nisan, and to Keep it up until the fourteenth of the same
Month, Exodus 12. And one reason which the Jews give of this is, that in those
four days, by having the Lamb under their eye, they Paul Fagius in Exodus 12.
might be stirred up to continual considerations and conferences of their
Redemption out of Egypt; for which reason they have a Tradition on among them,
that during those four days the Lamb was tied by a bedside. And thus do the
thoughts of this Christian Feast, when it is near at hand, very much serve to
excite men to the most serious considerations of the Redemption of all Mankind
by that Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the World. And besides, the
breaking of the Bread, and the pouring forth of the Wine, together with the
mention that then is made of our Lords death, do abundantly serve to imprint in
our minds a memory of the Passion after a most lively end efficacious manner;
so that it is not in any wise an Unfit or Improper way of speaking, to say that
this Sacrament is unto us a Remembrancer of our Duty.

2. But secondly, the generality of Divines render the Word (as the Socinians
do) Commemoratio; meaning, that this Mystery was appointed as a Test of men's
constancy, that to the Worlds end they might publicly Profess their Faith in a
crucified Redeemer, by showing, forth their dear Lords death, and by constantly
celebrating the memorial of his bitter, but meritorious Passion. I showed
before, how the Jews were wont at their Paschal Supper to commemorate, and
express the joyful sense they had of the deliverance of their Nation from the
Brick-Kilms, and the Cruelties of the Egyptians. In like manner (...) etc.
Chrysoft. in Pascha (...). Non solum inter Sacrificia, sed etiam in conviviis
and in omnibus solennitatibus antiquorum erant sermones de rebus ab illis diis
gestis. Not. Com. mythol. l. 1. c. 1. Inter vescendum lauds diis canere assuer
ant his, quibus sacrum fieret, etc. Alex. ab Alex. genial. dier l. 4. c. 17.
the Heathen Festivals were so many standing Monuments of those kindnesses,
which their supposed Deities had done for them, whether they were recoveries
from Plagues, or deliverances from Tyrants, or the building of Cities, or
victories in War, and the like. These things they were wont to Commemorate
solemnly, and to rehearse them at their Sacrifical Banquets in Honor of their
Gods, adding diverse sorts of Hymns and Praises, and showing all manner of
thankfulness for them. Now this Christian Mystery being a Religious Feast upon
a sacrificed Savior the very Nature and Analogy thereof does sufficiently show
this to be one purpose and end of it, that we should publish, declare and
commemorate the exceeding riches of Gods Grace by his kindness to us in Jesus
Christ, and that we should testify the sense we have of it by all manner of
Eucharistical acts and expressions of Affection. For the word (...) imports a
great deal more than a bare Commemoration: It signifies here such an outward
Profession as is attended with inward Heartiness, and with the intensest
actions of Grateful and Fervent Souls. The Apostle speaking of the Mosaical
Oblations which were to be once a year upon the Day of expiation, says in Heb.
10. 3. that in those Sacrifices there was yearly (...) or a Remembrance of
sins. He does not mean a bare acknowledgment of sin, but such an
acknowledgement as was accompanied with Compunction, with Repentance, or with
solemn Deprecations of Gods Wrath. Paulus Fagius has noted In Levit. 16.
the form of that Confession which the High Priest was wont to use upon that
great and solemn day, according to the account which the Hebrew Doctors give of
it. It was (says he) a threefold Confession i. e. he confessed his own sins, and
the sins of the Sons of Aaron, and the sins of all the Children of Israel; and
it was to this effect: O Lord, I and my house, and the sons of Aaron, and all
thy people the house of Israel, have sinned, have done iniquity, have
prevaricated before thee. I beseech thee O Lord, forgive the sins, the
iniquities, the prevarications, whereby I and my house, and the sons of Aaron,
and all thy people the house of Israel, have sinned, have done iniquity, have
prevaricated before thee. By Sins, the Hebrews mean all acts of Ignorance; by
Iniquities, all Presumptuous and willful transgressions; and by Prevarications,
all kinds of Rebellion, and Apostasy from God, and with this threefold
confession, a general Fast was to be joined, and the Law required them all to
afflict their Souls; nothing that Remorse and Anguish of Spirit, which Priest
and People were to be under at that time; and these hearty expressions of
Penitence and contrition is that, which the Author to the Hebrews calls, the
Remembrance of Sins. Thus should the Commemoration of Christ's death for Sin be
full of Life and Vigor, accompanied with such mortifications of Flesh and
Spirit, as are undeniable arguments both of that bitter sense we ought to have
of our own Vileness, and of those ravishing apprehensions of the Divine love,
which the Commemoration of our Saviors sufferings is apt to beget in us.
Briefly, though the Holy Jesus was about to die when he instituted this
Mystery, yet his design was to live for ever in the hearts of his Disciples:
and because nothing is more common among men (albeit nothing unbecomes men
more) than to let the Remembrance of Gods mercies, slide away from them, and to
Bury his favors in Oblivion, therefore to help our infirmities Christ ordained
a perpetual use of this Holy Banquet, that his Fathers and his own Love might
be had in everlasting remembrance, For nothing serves more to perpetuate the
memory of any signal and remarkable Event, than when Men assemble themselves
solemnly to Eat and Drink together by Occasion and upon the Score of that
Event. This was the ground and Reason of all the fixed Festivals, among the old
Heathens, that by means thereof the memory of those great achievements which
their reputed gods had done, might be transmitted and handed down from one
generation to another. And this was one great reason why the Paschal Supper was
instituted, that it might be a Memorial unto the Jews, Exodus 12. 14 And lest
through the negligence of men, the deliverance, which God at that time wrought,
should at any time after be forgotten, God added this command at the 26 and 27
Verses of that Chapter. It shall come to pass, when your Children shall say
unto you, what mean you by this service, that ye shall say, it is the Sacrifice
(in memory) of the Lords Passover, who passed over the Houses of the Children
of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians. It is very observable, that
the incredulous and stiff necked Jews do now expect to be redeemed again out of
all their thraldom by the Messiah, just at the self same time of the year,
when their Fathers were redeemed of Id quod patet ex ipsorum verbis, quae apud
illorum Cabalistas in hunc modum leguntur; in eadem die, viz. quintadecima die
mensis Nisan, scilicet Martis, redimendus est Israel in diebus Messiae,
quemadmodum redempti sunt eo die; de quo scribitur, in diebus egressionis tuae
ex Egypto estendam mirabilia, P. Jag. in Exodus 12.
Old by God out of the house of Bondage. For to this purpose (says my Author)
we read in the Cabalists; In the same day, viz. on the fifteenth day of Nisan,
(that is in March) the Israelites shall be redeemed in the days of the Messiah,
as they were formerly redeemed on that day, at their departure out of Egypt.
What those fond people expect still, was accomplished long ago: For it was just
at that time, that the Lord Jesus (that immaculate Lamb of God) was slain to
Redeem all Mankind: And as the Passeover-Feast among the Jews was instituted
for the Commemoration of one deliverance out of great Bondage, so was this
Feast, now used by us, instituted for the Commemoration of another deliverance
from a greater and more intolerable servitude; that Christ our Redeemer may
never be out of our minds, tho he be gone into Heaven, but that we should most
solemnly celebrate a perpetual memory of his infinite Love, and unspeakable
Condescension. Accordingly the ancient Church was wont to be very Prolix in the
Prayer of Consecration. For Vide Constable. Apost. lib.
having made mention, first of the Majesty and perfections of God, then of the
Creation of Angels, of Man, and of the whole World, then of his Providence over
Adam, over Seth, and Enoch, over Noah, over Abraham, over the twelve
Patriarchs, and over all the Children of Israel; and having concluded that part
on this wise; For all these things glory be to thee, Lord God Almighty;
infinite Hosts of Angels and Archangels worship thee, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, Powers, and innumerable Armies of Heavenly Spirits, the
Cherubim, and six-winged Seraphim, with thousands of thousands of Angels and
Archangels, that continually cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath;
Heaven and earth are full of thy Glory, Glory be to thee unto everlasting Ages:
Then the Church was wont to go on to make mention of the Holy and only begotten
Son of God, of his love to Mankind, of his Incarnation and Birth of a Virgin,
of his Life, Laws, Miracles, and Humility of his Passion, Crucifixon, Death,
Burial, Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven: (...), said they, we being
mindful of, and commemorating his sufferings, do give thee thanks according to
his command, who in the night when he was betrayed took bread into his Holy
hands and looking up to Heaven to thee his God and Father, brake it, and gave
it to his Disciples, and so forth. This is that (...) which our blessed
Redeemer meant and spoke of, not a Cold faint heartless speaking of that Love
of his, which was stronger than the most Torturing Agonies, and than Death it
self; but such a Devout commemoration as is attended with Solemnity, with
admiration, with active and vigorous Affections, with the meltings and
dissolutions of the hardest hearts, with such Divine Raptures, Ecstasies, and
Flights of mind, as if our Souls had dropped their mantles of Flesh, and were
entered into Heaven to bear their parts in that Quire of Blessed Spirits above.
This was one End and reason, for which the Holy Jesus appointed the use of this
Mysterious, Evangelical Banquet.

And before I let this point go out of my hands, there are two things which I
would note from this consideration.

1. First, that at this Blessed Sacrament there is not any New Sacrificing, or
offering up of Christ to expiate Sin, but only a Commemoration of his Death, a
Memorial of that One Sacrifice which he offered unto his Father when he offered
up himself upon the Cross for us. The Romanists are strongly persuaded, that as
the substance of Christ's Natural Body is really in the Host, so he is really,
truly and literally Sacrificed there, as a Propitiatory Oblation both for the
living and the Dead too. But it is a modest censure to say (for it is the the
least we can say) of this conceit, that it is a very fond and groundless fancy;
because neither from our Saviors words at the Institution, nor from St. Paul's
Repeating the Story, nor from the Nature and Analogy of this Feast, can we
gather any thing that gives Color to this Principle; it being apparent every
way, that Christ intended this Mystery, not that he should suffer in it a
fresh, or be Sacrificed in it afresh, but that we should thereby Commemorate
and show forth his Passion in Golgotha. Indeed in some cases the same thing may
be said to be a Commemoration of a Sacrifice, and a true Sacrifice also; as the
Paschal Lamb at Jerusalem was truly a Sacrifice, and a Memorial too of the Lamb
that was sacrificed in Egypt. But it cannot be said to be so in this case,
because it is Contradictory to the Apostles argumentation in Heb. 10, where he
shows, that Christ's Sacrificing of himself, had this Prerogative, this dignity
above all Legal Oblations, that it needed not (as the others did) any
Repeating, whereas the Sacrifices under the Law were offered year by year
continually, and every Priest stood Ministering and offering oftentimes the same
Sacrifices, Christ our High Priest offered one perfect Sacrifice for sins for
ever, and so sat down on the right hand of God, by that one offering of
himself having perfected for ever them that are sanctified, and having
sanctified them through the offering of his own Body once for all. So that
unless we will give the Apostle the Lie, we cannot affirm any Propitiatory
Sacrifice to be in this Mystery.

It Is true; this blessed Sacrament is called a Sacrifice (or rather the whole
Action and Rite is called so) and it is so in some sense, even as Prayer is
called a Vid. Tertull. p. 187. H. 104.
Sacrifice Psalm. 141. 2. and as Praises are called a Sacrifice, Heb. 13. 15.
and as Righieousness and a broken Spirit are called Sacrifices, Psalm. 51. 17.
and as Almsdeeds are called Sacrifices, Heb. 13. 16. and as the devoting our
selves to the service of God is called the presenting of our Bodies a Living
Sacrifice, Romans 12. 1. For, at this Holy Sacrament we are bound to do all this,
to bless Gods Name (therefore it is called the Eucharist, from our Praises and
Thanksgivings) to implore Gods goodness, to offer up to him the Oblation of
Penitent Hearts, to present him with some of our Worldly substance, to vow
obedience to his Laws, and to offer unto him our selves, our Souls and Bodies,
as a reasonable, Holy, and lively Sacrifice (as we profess in that excellent
Prayer after the Communion.) It is Hence, and upon these accounts (not from any
real Sacrificing of Christ, but from the offering up of our Devotion, of our
selves, and of our Goods,) that the Celebration of this Mystery is called a
Sacrifice. And hence it is too, that the Lords Table is called an Altar (as it
was called in the So Can. Apost. 3. So S. Cyprian every where calls the Lords
Table. And so does Tertullian, Nonne solenior ^^it statio tua, si ad Aram dei
steteris? de Orat cap. 14. And I Suppose the ancient Christians took occasion
of speaking thus from those words of our Savior Matthew. 5. 23, 24. if thou
bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought
against thee, etc. which words do^ certainly relate to those Oblations which
Christ intended should be made (and in the Apostolical times were made) in the
Church.
Ancient times of Christianity, but that some weak men now love to quarrel with
words;) and the Place too where the Table stood was called the So the Author de
Eccles. Hierarch. c. 3. (...); where he means the Sacrarium or Holy place where
the Table stands. And to the same purpose the word is used by Ignatius in those
expressions of his, (...), Ep. ad Ephesians. And (...), Ep. ad Tralles. Where he
urges that necessity which people are under to join with the Bishop, and the
rest of the Clergy in the Public Prayers of the Church. For Anciently Prayer
was made in the Chancel at the Holy Table; as it is insinuated Ignat. Ep. ad
Ephesians. And by Tertullian, Exhort. ad Castit cap. 10. Si Spiritus reus apud se
sit, conscientia erubescit, quomodo audebit Orationem dicere ad Altar? Hence
Bishop Usher notes, that (...) and (...) sometimes signify the same thing;
that is, the Altar-place: Unde in Polycarpi ad Philippenses, and Ignatio ad
Tarsenses tribut a Epistold, (...) a vulgato Latino interpret Sacrarium Dei,
recte est redditum. Armachan not. in Ignat. Ep. ad Magnes. Number. 42.
(...) Or Altar-place) because it is there (or should be there) before the
Lords Table, that we present to the Divine Majesty of God all our Christian
Sacrifices, and perform the Offertory (as I shall hereafter show at large, that
all Christians were wont to do in the Primitive and Apostolical times of the
Church.) But to call the Sacrament a Sacrifice, or the Holy Table an Alter,
upon presumption that Christ is really Sacrificed, and in his Natural Body
offered up there, is a Solaecism in Divinity, and that which is utterly against
the sense of the Ancient Doctors of the Christian Church.

For though in many Liturgies and other Ancient Books, we often find mention to
be made of Oblations and Sacrifices at the Celebration of the Holy Sacrament,
yet this is meant of those sacrifices and Offerings which I have now spoken of,
and which all Reformed Churches allow of: and particularly the Ancients point
to those Liberal Gifts, which Christians in those times brought with them to
the Church, to be presented and offered up to God on the Holy Table, as an
humble acknowledgement, that the whole Earth was the Lords, and as a Grateful
Recognition of his Right to all, of his Dominion over all, and of his propriety
in all the possessions they did enjoy. To this purpose I shall note a passage
or two out of that very ancient Writer, Irenaeus: Oblations in general, are not
forbidden us (says he) there 1. 4, c. 34.
are oblations under the Law, and there are Oblations under the Gospel, there
were Sacrifices among the Jews, and there are Sacrifices in the Church. And
again: Our Lord encouraging his Disciples to offer unto God the first Fruits of
his Creatures (not for that God has any 1. 4. c. 32. in fine.
need thereof, but that they might show themselves neither unfruitful nor
unthankful) he took that Bread which was made of his Creatures, and gave thanks
saying, this is my body; and he likewise acknowledged the Cup (consisting of
the Creature which we use) to be his Blood; and thus he taught the New Oblation
of the new Testament, which the Church receiving from the Apostles, offers
throughtout the world unto God. And elsewhere speaking of the same thing, c.
34. in initio.
he says, that the Oblation of the Church which our Lord taught and appointed
to be offered through all the World, is accounted a pure Sacrifice with God. If
any of the Fathers have spoken, as if Christ was offered up in the Holy
Sacrament, they are to be understood as speaking figuratively and improperly,
because the Signs and Symbols of Christ's Body and Blood are presented upon the
Table. Their meaning was (and they said so, when they spoke strictly and
distinctly) that they offered (...), Eusebius. them. Evang. 1. I. c. 10.
a Memorial instead of a Sacrifice (as Eusebius said) And to instance in no
more, nothing can be more plain, then what S. Chrysostom has said upon this
subject; viz. That though we offer every day, yet we do but make a
Commemoration of Christ's Death; that this that is done now, is in Remembrance
of that which was done before: Hom. 17. in Heb.
that we offer not another, nor a different Sacrifice, as the Jewish High
Priest did, but still one and the same, or rather (says he) we perform the
Remembrance of a Sacrifice: which is the very same that Justin Dial. cum Tryph.
page 260.
Martyr affirmed of our using the Bread in the Sacrament, that it is (...) in
Memory of that Passion which Christ was pleased to undergo for us Men, and for
our salvation.

I have noted all this to show, how, grossly the Romanists are deceived in that
which many poor wretches among them take to be a main part of Religion, tho I
am afraid their Crafty Guides tell them so for their own Interest and
Advantage. For do but take away the Doctrine of Christ being really Sacrificed
under the species of Bread and Wine, and their Masses for Quick and Dead must
go away next, then the Doctrine of Purgatory must down too, then the Practice
of praying for souls supposed to be in Torments there, must down also, and then
the conceit of Absolutions and Indulgences, and diverse other Lucrative Arts,
whereby the Knavish Priests cheat ignorant and Easy People out of their Money;
till in the end, by taking away first one shore and then another, the old
rotten House drops down upon their Heads, which has been held up hitherto by
this Artificial Prop (among others) that our blessed Savior is Really and
Truly offered up a Sacrifice for all men in this Mystery, whereas indeed it is
not a Sacrificing of him, but a Representation and memorial of the great
Sacrifice upon the Cross.

2. That which I would note in the second place is, that this Blessed Sacrament
was intended to be, not a Memorial of the Passeover-Supper, which Christ
Celebrated the same Night that he was betrayed, but a Commemoration of his
Passion and Death on the day following. This indeed is very obvious and easy
to be observed: And yet for want of minding this thing well, many weak people
among our selves have been unfortunately lead aside into wrong and
superstitious conceits, about some Circumstances which relate to this
solemnity. Because the Passover was eaten at Night, therefore some conclude,
that this Sacrament ought not to be solemnized at any other time. And because
our Savior and his Disciples did (as they suppose) eat the Passover Sitting,
therefore these men infer, that it is not lawful for us to receive this
Sacrament in a Kneeling posture. They would have us to be guided by those
Usages and Rites which were observed at the Paschal-Feast, as if the Customs
then were presidents to govern and direct us now, and as if this Feast of ours
were not only Analagous unto, but also a Representation and Memorial of that
Festival among the Jews. But all this is nothing but a Rope of sand, and any
man may find it so, that will but consider the thing rightly. For this being a
sacrifical Banquet, at which we do Commemorate the intolerable sufferings, and
infinite Love of the Son of God, such Rituals are to be observed now as are
most Congruous and suitable to the Nature and Ends of this Mystery. As for the
Passeover-Supper, it is ceased and out of doors long ago, together with those
observances which were belonging and appendant to it, and we have nothing to do
with them, because they were grounded upon special rea. sons, and were of
proper use, and of peculiar significancy to the Jews. Thus the Time of its
Celebration was to be at Night, because it was in the Night time, that the Lord
smote the first born of the Egyptians, and passed over the houses of the
Israelites, and this concerns us no more than it concerns us to Celebrate the
very Day of their deliverance out of Egypt. Thus also for the Posture used at
the eating of the Passover, at first it was probably a Standing posture,
because the Jews were commanded to eat it with their Loins girded, with their
shoes on their Feet, and with their Staff in their hand. But there were proper
and peculiar reasons for this Ceremony; for it was Significative and in Token
of their great Haste; and that concerns us no more neither, than it concerns us
to eat Unleavened Bread which was in token of their Haste also. In our Saviors
time the Posture was Altered (as I shall show in its due place) and 'twas
neither standing nor sitting (as many ignorant mem conceive) but a Recumbent
and Leaning posture, one guest lying along in the bosom of another, as (St.
John lay in our Lords Bosom) so making part of a Round or Oval figure. And
even This posture was of peculiar fignificancy to the Jews too, for it was in
Token that their Journey and Travels were at an End, and that they were possessed
of the Land of Rest, which God had sworn to their Fathers, that he would give
them. So that neither from hence can we gather any thing that binds us, unless
it be this, that in circumstantial matters we should submit to those innocent
usages, which either the Laws, or Customs of a Nation, or the Reason of times
have introduced, as our Blessed Savior himself did, who took such Customs as
they were, and observed them as he found them, not troubling the World with
debates and Controversies about things of nothing.

So then, the Rites used at the Passover are no Leading Rites to us, nor are
we to Copy out that pattern any more than we are Commemorate the Jews feast.
This Sacrament of ours is not a Memorial of the Paschal Supper, but of our
blessed Redeemers Death; and accordingly we are to use such Rituals as are most
proper and suitable to the meaning and purpose of this Mystery, and most
significative unto Us. Considering that it was between Nine and Three of the
Clock, that our dear Lord was hurried to Golgotha, nailed to the Cross, and
there hung upon four wounds, languishing, bleeding, dying with pangs and throws
unspeakable, unconceivable, it is proper for us to Celebrate about Noon this
Blessed Sacrament, which is the Memorial of his Great Passion. Considering too
the Intendments of this Mystery, that it serves (as I shall prove as I go
along) to engage us to be faithful and True to the Redeemer of our Souls, and
to convey unto us all those benefits, which he purchased for us by his Passion,
as Pardon of Sin, the Communication of his Blessed body and Blood, the
assistance of his Holy Spirit, a close Union with him, and an assurance of a
glorious Immortality; and considering also what We are, that the Divine
Goodness should be thus propitious and kind to us, his Unworthy, Despicable,
because Sinful Creatures, I appeal to any man of sense and true humility, if it
be not most proper, most becoming us (were Laws and Customs altogether silent)
to receive the blessed instruments and Pledges of the Divine Grace in the
Lowlyest, in the most Reverent, in the most Humble posture, and after such a
manner as is most expressive of that sense we ought to have of our own Vileness
and nothingness, and of the Love of Jesus. When I, who am so unworthy, that the
Lord should come under my Roof, am invited to come so near unto him, as to lie
(as it were) not in his Bosom, but in his Heart too, and to take into my hands
the Holy Seals of his dearest Love, of his tenderest and everlasting
Compassions, then be thou Prostrate, O my Soul; let me then Worship, and fall
down, and Kneel before the Lord my Redeemer, and if there be any thing viler
than the Dust, or any place lower and baser than the Earth, let my sinful Body
grovel and lie there. Thus the Nature and Ends of this Sacrament, and the
consideration that it serves to Commemorate, not what the Jews did at their
Paschal Supper, but what Christ, our true Passover, did in being Sacrificed
for us, are enough to take any humble man off from that regard which
Superstitious Persons have of supposed Jewish postures; because we are not to
represent and Commemorate their Actions, but to show forth the bitter Passion
and Death of the Holy Jesus. And this shall suffice to be said, as the Use and
Improvement of this matter; that this Eucharistical solemnity was intended to
be a a perpetual and standing Memorial of our Saviors sufferings and Love: Do
this in Remembrance, in Commemoration of me: That Is one great End of this
sacrifical Banquet.

CHAP. III.
The second End of the Holy Sacrament, to be a Covenant-Feast. The Ancient and
general use of Covenant Feasts. That this is such proved from its Analogy to
those Ancient Covenant-Feasts, among Heathens and Jews, and from the Words of
Christ at the Institutions. Two conclusions.

BY the leave of the Socinians we will go further, and confidently affirm, that
this Holy Sacrament is intended to another End too, viz. that it may be a
Federal Rite, or a Covenant banquet between God and the Communicants. By a
Covenant is meant, such a Communion, Alliance, and League with God, whereby he
claims a peculiar right, interest, and propriety in us, as in those who have
devoted our selves to his Worship and service, and expect good things at his
hand. And by a Covenant-Banquet is meant such a Religious Feast, whereby a
League of that nature is contracted or Confirmed.

This at first may seem somewhat dark to you, because the generality of us are
not well acquainted with the old Customs of of other Countries, especially of
the Oriental Nations; the right understanding whereof will give us a great deal
of light into this matter. For the opening of it therefore we must know, that
it was very usual for People, especially in the Eastern parts of the World, to
make and ratify Contracts by eating and drinking together. Of this the Holy
Scriptures give us some plain Exemples. For that Feast which Abimelech and
Isaac celebrated together Genesis 26. 30. was a Covenant-Feast, a token and symbol
of Friendship between them. Labans eating with Jacob upon an heap of stones,
Genesis 31. 46. was no other then a Foederal rite. The Israelites eating of the
Gibeonites Victuals, Josh. 9. 14. was the contracting of a League with those
crafty people, which the Israelites were blameable for doing without asking
Counsel at the mouth of the Lord; for had they first enquired of God, they had
not been Circumvented, as they were into a confederacy with them. When David
after an upbraiding manner spoke of his friends treachery (in words which are
very appicable to Judas) Psalm. 41. 9. mine own familiar Friend (said he) in
whom I trusted, which did eat of my Bread, has lift up his heel against me: He
meant one, that had entered into Covenant with him by a Feast (as you find that
Abner did in 2 Samuel 3. 20.) and therefore instead of a Friend, it is otherwise
rendered in the Margin of our Bibles, the man of my peace, (...) a (...) comedit.
or the man that was at peace with me. Hence the Hebrew word which signifies a
Covenant, is derived from a Root which signifies to Eat. And hence too we read
of an Idol among the Sichemites, which was called Berith (or the God of a
Covenant) because the people of that place were wont, when they made Covenants,
to eat and drink with their Confederates in the house of that God of theirs, as
you find they did, when they entered into a League with Gaal, and made him their
Head in Opposition to Abimelech, Jud. 9. 27.

But humane Writers afford many instances of this Nature, how people were wont
anciently to make and Ratify Covenants between Nation and Nation, between
party and party, and between Apud Graecos and Macedones panem gladio divisum,
sponsum and sponsam cum ineunt sponsalia, gustare solenne fuit. Apud Galatas ut
ex eodem poculo vir and uxor libant, Alex. ab Alex. l. 2. c. 5. This was called
Confarreatio, a marrying by the Rite of eating a Bride-cake, which had been
first offered as a sacrifice; and 'twas the most sacred band of Love. Nihil
confarreationis faedere in sponsalibus Religiosius fuit. Id. ibid. vide and
Gyrald. de diis Gent. Syntag 17 p. 487.
Man and Wife, sometimes by Feriebant plerique faedera vel pane praeciso and
i^vicem gustato, aut vini poculo Epoto. ab Alex. genesis dier. l. 5. c. 3.
Eating Bread, sometimes by drinking Wine, and frequently by Apud Persas inter
vinum and epulas frequenti convivio, in quo uxores and filios, caeterosque quos
charos habent, tanquam fider pignora adhibebant, ibique inter Sacra mensae,
velut apud hospitales deos, faedera and pacta inibant, eam fidem socialem rati,
and mansurae pacis pignus inviolabile. Qui etiam mos Germanorum fuit, ut de
pace and bello, deque faederibus, societatibus, amicitiis, sponsaliis and
pactis. in conviviis inter pocula decernant. Id. ibid. Hence we read of the
(...) among the Greeks, a Cup of Friendship. Theogn.
partaking of Both together, which does evidently show, that it was the general
custom of Mankind to Contract and Covenant with one another by the visible
rites of Feasting; that, as we now are wont to confirm Covenants by signing of
deeds so the common custom of the world formerly was to enter into Covenants,
and to Ratify all Contracts by Banqueting together.

To draw down this observation now, and to make it serviceable to our present
purpose, and business concerning this religious, Christian Feast, the blessed
Sacrament: There are these three things which I shall prove in their order.

1. That those Religious Feasts which the old Heathens celebrated before their
Idols, were visible Rites whereby they Covenanted with those imaginary Deities.

2. That those Sacrifical Feasts, which were observed by Gods people, according
to the Law, were visible rites too, whereby they Covenanted with the true God.

3. That this Sacrifical, Christian Feast, which we partake of, according to
the Gospel, is a visible Rite also, whereby we Covenant with the Blessed Jesus.
The proof of these three things will be sufficient, I hope, to clear this
matter.

1. That those Religious Feasts which were Celebrated by the old Heathens
before their Idols, were visible Rites whereby they Covenanted with those
imaginary Deities. So they were reputed to have been by God himself: for when
the Jews were so foolish as to grow fond of those Heathen Rites, and to be
taken with them, God charged them as guilty of a Sin of the Highest nature, as
Apostates, as Idolaters, as those that had forsaken him and his Covenant, and
as those that had really and actually joined themselves to the Heathen Idols;
which could not be true, if those Sacrifical Feasts of the Heathens had not
been Foederal or Covenant Rites. The First instance of this we may observe in
Exodus 32. where the people make an Altar to the Golden Calf, bring their
peaceofferings, and Celebrate a Religious banquet upon the Remainders thereof;
they sat down to Eat and to drink (to Feast together before the Golden Calf)
and rose up to play, ver. 6. Hebraei ad profanos Egyptiorum ritus animos
transtulerunt. Quam enim Moses dux eorum ascendisset in montem, atque ibidem 40
diebus moraretur, aureum caput Bovis', quem vocant Apim, quod cos signo
praecederet, figurarunt. Lactant de ver. Sap. lib. 4. c. 10. Sic and S.
Hieronym. in Hoseae cap. 4.
This they did in imitation of the Egyptians, among whom they had lived so
long. For those blind Heathens Worshipped a Bull in honor of their Nonne and
Apim bovem cum Egyptiis adoratis and colitis? Minut. Fael. in Oct. Factus est
Serapis omnium maximus Egyptiorum deus. Aug. de civ. dei. 1. 18. c. 5.
Great God Apis: and when they had found the Beast, they received him with a
great deal of Pomp and Festivity, (...) (says Suidas in Apides. (...) Schol
Aristophan. in pace.
Suidas) adding a great and magnificent Banquet: Which custom, because the
Jews used before Sperabant dei quem colebant spiritum in eam imaginem venturum,
sicut de astrorum Spiritibus gentes aliae sentebant. Grot. in Exodus 32. 5.
that Image which they had nowmade, (though perhaps they made it with a design,
that it should be a representation of the true God) therefore they were looked
upon as downright Idolaters: For so the Apostle speaks of them, 1 Cor. 10. 7.
neither be ye Idolaters, as were some of them, as it is written, the people sat
down to Eat and to Drink, and rose up to play.

Thus also when they were persuaded by the Moabites to eat of those Sacrifices,
which had been offered to their Idol, they were judged to have contracted a
Confederacy with that Demon, and so Moses and David both express it, the one
in Number. 25. 3. the other in Psalm. 106. 28. that they joined themselves to Baal
peor; that is, they entered into Communion with that Heathen Deity which was
Worshipped on Mount Peor, by eating Sacrificia ea inferiae erant in memoriam
defunctorum peractae. Seldom. de diis Syris Syntagm. 1. cap. 5.
the Sacrifices of the Dead, or such things as were offered in memory of the
dead.

Upon this account it is, that Idolatry is described in Ezekiel. 18. by Eating
upon the Mountains; because it was generally in High places, and in Groves Post
sacrificia epulari mos erat, and quidem iisdem in locis ubi Sacrificatum
fuerat. Grot. in Ezekiel. 18. 6.
upon Hills, where the Heathens were wont to place their Altars, and to offer
Sacrifices, and then to eat of the Sacrifices, as a Covenant Rite between them
and their Gods.

To all which let me add in the last place, that St. Paul calls the eating of
those Heathen Sacrifices, the having of Fellowship with Devils; 1 Cor. 10. 20.
The things which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to Devils, and not to
God; and I would not that ye should have Fellowship with Devils, Where it is
observable what the Apostle says. ver. 15. I speak as to Wise men, judge ye
what I say. He knew they could not be so void of common sense, as not to
understand the meaning of those Mystical Solemnities, because all intelligent
men in the world knew, that they were so many bonds of Friendship and Amity
with their Gods.

2. This then being so clear; I proceed to show in the second place, that those
Sacrifical Feasts which were used by the Jews according to the Law, were also
visible and customary Rites, whereby they Covenanted with the true God. In
Psalm. 50. 5. says God, gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made
a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. Hence it appears, that the offering a
Sacrifice was a Foederal Rite, whereby God and his people became One. Upon
which account it was, that Salt was used in Sacrifices by Gods own direction,
Levit. 2. 13. Every oblation of thy meat offering shall thou season with Salt
-- with all thine offerings thou shall offer Salt. For all Nations looked upon
Salt as a token of Love, a Pledge and Symbol of Peace and Friendship. And the
reason of it is given by Eustatius (as he is cited by Doctor Hammond on St,
Mark: 9. 50.) * because as Salt Numa Pompilius deos fruge coli, and mola salsa
supplicari instituit, quam molam ex far, sale and aqua composuit, sine qua
nullum Sacrificium ratum fieri censuit. Alex. ab Alex. genial. dier. lib. 3.
cap. 12: Multi modii salis simul edendi sunt, ut amicitiae munus expletum sit.
Cic. de amicitia. Graeci vino madentes oleoperungunt and sale, qui etiam ante
reliquas dapes sal velut Amicitiae symbabolum hospitalibus apponant. Alex. ab
Alex. l. 5. c. 21.
being compacted of many drops of Water, every one in it self of a Fluid and
Unsteady nature, becomes one solid body; so they that from distant places
Conjoyn into a League of Friendship, meet together both in place and friendly
disposition. Hence Dicitur sal faederis dei, quod deus exigat tanquam
firmissimum faedus, ut sal in quavis Mincha adhibeatur, and alias firma pacta
dicuntur pacta salis, Numer. 18. Hanc cerimoniam a Patribus acceptam, etiam
Ethnici in suis Sacris observarunt, nulla enim Sacra conficiebantur apud eos
sine mola Salsa P. Fagius. in Levit. 2.
it is called the Salt of the Covenant, Levit 2. 13. ratione Foederis (says
Paulus Fagius) because it was a Token of that Permanent and firm Covenant which
Men made with God by Sacrifice. And the Heathens themselves observed this
custom of Salting their offerings; for the partaking of Salt was an Instrument
and Pledge of Amity: like a Solemn Oath (as He in Origin said) which it is (...)
Orig. contra Cells. lib. 2. page 74. Edit. Cantab.
a wicked and disgraceful thing for any man to violate.

Sacrificing then being a Covenanting Rite, feasting upon the Sacrisice was a
Rite of the same Nature: Both Solemnities were looked upon but as one; and the
latter was only the Complement, the Close, the Finishing os the former. And to
this purpose Nullum fere Sacrificium sine aliquo epulo, and vicissim nullum
p^ne epulum, etiam profanum, publicum praesertim, sine sacris quibusdam
ritibu^s atque cerimoniis fuit celebratum. Quin ipsa quoque Sacrificia quid
fuerunt aliud quam quaedam quasi epulae, atque convivia, secundum illud Poetae
-- Epulis accumbere Divum.- Stuckius, Sacrific. Sacror. desorip.
I understand those words in Psalm. 50, 16. unto the wicked God says, what have
thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in
thy Mouth? By taking Gods Covenant into ones Mouth, is meant, Eating the Signs
and Symbols of the Covenant, the partaking of those Sacrifical Banquets, which
were a Token of Gods Covenant: As if he had said, what have wicked men to do to
Feast before me, pretending thereby to be in Covenant with me, seeing they hate
to be reformed. This is a Natural and easy explication of that place, and it
makes it very plain, that the Eating of Gods Sacrifices was a Foederal
Solemnity. And a clear instance of this we have in Exodus 24. where we find the
Covenant renewed between God and the Children of Israel, they solemnly
undertaking and Vowing, that they would do all that the Lord had said, and
would be obedient. Upon this burn offerings and peace offerings are Sacrificed
upon an Altar built on purpose there for that occasion, and then we read, that
Moses and Aaron, with the seventy Nobles of the Children of Israel, went up to
God, and saw his Glory on the Mount, and there did Eat and Drink says the
Text, ver, II. It was a Sacrifical-Feast, which they Celebrated in their own
names, and in the Names of all the Congregation, to confirm and ratify that
Covenant which they had openly, and universally engaged to keep. For want of
minding which thing, many learned Expositors and the Chaldee Paraphrast
himself, have been strangely mistaken in their sense of that place of Scripture.

I doubt not but the Paschal Supper was a Foederal rite too, as other the like
Sacrifical Feasts were. For Moses commanding a memorial of the Passover in
Exodus 13. gave this as one Reason of it, ver. 9. it shall be a sign unto thee
upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes; that the Lords Law may
be in thy mouth: Meaning that the Paschal Solemnity was to be a Token and sign
of their Covenant with God, to put them in mind of those Obligations they were
under to perform the Terms of that Covenant, which was sealed with the blood of
the Lamb. Nay, if the Passover had not been a very Solemn Foederal Banquet, we
cannot easily conceive why strangers and uncircumcised persons were forbidden
to eat of it; For the Law was very strict and express as to that in Exodus 12.
No stranger shall Eat thereof; but every man's servant that is bought for money,
when thou have Circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof; a foreigner and
hired Servant shall not Eat thereof. The reason is plain and obvious, because
the Paschal Solemnity was a Covenant-rite, which did not belong unto those, who
did not belong to that Covenant which God had made with his pecuculiar People,
the Children of Israel,

Having thus made it evident, that the Sacrifical Feasts of old were Foederal
or Covenant Mysteries, and were so esteemed both by Jews and Heathens, Satis
constat hanc and olim fuisse, and nunc quoque esse omnium fere gentium
consuetudinem, ut partim sacris quibusdam ceremoniis, libationibus atque
victimis: partem symposiis adhibitis faedera atque contractus, quibus ineantur,
stabiliantur atque confirmentur. Stuck. Antiq. convivial. lib. 1. cap. 30.
I proceed now to show in the third place, that this Evangelical Feast is a
solemnity of the like Nature. For tho we should suppose, that nothing to this
purpose was said at the institution of it, yet the very Analogy and
Resemblance, that is between this and other Sacrifical Banquets, does
sufficiently argue, that this Solemnity was intended to be a Federal rite
between the Church and Christ. This is the very principle upon which the
Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 10. where going about to show how unlawful it is for
Christians to eat of things offered to Idols, he lays down this Proposition,
that by a due use of this Blessed Sacrament we Communicate of Christ's Body and
Blood, and are Foederally united to him; so that as the Loaf we eat of, is one,
even so are we one Body (with Christ our Head) by being partakers of that one
Loaf. This is the meaning and substance of the 16. and 17. verses. And, to make
this the more evident, he draws a Parallel, and shows the Analogy between this
and other Sacrifical Banquets. Behold Israel after the flesh (ver. 18.) are not
they which eat of the Sacrifices, partakers of the Altar? i. e. are they not in
Foederal Communion with God, whose Altar it is? Why even so, they who sacrifice
to Devils, are in Foederal Communion with Devils, are joined to Devils, have
Fellowship with Devils; and therefore it is not lawful for us to eat of those
Sacrifices, because it is not possible for us to Communicate with Devils and
with Christ too. This is a plain and pregnant proof that this Evangelical
Mystery is (as other Mysteries of the like Nature anciently were) a visible
Rite of Covenanting.

But besides the Analogy of this sacrifical Feast, our Saviors words at the
institution, do sufficiently show it to be a Foederal Ceremony: For speaking of
the Cup, or of the Wine in the Cup, he said, This is my Blood of the New
Covenant (for so it should be rendered instead of, New Testament:) as if he had
said, this is the Representation of that blood of mine, which is the Seal of
that new Covenant that is now between us; or as St. Luke relates it, This Cup
is the new Covenant in my Blood, that is, the sealing unto you the New
Covenant. As Circumcision is called the Covenant of Circumcision, Act. 7. 8.
because it was the Token and Seal, whereby the Covenant between God and Abraham
was ratified; so is the Cup in this Holy Sacrament called the New Covenant,
because it is the Sign and Pledge whereby the New Covenant of Grace is sealed
between God and all faithful Communicants. Formerly it was a Custom in some
parts Grot. in Matthew. 26. 27. Alex. ab Alexand. lib 5. c. 3. de Medis, Lydis,
Carmanis, Scythis, Armeniis, Hyrcanis, etc.
of the World, for men to enter into Covenants by drinking of Blood, as the
Learned Grotius, and others have rightly observed. But because this was an
inhumane way, people that were more civilized, were wont to enter into Pacts
and Covenants by drinking of Wine instead of Blood. Now since our Savior said,
that the Wine in his hands (which was instead of his Blood, and a Symbol of it)
was the Cup of the new Covenant, we may easily discern, that he did intend this
as a Foederal Solemnity, as an Obsiguation of those promises and Engagements
which are on the Churches part, and on his part also. The Socinians therefore
do abuse the World with a very great Error in teaching, that there is no manner
of Obsignation at the Lords Supper: For the thing is evident and clear, that
this is a Covenant-Ordinance; and then it must follow (as I shall show in the
next Chapter) that here we do stipulate to God that we will live up to Christ's
Religion according to our Power, and that God does also stipulate to us, that
upon our so doing he will perform all those promises of Grace and mercy which
he has made to the Church in his only begotten.

To this that has been said it may add a little strength if we observe that
our blessed Savior himself expressed the making of Covenants under the the
notion of Eating and Drinking. So he represents Hypocrites pleading for
themselves, Luke 13. 26. We have eaten and drunk in thy presence: Meaning, that
some may profess to be in Covenant with him, and to hold Occasional Communion
with his Church too; but yet that all their fair shows and pretenses shall not
serve their turn in that day, when the workers of iniquity shall be cast
everlastingly from his presence. Thus also when he says Apocal. 3. 20. Behold
I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door, I
will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me; his meaning is,
that he will enter into the strictest League, and engage in an unviolable
Contract of Love and Friendship with every obedient heart. For those vulgar
expressions are no other then Condescentions to vulgar Capacities. Because such
actions were reputed by all Mankind to be Symbols of Peace, and arguments of
good will, therefore our Savior chose to express his divine Philanthropy after
that manner; and when Divines do accomodate such expressions to the business of
the Holy Sacrament, they go upon this ground, because this religious eating and
drinking is a feasting with God now (as it was in the days of old) in a
Foederal or Covenant way.

I have been the longer and the more particular upon this point, that I might
make every thing intelligible as I go along, and withal might open the sense of
some places of Scripture, which otherwise cannot be so rightly understood. Now
from these premises there are two things which I shall conclude by way of
application.

6. First, that men ought to come to the Blessed Sacrament upon great
Consideration, and with all imaginable Sincerity. We had need be serious when
we have to do with God; and never more than when we intend to approach before
Gods Altar, lest by going to it after a rash and inconsiderate manner we take a
large step toward our own destruction. Keep thy foot when thou go to the
house of God; and be more ready to hear (or obey) than to give the Sacrifice of
Fools; for they consider not that they do evil, says the Royal Preacher,
Eccles. 5. 1. For the Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination; how much more
when he brings it with a wicked mind? Says the same Solomon, Pro. 21. 27.
It Is enough to strike the heart even of an Infidel through with trembling and
horror, to consider that people professing so much sanctity and zeal, should
dare to be such audacious Hypocrites, as to use an Ordinance of such solemnity
and importance, only to make a show of Religion, or to comply with a custom,
or to evade the Law, or to serve a present turn, or to secure their temporal
interest, or to palliate a design, or to Color over a wicked Cause, or to
promote the ends of an execrable Association and Confederacy. A greater affront
cannot easily be offered to the Majesty of a just God, nor can Religion receive
a greater scandal and blow, than when men presume to employ Christ's own
Ordinance, as a Property and Tool, to bring about such low, such base, such
abominable purposes. And yet how many have we seen, who seldom or never would
communicate with us, but when their money was at stake, and when the hand of
Government lay somewhat heavy upon them? And have not all sober and indifferent
men reason to mistrust, that such persons come to the Holy Sacrament, not out
of Conscience, or any true fear of God, but rather out of pure Love of the
world, out of a dogged sort of sullenness, out of spite to the Magistrate, and
the Laws, with recoyling and self-condemning minds, and with this irreligious
and Athestical principle, that if they were left alone to themselves, they
would not trouble themselves with a thing of that Nature? I desire such as are
concerned to ask their Consciences, whether this be not their case? And to
consider, how they will answer it to the Judge of all the earth, for profaning
his Holy name, for debauching his Holy Ordinances, and for polluting his holy
Sanctuary and the service thereof, after such a lewd and Abominable manner?
This is to be liable to that dreadful reprehension in Psalm. 50. What have thou
to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take (the seals of) my
Covenant in thy mouth? For it is a Foederal Mystery which the Church here
Celebrates (as I have showed you;) every Communicant is reputed to Covenant
with God by this action; whether it be truth or a Lie that is in their right
hand, they take the Sacrament upon it; and they certainly contract with him,
either for a blessing, or for a Curse. So that there is no Trifling with the
Majesty of Heaven (for God will not be mocked, especially after such a Solemn
rate) there is no colluding with Angels, and men, and our own souls, especially
in a thing of such vast Importance and Concernment. It is a very memorable
story which the eminent Bishop Morton tells us (in his Appeal for Protestants)
of a learned l. 2. c. 2. s. 28.
young man of St. John's College in Cambridge, that being seduced (in the time
of Doctor, Whitaker, being then Master of the College) to the Romish Religion,
went to the Holy Sacrament (pretending Conformity, that he might save his
Preserment.) It seems, that receiving the Sacramental Bread into his hands, he
reserved it by some crafty way, and afterward threw it over the Wall, But the
vengeance of God pursued him so for his Hypocrisy, that he was soon tormented
with such Remorse and anguish of Soul, that he threw himself over the
battlements of the Chapel, and so ended his miserable Life. You see it is an
old Popish course, for men to go to Gods Table only to Qualify themselves,
only to serve their Secular interest, and to seem to make a Covenant with God,
when they have made a Covenant with Hell. But (though God does not make visible
examples of all such Monstrous Hypocrites, yet) we have as much reason to
believe that God is angry with them, as we are certain that he is angry with
every Rebel, though he does not presently destroy him in that manner as he
destroyed Korah. It is a desperate thing for any man to dally with the
Omniscient and righteous God; and very dangerous to be rash and heedless in
matters of Contract, especially in such Contracts as are for an Eternity. Men
use to be careful how they set their hands to a Bond, And to consider things
thoroughly before they seal instruments of Indenture: And by how much a Soul is
more valuable than Mammon, so much the more is every one obliged to deal wisely
and faithfully with his Soul, when he brings it under engagements. The rash
taking of Covenants and Engagements has sent more Souls to the Devil, than a
Civil War has sent men to their Graves, it is necessary therefore to be well
advised in actions which are looked upon to be of a Binding nature, and
especially when we come to the Holy Sacrament, which lays a strict and
indefeisable obligation upon the Conscience. Here we profess to contract with
God for all that our very souls are worth; and for that reason we should know
and consider rightly what we are about to do and stipulate with all sincerity
Vroditur Rhadamistus regis Iberiae filius, dum simulat cum Mithridate Armeniae
rege faedus inire, and ob id colligandipollices forent, lorum ad terram collido
astu decidere simulasse, quo Mithridatis pedesvinculoinvasit, ipsumque cum
uxore and liberis captivos duxit, and nece affecit. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 3.
and integrity of heart. The memory of that Prince is infamous, who professing
a desire to enter into a League with Mithridates, and pretending a willingness
to have their Thumbs tied together (as the manner of contracting was in that
Country) he craftly dropped the Thong upon the ground, and stooping down as if he
would recover it, presently bound Mithridates feet with it, and so, first led
him Captive and then killed him. This was shameful dissimulation and base
perfidiousness: But their Sin is infinitely greater, who come to the Sacrament
pretending they are desirous to enter into Covenant with the Prince of Peace,
but are no other than Cheats and Counterfeits in all this, full of
deceitfulness and hypocrisy in the whole action, being as ready to Betray
Christ, as they seem ready to Kiss him. Therefore men should be very serious
and without all guile, when they make their addresses unto God, and be afraid
ofnothing more, than of putting tricks upon Heaven, when they think to deceive
the world; because all such hypocrisy is both an argument of reprobate minds,
and moreover an effectual course that Hypocrites take to seal themselves up to
everlasting perdition.

2. And so it is also, when men wilfully Forsake the Covenant of God, after
they have solemnly undertaken it. In the next place therefore, we should be
very careful, as to Contract at Gods Table with all sincerity, so to stand
resolutely to what we have done, and to Perform our Vows, promises, and
obligations, with constancy and faithfullness afterward. When a Covenant is
evil, either in the whole or in part (as some Solemn Leagues and Covenants have
been in a very high degree) then it becomes null and void of it self, and it is
a Sin, not to break but to Keep it. But where a Covenant is both lawful and
necessary (as the vowing of universal Christian obedience at the Holy Sacrament
is) there if men flinch from their Duty, and wilfully draw back, the Crime is
of such a high nature, that Gods Soul will have no pleasure in such Apostates,
Heb 10. 38. The very Heathens accounted the violation of Contracts, especially
such Contracts as had been made at the Altars of their Gods, to be one of the
most Execrable Villainies in the World. Nay they looked upon those Covenants
which were made only by Bread and Salt, to have been very (...), Origin. cont.
Cells. lib. 2. page 74.
Sacred ties and obligations. For which reason Celsus the Pagan argued against
the Credibility of that story concerning the treachery of Judas. For (said he)
when one man eats with another, they scorn to betray one another; and
therefore he thought it impossible for any man to be false to his God, when he
communicates with him at the same Table. Now in this Celsus was guilty of a
manifest untruth (as Origin rightly answered) for many such perfidious fellows
there have been, who have betrayed those of whose Bread they have eaten. Origin
instanced in Lycambas, who was upbraided by Parius for violating the Covenant
he had made by the Rite of eating Bread and Salt. But yet it is true, that
mankind in general have ever Hated such treachery, and despised all such as
were guilty and faithless after that manner; and Judas his Sin was very great
and monstrous beyond expression, and comparison. And yet there have been more
Judases in the world then One: Many Traitors have eaten and drank at Gods
Table; nay have been admired too for their Treachery, have been Canonized for
it by such as themselves, have been numbered, by their fellow Traitors, among
the Blessed in the Saints everlasting rest. However the sin is Abominable; and
when men receive the blessed Sacrament, they are deeply obliged to be steady
and true to their promises, and to their Contracts, which they make with the
Divine Majesty. St Paul calls men's Apostatizing from the duty, the treading
under foot the Son of God, and the counting the blood of the Covenant an unholy
(or a profane and common) thing, Heb. 10. 29. Which expressions are
Emphatically applicable to the sin I now speak of, the sin of Unfaithfulness,
after we have participated of Christ, after we have drank of his blood; this is
indeed to despise the Son of God as one of no value; and to trample upon his
blood, as an unprofitable, as a contemptible, as a vile thing; and of what sore
punishments shall not such be thought worthy? It was an old custom among some
people to make Covenants by giving and taking a little quantity of Wool which
they had shorn -- Quibus foederibus qui contrairet, turpissimo facinore, and in
expiabili scelere tenebatur. Alex. ab Alexand. ubi supra.
from the top of a Lambs Head; and they who violated such Covenants, were held
guilty of the foulest Crime, and inexpiable wickedness. If Covenants between
man and man made by such frivolous and inconsiderable tokens, were reputed
sacred by the very Pagans, how Sacred ought we Christians to count such
Contracts as we make with the Divine being by eating the Flesh, and drinking
the Blood of the very Lamb of God? I conclude this consideration with those
words of Solomon, Eccles. 5. 4, 5. When thou vowest a Vow unto God, defer not
to pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have vowed.
Better is it, that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and not
pay.

CHAP. IV.
A third end of this Sacrament is to engage us to observe the Laws of that
Religion to which it does belong. Proved from the Notion of the new Covenant:
From the design of Mysteries in general: From its Analogy to Mystical Banquets
in particular both among Heathens and Jews; especially the Paschal-Supper. The
sense of the Church touching this matter.

TO proceed now to another end of this Sacrament: It being already demonstrated
that this Mystery was instituted as a Foederal, or Covenant Rite to be used
under the Gospel, it necessarily follows, that a Third End of it is to engage
all such as use it to the strict observation of that Religion which is
established by the Gospel. This will evidently appear, if we consider well these
three things. 1. If we consider only the Nature and Notion of the Evangelical
Covenant to which this Mystery does belong. 2. If we consider besides, the
design, an Importance of all Mystical Rites in general. 3. If we consider also
the Analogy which this Rite bears to the ancicient Mystical Banquets in
particular.

1. As to the First of these; the Nature and Notion of a Covenant is this, that
it is a Pact, Contract, or agreement, containing certain Conditions and
Promises, for the performance whereof each party binds himself, and
undertaketh to the other. And the Evangelical Covenant is a Pact of this
nature: For as it contains promises which it lies on Gods part to make good;
as that he will pardon our sins in this world, and take such care of our Souls
and Bodies, that we shall be everlastingly happy in the next World; so it
contains certain conditions and terms, which it lies on Our part to perform in
order thereunto; as that we will believe on his Son whom he sent into the World
to be our Propitiation, that we will sincerely repent of all the miscarriages
we have committed, and that we will make it our care and business to lead a
Life of Virtue and Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Seeing
then that this is the Covenant that is between God and us now; seeing that this
Mystery was appointed pursuant to this Covenant; and seeing that at the due
Celebration of it the Covenant is Ratified and confirmed; it must undeniably
follow (whatever the Socinians and others affirm to the contrary) that by this
Sacred Rite God himself is supposed to Seal his part of the Covenant unto us,
and moreover that we are supposed to Seal Our part of the Covenant unto him; I
mean, we are understood hereby visibly to profess, engage and stipulate, that
we do and will steadfastly believe, heartily repent, and by the help of Gods
Grace unfeignedly resolve to lead our lives so, as the Laws of Christ's
Religion do require us. If it be a Foederal rite (as I have sufficiently
proved) this must be the design and meaning of it in short.

2. But besides this we are to observe in the second place, that all those
Mystical Rites, which ever were used in the World by any Sect or Society of
men, were always designed to engage people to be obedient and True to that
Religion, to which those Rites did appertain. This I note, not as if any
Religion in the World could compare with the Christian Institution; nor as if
any Mystical Rites in the World ever were of that importance and dignity, as
ours are; but only to show what the general sense of Mankind has been, as to
the reason and intendments of religious Mysteries. Those Mysteries which were
used in the Infant-times of Christianity by those lewd Heretics the Simonians,
the Nicolaitans, the Valentinians, the Gnostics, and the rest, they were
intended by the Authors of them to serve the Ends, and to strengthen the
interest of their Religion, and to train up Proselytes in Conformity to that
profession which they were admitted into. Those Mysteries that were used of old
by Pagans, as their Washings, their Lustrations, their Sacrifices, their
Sacrifical Banquets, their many sorts of Festivals, and the like, they were
designed to no other purpose, but to keep men Pagans, and to promote Paganism.
The rites that were anciently observed by the Egyptians, by the Athenians and
other Greeks, by the Romans, and by other Nations, what were they for, but to
oblige people to be True to the gods of the Country? In like manner those
Mysteries, which God himself appointed under the Law, were intended by him to
tie his people fast to himself, and to keep them close to the Observation of
that Religion, which he had directed by his Servant Moses. Because the Jews of
old were so in love with superstition and Idolatry (having lived so long among
the Egyptians) lest they should turn aside after other Gods, the Divine Being
was pleased Ritus, qui aut ab Haebraeis ad gentes alias venere, aut, quod
credibilius est, a Syris and Egyptis usurpati correcti sunt ab Haebraeis, and
ab aliis gentibus sine ea emenda tione usurpati. Grotius Levit. 1. 9.
to correct the Abuses and vicious nature of some Gentile customs, and to
indulge his own inheritance the use of them, that thereby he might oblige them
to serve Him, and Him only. This was the reason why the Jews were interdicted
the use of many profane Rites and Mysteries, that they might Philo in libro
(...).
not forsake the Truth (says Philo) but, by observing Ceremonies of Gods
appointing, might go on with stedfastness in Gods way, Id. ibid. and in lib. de
victimis.
and practice that substantial Religion and inward Holiness of heart, which
those rites did Adumbrate and point to. It was for the same reason, that God
directed so many sorts of Sacrifices; not that he was delighted to see poor
Creatures slain, or was pleased with the Blood of Calves and Goats; but partly
that he Sacrificiorum onera, and operationum and oblationum negociosas
scrupulositates nemo reprehendat, quasi deus talia sibi proprie desideraverit
-- sed illam dei industriam sentiat, qua populum pronum in Idololatriam, and
transgressionem, ejusmodi efficiis Religioni. suae voluit astringere, quibus
superstitio seculi agebatur, ut ab ea avocaret illos, sibi jubens fieri, quasi
desider anti, ne simulachris. faci endis delinqueret. Tertull. adv Marc. lib.
2. vide and Origin. Hom. in Numer. 17. in initio. Justin. Mart. dial. cum
Tryph. p. 237, 238, 292.
might prefigure the great Propitiation and Sacrifice upon the Cross; and
partly that he might secure his peoples Obedience unto himself; that he might
bind them to the due observance of his own Religion, and that he might lay upon
them the strictest Engagements to be constant and faithful to the Laws, which
he had Established in his Covenant with them. For it has been the general sense
and opinion of Mankind, that the religious using of Sacred Mysteries was a
visible and Solemn way of Addicting and Devoting themselves to that Relion to
which those Mysteries did relate; that the communicating in such Mysteries was
of an Obligatory nature like a Vow; that it was a Consecrating act, by virtue
whereof they thought themselves bound, in the construction of Conscience, to
stick fast to that Religion which they undertook, and into which they were
initiated after such a Solemn manner. Hence it is that St. Paul said of that
Legal Foederal Rite; whereby men were initiated into the Jewish Religion, Gal.
5. 3. I testify to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtour to do
the whole Law. The voluntary and religious susception of that Rite, the being
matriculated into the Jewish Church by Circumcision, did tacitly bring upon the
man a burden, and Obligation, so that he stood Bound to observe the whole Law
of Moses, and to Worship God after the Mosaical manner, as much as if he had
with his own mouth vowed and stipulated to do so at Mount Sinai. The Sccinians
themselves understand those Words of St. Paul to this purpose, whosoever is
Circumcised, as Moses Disciple, by virtue of that action of his, is bound to
keep the whole Law: For he Vide Crellium in Gal. 5. 3.
that subjecteth himself to the Mosaical Law in one thing, subjecteth himself
in all; because the same Law requires other things as well as this. Besides,
Circumcision is the sign and mark of the whole Jewish Religion which the Law
prescribes; so that by undertaking that, men oblige and tie themselves, to the
Law, as it were by a Pledge; even as Baptism undertaken in the name of Christ,
and the use of the Lords Supper is (says Crellius) a Note and Symbol of
Christianity. Here the Socinians seem unawares to make an argument against
themselves, and confess upon the point, that the Eucharist is not only a
Commemorative, but a Foederal Mystery to, that it carries an obligation along
with it, and that it is in the Nature of a Pledge. And the truth is, as men did
formerly Plight their Troth to God by the right of Circumcision, so do we now
Plight our Troth to Christ by the use of both his Sacraments: They are binding
Mysteries; and for that reason, I suppose, our Savior made the use of Baptism,
and the Rite of Eating and Drinking, Sacramental, because they were mysteries
which were well known to the World, and which were known both to Jews and
Pagans, to be engaging and Consecrating mysteries. For (as the Learned Grotius
Grot. in Math. 28. 19.
has rightly observed) a Church being then to be congregated and gathered out
of all Nations, it was convenient that they should have some Note (or mark) of
their confession, the signification whereof should be perspicuous and clear to
all men. By this means Christ's Religion became the more easy, the more
acceptable, and the more obvious both to Jews and Gentiles: For they were wont
to Baptize too after a Sacred manner; they were wont to eat Bread and to drink
Wine too in their Temples, and places of Public Worship: And things being
thus, as they plainly saw, that Christ Adapted these old mysteries to his own
Institution, so they could easily gather from their own common Notions, how
that the great alteration and difference lay here, that Christ intended these
ancient Rites to new, and to better purposes; that is, to tie and engage all
Professors of Christianity, to be true to their Profession, and carefully to
observe the Laws of that Religion, of which these mysteries were now made a
Part.

3. Thus the purport and meaning of ancient, Sacred Rites in general, serves
to show that obliging force which we attribute to this Christian Mystery. But
if we pursue the thing a little further, we shall find, in the Third place,
more evidence of this matter still, by observing a little that Analogy which
this Christian Rite bears to the ancient mystical Banquets in particular. It
was customary among the Pagans by drinking of Wine, and making good cheer after
a Religious manner at their Temples, to make Solemn Thus the Athenians (which
was usual with other people also) quum in aureis and argenteis vasis d^is
propin^ssent, and (...) cecinissent, tunc aem^^n sanctissimis caeremoniis
coelum suspicientes vota nuncupabant Alex ab. Alex. 1. 3. c. 22. And when the
Boys of Athens commenced Ephaebi; they went into the Temple of Hercules, and
having consecrated a Vessel of Wine there, and drinking to the Company, took a
Solemn Oath conceptis verbis, to be true to the Gods of the Country.
Archaeolog. Attic lib. 5. c 13. and hinc (...) ea Sacra dicta sunt, sc.
Sacrificia quibus Ephaebi Herculi Libabant.
Vows. After the same manner they were wont to So Theocri^us de cerealibus
M^ster^is (...). And Virgil. lib. 1. Georgic. Curcta tibi Cererem pubes
agrestis adoret. Cui tu lacte ravos (...) miti dilve Ba^cho These Mysteries
were performed very secretly in Templi a ^y^is: And therefore Alcibiades was
accused of profanation for initiating privately the Mysteries of Ceres (...)
over Cups of Wine, whereby he initiated his Companions, who thereupon were
called mystae: Plutarch in Aleibiad. Hence that common saying in Julius
Firmicus, de Tympano mandueavi, de Cymbalo bibi, and Religionis secreta
perdidici; quod Graeco, sermon dicitur, (...) ( vel (...)) Jul. Fermic de
E^ro^e Prof. Relig. Which also Clemens Alexand. takes notice of (...); Clem.
Alex. in Protreptic.
initiate men into the Religion of their Deities; by Virtue of which Initiation
they devoted themselves and all they had (sometimes to their very So the custom
was, ut quam vestem quis eo tempore gestaret, quo initiaretur, non prius eam
exueret, quam longo usu detrita, gestari amplius non posset? Tum ferebatur in
Templum, dicanda illi Deo cujus Religionis candidatus fuisset, qui Sacrandam
offerebat. Gerard. in Aristophan. Plut. vide and Scholia ibidem.
Clothes) to the service, and Worship, and Honor of that Deity, into whose
Religion they were admitted. And for this reason they excluded all Extraneos ad
Sacra adhibere, fas non erat, Alex. ab Alex. de Epulis Sacrificalibus, 1. 4. c.
17. -- Delphis assuetum est, ut immolantes victimam, exclusis caeteris
vescantur, and quam extraneos admittere fas non erat. id ibid.
Strangers from Communicating in their Mysteries, and initiated none, who they
suspected would Hence it was that the Atheniaus would not initiate Hercules
into the Eleusinian Mysteries, because he was a Sranger ( Schol. Aristoph. in
Pluto.) and therefore probably would not keep his vow, nor be true to their God.
not be true to their Gods. After the like manner was Julian the Apostate
initiated into Paganism, when he had so long carried the Guise and Character of
a Christian. Being desirous to know whether he should be Emperor, and coming to
a place where an Heathen Temple stood, the Priest (who promised to answer his
Enquiry) led him into a Secret, close part of the Temple, and there wrought
upon him so by occasion of some Demons appearing to him, that he was persuaded
to participate of the Wicked Heathen Mysteries, and so from that time he
Theodoret Hist. 1. 3. c. 3.
became a professed Pagan, and hated Christianity and Christ himself to his last
Gasp.

By this we see, that the very Pagan sort of mankind thought they very obliged
by receiving the Symbols of their Religion to cleave and addict themselves to
it, and to Perform those engagements, which by those visible expressions and
tokens, they made unto their Gods.

And as for those who Worshipped the true God after his own way, it is plain,
that by Feasting upon part of their Sacrifices they Professed themselves to be
his People, to whom they had offered up those Sacrifices; and they Bound
themselves by that Sacred Rite to keep their Faith with him, and to continue
steadfast in their Duty to him: because that manner of Feasting in the presence
of God was esteemed (as I have showed) a Covenant-Ceremony. For our better
understanding of this matter we must note, that in the First Ages of the world
good men were not contented with the inward Religion of the Heart only; nor
did they think it enough for them to Express their Devotion by words alone. No;
their Zeal did excite them to give all Real, all Public, all Visible
demonstrations of their Love and Duty to that Supreme Being, who by the variety
of this own great Works had given Plain, Real, and Visible demonstrations of
his Goodness to them. As the Egyptians were wont to express things by
Hieroglyphics, so the Fathers of old were wont to express their Devotion by
Actions. This, I conceive, was the first Original of Sacrifices, which we find
to have been offered even by Cain and Abel. For considering that God was the
Cause of all Non ullo dei jussu. sed dictante ratione honorem deo etiam
conspicuum habend um etc. Grotius de Cain and Abel in Genesis 4. 3. In quem locum
vide and S. Chrysostom.
things, and that the Existence and preservation of all things depends upon
his providenced, they were led by the Light of Humane reason to express the
grateful sense they had of Gods goodness by presenting some of his own
Creatures to him, that thereby they might set forth his Honor, after the most
conspicuous, and after the Noblest manner they could

The Holy Patriarchs thought this offering up of Sacrifices, a Becoming,
because an ocular Act of Divine Worship; an Honorable, because a Visible and
Solemn way of Adoreing their Creator; so that every Sacrifice was esteemed a
Real Prayer, and every Holocaust was accounted a Visible Doxology. Was the
Glory of Gods Majesty to be set forth, and his Greatness to be Published? why,
a whole Burn't-offering was presently devoted for that purpose. Was his wrath
to be deprecated, and an Atonement to be made? why, a Sin-offering was
presently sent unto his Altar? was his Mercy to be Praised, and the Continuauce
of it to be Implored* why, a Peace offering was presently set apart for his
service. Such was the Simplicity and Zeal of men in those days, that they
thought themselves obliged to give the most Plain, the most Evident
demonstrations of their Piety. And as all their Prayers and Praises were, so
were their Vows too, not Verbal only, but Real, and Conspicuous. Part of their
Oblations they committed to the Fire to Honor their Creator, and part they fed
upon themselves to testify their own Obedience. From the Altar, where they had
offered up Gods Creatures, they went to the Table, to offer up Themselves, a
Living Sacrifice unto God. Their Actions were more Significant, though more
Silent Expressions than their words. For by eating of Gods meat, they declared
to the world, that they were and would be Gods Vassals. As Friends Pledge
mutual Fidelity by Feasting together; as a Bride Professes her Subjection and
Troth to her Husband by eating of a Cake; and as Servants declare their
Relation and obligations to their Master by feeding constantly at his Table; so
did the Saints of old own their Engagements and Duty to God, by partaking of
his Sacrifices.

When Jews and Proselytes feasted upon a Sacrificed Lamb at the Passover, they
did by that Action Engage their Services to God according to that way of
worship with was established then. For this Reason it was that no Uncircumcised
Persons could be Communicants at that Banquet, because they were out of the
Covenant, and so could not be supposed capable of Sealing that Covenant with
God, which they had not Undertaken, or entered into. They who were the Children
of faithful Abraham had indeed a Right to participate; but yet the Mystery was
such, as that it did call upon them to answer the Ends of that Covenant, which
they were interessed in. The careful purging of all Leaven out of their houses,
did put them in mind of that inward Purity and Sincerity of Heart, which the
Covenant, of God did require. The Sight of a Sacrificed roasted Lamb, did teach
them to believe in the Messiah that was to be slain for their Redemption from
sin and Eternal Death. The Haggada (I spoke of before) or the Repeating and
Publishing the History of their deliverance out of Egypt showed them the Reason
and Ground of those particular Obligations to God, which the whole Nation of
the Jews did lie under. Moreover, by their Prayers and Thanksgivings at that
Solemnity, they Owned their obligations, and Professed, that as that Infinitely
Good and Powerful Being was their God, so they would be his Ideo nos confiteri,
laudare, celebrare, extollere, colere, benedicere, Tenemur, etc. Vide Buxtorf.
Synag. cap. 13.
People. And so even the Modern Jews are wont to acknowledge at the Passover,
we are Bound to confess, to praise, to celebrate, to extol, to worship, and to
Bless God, because he did such Wonders for us and our Fathers, when he Redeemed
us into Liberty out of Servitude. Accordingly they durst not put an End to that
Faederal Solemnity, P. Fagius in Deuteronomy. 8.
nor depart, till they had Expressed their Thankfullness after a large manner.
For so Paulus Burgensis tells us, that the Paschal Lamb being all eaten the
Jews were wont anciently to Sing Seven of David's Psalms (which thy called, if I
mistake not, the Great Hallelujah) from the 112 to the 119th: which it is
thought was the very Hymn, which the Evangelist meant, when he noted of our B.
Savior, that having Sung an Hymn, with his Disciples, he went out into the
Mount of Olives, Matthew. 26. 30.

Thus the celebration of the Passeover-Supper Grot. in 26. Matthew. as also Dr.
Hammond; who distinguishes between (...).
was a Tie upon the Jews; and thereby they Professed Universal Obedience to the
Mosaical Institution. In like manner, the celebration of the Lords Supper is a
Tie upon Christians, and thereby we profess Universal Obedience to the
Evangelical Institution. Hence we may suppose it was, that the use of the
Paschal-Solemnity thencesorth ceased utterly and for ever, so that not so much
as that Comemorative Passover was used any more, which the Learned Grotius,
and others speak of, and which consisted of Unleavened bread and Bitter Hrebs
only. For Christ having fullfilled all Legal Righteousness, and having now
Buried Moses honorably before he dyed himself, he presently instituted another
Rite, thereby Signifying, that now all obligations of obedience to the Jewish
Religion ceased. and that his Church from that time onwards was to observe
another way, and that this Rite was intended as an Engagement upon them to do
so. For though or Savior did not tell his Disciples so much in Express terms,
yet we may be easily satisfied that this was part of his meaning, if we
carefully observe these three things.

1. If we observe the Analogy of this Feast (the thing which I have Labored to
clear as the Hypothesis of these Discourses.) For it plainly answers those
Sacrifical Feasts, which were used by Mankind in general; and it chiefly
answers the Paschal Feast, which was used by the Jews in Particular. Now since
That, and the Rest were Covenant-Banquets, that laid Ties and obligations upon
all such as did observe them, it is reasonable to conclude, that this Christian
Banquet is a Faederal Solemnity, that Lays Ties and Obligations upon the
Observers of it also: as it is Analogous to the Like Banquets in its Nature, so
we must Suppose it to be Analogous in its use and Signification likewise.

2. We may observe too, that Christ instituted this Rite presently after he had
washed the feet of his Disciples. Servitia aeque ac Proselyti sacris
imtiabantur, faeminae Lotione; mares autem circumcisione pariter and Lotime.
Lud. de veil. in Mosen Maiemond. de Sac. paschali page 6. 28.
It was the custom of the Jews to initiate Strangers into their Religion (not
only Women, but Men also though they were Circumcised) by washing their Bodies
with Water: and that Absolution was an Engagement upon them to observe the
Religion of the Jews. Our Blessed Lord being willing to make the best use of
those customs which others used and understood, did not only order his
Disciples to initiate Proselytes by washing them likewise, but he did it
Himself now. Though he did not Baptize any as John did, by washing all their
Bodies in a River, yet he washed his Disciples Feet, which was Tantamount. And
thereby he did not only set before them a wonderful pattern of Humility by that
humble ministration of his own, but he did also after a Ritual manner formally
admit them into that Religion, which he had instructed them in before; and by
that Ceremony they came to have a part in him; i. e, to have a great interest
and share in him, and to be very nearly related to him, as we may gather from
those words of his to Peter, If I wash thee not thou have no part in me, Jo.
13. 8. Now considering, that presently after that action, he returned to the
Table again, and proceeded to the institution of this Feast, it is rational to
Judge that he intended it as a another Tie, and as a further Obligation upon
his Proselytes, to be true to that Religion which he had now so Solemnly entered
them into.

3. We may observe, that the Disciples took the Sacred Elements from Christ's
own Hands. We do not read, nor does it Seem Probable, that our Savior did now
partake of either Himself; but having broken the Loaf and blessed the Cup, he
give it to his Disciples. Now as the taking of a Pledge brings a Tie and
Engagement upon the Receiver (and the receiving of Bread and Wine was of old
universally thought to carry the most Sacred obligation along with it) so the
taking of these things at the Hands of Christ, was a Visible Rite of
Stipulating with him: hereby they undertook Solemnly to do whatever he had
commanded them: hereby they give their Master the most Sacred Securities, that
they would be True and Faithful to him, whatever should come of it, though
they should even receive Death for it at the hands of men. The Actions which
now past between our Lord and his Family were Rites of Covenanting, such as
were generally used in ancient times in Cases of Contract: These were plain
Interpreters of their minds; and they spoke the Sense of the Disciples as
plainly, as if they had said with their Tongues, as the Jews said at Mount
Sinai, All that the Lord has spoken, we will do and be Obedient.

For these reasons our Church (I am sure) looks upon this as a Consecrating
Mystery, by celebrating whereof every Communicant does Devote himself wholly to
the Service of God in Christ. This is manifestly concluded from those words in
the Prayer at the Postcaenium, Here we offer and present unto thee, O Lord, our
Selves, our Souls and Bodies to be a reasonable, holy and Lively Sacrifice unto
thee. And herein the Church of England does perfectly agree with the Catholic
Church of old, for Christians in the Primitive times esteemed this Holy Rite,
as a most Sacred and Strict Tie upon them, that they who Live in this world
should no longer Live unto themselves, but unto Him, who died and rose again
for them, as S. Basil said. And that this was the Sense of the Ancient Church
will appear by these 3. Arguments.

1. From the special Notation and use of the Word Sacrament, in the Latin
Church. The Old Romans Milites jurare solent, and ideo militiae Sacramenta
dicuntur. Jurant autem se omnia strenue facturos, etc. Veget. de re mil. 1. 2.
were wont to call their Military Oath, Sacramentum, a Sacrament, because every
Soldier did, by that Sacred protestation, Vocati sumus ad militam dei vivi jam
tunc cum in Sacramenti verba spospondimus. Tertull, ad Martyr. Devotum Deo
obsequium Eucharistia resolvit, an magis Deo obligat? id. de Oration.
plight and Swear Fidelity to his General. From the Camp the word was brought
into the Church, and was used to signify those two great Mysteries of our
Religion, Baptism and the Eucharist. And the reason of it was, because the
ancient Christians did believe that by Celebrating these Mysteries they did
swear Fealty to the Captain of their Salvation, and did Vow that they would
manfully sight under his Banner against Sin, the World, and the Devil, and
continue Christ's faithful Soldiers and servants unto their lives end, as our
Church excellently expresses it with allusion to the Military Oath.

2. The same appears, secondly, from the Practice of the ancient Christians,
who were known, even by the confession of their Enemies, to use this Sacrament
to this End, that thereby they might be -- Seque Sacramento non in scelus
aliquod obstringere; sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne
fidem fallerent, etc. Plin. Trojano, lib. 10. Epist.
strongly engaged to observe all the Laws of Piety and righteteousness. For
Pliny, a Proconsul in Asia about sixty years after our Lords Ascension, writing
to Trajan the Emperor about the Christians, gave him this account of them, that
their custom was upon a set day to meet together before Sun rise, and to sing
Hymns to Christ, and to bind themselves by a Sacrament, not for any wickedness,
but that they would not to be guilty of any Thests, or Robberies, or
Adulteries, or be false to their words and promises, and the like.

3. This plainly shows, that the sense of the Primitive Church was, that Men's
taking of the Holy Sacrament is like the taking of a Promissory Oath, a taking
of the greatest Ties and Obligations upon them. And this, thirdly, we may
suppose was the reason, why they were wont to take it every day in those times.
For those were times of Persecution, dangers, and death lay every day before
them, and many provocations did lie in their way to tempt them unto Apostasy.
It was thought necessary therefore for Christians then, to address themselves
daily to the Lords Table, that their zeal for Christ crucified might not cool,
but that it might be like the Fire of old upon God's Altar, continually
Burning, and that their Obligations to all manner of active and passive
obedience, might be every day renewed and strengthened by their constant
reception of the blessed Sacrament.

To conclude this consideration therefore by making it practical. As men ought
to be very Serious and Sincere when they go to the Holy Table, so should they
be very Circumspect and watchful over themselves when they depart from it,
remembering, that they have entered Solemnly into the deepest Engagements, and
have taken Christ's whole burden upon them. I find Boldacius de Oggio Christiano
lib. 2. c. 19.
a Story told out of Abulensis concerning Joseph in Egypt, that when Potiphars
daughter, by her Fathers command, was going about to salute him, Joseph put
forth his hand to keep her at a distance; and gave this reason for it, because
a Woman that Worshipped Idols, that did eat the Bread and drink the Wine of
Idols, ought not in any wise to sclute a man, that Worshipped the living God,
and had eaten of Holy Bread. This Story indeed is granted to be a Fiction; but
yet it is of good use to us in two respects. 1. It shows (what I have already
proved) that the Authors and Publishers of this tale, took it for granted, that
the communicating of Bread and Wine, whether it was before God, or before an
Idol, was a visible Rite of Covenanting with that Deity whose Religion those
men professed, whether they were Jews or Heathens. 2. It argues (what I am now
upon) that such as have Eaten and Drank in the presence of the true God; ought
to take a most special care, that they defile not themselves with any manner of
Impurity. Not that men should only beware of falling into the embraces of an
Egyptian Love (I would not be understood so) but that every one, who
participates of this Holy Bread and Cup, should arm himself with a sturdy
resolution, never to commit Willingly, that which is really Base and Sinful. I
would crave leave to deal plainly; because we live in a lewd age, and many
Egyptians are among us, and every man has not either the Conscience, or the
Courage of a Joseph. Some have an unlucky and ill Art of shrinking the great
Catalogue of sins into a very little number; so that if they be not common
Swearers, or Drunkards, or Whoremongers, they are, in their own account, the
very Babes of Grace, though their Souls are as black as an Ethiope, nay as Hell
it self, with all other kinds of Villainy. I do not find, that every formal
professor of Religion makes any great account of injustice and dishonesty; nor
that they are so afraid of premeditated Perjuries, as of an ex tempore-Oath;
nor that they stick half so much in point of Blood-sted and Rebellion, as in
point of common decency; nor that their foreheads are as tender as they pretend
their Consciences are; nor that their Stomachs are so queamish, but an hundred
Camels will go down with them more glib than one little Gnat. Nay, we are come
to that shameful pass now, that wickedness must be Sanctified too, and the
Brand of a Reprobate is become the mark of a Saint; so that to be forsworn is
to be sober and conscientions; to be Perfidious is to be a Zealot; to be a
Rebel is to be a Stickler for the Faith; to be a Schismatic is to be a
precious vessel of Election; and to be any thing or nothing is to be moderate
and Prudent. I beseech every well meaning Christian, not to suffer himself to
be Imposed upon in things of such vast concernment; but before he go to the
Sacrament to ask his Conscience seriously, whether disobedience, and Rebellion,
and Hypocrisy, and self Love, and indifferency in Religion, be not sins in the
account of God, as well as other Crimes: And let such as intend to be
Communicants, take care first to be sincere and uniform Penitents, and resolve
steadfastly to keep those Vows, which they are understood to make so Solemnly
before Gods Table. It is a fearful thing to lay ones hand upon the Holy
Evangelists, and then to be Perjured: But the wickedness is far greater, to lay
ones hand, as it were, upon Christ's Body, and then to be a Traitor; and to take
Judas his morsel into ones Mouth with the Devil in his Heart, is the ready way
to be, as he was, a Son of Perdition. By receiving the Holy Sacrament you give
up your selves to the Holy Jesus, and are no longer your own; do not desecrate
that which you offer up, and hallow unto the Redeemer of your Souls after such
a Solemn manner, when you are solicited unto any sin, be it against the First
or against the second Table, remember I beseech you (as the Story says of
Joseph) that you have eaten of Holy Bread, and consider, as he did when he was
solicited by his wanton Mistress, how shall I do this great wickedness, and
sin against God? Men, that have a True sense of Religion, are always very
Circumspect, especially upon a Sacrament-day; they dare not leave their
Devotion at the Church-doors,, but carry the sense of what they have done,
along with them home, and are afraid to pollute and stain those Garments which
they have just washed. Why, thus circumspect ought men to be every day, though
they be not every day Communicants; for they are lasting ties and obligations
which we take upon us at the Sacrament: No shifts no pretenses, no
equivocations, no secular concernments or advantages, no not the very fear and
danger of Death, can be enough to set us free from those Engagements which this
heavenly Ordinance brings us under. We are bought with a price (and this
Sacrament is a commemoration of your Redemption) Therefore glorify God in your
body, and in your spirit which are Gods, as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 6. 20.

CHAP. V.
It is to be a Pledge and a Token of Gods favor. Proved from its Analogy to
the Ancients Feasts both among Heathens and Jews; and from the words of St.
Paul. Two Conclusions.

BEsides these Ends already mentioned, there is another yet, for which this
blessed Ordinance was appointed; viz. that it may be a Token and Pledge, and as
it were a Seal, to assure every devout and honest-hearted Communicant of the
Divine Grace and Sunt, qui omnino credant, caenam Domini nobis testari Dei erga
nos benevolentiam. Hoc nullo modo verum esse potest. Socin. de usu and fine S.
Caenae. Vehementer fallunter illis qui Coenam Domini visibile verbum appellant,
quo Deus suas promissiones obsignat Wolzogen. Comment. in Matthew. 26. 26. vide
and Cateches. Racov. and caetera scripta Sociniana.
favor. Socinus and his followers will by no means allow this, and the reason
which they bring for their Singular opinion in this point is this, because
Christ at the institution of this Ordinance, made no mention at all of any such
end. It Is true our Savior did not mention it in plain and express terms; but
this is no argument against us, because neither did he mention (that we read
of) the necessity of self-examination before the Celebration of this Ordinance;
nor (perhaps) had we had any Scripture proof for our Duty in that particular,
if St. Paul had not told it us occasionally, and by chance, and by reason of
some abuses, which had crept into the Corinthian Church. Nevertheless the
Reason of this our Duty may be gathered easily from the consideration of the
very Nature and Analogy of this Christian Feast, And so may our Doctrine
touching this End of it also. For seeing this is a Covenant-solemnity (as I
have showed from our Saviors own words) it is rational for us to conclude that
here there is an Obsignation between both parties; as on our part, so on Gods
part also. And seeing this Mystery is answerable to other the like Mysteries of
old, which were vulgarly known over the World, it is fit for us to judge, that
it was intended also for such answerable Ends and purposes as were vulgarly
known too.

Indeed I do not wonder that the Socinians deny the virtue and efficacy of this
Sacrament, seeing they deny the satisfaction made upon the Cross, and the
propitiatory Virtue of Christ's own blood. But we may well wonder, that Socinus
should have the confidence to say, that the blood of Beasts formerly was far
better (that is much more efficacious) in respect of the Old Covenant, Socin.
in disput. contr. Niemojev.
than this Bread and Wine now is in respect of the New, for though we grant
(what Socinus affirms) that it is not the Wine, but the Blood of Christ which
answers the Blood of the ancient Sacrifices; yet seeing the Wine is the
Representation and Communication of Christ's Blood, we must conclude that it
Communicates those benefits, for which that Blood was shed; and consequently
that it seals that Covenant to every faithful Communicant in particular, which
the Blood of Christ sealed to all Mankind in general. And as it is true, that
our Saviors Passion did answer those Sacrifices which were offered up of old;
so it is true also, that this Holy Banquet does answer those Sacrifical Feasts,
which were used of old. If therefore it be made appear. 1. That those
sacrifical Feasts which were anciently Celebrated by Heathens, were looked upon
as Tokens of the Friendship and Kindnesses of their Idols unto them. 2. That
the Sacrifical Feasts which were Celebrated by the Jews were esteemed Pledges
of the Friendship and Favor of God unto them: then it will follow of course,
that this Sacrifical Feast, which is Analogous unto those, ought also to be
esteemed a Pledge a Token, and Seal, of the Friendship and Favor of God now
unto Us.

1. First then it is evident, that the old Heathens did reckon, that their
being admitted to partake of their Sacrifices, was an Argument and Pledge of
the Favor of their supposed Deities. Hence it is that Porphyr. de abstinent.
lib. 2.
Porphyry tells us, as the joint opinion and confession of all their Divines,
that no man was to eat of their Piacular victims; meaning such Sacrifices as
were offered up to avert Evils from them, and to appease the wrath of their
Gods. The reason was, because the Sacrificers were looked upon at that time to
be in a state of Sin and Pollution, out of Favor with their Gods, and under
their heavy displeasure, and therefore they were not to partake of any oblation
till their Peace was made; no, instead of Feasting with their Deities, they
were to be Cleansed first, neither were they to go home to their Cities, or
into their own houses, till they had washed their Bodies and their very Clothes
in some River or Fountain. It was the general sense even of Idolaters, that to
banquet together in their Temples upon part of those things which they had
sacrificed at their Altars, was a sure Token that their Gods were Friends with
them. Hence it was, that after the Sacrifice they were wont to express all
manner of Mirth, chearing themselves before their Deities, and setting out
their Praises, and singing Hymns to them, Vide Alex. ab Alex. 1. 4. c. 17. and
Gyrald. de diis gent. Syntagm. 17.
and using many sorts of Musical Instruments, and Dancings, and all kinds of
Festivity. Hence it was too, that they called their Idols then, (...) their
well pleased Gods: And their Custom was to exclude all strangers from
Communicating with them, because their Gods were not in Friendship with such,
and they were wont at such times to cease from sirifes, and to let Law- suits
fall, showing thereby that now they were at peace both with Gods and Men. Many
other things I might observe were it needful; but this is enough to show, that
the old Pagans did believe that their Sacrifical Feasts were Pledges of their
Deities Favor and kindness Hinc Lectistermia a septem viris Epulonum celebrata
pacis deum exposcendae causa, vide Gyrald. loco citato. Post convivium antequam
discederent, Gratias Diis agebant, quod eos in convivium accepissent. Not. Com.
Mytholog. lib. 1. e. 1:
to them; and therefore before they departed they did use to give thanks to
their Gods for receiving and admitting them to Banquet with them. Upon this
presumption it was, that the old Pagans (especially the Great Men among them)
would rarely eat an ordinary meal at Home, before they had offered part of it
(and thereby had Consecrated the whole) Causa cur Daniel pane vinoque regio
abstinuerit, non alia est, quam quod moris est illis gentibus partem de pane
and de vino injicere in aram, aut si ara non adesset, in focum vice arae, atque
eo modo diis suis consecrate, totum illud quod erant comesturi. Grot. in Dan.
cap. 1. ver. 8.
unto their Idols; that they might never be out of their Gods Favor, but might
have them always propitious to them. This was the practice of Nebuchodnezzer at
Babylon; and for that reason Daniel and his Brethren refused to be fed from the
Kings Table, lest they should defile themselves with the portions of the Kings
Meat, and with the Wine which he drank, as we read, Dan. 1. 8.

2. But not to digress. It is not to be doubted, in the second place, but the
Jews counted their Eating of all Sacrifical banquets to be a plain Sign, and
undeniable argument of the Favor of God to them. For they went upon this
principle (nor were they at all mistaken in it) that as Philo says, the
Victims which they (...). Philo. de victimis.
offered, did no longer belong unto the Offerer, but unto God, to whom they
were offered. And hence they concluded rightly, that their being allowed to
come to Gods Table, and to eat of Gods meat, was a clear evidence that God was
at Peace with them. And this (as the same Author tells us) was one reason why
God sometimes appointed his Priests alone to eat of the Sacrifice in the name
of the Rest, and as the representatives of those who had offered it, that they
might be assured, that to as many as repented of their Sins, God was now become
kind and Propitious; because it was Id. Ibid.
not to be believed, that God would call his own Ministers and Servants to
participate at his Table, if all things past were not buried in Oblivion. I
suppose he means, that the Priests eating the Sacrifice as the peoples Proxies,
was an evident Token, that God was willing and ready to be in perfect amity
with them; and that he was so far reconciled to them, as to make them capable
of being instated in his Favor fully. For they were not sure, that God was
perfectly Friends with them, till they were admitted to eat of their sacrifices
in their own persons. Hence it was that the Priests alone did Eat of sin and
Trespass-offerings, because the parties that did offer them were now under
Guilt, and so were unfit as yet for Gods entertainment. Hence it was too, that
they offered piacular sacrifices, before the Peace-offrings, (which they were
allowed to partake of) because their sins were to be Atoned for, before they
could receive the Pledges of his Love, as his Guests and Favourties. Hence it
was also, that none of those, who were any wise polluted or unclean, in the
construction of the Law, were admitted to eat of any Peace Offerings, or of the
Paschal Supper, because they were not yet Reconciled unto the God of Purity and
holiness. But when once men had the Liberty and Privilege to Eat and Drink
before the Lord they were satisfied and assured by that Rite, that they had now
a good Title to the mercies of the Covenant, and were perfectly restored Omnis
res divina vocabatur Korban (quod est, proxima conjunctio) duas ob causas:
ipsamet altaribus conjungebatur, and hos, a quibus fiebat, quam arcte deo
conjungebat. Abarban. Exord. Commentar. in Levitic.
to the Love of God. For this reason it was (as Rabbi Abarbanel tells us) that
Oblations were called Korban (which is a word derived from an Hebrew Radix,
that Rab. Levi Ben Gersom. Solomon Iarchi, Kimchi and others cited by Dr.
Outram de Sacrificiis, lib. 1. c. 11.
signifies to draw near) because the Oblations were brought to Gods Altar, and
the Offerers themselves were thereby brought very nigh unto God. And for the
same reason diverse Hebrew Doctors thought, that Peace Offerings were so called,
because by means thereof Peace and Concord was procured (and by the eating of
them Confirmed) between God, and those who presented them. Their using of one
Common Table was a Token, that they were in Gods Grace and Favor; that
Sacrifical Feast was a Symbol of Friendship between God and all the
Communicants. And upon the same grounds it was also, that at the eating of the
Peace Offerings they were wont to rojoyce before the Lord, to sing Psalms and
Hymns unto him; signifying, that they Abarbanel. loc. laud.
were at peace with God, and that God was at peace with them; whereas at the
Sacrificing of sin offerings, the People did use to express their Grief and
Heaviness, such as become Penitents, abstaining from all Banquets, especially
those Sacrifical Banquets, which their sins had occasioned; for it was not fit
for De hostiis Pacificis licebat post effusum sanguinem privatis qui
obtulerant, eorumque uxoribus and liberis epulari, in signum am^citiae cum deo.
Id in oblatione simulae non licebat; quia id inter privilegia erat
Sacerdotalia: nec in victim is pro peccato and delicto, ne de culpa
Laetarentur. Grot. in Levit. 3. 1.
them to rejoice for their iniquities, when the Priests did eat of their
sin offerings, as they were wont to rejoice for Gods Friendship and Kindness to
them, which they were assured of, when they were suffered to eat themselves of
their peace offerings, as the learned Grotius has rightly observed.

Once more, as in general the Sacrifical Feasts among the Jews were Pledges of
Gods singular love to them, so was the Passeover-Feast in particular. The
Socinians cannot deny, but that at its first institution it was a visible Sign
to the Jews, that God would be so favorable and Gracious to them, as to
deliver them out of all their distresses in Egypt; for Moses told them in
express terms to that purpose. Those Idolaters the Egyptians thought themselves
sure of the good will of their Gods, when they had the Privilege to Banquet
before them. Therefore God himself, to confirm his own people in the belief of
his promise, and to make them sure of it, that he would infallibly redeem them
with a strong hand, notwithstanding all the discouragements and difficulties
they saw before them, ordered them to kill in each house a Lamb; and to feast
upon it, and to be assured thereby, that he would certainly deliver them, even
tho the Egyptians should be never so enraged to see that Creature killed, which
they thought it unlawful and abominable for men to slay and eat of; so that as
the Rainbow was a sign of Gods Covenant with Noah; and as circumcision was a
Token of Gods Covenant with Abraham (for so the Scripture calls it expressly,
not only the Seal of Abraham's righteousness (as the Socinians would have it)
but a Token of Gods Covenant too with Abraham, Genesis 17. 11.) even so the
Passover Feast was now a sign and Token of his Covenant with Abraham's
Children. In after ages it continued to be a Pledge still of the Divine favor
to them, and for that reason it was that no stranger, no uncircumcised Man, no
unclean person could partake of it, because being as yet out of Gods favor,
they were incapable of receiving the Token, the Pledge, the Earnest of his Love
and Goodness.

Seeing then, that the feasting upon Sacrifices was thought by all mankind to
be a Pledge and argument, that Heaven was propitious to them: Seeing that the
feasting upon peace offerings in general, and upon the Paschal-Lamb in
particular, was concluded by the Jews to be a Pledge and argument of Gods
special love to them above all other Nations; it evidently follows, that this
our feasting upon Christ our Sacrifice, this our Eating of Bread instead of his
Natural Flesh, this our Christian Sacrifical Banquet, being Analogous and
answerable to the Sacrifical Banquets of Old, ought also to be looked upon, as
those were, to be a Token, Pledge, and Seal of Gods favor, goodness, and grace
to us, though the Scriptures had not told us any thing to that effect in
express terms.

But in my opinion St. Paul has said enough to this purpose, if men will but
attentively listen to what he says in 1 Cor. 10. where part of his business is
to show, how unlawful it is for Christians to Eat of things that are offered
unto Idols. And this he does by showing the incongruity and inconsistency of
the thing, and the Evil effects of it; because every professor of Christianity
does hereby make himself a most wretched Bankrupt, and undoes all his interest
in Christ, and throws away an inestimable stock and Treasure of Blessings, by
his sitting at meat in the Idols Temple. To make this out he shows in few words
what those Blessings are, The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the
Communion Though some Socinians interpret those words, as if by the Communion
of Christ's Body and blood, was meant, the making and causing us to be of that
Society (or Church) which belongs to Christ's Body and Blood (which is a very
Trissing and far fetch interpretation) as Slichtingius in 1 Cor. 10. 16. Yet in
the Socinian Catechism, they own and confess, that such as ducly Celebrate this
Rite, do Communicate of Christ's Body and Blood that is (say they) of all those
good things which Christ has brought tous by his Death; though they trifle
again in saying, that this Rite is not any cause; but only an Attestation of
that Communion.
of the Body of Christ? ver. 16. were part of the Apostles meaning is this,
that by rightly receiving the Symbols of Christ's Body and Blood, we have a
share in all those Blessings for which his Body was broken, and his Blood was
shed: We have a Title, Claim, and Right thereby to all the Mercies of the new
Covenant; we receive the Virtues and wonderful effects of his Passion, and so
we are understood in a Mystical sense to participate of Christ's Body and Blood.
It Is true; we do here partake of Christ not mystically only, but really too; we
participate not only of his Bruised and Crucified, but also of his most Blessed
and Glorified Body, as I shall show at large hereafter in its proper place: But
that is not to our purpose now. Though we do Communicate of Christ now, while
he is in Heaven, yet in the place before quoted, St. Paul does directly point
to those blessings, which by means of this Sacrament accrue to us from his
sufferings on the Cross. And to convince us that we do hereby receive many such
blessings; and that we are entitled to the Love and favor of God in particular
(which is the Fountain and Original of all other blessings, to convince us of
this, I say) he draws a parallel between this sacrifical feast of Ours, and
those others which were used among the Jews. Behold Israel after the Flesh,
says he: Are not they which Eat of the sacrifices, partakers Clarius in Loc.
of the Altar? that is, do they not partake of the Virtue of those Sacrifices
which are offered upon the Altar? His plain meaning is, that the Jews did
partake of those effects, which by the Sacrifices were procured; their feasting
upon the Sacrifices was a Token and Pledge to them, that their desires were
answered; that what they had offered and sacrificed for, was granted them; that
their oblations returned into their own bosom, that they had the Benefit of
them, and were entitled to those blessings which they were intended for. There
is an expression which will make this matter clear, in Lev. 7. 18. If any of
the Flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings be eaten at all on the third
day, it shall not be accepted? neither shall it be imputed unto him that
offers it. When those sacrifical Feasts were regularly Celebrated, they were
imputed to the guests for their Good, they were reckoned advantageous to them,
they were favorably accepted at Gods hand in order to the Ends for which the
Sacrifice was designed, they served to make an Atonement, they were effectual
to their purposes, they were good to all intents, they were available to the
Offerers; (as the Hebrew Aynsworth. in Lev. 7. 18.
Doctors expound the Phrase.) This is the true meaning of being Partakers of
the Altar, in St. Paul's Language; when by eating duly of the Sacrifices of the
Altar, they turned to a good Account, and Men were Profited, Benefited, and
Blessed by so doing, being in Communion with God, whose Altar it was, and
receiving the Pledges of his favor, which was obtained by the things that were
offered upon the Altar. Was the Grace of God to be begged and sought for by an
Holocaust? why, eating of the Oblations, which were annexed to it was a Pledge
to assure them, that their Prayer was heard, and that God would be gracious
unto them? Was the Wrath of God to be appeased by a sin-offering? Why, the
feeding upon those oblations, which attended it, was appointed as a Pledge to
certify them, that an Atonement was made. Were peace offerings presented, that
people might be delivered from dangers and ill changes, and that God would give
them Peace, Prosperity, and Plenty, and continue his goodness to them? Why, the
Feasting upon the Peace offerings was intended as a Pledge to satisfy them,
that Gods good providence and care of them should not be wanting, as long as
they would not be wanting to themselves. Thus they were partakers of the Altar,
by being assured of the effects of their offerings.

To return now to our Apostles argument: As the Jews were partakers of Gods
Altar, so are we partakers of the Lords Table. Their sacrifical feasts were
intended as Pledges of Gods manifold mercies to them: And this Christian feast
is intended as a Pledge of Gods manifold Mercies to us, but to better purposes,
and in an higher degree. God Covenanted with them for things temporal; with us
he Covenants for spiritual and Heavenly things chiefly. Christ our Sacrifice
was slain, to purge our very Consciences from sin, to endue us with the Holy
Ghost, and with power from on high, to deliver us from the danger of Eternal
Damnation, to make us sure of Heaven, and to make God and us, one. And this our
sacrifical Feast is intended as a Pledge to certify and assure us, that his
friendship and dearest love shall never fail us, if we be but true friends to
our own Souls. Thus we partake and Communicate of our Saviors Body that was
Crucified, and of the streams of that Blood he shed for us, by receiving at
this Sacrament the virtues and effects of his Passion, as the Jews received the
Virtues and effects of their Sacrifices. This Sacrament is a Token to us, that
Christ's Sacrifice is imputed to us (in a comfortable sense) that is, here God
assures all faithful Communicants, and as it were sets his Seal to it, that
Christ's offering up himself shall infallibly turn to a good account to them,
that it is an effectual Atonement on their behalf; that it shall be available
for them to all intents and purposes; and that though they do not eat of the very
flesh of our Sacrifice, as the Jews did of their Peace-oflerings, but of Bread
in the Room of it, yet it shall be all one to them in effect, and that they
shall ever be the Blessed of the Lord.

I have been the more prolix and exact in this matter, that I might clear and
vindicate the Doctrine of the Church of England, In her Catechism.
whose Notion of a Sacrament in general is this, that it is an outward and
visible sign ordained as a means whereby we receive, and as a pledge to assure
us of an inward and spiritual grace. And of this Sacrament in particular she
says, that Christ has instituted and ordained these Holy Exhortation at the
Communion. Second Prayer after the Communion.
Mysteries as pledges of his Love; and that God does assure as thereby of his
Favor and goodness toward us. For it is senseless to imagine, that Christ
should intend the Absolution of so many Mosaical Rites, because they would be
useless and insignificant, or of very small account under the Gospel, and yet
should institute himself another Ceremony, that would be of very mean and
inconsiderable importance. For such would this Mystery be, were it no more than
what the Socinians would have it, a memorial only of Christ's sufferings, by
using which we profess our Faith in him. For the Scriptures are a memorial of
Christ, and that not of his Passion only, but of his Nativity, of his Sanctity,
of his Life, of his Doctrine, and of his Miracles; and every Chapter in the
Gospel does more or less annunciate, and show forth his Love. And Men have many
various ways of declaring and professing themselves his Disciples, tho this
Sacrament were not used at all. We publish our Faith daily by repeating our
Creed: The Ancients were wont to do it by using frequently the sign of the
Cross, signifying to all Unbelievers, that they were not ashamed of a Crucified
Jesus. The Holy Martyrs showed their Faith by their Constancy unto death; and
every good man in the World shows his faith by a Life of Obedience to his
Masters Laws; so that were the Doctrine of the Socinians allowed this great
Ordinance would soon become an useless, and worthless thing; and our Lords
Wisdom in appointing it would not only be questioned but even traduced and
blasphemed, were not this Christian Feast believed to be intended for those
Noble, those excellent, and those Beneficial purposes, which have been hitherto
mentioned.

1. To draw down this speculation now to our Christian Practice. First this
consideration should raise in us a Thirst and longing desire after this
Sacrament, and should encourage us all to go often to it with zeal, with
alacrity, and with an holy contention, who shall go fastest. Lord! How backward
are many to do their souls Right? How deaf are they when we invite them to an
unanimous Celebration of this Mystery? How many excuses have they at hand to
palliate their sinful negligence? How do they mutter and complain, if the Law
threaten them with stripes for their disobedience? And how do they think
themselves no less than Persecuted, if the Magistrate finds it necessary to
constrain them do their Duty, when persuasions will not work upon them? I
beseech you to consider seriously and indifferently, whither do these Counsels,
these admonitions, these importunities, and Christian Methods tend, but to
charitable and kind purposes? by any good means, if it be possible, to make you
truly Happy; to bring you very near unto God; and to make you receive the
Symbols and Pledges of his Everlasting Love: Will men call it persecution when
God himself threatens them with his Judgments, and visits them with a Rod,
that he may make them mindful of their Duty, and that he may bless and save
them in the end; Why, this is the reason of our corrections at the hands of
Men, when we begin to be exorbitant and intractable? and I know no other ends
of all our Discipline and Laws, but this that we may all be good Christans in
this World, and glorious Saints in another; and if men will be so Rash and
unjust, as to call this Persecution, I hope they will not grudge to be
persecuted into Heaven. But, say they, would you have us eat and drink our own
damnation? No, the Lord forbid it, but we would have you sincerely Repent that
you may be saved. Would you have us come before we are prepared? No, but we
would have you both prepare your selves and come: What God has joined together
you must not put asunder; much less must you plead the neglect of One duty in
contempt and defiance of both. Would you have us neglect the business of our
particular Callings? No, if they be lawful ones; nor yet neglect the more
weighty concernments of your general calling, but whatever regard you have to
your Purses, chiefly and principally to regard the interest of your immortal
Souls. Would you have us to come on a sudden? No, not so suddenly as to be
surpised, or with your iniquities, and with the Love of sin about you; but to
give all diligence to be fit to come the next opportunity lest God in vengeance
for your sin, should not suffer you to live till another.

These and the like are the Charitable considerations, for which we earnestly
press you to use this Ordinance, and they are a proper subject for your
impartial meditations.

But indeed there would be little need of these Argumentations, but that it is
the Devils great work, and he uses his utmost wiles, above all things to keep
men from the Sacrament, lest they should receive there the Seals of Gods
everlasting Grace and Goodness, and not come into the same Condemnation with
Himself, and with the damned Association in Hell. Hence it is, that he
suggesteth to some, that it is an Useless Ordinance, or not of such moment as
to be Necessary; to others, that they shall have Time enough, and will be
fitter for it Hereafter; to others, that it is Impossible to celebrate it
Rightly; to others, that it is a Formidable and Dangerous Mystery; and to
others, that when they have done what they are required, little Profit comes by
it, unless it be the Saving of their Money. But were not the Ignorance of men
so Great, and their Prejudices so Strong, as that they do not see or observe
the Meaning of this Rite, these Fancies (for so I call them) would Presently
Vanish. For one design of it is to Engage us to be Really and Sincerely Good;
and another end of it is, to Assure us, that as long as we are so, we have a
good Title to the Felicities which are above, so that let men be conscious to
themselves, that they have Honest and Good Hearts toward God and toward Men,
and they may be so far from looking upon this as a Dreadful discouraging or
empty Mystery, that they ought to look upon it as upon the most Comfortable
Ordinance of Jesus Christ: Because it is intended to be a Sacrifical Feast,
that by means thereof we may participate of the Great oblation made once for
all upon the Cross (that is, of the Virtue and effects of that oblation) and
may receive a sure Pledge at the hands of God, that thereby we are in a blessed
state of Salvation.

2. In an humble and modest confidence of this, secondly, every Devout and
upright-hearted Communicant may go away with an easy and cheerful mind, and
with this comfortable persuasion, that he stands fair in the Eye of God, and
that his condition is safe, if he be but careful to persevere unto the end in
well-doing. I do not love to blow Men up with Air, nay I think it a great
miscarriage and sin in some Teachers of our days, that they are given very much
to puff up their Disciples with a huge conceit of themselves and of their
State, and make poor ignorant, (nay ill) people to believe, that they are the
precious Vessels of Election, and the greatest Saints, when they have little
but their profession and some Cant, that bespeaks them Christians. It is not
for any of us to Canonize those who stand yet upon the earth, especially if
their feet be foul, and their ways crooked. Let him that thinks he stands,
take heed lest he fall, first into the Mire, and at last into Tophet. It is not
for any man to presume, so as to put it out of all question and doubt; but yet
every Good Man has reason to Hope, so as not to be perplexed and distracted in
his mind, touching the certainty of Gods dearest affections to him. And of all
others, the humble and honest-hearted Communicant has the greatest reason to
hope, that he shall one day see the goodness of God in the Land of the living;
because that part of the New Covenant which contains Gods promises, is
confirmed at this Sacrament to every Holy Soul. It Is true indeed, the Covenant
of Grace was confirmed by the Death of Christ upon the Cross, and therefore his
Blood is called; the blood of the Covenant; that is, of the New Covenant, which
was Sealed and ratified to us by Christ's Blood, as the old Covenant was
confirmed, ratified, and sealed to the Jews by the Blood of Beasts. But then it
is to be considered, that the Covenant was confirmed upon the Cross to all
indefinitely, not to me, or to thee in particular (for no man finds himself
named in Gods promise) but to all Believers in general. Now as it was
necessary, that the Divine Grace should be first purchased for all at large,
and then some means used for the conveyance of this purchase to every
individual Believer; so is it necessary, that besides the confirmation and
sealing of the promises by Christ's Death to all in general there should be
another obsignation to the Soul of every person in particular, that gives up
himself to him that died for him; because otherwise every ones mind would
fluctuate in endless doubtings, and uncertainties. Now we say, that this
obsignation is transacted at this Covenant-Feast: And how so? Why, here every
particular Communicant that is duly prepared, receives the Seal, when he
receives the Elements, which are the Tokens and Pledges upon the Divine favor.
In that I am admitted to participate here of the Sacrifice of the Cross, it is
an evident sign and strong argument to me, that that Sacrifice shall be imputed
to me, shall be available and effectual for me; as the Sacrifice was imputed to
the Jews, was available and effectual for the Jews, and was declared to be so,
when they were admitted to partake of the Peaceofferings, and to feast upon
them, as we do here upon Bread and Wine.

CHAP. VI.
Of the blessings we receive by a due use of this Ordinance. First, we
Mystically participate of Christ's Body and Blood. What that Mystical
participation is. Secondly, that we receive the Pardon of Sin. Proved from the
correspondency of this Feast to the Ancient Sacrifical Banquets in general: And
from its Analogy to those Feasts which were used after Sinofferings in
particular; and from the words of Christ at the Institution.

HAving thus discoursed of the Nature and Ends of this Sacrament, I proceed
next according to the usual method to discourse of the Blessings which it
brings us, by our due Reception of it.

1. And, first, it is the joint Confession of all the Christian Churches in the
world (for I do not reckon upon the Blasphemous Socinians) that we do hereby
receive the Body and Blood of our Redeemer. This I mention in the first place,
and must take the greater care and pains to clear, because the proof hereof
will strongly and evidently prove the conveyance of diverse other blessings
hereafter to be mentioned in their order. Now we are said to partake of Christ's
Body and Blood in a twofold sense; that is, after a Mystical, and after a real
manner.

1. In a Mystical sense we do partake here of our Saviors Body, as it was
Broken, and of his Blood as it was shed for us upon the Cross: that is, our
Feasting together at the Holy Table; is by interpretation a feeding upon our
Crucified Jesus; in the account of God, and construction of the Gospel. We are
reputed and esteemed to partake of that Sacrifice which he offered up, and so
are entitled to all those mercies which that Sacrifice was offered up for. For
the opening of this matter we must remember, how Mankind were wont of old to
participate of those things which they had first offered up in Sacrifice; as
the Jews (for instance) were wont to participate of their Peace Offerings, and
of the Paschal Lamb. Now this Feast being Analogous and answerable to those;
according to the Vulgar course and the Ordinary manner of Feasting, Christians
must have fed upon Their Sacrifice (that is upon Christ's own Natural Flesh) as
Jews and Gentiles were wont to seed upon their Oblations. But considering that
this would have been an (...) etc. Cyril. Alexand. in Catena Thomae in Luc. 22.
vide and e^. ad Calofyr. Item Theophylact. in Marc 14.
Inhumane way of feasting; and considering that one and the same Body could not
have served (...) Athanas. in illud, quicunque dixerit verbum etc.
for all Christians in all Ages; and considering too, that the feeding upon
Christ's very Flesh was not necessary in it self, but that the ends and purposes
of this Feast might be very well answered by our feeding upon something else in
the Place of Christ, therefore at the institution of this Ordinance he
appointed us the use of Bread and Wine, instead of giving us his very Body and
Blood, which he gave to God as a Sacrifice for us. These Creatures are the
Symbols and Representations of his Body and Blood; they are substituted in the
place and room of them; and the manducation of the one, and the drinking of the
other, is, to all intents, as valid and effectual to us, as if we did actually
partake of those things which they do represent, and in lieu of which they are
appointed. This I take to be part of the meaning of our Saviors words, this is
my Body, and this is my Blood: As if he had said, this Bread is instead of my
Flesh, and this Wine is in the Room of my blood. This is a Natural and an easy
interpretation; it is fair, and rational, and full of sense; and 'twould serve
to silence a great many controversies among Christians, were it but admitted;
would they put in but this one word, instead; and understand our Savior to
mean, this is instead of that, in the place and room of it. Nor do I see any
reason in the World against this interpretation; For all men know, that the
Jews were wont to speak after a concise manner, meaning something which they
did not fully express; of which there are a thousand instances and examples in
Holy Writ; and why may we not allow, that our Savior spoke now (as other Jews
did, nay as he himself did at other times) after a short concise manner, saying
of the Bread, this is my Body, but intending thus much, This is instead of my
Body. The Analogy of this Feast to other Sacrifical Banquets, does plainly and
infallibly argue, that our Saviors words are thus to be interpreted, because
we feed here upon Bread, instead of eating the very Flesh of our Sacrifice. And
I am confirmed in this opinion, by an observation that Bishop Tailor, of the
real presence, Sect. 4. in fine And Dr. Hammond in his Annot. on Matthew. 26. 26.
has been made by two learned Doctors of our Church, who have noted, that the
Lamb for the Paschal Supper, being dressed and set upon the Table, the Jews were
wont to call it, the Body of the Passover, and the Body of the Paschal Lamb.
If this be so, it is reasonable to believe, that our Savior alluded to a
Jewish Phrase, that was ready at hand, when he said, this is my Body, or this
is in the room of me, the true Passover. When he took the Bread into his Holy
hands and told his Disciples, that that was his Body, he gave them to
understand, that they were not to expect to eat of his very Natural Flesh, as
they were wont to eat of the Flesh of a Lamb; but instead of that, they were to
eat Bread, which should be as Beneficial to his Church, as the eating the body
of the Passover had been unto the Jews; it should be all one to us as if we
did eat of his very Body. His speech may be rightly Paraphrased after this
manner: Whereas hitherto it has been customary among people to feast upon the
Dead Carcass of a dumb Animal, in Token that they were in Covenant with God,
and were entitled to all the mercies of the Covenant: And whereas the Lamb is a
Type of me; to the intent now that you, and the rest of my followers may be
assured, that you shall have a certain interest in my Sacrifice, and shall
receive infinite blessings by my death, though you are not to feed upon my very
natural Flesh; Lo, instead and in the Room of that, I appoint you to Feast
after this manner, and to look upon it as a feasting upon me, and upon my
Sacrificed body, tho you do not eat of the very identical oblation, as has
been usual hitherto; and I would have you be satisfied, that as often as ye
shall eat this bread and drink this Cup, ye shall be supposed, interpreted, and
reckoned to participate of me my self.

Now this I call the Mystical partaking of Christ's body and blood; because, by
the celebration of this Mystery, we are presumed and reputed to do so; we do in
effect partake of both, by partaking of those things which do represent, and
are appointed to be taken in the place of both; and we are as truly said to
partake of our Sacrifice, as the Jews were said to partake of theirs, when they
did eat of their very oblations. This is the first and great blessing we
receive.

2. Hence we conclude in the second place, that every Communicant who is
rightly prepared and disposed, has hereby solid and substantial grounds for
his hopes touching the Pardon of his Sins. For since by this visible Pledge of
Gods Love we gain an interest in the Sacrifice of Christ's death, since we are
reckoned to participate of Christ's Body and Blood; since we are partakers of
the Cross, as the Jews were of the Altar, it necessarily follows, that we have
all the Benefits of our Lords Passion; and so, that we ought to be assured of
the Truth, and sincerity of Gods promise, that he will forgive and blor out all
our miscarriages; because it was for that end, that Christ died.

But this will more evidently yet appear, if we consider, 1. The Correspondency
of this Feast to the ancient Sacrifical Banquets in general: 2. The Analogy of
it to those Feasts which were used after Sin Offerings in particular: And
thirdly if we consider the words of our Savior at the institution of this Rite.

1. First then it is already proved, that Gods ordering his people to Feast
upon part of their Sacrifices, was a sign and Token to them, that they were in
favor and Covenant with God, that they had a Right unto all his promises, that
their Sacrifices were accepted Kindly, and were Imputed unto such as had
offered them. By the visible Solemnity of Eating and drinking in Gods presence
they were assured, that now they were in a State of Reconciliation and Peace
with him, and had a Title to all those mercies which their Sacrifices were
intended for. Seeing therefore that this Feast is answerable unto those, it
argues plainly, that as the Eating of Sacrifical Feasts was an Evidence unto
the Jews, that they were benefitted by the oblations, and were in Gods Favor;
so the partaking of this Sacrifical Feast is an evidence unto us Christians,
that we are Benefitted by Christ's Oblation of himself, and are in Favor with
God also; and consequently, that we have a Right to his Promise, that he will
Forgive and Pardon us, that being a main part of Gods Covenant, one of his
Principal Promises, an Eminent Blessing, and such a Singular Expression of his
Favor, as every Soul of man is Highly concerned most earnestly to Hunger and
Thirst after.

2. But for the further confirmation of this matter we are to note, that this
is not a Feast upon a Sacrifice at large, but a Feast upon a Sacrifice for Sin
in Particular, you must remember that there were certain Oblations appointed by
the Law, which were called Sin offerings and Trespassofferings, because they
were intended to make an Atonement for all iniquities whatsoever, both of the
Heart and of the Hand, whether they were offenses against the First, or against
the Second Table. Of these Sacrifices the People of the Jews were never
suffered to eat; no, nor the Priests themselves sometimes, as when it was a
whole burnt offering, or a Sacrifice of Expiation, that was to be burnt without
the Camp; which was a Lively Type of Christ, woe was Sacrificed without the City,
Nevertheless, these Sacrifices were attended with Other sorts of Oblations,
which the People were allowed to eat of, and their eating thereof was a Pledge
and Assurance to them, that their Atonement was now made, and their Pardon
given. Why now, Christ was made Sin for us (that is, he was made a Sacrifice
for our sins,) though be knew no Sin. And as he was our Sin offering, so our
eating at the Holy Table is a Token and Argument to us, that God is at Peace
which us, and that our Atonement is made for all our iniquities, trangressions,
and sins. Nay, we have a far greater Privilege in this respect, than the
People of the Jews, had for they were not permitted to eat the the flesh of a
Sin-offering; but we are, that is, we are permitted to eat of Bread instead of
it. They were never allowed to Drink the Blood of any of their Sacrifices, but
we are; that is, we are allowed to drink wine instead of Christ's Blood, These
Nova est hujus Sacramenti doctrina, and Scholae Evangelicae hoc primum
magisterium protulerunt, and doctore Christo primum haec mundo innotuit
disciplina, ut biberent Sanguinem Christiani, etc. Author Sermon de Caena Dom.
Cipriano ascript.
are Singular Privileges to us; and so they are Greater Assurances also of our
Pardon and Atonement: Christ gives us his Body and Blood too, for our plenary
Conviction and Consolation, touching the Remission of our Sins. In this respect
our Christian Feast does far out go all those which they used under the Law.
For they could participate but of some of their Sacrifices, and but of Part of
them too: we participate even of our: Propitiatory Sacrifice; nay, of our whole
propitiation. Whereas the Blood of every Sacrifice was wont to be poured out at
the Altar, and not so much as one Drop of it was to be tasted of, either by the
Poeple or Priests, behold says our Savior to his Disciples, you have liberty
to participate even of the Blood of my Sacrifice; as this Bread is in the Room
of my Body, so is this Wine in the place of my Heart Blood; and I give you this
particular command and Privilege, that ye Drink of it every one of you, though
no such thing has been allowed hitherto at any Sacrifical Solemnity. Which
shows, that our whole Sacrifice is fully imputed to every worthy Communicant
for his forgiveness; Dr. Patricks Menfa Mist. cap. 4. 5. 3.
and (as a Learned Man has well observed) that we are fully justified by
Christ from all those things, which we could not be justified from by the Law
of Moses.

3. Thus the Analogy of this Sacrifical Banquet does prove, that every worthy
partaker thereof has the strongest and most substantial reasons to hope in God
firmly, and to depend upon Gods goodness and promise for his Pardon. But
thirdly, the words of our Savior himself do seem to argue this beyond all
manner of controversy, though the Socinians endeavor to Evade the force of
them. For speaking of the Cup, he said expressly, Drink ye all of it, for this
is my Blood of the new Covenant, which is shed for many for the Remission of
Sins. Though it be granted (what the Socinians object) that those words, for
the Remission of Sins, do immediately relate to the shedding of Christ's Blood,
which was spoken of just before; yet they endeavor in vain to Lud. Wolzogenius
in Loc.
conclude thence, that they have no reference to the drinking of the Cup. Nor
have they reason enough to affirm, that Remission of sins is the fruit of
Christ's Passion only, but not the effect of our drinking, because he said not,
drink ye all for the Remission of Sins; but drink ye of the Wine that
represents my Blood, which is shed for the Remission of sins. For, since our
forgiveness is the certain, immediate, and necessary consequence of his
sufferings, it will undeniably follow, that it we participate of his Blood (as
I have showed we do) we must be supposed to partake also of that which is the
inseparable effect of his Blood shedding. That which brings the cause must also
bring the effect, which is the Natural result of it: The same action, which
makes us partakers of the Sacrifice it self, must likewise make us partakers of
the fruit and Benefit of the Sacrifice: So that it matters not how our Savior
expressed the thing, as long as he expressed it enough: Since he first tells us,
that his Blood was for our Remission; and then bids us to Drink of that Blood;
and then assures us that our drinking thus of Wine is in effect the drinking of
his very Blood, we have all the reason in the World to believe, that by our
thus drinking we obtain Remission, and that our Lord commanded us to drink in
Order thereunto. The truth is, Pardon of sin is the Blessed fruit both of
Christ's dying, and of our receiving: Of the former, as the meritorious Cause
that purchased pardon for all in general: Of the latter, as the ordinary
instrument that conveys the pardon to every Holy Soul in particular. The
shedding of Christ's Blood did procure and ratify Gods promise of Grace to all
Mankind; and the receiving of this Wine (which is the Symbol of that Blood) is
the Seal of that promise to all worthy Communicants, when Christ was slain upon
the Cross, he obtained this favor of God, that all Men were then put into a
salvable condition, into a Capacity of forgiveness, into a way whereby they
might be pardoned actually and fully, if they would not be wanting to
themselves, perfect Peace and reconciliation was then merited; and it was
merited for all that should accept of it, whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or
free; for he tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2. 9. He died for all that were
dead, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Thus far the Scripture speaks in general terms; but it
says nothing of Me, or of Thee, as to our particular Persons. We find not our
names there; much less can we find our Names in the book of Eternity: All that
we can do is to judge of our selves by examining our state, by fair
probabilities, and rational Collection. And to strengthen our hopes, and to
establish every man's humble confidence, this Ordinance was appointed; that as
offen as we eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord; after a worthy
manner, we may be comfortably and reasonably well persuaded, that our sins and
transgressions are done away. For that pardon is by this Ordinance applied to
every one in particular, which before was bought for all universally; and any
man that is but satisfied of the truth of his Faith, and of the sincerity of
his Repentance, may go away from the Holy Table well satisfied to, that he now
stands fair in the eye and favor of God, and so shall stand still, if he does
but hold up his goings in Gods ways, so that his footsteps do not slide back
into Sin and Perdition.

I hope, that by this time I have fully proved and illustrated this matter. But
yet before I let it go, I would note this one thing, that our Savior spoke
expressly of the Remission of our sins, when he spoke of the administration of
the Cup. Neither of the three Evangelists, who have recorded the History of the
institution of this Mystery, nor St. Paul, who has repeated it, takes any
notice of that expression, when our Lord spoke of the distribution of the
Bread. Indeed it is not to be doubted, but our Saviors Body was broken for our
forgiveness; nor do I doubt but his meaning was so, when he said, this is my
body which is given for you (that is for your Atonement and Pardon) but that
particular expression, touching the Remission of Sin, was used by him (for
ought we know) only in reference to the Drinking of the Wine. Hence I infer,
that for the Peace of a Man's Conscience, and for the satisfaction of his mind,
that he is in an hopeful state of Salvation, it is necessary for him to receive
the Sacrament in both kinds. Seeing forgiveness of sin is the effect of the
whole Ordinance; seeing our Savior seems to have a particular and special
regard to our drinking of the Cup; and seeing he gives us this reason for it,
because it is the Sacrament of his blood, that is for our Remission; I say,
seeing that the thing stands thus, I cannot see what substantial and solid
grounds men can have to be confident of their Pardon, if they participate not
of the Wine, as well as of the Bread.

If the thing were not prejudicial to the Peace of men's Souls, yet it would be
impossible to Vindicate the Church of Rome from the guilt of Impiety,
Sacrilege, and Innovation, for Denying the Cup to all the Lay People of her
Communion. For the Holy Jesus himself administered both the Bread and the Wine
to his Disciples; and as He had done, he commanded them to do also: nay, as if
he then foresaw, and was minded to prevent that abuse, which has lately crept
into the Roman Church, he Positively commanded his Disciples, when he reached
out the Cup to them, that they should All drink of it; and his Reason was this,
because his Blood (of which the wine was a Figure) was now to be shed for the
Forgiveness of All. So that were this argument driven home upon the Romanists,
they must be brought to confess (if they will speak out) either that the Cup is
to be given to Lay People, or else that Christ's blood was not shed for
Lay-peoples Sins. I will not enter into that enquiry, how many, and what the
persons were, to whom our Savior spoke at that time. Though some are ready to
tell us, that they were only the twelve Apostles (who were then in the quality
of Priests) yet this is a confident assertion, which we need not grant: For
though it be said, that he sat down with the twelve, yet it does not follow,
that no more than twelve were there. It is probable, that the good man of the
House, who is supposed to have been a Believer, might be there among the rest;
at least it is improbable, that the Holy Virgin, of whom he took such care at
his Death, should not be with him at his last Supper, especially since he
admitted the Traitor Judas. But suppose none but the twelve were Communicants,
yet they were the representatives of the whole Church; and what he said unto
them, he must be understood to have spoken in reference unto All; that every
Member of his Family should drink of the Cup, as well as eat of the Bread.
Accordingly was the practice of all Christians in the days of old. Wheresoever
St. Paul speaks of the administration of this Sacrament, he speaks of both
Elements, that they were communicated of, and this, he says, was that, which
he had received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 21. And that the same was the usage of
the times following, is undeniably clear out of the writings of many ancient
Fathers; both of Greek and Latin Churches, who Celebrated this Mystery as we
do, which I note the rather, that I may lay open those Liars, who, to palliate
their corruptions, confidently tell poor ignorant people this Monstrous
falsity, that Antiquity is on their side. This their custom of half-Communion
is a most Notorious Innovation; and the general practice of it was never
authorized, till that blessed Assembly of Divines (forsooth) at Constance,
about the year 1415. and yet those very men, though they were so bold as Licet
Christus post Caenam Instituerit, and suis Discipulis ad ministraverit sub
utraque specie panis and vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum; tamen hoc non
obstante etc. Et similiter licet in Primitiva Ecclesia hujusmodi Sacramentum
reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque specie, tamen, etc. Praecipimus sub paena
excommunicationis, quod nullus Presbyter communicer populum sub utraque specie,
panis and vini. Council. Constans. Sess. 13. acknowledged by their own Caranza,
Sum. Council. p. 626.
to appoint Communion under one kind only, yet they were so ingenuous as to
confess that the thing was contrary to Christ's Institution, and that the
custom of the Primitive Church had been to the contrary also: Hoc tamen non
obstante, as they then declared, not withstanding all this, they prohibited the
administration of the Cup to the Lay People. But whether their Prohibition, or
our Saviors Institution, and the custom of the old Catholic Church, ought to
take place, let the indifferent world consider.

Indeed it is no news to hear of the Dishonesty of the Roman Clergy; there are
so many palpable instances of their soul dealing with the world. But it is an
unaccountable injury they do to men's Souls, to defraud them of that, by a due
reception whereof we receive the remission of our Sins. And though Bellarmine,
and the rest, have taught them to come off with this Pretense, that the whole
Christ is in each part of the Sacrament, and so, that the very Blood of Christ
is even in the wafer, yet this is a groundless suggestion and untruth; at least
it is too vain an imagination for men to trust to, in a case of such vast
Importance and Concernment. For they themselves do confess, that the In una
specie non habetur perfect and integre Sacrificii ratio, sed utraque
necessaria est, etc. Bellarm. de Sacram-Euchar. lib. 4. c. 22.
Sacrifice of the Mass (as they call it) is not perfect without both Kinds: So
Alexander Alensis, Gaspar Cassalius, and Ruardus, as Bellarmine does confess
ubi Supr. c. 23.
And some of their Doctors have declared their Opinion, that there is less
spiritual benefit by Half Communion; and the Learned Objicit Georgius
CassAnder, quod Sancti patres tribuunt peculiarem effectum sanguini domini, qui
ex Calice sumitur. sic enim Ambrosius Ioquitur si lib. 5. de Sacram. c. 3.
Quotiescunque bibis Remissionem accipis peccatorum, and inebriaris Spiritu. Et
Cyprianus lib. 1. Ep. 2. Quomodo docemus, aut provocamus eos in comfessiore
nominis sanguinem suum fundere, si eis inibitaturis Christi Sanguinem
denegamus? Id. ibid.
Cassander objected justly, that the Ancient Doctors of the Christian Church
laid a great deal of stress upon the administration of the Chalice, ascribing a
peculiar efficacy to the Sacrament of our Lords Blood; not but that his Body is
the means of our Justification too, but because our Savior Dignified the Cup
after a peculiar manner; saying, this is my Blood of the New Co. venant, which
is shed for the Remission of fins. I wish therefore, that the deceived members
of that Church would consider this seriously: 'Twould be enough to make their
Hearts ache to think, how their Hopes of the forgiveness of their Sins are
wonderfully weakened by this Unchristian practice. It would be a wonder, how
any of the Laity, among the Romanists, could enjoy one quiet hour in their
lives, or ever go to bed in Peace and with any tolerable Satisfaction
(especially such of them as are Conseious to themselves of those flagitious
Crimes they have acted) did they but sadly consider what a miserable case they
are in. Were there nothing else to frighten them but this, that they
confidently Trust to a few fruitless Absolutions, which only keep up a Market,
but are Deprived of that, which, to penitent, Souls is a Certain instrument of
Pardon.

Blessed be God, that we lie in the bosom of a Church, which administreth to
all her devout children the Seals of Gods mercy according to her Lords own mind
and appointment, and agreeably to the way of the Catholic Church. And as this
should set all our desires upon the wing, and make us fly on every occasion to
the Holy Table that our wearyed Souls may find, a Resting place and Sure
footing; so should it replenish us with Comfort and Joy of Heart when we go
away, being fully assured of Gods purposes of Grace toward us, and being
satisfied in a good measure, that we are now in a Happy condition. It Is true,
before men go to the Sacrament they ought to be well satisfied of Gods merciful
Kindness, and gracious Intentions toward them; for this is matter of Faith and
Hope, which are the things we must necessarily go upon in all our addresses
unto the Father of mercies: but yet the fruit of eating and drinking here, is
Joy and Peace to every honest hearted Communicant, because his Faith and Hope
is hereby much the stronger, and built upon more sure and certain grounds. It Is
true also, that a man's pardon is begun before he does make his appraoches; that
is, if he makes his approaches regularly, and like a good Christian; for he
must repent first of all his transgressions, and that does dispose him for Gods
mercy, and makes him meet to be a Partaker of it. We must not presume to go to
the Lords Table with guilt about us, or while we are Reeking in our Sins; but
Repentance must wipe our defilements off, because Christ's Body and Blood is not
food for Swine. As the Paschal Lamb was not to be eaten but by persons that
were pure, and clean according to the Sanctifications of the Law; so this
Christian Passover Feast is not to be celebrated, but by such persons as are
purged by Repenance, which is the Sanctification of the Gospel. Yet all this
not withstanding, the Blessed Sacrament is an Ordinance of very great
concernment and comfort to the cleanest Communicant: for though he has
Repented long ago, and though, upon his having done so, he has great Reason to
Hope that he is Reconciled unto God, yet this Reconciliation is as yet but
imperfect in comparison. A man is not fully, perfectly, and finally pardoned,
till he has Ended his Life well. While we Live, we are still Transacting our
business with Heaven; but do not finish our work till we dye. My Pardon is
Inchoa ted upon my Repentance; it is compleatd and irrevocable upon my
Perseverance unto the End; but it is Confirmed to me upon my due Eating and
Drinking at this Solemnity. Hereby all former Grants are Ratified and Sealed
anew; so that now we have a fair Evidence to show for our discharge, and such
an Evidence as will be valid, and hold in the day of Judgment, if we be not so
Foolish as to Cancel the Deed our selves, and render our Title to a blessed
Eternity Null and void, by returning again with the dog to his vomit. A Release
you know may pass between Parties only by the Consent and Promise of the
Injured Person, but when once it is committed to Deed, the act is then
Confirmed; and the Seal which is affixt to the Deed makes that Sure in Law,
with before was only Parol or by Promise. In like manner, though our
forgiveness be Inchoated and Begun upon our Repentance, yet it is Continued,
Ratified, and Ascertained unto us upon our Participation; so that he who was
justified, is justified still, and his Justification is more certain (
certitudine Subjecti) than it was before; that is, a Sincere Commu, nicant has
better Hopes to comfort himsurer grounds to go upon, more to show and say for
himself, more to plead against the clamours of his Conscience, more and better
Reasons to be Quiet in his mind, than when he was barely a Penitent. To say the
Truth, if he does not Backslide and Revolt, he has a certain Title to the
Kingdom of Heaven. Upon this account it is every man's Interest to Communicate
often: The longer he lives, the Older he grows, the more he draws toward his
grave, still he should be the more intent upon this Duty, that his Peace and
Comfort may still receive the more Additions, and that his Assurances may be
the more and more strong; so that by the blessing of God he may at last use
such expressions as S. Paul did (which I am sure no Non-Communicant in the
world can with such Reason use) I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith; hence forth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8.

CHAP. VII.
Thirdly, We really communicate of Christ Glorified. The Doctrine of
Transubstantiation condemned as utterly contrary, to sense, Reason, and the
Holy Scriptures.

BEsides that participation of Christ Crucified which is Mystical, by
Interpretation, and Construction (as I have showed already) there is also at
this Ordinance a participation of Christ Glorified, So it is Expressed in the
Prayer of Consecration.
which is Real, by our being actually made partakers of his most Blessed Body
and Blood. This is manifestely the Doctrine of our Church, that the Body and
Blood of Christ are verily and indeed taken and received by the Faithful in the
Lords Supper; and that our Souls are strengthened and Refreshed by the Body and
Blood of Christ, as our Bodies are by the Bread and Wine. Now our Bodies
receive nourishment by our actual receiving the very Substances of Bread and
Wine; and so (according to the Comparison) our Souls also do receive strengh
and Comfort, by actually receiving and participating of the very Nature of
Christ. After the same manner was the Faith of the Church of England delivered
in the beginning of the Reformation by that truly Learned and Great man
Archbishop Cranmer, in that Admirable Book of his called a Defense of the true
and Catholic Doctrine of the Sacrament; wherein he does often use Fol. 32, 33,
73, 100. Et alibi. fol. 42, 76, 84.
that Similitude, That as the Bread and Wine Corporally comfort and feed our
Bodies, so does Christ with his Flesh and Blood spiritually comfort and feed
our Souls; and he positively affirms, that by the Communion we receive
spiritual food, and supernatural nourishment from Heaven, of the very true Body
and Blood of our Savior Christ, that our Souls by faith do eat his very body,
and drink his Blood (though spiritually) Sucking out of the same everlasting
Life; and that the Hearts of them that receive the Sacraments are secretly,
inwardly, and Spiritually Transformed, renewed, fed, comforted, and nourisht
with Christ's Flesh and Blood, through his most holy Spirit, the same Flesh and
Blood still remaining in Heaven. So that according to the sense of the Church
of England, not only the Sacrifice of Christ's Death is (in the account of God)
Sacramently Imputed unto us for the Pardon of sin; but moreover the very
Glorified Jesus, now Living and sitting in Heaven, is (in the Reality of the
thing) Actually Communicated unto us from above, and verily received by us in
the Sacrament: And the outward Elements of Bread and Wine are not only Signs
and Tokens (much less Empty Tokens and Bare Signs) of Christ's Body and Blood;
but are also the Means and Instruments of bringing the whole Christ to us; so
that his Flesh and Blood do Really, but after a Spiritual and wonderful
manner, go along with the Bread and Wine, to Sustain and Refresh the Soul, as
They do the Body.

I know very well, that I am now entering upon the Tenderest point concerning
this Sacrament; perhaps, upon the Nicest speculation in the whole Body of
Divinity: Nor am I insensible how wary and Cautious Divines are, what they say,
and how they unfold their thoughts of this matter. Indeed it is that, which
requires of us a great deal of Consideration and Pains, as well to Conceive a
Right notion of it, as to Express it so as to make it Intelligible to others.
But not withstanding the Difficulty of the thing, it being so very Useful and
Necessary for the Satisfaction of every man's mind, I shall take upon me to
discourse of it at large, but without trangressing (I hope) the due bounds of
Modesty and Truth.

To clear my way as I go from one foul mistake, we are to note, that Christ is
not so present in the Sacrament as to be eaten after a Carnal and Gross manner;
neither are the Elements so changed by any act of Consecration, as to be turned
out of one substance into another, out of the Substance of Bread and Wine into
the Substance of our Lords Natural Flesh and Blood. This indeed is the Faith of
the whole Roman Church, and they have Invented the word, Transubstantiation, to
signify and Express their Faith: and it implies these three things: 1. That
the Nature and Matter of the Elements vanishes away. 2. That the Accidents
thereof (as they call it) meaning the Color, the Smell, the Taste, the
Quantity of the Elements do all remain without their Proper and Natural suject.
3. That Christ's Natural Body supplyeth the room of Bread, and that this Blood
is in the Place of Wine. Now I might pass over this with quick dispatch, by
referring you to a great many Learned and Unanswerable Books, which have been
written against this Monstrous Error (to say no worse of it) but to save you
the charge and pains of so much travel, I desire you 1. To Consider in general,
that there are four things which are Infallibly able to satisfy a man's
Judgment, as to the Truth or Falsity of any thing whatsoever, viz. The Use of
our Senses, the Suffrage of Right Reason, the Authority of Divine Revelation,
and the help of Tradition. And if men will pertinaciously contend for a
proposition in spite of the Concurrent Evidence which is given against it, by
all these Demonstrative mediums, which ought, and are enough to Convince every
man, they were as good tell us plainly, that they are Resolved to be Infidels,
or Scepticks, or to believe no more than what they themselves please: for
stronger arguments than these four can never be offered to any.

Now thus stands the case between Us and the Romanists: they dispute for their
beloved Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and to maintain the Controversy, they
appeal to the Definitious of their own Church; that is, they will be Parties
and Judges too. We plead against their Doctrine, that it is contrary to every
Test which should govern Rational Creatures in their Sentiments. And though the
very Mentioning of this palpable Error be enough to Expose it to Scorn and
Laughter, yet for the further discovery thereof, observe in particular.

1. How it contradicted the Testimony of our very Senses. We cannot conceive,
but that God gave us our Senses as helps to inform our Understanding: nor can
it be supposed with any Color of Truth, that all men should be Constantly
deceived in the perpetual use of their Senses, when their Faculties are Good,
and the Object of their Sense is Adequate and Proper: this would be as
Ridiculous and Absurd, as to say, that none of us yet ever saw the light, tho
our eyes be open, and the Sun every day Appears. Now that which we contend for
is as clear to our Sense, as the Sun is at high Noon. For we see it, we smell
it, we taste it; we feel it (by Four of our Senses we find what we receive at
the Communion) to be Bread and Wine: and why should we fancy our selves
deceived in this case, more then S. Thomas was when he put his finger into our
Saviorus Side? why should not we be satisfied by so many of our Senses, that it
is Bread and Wine, when He was convinced by his bare Touch, that it was his
Lord and his God? Upon two accounts it is impossible for Considering men to
think, that a Fallacy can be put upon us in this matter. For 1. should we
Suppose the Omnipotent power of God could turn Bread into Flesh, the Species of
Bread remaining still, yet it would not at all answer that great End for which
Miracles have been ever wrought; and therefore it is not Reasonable for us to
believe that God would do it. It would be indeed the Greatest of all Miracles,
and infinitely beyond that which our Savior Himself did, when he turned Water
into Wine; for there the Color, the Taste, the Smell, the Operation of Water
was changed as well as the Substance. And as it is not in the least probable,
that every the Meanest Priest should every day do a Greater Miracle than ever
our Lord himself did, so it is not in the least Credible, that God Himself
would do a Miracle but to convince men of Some Necessary and Important Truth.
Should he do a Miracle for no other end but only to show his Power, of
necessity it must must be Seen, it must be showed in some sensible instance;
for otherwise it could not be a Demonstration of his Omnipotence. But God never
yet did any Miracle for the Miracle-sake, but that thereby he might Attest the
Truth of some Doctrine, and might Convince men of Something, which they could
not well be convinced of, but by Gods setting his own Seal to it after that
manner. For which reason all Miracles have been still Apparent and Open to the
Senses; and it is Necessary they should be so, because they would be of no Use
were they not perceived; neither could they prove any thing, unless they
themselves were Manifest: And if we reckon up all the Miracles that ever were
done in the world from the days of Moses to the times of the Gospel, we shall
find, that instead of being Concealed and Hid from men, they have been always
Exposed and made Plain to men's Senses. Now this does utterly baffle the
groundless pretense of Transubstantiation: for that Doctrine supposes God to
do the Highest Miracle that ever was done, to no Necessary purpose; neither to
edify Us, not to show Himself; and how can we think, that he will make Wonders
and his Power Cheap, and with an Almighty hand alter the Course and Nature of
things so as not to Glorify himself, nor to do Us Good by so doing? This would
be a Miracle, that could not in any wise serve the Ends of all Miracles; and it
becomes us not to believe that the All-good, and All wise God will deceive four
of our Senses at once to no End at all, since it has been all along the method
of his Providence to satisfy All our Senses for the Best purposes.

But this is not all: there is secondly a Worse thing behind yet, The Romanists
by crying down the Credit of our Senses give Atheistical Spirits, and all that
are Enemies to our Religion, advantage and Arguments to Discredit all the
Doctrines of Christianity: and therefore their Hypothesis is so far from being
Believed, that it is to be Condemned as Impious and Scandalous in the Highest
degree. For, if when our Senses tell us, this is Bread, and this is Wine, we
may not Trust our Senses, Ill men will presently draw thence this Natural
Conclusion, that they have no Reason to give credit to any Article of the
Christian Creed; especially if the Church of Rome be Infallible in this
definition, that men's Judgments must not be governed by what they See or feel.
The credibility of the whole Gospel depends Originally upon the Testimony of
Sense: and we therefore believe the Evangelical tidings to be True, because we
believe they were Preached by the most Holy Jesus, and were Attested by God
himself, who by working wonders Confirmed the Doctrines which were taught by
his Eternal Son. Now if men overruled the Evidence which is given by Sense, I
would fain know how the Subtilest Romanist can prove, that there was such a one
as Christ in the world; or that he was not a mere Phantasm (as some Heretics
thought of old?) Or how can they make it credible upon Sufficient grounds, that
Christ. Preached some of those things, which the Papists themselves believe? or
that he Confirmed his Doctrine by Miracles? They must at last come to this,
that competent witnesses heard him deliver those Doctrines, and saw his works:
and to all this any Infidel may answer, that according to their Principle, men's
Senses may be Deceived: and if we may not believe our Own eyes (as they say, we
must not) what reason is there to believe the Senses of Others? and if All may
be mistaken, how can it be made appear, that the History of the Gospel is not a
Dream, a Fancy, a Fable (as one of the Popes did upon a time call it?) The Holy
Apostles proved the Truth of Christ's Religion, by the certainty of their
Senses. So S. John, 1. Jo. 1. 1, 2, 3. That which was from the beginning, which
we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes; which we have looked upon, and
our Hands have Handled of the word of Life, (for the Life was made Manifest,
and we have seen it, and bear witness, etc.) that which we have Seen and Heard,
declare we unto you. The Expressions are ingeminated to show the Truth and
Certainty of Christ's being in the Flesh: and this certainty is proved by the
Testimony of their Senses: which undeniably argues, that such a Testimony is to
be taken, when the Organs of Sensation are rightly disposed, and the Object is
suitable to the Faculty. Briefly; the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead, is
the fundamental Article, upon which many others do depend; for if Christ be not
risen, then is our Preaching in vain, and your faith is also vain. 1. Cor. 15.
14. Now Christ himself appealed to the Senses of his Disciples, to Convince
them that he was Risen indeed. As they were frighted at his appearance, and
fancied that it was a Ghost, to Satisfy them to the Full, Behold, said he, my
hands and my feet, that it is I my self; handle me, and see, for a Spirit has
not Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have, S. Luke 24. 39. Now if they had reason
to conclude, that it was their Master indeed, because they heard, saw and
handled him; why may not we as well believe and conclude, that this is Bread and
Wine indeed, when we see, and taste and smell, and feel it to be so? The
Apostles had the Testimony but of Three Senses; we have the Testimony of Four,
and if our Senses must not be believed, then not theirs neither, and then what
becomes of our Christian Religion?

2. Methinks all thoughtful men should mistrust that cause, which to secure it
self from the danger of a Shock, blinds their eyes, and befools them into such
absolute Bondage, that they must be obliged to believe, that snow is Ink, and
that Ice is fire. But besides this, secondly, nothing can be more contrary to
Reason, than the doctrine of Transubstantiation. The Spirit of man is the
Candle of the Lord, says Solomon, Prove. 20. 27. and it is senseless to imagine,
that when God set up this luminary in our hearts, his meaning was, that we
should mind it no more than as if we lived in utter darkness, or that it should
be less useful to us than the light of a Glow worm. Now first this is a certain
principle of Reason, that a man can have but one body, and so we are to
conclude, that Christ himself had no more. But if that which he gave to his
Disciples was his very Natural Body, consisting of so many organical parts,
then had he more Bodies than one (even as many as there were Morsels) because
it is supposed, that every Disciple received the body of Christ entirely. Now
this is an imagination which the greatest Heretics yet never durst to defend.
Some indeed held of old, that Christ had no real Body at all, but only an
imaginary, and Fantastic being, which was a delusion of men's senses; so the
followers of Simon Magus, the Marciouites, and others did falsely maintain. But
that he had more than one natural Body (properly so called) none did ever
affirm. And yet this is the consequence of the Romish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. For either his Natural body is not in the Wafer at all; or
else it is not there wholly and entirely; or else it must be supposed to be
multiplied proportionably to the number of the consecrated Wafers: And hence it
must follow of necessity, that as at the institution of this Sacrament, Christ
had some Bodies which were not Crucified (for the Supper was before the
Passion, and that body which every Apostle did eat was never Crucified) so
still that Christ has an indefinite number of Bodies, even as many as there
are Communicants in the whole World: And then where shall we find that one man
Christ Jesus, that St. Paul speaks of Romans 5. 15. the gift of grace has
abounded unto many by one man Jesus Christ.

Again, Secondly these are certain and Eternal principles of Reason; that one
and the same body can be but in one and the same Place at once, as my body
cannot be here and at the Indies in the same moment (for then it would be one
Body, and yet not one at the same time.) it is certain by reason that a body
must have Parts, divisible and distinct the one from another, as every humane
Body has a Leg distinct from the arm, and the head distinct from the trunk
(for else it would be a body, and not a body.) A body must be Circumscribed and
limited to a determinate space proportionable to its dimensions (for else it
would be a finite and yet an infinite substance.) A body cannot be broken into
pieces, and yet remain entire (for then it would be whole and not whole.) These
and the like are everlasting and certain principles, which all men that will
obey common reason must agree in; and they are taught us both in Christian and
Heathen Philosophy as common Notions and Maxims, as fixed and clear, as that one
and one makes two: So that to contradict these principles is to tell Mankind,
that they are all madmen and fools that are not able to tell their Fingers.
And yet these principles are contradicted by the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which is made up of I know not how many impossibilites,
which we can no more reconcile to reason, than we can prove that the same
proposition is both true and false in the same respect; and that man, who
believes that Doctrine, must believe the grossest and most palpable
contradictions. For according to this rate these monstrous Absardities will
follow; that Christ's Humane flesh is Circumscribed in Heaven (as every body
must be confined to a certain place) and yet at the same time is in millions of
places here on Earth, and yet one Body still: That it is whole, and yet is
broken: That it is divided, and yet is entire; that it is entire in every
Wafer, and yet if you break those Wafers into a thousand particles, that the
body of Christ is one still, and whole in every the least particle: That tho
there be feet, and hands, and head, and many other constituent and integral
parts in Christ's body, and tho all these parts are the one without the other,
and by the other, and distinct from the other, yet that all are so jumbled and
crowded together into a point, that whosoever eats but a piece that is no
bigger than a Pins point, eats all and every part of Christ's body: And many
more such contradictions there are, so wild, so irrational, so inconsistent
with common sense, that it is as tiresome to count them up, as to tell the
number of the Stars.

Further yet, Thirdly, we find by experience, that what we eat and drink at the
Communion, does serve for Nourishment, (...). Justin. Mart. Apol. 2. Quomodo
dicunt carnem in corruptionem devenire, and non percipere vitam, que a corpore
Domini and Sanguine alitur? (Subaud. Symbolico) Irer. adv. Haeres. l. 4. c. 34.
* it recruites the spirits, and helps to repair the expenses of Nature; and
they tell us of King Lewis, that he lived 40 days together only by the food
which he had from the Holy Table; and without question any man may sustain
himself a Considerable time only by the use of the Sacred Viands, provided he
receive a Convenient Quantity. Now we desire a Rational answer to this Inquiry,
what is it that nourishes a man in this case? If they say, it is Christ's Body
and Blood, Naturally understood, and Corporally taken; it is Blasphemy; for
then it may feed a Reprobate as well as a Saint; and a Jew as well as a
Christian: nay, what if some Unclean Beast should happen to light on it? The
Consequences thereof would be such, are as enough to strike the Heart of any
good Christian with Horror, but to hear them mentioned. If they say, it is the
Species, the Accidents of Bread and Wine that nourishes, without the Substance
of either, it is down right Nonsense: And they were as good say, that a Body
can be sustained with a shadow; or that a man may Live upon a show, which is
not so much as Air; or that he may be fed by Dreaming, specially if he Dream as
Pharaoh's Baker did, of three Baskets upon his Head, full of all manner of
Meats; or that he may Quench his Thirst, and Refresh his Spirits, only by
Looking upon Grapes; nay, though he mistake Paint for Reality, as those Birds
did which flew to the Picture of a Vine which Zeuxes had drawn, supposing that
they were Natural and Real Clusters. Either they must grant that to be Bread
and Wine which they feel in their Stomachs, and find Refreshment and Strength
from, or else they must say, we Trust too much to Sense and Reason; and then
they cannot blame us, but by allowing sense and Reason to be on our side; a
Crime, which I wish all Romanists were guilty of in every Particular.

To all which I add in the 4th. Place, that the outward parts of the Sacrament
are Subject to many Alterations and Changes, which without Loathsomness and
Abhorrence we cannot conceive to be incident to the Blessed Body and Blood of
our Redeemer, the Lord of Glory. The solid part is torn in pieces with our
Teeth; and if men have stronger Stomachs than the Capernaites, who could not
away with the thoughts of eating Humane Flesh; or if they can endure to go
beyond the Cannibals, who were wont to eat their Enemies Flesh only; yet we
have Reason to wonder, how they can relish the thoughts of out going the most
Barbarous Pagans, who ever had more Reverence and Veneration for that they
Worshipped, than to Devour such things as they took to be Deities. Yet thus the
Romanists do not stick to do; for which reason Averroes would not become a
Christian; but when he saw some of that denomination to Eat that which they
Adored as their God, he cried out with Indignation, Let my Soul rather venture
its Lot, and take its portion with the old Philosophers. Again; the Bread may
grow Moldy, may Corrupt, may bread Worms and stink; for which cause Hesychius
tells us of some Christians formerly, Hesych. in Levit.
that their custom was to Burn the Remaining Surplusage of the Sacrament. Nay
it may be stolen away by a Mouse, as sometimes it has been since People came to
be so Superstitious as to Reserve it; and to secure it from the like chance,
and from the Vermines teeth, the Romanists are wont to keep it shut up close in
a Pix. So also the Liquid part in the Cup, may Intoxicate the Brain, being
immoderately taken; it may be pricked and become Eager through negligence; and
many accidents more it is Subject unto, which without abomination we cannot
conceive can happen to the Holy Blood of our Savior. Nay, both the outward
Elements may be Bellarm. de Euch. lib. 3. c. 24.
mixed with Poison; and Peter Martyr well objected against the Papists (neither
does Cardinal Bellarmine positively deny the truth of the Stories) that Pope
Victor the 3d. and the Emperor Henry the 7th. were both of them poisoned with
the Sacrament. In a word; our Savior himself has told us, S. Matthew. 15. 17.
that whatsoever enters in at the mouth, goes into the Belly, and is cast out
into the Draught. Origin does positively affirm the same thing of the Quod si
quickquid ingreditur in os, in ventrem abit, and in secessum ejicitur, and ille
cibus qui Sanctificatur per verbum Dei, perque obsecrationem, juxta id quod
habet materiale, in ventrem abit, and in secessum ejicitur -- Et haec quidem de
Typico Symbolicoque corpore; Which a little before he calls five several times,
Bread, and the Bread of Lord. Origin. in Matthew. cap. 15.
Sacramental Bread: though Bellarmine does only trifle upon the Argument,
interpreting it of the Corruption of the Species or Accidents only; that is of
Nothing, or of things without matter and Substance, which is as good as
nothing. The truth is, the Learned Jesuit was not able to answer this
objection; and therefore Bellarm. de Euch lib. 1. cap. 14.
he tells men, that they should stop their ears at it, and say nothing to it.
But let them endeavor to Shuttle it off what they can; it is a most Horrid
Conclusion which follows their Principle of Transubstantiation; which renders
the Principle it self highly wicked, and Blasphemous, as well as Unreasonable.

3. But yet did the Holy Scriptures say expressly, that what we taste and see at
the Lords Table is the very natural Flesh and Blood of Christ, we ought rather
to disbelieve our senses and reason too, than contradict the Word of God. But
they speak nothing to this purpose, but do plainly say and argue the contrary:
and this is the third thing which we justly blame the Romanists for, that they
will not suffer the Scripture to determine the point between us, though it be a
Book which They acknowledge as well as We to contain the Word of God, and which
one would think should be judged a certain Rule of Faith, and of sufficient
authority to oblige every Christians Judgment to Acquiesce by.

Now 1. as touching the Body of Christ, the Scripture tells us, that it is gone
up into Heaven there to abide till the day of final Judgment. To this purpose
S. John tells us chap. 14. and 16. that Christ spoke to his Disciples before
his death, telling them that he was about to leave them, and to depart from
them, that he was going his way to the Father, and was leaving the world. Which
expressions must necessarily be understood of his Bodily absence, that his
Humane Nature was to be no longer here below, or else the sense would be
Impertinent and to no purpose. For his design was to Prepare the minds of his
followers, that they might not be dejected at his departure, nor surprised with
it: And to that end he told them of it before hand, and assured them withal,
that in lieu of his Corporal presence he would give them his Spirit, to be with
his Church to the end of the world. Now to what purpose were these Expressions
and Promises, if he was to be with them still in Person, and if his Body was to
be handled by them still, at the Sacrament? The Poor (said he) ye have with you
always, but Me ye have not always, Matthew. 26. 11. This is contradicted by those
of the Church of Rome, for they say, we have him with us still, even in his
person, though he be not visible to our eyes, nay, they pretend to have him
much better than the Jews had, for they saw him, and heard him, and touched him
only, but these pretend to eat him too, and to take him down into their very
Stomachs. And S. Peter speaking of him affirmed, that he was in Heaven, and
there was to be until the times of Restitution, Act. 3. 21. In respect of his
Body he is at the right hand of God in Heaven; and thence we look for him says
S. Paul, Phil. 3. 20. not in the Sacrament, on the Patin, or in the Chalice,
but we look for him from Heaven, at the general Resurrection. Lord! what can a
man in his wits collect out of all these Texts, but this, that though Christ be
with us by his Spirit, yet he is at such an infinite distance from us in his
Humane nature, that till the end of all things we cannot have so much as a
Glimpse of him, unless Heaven be opened to us by a Miracle, as it was to S.
Stephen? Men were as good take the Holy Writers by the Throats, and with
violent hands keep them from speaking at all, as dispute against such plain and
Full Evidence, touching the absence of our Saviors Natural Body.

And then secondly, as touching that which we take into our hands at the
Sacrament, the Scripture still calls it Bread and Wine. At the institution
our Lord pointed to the contents in the Cup, and termed it the fruit of the
Vine. And so he is said to have taken Bread, to have blessed it, to have broken
it, and to have given it to his Disciples, requiring them to eat it; meaning
plainly, that which he took into his hands, and that was Bread. S. Luke calls
the Distribution of the Sacrament, the breaking of Bread, Act. 2. 42. And S.
Paul says, it is Bread which we break, 1 Cor. 10. 16. that we are Partakers of
Bread, verse. 17. and that as often as we eat of it, we eat of Bread, 1 Cor. 11.
26. whence it appears, that it is Bread after Consecration as well as before;
though the Use and Condition of it be changed, so that by it the Body of Christ
be communicated to us, yet the Nature and Substance of it is the same still,
even Bread, as the Scripture calls. For it is an eternal truth that where things
are of a Different Nature (as bread and flesh are) the one cannot be said to be
the other with any Propriety of speech; as Bertram rightly argued* that nothing
is more absurd, than to call Bertran. de Corp. and Sang. Dom.
bread, flesh; or wine, blood, without a Figure, for it is as absurd as to call
a Man an Elephant, or a Fish a Scorpion. Either then it is not Bread (and then
the Scripture deceives us:) or if it be Bread, it is not Christ's Natural Flesh,
(and then the Church of Rome cousens us; and there is the point.)

The utmost that they can pretend from Scripture is, that one expression, this
is my Body: and will you not (say they) believe our Savior himself? Yes we do
firmly believe that to be true, which our Savior did mean, but the question
is, what his meaning was? Now, that those words are not to be taken strictly,
and according to the first Sound of them, will be clear from these following
considerations.

1. That before men grew Hot, and Angry, and Magisterial about this matter,
several Doctors even of the Roman Church could not find, that our Savior meant
any thing of Transubstantiation by that Phrase. That Doctrine was defined first
at the Lateran Council, a little above 400. years ago; and yet Scotus and
Cameracensis (who lived after that Council) did hold, that without the Churches
Declaration there is no place of Scripture which forces men to believe
Transubstantiation. Nay Bellarmine himself confesses the thing to be Probable
enough (which those Bellarm. de Euch. lib. 3. c. 23.
Doctors said) and by this it is manifest, that in their own opinion Christ's
words may be allowed to bear a very doubtful sense; so that had it not been out
of pure respects to the Declaration of their Church, probably they would have
been contented, that those words at the Institution should have born such a
construction, as would not have shook the Reason of men so notoriously.

2. If we frame notions of things just according to the clink of a Phrase, we
must needs entertain very strange apprehensions of our Savior himself; because
he is usually called a Lamb, a Lion, a Shepherd, a Rock, a Door, a Way, a Vine,
and the like.

3. As Christ says here, This is my Body, so in Job. 6. he says also, that he
is the Bread of life; and that his Flesh, is Meat; and his Blood, Drink. He
speaks as plainty and positively in the one place, as he does in the other. Now
if men affirm, that the bread is changed into Christ's Flesh, because Christ
says positively, This is my Body, they have equally the same reason to affirm,
that Christ's Flesh is turned into Bread, and his Blood into Drink, because he
said as positively, My Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood Drink indeed. A
latitude must be allowed to be as to the sense of those expressions, or else
men must fall into a Labyrinth of absurdities and contradictions, which they
can never wind themselves out of by the help of any clue.

4. If we observe what our Savior said to the Capernaites upon the like
occasion, we cannot but conclude, that his meaning at both times was mystical.
The story we have in the 6th. of S. John* verily, verily (says our Lord)
except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life
in you, verse. 53. This seemed a very Harsh expression, because they conceived
(as the Romanists do now) that Christ intended his Flesh should be torn in
pieces with their Teeth, and that his Natural blood should be sucked out of his
veins with their mouths. The bare apprehension of this matter turned their
stomachs, so that they were scandalized presently and fell off from him.
Therefore to rectify their mistakes, he expounded himself, telling them, that
they were not to understand him in a literal and carnal sense; no, the words
that I speak unto you they are Spirit, and they are life, verse. 63. meaning,
that he spoke Mystically, and that they were to interpret So that place was
understood by the Ancients.
his words after a Spiritual manner, and of a Spiritual and Divine way of
feeding upon him, and so we feed upon Christ, who laughd at the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; and so all good Christians fed upon him for many hundreds
of years, before that Doctrine was dreamt of, or thrown about, to debauch and
intoxicate the world.

CHAP. VIII.
The Doctrine of Transubstantion inconsistent with, and contrary to the
Doctrine of the Primitive Church. Proved by five Observations touching the
common sense of Christian; in the most ancient times. A short account of the
Doctrine of the Church in succeeding Ages, till the twelfth Century.

3. It Is true, the Papists are wont to crack of Tradition and Antiquity, as if
all the ancient Fathers of the Catholic Church were on their side. And nothing
has prevailed more with ordinary people to turn or continue Papists, than an
opinion, that Transubstantiation was all along the Faith of the Christian
Church. I confess I wonder much that common people will pretend to be judges in
this case, when they understand little of Greek or Latin, much less have skill
to tell, which of the Books, that are ascribed to the Fathers, are Genuine, and
which are supposititious. But alas they are taught by their leaders to believe
any thing, and to talk by Rote like a sort of men among our selves, who are
readily persuaded to act any thing that is for the Cause, for the Cause, for
their darling and dearly beloved Cause, though they venture their Necks and
their very Souls for an evil cause sake.

Therefore to clear this matter fully, we will once for all try the point by
unquestionable authorities, and examine particularly what the sense of the
Christian Church was, chiefly in the Primitive times, and ex abundanti in the
times following: And I am foully mistaken, if we do not find, upon the whole
enquiry, that Tradition (which the Romanists brag of so much) is plainly
against them for above a thousand years.

In the prosecution of this thing, I beg leave to go a little out of the common
rode, not to trouble my self with an endless fatigue of collecting a world of
sentences out of the Fathers (a course, which tho it be proper enough for a
Disputant, yet may be liable to a great many Cavils.) I shall rather choose to
argue from some observations that may be made upon those Controversies the
Ancient Church had with Infidels and Heretics, which will evidently show the
sense of the Ancient Christians, as to the point under our hands: for this is
certain, that we can never better learn the sense of the Ancient Church, than
out of their Disputations, especially when they go upon the same grounds, and
use the same way of Argumentation.

1. Now, first, it is easy to observe what the sense of the Ancient Church
was, as to the eating of Humane Flesh, and the drinking of Blood. The Pagans
were wont for a long time to throw this in the teeth of the Primitive
Christians, that they celebrated Thyestean banquets, and stories ran about,
that at their sacred Assemblies they killed a Child, and then junketed together
upon the tragical dish. The Christians granted, that the feasting upon Humane
Flesh and Blood was a most Barbarous and Flagitious crime, but they proved
themselves Innocent; they abominated the very thoughts of any such detestable
practice, and in all their Apologies they declared their utter Abhorrence
thereof: so Justin Martyr in the Age next to the Apostles: then Tatian; after
him Athenagoras, and Theophilus Justin Martyr (...) 2. Apolog. 2. Tatian. Orat.
cont. Graec. P. 162. Athenagor. legate. pro Christian. P. 4. 35, 36. etc.
Theophil. ad Autol. lib.3. P. 119. 126. Tertullian. Apologet. cap. 9. Origin.
cont. Cells. l. 6. P. 302. Minut. Felix in Octavio.
the Patriarch of Antioch. After these, Tertullian; after him Origin; and after
him Minutus Faelix. For an hundred years together were (...) etc. Theop. ad
Autolyc.
the Primitive Christians busy in vindicating themselves from that Atheistical
and Savage Practice (as Theophilus calls it) of eating man's flesh. And to make
this evidently appear, the ancient Christians did appeal to their very Enemies,
who could not but know, that some Christians were wont to refrain from all
flesh whatsoever; that none of them would taste of that which was strangled, or
which was destroyed Tantum ab Humano sanguine cavemus, ut nec edulium pecorum
in cibis sanguinem noverimus. Minut. Felix P. 34. Denique inter tentament a
Christianorum, botulos cruore distentos admovetis certissimi scilicet illicitum
esse penes illos etc. Tertull. Apol. c. 9.
by a wild Beast, or which dyed of it self; nay, that they were so very Nice
in these times, that they would not eat any thing (not so much as a Sausage)
that was mixed with Blood. Now to argue hence: Can it be credible in the least,
that they would have made such Apologies for themselves, had they believed that
they did constantly eat of Christ's Natural Flesh, and drink of his Natural
Blood in the Sacrament? With what faces could they then have pleaded as they
did? What an Argument would they have given the Heathens against Christianity?
How soon would the Pagans have given them the Lie? What Hypocrites would they
have been rendered, in pretending that they durst not taste of the flesh and
blood of men (no not of Cattle neither) if all the while they were Conscious to
themselves, and were persuaded, that they fed daily upon the Flesh and Blood of
Jesus? Nor was it possible Tertulian ubi Super. Athenagor leg. pro Christianis
p. 39.
for them to have concealed this matter; because the Heathen Inquisitors every
day apprehended their Servants, who for fear of Torments and Death discovered
the Secrets of their Religion; and they would certainly have discovered this
too, had they been taught by their Pastors, that Christ's Flesh and Blood were
received at the Sacrament after a Corporal manner. And to this purpose serves
that memorable and apposite Story of the Confession that was made by Sanctus
and Blandina at their Martyrdom in the early times of Christianity. The Story
is related by Ireneus, and (though it be not to be found in those Works of his
that are extant, yet) it stands upon record in the Comments of Oecumenius upon
S. Peter; and Albertinus and others have taken particular notice of it, because
it is a most evident Testimony in this case. The Greeks (says this Author)
having apprehended Albertin. de Euchar. l. 2. c. 3.
some Servants that did belong to the Christian Catechumeni, and endeavoring
by force to understand from them some of the secrets of the Christians, those
Servants had nothing to tell, so as to gratify their Tormentors, but this, that
they had heard their Masters say, how that the Divine Communion was the Blood
and and Body of Christ, they supposing the meaning to be, that it was properly
blood and flesh. The Pagans upon this taking it for granted, that the
Christians celebrated such [barbarous] Mysteries divulged it presently among
the rest of the Greeks, and by tortures compelled Sanctus and Blandina the
Martyrs to confess the truth. Hereupon Blandina presently dealt freely with
them, and said, How can Christians endure the thoughts of doing this (the
eating of the flesh, and drinking of the blood of Christ) seeing that for
exercise (or Discipline-sake) they Refrain from several sorts of flesh, that
are Lawful to be eaten? Now several things are observable from this Relation.
First, that this suggestion was originally grounded upon Hearsay. Secondly,
that these Servants did belong to such Christians as were mere Novices in the
faith, Candidates as yet for Baptism, not instructed well in the nature and
meaning of this other Sacrament. Thirdly, that they did utterly mistake too the
sense of their Masters, and perhaps were willing to tell a fable for their own
Security sake. Fourthly, that what the Pagans concluded hence was a perfect
Calumny, and an Unjust charge against the Christian Church. And to make this
evident to all the World. Fifthly, the Holy Martyrs argue from a custom that
many Christians then had, of abstaining from ordinary flesh-meats, when they
were not bound to such abstinance by any Law of Christ; so that 'twas
impossible for them to conceive, that they did eat of the very Flesh of their
Savior (much less that they should be so Barbarous, as to drink his Blood) in
the Sacrament. This therefore is enough to make it clear, that the old
Christians in the Apostolical and most Primitive times did not so much as Dream
of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and it is a most Ridiculous thing for any
man to think otherwise.

2. It is observable, that the Ancients were wont to prove the Truth of our
Lords Incarnation, from this known and received principle, because the Bread
and the Wine at the Sacrament were Tokens and Representations, the one of his
Body, the other of his Blood. Some Heretics there were of old, who would not
own that Christ took indeed Humane flesh of the Holy Virgin; nor that he really
suffered, or rose again; but they taught their Disciples that all this was
nothing but a Show and Phantasm. This Heresy was broached in the days of the
Apostles, 1 Jo. 4. 3. 2 Jo. 7.
and was afterward propagated in a great many places by that Arch. Heretic
Simon the Sorcerer, and by Saturninus, Basilides, Valentinus, Marcion, and
diverse more. Now against these Heretics the Catholic Doctors Ignat. Ep.
argued from a known Principle of Christianity, viz. that the Bread and Wine in
the Eucharist were Sacraments, Figures, and Representations of Christ's Body and
Blood. This was Tertullians Argument, Panis and Calicis Sacramento jam in
Evangelio prebavimus Corporis and Sanguinis Dominici veritatem adversus Phat
asma Marcionis. Tertull. ad Marc. l. 5.
that when Christ took and distributed Bread among his Disciples, he made it
his Body by saying, This is my Body; that is the Figure of his Body (said
Tertullian.) And hence he concluded that our Lord had indeed a true and real
Body, because the bread was a Figure of Corpus sum insuistum [panem
distributum] fecit, hoc est corpus meum dicendo; id est, Figura Corporis mei.
Figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus. Caeterum vacua res, quod
est Phantasma figuram capere non posset. Tertull. adv. Marcion. lib. 4. where
note, that he calls it Bread, when it was distributed; after Consecration.
it. For a shadow must be the shadow of some Substance, and an Image must be
supposed to represent something that is Real. In like manner Origin grounded an
Argument against those Heretics upon those words of S. Paul, that the Bread
and Cup of blessing is the Communication of Christ's Body and Blood; whereupon
he asks the Question, that if Christ was (as Quod si, ut obloquuntur isti,
carne distitutus er at, and exanguis, cujusmodi carnis, cujus corporis, and
qualis tandem Sanguinis Signa and Imagines and panem and poculum ministravit?
Origin. Dial. 3. where note again, that Origin called it Bread, when it was
administered.
they said) destitute of flesh and blood, of what flesh, of what Body, of what
blood, was that Bread and Cup, the Signs and Images, which Christ administered?
Some of those Heretics foresaw the strength of this Argument; and therefore
that they might not Confute their own Principle by their Practice, that they
might not seem to grant the Reality of Christ's Humane Body by receiving the
Symbol and Sign of it, we are told by Ignatius the Martyr (who lived in the
Apostolical (...) etc. S. Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrnaeos.
age) that they would not receive the Sacrament, because they would not Confess
the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior which suffered for our Sins, and
which was raised again by the goodness of the Father. Undoubtedly the Holy
Martyr meant, that they would not own the Bread to be the Sign and Figure of
Christ's Body (as all Catholics then believed.) For the Question was, whether
our Savior lived, and dyed, and rose again in a true Humane Body? The Church
proved that he did so, because he appointed bread to be the Figure of his Body.
But had they believed the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, it would have proved
that Christ had a Body, which was made of meal (not of the substance of the
Virgin) a Body which did not suffer upon the Cross, nor Rise again; but it
would never have proved, that which the Catholics contented for; and so they
would have Lost the Question in hand, and made Si propterea Corpus sibi finxit
quia corporis carebat veritate, ergo panem debuit tradere pro nobis. Faciebat
ad vanitatem Marcionis ut panis cru^ifigeretur. Tertull. adv. Marcion. lib 4.
themselves Ridiculous to their Adversaries. Seeing then the Church in those
times believed the bread to be the Figure and Image of Christ's Body (as
Tertullian and Origin affirmed, and S. Ignatius meant) it is Nonsense to
conceive, that they believed it to be his very Natural Flesh. For how can it be
the Figure of a thing, and the very real thing too? How can I call this the
Picture of Christ, if I believe it to be Christ himself? How can I say, it is
the Image Nemo potest ipse sibi^ Imago sui esse, Ambros. de Fide lib. 1. Neque
ipse sibi quisquam imago, Hilar. Imago corporis non potest esse ipsum divinum
Corpus, Council. Nicaen. 2. Action 6. Pignus and imago alterius rei sunt, id
est, non adse, sed ad aliud aspiciunt; Bertram. de Corp. and Sang. Christi.
of his Flesh, if it be the very Same? This does evidently show, that the
Ancient Church did not in the least imagine, that the bread is turned into his
very natural Body.

3. It is observable that the Primitive Christians aknowledged two distinct
Natures in the Sacrament; meaning the material Element, and that blessed
Spiritual thing which goes along with it. Thus we are told by Ireneus (who was
but one remove from the Apostles) that the bread which is of the Earth, after
the calling upon God, is no longer E terra panis percipiens invocationem Dei,
jam non communis* panis est, sed Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans terrena
and caelesti, Iren. adv. Haer. l. 4. c. 34.
Common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, an Earthly, and an
Heavenly thing. Thus also Origin does distinguish the Typical and Symbolical
body of Christ (meaning the Materia Panis, Orig. in Matthew. c. 25. Haec quidem
de Typico Symbolicoque corpore. Multa porro and de ipso verbo dici possunt,
quod factum est caro verus cibus, Ibid.
Bread) from his True Humane Nature, which he calls the Word that was made
Flesh, the true Food of life. So likewise Nec panem [reprobavit Christus] quo
ipsum corpus suum representavit, Tertull. adv. Marcion. l. 1.
Tertullian does distinguish the Bread which represents Christ's Body, from the
Body it self which is represented by it. In like manner the Author of the book
de Caena Domini, ascribed to S. Cyprian, does distinguish between the bodily
Substance of the Holy Viands, and that Divine Virtue which is present with
them. Lastly S. Austin Hoc est quod dicimus; hoc modis omnibus approbare
contendimus, Sacrificium scilicet Ecclesiae duobus confici, duobus constare,
visibili Elementorum specie, and invisibili Domini nostri Jesu Christi carne
and sanguine, Sacramento and Re Sacramenti, id est, Corpore Christi. August.
apud Gratian. de Consecratione, distinct. 2. c. 48.
(as he is quoted by the Collector of the Decrees) is positive and plain, that
the Sacrifice of the Church is made up of two things, consists of two things,
the visible Substance of the Elements, (for that is the meaning of the word
species, among the Ancients) and the Invisible Flesh and Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ; the Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament (or the thing
Communicated by the Sacrament) namely the Body of Christ. To which purpose S.
Austin speaks himself up and down in many places of his Writings. By this it
does appear, that the Christian Doctors for the Quia omnis res illarum rerum
naturam and veritatem in se continet, ex quibus conficitur. Id. Ibid.
first 400. years acknowledged two distinct and real natures to make up the
Eucharist, (for every thing contains in it the Nature and Truth of those things
whereof it does consist, says S. Augustine,) which they could not have
acknowledged, had they conceived the Nature and Substance of the Elements to be
turned into the Nature and Substance of Christ's Body and Blood.
Transubstantiation implies the total Destruction of the Earthly Nature and
Substance, which is utterly repugnant to the sense of the Ancients: of whom we
confidently affirm, that as with one mouth they still called it Bread, even
when it is broken, distributed and received; so they distinguished it still from
that which is Represented by the Bread. And so true is this, that the Whereas
in the genuine Epistle of Ignatius ad Philadelph. it is, (...) the Interpolator
renders it, (...) etc.
very Interpolator of Ignatius, and the Ancient Interpreter of his Epistles,
speaking of the Eucharist, say, There is one Flesh of our Lord Jesus, and one
Blood which was shed for us; and there is one Bread (or Loaf) which is broken
for all. Which Observation makes it clear, that the Bread and Christ's Flesh
were believed to be two distinct Natures, and so, that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was not thought of in that age, wherein that Interpolator
and Interpreter did live, whenever that was.

4. For the further clearing of this thing yet, it is observable, in the fourth
place, of the Primitive Fathers, that they Resembled the Union of those two
Natures in the Sacrament, to the Union of the Two Natures in our Saviors
Person. To this purpose Justin Martyr, discoursing of the (...) [leg. (...),
meaning the words of Institution] (...) Justin. Mart. Apol. 2.
Eucharist, says, we do not receive those things as common bread, or common
drink; but as Jesus Christ our Savior was by the word of God made Flesh, and
had Flesh and Blood for our salvation, so we believe that Food which is blessed
by Prayer, and by his word (whereby our Flesh and Blood are by alteration
nourisht) to be the Flesh and Blood of our Incarnate Savior. As Christ was God
and man by the union of two real and distinct Substances, the Humane and divine
Substance; so must the Eucharist be believed to consist of two real and
distinct Natures, the visible and invisible nature: which Joannes Langus
observed to be so strong an Argument against Transubstantiation, that the
Expurgatory Indexes have ordered his Annotations upon those words of Justin to
be Quod Transubstantiationem non agnoseit, sed aperte contendat cum corpore and
sanguine Christi remanere veram panis and vini Substantiam. Ind. Belgic. p. 76.
blotted out. So he that wrote the forementioned book of the Lords Supper,
affirms, that as in the Person of Christ the Humanity was seen, and the
Divinity was hid, so in the visible Sacrament the Divine Essence infuseth it
self after an invisible, and ineffable manner. S. Augustine, S. Hillary and
others of the Ancients, use the very same similitude; and conclude, that the
Mystery of the Eucharist (where two real Vide Augustine. in Gratian de Consecr.
Distinct. 2. c. 72. and Hilar. de Trin. 1. 8. Ibid. c. 82.
Natures go together in the same Sacrament) is like the Mystery of the
Incarnation (where two real Substances were united together in the same
Person.) For the Romanists themselves dare not say, that only the Accidents of
Humanity were in our Lord at his Incarnation: and therefore they ought not to
say neither, that only the Accidents of bread and wine are in the Eucharist
after Consecration. At least, they ought not to appeal to Antiquity for this
conceit, it being plainly the sense of the Primitive Church, that as the Nature
of Man was neither abolisht, nor changed into Christ's Divinity, when 'twas
united to it, so neither is the nature of bread abolisht or changed into
Christ's Body, when it is administered with it.

5. It is observable, that whereas some Heretics in the Ancient times denied
our Savior to have two several Natures, the Catholics proved he had so, by
this known, received Principle, because there are two several Natures in the
Sacrament, which is a Figure of Christ. This is a thing which requires
particular observation, because it will clearly and undeniably prove, that the
sense of the Church, which I have shown for the first 300. years, was the same
still (and indeed more plain, if possible) for the two Centuries next
following. The occasion of their speaking so plainly was this: Between the
third and fourth Century there brake out the pestilent heresy of Apollinaris,
S. Aug. de Haeres. c. 55.
who held, that our Lord took not his Body of the holy Virgin, but that the
Word was made Flesh, so that the Deity was turned and transubstantiated into
the Manhood. Against this Heresy S. Chrysostom undertook the defense of the
Catholic Faith, that Christ, at his Incarnation, was both God and Man, one
Person of two Natures joined together, which are not one Substance, but each
has its Properties distinct from the other. And how does he prove this? Why,
he argues from the condition of the Holy Sacrament wherein there are two
Natures, so that neither is the Bread turned into Christ's Flesh, nor his Flesh
into Bread, but both are distinct Sicut enim, antequam Sanctisicetur panis,
panem nominamus, Divina autem illum Sanctificante gratia medinate Sacerdote,
liberatus est quidem ab appellatione Panis, dignus autem habitus est Dominici
Corporis ^appellatione, ersi Natura panis in ipso Permans^t, and non duo
corpora, sed unum flii corpus praedicatur, sic and hic divina insidente corpori
natura, unum filium, unam personam, utraque haec fecerunt. S. Chrysoft. Ep. ad
Caesarium contra Appollinarem.
in themselves, though they go As (says S. Chrysostom) before the Consecration
of the bread, we call it bread, but when the Grace of God has sanctified it by
the Priest, it is delivered from the name of Bread, and is exalted to the Lords
Body, though the Nature of Bread remains still (and so, two things make one
Eucharist) so here, the Divine Nature is in the Body of Christ, but these two
Substances are distinct, and make one Son, and one Person. This is a very plain
testimony on our side. Afterward the Apollinarians were divided in their
opinions (for they shifted, and were Unstable for want of truth) and then
Theodoret took up the quarrel against them all in his book entitled
Polymorphos. For then the Heresy of Eutyches appeared abroad, whose opinion
was that though Christ had at First two Natures, yet after the Union of them
the Humanity ceased, was quite absorpt, and Transubstantiated into the
Divinity. To prove this, those Heretics drew an argument from the Eucharist:
Christ's Body (said they) was turned into his Deity at the Ascension, even as
the Bread and Wine are turned into his Flesh (...) Theodoret Dialog. 1.
and Blood upon Consecration. But to his Theodoret answered roundly, that
Christ honored the visible Symbols with the name of his Body and Blood, not
changing their Nature, but to their Nature adding Grace. And whereas it was
urged again by those Heretics, that the Symbols of the Lords Body and Blood
are one thing before Invocation, and another thing after; Theodoret told them,
that they were taken in their own nets, because the Mystical Signs do not Id.
Dialog. 2.
depart from their own Nature after Sanctification; but Remain in their former
Substance, as well as in their Figure and form. If this be not Home and Plain, I
know not what can be: and yet we have a Further Testimony from the mouth of
Gelasius (who was Bishop of Rome too about 500 years after our Savior.) He
wrote an Excellent Book of the Two Natures of Christ against the Eutychians and
Nestorians: and how does he argue? Why he clears the Catholic Faith by arguing
from the Eucharist too: and these Gelas. de duabus Naturis in Christo.
are his words; Indeed the Sacraments of Christ Body and Blood, which we
receive, are a Divine thing, for by them we are made partakers of the Divine
Nature; and yet it does not cease to be the Substance or Nature of Bread and
Wine. The Image and Similitude of Christ's Body and Blood is in the Action of
the Mysteries; and by this it appears, that we must think that to be in Christ,
which we Profess, celebrate, and take in the Image, that as they pass into a
Divine Substance by the Operation of the Holy Spirit, the Nature of the things
remaining still in their own Propriety; so is the Principal Mystery, the
Efficiency and Virtue whereof the Sacraments do Represent; by their Continuing
what they were it appears, that they show one entire and true Christ to
continue also. If this be not enough yet, we will produce Ephraim the Patriarch
for another witness after Gelasius. He wrote very learnedly against the same
heresies; and even he draws one of his Arguments from the blessed Eucharist
likewse; and he is as Positive as can be, that the Body of Christ (meaning, the
Symbolical Body, as Origin In Photii Biblioth. cod. 229.
called it, that is the Bread) which is received by the Faithful, does not
depart out of its sensible Substance and Nature, and yet remains undivided
from the Spiritual Grace: and to clear his meaning fully, he shows in the very
next words, that the Elements in the Eucharist are no more changed, than the
water is in Baptism, which Remains still water after Sanctification. Thus
these four Great men, S. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Gelasius, and Ephraim,
delivered the Sense of the Catholic Church in their times: and if you add them
to the forementioned Fathers who lived in the Primitive times before them, it
will be manifest beyond exception, that for above 500 years together after
Christ, the Christian Doctors did no more believe the Elements in the Sacrament
to be Transubstantiated into Christ's Flesh and Blood, than they did believe
the Manhood of Christ himself to be Transubstantiated into his Godhead, or his
Godhead to be abolisht and turned into his Humanity.

Now the sense of Christians in those ages ought to satisfy the minds of
Christians in these: for certainly the faith of Christ was never more clearly,
more Learnedly, more solidly maintained, than in the first five Centuries; and
one reason of it (as I conceive) was this, because Heresies of all sorts were
then so very thick and Numerous; the Providence of God permitting it so to be,
that the zeal of good men might be exercised continually, whereby it came to
pass that the Doctors of the Church were industrious and learned, and the true
faith was thoroughly sifted and established: for so it is ever, that as evil
manners in the State are the occasion of good Laws; so evil Doctrines in the
Church are the occasion of Sound and Excellent Definitions.

I do not wonder, if in the following ages we have not such great Plenty of
witnesses to appeal to. They were times wherein learning did much Decay, and
men's Industry and zeal were much abated for want of those Incentives which had
formerly been, like goads in the sides of the holy Fathers; and I remember what
Boniface the Martyr said of the times he lived in, that whereas Golden Priests
were formerly forced to use wooden Chalices, Then wooden Priests did use
Chalices of Gold.

And yet we may well be Astonished at their Monstrous confidence, who tell us,
that Transubstantiation was believed in those declining times. If it had been
so indeed, the Argument from it would have Signified nothing, because there can
be no Prescription against truth; and the sense of some in latter ages ought
not carry the cause against the general Judgment of the Primitive and best
times But in good earnest, upon the strictest search I can make, I do not find
any grounds for the credit of the present Romish Doctrine, either in Unus
idemque secundum humanam substantiam absens caelo cum esset in terra, and
dereliquens terram cum ascendisset in caelum. Secundum divinam vero immensamque
substantiam nec caelum dimittens cum de caelo descendit, nec terram deserens
cum ad caelum ascendit, etc. Fulgent. ad Trasimud. l. 2. c. 17.
Fulgentius, or in Christi sanguis non jam in manus infidelium, sed in or a
fidelium funditur, Gregor. apud Gratian. de Consec. did. 2. c. 73. Mysterium
est, quod aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur. Quod videtur speciem habet
corporalem: quod intelligitur fructum babet spiritualem, sed cum Mysterium sit,
unde corpus and sanguis Christi dicitur? Consulens ommipotens Deus infirmitati
nostrae, qui non habemus usum comedere carnem crudam, and Sanguinem bibere,
facit ut in pristina remaneant forma illa duo munera, and est in veritate
Corpus Christ and Sanguis. Id. in Glossa ex Alcuino, ibdi.
Gregory the Great, who lived in the sixth Century; or in Christus in caelum
ascendens discessit quidem carne, sed presens est majestate, etc. Isid. Hisp.
Sentent. lib. 1. Sacrificium dictum, quasi sacrum factum, quia prece mystica
consecratur in memoriam pro nobis Dominicae passionis. Unde hoc eo jubente
corpus Christi and sanginem dicimus, quod dum fit ex Fructibus terrae,
sanctificatur and fit Sacramentum operante invisibiliter Spititu Dei. Id.
Origin. lib. 6. c. 19.
Isidore Hispalensis, who flourisht in the seventh, or in venerable Finitis
veteris Paschae solenniis quae in commemorationem antiquae de Egypto liberation
is agebantur, transit in novum quod in suae redemptionis memoriam Ecclesia
frequent are desiderat* ut videlicet pro agni carne and sanguine suae carnis
sanguinisque Sacramentum in panis ac vini figura substituens, etc Beda in Luc.
22. Panis ac Vini Creatura in Sacramentum carnis and sanguinis Christi
ineffabili Spiritus sanctificatione transfertur, sicque corpus and sanguis
illius non infidelium manibus ad perniciem ipsorum funditur and occiditur, sed
fidelium ore sumitur asl; salutem. Id. Homil. de Sanctis.
Bid, who was in the eighth Age; no not in Damascen himself neither, tho he be
brought forth by the Romanists, as a Champion on their side.

The Learned Arch Bishop Cranmer has drawn up the sense of Damascen into this
sum, that the Bread and Wine are not so changed into the flesh and blood of
Christ, that they be made one Nature, but they remain still distinct in Nature,
so that the Bread in it self is not his flesh, nor the Wine his blood, but unto
them that worthily eat and drink the bread and Wine, to them the bread and Wine
be his flesh and blood, that is to say, by things natural, and which they be
accustomed unto, they be exalted unto things above Nature: For the Sacramental
bread and Wine are not bare and naked figures, but so Pithy and effectuous,
that whosoever worthily eats them, eats spiritually Christ's flesh and
blood. Wherefore (says the Holy Martyr) they that gather out of Damascen;
either the natural presence of Christ's body in the Sacraments of bread and
Wine, or the Adoration of the outward and visible Sacrament, or that after
Consecration there remains no bread nor Wine, nor other substance but only
the substance of the body and Blood of Christ; either they understand not
Damascen, or else of wilful frowardness they will not understand him; which
rather seems to be true by such collections as they have unjustly gathered
and noted out of him. For Damascen says plainly, that as a burning coal is not
wood only, but fire and wood joined together, so the bread of the Communion is
not bread only, but bread joined to the Divinity. He that desires further
satisfaction as to this, may peruse the whole vindication of Damascen in the
third book of the Archbishops defense. This I shall presume to say, that
Church Writers about Damascens time, and Damascen himself spoke for the most
part as other of the Ancients did: They spoke to the same purpose and in many
places (to my apprehension) very clearly and very agreeably to the sense of our
own Church, viz. of the real presence of Christ's Spiritual body, (which in the
next discourses I shall endeavor to explain) tho possibly here and there we
may light upon some few expressions, which may seem somewhat harsh to such as
do not rightly understand the Catholic Faith in this particular point.

Indeed Cardinal Bellarmine does insinuate, Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 1. c. 1.
that the Doctrine of Christ's Corporal presence in the Sacrament was believed
at the Second Council at Nice, about the year of Christ 787. And herein the
Jesuit is followed by some Divines of our own, who have taken the insinuation
from Bellarmine at the second hand; and have thence concluded, that the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation had its rise at that Council, that thereby the
Practice of Image Worship might be the better settled and supported. But this
is false; and I cannot tell whether this error proceeds from inadvertency, or
from a willingness some have to disgrace the Catholic Church, as if it had
been guilty of such a foul mistake in those ancient times. I am sure that upon
looking into the Nicene Council, (...), Synod. Nicen. 2. Action Sexta.
I cannot find any such matter. They determined indeed that after Consecration
the bread and Wine are rightly called the body and blood of Christ. But why
must this be meant of Christ's Natural Body? Why might they not intend his
Spiritual body, and his real, Spiritual presence (of which anon?) Do but
observe the occasion of this their assertion, and the thing will evidently
appear. The Council at Constantinople were against the bringing of Images into
Churches, for this reason among many others, because Christ left no Image of
himself but the Sacrament. At this expression the Nicene Council afterward
took pet, and would not endure such Language, that the materials of the
Sacrament are the Images of Christ's body and blood; for they supposed the
meaning to be, that they are bare Images naked and empty Figures, without the
presence of Christ's body and blood; and this they exploded as unsound, and
uncatholick Doctrine. Here was the quarrel as to that point: For whereas the
Constantinopolitan Council had said, that the Eucharist became a Divine body,
the Nicene Council accused them for contradicting themselves; for (said they)
if it be the Image of a Body, it cannot be a Divine Body too. They denied the
Sacrament to be a bare Image; they affirmed it to be, not so much an Image as
the very Body of Christ, and that so it ought to be called; but that they hold
a corporal presence of Christ's Natural flesh and blood in the Sacrament there
is nothing in the whole History o, that Council, that constrains us to
believef and therefore the Doctrine of Transubstantiation had not its first
rise then.

In the ninth Century Dum quidam fidelium, corporis sanguinisque christi quod
in Ecclesia quotidie celebratur Mysterium, dicunt, quod nulla sub figura, nulla
sub obvelatione fiat, sed ipsius veritatis nuda manifestatione peragatur:
Quidam vero restantur, quod haec sub mysterii figura contineantur, and aliud
sit quod corporeis sensibus appareat, aliud artem quod fides aspiciat, non
parva diversitas inter eos esse dignoscitur. Bertram de Corp. and Sang. Christ.
indeed some began to speak variously (...) Ibid.
and doubtfully concerning the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament
(which in a little time was the occasion of Bertrams writing his excellent
book, of the Body and Blood of Christ, to Carolus Calvus then Emperor.) De
Char. c. 11.
But even in that Age Rabanus Maurus taught (as the received Doctrine of the
Church) that it is unlawful (as well as im- impossible; Nefas, is his word) to
eat the body of Christ with our Teeth; that Christ is in Heaven, and ought to
be there according to his flesh; and that therefore he left us this Sacrament
as the visible figure and character of his flesh and Blood. He distinguishes
(as many of the Ancients before him did) between the Sacrament, De institut.
Cleric. lib. 1. c. 13.
and the virtue of the Sacrament; affirming the one to be eaten with the mouth,
and the Inward man to be satiated with the other; so that though the Sacrament
De Institut. Cleric. lib. 1. c. 31.
it self turns to our Bodily nourishment yet eternal life is obtained by the
virtue of the Sacrament. And whereas Paschasius Radbertus and his followers had
now vended some new conceits, which had a tendency toward the introduction of
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, he wrote purposely against them, as
erronous conceits; some of late (says he) being not rightly persuaded of the
Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, have affirmed it to be that very Body and
Blood of our Lord which was born of the virgin, and wherein the Lord Suffered
upon the Cross, and rose again out of the Sepulcher, De Euchar. 33.
which error (says he) we have exposed with the best of our skill in an
Epistle to Egilo the Abbot. That Epistle indeed is not now extant, but the
matter of fact is certain; and the faith of that great man, Rabanus, was so
well know to be utterly destructive of the Fancy of Transubstantiation, that
Waldensis in an Epistle to Pope Martin the 5th (almost 600 years after) had the
confidence to censure Rabanus for an Heretic, though he were no less then
Archbishop of Mentz, and for all sorts of learning had few in the Christian
world that were his Match.

Haymo likewise affirmed, that the Bread and Wine (for so he call the Elements
In 1. Cor. 11.
after Consecration) are replenished with the virtue of our Lords Divinity, and
so become his Body; but this does no more argue Transubstantiation, then it
argues that Christ's Humane Nature is turned into his Divine Substance, because
that in him the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily. Bertram was a very
learned and judicious Divine, in the same age; and he in the Book I mentioned
but now, gives the Cause against the Romanists so fully, and argues against
Christ's Corporal presence in the Sacrament so strongly from the Nature and
Notion of a Sacramant, from sense, from Scripture, and from Tradition, that the
Knavish Compilers of the Spanish Index Expurgatorius had no way Bertram. de
corp' and Sang. Christi.
left them but to forbid the Use of the Book; which to my sense was the same
thing as if they had said, we will damn all Authors, or cut out their Tongues,
that we can find to Speak against us (Behold the Honesty and Ingenuity of
those, who vaunt so much of Tradition.)

They that had the management of the Belgic Index were somewhat more modest,
for they professed they would use all arts to Extenuate, and excuse Bertrams
errors, and to put some convenient sense to them, or by some device or other
tell a lie for him; and they were content that his Book should be mutilated,
and some things purged and taken away from it: this, I say, was more modest
usage, then what poor Beriram received at the hands of the Other Censors; and
yet this was very dishonest too; and a plain Sign of a very weak cause that
needed such disingenuous Artifices. So they might have dealt with Amalarius
too, the Archbishop of Triers in the same age; who trod in the steps of S.
Austin, affirming Amalar. de Ecclesii Offic. l. 3. c. 25.
the Elements to represent Christ's Body and Blood, as Signs of things, and
that the Priest offers up Bread and Wine instead of Christ, and that the
Bread and Wine in the Sacrament are in the Place and Room of Christ Body and
Blood.

It Is true, Paschasius Rabertus, who lived at the same time, differed much in
his opinion from these great men, though it be hard to tell what his opinion
was, so very Inconsistent was the man with himself; as it usually happens to
Heady Opiniators, especially when they are on the wrong side, and will be
venturing upon new discoveries. This is allowed, that Paschasius had a Notion
by himself; but I think if it be searched well into, it will be found to come
nearer to the Lutheran Doctrine of Consubstantiation, Paschas. de Euchar. c.
41. and 13.
then to the Romish Conceit. For since he affirmed (as Rabanus did) that Christ
is not to be torn with men's teeth; that because it was necessary for Christ to
be in heaven, he lest us this Sacrament, to be the visible Figure and Character
of his Flesh and Blood; that we drink of Christ Spiritually, and that we eat
his Spiritual Flesh and the like; whether do these Expression and Notions tend,
but to destroy the fancy of eating Christ's Natural Body after a gross manner,
as the Doctrine of Transubstantiation does import?

In the 10th Century we meet with Theo-phylact; who spoke of the Sacrament in a
Lofty strain (as many others before him did) and used the Word (...) to express
the Mutation of the Elements. Which Expression the Romanists greedily caught
hold of, as if he intended the changing of things out of one Substance into
another. But this is very wide of Theophylacts meaning, who plainly intended
not a Real, Essential change of the Substance and Nature of the Bread and Wine;
but a Mystical, and Sacramental change of their Quality and Condition; so that
upon (...) etc. Justin Martyr. Apolog. 2.-Qui est e terra Panis percipiens
invocationem Dei, jam non communis panis est sed Eucharistie ex duabus rebus
constans, etc. Iren. adv. Har. l. 4. c. 34.
Consecration they are no longer Common things (as Justin Martyr and Ireneus
said of old) but the Elements of Divine things unto us, so that thereby the
Divine body of Christ is communicated to every Holy Soul. The learned Cranmer
explains him rightly, that as hot and burning Iron is Iron still, so Defenc.
lib. 3.
the Sacramental bread and Wine remain bread and Wine still, tho to every
worthy Communicant they be turned into the Virtue of Christ's flesh and blood.
And that this was the sense of Theophylact is clear from his own words, that
the kind (or substance) of Bread remaining and continuing, a Transelementation
is made in. Theophylact in Marc. 14.
to the Virtue of Christ's Flesh: which notion I shall explain hereaster.

In the mean time I desire the Reader to note once for all, that the Romanists
to support their new Doctrine of Transubstantiation have grossly abused the
ancient Writers of the Church, by rendering the words (...) and Species, as if
they signified no more then show and appearance: And this they call the
accidents of the Bread and Wine, which they grant to remain, but without the
Natural substance or essence of them; so that men's senses are cousened as to
the things which they see. Whereas the word (...) among the Greeks signifies
not the appearance or show, but the sort and kind of a thing; and when it
relates to things of matter (as Bread and Wine) it signifies the Essence or
substance of those things. And thus the words form, likeness, and fashion, are
used by St. Paul himself, in the second of Philippians at the seventh Verse;
where speaking of our Savior, he says, that he took upon him the form of a
Servant, (...) Phil 2. 7.
and was made in the likeness of Men, being found in fashion as a Man: Meaning
that he was really in a servile Condition; and a Man in substance, essence, and
Nature. In like manner the word species among the Latins, signifies the sort,
the kind, the substance of the thing, and, being spoken of the Bread and Wine
in the Sacrament, it signifies the very natural Essence or matter (not barely
the appearance) of the Elements. And this is the true meaning of Theophylact in
this place, where he says, that God (...).
does preserve the kind, the Essence, the substance of the Bread and Wine, but
does Transelementate (or change) them into the Virtue of Flesh and Blood.
However we grant, that this expression of Theophylacts gave occasion (though
wrongfully) to the School men in after Ages, to lose their time in enquiring
after the manner of that change which is consest to be in the Elements. But
even they were divided in their opinions, so that the poin was not agreed upon
for some time after, Theophylact.

For until the controversy arose about Berengarius (which was toward the end
of the eleventh Century) it was matter of Dispute; some being of one opinion,
and some of another. They were only agreed in this, that Christ is really
present in the Sacrament, but they could not tell how. But Berengarius raised a
dust which blinded other men's eyes and his own too. His true Crime seems to me
to have been this; not that he erroneously disputed about the manner of Christ's
presence, but that he denied him to So his Schooll-fellow Adelmannus charge
him, in an Epistle to him which Is yet extant in the Bibliotheca Patrum,
wherein speaking of the Novel Doctrine, which was reported to have been spread
abroad by him, he says, hoc est, ut illorum dictis utar, non esse verum corpus
Christi, neque verum sanguinem, sed figuram quandam and similitudinem.
be present at all in the Sacrament; affirming not only that the Elements were
Bread and Wine, but that they were bare bread and Wine, and nothing else; which
was the opinion of those, who in the beginning of the reformation were properly
called, Sacramentaries, and which is the opinion of those blackmouth'd
Heretics the Socinians now. This was an Heterodox conceit indeed, that was
utterly against the Faith of the Catholic Church from the beginning: and out
of hatreed and detestation of this foul Error, the Bishop of Rome, and others,
presently fell into another extreme, as foul as that (as usually men do when
they are in Heat and Passion.) Then the Doctrine, not so much of Christ's real,
as of his corporal presence was laid upon the Anvil, and Lancfranck and
Guitmund (Berengarius his Enemies) See the Confession which was extorted from
Beren. garius at Rome, and which he afterward retracted, in Gratian de Consec.
did. 2. c. 24.
fell a hammering at it; and then they would not be satisfied with this (which
yet had satisfied Christians for above a thousand years) that Christ's Divine
Body is verily communicated after a Spiritual manner to the faithful. But they
would needs have it, that his Natural Body is actually eaten with men's mouths,
and handled with their hands. However, this was the sense but of a few men as
yet, and all men were yet at liberty to opine and dispute, as long as they did
it Modestly. For Fulbertus was against the new opinion; and at the second Synod
at Rome against Berengarius, under Gregory the seventh, Anno 1079, they did
declare, that there was great variety of opinions about the Body Habitus est
Sermo de Corpore and Sanguine Domini nostri, multis haec, nonnullis alia
sentientibus.
and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as may be seen in the Acts of that
Synod; and Adelmannus though he blamed Berengarius, yet was he against
Lancfranck, not owning that Conceit of Christ's Corporal presence. Lancfranck
maintained it here in England (and he was the first man that planted that weed
in this Island) but all men were not of his opinion here; (though he was a man
of great Authority) and in Foreign parts the point continued disputable for a
long time: for S. Bernard (who lived in the twelfth Century current) was of
another opinion, and Peter Lombard (who was fifty years after him) found it to
be a moot point even in his days; and he tells us himself, what various
opinions there were about it then; so that for a matter of 1200. years
together, P. Lomb. Sentent. l. 4. did. 11.
the Doctrine of Transubstantation (you see) was not determined: In the
Primitive times, and for some Centuries after, it was not thought of: In later
ages it was but dreamt of, and when men began to talk of it, they talked as if
they were asleep, and they declared their several opinions, as men tell their
Dreams; 'twas no Article of Faith, no not in the Church of Rome, till the
Lateran Council, Anno 1215. nay, some Learned men are of opinion, that it was
Vide Mr. Thorndike of the Laws of the Church p.37. Bish. Tailor of the Real
Pres. p. 267.
not determined then neither, but some time after. But let that rest for me; I
will enquire after it no further now, since we have found it already a child of
Fancy, and an upstart too, that was Begotten of Late, and brought into the
World by the midwifry of time, but cannot derive its Pedigree from any of the
Holy Fathers: we must lay the Brat at the Church of Romes door; it is their
own; and since they are so fond of it without any sense or reason, let them
keep it if they please, (so they keep it to themselves) though we wish it had
been an Abortive, or had dyed a Chrisom, specially since it has cost so much
Christian Blood to Foster and Breed it up.

CHAP. IX.
That though there be no Transubstantiation, yet Christ's Body is really in the
Sacrament. A distinction between Christ's Natural and Spiritual Body. What is
meant by his Spiritual Body. Why so called. That such a Spipiritual there is.
And that it is received in and by the Sacrament.

TO proceed, though there be no grounds in the World for the opinion of
Transubstantiation, yet we must not conceive that Christ is not verily, really,
and of a truth in the Sacrament; he may be really present, though there be no
reason to believe, that he is present after a Corporal manner. For two
different Substances and Natures may be joined and go together, though they
remain distinct in themselves, and in their properties; as the Soul and Flesh
of a man are united in the same Person; and as the Humanity and Divinity of
Christ were united together in the same Lord. Though we should suppose that
Pillar to have been a real cloud which went before the Israelites, yet it will
not follow that God was not in it, though we shoiuld suppose those shapes, to
have been true Bodies, wherein the Spirits of God were wont to appear to the
old Patriarchs, yet this does not argue, that Angelical Substances were not
present in them, though we should suppose that to have been a real Dove which
lighted on our Savior, and that to have been real Fire, which sat upon his
Apostles, yet this will not argue but that the Holy Ghost was in both. In like
manner, though we grant the Elements in the Eucharist to be Substantially and
really Bread and Wine, yet it will not follow by any means that Christ is not
present in the Sacrament: it is easy to conceive it possible for it to be Bread
still and Christ's Body too, and to be wine still, and Christ's Blood too: There
may be an union of these two things, though we do not suppose the Nature of the
one to be destroyed or turned into the nature of the other.

And that this is not only possible, but is certainly so de facto, the
Scripture does strongly oblige us to believe. For, 1. S. Paul tells us, that
the administration of the Sacrament is the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood,
1 Cor. 10 16. which words are to be understood, not only of that foederal Vid.
S. Chrysost^n 1 Cor. 10. 16.
Communion which we have thereby with Christ; but moreover of that real
Comunication which we have of him; so that by drinking of the Wine we
participate of Christ's Blood, which streamed out of his side, and which he
gives us here, as well as he shed it on the Cross; and by eating of the Bread,
we do not only Partake of his Body, but also obtain thereby a close Conjunction
and Coherence with him, whose Body it is: we are united to him by the Bread,
even as our Flesh is united to Christ himself, as S. Chrysostom affirms, which
does plainly argue the real presence and communication of his Body and Blood.
2. Again whereas S. Paul says, I Cor. II. 27. Whosoever shall eat this Bread,
and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and
Blood of the Lord; he does seem manifestly to conclude, that Christ's Body and
Blood is really in the Eucharist, that all worthy Communicants do indeed
receive Christ's very Body and Blood by receiving the Elements, and that Christ's
Body and Blood are verily tendered and offered even to the unworthy, though they
receive them not. For were it not thus, I would gladly understand how it comes
to pass, that unworthy receiving brings upon a man's Soul some peculiar and
extraordinary Guilt? If it be a special sin (as S. Paul's words argues it to be)
against the Body and Blood of our Lord, it must follow that the Body and Blood
of our Lord are there. For a sin is of a peculiar nature and consideration,
when it is acted against an Object that is more peculiarly Interested and
Concerned; so the sin against the Holy Ghost seems strictly and and properly,
to be a malicious resisting and reproaching of the Truth, in spite of those
Miracles which are wrought by the Holy Ghost, for the Confirmation of the
Truth. A man is then said to be peculiarly guilty of the sin against the Holy
Ghost, because in the working of Miracles the Holy Ghost is concerned and
interested after a peculiar manner. To this purpose it is observable, that when
our Savior spoke of this sin, it was after some Miracle that he had done, and
by occasion of the Jews reproaching it, as if it had been done, not by the
Power and Spirit of God, but by Beelzebub, It was especially a sin against the
Holy Ghost, because in the Miracle the Holy Ghost was specially concerned. Even
so here unworthy receiving makes a man guilty of a sin against our Lords Body
and Blood, because his Body and Blood are peculiarly Interested in the
Sacrament. Evil men strike at Christ then after a most sinful sort, because his
Body and Blood are present there after a singular manner; and therefore does
the sin bring an extraordinary guilt, because it is the doing despite to the
very Body and Blood of Him, who made himself an offering for us.

For these and the like reasons the Catholic Church of Christ has in all ages
believed a real presence of his Body and Blood in the Sacrament, nor do I know
any one Doctrine of Christianity, which has come unto us with less
Contradiction, then this came down from the very days of the Apostles, even to
the times of Berengarius. And so true is this, that the Learned know well, that
the Ancients grounded their Faith of our real Union with Christ upon this
Principle, because his very Body and Blood are really communicated to us by our
receiving the Eucharist. As they believed (...) S. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 10. 16.
vide and Iren. and multos alios.
a Supernatural Union between the Natures in Christ, so they believed a
Mystical Union between all the Faithful and Christ; and this they concluded,
because they believed a Sacramental Union between Christ and those Creatures of
Bread and Wine, whereby we receive Christ. S. Hilary calls our Conjunction
Hilar. de Trinit. lib. 8.
with Christ a Natural conjunction, because as Our Nature was before united to
his by his Incarnation so now his Nature is United to Ours by the Communion.
Our Church calls it, the Communion of the Body and Blood of the Lord, in a
mavelous Incorporation: and S. Austin himself Homily of the Sacram. 1. Part.
used the same Expression: and all the Ancients acknowledged this real Union to
be wrought by means of that Real S. August. Ep. ad Iren.
Communion of our Saviors very Body and Blood, at and by the Holy Sacrament.

For the Opening now of this great Mystery, I shall show these Five things. 1.
That we are to distinguish between Christ's Natural and his Spiritual Body. 2.
What is meant by his Spiritual Body. 3. Why it is so called. 4. That Christ
has a Spiritual Body indeed. 5. That this Spiritual Body is received by us in
the Sacrament.

1. We are to distinguish Christ's Spiritual from his Natural Body; not as if he
had two different Bodies, but because that One and the same Body of his is to
be considered after a different manner. Now this is S. Paul's own distinction, 1
Cor. 15. 44. There is a Natural (or Animal) Body, and there is a Spiritual
Body. The Apostle there treats of that Exalted state our bodies shall be in
after the Resurrection, how they shall be delivered from all Mortality and
Corruption, and shall be the everlasting Temples of the Divine Spirit, and
shall shine with light like the Stars, and shall be like Angelical Substances
and Spirits, in Comparison; and all this, because our Savior is risen, and
gone before us into heaven, and there remains in a Glorious Body, as it is
called Philip. 3. 21.

Now this Body of Christ may be considered, either in respect of its own
Natural Substance, as it consists of Flesh, Bones, and Blood, and other
Constituent and Perfective parts of humane nature; and in this sense no man can
partake of the Lords Body. Or else it may be considered with respect to his
Divinity, as that is united to it, as it is clothed with infinite Majesty, as
it is replenisht with the Presence and energy of the Godhead, as it casts
live Influences upon his Church, by virtue of the Godhead dwelling in it, and
fills all things with Spiritual rays and emanations of his Grace. In this
respect our Lord is called a Quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. the first man
Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam was made a Quickening Spirit; because
he gives life to every Humble and Obedient heart here below, and through his
Humane Nature dispenses to every one the Virtues of his Passion; and in this
respect every good Christian participates of Christ's Body, that is of the
Spiritualities of his glorious Body. The Ancient Christians acknowledged and
insisted much upon this distinction between the Natural, and the Spiritual body
of Christ, confessing the one to be in the Sacrament, but not the other. There
is (Says Clemens Alexandrinus) a Twofold (...), Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2. in
mitio.
Blond of our Lord; there is his Fleshly Blood, whereby we were redeemed from
destruction; and there is his Spiritual Blood, whereby we are now Anointed: and
this is to drink the Blood of Jesus, to be made partakers of our Lords
Incorruption. In like manner, Origin Showing, that even in the New Testament
there is a letter which kills, if men do not understand that which is said
after a Spiritual Si enim secundum liberam sequaris hoc ipsum quod dictum est,
nisi manducaveretis carnem mean and biberitis Sanguinem meum, occider haec
litera. Orig. in Lev. 10. Homilt.
manner, instanceth in that Phrase, of eating Christ's Flesh, and drinking his
Blood, for (says he) if you understand this according to the sound and clink
of the Expression, it is a killing letter. S. Jerome also tells us, that the
Blood and Flesh of Christ is to be Duplicitur vere sanguis Christi and caro
intelligitur; vel Spiritualis illa atque Divina, de qua ipse dixit, caro mea
vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere est potus -- vel caro and sanguis quae
Crucifixa est, and qui militis effusus est lancea. S. Hierom. Comment. in Ep.
ad. Ephesians. cap, 1.
understood in a twofold sense, either for the Spiritual and Divine Flesh and
Blood, of which our Lord said, my Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink
indeed; or for that Flesh and Blood which was Crucified, and which was poured
out by the Soldiers Spear. So does S. Austin distinguish the Invisible, the
Intelligible, the Spiritual Gratian. de Consecr. did. 2. cap. 148.
Flesh and Blood of Christ, from that Visible, that Palpable Body of his, which
is full of Grace, and of the Divine Majesty: This he calls strictly and
properly, the Body of Christ; Donec seculum finiatur, sursum est Dominus; sed
tamen hic etiam nobiscum est veritas Domini. Corpus enim Domini in quo
resurrexit, unto loco esse oportet. Veritas autem ejus ubique diffusa est. Id.
cap. 144. Quaere whether, it should not be read Virtus, instead of veritas;
Whereas in some Ancient Authors, and specially in S. Austin, there is mention
made of Veritas Domini, and Veritas corporis Dominici, etc. I mistrust that
those Expressions are corrupt, and that we should read Virtus Domini, and
Virtus corporis, etc. Albertinus observed a corruption in a passage of S. Cyril
Translated out of Greek into Latin, by Thomas Aquinas in the Catena. There it is
thus Influit Deus oblatis vim vitae, convertens ea in veritatem propriae
carnis, whereas it should have been rendered, in virtutem propriae carnis, for
it is in the Greek (...), at Albertinus shows out of Victor Antiochenus his
Comment upon S. Mark. preserved in the Kings Library at Paris: Albertin: de
Sacr. Euchar. lib. 2. page 752. Here was a Palpable Trick; so there might be in
other such instances for ought we know.
the other he calls, the truth of his Body, meaning the Virtue of it: and says
positively, that till the end of the world, the Lord is in heaven above;
nevertheless that the truth of the Lord is with us here below. For that Body of
Christ wherein he arose, is necessarily to be in one place, but the truth (or
Virtue) thereof is diffused every where. St. Ambrose speaking of that Body
which is received in the Eucharist, calls it the Spiritual S. Ambros. de
Mister. c. 9.
Body of Christ, the Body of a Divine Spirit? and this I confidently affirm of
all the Ancients, who have either purposely interpreted, or occasionally quoted
those words of Christ in the sixth of S. John, that they all understand him to
speak, of our feeding upon him after a Spiritual manner, and of Spiritual food,
of Spiritual Flesh, of Spiritual Blood, which he does give us from Heaven to
eat and drink of, Secretly and Undiscernably; always distinguishing this
Spritual Body, not only from the Substance of the Holy Elements, but also from
that Natural Body of Christ, which he took of the Substance of the Holy Virgin.

2. This then being manifest, that our Savior has a Spiritual body, of which
(and of which alone) we do participate, I am now in the next place to show what
that spiritual Body is. Now by his spiritual body we mean, the spiritual
virtues of his glorified Body; those Heavenly streams of Grace which flow from
him; those vital Powers which we receive into our Bosoms through him; those
Divine operations which our poor Souls depend upon him for; those Celestial
and admirable influences, which are derived to his whole Church from his Throne
of Glory. For the right understanding of this matter, we must consider. 1. That
the Body of Christ is filled, not only with the habitual Graces of the Holy
Spirit, where with he was anointed above his Brethren, but filled too even with
the Majesty of the God head, so that in him all the fullness of the Godhead
dwells bodily (that is, really, substantially, and fully) Col. 2. 9. 2. We
must consider, that of his fullness all we do now receive plentifully, and
Grace upon Grace, as St. John tells us, Jo. 1. 16. So that tho Christ be in
Heaven, above all Principalities and Powers, and there is to remain until the
restitution of all things, yet is he unto every one of us the Source and
principle of Life; Virtue goes out of him even now; still he imparteth himself
to us after an ineffable, but effectual manner; and the meanest Soul in his
Church is no more hid from the Emanations of his Grace than the least Plant in
a Garden is hid from the influence of the Sun. Hence it is, that we are said to
be made partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Because we do partake of
those Divine Graces and Influences, which flowing from Him, do transform and
shapen Us into his own likeness. And this is that anointing which St. John
speaks of, 1. Jo. 2. 20. Ye have an unction from the Holy one; meaning that
plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit, through the Man Christ Jesus, whereby
the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts. For Christ himself has received
the Spirit without measure, and is anointed with the Oil of gladness above his
Brethren; but this is like the Ointment which was upon Aaron; it was poured out
upon his Head, but it ran down even to the skirts of his clothing, and
perfumed his whole Body. So does the Spirit of Christ descend from Him upon Us
in streams of bliss and joy, and every drop of comfort which falls upon our
hearts, is a distillation from him whom God has made the head of his Church.

At present I do only suppose (what shall be showed by and by) that every
faithful Christian does derive Virtues from the Blessed Jesus, which do relieve
and operate upon our Souls, as those Virtues did upon the Bodies of such as
were healed and relieved by him in the days of his Flesh. For St. Luke tells
us, Luke 6. 19. that there went Virtue out of him, so that he healed them all.
And when that poor Woman had been healed of her bloody issue only by touching
our Saviors Clothes, he himself said, that virtue had gone out of him, Mark.
5. 30. which Story is related by St. Luke too, who adds also, that Jesus
perceived that Virtue was gone out of him, Luc. 8. 46. And if such wonders were
wrought by the Virtues of his body in his state of Servitude and Humiliation,
we may well believe that he now casts upon every member of his Church, more
Abundant Virtues and influences, since his body now is infinitely Glorious and
Vivifick by reason that the Divinity (which was hid in him before) abides in
it, in its greatest plenitude. (...) S. Ignat. Ep. ad Ephesians.


3. Now these spiritual Virtues we receive from Christ, are called his Body,
his flesh and Blood upon these three accounts. 1. First because they have the
like Natural Properties, which Flesh and blood has, and tend to the like Ends
and Purposes to which flesh and blood serves. For as this helps to
corroborate and animate our Bodies, so do these Divine Virtues help to
strengthen and enliven our Souls In which respect, Christ Panis est esca,
sanguis vita, caro substantia panis propter nutrimenti congruentiam, sanguis
propter vivificationis efficientiam, caro propter assumptae humanitatis
proprietatem. Panis iste communis in carnem and sanguinem mutatus, procurat
vitam and incrementum corporibus: ideoque ex consueto rerum effectu fidei
nostrae adjuta infirmitas, sensibili argumento edocta est visibilibus
Sacramentis in esse vitae eterne effectum, etc. Author de Can. Domini, Cyprian.
is to us meat indeed, and drink indeed; for these Spiritual Influences which
spring from him, are, as Flesh to feed, and as Blood to preserve our Spirits to
Life everlasting. 2. These Spiritual Virtues do issue immediately from Christ's
Humane Nature; and therefore when we receive them, we are truly said to
participate of Christ's Body: For the Body of Christ, by being united to the
Deity, is become a Quickening Body. This S. Cyril (...). S. Cyril Alex. in Joan.
l. 4.
of Alexandria teaches us, that the Son of God is by Nature Life, as being
begotten of the Living Father; yet nevertheless, that his Holy Body is Vivifick
too, as being joined and United, after an ineffable manner, to the Word which
Quickneth all things. This S. Cyril, of all the Ancient Doctors (I know of)
has given the Fullest, the Clearest, the most Substantial account of this
matter: though what he says is very agreeable to the sense of the Rest; who by
Christ's Real Presence in the Sacrament understood nothing else, but the
Presence of those Heavenly Virtues and Influences; which are called his Body,
because they are the Distillations and Effects of his Glorified Humane Nature.
For (as a Learned Doctor of our own Church has confidently affirmed) though
the Divine Nature be the Prime Fountain of life to Dr. Jaekt son, vol. 3. l. 2.
c. 3.
all, and an inexhaustible Fountain in it self, yet a Fountain it is, whereof
we cannot drink; save as it is derived to us through the Humane Nature of
Christ. And, though God the Father does convey unto us many inestimable
blessings, yet he conveys them only through his Son; and not only through him
as our Advocate or Intercessor, but through him as our Mediator, that is,
through his Humanity, as the Organ or Conduit. So that we are as truly said to
partake of Christ's Body, when we partake of these Blessings, as we can be said
to partake of a Spring, when we drink of the Waters, which stream and flow from
it. 3. Besides, nothing is more usual among Mankind, than to give the
Denomination of things to the Virtue and efficacy of those things. So we are
said to be warmed with the Fire, when we only feel its Heat; and to have the
benefit of the Sun, when we are comforted only with its Rays. Which Two
Similitudes I make use of the rather, not only because they serve to
illustrate the matter in hand, but also because S. Chrysostom calls that
Heavenly thing we receive at Sacrament, Spiritual Fire; and because the Holy
Scripture it self calls our Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 60.
Savior the Sun of Righteousness. And as it is not Improper to say, that the
Sun, though it be at a vaste distance from us, reaches every corner of the
Earth, so that in the Fields, in our Houses, in our Closest Retirements we feel
it; and nothing is hid from it, from the moss upon the wall, to the Vegetables
that are wrapped up in the bosom of the earth; when yet all these are cherisht
not by the Sun it self, but by its Beans only: so it is not a Paradox to
believe, that the Sun of Righteousness, casts his Influences from above, and
quickens his Church, and every part thereof; so that every heart, that is not
quite Dead in Trespasses and Sins Ecclesia corpus Christi effecta obsequitur
capiti suo; and superius lumen in inferior a diffusum claritatis suae
plenitudinae a fine usque ad finem attingens, totum apud se manens, totum se
omnibus commodat, and caloris illius identitas it a corpori assidet, uta capite
non recedat. Panis itaque hic azymus, cibus verus, and sincerus, per speciem
and Sacramentum nos tactu Sanctificat, etc. De Caena Dom. opusc. S. Cypriano
ascript.
(like a Rotten Root) Receives the benefit of his Operations: neither is it any
Impropriety of speech to say, that our hearts are wrought upon by the Body of
Christ, that we are Partakers of his Body, that we are enlivened and comforted
by his very Body, when we receive those Spiritual Virtues which are darted from
that Glorified Body of his which is in Heaven,

4. By this time, I hope, it does appear, how necessary the distinction is
between Christ's Natural and Spiritual Body, and what is meant by that Spiritual
Body, and why it is so called, I proceed next to show, that He has indeed such
a Spiritual Body, wherewith he really. quickneth and strengthens every
faithful Christian. For the clearing hereof we must observe our Saviors
discourse which the Jews in the sixth chapter of S, John's Gospel, by occasion
of their speaking of the Miracle of the Manna; he told them, that he would give
his followers the true Bread from Heaven, that his Flesh, which he would give
for the life of the World, should be that Heavenly Bread; that his Flesh should
be meat indeed; and his Blood drink indeed; and that it was necessary for every
one (who hoped for life) to eat that Flesh, and to drink that Blood of his. To
conceive (as the Socinians, and some other modern Writers do) that by his Flesh
is meant his Doctrine only, and that by eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood
is meant, the Believing of his Doctrine and no more, to me seems a forced, a
foreign, and very weak Notion; and an inexcusable act of Singularity; For all
the Fathers of the Greek and Latin Churches, do with one mouth interpret our
Saviors discourse of that Spiritual Communication of his Flesh and Blood,
wherewith every good Christian is blessed, Now, that our Savior might make this
credible and easy to his Auditors (that his Flesh and Blood should be meat and
drink to the Souls of his Disciples) he opens the matter to them these two
ways. 1. By intimating to them, that he was to Ascend up in his Body into
Heaven; verse. 62. what if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was
before? For this reason (says Athanasius) he put them in mind of his Ascension
(...) Athanas. in illud si quis dixerit verbum contra filium etc. Tom. 1. P.
979. Edit. Par.
into Heaven, that he might draw off their minds from Gross and Carnal
Apprehensions, and that they might thenceforth know that the Flesh he speak of
was to be Food from above, Heavenly and Spiritual nourishment that he S. Cyril.
Alex. in Joan. lib. 4. c. 22.
was to give them. And this was no more impossible for him to do, than it was
impossible for him to fly through the air: he could as easily make his Body
Spiritual and vital, as he could make an Heavenly of an Earthly Substance,
especially since he was God, which he put them in mind of by telling them, that
he was in Heaven before.

2. But to clear the matter fully, he Id. 16. c. 23.
Interpreted himself to them, verse 63. It is the Spirit that Quickneth, the
Flesh profits nothing: meaning (as S. Cyril excellently understands it) that
though his Flesh considered in it self, could not quicken any thing; as
standing in need it self of a quickening principle, yet considering the Mystery
of the Incarnation, and how the Word dwells in the Flesh, we are to conclude,
that even the Body of Christ has a quickening Faculty, being united to that
Word which gives life to all. For the corruptible Nature of Man did not
degrade the Word by being joined unto it, but became it self exalted into a far
better condition; so that though it Quickneth not of it self, yet it does by
the Energy and Operation of the Word, the Spirit or Deity of Christ, the
plenitude whereof dwells in our Saviors Flesh bodily, and so makes it
Vivisick. This truth being laid down, that our Lords Body is full of Vital
virtue by being united to the Godhead, it follows very plainly, that we must
not think of eating the Natural and Heavenly Substance of our Lords Body after
a Bodily manner, with our mouths; But of receiving into our Hearts and Souls
the Spiritual Virtues of his glorified Flesh with a lively Faith: the words
that I speak Ubi supra.
unto you, they are Spirit and they are Life, says Christ: meaning thus much
(according to Athanasius) that my Body which is given for the World, shall be
given for food, to be ministered to every one after a Spiritual manner: his
words are Spiritual, and to be spiritually understood (as S. Cyril, S.
Chrysostom, and the rest all say) that is to be interpreted of that Spirit
which is Life, and which gives life, and of those Spiritual Influences which
come from Christ's Heavenly Body, by the virtue, energy, and operation of that
Eternal vivifick Word which abides in it.

From this whole discourse of our Savior (especially as it is explained by
those two great Luminaries of the Church, S. Cyril and Athanasius) we are to
conceive, that the Humane Nature of Christ, being taken (...) S. Cyril. in
Joan. lib. 4. c. 24.
into God at his Incarnation, and being vested with the Glories of Heaven upon
his Ascension, is so full of the Energy of the Divine Spirit, that it is become
a Spiritual Body: Not that it has lost the Nature of Flesh, but because it is
Hypostatically united to the Godhead, by reason of which Union it is endued
with an enlivening Quid est, eundem, nisi quia eum quem etiam nos? S. Aug. Tom.
10. Hom. 27.
Power, and the Man Christ Jesus (that Quickening Spirit) does through his
Glorified Humanity dispense those Spiritual Virtues, which are the proper Food
and Nutriment of the Soul, and are fitly called Christ's Spiritual Body, Christ's
Spiritual Flesh and Blood.

This may be further illustrated yet by considering what S. Paul says 1 Cor.
10. 3, 4. how that our Fathers in the wilderness did all eat the same spiritual
meat; and did all drink the same Spiritual drink (meaning, that they had the
same Spiritual meat and drink with us. For they drank of that Spiritual Rock
that went with them, and that Rock was Christ. And how did they eat and drink
of Christ, but by receiving from him those Graces and Virtues, which have all
along been the Portion and Sustenance of the Faithful? For Christ was with all
Believers under the Law, before his manifestation in the Flesh; they were
continually under his care and Providence their Souls lived by his Divine
Influence, as their Bodies were supported with Manna, and were refresht by
waters out of the Rock. Now these were Figures of good things to come, that
when Christ the true Manna should descend from Heaven, and should be smitten
upon the Cross, as the Rock (which prefigur'd him) was smitten with Moses Rod,
he would ever be life and aliment to those that should believe on his Name, and
that that Body of his, which was to be smitten, as the Rock was, should send
forth such abundant, salutary streams of Living waters, as would Quench the
thirst of every true Israelite to all Eternity.

And this real (but Ineffable) presence of Christ's Grace and Virtues is that,
which the Doctors of the Christian Church meant, when they speak with such
ravishment of the Presence of the Holy Jesus with us poor mortals in this vale
of misery. They entertained not any mean and nauseous conceits of the presence
of Christ's Natural Body, whether in or out of the Sacrament; but they were
taken up with Noble and Lofty speculations, and they fixed their minds upon the
Divine and Mysterious consideration of those Beatifying streams of Grace, which
spring from Christ (the Fountain of everlasting life) and are conveyed unto his
Church through his Humanity, by the efficacious operation of his Divine Spirit.
The Anciens considered, that the eating of Christ Natural Flesh; and the
drinking of his Natural Blood (were the thing possible, and consistent with
Humanity) could not be profitable, could not be to any purpose in comparison of
those vital and operative Virtues, which flow from Christ, and Quicken all that
are capable and apt to be quickened: and therefore their meditations soared
high, they listed up their own minds to Heaven, instead of bringing down Christ
upon the Earth, they minded and spoke of the real presence of his Spiritual
Body only. And when we find some of them to speak, as if the Nature and
Substance of Christ were exhibited to us, we should consider what they
themselves meant by those and the like expressions, For they spoke like
Divines, that were full of Lofty and Seraphick notions, and were forced to
speak of Mysteries in a high strain, giving the Elements in the Sacrament
becoming and honorable (...). S. Cyril ubi Supr.
Names, but intending by the Flesh and Blood of Christ, the Virtue, the Grace,
the Spirituallities and Efficacy of his Humane Nature, as it is Quickened and
made quickening to us by the Power of the Eternal Word in conjunction with it.
As S. Austin. says Secundam Majestatem suam, secundum providentiam, secundum
Ineffabilem and Invisibilem Gratiam impletur quod ab eo dictum est, Ecce ego
vobiscum sum usque ad consummationem seculi. Secundum carnem vero quod verbum
assumpsit, secundum id quod de Virgin natus est, secundum id quod a Hudaeis
prebensus est, quod ligno confixus, quod de cruce depositus, quod linteis
involutus, quod in sepulchro conditus, quod in resurrectione manifestatus, non
semper habebitis vobiscum. S. Aug. Tractat. 50. in John.
plainly, in respect of that Body which was assumed by the Word, which was born
of the Virgin, which was apprehended by the Jews, which was nailed to the Tree,
which was taken down from the Cross, and was wrapped up, and laid in the
Sepulcher, in respect of that Body we have him not with us; but in respect of
his Majesty, in respect of his Providence, in respect of his Ineffable and
invincible Grace, that promise of his is fulfilled, lo I am with you always
even unto the end of the world. And speaking of the Eucharist he does
distinguish between Nam and nos body accipimus visibilem cibum, used aliud est
Sacramentum, aliud virtus Sacramenti. S. Aug. Tractat. 26. in John. Usque ad
Spiritus participationem manducemus and bibamus. Id Tract. 27.
the Sacrament it self, and the virtue of the Sacrament, calling that, the
Grace of Christ, which is not consumed with our Teeth, and the participation of
the Spirit. This is that which S. Austin elsewhere calls the Intelligible, the
Invisible, the Spiritual Body of Christ: that which Ireneus calls the Heavenly
thing; that which Clement and Jerome call the spiritual Flesh and Blood of the
Lord, That which Pseudo-Cyprian calls the Divine Virtue, the Divine Essence,
the Divine Majesty, the participation of the Spirit, the drink which flows and
streams from that Spiritual Rock, Christ Jesus: That which S. Ambrose calls,
the spiritual Aliment, and the Body of a Divine Spirit; that which others call,
the Lords Immortality, his Divine Body, the Truth of his Body, the Nutriment of
the Inward Man, the vital Pulment of the Incarnate Deity: and diverse other
expressions we meet with in old Authors, signifying the wonderful virtues of
Christ's Glorified Humanity, whereof every Faithful Soul is made Partaker. S.
Ifidore Pelusiot conceived, that the roasting (...) Isidor. Pelus. Ep. 219. l.
1.
of the Paschal Lamb with Fire, did Typically fignifie, that Christ (the true
Pasleover) was to unite the Fire of the Divine Essence to his Flesh, to be
eaten of us: That Is his Experssion, and it shows his opinion; that we receive
the virtue of his Divine through his Humane Nature. Among modern Foreign
Writers, none seems to me to have explained this thing better, than the
moderate and Judicious Author of the Diallacticon Eucharistiae a Book written
about 130. years ago, to compose all controversies Hoc corpus, hunc sanguinem
and carnem, hanc substantiam corporis, non communi more, nec ut humana ratio
dictat, accipi oportet, sed it a nominari, existimari, credi, propter eximios
quosdam effectus, virtutes and proprietates conjunctas, quae corpori and
sanguini Christi natura in sunt, nempe quod Pascat animas nostras, and
vivificet simul, and corpora ad resurrectionem and immortalitatem praeparet.
Dialact. page 33. and 34. Non hic cogitandum est nos crudas bominis carnes
comedere, vel sanguinem bibere: Sed verba spiritalia esse, and spiritualiter
intelligenda; carnem quidem and sanguinem nominari, sed de Spiritu and Vita,
idest vivifica dominicae carnis virtute debere intellagi, etc. Ibid. page 25.
Quia figur a very corporis panis est, jure Corpus appellatur, and quia virtutem
ejusdem vitalem conjunctam habet multo magis, tum vero maxim quod utrumque
complectitur. Ibid. page 54. Panis Domini, Corpus Christi est, quia gratiam and
virtutem ejus vitalem conjunctam habet. Quod outem haec non commentitia, aut
nuper nata sententia est, sed ab antiquis recepta and approbata Scriptoribus,
claris ipsorum testimoniis confirmabimus. Ibid. page 57.
about the Sacrament) and he too goes altogether this way, showing, that that
Body of Christ which is present with us, is his spiritual Body, and that we
communicate thereof by deriving Efficacy, Power, and Vital Virtue from the Body
of the Lord. And this account I am the better pleased and satisfied with,
because it was a Notion that was en tertained and really asserted; by a very
Learned Doctor of our own Church, with Dr. Jack. vol. 3. p. 325. and Seq.
whose words I shall conclude this consideration: we must not collect (says
he) that Christ's Body, because comprehended within the Heavens, can exercise no
real operation upon our Bodies or Souls here on Earth; or that the live
Influence, of his Glorified Humane Nature may not be diffused through the
World, as he shall be pleased to dispense it: no, we must not take upon us to
limit or bound the Efficacy of Christ's Body upon the Bodies or Souls which he
has taken into his Protection: there are Influences of Life which his Humane
Nature does distill from his Heavenly Throne: And the Sacramental Bread is
called his Body, and the Sacramental Wine his Blood, as for other reasons, so
especially for this, because the Virtue and Influence of his most Bloody
Sacrifice is most plentifully, and most effectually distilled from Heaven unto
the worthy Receivers: and many more things he says to the same effect.

By this account we may easily undergand the meaning of the sixth chapter of S.
John, which has so puzzled many Learned Interpreters; and we may fairly give
the reason of the Sentence of our Lords, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you. For the Principle of life
comes from our Lords Glorified Humanity; and unless we receive into our Souls
the vital Virtue which distilleth from it, we can be in no other than a dead
Condition.

I do not mean, that it is impossible to have life without receiving the
Sacrament: no, there is that which Divines call a Sacramental and Spiritual
receiving of Christ, and a Spiritual receiving only: when men eat and drink
after a right manner, they receive both the Sacrament and also the thing or
virtue of the Sacrament: but yet men may derive (and by Faith do derive) virtue
from Christ without the Sacrament) (if they do not abstain through negligence,
or the love of sin, and the like.) The Grace of God is not tied to Sacraments
so, but that God may dispense it as he pleases; nor are we to conceive, that
the Blessed Body of Christ does quicken none but at the Communion.

CHAP. X.
That Christ's Spiritual Body is actually, verily, and really taken and received
by the Faithful in the Lords Supper. Proved from the Analogy thereof to other
Sacrifical Feasts among Jews and Heathens. From S. Paul's Viscourse, 1 Cor. 10.
and from the sense of the Catholic Church. Several advantages gained by this
Notion.

5. BUt yet the celebration of the Communion is the Ordinary, standing, and
effectual means, to make us partakers of Christ's Virtues and Spirit: And this
is the last thing I shall show (for the conclusion of this whole point) that
the spiritual Body of Christ, which in some measure is given in general to all
faithful Christians, is effectually, certainly, and abundantly given,
particularly to all Devout and Faithful Communicants.

And here to touch a little upon the Effects of the Ancient Sacrifical
Banquets, which have been spoken of before: It is observable, that those
Mysteries were not things of an empty nature to those that communicated
thereof, but were attended with the operation and efficacy either of Divine or
Diabolical Powers. 1. That great care and Reverence which was required of the
Jew under pain of death, for the due celebration of the Paschal Supper, was a
clear argument, that God himself intended to be with them at the time, after a
more Peculiar manner, and to scatter his Heavenly Blessings among them. The
intent of that, and other Religious Mysteries was that the Souls of Gods People
might be united to the Divine Nature, and might be Inspired by the Divine Mind,
as Abarbanal tells us. To this purpose the Learned Masius observes, Abarbanal
Exord. in Levit. in fine.
that some Hebrew Doctors believed so great a Mystery to have been in the
Paschal Sacrifice, as that thereby God did after some sort first of all
Communicate his Divinity unto Men. And he cites a passage in a Book of Rabbi
Judas, where he says, that by means of the Passover God did Masius Comment.
in Josh. c. 5. p. 89.
take men into such close Communion with himself, that by his Divine Power they
did abide in him, as the week of a candle abides in the Light; and that this
was mystically signified by those words, Levit. 11. 45. I am the Lord, that
brings you up out of the Land of Egypt, to be your God; meaning (as that
Rabbi interprets it) that I might impart unto you mine own Divinity. Where the
same Author also takes notice of a saying in Philo, that by the Passover, was
signified the passing of our mortal and corruptible nature into God, that is,
the changing and raising of it into the Divine Nature. And for the
understanding of these Mysterious That Is the true reading (not withstanding
what we find in the margent). (...). Philo de Sacr. Abel. and Cain.
notions, Masius refers us particularly to the sixth chapter of S. John; as if
God under the Law did bless men with such Spiritual Influences and Divine
virtues at the Passoever; as Christ does now bless Communicants with at the
Eucharist, to be meat and drink indeed to the Souls of his Disciples.

2. As the Jews did partake of God at the Paschal Supper, so did the Heathens
partake of Devils at their Sacrifical Banquets. That there were Demoniacks of
old, people that were inspired by Devils, and possessed with Devils, is out Etiam
de corpuribus nostro imperio excedunt inviti and do^entes; Tertull. Apolog. c.
23. de Daemonibus.
of all controversy: for the Ancient Christians were commonly wont to force
them out of men, and to put them to a great deal of Torment. The Devil had many
opportunities and ways of getting this power over people, God permitting it so
to be in vengeance for their wickednesses. So Tertullian tells a story of a
Christian woman, that going to see an Heathen Tertull. de Spect. c. 10.
Play returned possessed with the Devil: and when the Exorcist demanded of the
Demon how he durst meddle with one of the faithful, his answer was, that he
found her in his Dominions. But never did these Infernal Spirits take greater
advantage over men, nor seize them more effectually, than when they did
Sacrifice unto them, and did eat of their Sacrifices in their Temples. Then
these Demons did sometimes appear unto them, as they did to Julian: sometimes
Theodor. Ecol. Hist. l. 3. c. 3.
they possessed them so that they were besides their senses, and become mad and
furious, as those who were called (...), and such as (...) [sorsan, (...)]
(...): Galen, quoted by Casaubon of Enthusiasme. chapt. 1.
celebrated the Orgia, or the Mysteries of Bacchus, (otherwise called,
Omophagia, from their eating of Raw-flesh) whereby they grew quite Frantic,
yet past for men that where Divinely inspired full of the Arnob. adv. Genr.
lib. 5.
Numen and Majesty of God. Sometimes the Devils drove them into such a violent
furor, that they whipped and scourged one Herodot. l. 2.
another (as the old Egyptians were wont to do, when they had done
Sacrificing:) Vide Lucian de Dea Syria.
nay, that they would cut their Arms and other parts of their Bodies (as those
Lucian speaks of) like the worshippers of 1. Kings. 18.
Baal, those Demoniacks, that did usually cut themselves with knives and
Lances, till Vid. Lucian ubi Supr.
the Blood gushed out upon them. Sometimes the Devils did Influence them so,
that they were full of Poetical strains, could So the Enthei Sacerdotes
mentioned by several Authors. Pleni and mixti Deo vates; Minut. Fael. And such
was that (...), that Pythia vates (like that Phythoniffa, 1. Sam. 2 8. called
by the Seventy (...)) vide Gyrald-Hist. Deor. Syntagm. 7. page 222.
deliver Oracles, and by the help of the Demons within them, could foretell
things to come, could Divine; and presage events, after they had Hence (...) to
banquet upon the Sacrifices which had been sent to the Oracle, for the asking
his advice) Eurip. in Electra. p. 835.
eaten of the Sacrificess. Out of many Writers it Dr. Cudworths True Notion.
appears, that the old Heathen by means of their Sacrifical, Idol feasts,
contracted such fellowship and intimacy with the Powers of hell, that they
hardly ever wanted their Assistance. And a learned Doctor of our Church tells
us out of one of the Rabbis, that the Amient Chaldeans were wont to eat Flesh
and Drink Blood with their Idols, because they had thereby such Communication
with Demons, that they familiarly conversed with them, and told them what would
happen in process of time. Which he also confirms out of another Rabbi, who
says, that by this kind of Communion with Devils, at their Tables, the
Chaldeans were able, to Prophecy and foretell things to come. To all which I
shall only add, that those lewd Heretics, who used Enchantments and Magical
Arts (as many of them did) in the Primitive times of Christianity, did learn to
deal with Devils, and taught others to deal and to be possessed with Devils also,
by means of those Mysteries which they used in Imitation of the holy Eucharist,
that was used by the Catholics: and to this purpose Ireneus tells us
particularly of that Wizard Marcus, Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 9.
that he became familiar with Demons, and fascinated his Disciples, especially
of the female Sex, after this manner.

Now this I take to be the full importance and design of that Phrase, 1 Cor.
10. 20. where S. Paul says, I would not that ye should have fellowship with
Devils; (...), to be Communicants with, and Partakers of Devils: meaning, that
they should not have any the least society with them, lest by sitting at their
Tables they should come to be governed, acted, and inspired by them, as
Demoniacks were. And this gives a great deal of Light to those places of
Scripture where we are said, to have the Communication of the Body, and of the
Blood of Christ, and to be partakers of the Lords Table. For the full meaning
of these expressions is, that by feasting together at the Table of the Lord, we
do participate of our Lords Spiritual Body, and of his Spiritual Blood, so as
that we are Influenced by him, and receive Spiritual Virtue, Power and Energy
from him. that as the Possessed of old were thought to have a Divine Numen in
them, so every devout Receiver of the Lords Supper may be said to have God and
Christ in them, because they are lead by Hence Demoniacks were called (...),
and (...) Maxim. in Pseudodyonis. de Eccl. c. 3. So the Saints of Christ were
ancienly called, (...) and (...) (as Ignatius the Martyr was called) (...),
Clem. Alex. Trajanus dixit. Quis est Theophorus? Ignatius respondit, Qui
Christum habet in pectore; vide Acta Ignatii page 3. etc.
the Spirit and receive the Graces of the Spirit of God and Christ, in Virtue
of Christ's Body and Blood. The Socinians go a great way round about to fetch a
wrested interpretation of these words of S. Paul, The Cup of bessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? the bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? 1 Cor. 10. 16. For
whereas they understand those words to this effect, that our celebration of the
Eucharist, is a Declaration of that Communion we have with that sacred Society,
the Church, which is the Mystical Body of Christ; the Interpretation is
Impertinent, Idle, and Ridiculous; because that place of Scripture does plainly
signify a Communication of Christ's Blood, as well as of his Body; nay, of that
blood which was shed, and of that Body which was given for us; and this cannot
be meant of his Body Mystical. Some again are as wide on the other hand; who
though they grant a Communication of Christ's very Body, yet never the less Deny
the Reality of its presence, which is a mere Riddle, and an unintelligible
notion, for how can we conceive, that we really partake of Christ's Body at the
Sacrament, if it be not really there; to deny him to be Present, and yet to
affirm that we receive him Spiritually, Mystically, and Sacramentally, is
nothing else but to use so many dark expressions to cover Non sense; it being
impossible to imagine how we can Communicate of that which is Not: and it is as
plain a Contradiction to say, that we eat of Christ's Body, and drink of his
Blood, if his Body and Blood be not Present; as it is to say, that we receive
Christ, and yet not receive him at the same time. Nor does it mend the matter
to say, that we receive Christ by faith. For if Christ be not Present, and at
our hand, I cannot see how all the faith in the world can help us to receive
him. Christ does dwell indeed in every Believers heart, and faith does dispose
and qualify us for the reception of him; but how can faith bring that to me,
which is not nigh me, and which is not her below to be gime? Faith is a
persuasion of the mind, and this persuasion works upon mine own heart, but
cannot work upon the object of my faith so as to bring that to me, which is
really above in heaven only. Nay, we must suppose the Body and Blood of our
Savior to be in the Sacrament; or else we cannot Rightly believe, that we do
receive him; for to believe that I receive Christ at the Sacrament, when at the
same time I believe that he is not Really there, is a Lying faith that
contradicts and confuteth it self. Seeing then it is reasonable to believe,
that Christ's Body and Blood are actually and verily in the Sacrament, it must
be granted that they are there, either in respect of their Natural Substance,
or in respect of their Spiritual (but Real) Virtues, and in respect of those
Divine Influences, which are, by means of the Sacrament, derived from the man
Christ Jesus. But the first of these is a proposition so uncouth, so
irrational, so repugnant to Scripture and all Antiquity, and upon every account
so impossible to be true; that it no more agrees with Christianity, then
darkness does agree with light. Therefore if men well understand and speak
sense, they must grant S. Paul to speak in the forecited place, of the
Communication of Christ's Spiritual Body and Blood: and so the thing will be
obvious, rational, and intelligible: for in regard that by the use of the
blessed Sacrament we receive virtues and influences from our Lords Glorified
Humanity, we are very rightly said, to Communicate of his Body. In regard that
these Virtues are not imaginary Ideas, but Real things (Real in themselves, and
of real effect and operation) it is very proper to affirm, that Christ is
Really present in the Sacrament. Lastly, in regard that these virtues are of a
Spiritual Nature, and flow from him who is a Quickening Spirit; and are
dispensed by the Holy Spirit, and are receive by, and work upon our Spirits,
and are efficacious in order to our Spiritual Life; and do make us partakers of
the Divine Nature; it is easy to conceive the reason, why Christ is said to be
present in the Eucharist after a Spiritual manner: and so by this construction
of the matter, the Doctrine of Christ's Real (but Spiritual) Presence, and of
the Real (but Spiritual) Communication of his Body and Blood, is secured, and
the darkest part of this Mystery lies open, and fair, and easy to be
understood by men of the most Vulgar capacities.

To this purpose Anselm understands those In 1. ad Cor. cap. 10.
words of the Apostle the Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communication of Christ's Blood? that is, does it not make those who drink of it
worthily, partakers of the Life of Christ, which is designed by his Blood? does
it not make us partakers of his blessedness and Glory, wherein our souls are
made One with his by the Communication of the same Glory? And so the Bread
which we break, is it not the participation of the Body of Christ? that is,
does it not work this in Us, that our bodies participate of the Immortality and
glory of our Head? This is the meaning, says he, that the participation of the
Bread and Cup of the Lord has this effect, that our souls and Bodies are
thereby made conformable and Like to the soul and Body of our Redeemer. We eat
Id. in 1. ad Cor. cap. 11.
and drink even to the participation of Christ's Spirit; so that we are the
members of his Body, and are enlivened by his Spirit.

Indeed Anselm was but a late Writer in comparison (for he lived in the 11th.
Century.) But in this he spoke the sense of the Ancient Doctors of the
Catholic Church; whose faith it was, that Christ's Humane nature, by being
united to the Deity, has a Quickening faculty, so that all true believers do
receive Quickening Virtues from him, specially by a due use of the blessed
Eucharist. That this was the Catholic faith appears by one pregnant instance,
which has not been taken notice of by many Writers upon this Subject. A little
above 400 years after our Savior, Nestorius the Heretic taught, that the
Divinity and Humanity of our Lord was not united in one person. Upon this a
General Council met at Ephesus, and unanimously condemned this Heresy. S.
Cyril of Alexandria was a great man at the Council and had a great hand in the
condemnation of Nestorius; and one Reason he gave to justify their proceedings
was this, because, Nestorius by that his Doctrine made void the Virtue (...).
Council. Ephesians.
of the Sacrament. And how did they conclude so? why this was the principle of
S. Cyril and the rest of them, that the Body of Christ is Vivifick, and that
the Souls of Communicants live by receiving Vital Virtue from it. Now, if (as
Nestorius said) the Divinity and Humanity of Christ be not United, it is
impossible for his Flesh to yield any Life; because no flesh quickneth of it
self, neither can Christ's flesh Quicken, but by the power of the Word. Seeing
therefore, that Heretic denied the Union between the Word and the Flesh of
Christ, it would follow of necessity, that the Body of Christ is not vivifick,
and consequently that we receive no vital virtue from it at the Sacrament;
which Doctrine being contrary to the Common Faith, the Author of it, Nestorius,
and his followers were very justly Anathematized. Whosoever reads the History
of that Council with indifferency of judgment, may easily perceive that the
sense of the Church at that time was, that at the Holy Communion men receive
Divine and heavenly Virtues from our Saviors glorified Humanity, so that we
live by Him through the Communication of his Virtues, as he himself lived by
the Father through the Communication of his Nature. And I am sufficiently
satisfied, that this was the faith of the Catholic Church both before that
Council, and also for many ages after it. Thus when St. Ignatius intimates,
that the Eucharist is the Flesh of Christ, it is clear to me, that he meant
Christ's spiritual Flesh, as Clemens Alexandrinus, and St. Jerome expressly
called it, meaning the Spiritual Virtue of his flesh by reason of its
Hypostatical Union with the Deity. When Ireneus said, that the Eucharist
consists of two things, the Earthly and the Heavenly thing, it is plain that
by the Heavenly thing he meant (not Christ's solid, Natural Body, but) that
Heavenly Grace and Virtue which goes along with the Sacrament. When Justin
Martyr compared the Mystery of the Eucharist with the Mystery of the
Incarnation, I cannot doubt but he meant, that, as in the one there was a
Personal union between Humanity and Divinity, so in the other there is a
Sacramental Union between Bread and Spirit, when the Pseudo Dionysius affirms,
De Eccl. Hier. c. 3.
that by the Sacrament we Communicate of the Divine things of Christ, it is but
fair to understand him to speak of those Divine Virtues and influences
wherewith the Holy Jesus does bless every humble and devout heart. When Clemens
Alexandrinus (...), Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib. 2. c. 2.
distinguishes the spiritual Blood of Christ from that which is fleshly, and
moreover says, that by drinking the blood of Jesus is meant the being made
partaker of the Lords Incorruption, any man may see that he spoke of the
Spiritual Virtues of Christ's Blood, whereby we are purified, sanctified, and
fitted, for a blessed Immortality. When Theodotus affirmed that by (...), [leg.
(...), Theodot. in fine oper. Clem. Alex. page 800.
the power of the Spirit the Bread is changed into a spiritual virtue, his
plain meaning was, that there is a change, not of the substance, but of the
quality of the Bread, so that by the manducation thereof spiritual Virtue is
given to the worthy Receiver. When Origin, speaking of the Bread, calls it the
Typycal and Symbolical Body of Christ (or the figure and Type In Matthew. 15.
of it) and then presently mentions, by way of distinction, the Word it self
which was made flesh, and is the true food, which whosoever eats shall live
for ever; it is most reasonable to understand him to speak of that vital and
Divine virtue (...), Cyril. Catech. m yst-8.
which goes along with the symbol, and is derived from the Word, which is the
suitable food of the Soul, as bread is of the Body. When Athanasius
understands, by the flesh of Athanas. in illud quicunque dixerit verbum etc.
Christ, that Heavenly food from above, that spiritual Alimony which Christ
gives us from Heaven, what else could he mean, but those Divine and Caelestial
Virtues, whereby he strengthens and refreshes every craving Soul; tho, in the
substance of his Natural body, he be absent from us? When according to Julius
Fermicus, Ipse ut Majestatis suae substantiam credentibus tradens ait; nisi
edevitis carnem filiis hominis etc. Jul. Firmic. de Errore Profan. Gent. in
Bibliotheca Patrum.
the receiving the substance of Christ's Majesty, is the very same thing with
the eating of his flesh, and the drinking of his Blood, what can he mean by the
substance of Christ's Majesty, but those substantial and Divine influences which
come from his Throne of Glory, whereby we are made partakers of the Divine
Nature (as St. Peter Si ergo nos naturaliter secundum carnem per eum vivimus,
id est, Naturam carnis suae adepti, etc. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 8.
speaks) or as St. Hilary expresses it, whereby we are made partakers of the
Nature of his Flesh (glorified?) when St. Cyril of Jerusalem says of the
Bread, (as he did of the Ointment which was used in those days) that after St.
Cyril. Cateeh. 3.
Invocation it is not any common or inconsiderable thing, but the gift of
Christ and of the Holy Spirit, made efficacious by the presence of his
Godhead; how can we understand it but of that spiritual Energy and Virtue
wherewith the Element is endued, Epiphan. in Anaceph.
and which efficaciously works by the power of Christ upon the soul of every
worthy Communicant; When Epiphanius speaks so positively and so home, that
the Bread in the Eucharist, and the Water in Baptism have their Virtue from
Christ, that it is not the Bread it self that is efficacious, but it is the
Virtue of the Bread (wherewith Christ indues it) and that the Bread indeed is
Food, but it is the Virtue in it which serves for vivification; what can any
man desire more plain, more emphatical, more full? when St. Ambrose says (if
the Book be his) that we take Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 6. c.
the Sacrament as the Similitude of Christ's body, but do really receive the
Grace and Virtue of Christ's Nature: it is plain that he means those spiritual
influences which are derived from him. When St. Chrysostom Chrysostom. Hom. 50.
in Matthew.
to show what benefits we have by receiving of Christ shows the benefits which
they had who touched but the Hem of his garment; undoubtedly he meant that we
receive these benefits (as they did) by virtue which goes out of him. When St.
Austin so often speaks of not the outward Symbols only, but chiefly of the
thing in the Sacrament, of the Virtue of the Sacrament, and of our eating and
drinking even to the participation of the Spirit, and says, that the Truth and
virtue of Christ's body is diffused every where; what can any reasonable man
suppose him to mean but that though Christ be in Heaven in his Body, yet he is
with us by his spirit, and blesses us all with his Spiritual influences, but
especially when we Celebrate the memory of his Passion? When St. Cyril of
Alexandria so frequently affirms, that the Glorified Body of Christ is
vivisick, and makes the Sacrament vivisick too; and says that God
condescending to our weakness Carene Thomae in Luc. 22.
sends the Virtue of Life into the Bread and Wine that are before us turning
them into the Energy (or efficacy) of his own flesh, so that a quickening
principle may be in us; the sense is so plain and satisfactory that I will
presume to say, were St. Cyril alone allowed to be judge in this case, there
would hardly be any ^^^^^oversie at all in the Christian World about the
blessed Sacrament, unless it were this, who should receive it oftnest, and with
the great est reverence. This Divine and spiritual virtue derived from Christ,
and conveyed into the Sacrament, is that which Theodoret means by that Grace,
which he says Gratian. de Consecdist. 2. c. 28.
is added to the Nature of the Elements. This is that too which Pope Leo and
the Synod of Rome meant by the virtue of Theophyl. in Marc. 14 Hugo. de
Mysteriis Eccles. cap. 7. Gelas. de duab. Not. in Christo.
this heavenly food; that which Theophylact meant by the Virtue of Christ's
Flesh and Blood; that which Hugo de St. Victore meant by the efficacy of the
Sacrament, by the spiritual Grace, and by Christ's spiritual Flesh; that which
Pope Gelasius meant by that Divine thing in the Eucharist, whereby we are made
partakers of the Divine Nature; that which Beriram Bertram de Corp. and Sang.
de Domini.
meant by the invisible Bread, the Power of the Divine word, the Virtue of
Christ's Body and blood, the invisible efficacy, the spiritual flesh and blood
of our Savior, and abundance of expressions more to the same purpose, in his
admirable Book to Carolus Calvus. It Is that too which Isidore Hispalensis meant
Isidor. Hispal de Eccl. Offis.
by the Divine Virtue which works salvation under the cover of earthly
things: That which Haymo meant by the grace of Haymo. in Cor. 11.
Sanctification, whereby he says the Plenitude of the Deity, and the Divinity
of Paschas. Ratbert. de Euchar.
the Eternal Word fills the Elements: That which Paschasius Ratbertus himself
meant by the Spiritual Flesh of Christ, that vital Portion which every good
Communicant receives of the fullness of Christ's Divinity: Lastly, it is that
which Panis iste quem Dominus Discipulis porrigebat, non effigy, sed [ leg.
seu] natura mutatus, omni potentia Verbi factus est caro; Et sicut in persona
Christi Humanitas videbatur, and latebat Divinitas; ita Sacramento visibili
ineffabiliter Divina se infundit Essentia, etc. Pseudo-Cyprian. de Caen. Dom.
-- Et Superius lumen in inferiora diffusum, claritatis suae plentitudine a fine
usque ad finem attingens, totum apud se manens, totum se omnibus commodat, and
caloris illius identitas ita corpori assidet, ut a capite non recedat. Id. ib.
the Pseudo - Cyprian meant by that Divine Virtue which he acknowledged to be
in the Sacrament, that Supersubstantial Bread, (as he calls it) that Divine
Essence, and Majesty which accompany the Elements, that effect of Eternal Life,
and that Latent Spirit, whereof every devout and well disposed Christian does
participate. I have not time to look into every particular Church-Writer: but
this I will presume to affirm, that where any of the Ancients do harp upon
Christ's presence in the Sacrament, they mean his presence by his Grace and
Virtue, and where they speak intelligibly and distinctly of this matter, they
speak plainly to this purpose; intending by the body and blood of Christ, which
we receive, neither more nor less, then those efficacious Virtues which are
derived to his Church from his glorified Humanity; this they call his Body and
Blood, especially when they call it, by way of distinction, the spiritual Body,
and the spiritual Blood of our Blessed Redeemer.

And this account is the rather to be received by us for several good Reasons.

1. Because it makes this great Mystery very easy to be understood, so that
without any straining of our wits, or forcing of Scripture, we may readily and
clearly conceive how we are said to Communicate of Christ's Body and Blood. For
do but conceive a notion of Christ's spiritual Body, and the account is very
short, and the matter is very intelligible.

2. It shows the sense of the Catholic Church in former Ages to be the same
with ours now. For Christians did ever acknowledge two different things in this
Mystery, the outward sign, and the inward Grace, and accordingly they did every
set a different Price upon these two things, valuing most of all the spiritual
Grace, but yet Honoring the Element for the Grace sake. Many times indeed they
called the bread, Christ's Body, because it signifies, and represents and
exhibits it; but usually they called the Elements, the Types, the Antitypes,
the Figures, the Images, the Signs of our Lords Body and Blood; so the Author
of the Constitutions, Pseudo Dionysius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian,
Theodoret, Eusebius, Chrysostom, Origin, Cyril, Basil, Macarius, Jerome,
Gregory Nazianzen, and diverse more: so that we may well laugh at those who are
pleased to talk, as if the Fathers believed Transubstantiation. Yet
nevertheless they all with one mouth confessed the Body of Christ to be in the
Sacrament; and so do we now, but in that sense which the Ancient Church meant,
they believed the presence of Christ spiritual Body, and after a spiritual
manner, and that is our Faith also: and we cannot be condemned for Heretics,
but the old Catholic Church must lie under the Anathema too.

3. This account serves for ever to break the neck of their pretenses, who to
defend their new Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and other pestilent Errors
which are built upon it, do stiffly urge the literal and strict construction of
those words, this is my Body, and this is my Blood; supposing, that it passes
the skill of the Protestants to give a better Interpretation: whereas this
account gives such a fair, such an Intelligible, such a Rational, such a
Catholic explication of the thing, that the Romanists themselves, if they
would consider it well, may look upon their Construction, not only a very
absurd, but as a very needless one too.

4. This account may serve to reconcile and make up those differences which are
between some Reformed Churches about this matter. For whereas it is granted by
us on all hands, that the Elements retain still their own Nature and Substance
even after Consecration; and yet the Lutheran Churches hold, that Christ's Real
and Substantial Body is delivered together a long with the Elements; methinks
this should not be enough to maintain a breach, if men were considerate and
candid, and would not insist too much upon Phrases. For if by Christ real and
substantial Body be meant (as I believe the old Lutherans did mean) the real
and (as they may be called in some For the Ancients themselves used the words,
Nature, Substance, etc. to this sense; as is well observed by the Judicious
Author of the Diallacticon (commended by Lavater in his Historia Sacrament.)
Cum agitur de Sacramentis, mentionem faciunt Patres Naturae and Substantiae,
non (...) sed (...), hoc est, non ut Philosophi naturales loquuntur, sed ut
homines de Divinis rebus disserentes, Gratiae, Virtuti and Efficacitati,
Naturae Substantiaeque nomen impertientes, nimirum Sacramenti natura id
postulante. Diallact.. page 63. Edit. Anno 1557. Est autem virtus corporis
Christi efficax and vivifica, quae per gratiam and Mysticam benedictionem cum
pane and vino conjungitur, and vino conjungitur, and variis nominibus
appeilatur, quum res eadem sit. Ab Augustino, Corpus intelligibile, invisible,
spirituale: Ab Hieronimo, Caro Divina and Spiritualis: Ab Irenaeo, Res
Caelestis: Ab Ambrosio, Esca Spiritualis, and Corpus Divini Spiritus, Ab aliis
aliud simile quippiam. Et hoc multo etiam magis efficit, ut hoc Sacramentum
dignissimum sit very Corporis and Sanguinis nomenclatura, quum non solum
extrinsecus figuram and imaginem ejus prae se ferat, verum etiam intus abditam
and l^^entem naturalem ejusdem corporis proprietatem, hoe est vivificam
virtutem secum trahat, ut ham non inanis figura, aut absentis omnino rei signum
existimari posset, sed ipsum Corpus Domini, Divinum quidem and Spirituale, sed
presens gratia, plenum virtute, potens efficacitate. Ibid. page 56. 57.
sense) the Substantial Virtues and Influences of Christ's Body, I do not see
but all Reformed Churches in the World, mightshake hands and be Friends as to
this matter.

5. This account serves to the clear meaning of several Doctors of our own; who
are wont to say, that Christ is present in the Sacrament, and received in and
by the Sacrament, and that really; but yet Spiritually, Mystically,
Sacramentally, Effectually, Virtually, and the like: all which expressions
(otherwise hard to be understood) are very Intelligible, if we do but take this
notion along with us, that the Virtues and Influences which flow from Christ,
are by the due use of this Sacrament, actually, really and effectually
dispensed.

CHAP. XI.
Other Blessings which we receive by the Sacrament. As the Assistance of the
Holy Spirit. Proved from the Words of Christ, and S. Paul. The Confirmation of
our Faith. An intimate Union with Christ. What that Union is, explained and
Proved. Lastly a Pledge of an Happy Resurrection.

THis then being a Fixed principle, that by means of the Holy Bread and Wine we
do really participate of Christ's Body and Blood, diverse other Blessings do
necessarily follow, which depend upon this, as upon the Prime and Fundamental
Blessing. And, as I have showed already, that pardon of Sin, is the effect of
our feeding upon Christ in a Mystical sense, so I am to show you next, that
there are more Blessings which accrue to us by our Communicating of Christ
after that real and spiritual manner which has been explained now.

And the next is this, that hereby we receive such large supplies and measures
of Christ's Spirit, as are suitable to our necessities. Our condition by nature
is so miserable, that we are not sufficient of our selves, no not to think any
thing (that is good) as of our selves: therefore unless we receive supernatural
aids and assistances from Heaven, it is impossible for us to make our selves
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light: Without me ye
can do nothing, as our Savior told his Disciples, Joh. 15. 5. without the
communications of his Holy Spirit, it is in vain to conceive, that either we can
have our fruit unto Holiness, or reap in the end everlasting life. For this
reason he there compares himself unto a vine, and us unto the branches,
because, as the branches cannot bear fruit of themselves, except they abide in
the Vine; so neither can we, except we abide in Christ. That spiritual
assistance which is derived from Christ unto every particular Christian, is
like that vital Sap which is conveyed from the Root unto every particular Twig:
And by means of his vital Spirit it is, that we thrive, and grow, and bring
forth fruit unto perfection. Hence Christ is called our Life, because he is the
Author of that quickening, Principle whereby we live unto righteousness; and
from Him it is, that the whole Body (of the Church) by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered, and being knit together, increases with the increase of
God, Col. 2. 19. Now this Heavenly assistance, this quickening Principle, this
Divine Nutriment is given to every Soul by the Mysterious and Gracious Energy
of the Spirit; and by the due celebration of the Eucharist, the assistances of
the Spirit are the more plentiful, and his Irrigations are the more abundant; a
dew is then increased into a shower, and every thirsty Communicant is largely
refresht with distillations from above, as the parched ground in Summer is
refresht with Rain. This appears two ways: first, because (as has been proved)
by this Blessed Mystery, we are made partakers of the Nature of Christ: and
consequently it must be granted, that we partake thereby of the Spirit of
Christ. For considering that the fullness of the Deity dwells in him:
considering that he has received the Spirit without measure: and considering
that of his Fullness we receive by this Ordinance according to our capacities
and wants, we must conclude, that we receive of his Spirit, whatever the
Socinians affirm to the contrary. Secondly, S. Paul has put the thing out of
doubt, if we will but observe his meaning in 1 Cor. 12. 13. where he says,
that by one Spirit we are all Baptized into one body, and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit. The Apostles design there is to persuade Christians to
Unity and Love; and he uses this as an argument, because they have all
received one Spirit, first at their Baptism, and afterward at the Lords
Supper; there they all drink of one Spirit, (or as some conceive it should be
read) they are all drenched For the Socinians themselves grant a Redundancy in
that Phrase, (...) idque redundat, utrumque Hebraea Phrasi; Slichtingius in 1
Cor. 12. 13.
with one and the same Spirit ( quasi potionati Spiritu, as S. Jeromes
expression is) by receiving very liberal These Pharses, (...) and (...) are all
one with (...); vide Chrysostom. in Locum. And Clemens Alex. reards it (...), [
Sc. (...)] which cannot favor the fancy of the Socinians, who understand the
word (...) in reference to our Spiritual washing in Baptism: for the (...)
plainly relates to our drinking at the other Sacrament, and to our receiving of
the Spirit by it.
measures of the Spirit at the Sacrament. To drink the Spirit, and to drink
into the Spirit, are Phrases here of the same importance: they signify the
receiving of the Spirit in a very plentiful measure; and S. Paul's expression
does constrain us to believe that we receive the Spirit plentifully by drinking
of the Sacramental Cup.

Indeed this must not be understood so, as if the Holy Spirit were first given
us at the Lords Table: For if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of His, nor is he fit to be a Communicant. For every one ought to use this
Ordinance being well prepared, with a lively Faith toward God, with sincere
Repentance from dead works, and with unfeigned Charity to all Mankind (as shall
be shown hereafter) and these virtues are wrought in us by the Spirit of
Christ, who divides to every man severally as he pleases, and as every one
needs. The meaning therefore is, that by eating and drinking after a worthy
manner great Additions are still made to our former stock. Here is an
Improvement of every Talent of Grace, which was put into our hands before. Here
that Holy seed which was sown in our hearts by Baptism, is nourisht and made
very fruitful by fresh Influences from Heaven. For as the Spirit is given us by
measure, so is it given by degrees too; and every Ordinance of God brings a
portion of the Spirit, if our hearts be but ready, and our bosoms be but open
to receive it. But at this Ordinance men receive a double portion; so that to
him that has much, more is given, and Quotiescunque bibis, remissionem
peccatorum accipis, and inebriaris Spiritu. Sancto Ambros. de Sacram. l. 5. c.
3.
he has more abundantly: and by drinking duly of the sacred Chalice we are
inebriated with the Holy Ghost, as S. Ambrose said (if the Books de Sacramentis
be his.) And if we may have leave to guess at the reasons why our blessed
Savior was pleased to continue the use of bread and wine at this Mystery,
which he himself instituted instead of the Passover, we may conjecture this
reason to have been one, that they might signify that variety and abundance of
Grace, which he gives us by our worthy eating and drinking of these Elements.
For bread and wine are the most principal and most substantial sorts of
nutriment; the one serves to strengthen man's heart, the other to make it glad,
Ps. 104. 15. Now the designation of these two things to this Sacred use
intimates that plentiful Assistance and Recruit which is by this Holy Rite
given unto all, who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity. They have not only so
much as is necessary for their support, but such a portion of the Spirit too as
is productive of cheerfulness and pleasure in the ways of Religion. This was
eminently verified in the case of the Primitive Christians, who had this
Mystery in such great esteem, and were fitted by it for the sharpest
afflictions that could be brought upon them. They had not only the tongues, but
the hearts of Saints, and Religion was not matter of their discourse, but of
their practice. They overcame the World, and were more than Conquerours: their
constancy was as firm as the Rocks; their Prayers went up daily as the Incense;
their Zeal was like the fire upon Gods Altar, that went not out; their Charity
was as active as the Flames, and as large as the World: their Love of Christ
was so vigorous and fervent, that they sang in Prisons, and rejoiced in their
torments and at the very stake; and I cannot so well impute the reason of this;
to any other thing, as to their frequent and religious use of this blessed
Sacrament. I am sure, they themselves believed, that the Holy Ghost did both
Sanctify those things which were to be distributed at the Communion, and did
also enter into the heart of every Faithful Receiver. Hence it was, that they
thought it the greatest punishment that could be inflicted upon them in this
world, to be deprived of the Sacrament; concluding, that they were thereby cut
off from all fellowship with God. Hence it was, that Penitents were wont to beg
the Prayers of good Christians upon their knees at the Church-doors; and were
content to undergo any the severest Penance, that they might have the liberty
to go to the Altar of God again. And hence it was too, that on all occasions,
especially in times of danger or distress, they flocked together in crowds and
throngs to the Holy Table, because this was the most certain, and the most
effectual course they could take, to arm themselves so with the Spirit of God,
that they might persevere in well doing, and endure all their conflicts and
agonies, as it became the Hearty Disciples of a crucified Jesus.

It being clear therefore, that large measures of the Spirit are given by this
Ordinance, this conclusion will serve as a principle to infer another; viz.
that those Divine Graces wherewith our Souls are endued, are hereby increased
and strengthened; and particularly, that our Faith in Christ is very much
Confirmed at, and by this Ordinance. For the Spirit of God is never given to
vain, or to mean purposes; but his office is, by kindly and gracious
operations, to renew men's minds and to bring their hearts still more and more
to such a temper and frame, as is suitable to the Laws of the Gospel. So that
our drinking of the Spirit at the Holy Communion must necessary have this
effect, that those good things are established, which were wrought in us before,
by the Spirits Energy. No^ is this any more, than what Devout Communicants find
to be true by their own experience: their minds are then fixed upon things of
Heaven; their sense of Christ's Love is then strong; their affections to him are
then warm; their hope in him is then lively and comfortable; their Charity to
others is then great; and their whole Soul is full of the most ravishing
Pleasures: so that were men careful, not to stifle or resist the Spirit, but to
keep themselves so well disposed all their time, as they are when they go from
the Lords Table, it would be impossible either for their salvation to be
insecure, or for their minds to be uneasy. And yet Faustus Socinus will by no
means allow our Faith to be at all Confirmed by the use of the Lords Supper. He
looks upon that Holy Rite as a work of our own (as he is pleased to call it) as
an ordinary thing that we do among one another, in Commemoration of the Lords
Death, but not as a Mystery whereby we receive any benefit* any advantage from
God. But though the Heretic be so admired, as a great man of sense and reason,
yet he trifles altogether, and talks Impertinently and Idly upon this, as he
does Sophistically upon the Rest of his own notions. For why does not the
celebration of this Mystery confirm our Faith? Why (says Socinus) the
distribution of the bread and wine cannot do it, because they are mean things,
which testify Nec enim panis ille fractus, and a nobis comestus, vinumque in
poculum infusum, and a nobis epotum oftendunt nobis, aut suadent, vere Christi
Corpus pro nobis fractum fuisse, etc. Socin. de usu S. Caen.
nothing, which show no reasons for our Faith, nor contain any thing that
persuades us to believe, that Christ's Body was Broken, or that his Blood was
shed for us. Now the Heretic and his followers in this argument, do first
mistake the Question: for we do not say, that the bare distribution of the
Elements is the thing which serves to help and strengthen our faith, but that
this is done by the whole action: Now the whole Action contains Prayers and
praises, a rehearsal of the Institution, and a declaration of Christ's Passion,
as well as a division of the Creatures of Bread and Wine. All these things come
under the Notion of the Eucharist, and each of them ministers to the
confirmation of our faith (especially since they all concur in the same Action)
because they were appointed by Christ himself to be done in Commemoration of
his death, and consequently do suppose and argue that he died indeed. 2. So
that Secondly, these men are false and deceitful in this their way of
reasoning, that the Sacrament is no Proof of our Lords Passion. For 1. St. Paul
says plainly, that as often as we eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, we do
show forth the Lords Death, 1 Cor. Nec oftendunt nobis, aut suadent, etc ubi
supr.
11. 26. (which in express terms contradicts the Doctrine of Socinus.) This
is an outward Testimony for my faith to rely up on. 2. The Holy Spirit is given
(as has Nonne ad credendum Evangelio, Spiritus sancti interiore dono opus est?
Non Catech. Sect. 6. cap. 6.
been proved,) with the Bread and Wine; and by his secret operation I am
persuaded to believe the Article of Christ's Passion to be true: That Is an
inward Confirmation of my Faith (though I suppose, the Socinians may not value
that, because they allow not Faith to be the effect of the Spirits operation.)
3. Considering that this Ordinance was instituted by Christ himself as a
memorial of his death, and that he has appointed us the use of it for that
reason and upon that account, this is evidence and proof enough to convince me,
that he suffered and died of a truth. The Divine institution and command,
together with the meaning, End, and Design of it, this is that which we ought
Quid insulsius, quam si quis ita argumentaretur; nos panem istum frangimus and
comedimus, idque ut praedicemus, Christum corpus and Sanguinem suum pro nobis
tradidisse: Igi ur verum est, ita Christum fecisse? Socin. in Append. ad
scriptum de Caena Dom.
particularly and carefully to regard; and then if I argue thus, we eat Bread
and drink Wine (by the Divine appointment and institution) that we may declare,
that Christ gave his Body and blood for us; and therefore it is very true, that
Christ did so; this is no absurd argumentation (as that wicked Impostor had the
confidence to say,) it is rather a very rational and clear way of reasoning;
for why should I believe, that Christ would command me to commemorate that
which is an untruth. It is a plain argument that Christ did dye, because he
has required us to Celebrate this Mystery in memory of his Passion; and
consequently it is true, that the Celebration of this mystery is for the
confirmation of our faith. The meaning and signification of this Mystery is the
thing which we are principally to consider; and to illustrate this matter
briefly by two familiar instances, let us consider that common Phenomenon in
the air which we call the Rainbow: If you ask a Philosopher about it he will
tell you, that it is nothing but a Meteor, the Natural effect of such and such
Natural causes; but the Christian will tell you, that it is a Token of that
promise which God made of old unto Noah, and therefore when we see the Rainbow
we may assuredly believe, that tho the World was once drowned with a Flood it
shall never be destroyed by Waters again. Thus the signification and meaning of
that thing is for the Confirmation of our Faith, though there be not groundse
nough for this persuasion from the Nature of the thing it self. 2. Again; let
us consider that ancient Mystery, the Passover Supper; the eating of a Lamb
with bitter Herbs, to the ignorant Pagan might seem but an Ordinary meal, or
perhaps a silly, because unpleasant Ceremony; but to the Jews it was a Rite of
great signification; because it was a memorial of Gods Mercy to their Fathers,
in delivering them out of Egypt; and therefore God commanded even their
Posterity to keep it with all diligence and solemnity. Now let me ask the
Socinian; was not this memorial thus instituted, thus appointed, sufficient
grounds for all the Jews in afterages to believe; that the History of that
deliverance was true. Nay, are not all the Jews in the World now, by eating of
bitter Herbs only, certified and convinced and confirmed in their Faith
touching the truth of that deliverance? It cannot be denied: but that story was
made undoubtedly credible by that Mystery, because that Mystery was instituted
and appointed by God himself upon that occasion; so that from that rite any man
might conclude; that the matter of Fact to which it did relate, was beyond all
controversy true. Why, this Christian Rite is of the like signification and
use to us, as the Paschal Solemnity was to them. Though to unbelievers and
Heretics it may seem a thing of a very mean Nature, yet considering, the
reason of its institution and designation, it serves very much to comfort the
Hearts and to strengthen the Faith of such as look into it well. For it is the
memorial of our spiritual deliverance by that Holy Lamb of God which took away
the Sins of the World; and because we are commanded by him, who is the way, the
truth, and the Life, to Celebrate this memorial to that End, and under that
Notion, we may be assured, that the thing, whereof it is a memorial, was most
certainly True; we are hereby certified, that Christ our Passover was
Sacrificed for our sins indeed; and so our Faith is Confirmed (by this Mystery)
that with Christ there is Plenteous Redemption for us all, if we will but quit
our bondage, and accept of that deliverance which he has purchased for us by
the effusion of his most sacred blood.

Our Souls being thus established by a well grounded Faith, another invaluable
blessing accrues unto us still: For hereby we are closely, and (if we our
selves do not dissolve the band) inseparably United to the Lover and Redeemer
of our Souls; the same Holy Spirit which strengthens our Faith, making us also
partakers of Christ's Nature, so that we dwell in him, and he in us; we are one
with him, and he with us, Exhortat* before the Communion.
as our Church teaches. I confess this is an abstruce speculation, and that
which many Divines have labored hard to open to our understanding, though all
of them, have not labored with equal success. Some call it a personal and
Mystical Union that is between Christ, and every true Believer; and in some
sense they call it rightly so, for this personal Union (as some fanciful Men
talk of it) is such a Mystical business indeed, that it is an unaccountable and
unintelligible Notion. Others calls it (and with more Reason and clearness) a
Moral and political Union; and I wish that some in this Age were not so peevish
as to be angry at every word that comes not out of their own Mint, nor clinks
according to their own fancy; but would be so charitable and Candid, as to give
one another grains of allowance, considering the unavoidable weaknesses of our
Nature, for many times it is hard for us to Conceive of things rightly, and
sometimes it is much harder for us to express and utter our Conceptions. Now for
the due understanding of this matter, I conceive that there is a fourfold
Union, which relates most to our present business. 1. Such an Union as is
between the Foundation of a Fabric, and the superstructure, which are made one
House by being fastened together with the same pins and Cement. 2. Such as is
between Husband and Wife, who become one Flesh, by being knit together by the
same consent and Love. 3. Such as is between a King and his Subjects, who
become one Society by being linked together by the same Laws. 4. Such as is
between a root and the boughs, which become one Tree by being nourisht with the
same moisture; and between the head and the Members, which are made one Body by
being animated with the same Soul. Now our Union unto Christ bears a
Resemblance and similitude with all these (though it be above them all) and it
increases in degrees according as we grow more and more perfect. Then are we
one with Christ, when we heartily believe his Doctrines, when we love him, and
set our affections upon him, when we submit to his Government, and obey his
Laws, when we put our selves out of our own power, and resign up our selves to
his command, and when our own wills are entirely Subject and Conformable to
his. This is that Moral Union, whereby we are fastened to him as to the
Foundation and corner Stone of his Church; whereby we are Joined to him, as to
the Foundation and corner Stone of his Church; whereby we are Joined to him, as
to the Bridegroom of our souls, and whereby we are Related to him, as to our
Sovereign Head and Lord. Upon no other Terms but these, will he own us to be
his; and when men talk after that wild and Iewd rate, as if Christ were all
theirs, though they be of an Unchristian Temper, and live in open Disobedience
to the Laws of Christianity, it is the same thing as if they should say, that
such may be the Sons of God, as are not led by the Spirit of God; which is
contrary to what S. Paul teaches us, Romans 8. 14.

But yet there seems to be besides this Moral Union, a Closer Band between
Christ and his Church, and that which is the efficient Cause of our abundant
Love and Obedience to him: and this I call (as some of the Ancients did) an
Union of Nature. For as our Humane Nature dwells in Christ by means of that
Hypostatical Union of our Flesh in his Person; so does Christ's Divine Nature
dwell in Us, by means of a Mystical Union of his Spirit with our Souls. The
same Spirit which is in him, is Communicated to Us also; and by Virtue of that
Communication we are transformed into his Image, his Nature is Graffed in Ours,
so that we are of a New Constitution and mould; and every Lively Member of his
Church, by Participating of his Spirit, is of the same mind with him, of the
same Temper, frame and Disposition, that is, Holy, Humble, Heavenly-minded,
Just, Pure, Good, Charitable, Compassionate, Kind and Obedient, as he himself
was. To do men of Learning right, they who dispute about Christ's being a
Political Head, do not at all Deny, but plainly Own his being an Influential
Head too. Nor can any thing be more clear, then that we derive Influences from
him, as every member Dr. Sherlocks defense of his Book against Owen, page 505.
in ones Body deriveth Influences from the Head; so that we are animated with
the Life of Christ; there is (as it were) one and the same Soul in Him, and in
his Church; for he that is joined unto the Lord, is One Spirit, 1. Cor. 6. 17.
I am the S. Aug. in loc.
Vine, thy are the Branches, says our Savior, Jo. 15. 5. The Vine and the
Branches are of One and the same Nature: the same Vital Humor which is in the
Root, is Transmited and Communicated to every living Twig: and for that reason
did our Savior use that Similitude, to show that as the Root does Convey its
Quality to the Boughs, so does the Son of God give Cyril. Alex. in Joan. l. 10.
c. 13.
to his Saints an affinity of his Own and his Fathers Nature, by giving them
his Spirit; so that by the participation of his Spirit, (whereby we are
conjoined unto him) we Communicate of his Nature. To the same purpose are those
words, Jo. 17. 21. where the Holy Jesus prayed, that his Disciples might be
One; that as the Father is in him, and he in the Father, so his Disciples might
be One in (or, with) them. Which words do import something more than an Unity
of Affection and Will: for the Son is One with the Father and the Father One
with the Son, by being Both of the same Divine Essence: so that we may conceive
the full meaning of that Prayer to be, that all Christians might be One, not
only with themselves by the Unity of Faith and Love, and with God by Consent
and Agreement of Will; but that they might be One with the Son and the Father,
by bearing in them the Divine Image, by a likeness, Similitude, and Resemblance
of Nature, though they cannot be One by Identity of Substance. Thus, I am sure,
some of the Ancients understood this, and the other place of Scripture, where
Christ is called a Vine, And the Faith of the Old Catholic Church was this,
that by the efficacious Energy of Gods Spirit some Rays of his Divinity are
conveyed into us, whereby we are made partakers of the Divine Nature; and that
this Participation of Nature is the closest Ligament, S. Ignatius calls it
(...); Ep. ad Ephesians. page 22.
Bandage, and Instrument of Union between Us and our Redeemer. This will
evidently appear by this one Argument: Some Heretics did of old (as the the
Socinians do now) Deny the Divinity of our Savior: and when they were put hard
to it by the Catholic Doctors, who argued against them, from those words of
Christ himself, I and my Father are One, and from other places of the like
importance, the Heretics returned this answer, that Christ is One with the
Father, by Id quod ait, Ego and Pater unum sumus, tentant [Haeretici] ad
unanimitatis refer consensum, ut voluntatis in his Unit as sit, non naturae:
id est, ut non per id quod idem Sunt, sed per id quod idem volunt, unum sunt.
Hilar nitate lib. 8. page 119. Ed. Par.
Unity of Love, and by agreement of Will, but not by Identity of Essence. But
this would not by any means Satisfy the Catholics, who proved an Unity of
Nature between Christ and his Father, by showing that Unity of Nature which is
between Christ and Us, in some Cvril. Alex. in Joan. lib. 10. c. 13.
measure and Degree. We do not deny (says S. Cyril) but that we are joined, to
Christ by a True Faith, and Sincere Love: but that there is no Union at all
between him and Us in respect of his Flesh, that (says he) we do utterly Deny:
For Christ is in Us by the Communication of his Nature. And again, besides the
Unity of Consent and Will, Id lib. 11. c. 26.
there is, says he, a Natural Union, whereby we are Tied unto God: And again;
we are made the Sons of God, and Heavenly men, being made one with Christ by
the participation of the Divine Nature; and so we are One, not only by
Affection and Consent, but one also by the Communion of his Holy Flesh, and one
by the Participation of One Holy Spirit. S. Cyril was very prolix and very
Positive and Dogmatical upon this point; and so was S. Hilary before him; for
he did argue the same way, and did plainly assert a Natural Eos nunc qui inter
patrem and filium voluntatis ingerant unitatem, interrogo, utrumne per naturae
veritatem body Christus in nobis sit, an per concordiam voluntatis? Si enim
vere verbum caro factum est, and nos vere verbum carnem cibo Dominico sumimus,
quomodo non naturaliter manner in nobis existimandus est, qui and naturam
carnis nostrae jam insepar abilem sibi homo natus assumpsit, and naturam carnis
suae ad naturam aternitatis sub Sacramento nobis communicanda carnis admiscuit?
Hilar. de Trin. lib. 8. Haec vitae nostrae causa est, quod in nobis carnablibus
manentem per carnem Christum habemus; victuris nobis per euin ea condition qua
vivit ille per patrem. Si ergo nos naturaliter secunduim carnem per eum
vivimus, id est, naturam carnis suae adepti; quomodo non naturaliter secundum
spiritum in se patrem habeat, cum vivat ipse per Patrem? Id. ibid.
Unity between Christ and Us; meaning such an Union as is wrought by the
Communion of his Nature. This is (says he) the cause of our Life, that we have
Christ abiding in us according to his Flesh (that is, his Spiritual Flesh) and
we live by him, as he himself lives by the Father, etc. Now Christ lives by
his Father through the Communication of his Divine Substance, and we live by
Christ through the Communication of his Holy Nature. By the Communication of
Christ's Nature to us, is meant the Communinication of the Divine Virtues of his
Flesh, which are, like sparks, conveyed into Our nature, and by means of this
Communication of Christ's Virtues, that Union is wrought between him Us, which
S. Hillary and S. Cyril call a Natural Union. Sensus est, Christum in nobis
esse, non per corporis sui Substantiam, sed per Efficaciam carnis suae, quam in
Eulogia Mystica participamus, unde resultat cum eo inter nos vera Unitas. Quis
enim negare posset aut participationem efficaciae earnis ejus veram ac Realem
esse, aut ex ejusmodi participatione veram and Realem unitatem inter illum and
nos consurgere? Albertinus de Sacr. Euchar. lib. 2. page 765.


The Notion of our Union with Christ being thus explained, it is easy to prove
now, that this strict and most blessed Union is effected by a due use of this
Holy Sacrament. For since we do hereby participate of his Blessed Body and
Blood, and are endued with a plentiful measure of his Spirit, it necessarily
and plainly follows, that we receive such a portion of his Nature, as is
suitable to our Capacities; and so, that we are One with him, because we
receive of His, and are enlivened and quickened by the same Spirit which
dwells in him, and are of one and the same Nature with him. But besides, the
words of Christ himself are plain, Jo. 6. 56. He that eats my Flesh, and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in Him. Perhaps the words are to be
understood, as if they were to be read Thus, as he dwells in me, so I dwell
in him; meaning, that as our Nature was United to his, when he became
Incarnate, so his Nature is United to Ours, when we eat his Flesh and drink his
Blood. And this we infallibly do, when we worthily celebrate this Holy Mystery.
Though in some cases men may eat his Flesh and drink his Blood Spiritually and
by faith alone, without the Sacrament; yet we do it much more, and more
effectually by the Sacrament: and consequently we must be supposed to be more
nearly United to him by means of this Ordinance, then by any other means
whatsoever. Hence it was (as some of the Ancients tell us) that Christ
appointed the use of such Creatures as are of a Nourishing faculty (for so
Bread and Sicut cibus materialis forinsecus nutrit corpus and vegetat, ita
etiam verbum Dei intus animam nutrit and roborat, etc. Raban. de Sermon.
proprietate, lib. 5. cap. 11.
Wine are) to show, that as there is a Natural Incorporation of our nourishment
into our Flesh, so there is a Spiritual Incorporation (if I may so speak) of
Christ into our souls. And hence it is that others of them compare the Spirit
of Christ, which is received by the Sacrament, to Leaven; representing to us by
that Similitude, that there is such a Diffusion Cyril Alex. in Joan. l. 4. cap.
17.
of Spiritual Virtue throughout the soul, as there is of ferment, that
leaveneth the whole Lump into which it is cast. And Id. lib. 10. c. 13.
hence it is, that S. Cyril also compares the Mixture of Christ's Nature with
Ours, to the Mixture of wax with wax, when several pieces of wax are melted and
incorporated together. All these Notions and Similitudes (and diverse more such,
which we meet with in the writings of the Ancients) do show, that by eating
Christ's Flesh, and drinking his Blood (especially at and by the Sacrament) we
do so participate of his Spirit, of his Virtues, Influences, and Divine Nature,
as that Christ and we do become One. Quemadmodum intelligit ( Cyrillus Glaphyr.
in Genes. lib. 7.) Christum se in animas immittere per Gratiam and virtutem
Spiritus, sic etiam sensus ipsius est, eum corpora ingredi per virtutem
corporis sui Eucharistiae communicatam? nec ulterius urgendae sunt
comparationes quas affert mixtionis, scentillae ignis, caerae and fermenti.
Albertinus ubi supr. page 761.


And thence follows the last inestimable blessing, that I shall mention (a
Blessing that we carry with us to the very Grave) viz. an Assurance and Pledge
of a Glorious Resurrection. It is appointed unto man once to dye, Heb. 9. 27.
This Sentence having past upon our Parents in Paradise, Nature it self does now
Execute it upon their Posterity. For as none can bring a clean thing out of an
Unclean, so none can bring an Incorruptible thing out of a Mortal. We dye of
course; Christ that took on him the burden of our sins, did not take off this
weight from us: though he delivered us from all Necessity of tumbling into
Hell, yet there are wise and great Reasons for which he did not think it fit
for him to keep us from falling into the Grave. But yet, that we may dye in
Hope, in hope of a joyful Resurrection (as corn is committed to the earth in
hope of a good Harvest) Christ does by this Sacrament take Seizure of our
Bodies, by communicating to us his Own, and so uniting us to himself, that he
may change our vile Body, and make it like unto his own Glorious Body,
according to the mighty Energy, whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself, Phil. 3. 13.

Hence it is that the Church in her wisdom has thought it convenient, that
men should often receive this Sacrament especially in times of danger,
distress, and Sickness; to the end, that they may make their peace with God,
and with their own Consciences, and may go out of this world with firm and well
grounded hopes both of a plenary Absolution, and of an Happy Resurrection. For
this Sacrament is an Earnest to assure all worthy Communicants, that these very
Bodies of theirs, in which Infirmities and death do now Lodge, shall be raised
again out of the dust being nourisht, as it were, out of the veins of our
Redeemer. These Elements are the Symbols of our Resurrection, the Medicine of
Immortality, the Antitode that keeps us from Final Corruption, the -- (...).
Ignat. Ep ad Ephesians. (...) Athanal
Conservatory for a Resurrection to Eternal Life.

That which has been spoken already does make this evident sufficiently. 1.
For, first, it is sure, that by the Sacrament we receive the Spirit of Christ;
and since the same Spirit is communicated to Us, that dwells in Him, it must
necessarily follow, that it shall have the same power over our Flesh, which it
had over His, to raise it up again at the day appointed. Thus S. Paul himself
argues, Romans 8. 11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead
dwells in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken
your mortal bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you. 2. Secondly, seeing,
the Holy Communion is an instrument of Uniting even our Bodies unto him, who is
the Head over all, so that the members of our Bodies are the very members of
Christ, and we become, as it were, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh,
less cannot follow then that our Bodies shall be made Immortal, as His is; it
being impossible that any thing which is His, should perish everlastingly. To
effect such an Union as is between Christ and his Church, it is not necessary,
nor possible, that there should be a confusion or conjunction of bodily
Substances: It suffices that there is a Contact of Spiritual Virtue from the
Flesh of Christ. Now this Virtue goes along with the Sacrament, and is received
by every faithful Communicant, so that it does affect even his Body,
Sanctifying and Appropriating it to the Savior of our Souls and Bodies both,
and making our whole man His. And this Union cannot in any wise be dissolved by
Death: because Death is only a Separation of the Soul from the Body, so that
for that time the one loses all vital activity from the other; but neither of
them does, or can lose its Title to Christ's Protection; the Body continues
still related unto its Head, as in time of its Life, and the Union between
Christ and it remains entire, and so its Right to a glorious Resurrection
through Christ, is indefeisable. In this respect our Condition is very like to
the Condition of the Son of God, when he himself was in a state of Death. He
dyed, as we do (though to purposes infinitely Great, and with torments
unspeakably Excessive) his Spirit was actually severed from his Flesh, when he
gave up the Ghost. Nevertheless, though his Flesh had no manner of vitality
from his Humane Soul, being really Separated from it, yet it was not separated
from the Deity, but remained perfectly United to it by a Substantial
Conjunction, and by reason of that Conjunction it was restored to life after so
many hours. In like manner when we give up the Ghost, the Body parts with the
Soul, and during this state has no manner of sensation or Motion, having lost
the Natural Principle of Both: but yet it is not separated from Christ though
it Corrupts in the Grave, while its Mate is in the enjoyment of Bliss, yet it
is still United to its Lord by a Mystical Conjunction; and by reason of that
Union it shall be reunited to the soul in Gods good time, that Both may have
their Partnership in the fruition of an endless Life. 3. This consideration,
were it duly weighed, would be of very great Use and Comfort to good men, when
they are going out of this world. But there is besides a third thing to be
considered; viz. that as we are united to Christ, so Christ's Nature is also
communicated to Us by means of this Sacrament, which does further conclude an
Assurance of an Happy Resurrection. This Nature thus communicated, is as it
were a Spark of the Divine Nature, which gives the Body a Disposition and
Aptitude to Rise again; like that Vital Principle in wheat, that makes it Apt
to spring out of the earth again, when it is committed to the ground, though it
has been laid up a long time in the Granary. S. Cyril calls Christ's -- (...).
Cyril: where (...) is a living Body (and so corpus vitae in some of the
Latins) as (...) is a Glorious Body, Phil. 3. 21.
Living Body (meaning the Virtue of it, or his Spiritual Body, the Quickening
Seed that is in us. For Christ, by Divine Influences from his body, gives
vitality to our, mortal Bodies; by that vivifick Virtue, which is communicated
by the Bread, it enters into the bodies of the Faithful (though it be
Substantially absent.) And hence he argues, that if the dead in our Saviors
time were raised to Life only by being touched with his Holy Body ( out of
which there went Virtue) certainly the vital (...); etc. Cyril in Joan. lib. 4.
cap. 14.
Blessing must be much more abundant, which we receive who even Taste and
Communicate of it, because it transforms Communicants into its own Blessed
Condition, that is, into Immortality. In like manner Ireneus proved the
Certainty of a Resurrection, from the Virtue and efficacy of this Sacrament;
supposing it a thing very Unreasonable to deny that Flesh to be capable of
Incorruption, which is nourished with This is plainly the meaning and force of
those words of Irenaeus, Quomodo dicunt (Haeretici) carnem in corruptionem
[scilicet finalem] devenire, and non percipere vitam, quae a corpore Domini and
sanguine alitur? Quemadmodum qui est e terra panis, percipiens invocationem
Dei, jam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia, ex duabus rebas constans,
terrena and caelisti, sic and corpora nostra percipientia Eucharistiam, jam non
sunt corruptibilia, spem Resurrectionis habentia. Adv. Haeres lib. 4. cap. 34.
Quando mixtus calix and fractus panis percipit verbum Dei, fit Eucharistia
sanguinis and corporis Christi, ex quibus augetur and consistit carnis nostrae
substantia; quomodo negant carnem capacem esse donationis Dei (quae est vita
aeterna) quae sanguine and corpore Christi nutritur, and membrum ejus est? Id.
lib. 5. cap. 2.
that Bread which carries with it the vital Virtues of the Flesh of our Lord;
because those Virtues turn to the advantage of that Body as well as of the
soul, by reason that our Flesh (being United to the Flesh of Christ by the
Spirit) is by the Eucharist Prepared and Disposed for, and made capable of the
gift of God, which is eternal Life.

But (to conclude this point) besides these arguments drawn from the Reason of
the thing it self, and from the sense and suffrage of Antiquity, our Saviors
own words are abundantly demonstrative of this matter, in S. Jo. 6. The bread
of God is be, with comes down from heaven, and gives Life unto the world: I
am that bread of Life. -- Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are
dead: this is the bread which comes down from Heaven, that a man may eat
thereof and not dye (for ever.) I am the Living bread which came down from
heaven; if any man eat of this bread, he shall Live for ever; and the bread
that I will give, is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the world. --
Who so eats my Flesh and drinks my blood has eternal Life, and I will
raise him up at the last day; for my Flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed. -- As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father;
so he that eats me, even he shall live by me.

These words are so plain, that they need no Explication, if by eating the
Bread, the Meat, the Flesh here spoken of we understand (not of Believing the
Doctrines of Christianity, as some most Absurdly imagine; nor of eating the
very Substance of Christ's Body, as others most Ridiculously conceive; but) our
partaking and communicating of the Virtues of his Flesh and Blood; which is the
genuine and Catholic construction. Now by a right use of this Holy Sacrament
we do this effectually; and consequently may be assured, that as we are blessed
with the Spirit, and Life, and Communion of Christ in this world, by so doing;
so we have an undoubted Title to a Life of Glory and Immortality in the next.

CHAP. XII.
Two Practical Conclusions from the Whole Discourse.

I Have now done with the Speculative or Doctrinal part of this Subject, having
after a plain, Didactical manner delivered and asserted the true Catholic
Faith concerning this Sacrament: and from the consideration of those blessings
which it brings with it, I shall briefly draw these following Inferences, and
so conclude the whole matter.

1. That we are not to rate this Mystery according to its Face and Outward
Appearance, nor judge of its efficacy and Dignity by the Elements. For though
our Senses do infallibly assure us, that it is Bread and Wine, yet our Faith
ought to assure us too, that it is not Common bread or Bare Wine, but something
more. By the word and Prayer, and by the Secret (but effectual) operation of
the Holy Ghost, there is, besides the Natural and true Substance of the
materials, an Addition of Grace, which is chrefly und principally to be
considered by us. And this is that Change of the Elements, which the Catholic
Church ever did believe; meaning not a change of their Nature, but of their
Use, of their Quality, of their Condition. As when we say, such a man is turned
a Christian; or such a Christian is turned a Minister; or such a Fabric is
turned into a Church; our meaning is not, that there is a Substantial, but an
Accidental So Philo says of Cajus Caesar, when he changed the Temple of God at
Jerusalem, into a Temple bearing his own Name, (...); Philo. lib. de legatione
noted by Eusebius Eccles. Hist. 2. cap. 6.
mutation, an alternation of the state Condition and Quality of the man, or the
thing, but not of the Substance, or Nature, for the Convert is a man still, but
something more, that is, a Servant of Christ; and the Minister is a Christian
man still, but something more, that is, an Ambassador of the Gospel; and the
Fabric is an House still, but something more, that is, the House of God. In
like manner, when St. Chrysostom and the rest of the Ancients (...): Chrysostom.
in Prodit. Judae Tom. 5. p. 559.
say, that upon repeating the words of Institution, the things which lie before
us on the Holy Table are Changed, the meaning clearly is, not that their Nature
or Substance is Destroyed, but that the Condition of them is altered, so that
they are Bread and Wine still, but something more, that is, they are now become
Sacraments; the vehicles of Grace, the means and Instruments, whereby the
Spiritual Body and Blood of Christ are conveyed and communicated to us.

Upon this account, when we go to the Holy Communion, we should think we go (as
indeed we do) to an Ordinance of the greatest Consideration and Consequence: we
should value it highly for that Divine stamp which the Holy Jesus has set upon
it: we should prize it according to the Purport and Ends for which it was first
instituted: and we should regard not so much the things themselves which we eat
and drink, as the Institution of the thing, together with the Power and
Blessing of God which does attend it. Men that do not look into the Inside of
this heavenly Mystery, but judge according to Appearance, are apt to entertain
mean and low thoughts of it, because they see none but a weak and Sinful man
that Ministers, and nothing but the Common Creatures of Bread and Wine that
are distributed. But when we present our selves before the Lords Table, we
should Lift up our Hearts, and Raise our Thoughts above those things which are
obvious to the Sense; we should bear in our Hence that very Ancient Admonition,
extant in S. Cyprian (de Orat. Dom.) and in diverse Ancient Liturgies, Sursum
corda, Lift up your hearts.
minds the Truth, the Goodness, and the Power of God; and consider, that it is
the Usual method of his Providence, to bring the Greatest Ends about, by the
use of such means, as to our thinking are the most Unlikely and incompetent for
those purposes. Thus it was as to his choice of Persons in the beginning of
Christianity: he employed such men for the great work of the Ministry, as in
the esteem of the world were of the least and Meanest consideration; One, a
Publican; another, a Tent-maker; many, that were Fishermen; few, that were
Learned; none, that were Noble, or that bore a great Figure in the world; and
yet by these weak, these contemptible Instruments (I mean, weak in themselves,
and Contemptible in the account of others; by these instruments) were
Philosophers, Princes, Kingdoms, and infinite numbers of Jews and Idolaters
Captivated and brought in obedience to the Faith of the Son of God: we have
this Treasure (of the Gospel) in Earthen vessels that the Excellency of the
Power may be of God and not of Us, says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 4. 7. Thus it
has been Gods method too, as to his choice of things: He has been wont to use
the most Ordinary, the most Contemptible means to effect his purposes of Grace
and Mercy; that he might show the greatness of his own Power, and convince the
world, that nothing is so mean, but that it shall be serviceable and effective
of Noble ends, as long as it is the hand of an Almighty Agent. What was
Circumcision, that it should be the Seal of Abraham's Righteousness, and a sure
Token of Gods Covenant with him and his whole Issue? what was the noise of a
few Rams-horns, that it should tumble down the walls of Jericho? or a Cake of
barley bread, that it should be seen to overturn the Tents of the Midianites? or
a Brazen Serpent, that the sight of it should cure the wounds of the
Israelites? or a little lump of Figs, that it should presently heal Hezekiah?
what was a manger, that it should be the Cradle of the Lord of Glory? or a
Cross, that it should be the Altar for the great Propitiatory Sacrifice to be
offered up upon it? what was St. Peter's Shadow, that it should restore the
sick, and cast Unclean Spirits out of their Holds and Possessions? nay, what is
a little Water, that it should Cleanse and Sanctify all our souls and make
Baptized persons the Vessels of Election? And yet S. Paul calls it, the Washing
of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. And the operations of Christ's Spirit are so
effectual by Baptism, that to every Faithful man it becomes the instrument of
Salvation. And why should it be thought a thing incredible, that God should
bless the use of the Bread and Wine, or make it productive of those Spiritual
Benefits, which have been aforementioned? Our Faith ought not to stumble at
this: we should not look upon the Elements, but upon the Institution, not take
an estimate of this Ordinance by the Creatures we receive, but by the Divine
Benediction that comes down upon them. For when Christ Blessed the Bread and
the Cup, and commanded the use of them, he intended that this Mystery should
ever be successful and effectual to every Soul that should be rightly Disposed.
It Is S. Chrysostoms observation, S. Chrysostom. ubi. Supr.
that when God blessed his Creatures in the beginning, and commanded them to be
Fruitful and Multiply, that word, though it was given so long ago, yet it is
powerful still, and will be powerful to the worlds end: and by Virtue thereof
the least grain of mustard seed grows up to a great plant. In like manner
that Blessing wherewith the Son of God blessed the bread and Wine at the
Institution of this Solemnity, cease not now, but is as effectual as ever; so
that they are still the Instruments of Our growth in Grace, as they were to the
Disciples in the beginning: not indeed by any Natural Causality that is in
them, but by the good Pleasure and Blessing of God, and by the Operation of the
Holy Ghost. For the workings of the Spirit, though they be Mysterious and
Secret, yet are they certain and True, and at this Heavenly Solemnity the work
of the Spirit is done. So that we must draw our minds off from the things which
are below, which are before us, which we see and taste of, and Fix our thoughts
upon the Spiritual Body and Blood of Christ which are, as it were, wrapped up
in them; and as the Ancients were wont to admonish, we should prepare, not so
much the Mouth, as the Heart. And this is the true reason of those Rhetorical
Expressions of some of the Fathers (S. Chrysostomes especially;) where they
seem to speak as if it were not Bread and Wine, but something of a more Noble
and Excellent nature, that we Communicate of. Such forms of speech were not
Pure Negatives, but Negatives by Comparison (as has been admirably well proved
and explained by the Learned Archbishop Cranmer in several the like instances
both in the old and New Testament.) It is not Bread and Wine, that is, it is
not so much the Bread and Wine, as the Body and Blood of Christ which is to be
considered. The Elements are nothing at all in Comparison of that which they do
Represent, Exhibit, and bring to us. And the design Defense page 36.
of those Fathers was, to draw our minds upwards to Heaven; that we should not
regard so much the Bread, the Wine, the Priest, and the Natural Body of Christ,
as we should consider his Divinity and Holy Spirit, given unto us to our
Eternal salvation: That we should not fix our thoughts and minds upon the
things themselves before us, but lift up our hearts higher, unto Christ's Spirit
and Divinity, without which his Body avails not; as he said himself, it is
the Spirit that gives life; the Flesh profits nothing. The Archbishop is
very copious upon this; and I shall transcribe his words the rather, because
the passage is very useful, and the Book is not very common. This form of
speech (says he) is Negatives by compason.
commonly used, not only in the Scripture, and among all good Authors, but also
in all manner of Languages. For when two things be compared together, in the
extolling of the more excellent, or abasing of the more vile, is many times
used a Negative by comparison, which nevertheless is no pure Negative, but only
in the respect of the more excellent, or the more base. As by example. When the
people rejecting the Prophet 1 Reg. 8.
Samuel, desired to have a King, almighty God said to Samuel: They have not
rejected thee, but me. Not meaning by this Negative absolutely, that they had
not rejected Samuel (in whose place they desired to have a King) but by that
one Negative, by comparison he understood two affirmatives, that is to say,
that they had rejected Samuel, and not him alone, but also that they had
chiefly rejected God. And when the Prophet David Psalm. 22.
said in the person of Christ, I am a Worm, and not a Man. By this Negative he
denied not utterly, that Christ was a man, but (the more vehemently to express
the great humiliation of Christ) he said, that he was not abased only to the
Nature of Man, but was brought so low, that he might rather be called a Worm,
than a man. This manner of speech was familiar and usual to St. Paul, as when
he said: It is Romans 7.
not I that do it, but it is the sin that dwells in me. And in an other place
he says: Christ sent me not to baptize, but 1. Cor. 1.
to preach the Gospel. And again he says: My speech and preaching, was not in
words 1 Cor. 1.
of man's persuasion, but in manifest declaration of the Spirit and power. And
he says also: Neither he that grafteth, nor he 1 Cor. 3.
that waters, is any thing, but God that gives the increase. And he says
moreover. It is not I that live, but Christ lives Gal. 2.
within me. And God forbid that I should Gal. 6.
rejoice in any thing, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesu Christ. And further,
we do not Ephe. 6.
wrestle against flesh and blood, but against he Spirits of Darkness. In all
these sentences and many other like; although they be Negatives, nevertheless
St. Paul meant not clearly to deny, that he did that evil whereof he spoke, or
utterly to say, that he was not sent to Baptize, (who indeed did Baptize at
certain times, and was sent to do all things that pertained to salvation) or
that in his office of setting forth Gods word, he used no witty persuasions,
(which indeed he used most discreetly) or that the grafter and waterer be
nothing, (which be Gods Creatures, made to his similitude, and without whose
work there should be no increase) or to say, that he was not alive, (who both
lived, and ran through all Countries, to set forth Gods Glory) or clearly to
affirm, that he gloried and rejoiced in no other thing than in Christ's Cross;
(who rejoiced with all men that were in joy, and sorrowed with all that were in
sorrow) or to deny utterly, that we wrestle against flesh and blood, (which
cease not daily to wrestle and War against our Enemies, the world, the flesh
and the Devil.) In all these sentences St. Paul (as I said) meant not clearly
to deny these things, which undoubtedly were all true, but he meant, that in
comparison of other greater things, these smaller were not much to be esteemed,
but that the greater things, were the chief things to be considered. As that
sin committed by his infirmity, was rather to be imputed to original sin, or
corruption of Nature, which lay lurking within him, than to his own will and
consent. And that although he was sent to Baptize, yet he was chiefly sent to
preach Gods word. And that although he used wise and discreet persuasions
therein, yet the success thereof came principally of the power of God, and of
the working of the Holy Spirit. And that although the Grafter and Waterer of
the Garden be some things, and do not a little in their Offices, yet it is God
chiefly; that gives the increase. And that although he lived in this world,
yet his chief life, concerning God* was by Christ, whom he had living within
him. And that although he gloried in many other things, yea in his own
infirmities, yet his greatest joy, was in the Redemption by the Cross of
Christ. And that although our spirit daily fights against our flesh, yet our
chief and principal fight is against our ghostly enemies, the subtle and
puissant wicked Spirits and Devils. The same manner of speech, used also St.
Peter in his first Epistle, saying, that the apparel Pet. 3.
of Women should not be outwardly with broidred Hair, and setting on of Gold,
nor in putting on of gorgious apparel, but that the inward man of the heart,
should be without corruption. In which manner of speech, he intended not
utterly to forbid all broidering of Hair, all gold and costly apparel, to all
Women. (For every one must be apparelled according to their condition, state
and degree) but he meant hereby clearly to condemn all pride and excess in
apparel, and to move all Women that they should study to deck their Souls
inwardly with all virtues, and not to be curious, outwardly to deck and adorn
their bodies with sumptuous apparel. And our Savior Christ himself was full of
such manner of speeches. Gather not Mat. 6.
unto you (says he) treasure upon Earth. willing us thereby, rather to set our
minds upon Heavenly treasure, which ever endures, than upon Earthly treasure
which by many sundry occasions perishes, and is taken away from us. And yet
worldly treasure must needs be had, and possessed of some men, as the person,
time, and occasion does serve. Likewise Mat. 10.
he said: When you be brought before Kings and Princes, think not what and how
you shall answer. Not willing us by this Negative, that we should negligently
and unadvisedly answer we care not what; but that we should depend of our
Heavenly Father, trusting that by his Holy Spirit, he will sufficiently
instruct us of answer, rather than to trust of any answer to be devised by our
Wit and study. And in the same manner he spoke, when he said: It is not you
that speak, but it is the Spirit Mat. 10.
of God that speaks within you. For the Spirit of God is he, that principally
puts godly words into our mouths, and yet nevertheless we do speak according
to his moving. And to be short, in all these sentences following, that is to
say: Call no Man your Father upon Earth: Let Mat. 23.
no Man call you Lord or Master: Fear not Mat. 23.
them that kill the Body. I came not to send Mat. 10.
peace upon Earth. It is not in me to set Mat. 10.
you at my right hand or left hand. You shall Mat. 20.
not worship the Father neither in this Mount Joh. 4.
nor in Jerusalem. I take no witness at no Joan. 5.
Man. My Doctrine is not mine. I seek John. 7.
not mine. I seek not my glory. In all John. 8.
these Negatives, our Savior Christ spoke not precisely and utterly to deny
all the foresaid things, but in comparison of them to prefer other things, as
to prefer our Father and Lord in Heaven, above any worldly Father, Lord or
Master in Earth, and his fear above the fear of any Creature, and his word and
Gospel above all worldly peace. Also to prefer spiritual and inward honoring
of God in pure heart and mind, above local, corporal and outward honor, and
that Christ preferred his Fathers glory above his own. Now forasmuch as I have
declared at length, the Nature and kind of these Negative speeches, (which be
no pure Negatives, but by comparison) it is easy hereby, to make answer to St.
John Chrysostom, who used this phrase of speech most of any Author. For his
meaning in his foresaid homily, was not that in the Celebration of the Lords
Supper is neither Bread nor Wine, neither Priest nor the Body of Chist, (which
the Papists themselves must needs confess) but his intent was, to draw our
minds upwards to Heaven, that we should not consider so much the Bread, Wine,
Priest, and Body of Christ, as we should consider his Divinity and Holy Spirit,
given unto us to our eternal Salvation. And therefore in the same place he
uses so many times these words, think and think not. Willing us by those
words, that we should not fix our thoughts and minds up the bread, Wine,
Priest, nor Christ's body: But to lift up our hearts higher unto his Spirit and
Divinity, without the which his Body avails nothing, as he said himself. It
is the spirit that gives life, the Flesh avails Joan. 6.
nothing. Thus far he. Therefore when you address your selves to the Table of
the great God, you should be full of lofty and Divine apprehensions of that
hidden Treasure of Celestial Grace and Virtue, which is then to be tendered unto
you, how mean soever the Instruments of that Grace are in their own Nature. And
accordingly you should go with those Holy dispositions and affections, with
that Reverence, dread, and awe of God, but withal with that forwardness and
swiftness of Devotion, and with those transports of pleasure and joy, as if you
were now going to the very gate of Heaven. Men should be afraid to use this
important and venerable Ordinance with respect to secular and base ends, only
to satisfy the Laws of the Realm, to save their Places, their Reputation,
their mammon. It is a most fearful act of presumption, a deadly and horrid
profanation, an argument of Atheistical or debaucht minds, when men dare
prostitute a thing of such a sacred Nature to their carnal Lusts, and take the
Viands of Eternity into their hands and mouths, even when the Devil is in their
hearts. When you prepare for this solemn occasion, be in good earnest with God
and with your own Souls, be as considerate and serious as if you were going to
die, be as upright in heart as if you were to take the next step to judgment.
When you see the Holy Table spread, call home your thoughts, let your minds be
as composed, and your Meditations be as full of Reverence, as if you saw a
vision, and beheld the food of Angels let down from Heaven in a Sheet, when the
happy hour is now come, that God waits to bless you with the greatest Treasure
of his love, begrudge not the going to his Table for it, but bless God that you
may have it for fetching; and when you go, be as pure in heart, as if your lips
were touched with a live Coal from off the Altar, prostrate your bodies, and
cast your Souls down to the lowest step of humility, and adore the Almighty
like those Seraphims in Isaiahs Vision, who covered their feet and their Faces
with their wings, as they cried one unto another. Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord
of Hosts the whole Earth is full of his Glory, Isa. 6. 2, 3. When the Bread and
Wine are made Sacraments, and those blessed Symbols of Grace are reached out
unto you, think and know that the Lord of Life and Glory is now coming under
your roof; and great is the Peace of such as receive him with the passionate
desires of affectionate Penitents, that bathe his feet with their Tears, and
lodge him in the retirements of a clean, innocent and Virgin heart. And when
you depart, let it be with Thanksgivings and Hallelujahs, and with all the
expressions of grateful Souls, enflamed with the Love of Jesus, and with a deep
sense of your Honor and Felicity, that God has vouchsafed thus to visit you
with his goodness, that he has taken you into his Arms; that he has covered
your offenses, that he has fed you with the true Bread of Life from Heaven,
that he has shed his love abroad in your hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is
now given unto you, that he has united you to himself by the Communication of
the Divine Nature, that he has cast into you the seed of immortality, and
given you an earnest of a blessed Resurrection, and an antepast of Heaven; for
all these blessings you receive at the hand of God, as often as ye eat this Bread
and drink this Cup of the Lord after a worthy manner, and as it becomes Saints.

2. Whence I proceed to the Second Conclusion; that if no special Law had been
given us for the celebration of this Mystery, if no Positive Command had been
annexed to its Institutions, were we so wholly left to our own Liberty whether
we would Receive the Communion, or no, that we should not sin against God by
not receiving; we should nevertheless be very much wanting to our selves, and
sin against our own souls, should we Turn our backs upon this great Ordinance,
as (to their shame) many Ill men do; some that never yet Communicated in all
their Life; some that Despise it, and Hate to do it; some that pretend they are
Afraid to do it (though it be not the Ordinance, but their own Wickedness that
scares them) some that strive against their own Convictions for the sake of
this world; some that are so supine and Listless, that they care not to set
about it; and some that do it so seldom, that they seem Indifferent whether
they do it at all, or no. To bring all these wretches to a due Sense and
Practice of their Duty, I would beseech them to Consult their own Best thoughts
(if they be ever Thoughtful) and Seriously to consider, what mercies they
wilfully Forsake. Is it a slight thing, is it Nothing to be made a Partaker of
that Great Sacrifice for sin which was offered upon the Cross? when we daily
lie at Gods mercy, and stand in need of his Pardon, and are utterly Undone, if
we have it not: when we feel in our own Breasts the miserable Effects of our
Follies, those Twinges and Sores in our Consciences, those wounds and gashes in
the Spirit, which are so full of intolerable Anguish, that some have hurryed
themselves out of the world on purpose to be rid (as they thought) of the sense
of their Torments: when we are sensible how the Judgments of God go abroad in
the Earth to Punish men for their Impieties: when we have seen so many sad
Examples of men, who have roared, and sometimes Despaired upon their
deathbeds, under the burden of their guilt; and when none can tell, but that
he may be tortured, punished and visited after the same manner; these things and
the like being considered well, what can any man desire so much as to have his
iniquities forgiven? and then what Fools are they, that neglect to receive the
Holy Sacrament, which is the Seal of our Pardon? Is it a mean thing, not worth
our craving or longing for, to be nourisht with the most Blessed Body and Blood
of our Redeemer, to receive Vitality and Influences of Grace from him, to be
Refresht and strengthened with that Divine aliment, which has been the Support
of Apostles, Prophets and Martyrs, and without which our Souls can no more live
a Life Spiritual and Divine, than our Bodies can continue in plight and
strength without Sustenance? Is it not a mercy invaluable, to have the
Guidance, Aids, and Comforts of Christ's Spirit? when our Natural Corruptions
are so strong, when the Enemy of our Souls is so malicious and Buisie, when the
Temptations we meet with are so Thick and ensnaring, when the Common course of
Humane Life is such, that we walk continually among Dangers and Deaths: Lord!
what a Miserable Creature would man be, without the care, Assistance, and
Succors of the Spirit? In times of Errors and Delusion to be assisted, and
kept steadfast by the Spirit of Truth: in times of Trial to be led by that
Spirit of Power, which helps our infirmities: in times of Impiety to be
guided and governed by the Spirit of Grace and Holiness: in times of Affliction
and Distress, whether they be Public or Private calamities we groan under,
then to have the Spirit of Comfort, to speak peace to our Consciences, to take
away the Bitterness of our pottage, to sweeten and lighten our Griefs with
salutary Breathings from above, to Support us in all our sufferings, to carry
us safe through all Difficulties, and at last to lead us into a Serene and Calm
world; Oh! what an Happiness is this, and what Improvident people are thy, who
neglect an Ordinance that is Productive of this Happiness, that is so
Beneficial and Useful to all these purposes? Again; to have such a lively Faith
as will not fail us, however we may be winnowed, sifted and tossed; to have a
vigorous Hope that will keep our Heads up, when storm, and tempest beat down
thousands; to be full of those Graces, which are sweeter then Nard under our
nostrils; to be United to him, who Loved us and gave himself for us, and to
have this Testimony within us, that we are the very Members of Christ, and in
the end to Dye with Satisfaction, and with a strong Confidence, that one day we
shall rise again and see the Salvation of God in the Land of the Living; these
are Felicities, than which the Nature of man is not capable of Greater in this
Life; and I have showed you particularly; one by one, that these are the
Blessings, wherewith God crowns every Constant and Devout Communicant.
Briefly, there is no Ordinance of God, but what does carry its Advantages with
it, where men use it after a Regular and Due manner. But all other Ordinances
seem to center and meet in this; so that it is a certain Instrument of an Holy
Life, and of that which will be Dear and Valuable to us when all the Gayeties
of Life are over; I mean a Comfortable Death. And so I leave it to the thoughts
of every Understanding and Thinking Christian to consider, what Unwise, as well
as Unthankful men they are, who are so willing to go from an Ordinance at
which others gather up Life and Immortallity. It is no wonder, that the world
grows so vain and wicked, and that the Souls of men are so Improsperous. One
great reason is, because they have Itching ears, but Insensate Hearts, that
neither Crave for the Influences of Heaven, nor care to Receive them, though
they come down in streams God be merciful unto them; but they will one day
find, what a crime and Folly they are guilty of, in forsaking thus the mercies
of the Cross, and in trampling under their feet the Blood of the Son of God
after this manner.

Not that their imprudence, or unthankfulness is their only sin: No there is an
addition of impiety too, which helps to aggravate it. For in this case we are
not in our own hands, neither are we left to our own liberty and Pleasure. The
Command of Christ, whereby we are obliged to solemnize this Mystery, is as
plain, and as peremptory a command, as any other in the whole Bible? and if a
law from Heaven can make any thing necessary, then is this so. But I will not
now meddle with that consideration: There being that and many more, which
relate more immediately to our practice, that I see will cost another just
Discourse; as of the necessity that is incumbent upon us; and of the necessity
of preparation also, together with the Nature and Extent of that preparation
which is requisite, and diverse other the like matters, which deserve to be well
considered, and to be treated of by themselves in their due order, and by
degrees. Here we will end this Discourse, beseeching God to help us to a right
understanding, and to enable us to keep a good Conscience in all things, for
Christ Jesus his sake. to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three
Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, be all Glory, and Honor, and Praise, for
evermore,

Amen.
FINIS.

