IMPRIM^^^^.

October, 24. 1692. ^ ^

A Practical Discourse UPON PRAYER.

By EDWARD PELLING, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's, and Rector
of Petworth in Sussex.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones for William Crook, at the Green-Dragon without
Temple Bar, 1693.

A Practical Discourse UPON PRAYER.
THere is not any one act of Religion, which carries with it a more beautiful
Luster; or which is of greater use to us in all manner of of respects; or which
is more strictly required by the Laws of God; or better recommended to us by
the practice of God's Saints, especially by the most holy Example of our
Blessed Savior himself, than that of Prayer. And for this reason, I think I
cannot do a more becoming or better office, than to discourse upon this Subject
after a plain practical manner; as fully, and yet as briefly as I can.

By Prayer I mean now, not only Supplication to God, or the Asking and Begging
at his hands all such things as we want both for our Souls and Bodies; but (in
the largest sense of the word) the Praising, and Blessing of his Holy Name
also, and the giving him thanks for all those Benefits, which we have already
received from him. And in discoursing upon this subject, I shall proceed after
this easy instructive method.

I. First, I shall consider the Motives, which serve to kindle and increase in
us a Spirit of Devotion. II. And then Secondly, For the due performance of this
great thing, I shall show the way and manner, after which it is to be done.
Now there are several Motives unto Prayer, which may be taken, 1. Partly from
the Consideration of God's Nature and Works, and 2. Partly too from the
Consideration of Prayer it self.

I.
First, The Greatness and Majesty of God is so infinite, and he is so
infinitely exalted above all things else, that he deserves, and is highly
worthy of all manner of Adoration, by reason of the Perfections and Glories of
his Nature. All worship is founded upon the real, or at least supposed Dignity
of the Object; and the very blindest People in every Nation pay it, because
they believe that there is something above them, and that the Being they
worship is better, and Greater than themselves. We therefore to whom the true
and ever-blessed God has been pleased to reveal himself so plainly from
Heaven, should never fail in this part of our Duty to him, because we know him
to be the most Excellent Being in the World, Higher than all that are in the
Earth, exalted far above all Gods (or, above the Highest Dignities) Psalm. 97.
9. God has so manifested himself in times past by his Prophets, and in the
last days by the Eternal Son of his Bosom, that if People would but look upon
him by Faith, and with attentive Minds contemplate those admirable Glories,
wherewith he shines, it would naturally move them to prostrate themselves
before him, and to offer up the affections of their Souls to him. For the
Reasons of our Devotions are in his own most perfect Nature; and those
perfections which we discover there, do cast such a powerful infiueuce upon our
Minds, that they set the Faculties of the Soul presently on work; and after a
most kindly manner excite us to such acts of Adoration, as are suitable to
those apprehensions we have of the Divine Being. As for instance;

The Notions we have of God are, that he is Eternal, Self-existent, absolutely
Perfect, infinitely Happy, full of Majesty, Glorious in Holiness; and that
Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth is his Footstool. And if we would rightly
consider this, and consider withal what our own condition is, what needy,
frail, despicable, and wretched things we are, this alone would powerfully move
us, to fall down upon our Knees before him, to praise and magnify his Name, to
extol his Greatness, and to worship him with all suitable Awe and Reverence.

Again; We have this notion of God, that he is about our Paths, and about our
Beds, and understands all our ways; that he sees in Secret; that he makes
manifest the Counsels of the Heart; and that where two or three are gathered
together in his Name, there he is in the midst of them. And how naturally does
the consideration of God's Omnipresence, and Omniscience move us, to pray every
where unto him? To pour out our Hearts before him? in all our necessities and
circumstances to call upon him, and to speak to him with that sincerity of
Heart, with that attention of Mind, with that fervency of Affection, and with
that modest, humble, and reverent Behavior, which becomes those, who are under
the Eye, and in the presence and hearing of that infinite Being, who searches
the very Heart and Reins?

This Notion we have of God too, that whatsoever he pleases that he does in
Heaven, and in Earth; that he orders all things according to the Counsel of
his own will; and that he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy: So that
if any Man be more excellent than his Neighbor, whether it be in Spiritual, or
in Temporal and Worldly respects, it is God that makes the difference, of his
own good pleasure: And does not this lay very strict obligations upon us to
seek his face evermore? To be constant Supplicants at the Throne of Grace? And
to give the Lord most humble and hearty thanks for the Benefits and Blessings,
he is pleased to bestow upon us?

Again; The notion of God signifies a Being infinitely wise; that knows all our
wants, and what is best and most convenient for us: infinitely Powerful, that
is able to answer all our necessities; and infinitely Good, that extends his
mercies to all his Works, and is particularly gracious to all that call upon
him, to all that call upon him faithfully. And if we seriously consider that we
depend upon his good Providence every moment of our Lives, it would powerfully
move us, to have recourse unto him continually, to open our hearts to him; to
lay our necessities before him, importunately beseeching him to take us under
his care; and to supply us with all things needful both for Soul and Body.

Above all, it would charm us into Devotion, did we but consider, how God loves
every Soul, which he has created; that as he is happy in himself, so he
desires that we too may be perfectly happy in him; that all his Dipensations
are in order to this great end; that the very Duties he exacteth at our hands,
are intended to fit, and prepare us for it; that the very afflictions he lays
upon us are to discipline us for Heaven; and that all things work together for
good to them that love him. These considerations are enough to kindle in our
hearts the most ardent affections toward him; And where affection is, there
will be all cheerful Obedience, and there our Love of God will make us with
readiness, and zeal, and pleasure of Mind express the sense we have of his
great Goodness, by the most devout Adorations.

It is for want of a true sense of God, that People are so seldom at Prayer; so
hardly drawn to it; so cold, and careless, and, as it were, unconcerned at it.
Right apprehensions of his Nature and Perfections do naturally cast such an
influence upon the mind, as would soon set the Powers and Faculties of the Soul
on motion, if we would dispose our selves so, as to be capable of those Divine
impressions; and if we would duly consider what God is in himself. And for that
purpose we should look every day for him in the Scriptures, and contemplate
those Beauties and Glories, under which he is represented to us in the
Scriptures; for there we have a true Revelation of his Essence and Attributes;
there he is represented as a Being so Great and Holy, so Immense and Glorious,
so Omnipotent and Omniscient, so Wise and Powerful, so Communicative Kind and
Beneficent, and in every respect so Amiable and Adorable, that, were there no
other considerations, this alone touching the transcendent Excellence of his
Nature, would be a strong Argument to move us to worship him daily in the
beauty of Holiness.

II.

If besides this, we consider God in his Works, and as he stands related to us
under the notion of a Being, in whom we Live, and Move, and have our own Being,
and to whom we owe all that we have, all that we are, and all that we expect
and hope to be, we shall find what a just Right, Title and Claim he has to our
daily Devotion. These Works of God are of three sorts.

1. First, His Creating and Forming of us in the Womb. By Virtue hereof he does
justly challenge and require all possible services from us, as his peculiar
Right and Due; and it was for this end, that he fashioned the several Members
of our Bodies, and endued us with Rational Souls, that we should Glorify him
with our Bodies, and with our Spirits.

And what can be more reasonable, then that he, who gave us Hearts, should have
them? That he who Formed our Lips, should be praised and magnified with them?
That we should Worship and Fall down, and Kneel before that infinite Being,
which is our Maker? I will praise thee, O Lord (says the Holy Psalmist, for
this reason) because I am fearfully and wonderfully made, Ps. 139. 14. And
would to God every Man would seriously consider, before he goes out of the
World, for what end and purpose he came into it! 'Twill be a very dismal thing
in that day, when the terrors of Death are about him, to have the Torments of
an Evil Conscience too, and to remember with anguish and bitterness, how many
blessed Opportunities of Devotion he has despised: how much time he has thrown
away upon Wicked, or upon vain Employments, which God sent him into the World
to spend upon offices of Religion; and for how many years together he has
dishonored the Majesty of Heaven with those Faculties, which were made to
serve, and Glorify and Adore him. Think often, I beseech you, of the Day of
your dissolntion, when the Dust shall return to the Earth as it was, and the
Spirit shall return unto God, who gave it. Lay up betimes a good treasure
against that day: Put not off Devotion as a work proper only for a Deathbed.
God alone knows, how you will be disposed at that time. They have not cried
unto me with their heart, when they howled upon their Bed, says God, Hosea 7.
14. Your Hearts may deceive you at your last Hour, though you think your selves
sure of them now. A Life of Piety and Devotion cannot possibly deceive you. It
must needs save you many Tears, and Groans, and bitter Thoughts of Heart; but
it cannot cost you any to consider, that you have remembered the Creator from
the days of your Youth.

2. Another work of God, by Virtue whereof he has a just right to our Prayers
and Praises, is his Providence. Hereby God preserves that Being, which he first
gave us; supports our Faculties; and supplies us with all things, that are
necessary and suitable to our Natures.

The Measures of God's Providence are not all equal or alike; but it differs in
its proportion, according as things differ in Degree and Dignity. It is general
over all things, and shows it self by conserving and sustaining every part of
the Universe. It is particular and special over Men, who are the principal part
of the sublunary World; and as they are Evil or Good, so does God adapt and
suit his Providence to them, according to their respective conditions. He
tenders his Grace and Mercy even to the Wicked; is Patient and Longsuffering
toward them, that the sense of his Goodness may lead them to Repentance. Upon
their sincere Repentance he Pardons them: but if instead of harkening to his
Calls, they continue obstinate, and go on still in their Wickedness, then he
does Punish and Plague them; oftentimes makes them visible Examples of his
Wrath and Vengeance, even in this World; and sometimes too delivers them up to
a Reprobate mind, which is the heaviest and forest Plague of all. To such as
make a due use of his Grace he gives more. These he Nurtureth and Loves, as a
Father does his Children, and indeed with much more tenderness and compassion.
He takes a most especial care of them: the very Hairs of their Heads are all
numbered; they want no manner of thing, that is really good for them; and though
he does suffer them sometimes to be evil entreated and hardly used here, yet he
never lets them go out of his hands; but compensates their sufferings
abundantly, and makes all things work together for their good; nor can any
thing in this World be able to separate them from his Love.

And does not all this make it Necessary for us, to be conversant daily at the
Throne of Grace? Is it God that upholdeth us; and are not we concerned to
beseech him, not to withdraw his arm from under us? Is it of his mere
Compassion and Mercy, that we are not utterly consumed; and shall we not Praise
and Adore him for it? Is it at his hands that we must receive every good and
perfect gift; and shall we not repair to him in all our Necessities? Is the
Sword, Famine, and Pestilence; every calamity we feel, and every Judgment we
are afraid of, are all these sent from God; and are we not deeply concerned to
deprecate his Vengeance? Is it God alone, that can forgive Sin; and is it not
our duty to Beg it upon our Knees? Or, have we not Sins to ask his Pardon for?
Have we no other wants to be supplied? Are there no Mercies that we stand in
need of? Have we no Souls nor Bodies to be provided for? Are there no Evils we
desire to be delivered from? Are there no Dangers we would avoid? Is not God's
Protection Day and Night necessary to be desired? Is not his special Grace and
Favor to be Implored? Or, have we not received any Favors and Blessings, to
return him our Thanks for? These things carry their own light with them; and it
must needs be the greatest stupidity, to be wanting to our selves in a case,
where there are so many strict and weighty obligations.

3. Besides these Works of Providence, which relate mostly to this Life, we are
to consider the stupendous Work of Redemption, whereby the great Lover of
Souls has done all that was on his part to do to prepare us for a Life
Eternal. And one would think this to be work enough for us all our days, to
Bless, and Praise, and Adore God for his unspeakable and infinite Love to lost
Mankind, in sending the Son of his Love, the Lord Jesus into the World, that
whosoever believes in him should not Perish. The exemplary Holiness of
Christ's Life; his Death and Sufferings; his Resurrection and Ascension into
Heaven; his sending the Apostles to preach the Gospel unto all Nations; and the
wonderful effusion of the Holy Spirit, to render their Ministry successful; and
to be with the Church to the Worlds end; these were glorious Methods, whereby
God carried on the great work of Redemption. And as we ought with the most
Devout Hearts to offer unto God daily our Sacrifices of Praise for these
inestimable Blessings; so should we Beg the continual Assistance and Increment
of his Grace; that we may make a due use of them, lest the Death of Christ, and
the Preaching of his Gospel be all in vain to us, and lest we make our selves
Reprobates and Sons of Perdition at the last. In the next Life there will be an
end of Christ's Economy; He will deliver up this his Kingdom to the Father,
and then the state of every Man, whether it be in Bliss or in Misery, will be
unalterable; And how can we think of another World, and not Pray unto God to
Deliver us in the hour of Death, and in the day of Judgment? We cannot be such
Fools as to think we shall live here for ever. All of us must dye in our turns;
though Men are apt to put the Day of their Dissolution far from them, yet
sooner or later it will certainly come; for it is appointed unto Man once to
die, and after that to be judged, Heb. 9. 27. And how can we expect any
happiness another day, if either we do not think there is such a thing, or do
not think it worth our Prayers? It will be most just for God to deny us that,
which we would not so much as ask for: That certainly is the easiest and least
thing we can do, and if our Salvation be of such vast concernment, that we must
work it out with fear and trembling, it must needs be the greatest folly in the
World to expect it, if we will not take, no not such little pains for it, as
the Lifting up of the Heart, and the labor of ones Lips amounts to.

2. Having thus considered those Motives unto Prayer, which are taken from
God's Perfections and Works, let us now proceed to those which may be drawn
from the thing it self.

Prayer is a necessary and due acknowledgment of God's Sovereignty over all. He
knows all our Necessities, whether we ask him or no: He is privy to the very
secrets of our Hearts, though we pour not out our Complaints before him: He
understands our thoughts afar off; and therefore he does not stand in any
need of our Supplications: He has appointed us to Pray to him; that thereby we
may admire him the Lord Paramount, and that we may testify our inward sense,
that our whole dependence is upon him; that whatever we have, we receive at his
hands; that he has the supreme Propriety in all that we enjoy; that the whole
Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; and for that Reason we are bound
to do him Homage; all people must fall down before him, and all Nations must
pay him service.

Prayer is the greatest Privilege we poor Creatures have in this World; That
Dust and Ashes can speak freely to the God of Comfort; that we can repair to
him in all our Straits and most melancholy Circumstances; that we can with
confidence and safety open our very Hearts to him, and acquaint him with our
Condition; that we can come with boldness to the Throne of Grace; and that we
can beg of God with a full assurance, that we shall receive of him what we
would have, or that which is much better.

Prayer is a direct Instrument of Virtue and Holiness. When we are at our
Prayers, we are, or ought to be very serious; and when we are so, many serious
thoughts are apt to fall in, touching Death and Judgment, touching Heaven and
Hell, touching the Purity and Omniscience of that Infinite Being we are
speaking to, and touching the vain and uncertain Condition of this World. By
this means our Hearts by degres come to be weaned from this World, and to long
for a Better; our Minds are kept in continual Awe, lest we offend God, whose
mercy and goodness is to bring us to it; our Lusts cool, and we are led to
Repentance; the Remembrance of our Sins and Follies becomes bitter; Humility,
Charity, and Meekness take possession of our Souls; and we learn to be Patient,
to resign our selves up into the hands of God, and to submit to his Heavenly
will in all cases.

But nothing can be a greater Motive unto Prayer, than the Power and Usefulness
of it, in the returns it makes us. The effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous
Man avails much, Jam. 5. 16. It has wrought Miracles; and though Miracles
are ceased long ago, yet God hears still, and never do we go away from the
Throne of Grace empty, if we pray as we should. Many times God hears our
Prayers, and we are not sensible of it, because we do not presently receive the
very thing we desire. But the request is Granted, though it may not be actually
Fulfilled at our own time, and in our own way. For wise and good reasons God
does defer the bestowing of the matter we crave for, and sometimes exchangeth
it, and gives us a Better thing in lieu of it. No Prayers miscarry if they be
rightly Qualified, or if they, who offer them, be rightly Disposed.

II
And this brings me to that, which we are to consider in the next place, viz.
After what way and manner this great and so^^^^ (...) of Religion ought to be
per^^^^^^ (...)

I.
And First, When we are going to our Prayers, we must be very careful to go
with Souls purified from Sin by sincere Repentance. For God hears not
Sinners, John 9. 31. If I regard Iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear
me, Psalm. 66. 18. He that turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, even his
Prayer shall be abomination, Prove. 28. 9. I will that men pray every where,
lifting up holy hands, 1 Timothy 2. 8. where the Apostle alludes to a custom among
the Jews, instituted by God himself (and observed anciently by most Nations) of
washing before Prayer, Exodus 40. 32. A Mystical Rite signifying the Spiritual
Cleanness, which is requisite in all that prepare themselves to speak unto the
God of Purity: And so the Psalmist explains it, Psalm. 26. 6. I will wash my
hands in Innocence; and so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord.

These places of Scripture do not mean, that we must not Pray, if we have
committed Sin, or if we have the sense of any guilt upon us: No, we must Pray
the rather, that God may forgive and pardon the Sins we have committed: But the
meaning is, that we are not to go to our Prayers, with the love of Sin about
us, or with purposes to Sin on still.

Our Souls must be clean and pure from wicked Resolutions and Affections; we
must appear before the Lord empty, in this sense; void of all sinful Habits and
Intentions. The Heart is the Censer, and it must be Holy; and the Incense must
be Holy, which comes out of it. If any Lusts of Uncleanness be burning there,
it is as abominable, as the offering up of Unhallowed fire. If there be Envy or
Hatred, Malice, Bitterness, or designs of Revenge, it is as if we lifted up
hands defiled with Blood: For in the construction of the Gospel, he that hates
his Brother is a murderer, 1 Jo. 3. 15. If there be that which the Scripture
calls Filthiness of Spirit, it is like the offering of Swines-Flesh. If there
be a Ravenous or Quarrelsome temper, it is like the presenting of a Dog's Neck.
If there be an insatiable or inordinate love of the World, it is like
Sacrificing to an Idol. We should be sure therefore at our Devotion to have
Penitent and Honest Hearts, pure Affections, and gracious Lips. It is the Holy
Person, that makes the Prayer Holy; that Sanctifies the Altar and the Sacrifice
upon it, so as to make the savor thereof sweet in God's Nostrils. Where Sin
lies at the Door, it stops the passage of Prayer, and hinders it from being
successful. Such a one has no benefit, either by his own Prayers, or other
Men's. Witness the Story of Achan, Jos. 7. Achan had kept some of the spoil of
Jericho, which was consecrated unto the Lord; this Sin was imputed to the whole
Congregation; and God refused to hear Joshua's Prayer for them; The Lord said
unto Joshua, get thee up, wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has
sinned, for they have even taken of the accursed Thing; (that is, the thing
which was devoted unto me, and which has now brought a Curse upon them) Jos.
7. 10, 11. Sin unrepented of hinders the Power and Efficacy of Prayer.

II.
Besides Innocence of Heart, there is required in a devout Person Constancy and
Perservance. Pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Continuing instant in
Prayer, Romans 12. 12. Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in the
Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, Ephesians. 6. 18. Continue in
Prayer, and watch in the same with Thanksgiving, Col. 4. 2. All which commands
are pursuant to that of our Blessed Savior, that Men ought always to Pray, and
not to faint, Luke 18. 1.

These places of Scripture are not to be understood in such a strict sense, as
if we were to employ our whole time at Prayer, without doing any thing else;
for that is inconsistent with the business of our Calings, and impossible for
humane Nature to do: But the meaning is, that our minds must always be devoutly
disposed; that some portions of every day should be set aside for Prayer, that
we should be diligent, and frequent at it, addicted to it, and intent upon it;
and that we should not let slip any set or convenient hours of Devotions, but
observe them constantly as often as they return.

As Saint Chrysostom has rightly noted, (in Col. 4. 2.) the Devil thoroughly
knows what a good thing Prayer is; and therefore he mightily endeavors to keep
People from it. He draws them into his own Snares, by drawing them away from
God; by tempting them, first to Pray seldom, and so by degrees to give it quite
over. By this wile of the Devil there is a great strangeness between them and
God, which at last ends in direct Enmity: and then it falls out as it happens
usually in differences between Man and Man, that the offender is the hardest to
be Reconciled.

It is therefore our Wisdom to Renew our Prayers, and to draw nigh unto God
often; to repair to him as frequently, at least, as the Holy Psalmist speaks
of, Evening and Morning and at Noonday will I pray, and cry aloud, Ps. 55. 17.
By this means our Hearts will be kept up at a high Key; our acquaintance with
God will not only be preserved, but increase too; the Duty it self will become
easy and delightful; our Life will resemble in some measure the Heavenly
state, and we shall prepare our selves by it for the services of Eternity; the
Joys above will be our portion here; our Conversation will be every day in
Heaven together with our Hearts; our Temptations unto Sin will lessen; our
irregular Affections will be the better conquered, and the sooner transformed
into a Divine Love; and if there could be a Sinless state on Earth, this would
be the ready way to it, because it would keep the minds of Men under a
continual Awe and Dread of offending that Holy Just, and Omniscient Being, in
whose Presence they must appear, and to whose Majesty they must speak the next
hour.

Besides, we must not always expect to be heard for once or twice speaking. God
does many times suspend the answering our desires, to Try and Exercise our
Faith, to envigorate our Zeal, to make our Devotion the more fervent, and our
Addresses to him the more and more importunate, like the cries of the restless
Widow in the Parable, which our Savior used as an argument to show, that Men
ought always to pray, and not to faint, Luke 18. If therefore our wants are not
supplied as we would have them, the fault is in our selves, because we are not
so Constant, so Frequent, so Importunate at our Prayers, as we should be. It is
a set and stated Course of Devotion that God is pleased with; and this is one
reason why we reap so little profit by all our Labors under the Sun, because
we squander away a great part of our time upon Vanity, or upon Vice, which
should be devoted unto God, to maintain a continual intercourse and communion
with him, and to fetch down his Blessings upon us: Such an intercourse as was
between God and Jacob, when the Angels were Ascending and Descending on the
Ladder.

III.
Prayer must be accompanied with Faith. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask
of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be
given him: But let him ask in Faith (or, with Faith) nothing wavering, etc.
James 1. 5, 6.

The meaning is not, that we must always confidently believe, that we shall
most certainly receive every particular thing we pray for. We cannot
confidently expect what God has not some way or other, and in some measure or
other, promised. And though he has absolutely promised us all things which
pertain to Eternal Life, and Godliness; yet there are other things, which
appertain to this present Life, which he has promised with some limitations;
that is if such and such things be Necessary, or Profitable, or Convenient for
us. Seeing then all the promises of God are not of equal Extent, and seeing
ones Faith can go no farther than the promise goes, we cannot firmly believe,
that we shall have every particular thing granted us, because we cannot
certainly tell, whether this or that in particular will be Beneficial, or
Proper for us: Whatever we may imagine or conceive in our own thoughts, it is
God alone that knows that infallibly; and therefore we cannot be assured, that
God will give it us.

We are to understand the matter thus then; that when we Pray, we must be
firmly persuaded in our minds, that God knows how to grant the thing we beg
of him, and that he is able and ready to do it, if he sees it* Necessary or
good for us. There must be no doubt of God's Power and Goodness, nor of his
Care for us: He that comes to him must believe, not only that he is, but also
that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. When
therefore we are preparing our selves for Prayer, that we may prepare our
Hearts aright, we should entertain our Minds with the serious consideration of
God's Attributes and Perfections; that his Mercy reaches over all his Works;
that he is the faithful God; that he cannot Lie; that with him there is no
variableness or shadow of Change; that his promises are Yea and Amen; that he
is nigh unto all who call upon him faithfully, and that he will (one way or
other) fulfill the desires of them that fear him. Such Considerations as these
will enliven and envigorate our Prayers with an active Faith; and in the
strength thereof we may draw near and fall low, in full assurance that his Ear
is open, and his Hand ready, to give us the very things we long for, or
something else which in his infinite Wisdom he knows to be better for us.

IV.
In our Prayers we must with all humbleness of Mind evermore submit our selves
to God's Will and Pleasure. Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, is a
part of that Prayer, which our Blessed Lord himself formed for our Daily use.
And though those words do primarily mean such an active, cheerful, and universal
Obedience to God's Commands as the Angels of Heaven express; Yet in a Secondary
sense they signify too such Patience and Submission to God's Providence, as
was so eminent in the Lord of Life and Glory; who in his last Agonies resigned
up himself into his Fathers hands, with this holy request, Not my Will, but thy
Will be done.

Because we are so ignorant of those things which are really for our good, it
is very reasonable we should leave it unto God to determine for us; and it is
for good reasons that he does sometimes deny even his faithful Servants the
request of their Lips.

Though the matter of their Prayers, or the thing they desire to have, may be
Lawful enough in it self, yet accidentally and in the consequence it may be
hurtful, or very dangerous, though they do not think it; and in such a case it is
a Favor and Kindness, if God gives them such a denial as the Lord Jesus gave
James and John, when they put their Mother upon asking that they might sit, the
one on his Right Hand, and the other on his Left in his Kingdom; Ye know not
what ye ask, says our Savior, Matthew. 20. 22.

Or perhaps the thing they pray against, may be indeed for their good, though
they be not sensible of it for the present; and then God is their Friend in
suffering them to labor under it, especially if he grants their desires
another way; as he never fails to do in such cases, you know St. Paul
complaind of a Thorn in his Flesh, a Messenger of Satan sent to Buffet him, 2
Cor. 12. 7. Divines cannot certainly tell, what the particular thing was, which
he compared to a Thorn; whether it was some acute Disease in his Body, or some
persecution outwardly. Questionless it was some sharp Affliction or other,
which touched him to the quick; and St. Chrysostom's opinion is very probable,
that it was some very harsh usage he received from some opposers of the Truth,
who were the Devils Instruments to imprison, beat, and scourge the Apostle.
Whatever that Thorn in his Flesh was, notwithstanding all his prayers it was
not drawn out. He besought the Lord thrice (that is, often says St.
Chrysostom) that it might depart from him. But his Prayers could not prevail:
because whatever the Devils Instruments intended, God intended it in Mercy to
him, that he might not be exalted above measure, through the abundance of his
Revelations.

However his Prayers did not return empty; instead of Deliverance from Pain, he
received Divine assistance and support from above. My Grace, said God, is
sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness; and that was
far better, than if he had had his Prayers answered in kind. And from this
single instance we learn, whatever our Condition, and whatever our own desires
may be, still to submit to the will and pleasure of God; who best knows what is
fit for us. Though we have not the very thing we pray for, yet God will give us
that which will do us more good, if we be but mindful of our Duty to him. And
though he lets us go about with Thorns in our Flesh, yet his Grace is as
sufficient for us, as it was for St. Paul; and as long as we receive a
sufficient measure of Humility, Patience, and Meekness, together with a
Mortified Temper, and a Christian frame of Heart, we have reason to bless God
for such a plentiful and rich return of our Prayers; and to adore his Goodness,
that we have much more than we deserve, and much better things than we desire.

V.
Prayer must be accompanied with great attention; I mean a settled and composed
Temper, a staid Mind, with our Thoughts gathered together into a Center, and
all of them fixed upon the solemn business we are about. Men cannot expect that
God will mind those Prayers, which they do not mind themselves; or that he will
open his Ears to those, who are not serious before him, and with him. The Text
bears a farther Construction, 1 Cor. 14. 15. But yet in this sense, we are to
pray with the Understanding; to consider and mind well what is uttered in time
of Prayer; not to offer the Sacrifice of Fools, who run by rote, and at all
adventures; but with recollected thoughts to ponder and attend to what we say
unto the Majesty of Heaven.

When we are at Prayer, we should call home our Fugitive Thoughts, and employ
them with such seriousness and united consideration, as if we were going to
die. The custom of the Lord Jesus was to go up to some Mountain to pray;
thereby teaching all his followers to take their leave of the World, for the
due performance of their Devotion; and during the time of it, to retire as near
as may be to Heaven, and to have their minds there, and there only. To draw
nigh unto God with our Lips, and at the same time to let our thoughts rove and
ramble, and run away at a great distance from him, is in effect to tell God,
that we are willing to pay him some outward Civility, but care not for the
business we come to him about; and how then can we expect that God will attend
to it? It Is necessary therefore to recollect our selves, to fix our minds, when
we fall down on our Knees before him, and in order thereunto we should consider
how infinitely great that Being is, to whom we make our Addresses, and of what
vast importance the thing is, which we are transacting with him; no less than
the Eternal Welfare of our Soul and Body; which we should pray for with the
greater attention, because we are not sure of another Opportunity to solicit
God about it.

At the Public Service of the Church, it is an excellent means to keep our
thoughts at Home, to give great heed to what is uttered by him that ministers,
that is our Mouth and Intercessour; not to lose a word, but to keep an even
pace with him in our Meditations, and as he goes along, to mind, ponder, and
weigh the things spoken, because the Soul lodges so near unto the Ear, that if
the door be open to let in the voice, the Inhabitant within cannot but listen
and be attentive.

VI.
If we carefully observe this, it will help to carry us on to that which is
another Qualification of Prayer; I mean Affection and Fervency. When we
apprehend and mind the matter of our Prayers, and add to it an Earnestness and
Vehemence of desire; then is our Devotion truly said to be Fervent and
Affectionate. And this is one sense of that Phrase which we meet with thrice in
the Epistles; Praying with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Supplication in the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18. and Praying in the Holy Spirit, Jude 20. In the strict
sense it signifies Praying by the Extraordinary Assistance and Gift of the
third Person in the Holy Trinity.

For in those first times of Christianity, there was among many other
Extraordinary Gifts, a Miraculous Gift of Prayer, wherewith some of the Church
were Divinely and immediately inspired, so that they were able on a sudden to
conceive and utter Prayers, which were apt and suitable to the Christian
Religion; the old Jewish Forms being then some of them useless, and all of them
imperfect, because the condition of Church Affairs was now changed. Upon this
account there was then great need of an exttaordinary Gift of Prayer, to supply
the wants of the Christian Assemblies.

But this extraordinary Gift ceased in a little time, stated Forms of Divine
Service being provided for the Churches use; Forms which had been Originally
conceived by inspired Men, and which were afterward preserved and used See Dr.
Hammond an Jude the 20th, and his Vindication of the Liturgy.
by those who had benefited so much by them. There is no such thing as Praying
by the Spirit in a strict sense; or, Praying by the extraordinary Gift of the
Holy Ghost: nor in truth, is there any need of it now, when there is a
sufficiency of Useful, Ancient, and excellent Forms.

And yet we must in some sense pray in, or by the Spirit, or else our Prayers
will do us no good. We must pray with that Zeal, which is kindled in the Heart
by the ordinary operation of the Holy Spirit. We must Pray with Spiritual
Affection, with ardency of Desire, with Fervency of Spirit, and with Hearts
lifted up and Inflamed. Our Prayers must not be Spiritless, nor must we be
Cold, or Lukewarm at them; God hears not Prayers which are offered up by
People that do not stir up their Affections, nor chafe their Desires, nor move
their Minds into a Warmth; but Pray carelessly as if they were indifferent
whether God heard them or no. Such Prayers can never reach the Heavens; they
are lost by the way; they drop down presently to the ground for want of
Affection and Fervency, which should have been their Wings.

In short when we call upon God, we should employ all the powers and faculties
of our Souls, and lay out our whole Man upon the business before us; and
because the consideration of God's Attributes gives life and vigor to the
whole body of Religion, we should possess our minds with the sense of those
perfections: and especially with the sense of his great Goodness. For as the
Notion of his Greatness, Power, Justice, and Omnipresence is naturally apt to
create in us attention of mind to what we say; so the consideration of his
Mercy and Benignity is enough to Charm our Affections.

In order therefore to Fervency in Prayer, let us think of the wonderful
kindness and goodness of God, and carry the thoughts of it along with us
throughout the whole tenor of our Devotion, how good he is in his own Nature;
how Communicative and Beneficent to his poor Creatures; how Gracious to
Mankind; how Merciful to Sinners; how easy to be entreated upon our
Repentance; and how ready he is to pardon Iniquity, Transgression and Sin.

2. We should cast our selves down under an humble sense of our own
Unworthiness and Vileness, and with a thankful acknowledgment of the Happiness
we have, that Worms, Dust and Ashes, Nothings, Creatures, that by our Sins are
worse than nothing, have the favor and freedom to speak before him, and to
him. These Considerations are good inward means to raise our Hearts and
Affections into a warmth, when we lift up our voice in Prayer.

To which I shall add, 3. but one direction more touching outward help; and it
is in all your Devotions to use some wholesome and affecting Forms of Prayer:
Whatever has been objected against them, they are all Pious and Unprejudiced
Spirits of great advantage. For thereby the Soul is rid of a great variety of
thoughts, which bring Distractions. The Mind is not at a loss for Words, nor
the Invention to seek for Matter; nor is there that fear upon us, which
otherwise must needs be upon all humble men, of speaking irreverently, or
unbecomingly to God. Every thing else being prepared, we have no more to do,
but to prepare our Hearts, and stir our Affections. The Wood and the Sacrifice
being ready at hand, our only business is, to bring Fire to the Altar, and to
keep it burning.

And here let me recommend unto your special use those Forms of Prayer, which
our Church uses in her Public Liturgy. Forms that carry with them the true
Spirit of Primitive Christianity, and are agreeable to those, which were used
in the Primitive Ages, and some of them the very same. Forms that were
thoroughly digested, and put together by the great Men at the time of
Reformation; Great for their Learning; Great for their Wisdom; Great for their
eminent Zeal, and Piety, and Love of Truth; and the Greater still, because
afterward they suffered for this Work by the hands and fury of the Romanists,
and some of them settled it at the stake with their last Blood. In Composing
that Book, they did not consider how they might gratify particular Fancies,
but how they might answer the necessities, and provide for the real good of the
whole Church; And accordingly such Prayers were, after much deliberation,
pitched upon, as were most Profitable, most significant, and most moving. And
it is observable of them, that as they are generally short, and therefore easy
to be Learned and Remembered; so they are very full too, and so comprehensive
for matter and signification, that there is nothing needful for Soul or Body,
but what there are Petitions for; and those too, rellishing of such a Spirit of
Piety, as is enough to affect and move the dullest Hearts, if our Minds do but
go along with them; and without that, all the Prayers in the World will not
work upon us.

VII.
In all our Prayers we must be sure to be Charitable. When our Savior gave his
Church a Prayer of his own Composing* he directed us to pray in the Plural
number, even at our private Devotion. When thou Prayest, enter into thy Closet,
and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret -- And
after this manner pray ye, Our Father, which art in Heaven -- Give us this day
our daily bread -- Forgive us our trespasses -- And lead us not into
temptation; Matthew. 6. 6, 9, 11, 12, 13.

Next to our serving God, all our business in this World is, to do our selves
and others all the good we can; and because the condition of our nature is so
scanty and weak, that it is not in our power to do all that is needful with our
own hands, therefore we must apply our selves to him, from whom every good and
perfect gift comes, that he may supply all Men's wants out of his own infinite
and inexhaustible treasures. Every one therefore must have a share in our
Prayers, because every one of us is in some want or other. I exhort therefore,
that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made for all men, says St. Paul in 1 Timothy 2. 1. For Kings, and for all,
that are in Authority; for one another, says St. James, Jam. 5. 16. For them
that despitefully use you, and persecute you, says our Blessed Savior
himself, Matthew. 5. 44.

Indeed this last direction, about praying for ones Enemies, is commonly looked
upon as a hard saying; but the only reason is, because there is so much ill
nature in the World. The Lord Jesus, and his first Martyr St. Stephen did both
go out of the World praying for their barbarous and bloodthirsty Enemies, the
very worst of Men. And that our Prayers may be, as theirs were, Holy and
Efficacious, they must proceed from sedate Minds, from Hearts full of
Gentleness, Goodness, and Compassion. There are two things especially, which
infect all Prayer, and turn it into Abomination.

The first is unreasonable Anger; when Men's Passions are suffered either to
start without just and sufficient cause, ot to rise unto an immoderate Height,
or to last an undue time. Such Heats are sinful, and consequently as noisome
Fuel in the Heart, as the fire and brimstone of Hell. Therefore St. Paul
requires us to lift up holy hands without wrath, 1 Timothy 2. 9. And this is one
reason of that other command, Ephesians. 4. 26. Let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath; because the Evening was wont to be a constant time for solemn Devotion.
Anger at best is a weak Passion in us, an Argument of great infirmity in our
Nature, that shows how near of kin we are to the Beasts that perish. Therefore
amidst all Resentments we should govern our selves by God's Example, whose
Wrath moves with a very slow pace; and endures but the twinkling of an Eye,
Psalm. 30. 5. But when we approach to God, we must be sure to keep out the
Brutal part from mingling with our Devotion, to bring our Minds to a right
Christian temper, and to speak unto the Author of Love and Peace, without Coals
in our Bosom, and without any Warmth, but that of Zeal and Charity.

2. The other thing, which corrupts all Prayer, is Malice; when that, which
ought to be a transient Passion, settleth, and fixes into a wicked Habit, so
that the Mind becomes Implacable, Irreconcilable, and Revengeful. This is
utterly inconsistent with the Spirit of Christ's Religion, which commands us to
forgive a Brother that sins, even till seventy times seven, Math. 18. 22.
That is, as often as he sins, and repents of it. All that God himself
requires at our hands is, Prayer and Repentance: And if this be the price of
his favor, surely we sinful, wretched Men should think it enough to purchase
each others Charity. What Man is he that lives and sins not? And how can
any of us expect Mercy, if we show none? How can we hope, with our cries and
importunities to move the Bowels of God, as long as we have no Bowels our
selves? Or (which is the same thing) none but what we shut up from our fellow
Creatures? It is a peremptory Sentence, Matthew. 6. 15. If ye forgive not Men
their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. It is
observable, that our Savior took hold of frequent occasions, to inculcate the
necessity of mutual Charity and Mercifulness, as one great Characteristical
note of a Christian indeed. And, that we might continually remember it, and be
afraid to neglect it, He inserted it into that Prayer which we are to use as
daily, as we need our Bread; Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us. And with what confidence can an uncompassionate, and
uncharitable Man look up to the Father of Mercies, with that, or any other
Prayer in his Mouth? What is this, but to bring a Curse upon himself, instead
of a Blessing? What is this, but a ready way to have all his Prayers flung back
upon his face with Indignation and Scorn; since it is the rule of God's
proceedings, that he shall have judgment without mercy, who has showed no
mercy, Jam. 2. 13.

VIII.
To all these necessary Qualifications of Prayer, I must add, in the last
place, that we must Pray with Reverence. For though this be the least
considerable thing, because it is an external bodily gesture, which bears no
proportion to the necessary dispositions of the Soul; yet it is of such moment,
that if we pray not in an humble manner, it looks as if we did not consider or
know what a weighty business we are about; A covered Head, a heavy Eye, a stiff
Neck, and an unbended Knee are far from being expressions of that great sense
we ought to have of God's Majesty, and of our own Vileness, and infinite
distance from him. And besides the Decency of this matter, it is to be
considered, that Bowings and Prostrations, and such outward acts of Religious
Worship, are God's proper and peculiar right; or else the second Commandment
would not have it unlawful to give them away to other things. Indeed as to
actions of this nature, Men should be careful, not to fly out into Vanity,
Fantasticalness, or Superstition, but contain themselves within the bounds of
an Humble and Reasonable service. When Decency and Prudence are observed,
Reverent gestures are of great use to heighten the Devotion of the Heart; and
at the Public Service of the Church they are Exemplary too, and by consequence
good means in their kind, to provoke, assist, and raise the Devotion of all.

I have now done these two things, which I was desirous to discourse of in
their due order, to form in your Hearts a Devout temper, and to instruct you in
the way, how you are to offer unto God your Daily Sacrifice, so that it may be
Holy and Acceptable to him. If we intend to be wise for our selves, and to
order our Life, so that it may be well with us; nothing can be of greater
concernment, excellence, or advantage to us, than a Spirit of Devotion.

Hereby we become conformable to the Image of our Blessed Savior; whose custom
was, not only to repair to the Temple and Synagogues, there to join with the
rest of the Jews in the Public Worship of God; but to retire also into
Solitudes and Deserts for Private Commerce with his Father, and sometimes to
continue whole Nights in Prayer: Nor is it possible for us to walk as we
should, but by treading in some fair measure in those steps of his, and by
leading, as he did, a life of Piety.

Hereby we resemble too those first Disciples of his, on whose Hearts the Blood
of Christ was so warm, and in whose Spirits there was such a constant Fervor
and Zeal, that they were daily in the Temple praising and blessing God, and
divided their hours between the public Sanctuary, and that private House or
Oratory by it, whither they were constrained to go for those solemn offices,
which were peculiar to Christianity.

By a Spirit of Devotion we have our Hearts daily there, where our only true
treasure is; we are taking every hour a new step out of this vexatious and vain
World; we exercise the Faith, Patience and Humility of Saints; we learn to be
Meek, Charitable and Holy; We are full of the joys and comforts of the Holy
Ghost, even amidst those Thistles and Brambles, which we are to go through
toward God's Kingdom; we lie down with Pleasure, sleep in Peace, and rise
again under the covert of the Divine Protection; we have God always in our
thoughts; and live daily upon the sense of his present Goodness, and upon the
Credit of his Power, Faithfulness and Truth for the future, replenished with
those hopes, which will never make us ashamed; we think every day of our latter
end, and prepare for it, and lay up before hand an inestimable Treasure against
it; which is the only thing that can stand us in stead on our Deathbeds, when
the satisfactions of this life will slip out of our hands like Sands, and slide
away from us like a Shadow.

This and much more comes by a Spirit of Devotion; and therefore let me beseech
you to be ever mindful of that; that which will return you your last and
richest Crop, when you have done with all your Corn, Wine, and Oil. Now for the
kindling and cherishing of a Spirit of Devotion in the Hearts, give me leave to
propose these following means.

I.
That we never neglect Private Prayer. Our Blessed Savior sends us into our
Closets, there to shut our Doors after us, Matthew. 6. And the reason is, because
every man has some Particular Sins to beg God's forgiveness for, some
particular Mercies to be implored; some particular, wants to be supplied; some
particular Graces to be desired. God has no where required, nor is it proper
for us, to proclaim all our necessities from the Housetop: and therefore we
are to go to him, who is in secret, and to whom we may unbosom our selves with
freedom and safety. This will not only breed an awe upon our Minds, with an
hearty affection to that Divine Beiug, we familiarly speak to in Private; but
it will also make us in Love with that, which is the means of this familiarity;
so that by Praying often, we shall be the more willing and ready to pray still;
nor will it be an easy matter for us to venture, either to begin any business,
without begging God's assistance, and protection over us; or to close up the
Day, without giving him thanks and praise for the Mercies of it.

II.
Where Men have the care of Families committed to them, they should teach them
to be of a devout temper too by their own Example. Remember the pious
resolution of Josuah, Jo. 24. 15. As for me and my house, we will serve the
Lord. When a Spirit of Devotion influenceth a whole Household, every ones Zeal
is kept warm and increased by it, and the Blessing of God is upon them all. To
this end we should teach our Children and Servants to pray, as our Lord taught
his Family. And by his giving them a Form, he has showed us, which is an
Effectual way of breeding up our respective charges in the fear and nurture of
the Lord; viz. by putting some short and wholesome Prayers into their Mouths
and Memories. And this advantage every private Family might easily get by our
public Service Books, if people would but apply their minds in Diligence to
use it, as they should. There is in it great variety and store of choice Forms,
which may be digested and remembered with the more facility, because they are
concise: Nor is there any condition of Life, but we may pick out some Forms,
which are one way or other suitable to our circumstances, especially as to our
spiritual wants; and if people would be careful to learn them, and imprint them
in their hearts; they would not only be devoutly disposed in the midst of their
secular affairs, but be furnished too with matter to offer continually up to
God, at lost in their minds and thoughts. For even at the works of their
Callings men may meditate; They may think often upon God, and of things
pertaining to Godliness, without any loss of time, or hindrance to their
worldly Employments. By the very lifting up of the Eye a thought of Heaven may
fall in, and of the way to get thither. Any the least work of Nature is enough
to put us in mind of the Divine Power and Wisdom. Nay the very Works of our own
hands may help us to consider how necessary it is to work out our Salvation,
above all things. If then in our Secular Affairs there be frequent occasions
for Meditation, there must needs be frequent opportunities for Prayer too, at
lest for Mental Devotion. And how easy a matter is it for any man at the
business of his Vocation, to lift up his heart with some such Ejaculations as
these? O Lord dispose the way of thy Servant toward the attainment of
everlasting salvation. O Lord, direct, sanctify and govern both my heart and
body, in the ways of thy laws, and in the works of thy commandments. Prevent
me, O Lord, in all my doings with thy most gracious favor, and further me with
thy continual help. I humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon my
infirmities. O Lord, grant me such strength and protection as may support me in
all dangers, and carry me through all temptations. O Lord, create and make in
me a new and contrite heart. O Lord keep me both outwardly in my body, and
inwardly in my soul. O Lord, give unto me the increase of Faith, Hope, and
Charity. O God, mercifully grant, that thy Holy Spirit may in all things direct
and rule my heart. We have a great number of such useful and holy Petitions in
our Liturgy, which if people would take but a little pains to fix in their
Memories, their hearts would be always ready; ready for God; ready with Sweet
Incense to offer up to him; so ready provided that honest Tradesmen in their
very Shops, painful Husbandmen at the Plough, and the poorest Servants at the
Mill, would not be at a loss for some Godly Prayers to send to the Throne of
Grace at every turn, to be united to the intercessions of the Lord Jesus for us
all.

III.
But the best way to strengthen and increase in us a spirit of Devotion, is
constantly to attend the Public Assemblies, and to bear our parts in them, at
the House of God. For this reason God loves the Gates of Sion, more than all
the Dwellings (or Private Houses) of Jacob, because at the Sanctuary the
Prayers of his Saints* are most fervent. Thither we go to sing aloud unto God
our strength; to make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob. There we meet
together to offer up all our praises with one Heart, and with one Lip. There
our Joint Devotion conglomerates in its right Center. There every one helps
to inflame his own Zeal; and his Brethrens also. There spark mixeth with spark,
and all serves to set fire to the Sacrifice. This therefore is the chief thing
I would recommend to your Christian care and practice, to attend with all
possible diligence the public and solemn service of God. What a shame is it,
that the ways of Sion should mourn for want of comers to the Temple? That the
fire and the wood should be in a readiness, and the Lambs be missing? Men
little think of those severe times, when the Primitive Christians were wont,
rather than fail, to rise up at Midnight, and to steal and creep away into
Holes and Caves, to Pray and sing Praises together. How joyful were all Pious
Hearts in those peaceable times following, when they saw Christian Churches
erected, and the Doors of them open, so that they might without fear or danger
enter in to worship God in the Beauty of Holiness? What Multitudes thronged in,
to offer violence to the Kingdom of God, in this sense, and (as Tertullian
speaks) to Beleaguer Heaven with a great Army? And with Alacrity and Zeal did
they send up their joint Prayers, when (as St. Jerome tells us) their Amen was
like the noise of Thunder? And how can we reflect on those happy Ages without
lamenting the great Degeneracy of this, when it is so hard a matter to persuade
some people to repair, though it be but once a day, to the solemnities of God's
Worship? For God'ssake, and your own Souls-sake, let me at last persuade you.
What is Priest and Parish, but one large Family? and why should we not meet
once aday especially (I wish it might be oftener) to pray unto God our Father,
to be Merciful and Gracious, and provident for us all? And where can we meet so
properly, so decently, so conveniently, as in our common Fathers House, who
has called us all unto Hope, and unto* one Business? Are our Families so
little that we cannot spare so much as one out of an House, to be Advocate and
Intercessor for the rest? Is the distance from the Church so great, that you
should count it more tedious then a Sabbaths Days journey? Are our Sins so few
and inconsiderable, that there is no need of our Prayers for Pardon? Is our
business so urgent, that we cannot spare a few minutes for the Honor of God,
and for the good of our Souls? Have we lost no time, that is necessary for us
to redeem? Our own safety and preservation, and the Blessing of God upon all
our Labors, and the prosperity of the whole Kingdom; are these such trifling
things, that we should not think it worth our while to step over our Thresholds
to meet together at Prayer for them? For God's sake let us in time lay to heart
the things, which thus manifestly belong to our Peace. If nothing else can make
us serious and thoughtful, a Deathbed will; and then it may be too late,
because we may not be serious to good purpose. Whether we shall be then true
Penitents, or truly Devout, is a thing uncertain; For it depends altogether
upon the Grace of God; and Men may Sin their time of Grace away. Our safest
course is to provide for Eternity betimes; and not to harden our hearts, but to
hear the voice of God, and to answer it with an Echo of Prayers and Praises,
while it is yet called, to Day: And as many as walk according to this rule,
Peace be on them and Mercy, and upon the whole Israel of God.

Amen.
Forms of PRAYER which may be used at Home every Morning and Evening daily.
MORNING PRAYERS.
O Lord our Heavenly Father, Almighty and Everlasting God, who have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day, Defend us in the same with thy mighty
power; and grant that this day we fall into no Sin, neither run into any kind
of Danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that which is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Almighty Lord and Everlasting God, vouchsafe we beseech thee to direct,
sanctify, and govern, both our Hearts and Bodies in the ways of thy Laws, and
in the works of thy Commandments, that through thy mighty Protection both here
and ever, we may be preserved in Body and Soul, through our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help; that in all our works begun, continued and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy Holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy may
obtain Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Almighty and most Merciful God, of thy bountiful goodness keep us, we
beseech thee, from all things that may hurt us; that we being ready both in
Body and Soul, may cheerfully accomplish those things, that thou would have
done, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, give us the increase of Faith, Hope, and
Charity; and that we may receive that which thou do promise, make us to love
that which thou do command, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

GRant to us, Lord, we beseech thee, the Spirit to think and do always such
things as be rightful; that we who cannot do any thing that is good without
thee, may by thee be enabled to live according to thy will, through Christ our
Lord.

LOrd of all Power and Might, who art the Author and giver of all good things,
graft in our Hearts the Love of thy Name, increase in us true Religion, nourish
us with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us in the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

ALmighty God, who have given thine only Son to be unto us (...) a Sacrifice
for Sin, and also an Ensample of Godly Life; give us grace that we may always
most thankfully receive that his inestimable Benefit; and also daily endeavor
ourselves to follow the blessed steps of his most holy Life, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord.

GRant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this World may be so
peaceably ordered by thy governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in
all godly quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and do
forgive the Sins of all them that are Penitent; Create and make in us new and
contrite Hearts; that we worthily lamenting our Sins, and acknowledging our
Wretchedness, may obtain of thee the God of all Mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy name turn from us all those Evils that we most righteously
have deserved; and grant, that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust
and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness
of living* to thy Honor and Glory, through our only Mediator and Advocate
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O God, who know us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers,
that by reason of the frailty of our Nature, we cannot always stand upright;
grant unto us such strength and protection, as may support us in all dangers,
and carry us through all temptations, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, etc.
EVENING PRAYERS.
LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great Mercy defend
us from all Perils and Dangers of this Night, for the love of thy only Son, our
Savior Jesus Christ.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, mercifully look upon our infirmities, and in all
our dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy Righthand to help and defend us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

ALmighty God, who see that we have no power of ourselves to help ourselves;
keep us both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our Souls; that we may be
defended from all adversities which may happen to the Body, and from all evil
thoughts which may assault and hurt the Soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord, we beseech thee, mercifully hear our Prayers, and spare all those who
confess their Sins unto thee; that they whose Consciences by Sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord.

GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we who for our evil deeds do
worthily deserve to be punished, by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully be
relieved, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, who do govern all things in Heaven and Earth;
mercifully hear the supplications of thy people, and grant us thy peace all the
days of our Life, through Christ our Lord.

O Lord, who have taught us, that all our doings without Charity are nothing
worth; send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift
of Charity, the very bond of Peace, and of all virtues, without which whosoever
lives, is counted dead before thee; grant this for thine only Son Jesus
Christ's sake.

O Lord God most Holy, O Lord most Mighty, O Holy and most merciful Savior,
deliver us not into the bitter pains of Eternal Death: Thou know, Lord, the
secrets of our Hearts, shut not thy merciful Ears to our Prayers; but spare us,
Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O holy and merciful Savior, thou most
worthy Judge Eternal, suffer us not at our last hour for any pains of Death to
fall from thee.

O God whose blessed Son was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil, and make us the Sons of God, and Heirs of Eternal Life; grant us, we
beseech thee, that having this hope, we may purify our selves, even as he is
pure; that when he shall appear again with power and great Glory, we may be
made like unto him in his Eternal and Glorious Kingdom; where with thee, O
Father, and thee O Holy Ghost, he lives and reigns ever one God, World
without end.

GRant, O Lord, that as we are Baptized into the Death of thy Blessed Son our
Savior Jesus Christ; so by continual mortifying our corrupt affections, we may
be buried with him; and that through the Grave, and Gate of Death, we may pass
to our joyful Resurrection, for his Merits, who died, and was buried, and rose
again for us, thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord, who never failest to help and govern them, whom thou do bring up in
thy steadfast, fear, and love; Keep us we beseech thee, under the protection of
thy good Providence, and make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy
Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord, we beseech thee, let thy continual pity cleanse and defend thy Church;
and because it cannot continue in safety without thy succor, preserve it
evermore by thy help and goodness, through Christ our Lord.

UNto God's gracious mercy and protection we commit our selves. The Lord bless
us, and keep us. The Lord make his face to shine upon us, and be gracions unto
us. The Lord lift up his Countenance upon us, and give us peace, both now and
evermore.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc.
Short PRAYERS fit to be learned by Heart, and to be used by single Persons at
any time.
LOrd have mercy upon me.

O God make clean my Heart within me,

And take not thy holy Spirit from me.

O Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the World, grant me thy Peace.

O Lord deal not with me after my Sins:

Neither reward me after mine iniquities.

Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my Heart to keep thy Laws.

Grant that all Carnal affections may die in me, and that all things belonging
to the Spirit may live and grow in me.

Grant that I may have power and strength to have Victory, and to Triumph
against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.

Lord send me help from thy Holy place;

And evermore mightily defend me.

Let the Enemy have no advantage of me,

Nor let the Wicked approach to hurt me.

Be unto me, O Lord, a strong tower

From the face of my Enemies.

O Savior of the World, who by thy Cross and precious Blood have redeemed me,
save me and help me, I humbly beseech thee, O Lord.

O Lord, bless me and keep me: O Lord lift up the light of thy Countenance upon
me, and give me peace.

Lord, hold thou up my goings in thy Paths, that my footsteps slip not.

Keep me as the apple of an Eye.

Hide me under the shadow of thy wings.

O cleanse me from my secret faults.

And keep thy Servant back from presumptuous Sins.

O remember not the Sins and offenses of my Youth; but according to thy mercy
think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness.

O keep my Soul and deliver me: Let me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in thee.

Lord hide not thy face from me, nor cast thy Servant away in displeasure.

Thou have been my succor: Leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
Salvation.

Into thy hands I commend my Spirit; for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou
God of Truth.

O let not the Foot of Pride come against me; and let not the hand of the
Ungodly cast me down.

Turn thy face from my Sins; and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit in me.

Comfort the Soul of thy Servant; for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my Soul.

Teach me thy way, O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth; O knit my heart unto
thee, that I may fear thy name.

So teach me to number my days, that I may apply my Heart unto Wisdom.

O let me have Understanding in the way of Godliness.

O that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy Statutes!

I am a stranger upon Earth: O hide not thy Commandments from me.

Open thou mine Eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law.

Lord, look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto
those that fear thy name.

I have gone astray, like as a Sheep that is lost: O seek thy Servant, for I do
not forget thy Commandments.

Do well, O Lord, unto those that are good and true of Heart.

As for me, I am poor and in misery, haste thee unto me, O God.

Thou art my helper and my Redeemer; O Lord, make no long tarrying.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by W. Crook, at the Green-Dragon without
Temple Bar, 1693.
1. THe London Practice of Physic, or the whole Practical Part of Physic,
contained in the Works of Dr. Tho. Willis; faithfully made English, and Printed
together for the Public good: To which is bound his Plain and Easy Method for
preserving from, and Curing of the Plague, and all other Contagious Diseases,
in 8o. price bound 8s.

2. The Christian Manual, in three Parts.

1. The Catechumen, or an Account given by the Young Person of his Knowledge in
Religion, before his Admission to the Lords Supper, as a Groundwork for his
right understanding the Sacrament: alone, price 8d.

2. And Introduction to a plain and safe way to the Communion Table, with
Prayers fitted for the Communicant, Before, At, and After the receiving of the
Lords Supper: To which is added the Communicants Assistant. Alone, price 1s.

3. The Primitive Institution, showing the great Benefit and Necessity of
Chatechising, to save the Souls of particular Persons, and to heal the present
Distempers of the Church, in 12o. Alone, price bound 1 s. But the whole
together 2 s. bound; Entitled the Christians Manual, all three by Dr. Addison
Dean of Lichfield.

3. The Historians Guide, or Britain's Remembrancer; being a Summary of all the
Actions, Battles, etc. Preferments, Changes, etc. that happened in his
Majesty's Kingdom, from An. Dom. 1600. to 1690. showing the Year, Month, and
Day of the Month each was done in; with an Alphabetical Table, for the more
easy finding out any thing in the Book, in 12o. Price bound 2 s.

4. Compendium Geographicum, or a more plain and easy Introduction into all
Geography than yet extant, after the latest Discoveries and Alterations; with
two Alphabets, 1. Of the Ancient, and 2. Of the Modern Names of Places, etc. by
P. C. Chamberlain of the Inner Temple, in 12o. price bound 1 s.

5. Bucaniers of America, or a true Account of the most Remarkable Assaults,
committed of late Years upon the Coasts of the West Indies, by the English and
French; with the unparalled Exploits of Sir H. Morgan, Captain Cook, Captain
Sharp, and other English Men: Also the great Cruelties of the French Bucaniers,
as of Lolonris, Barti, Portugues, Rock Brasiliano, etc. in two Volumes; both
bound together.

6. The Works of Homer, viz. His Illiads and Oddises, Translated out of Greek
into English by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, Third Edition, price bound 5 s.

7. Nine Treatises of Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, bound in two Volumes in 8vo,
viz. 1. His Behemoth, or Civil Wars of England. 2. His Historical Narration of
Heresy. 3. His Answer to Bishop Bramhall in Defense of his Leviathan. 4. His
Seven Problems; with an Apology to the King for his Writings. These four were
printed all at one time, and called his Tracts: price bound 5s. -- 5. His Life
in Latin, writ part by himself, and finished by Dr. B. 6. His Consideration on
his own Religion, Loyalty, etc. 7. His Art of Rhetoric in English. 8. His
Dialogue about the Common Law of England. 9. His Ten Dialogues of Natural
Philosophy in English. These Five last were printed at several times, and sold
single; but for convenience also bound in a Volume together, and sold for 7 s.
6 d.

8. A Modern View of such parts of Europe that has lately been, and still are,
the Places of great Transactions; viz. Italy, with all its Principalities:
France, with all its Provinces and Bishoprics; Germany, with the Dukedom of
Lorrain, and all the Electorates and Lordships of the Empire; Spain, with all
its Dominions, etc. Wherein is showed the Present State of all those Countries,
with curious Remarks of Antiquity interwoven, in 8o. price bound 2 s. 6 d.

9. The Case of the Resistance of the Supreme Powers Stated and Resolved,
according to the Holy Scriptures, by W. Sherlock, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, and
Master of the Temple, the Second Edition, in 8o. price bound 2 s.

10. A Plain and Easy Method, for preserving those that are well from the
Infection of the Plague, or any Contagious Distemper in City, Country, Camp,
Fleet, etc. and for Curing such as are infected with it; by Dr. Tho. Willis,
never printed before.

11. De Mirabilibus Pecci, being the Wonders of the Devils Arse of Peak, in
Latin and English, by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, in 12o. price bound 1 s.

12. Britain's Glory, and England's Bravery* wherein is showed the Degrees of
Honor from the Prince to the Peasant; the Precedence of all Persons, from the
Throne to the Bondsman, useful for all, especially for Feasts, Funerals,
Processions, and all great Assemblies, etc. With the Heralds Duty and Power;
and a Dictionary of the Terms in Heraldry, and an Account of all the Orders of
Knighthood in Christendom; by B. Smithurst in 120. price bound 1 s. 6 d.

13. The Court of Curiosity, wherein the most intricate Questions are resolved
by the most exact and curious Fortune Book that is extant. And Dreams and
Visions Interpreted and Explained according to the Doctrine of the Ancients,
and Practice of the Moderns. Much enlarged and explained in this third Edition,
120. price bound 1 s. 6 d.

14. Peppa, or the Reward of Constant Love, a Novel. Done out of French by a
Tongue Gentlewoman: with the several Songs set to Music, in 120. price 1 s. 6 d.

15. Dr. Hascard, Dean of Windsor his three Sermons on Public Occasions.

16. Dr. Maningham's Seven Sermons on several Occasions, in 4to.

17. -- His Two Discourses, 8vo.

18. Mr. Budgel's Sermon of Prayer, 4to.

19. Mr. Loightonhouse's Sermon on the Sacrament, 4to.

20. Mr. Buckly's Sermon at Hereford, 4to.

21. Dr. Harrison's Sermon on the Plot, 4to.

22. Mr. Wight's Disc. of Schism, 4to.

23. Mr. Chillingworth against the Papists, in Quarto and in Folio.

24. Des Escotai's Sermon at the Savoy, French and English.

25. Mr. Ellesby's Sermon on Jan. 30. 4to.

26. -- Discourse of Conscience, 4to.

27. Mr. Howell's Visitation Sermon, 4to.

28. Grotius. Chatechism, Greek, Latin, and English, with a Praxis to the
Greek, 8vo.

29. Mr. Howell's Spirit of Prophecy, 8vo.

30. Dr. Addison's State of the Jews, 120.

31. -- Modest Plea for the Clergy, 8vo.

32. -- First State of Mahumetism, 8vo.

33. -- Moors baffled in Tangier, 4to.

34. -- Chatechumen, 120.

35. -- Mr. Trahern's Souls Communion with her Savior, 120.

36. Kitchin's Jurisdiction of Courts, 8vo.

37. Lord Hobart's Reports.

38. Cook's Institutes, 2d, 3d, and 4th Parts.

39. Officina Brevium, fol.

40. Lord Littleton's Reports.

41. Complete Solicitor and Attorney.

42. Lord Saunder's Reports.

43. Mr. Hansard's new Book of Entries.

44. Doctor and Student.

45. Fitz. Natura Brevium.

46. Keilway's Reports, with the new references to all the Modern Reports.

47. Wingate's Abridgment of all the Statutes in force to K. W. and Q. M.

48. Bulstrode's Reports.

49. Dr. Howell's History of the World. The first and second Volumes published
by the Author in his Life time, Fol.

50. Clelia, a Romance.

51. Scarron's Comical Romance: being a facetious History of a Company of
Stage Players, Fol.

52. Journal of the House of Peers.

53. Journals of the House of Commons.

54. Townsend's Historical Collection of Queen Elizabeth's four last
Parliaments.

55. Last Seventeen Years of Queen Elizabeth.

56. The Connection in King James I. Reign, being a Supplement of remarkable
Passages omitted betwixt Mr. Townsend and Mr. Rushworth's Collections.

57. Fathers Advice to a Son on a Voyage.

58. Flower-Garden, and Complete Vineyard, by Mr. Hughes, 120.

59. King killing Doctrine of the Jesuits.

60. Brevis Demonstratio, or the Truth of Christian Religion demonstrated by
Reason, price 10 d. in 120.

61. Blunt's Voyage into the Levant.

62. Bridall's Present State of London.

63. Hobb's Homer in English, both Illiads and Odisses, with a large Preface of
Mr. Hobbs's about Heroic Poesy, 120. price 55.

64. -- Travels of Ulysses, Eng.

65. -- Behemoth, or Civil Wars of England.

66. -- Natural Philosophy.

67. -- Vita per Dr. Blackborn.

68. -- Poem on his Life, in English.

69. -- Poem on Darby Peak. Latin and English.

70. -- Narration of Heresy, and the Punishment thereof.

71. -- Answer to Bishop Bramhall, in Defense of Leviathan.

72. -- Letter of Liberty and Necessity.

73. -- Seven Problems.

74. -- Whole Art of Rhetoric, English.

75. -- Dialogue of the Laws of England.

76. -- Consideration on his Loyalty, Religion, Reputation, and Manners, 8vo.
price bound 1 s.

77. -- Leviathan in 4to. in Latin.

78. -- De Principiis and Ratiocinatione.

79. -- De Duplicatione Cubi.

80. -- Quadratura Circuli.

81. -- Rosetum Geometricum.

82. -- Principia and Problemata.

83. -- Epistola ad Ant. a Wood.

84. -- Lux Mathematicus.

85. -- Historia Ecclesiastic.

86. Popish Cruelties, being Dr. Parry's Trial.

87. Mr. Hallely's Golden Rule of Arithmatick made easy.

88. The True Englishman, 4to. by Dr. Harrison.

89. The Queen's Birthday Song, for Ap. 29. 1691.

New Books.
90. Cicero's Laelius, being a Discourse of Friendship: Written by M. T.
Cicero, in the latter part of his Age, when all the World were at Wars,
curiously Translated into English: price bound 1s. 6d.

91. Mr. Wright's Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Greswald, Wife to Mr. Greswald,
Rector of Sollyhull in Warwickshire.

92. A Brief Character of Ireland; with some Observations on the Customs,
Manners, and Behavior of the Native Irish. Written by J. B. Gent. that lived
among them long, 120. price bound 8d.

93. A Sermon Preached before the Queen, March 16. 1691/2. by Dr. Pelling,
Rector of Petworth.

94. A Sermon concerning Public Worship, Preached before the Queen, March 23.
1691/2. by Dr. Manningham, Rector of St. Andrew Holborn, London.

95. A Sermon Preached at the Assizes (held at Lincoln, March 6. 1691/2. by the
Lord Chief Justice Sir John Holt,) by Mr. Leightonhouse, Rector of
Washingburgh, nigh Lincoln, late Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxon.

96. A Practical Discourse upon the Blessed Sacrament; Showing the Duties of
the Communicant, Before, At, and After the Eucharist, by Edw. Pelling, D. D.
Rector of Petworth, and Chaplain to Their Majesty's.

97. A Sermon Preached, Sept. 28. 1692. at a Primary Visitation held at
Chichester, by the Right Reverend Father in GOD Robert Lord Bishop of
Chichester, published at the Bishops request, by Edw. Pelling, D. D. Chaplain
to Their Majesty's, and Rector of Petworth, 4to.

98. The Great Danger and Uncertainty of Deathbed Repentance, as it was
delivered in a Funeral Sermon at Chiswick, by J. Ellesby, Vicar thereof, in 4to.

ADVERTISEMENT.
DR. Willis's famous Pills for the Cure of the Scurvey, at 3s. a Box, are Sold
by W. Crook aforesaid, Mr. Bird in Westminster Hall, Mr. Harbin against the
Golden-Tun Tavern in the Strand, at Lichfield, Tamworth, Launceston,
Northampton, Tocester, Durham, Ipswich, Colchester, Bath, Bristol, etc.

FINIS.

