A COLLECTION OF Chronical Diseases, VIZ. The Colic: The Bilious Colic:
Hysteric Diseases: The Gout: And the Bloody Urine from the Stone in the
Kidneys.

By J. Pechey, M. A. Of the College of Physicians in London.

LONDON: Printed by J. R. and are to be Sold by Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion
in St. Paul's Church Yard, 1692.

ADVERTISEMENT.
MY Collections of Acute Diseases, being well approved of, I was encouraged to
publish these of Chronical Diseases; the first Chapter is taken from Riverius,
the other from the worthy Dr. Sydenham's Works; and it is probable I may go
through the whole History of Chronical Diseases, if God grant Life and
opportunity.

THE TABLE.
CHap. I. Of the Colic. The Colic takes its name from the part affected, viz.
the Colon, Page 1. The Causes of it, p. 1, 2, 3, 4. External Causes of it, p.
5. The Signs of the Causes, p. 6, 7, 8. The difference betwixt Nephritick
Pains, and the Colic, p. 8, 9. An obstinate Colic from Acrid Matter often
degenerates into other Diseases, p. 10. The Cure, ibid. The Cure of the Colic
when it degenerates into a Palsy, p. 15.
Chap. II. Of the Bilious Colic of the Years 1670, 71, 72. A Description of
the Disease, p. 17, 18. The Cure, p. 19. The Pain is apt to return, p. 23.
Riding good in this Disease, p. 24. A thin Diet must be observed, p. 25. The
Hysteric Colic, p. 26. The Cure of it, p. 28. The Cure of the Jaundice,
coming upon this Disease, p. 30, 31.
Chap. III. Of Hysteric Diseases. This Disease is the most frequent of all
Chronical Diseases. p. 32. The great variety of this Disease, p. 33, 34, 35,
36, 37, 38, 39. The procatartick, or external Causes of this Disease, p. 40.
The origin and antecedent cause of the Ataxy, p. 41. Mother Fits, p. 43.
Clavus Histericus, p. 44. Hypochondriack Colic, p. 45. Spitting common in
Hysterical Women, p. 46. Of the Cold in Hysterical Diseases, ibid* Fits of
Weeping, p. 47. The disturbance and varying intemperies of the Body and Mind,
is occasioned by the inordination of the Spirits, p. 48. This Disease is not
occasioned by Seed and Menstruous Blood, p. 49. The chief indications in this
Disease, p. 51. Bleeding in the Arm is ordered, p. 52. Chalybeat Remedies are
ordered, ibid. Steel is best given in Substance, p. 53. Purging is not to be
used in a Chalybeat Course, p. 54. A Prescription for Swelling of the Belly, p.
56. The Rickets, p. 56. Filings of Steel, p. 57. Hysteric Medicines are to be
used in a Steel course, ibid. Medicines to answer all the Indications, p. 58,
59, 60. Chalybeats sometimes cause great Disorders in Women, p. 60. What is to
be done when the Disease is but small, ibid. Some Women abhor Hysterical
Medicines, by a certain Ideosyncracy, ibid. Of Drinking Tunbridge-Waters in
this case, p. 61. What is to be observed in Drinking them, p. 62. Of hot
Sulphurous Waters to be used in this case, p. 63. Venice Treacle is a great
Remedy in this Disease, ibid. Spanish Wine Medicated with Gentian is good, p.
63, 64. A Milk Diet is to be used, p. 65. Riding on Horseback best, p. 66.
Riding on Horseback not proper for delicate Women, p. 67. Riding is good for
People in Consumptions, p. 68. In the Fits we must use Hysterical Medicines, p.
69. Laudanum must not be used to quiet the pains occasioned by Vomiting, 'till
Evacuations have been used, p. 70. The likeness betwixt this Disease and
Nephritick Pains, p. 73. The errors which hurt Childbed Women, p. 76.
Medicines to cause the Locha to flow, p. 78. The immoderate Flux of the
Courses, p. 81, 82, 83. A Cooling and thickening Diet must be ordered, p. 83.
Falling of the Womb, p. 84.
Chap. IV. Of the Gout. The Gout chiefly seizes Old Men, and People of a gross
Habit of Body, p. 86. Sometimes it seizes thin People, and those that are in
the Flower of their Age, p. 87. The regular Gout, p. 88. Rich Men and Wise Men
are more troubled with the Gout than Poor Men and Fools, p. 97. Women are
seldom troubled with the Gout, ibid. Boys and Youth have not the genuine Gout,
ibid* The Disease rises from the weakened Concoctions, p. 98. Of the Cure, p.
100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111. Digestive Remedies
must be used constantly, p. 117. A Mediocrity is to be observed in Meat and
Drink, p. 119. A Milk Diet, p. 120. Liquors, p. 122. Dietetick Drink, p. 125.
Those that have been used to Wine must not leave it off suddenly, p. 126. The
Sick must go to Bed early, p. 127. Tranquillity of Mind must by all means be
obtained, p. 128. Exercise of the Body most profitable, p. 129. Riding on
Horseback is the best Exercise, p. 131. Exercise must be used in a good Air,
p. 132. Venery, ibid. Of keeping in Bed the First Days, p. 137. We must apply
our selves to those Symptoms whereby the Life of the Patient is endangered, p.
138. The translation of the Morbisick Matter upon the Lungs, p. 140. The Stone
in the Kidneys, ibid. External Remedies for the Gout, p. 141. The Pultis for
the Gout, p. 142. The Moxa, ibid.
Chap. V. Of the Bloody Urine from the Stone in the Kidneys. Manna good in this
case, p. 146. A Paregorick was given every Night at Bedtime after Purging, p.
147. The Regimen and manner of Diet, p. 148. If the Stone is large, Manna must
not be taken in Purging Mineral Waters, p. 150. Chalybeat Waters must not be
used when the Stone is too large to pass through the Vreters, p. 152.

A TREATISE OF Chronical Diseases.
CHAP. I. Of the Colic.
THE Colic takes its Name from the part affected, which is the Colon, a long
and winding Gut, appointed to receive the Excrements of almost the whole Body;
and if those Excrements are retained too long, they are wont to occasion Pains
of this kind, the Excrementitious Matter occasioning a Dissolution of the
continuity either by distending, or pricking, or corroding; and this Matter is
either Wind or Humor.

Wind proceeding from Crudities, or from a cold intemperies of the Stomach or
Guts, if it be stopped by reason the Excrements are grown hard, or because
something else obstructs the Intestines (a great quantity of it remaining in
the great Guts, especially in the Colon) occasions violent Pain.

Gross cold and phlegmatic Humors driven into the Tunicles of the Intestines,
may occasion such Pain, either by gnawing, if they are Acrimonious or Briney,
or by chilling the part which is consequently bound up thereby, and much
disordered, (as Galen says, when he was grievously afflicted with the Colic,
he evacuated a Glassy sort of Phlegm actually cold,) or by emitting Wind, which
is easily elevated by a small Heat from the gross viscid and clammy Humor.

Lastly, Choleric and Acrid Humors, and also Melancholy and Acid by pricking
and twiching the Intestines, cause such Pains. But it may be asked how it comes
to pass, that in the action of these causes, the Colic should have its
exacerbations and remissions, the same Matter remaining in the Intestines,
which as it is present, should continually gnaw and distend. To which I answer,
that sometimes that Matter remains quiet, and so at that time occasions little
or no pain; but that at other times it is moved and excited by various
Fermentations, which happen in the Humors, as is usual in an Epilepsie,
Hysteric Fits, and the accession of Fevers.

But we must take notice that the Wind or Humors don't only reside in the
Cavity of the Intestines, for then they would be easily excluded, by evacuating
deterging and carminative Medicines; but for the most part insinuate themselves
into the Coats of the Intestines, and for that reason they are difficultly
removed; and so the Disease lasts longer, and cannot be easily eradicated by the
foresaid Remedies. The gross and phlegmatic and melancholy Humors flow by
little and little through the Veins of the Intestines, into their substance,
and so don't presently cause Pain, 'till there is a quantity sufficient to
irritate Nature for their expulsion; and then being moved and exagitated, cause
Pain. Or Wind, occasioned by them, and included in the Coats of the Intestines,
distends and twitches them, and not easily getting out, occasions a lasting
Pain. Also Choler after the same manner poured through the Veins of the
Intestines upon their Coats, and imbibed by them, causes violent Pains, which
are wont to be long and obstinate, because it is difficultly removed from their
Substance.

There is another Species of a Bilious Colic which degenerates into a Palsy,
scarce known to the Ancients, which proceeds from a bilious Humor, not poured
as the former upon the Colon, but of a sudden upon the Membranes of the
Abdomen, which is transferred thither, either from the Gaul-Bladder, or from
the Mesentery in the Crisis of long Fevers, or by reason of violent Anger, or
some other external cause, when because of Obstructions, it cannot be carried to
the common passages, but by a preposterous motion is put off suddenly upon the
foresaid Membranes of the Abdomen. And hence great pain arises like the Colic,
which yields neither to Clysters nor to any other Remedy, but continues for
many Months, by which the Body Wastes, and the Sick is vexed with a sort of
intermittent Fever, and often with a slow continual Fever; at length the pain
remitting, a Palsy succeeds, that Humor leasurely creeping through the
Membranes of the Abdomen, to the Spine of the Back. But this Palsy chiefly
possesses the upper parts; yet there is most commonly a Pain in the Thighs and
Legs, and in some few the use of them is wholly taken away; the Choler by
reason of its Levity moving chiefly upwards; and sometimes it breaks in upon
the Brain, and causes Epileptick Fits, from whence Death generally follows.

There are other causes of the Colic, but less frequent, viz. Stones growing
in the Guts, Worms wound up in a bottom, and Obstructing the Intestines, a
compression of the Guts, by a tumor of the Neighboring Parts, and the
narrowness of them by reason of an Inflammation, and other tumors of the Guts,
or a twisting of them, occasioned by Wind, which is next to an Iliac Passion;
and sometimes the Matter which causes a Colic is venomous and malignant, and
so it is a Pestilential Colic. As Paulus Aegineta relates, that a Pestilential
Colic arising in Italy, was very troublesome to many of the Roman Provinces.
Lastly, all hard Bodies by obstructing the Guts, or distending them, may
occasion a Colic, as Stones generated in the Guts, a great quantity of Cherry
Stones, hard Cheese, and the like. As Platerus relates of a certain Governor a
long while troubled with the Colic and Convulsions, who after the use of
Clysters, evacuated a great quantity of hard Cheese by Stool, which had
remained a long time in his Guts; for before he was Sick, he eat of it
immoderately.

The external causes, are a cold constitution of the Air pressing and hardening
the Belly, or a hot Constitution which does likewise harden the Excrements, for
all their Moisture is dried up by heat: The use of Meat and Drink unfit for the
Man's Constitution, of crude and harsh Fruits, and of gross Meats of hard
Digestion, too much Rest, immoderate Sleep, unseasonable Exercise, immoderate
Venery, and other external Causes which may injure the Concoction of the
Stomach. The Diagnosticks in this Disease are plain, for first the Pain is
violent; for if it be small, it ought not to be called the Colic; and then the
pain is wandering, sometimes it grievously afficts this part, sometimes that,
so that sometimes it possesses the Region of the Spleen, sometimes of the
Stomach or Liver, or of the Reins, sometimes it is above, sometimes below the
Navel, and oftentimes it is most violent in the left side, because in that part
there is a narrowness first observed by Bauhinus. For when the Excrements in
the upper and capacious part of the Colon being hardened into great Clods,
agreeable to the capacity of it, are violently driven by the Wind toward that
narrow part, they cannot pass through without great pain; by reason of which
Symptom the Colic is often taken for Splenetick or Nephritick Pains; neither
are they easily distinguished when the Signs of each are compared one with
another. But sometimes the pain is more fixed and settled in one place, and like
the boring of an Auger. The Patient often Vomits, the Stomach being affected by
consent of Parts, and Phlegm is sometimes cast up, and sometimes Choler, green
as a Leek, and like Verdegrease: The pain is increased after Eating, because
the Stomach being full, presses the Guts. The Belly is most commonly so bound,
that the Sick can evacuate nothing that way, not so much as Wind; but if any
thing be evacuated naturally or by art, it is chiefly windy, and like Cow Dung,
and Swims upon the Water, being for the most part Phlegmatic; for Phlegm
voided by Stool, is wont to swim upon Water and serous Excrements: But
sometimes the Belly is so much bound when the pain is violent, that strong
Purging Medicines will not work at all.

The Signs of the Causes are distinguished after this manner.

If the pain proceed from Phlegm, it is not so violent, unless it be accompained
with Wind, which cannot break out of the Places it is contained in, for then the
pain is violent, and sometimes remains in one part, and seems to bore as with
an Auger, and sometimes it is in many Parts, when the Wind wanders about. The
Sick is eased by hot things, but is injured by cold things. A course of Diet
went before, apt to increase Phlegm. The Urine is crude and sometimes whitish,
but not always which is wont to impose upon young and unskilful Physicians, for
sometimes in a Phlegmatic and Windy Colic, the Urine is yellow and red dish,
by reason of the Pain which inslames the Humors contained in the Veins and
Arteries. Which Avicen has wisely observed, He says, no one should deceive
himself, by judging the Disease is hot, from drouth, inflammation, and redness
of the Water, for 'that's common to all.

If the Colic is occasioned by Wind, there is a stretching Pain, and certain
inflation of the Belly: The Sick perceive a great deal of Wind, and a rumbling
of the Belly, they are much eased by breaking Wind. A course of Diet fit to
breed Wind went before, as unseasonable Drinking of cold Water, the frequent
use of Pulse, Turnips, Chestnuts, Herbs and Fruits, and the like. And if the
Wind be contained in the cavity of the Intestines, the Pain is wandering, and
not fixed to one Place, and is renewed by Intervals; but if it be kept in
within the coats of the Guts, the Pain is fixed, because the Wind cannot change
its place, and is continual and obstinate, because it cannot find vent.

If the Colic proceeds from an Acrid and Choleric Humor, it is most sharp;
there is a twiching and pricking Heat, Drouth, and for the most part a Fever,
and the Urine is very Choleric, and the Disease is increased by hot Medicines
and Diet, and is mitigated by cold, and likewise by the excretion of Choleric
Matter, and a course of Diet fit to breed Choler went before. The pains of the
other parts contained in the lower Belly, are easily distinguished from the
Colic by their proper signs, except the Nephritick pain, whose signs are so
like those of the Colic, that oftentimes the most skilful Physician cannot
distinguish them, as Galen confesses of himself, being afflicted with the
Colic Pain, he thought 'twas Nephritick, by reason of a Stone driven into one
of the Ureters, 'till the Humor being evacuated by Stool, and so the pain
ceasing, he found 'twas the Colic. But by the following Signs, these two
Diseases may be plainly distinguished, if they are accurately examined.

First, The Nephritick pain is fixed in the Kidny, and stretches it self from
that to the Testis, according to the length of the Ureter; but the Colic is
wandering, and painfuly girds the lower Belly.

Secondly, The Colic increases after Eating, by reason of the pressure upon
the Gut by a full Stomach; but the Nephritick pain is not at all increased
after Eating, but rather lessened, because some of the nutricious Juice is
carried to the Reins, which somewhat asswages the Pain.

Thirdly, In the Colic, Vomiting is more severe, and the Belly is more bound,
because the Colon lies near the bottom of the Stomach, and the Intestines being
full or violently provoked, contract themselves, that they may expel the Enemy;
but either of the Symptoms is common to either of the Diseases: So that the
intension or remission of them, has a difficult diagnostick; for the Nephritick
pain being intense, may occasion greater Vomiting, and bind the Belly more than
a remiss Colic.

Fourthly, In the Colic, the Patient is more eased by Vomiting and going to
Stool, than in Nephritick Pains.

Fifthly, In the Nephritick pain, the Urine is first clear and thin, afterward
something settles to the bottom, and at length Sand or Gravel is evacuated: But
in the Colic the Urine is thicker, from the beginning.

As to the Prognostics, the Colic most commonly, if it be gentle and remiss,
and not very lasting, and not fixed in one part, and intermits, and does not
wholly stop the Belly, is curable and without danger. But if the pain be
violent and fixed to one part, and does not intermit, and if nothing be
evacuated by Stool, and if the Patient cannot Sleep; and lastly, if Vomiting,
Hickocks, Delirium, Coldness of the Extreme Parts, and cold Sweats follow, the
Disease is Deadly.

An obstinate Colic from Acrid Matter, especially occasioned by Choleric
Matter, often degenerates into other most dreadful Diseases, as to the Gout or
Epilepsie, but oftener to the Palsy.

A contagious Pestilential and Epidemick Colic is most commonly deadly.

The Cure of this Disease must be varied according to the variety of the Causes.

And First, There is the same way of Cure for a windy and Phlegmatic Colic:
You must begin with an emollient Clyster, and afterward you must give a
carminative and discutient Clyster, which must be repeated twice, thrice, or
four times in a Day, till the Pain be gone. But if after the use of one or two
Clysters, the Sick does not go to Stool, as sometimes it happens, the Belly
must be irritated by a sharp Suppository; but it is convenient to add to one of
the Clysters iiij of the Aq. Benedicta, or ij, or iij of Coloquintida may be
boiled in an emollient and carminative Clyster.

If Clysters don't give ease, you must not obstinately persist in the use of
them; but it is better to use some gentle Medicine. It has been observed, that
when a Sick Person has taken without any success Thirty Clysters, another
Physician having given only iss of Manna, with ij of Oil of Almonds in Fat Hen
Broth, has cured the Patient: But in that pain which proceeds from thick Phlegm,
stronger Medicines must be given.

Afterward Fomentations, Ointments, Baths, Plasters, and other Remedies, are
useful; to which must be added some Specificks very proper in this Disease.

Wash the Guts of a Wolf in White Wind, and afterward dry them in a Furnace,
in an Earthen Vessel, till they may be powdered, let the Sick take i of this
Powder in White Wind, it presently eases pain. Boil Simple Water, and when it is
Boiling Hot, add a Fourth part of common Oil, and some Grains of Pepper grossly
beaten; let the Sick take Three or Four Spoonfuls as hot as he can bear it, the
pain will be gone as 'twere in a moment.

Take of the best Aloes i, of Laudanum Opiatum, gr. iv, of Diagridium, gr. vi,
Mingle them, make Six Pills, guild them. Let the Sick take them at a convenient
time, they give ease in an Hours time, and afterward purge off the noxious
Humors. Instead of the Pills, a Potion may be taken, made of ss of
Diaph^enicon, and ij of Philonium Romanum, in the Water or Decoction of
Chamomil.

Hypocrates proposes a Purge made of Wild Purslain and Meconium. Six of Fresh
Oil of sweet or bitter Almonds taken, assuage the Pain, and carry the marter
sticking to the Guts downwards, and mixed with the following things, it does a
great deal of good.

Take of the Oil of Almonds, or of some other Oil for Poor People iiij, of
Generous Wine i, of Syrup of Poppies i, mingle them, make a Potion.

Oil of Sweet Almonds also taken with Manna in fat Broth, asswages the pain,
and evacuates the Peccant Matter.

The Seed of Ammi powdered, and i of it given in Wine, soon takes off the pain,
and being given a Second time, it most commonly cures the Disease; a Cataplasm
of iij of Turpentine being applied with Stupes at the same time, to which must
be added of the Sinapisatum Piperis, and of Dragons Blood, each i.

Paracelsus's Galbanetum is proper to discuss the Humor, if the whole Belly be
anointed with it: This Description of it is proposed by Crato.

Take of Gum Eleme, of Ivy, of Galbanum, of Oil of Laurel, each equal parts,
distill them in a Retort in Sand; keep what comes over apart, first the Water,
then the clear Oil, afterward the thick Oil like Honey, which must be used
first.

Take of Calamus Aromaticus i, of Galangal iij, of the Yellow of the outward
Peel of Oranges iiij, of choice Cinnamon, of Anise and Fennel Seeds each iij, of
Cummin Seed vi, of fresh Juniper Berries ss, of Laurel Berries iij, let them be
finely Powdered and infused in vi th of Malago Sack, let them stand in a warm
place for vi days, afterward distill them in B. M. the Dose is i evacuations
going before.

Gum Caragna and Tacamahaca may be conveniently applied to the Belly, and
before they are put on, a Cupping-Glass may be applied t^ ^he Navel.

And tho the foresaid Plasters are not applied, yet the Cupping-Glass ought to
be applied to the Navel, which Galen says, does like a Charm, remove the pain
occasioned by Wind.

If the Disease is lasting, it may be successfully treated with the Decoction
of Guaiacum continued for many days, purging now and then, and injecting
Clysters frequently; but if the Colic proceed from glassy Phlegm, boil the
Guaiacum with Wine, as Amatus Lucitanus used it with good success.

The pain being quieted, an Apozem evacuating Phlegm is to be prescribed, by
which the Relics of the Disease may be carried off, or instead of that, a
decoction of an old Cock, compounded of such things as purge and attenuate.

A bilious Colic is cured by emollient Clysters, and with such things as
attemperate the Acrimony of the humors.

Let the Belly be fomented with an emollient and anodyne Decoction, or which is
better, let a Semicupium be prepared of the same Decoction.

A Cataplasm will also be convenient, prepared with Barly-meal, and Flax-seed
boiled in Oil of Camomel, and applied to the bottom of the Belly.

Also a cooling Epithem compounded after this manner, to be applied to the
region of the Liver, will be proper:

Take of the Juice of Endive, of Cichory, each thss. of the Juice of Lettice
and Rose-Vinegar each ij, mingle them, make an Epithem.

Give Juleps of the water of erratic Poppy, of Lettice and Sorrel, with the
Syrups of Violets, of Apples, and of Lemons.

If the pain is very violent we must use Narcoticks. The pain being somewhat
mitigated, an infusion of Rubarb in Cichory-water is to be given, with Syrup of
Roses, and to be repeated often, till the stock of matter is evacuated. If
gentle purging be not sufficient to eradicate the Disease, we must use
Mercurius dulcis, which being given sometimes with Purging Medicines, that have
Diagridium in them, perfects the Cure. They that dislike Diagridium may give
Mercurius dulcis alone, made into Pills with Conserve of Roses, drinking upon
them an infusion of Rubarb and Senna, with Manna and Syrup of Roses added to it.

Afterward 'twill be convenient to use Tunbridge, or such like Water.

When the pain is violent, we must fly to Baths and Laudanum, with which
Catharticks may be sometimes given, but in a large Dose, because the quality is
much blunted by Laudanun.

Paracelsus's Galbanetum, tho it is hot, is proper to discuss the humor, if the
whole Belly is anointed with it; the description of it is above.

Bleeding is sometimes proper in this sort of Colic, when there is danger,
lest the violence of the heat should occasion a Fever; but if there be a Fever
already, it is presently to be used.

When there is a great drouth, Cold water must be given, according to Galen's
instruction; and Amalus Lusitanus says, he wonderfully Cured of a sudden, such
a pain by the use of it; and Septalius declares in two Observations, that he
used it inwardly and outwardly with great success.

For the Cure of a Colic that degenerates into a Palsy, put the Patient into
a warm Bath, made of a Decoction of emollient things, the Belly being loosened
with various Clysters, and the first passages opened by Catharticks. The
Patient must be bathed twice, thrice, or four or five times in a day, that the
Acrimony of the Humors may be attemperated, and that the Pores of the
Membranes may be opened. The next day let the Humor be purged with some proper
Cathartick, and then the Bath must be repeated; and so you must do every other
day, if the Patient be able to bear it, till the humors being purged off, and
the pain quieted, he is recovered.

In the mean while, you must continue the use of Clysters; but those made of
Milk are best to assuage the pain; to which you may add Cassia, Oil of Violets,
and Oil of Lillies.

Let the Belly be frequently anointed with Oil of Chamomel, of Dill, sweet
Almonds, Lillies, and with Butter.

Lastly, Use Whey and Tunbridge-waters, or the like: And if the Disease
continue a long while, those things may be used which are proper to Cure
Hypocondrical Melancholy.

And Bleeding is to be used at the beginning of the Disease, and before
Purging, and to be often repeated, if the Blood seem to be bad, or if something
of a Rheumatism seem to be joined with it.

Lastly, All those Remedies which are proposed for the Cure of the Bilious
Colic, may be used in this case; and if these things do no good, some
Physicians prescribe the following Potion, which though it be loathsome, and
will not go down with the delicate, yet they say it presently mitigates the pain.

Take of Horse-Dung i, crumble it into small pieces, and infuse it in lbi of
Erratic Poppy water, to which add viij or x Drops of Spirit of Wine; stram it
gently, and divide it into Three Doses, to be taken at the times in which the
Pain is most violent.

But if the Disease degenerate into a Palsy, you must use to the Spine of the
Back, and the Paralitick Parts, some resolvent Balsom, and such a one as
strengthens the Nerves if there be a Fever. But if there be no Fever, you may
apply Wool dipped in Oil or Ointment to the Paralitick parts, taking great care
that the Patient does not catch cold, for by that means the Humor will be more
fixed upon the part, and the perspiration of it will be hindered. Paracelsus's
Galbanetum is very useful in this case, if it be applied to the foresaid parts,
and also to the Navel.

CHAP. II. Of the Bilious Colic of the Years 1670, 71, 72.
IN all these Years the Blood was much inclined to put off upon the Bowels Hot
and Choleric Humors, upon which account this Colic was more frequent than is
usual: The same Febrile Symptoms preceeded this Disease as used to go before
the Dysentery that reigned in those times; and sometimes this Disease followed
the Dysentery, when it had a long while afflicted the Patient, and was just
about to leave him. But when it did not follow a long Dysentery, it generally
took its rise from a Fever, which after some Hours was wont to end in this
Disease. It chiefly siez'd young People of a Hot and Choleric Constitution,
especially in the Summer. The pain of the Bowels was extremely violent, and
more intolerable than any other that afflicts poor Mortals. It sometimes binds
as it were the Guts, and sometimes being contracted to a point, it bores like
an Auger. The pain now and then remits, and presently the Fit approaches again,
which as soon as the Patient perceives, he looks sadly, and bemoans himself as
if 'twere actually upon him. At the beginning of this Disease, the pain is not
so certainly determined to one point, as in the progress of it; neither is the
Vomiting so frequent, neither does the Belly so obstinately resist Catharticks;
but the more the pain is increased, the more pertinaciously is it fixed in a
point, the Vomiting is more frequent, and the Belly more bound, till at length
by the dreadful force of these Symptoms, a total inversion of the Peristaltick
motion of the Guts, (if the Patient be not soon relieved,) and by consequence
an Iliac Passion is procured; in which Disease all Purging Medicines become
presently Emetick, and Clysters that are injected, are vomited up with the
Excrements. The Matter that is cast up after this Manner, if it be sincere and
without mixture, is sometimes green, and sometimes yellow, and sometimes of an
unusual color.

Now seeing every Phenomenon of this Disease shows plainly that it proceeds
from some Acrid Humor, or Vapor put off by the Blood upon the Intestines;
this in my Opinion is the chief curative Indication, namely, that the said
Humor should be evacuated, as well that which is antecedently in the Veins, as
that which is contained in the Guts; and the next to this is, that the force of
the Humors tending thither* should be restrained by the use of Anodines* and
that the violent pain should be mitigated by them.

Therefore I order that Blood should be freely taken from the Arm, if no Blood
has been taken away before; and after The Cure.
Two or Three Hours, I give an Anodine. The next day I prescribe some gentle
Purge, and to be repeated the next day save one, and sometimes thrice,
according as the Relics of the Humor are more or less.

But we must take notice, that if this Disease proceed from Eating too much
Fruit, or from any Meat of hard Digestion, upon which account ill and corrupted
Juices are first transmitted to the Blood, and afterward to the Bowels, I say
in this case the Stomach must be washed with large Draughts of Posset Drink,
which must be Vomited up again; which being done, an Anodine is to be given,
and the next day a Vein must be opened; and as to other things, you must
proceed according to the Directions abovementioned. But when the violence of
the Pain, and the Vomiting (by reason of which the Guts are as it were
inverted) do resist the operation of the Catharticks, they must be made
stronger; for it is in vain to give a gentle Cathartick, unless the Patient is
easily Purged, which must be carefully inquired into; for such a Medicine being
not strong enough to make its way through the Intestines, the Patient is more
injured thereby; for by its ineffectual agitation, the Vomiting and the Pain is
increased. A Lenitive Cathartick Potion, of the infusion of Tamarinds, of the
Leaves of Senna and Rubarb, in which may be dissolved Manna, and Syrup of
Roses, is to be preferred before other Catharticks, for it least exagitates and
moves the Humors. But if the Sick cannot retain a Liquid Medicine, by reason of
an aversion, or because of the Vomiting, you must necessarily use Pills, among
which the Pill Cochia pleases me best, for they pass best through the Body in
this and in most other cases. But when the weakness of the Stomach, or the
Vomiting is so great, that the Pills cannot be retained, then I first order an
Anodine, and a few Hours after a Purge; but there must be so much space betwixt
them, that the Cathartick be not quelled by the Narcotick, and so rendered
ineffectual; but that it may continue so long in the Stomach, as is necessary
for its imparting its Purgative* quality to it, that it may operate when the
virtue of the Narcotick is spent; though the Purge if it could be conveniently
done, is best given a long while after the Anodine; for Twelve Hours after
taking it, the Patient is difficultly Purged.

But because in this as well as in most other Diseases, in which Narcoticks are
indicated, a Purge always increases the Pain (at least when it has done
working, for while it is in operation, the Patient is not so ill,) therefore I
usually give an Anodine as soon as the Purge has done working, which I order to
be taken Morning and Evening Daily, viz. In the middle spaces betwixt the
Purges, that I may the more certainly appease the Pain till the Patient has
been sufficiently Purged.

The Purging of the Humors being over, I endeavor to bridle the fury of the
Disease, (which now only remains to be done,) by giving an Anodine constantly
Morning and Evening, which must be sometimes repeated oftener; nor could I ever
take off violent pains, without a larger Dose than is usual, and that repeated
too; for that which is sufficient to vanquish another Disease, will be
altogether insufficient in this case, the violence of the Disease subduing the
force of the Medicine: And it is indeed safe to repeat Narcoticks, while such a
pain as this continues violent, but not when it is gone off. Wherefore I repeat
the Anodine according to the degree of the pain, till it ceases, or till it be
very much lessened; yet there must be such a space of time between them, that I
may find what may be hoped for from the former Dose, before I give another: But
for the most part, unless the pain be very violent, a Paregorick given Morning
and Evening may be sufficient. Liquid Laudanum is the Anodine I chiefly use, of
which I give Sixteen Drops in some Cordial Water, or the Dose may be increased
according to the violence of the Pain.

This plain Method by which first the Peccant Matter is evacuated by Bleeding
and Purging, and then ease procured by the help of Narcoticks, succeeded better
in my practice, than any other I ever knew; whereas Carminative Clysters,
injected in order to Exterminate the Acrid Humors, do only stir the Coals, and
render the Disease more lasting, by the tumult they raise in the Humors. But
here I must admonish you, that though I have said Bleeding and Purging must
necessarily precede this quieting Method, yet sometimes upon occasion both
being omitted, you must begin with Anodines. For instance, when by reason of
some preceding Sickness, large Evacuations have been used not long before the
coming of the Colic, (for many times they who have recovered of another
Disease, have fell suddenly into this, by reason of a weakness of the Bowels,
especially if there be a great degree of Heat, occasioned by drinking of Wine,
or some other Spirituous Liquor immoderately,) I say in this case, it is not
only unnecessary, but I think it is injurious to give Catharticks again, for by
them new Tumults will be raised. Moreover the Guts are most commonly
sufficiently cleans'd by Clysters, frequently used before the Physician is
advised with; so that partly for this cause, and partly by reason of the long
continuance of the Disease, Narcoticks seem in a manner to be only useful.

In August, 1671, the Noble Baron Annesly being afflicted with the Bilious
Colic, with intolerable Pain, and frequent Vomiting for some Days, sent for me
to the Castle of Belvoir; he had tried all sorts of Clysters and other
Remedies, by the prescription of Learned and Experienced Physicians living
thereabout. I advised without any more ado, the repeated use of Narcoticks,
according to the Method just delivered, by which he recovered in a few Days,
and came to Town well with me.

But because this pain of its own nature is wont to return more than any other,
all occasions of its Relapse must be prevented, by giving an Anodine twice a
Day for some Days: But if as often as the Narcotick is intermitted, the pain
now and then returns, as it sometimes happens, I don't know any thing that will
so certainly perfect the Cure, as Riding on Horseback, or in a Coach, with
which the Patient must take long Journies* and in the mean while an Anodine
must be given constantly Morning and Evening; for by this kind of Exercises,
the Matter causing the Disease, is removed to the habit of the Body, and the
Blood being broke into small parts by perpetual agitation, is as it were
depurated again, and at length the Intestines are much strengthened and
refreshed by this way of stirring up the natural Heat. Nor am I ashamed to
confess, that by the help of this Exercise, I have more than once perfectly
cured this Disease, when I was not able to cure it any other way; but this must
not be used before the Patient has been well Purged, and then he must continue
the use of it for many Days.

One of my poor Neighbors who is now Living, was afflicted in these Years with
a most violent Bilious Colic, who a long time endeavored, but in vain, to
conquer the Disease by Catharticks, Clysters, and Leaden Bullets swallowed
down; I ordered him to use Narcoticks frequently, which he did with good
success, for as often as he used them, he found himself very easy; but seeing
the Disease was only palliated with these things and not extirpated (for it
returned as soon as the virtue of the Narcotick was spent,) I took pity upon the
Man, being grievously afflicted with this Disease, and also with Poverty, and
lent him one of my Horses, that he might go a Journey as above directed, and
having traveled a few Days, the Bowels grew so strong, as to be able to shake
off the Relics of the Disease, and so he perfectly recovered, without the help
of Anodines.

And to speak the truth, I have known this kind of Exercise has been always
used with admirable success in most other Chronical Diseases, if the Patient
continued it resolutely. For if we consider with our selves, that the lower
Belly in which are placed the Organs of Secretion, are much shaken by this
Exercise, perhaps some Thousands of times in a Day, we shall easily believe
that they are able by the help of the foresaid Exercise, to shake off any
Excrementitious Juice that is impacted there; and (which is of greater Moment
yet,) that they are so corroborated by that powerful excitation of the native
Heat, that they may duly perform that office of purifying the Blood which
Nature has appointed them.

If the Patient be Young, and of a Hot Constitution, I order a cooling and
thickening Diet, suppose Pulp of Barley, Panada, and the like, and every third
day if the Stomach is craving, a Chick, or a Whiting boiled. I allow no other
Drink than Small-beer, or Milk-water: And this is all I order, unless Riding
necessary to recover the Health, requires more nourishing Food, and more
generous Liquor, by which the Spirits exhausted by Exercise may be repaired.

But when the Disease being unskilfully treated has a long while afflicted the
Patient, so that the Bowels become weak and infirm, and he is in a manner quite
wasted, I say in this case we find by experience, that the free use of
Epidemick Water, or of Aq. Mirabilis, or of any other the Patient likes best,
relieves him at this time beyond expectation; for by this means the small
Relics of the Native Heat and the Spirits will be excited, and the
preternatural ferment sticking to the Bowels, and now and then occasioning new
Fits, will be extinguished by Spirituous Liquors.

Moreover as in the cure of the Disease, so when it is over, the thin Diet we
have mentioned must be observed for some time; for this Disease being more apt
to return than any other, and seating it self upon the principle parts for
Concoction (I mean the Bowels already weakened by it) the least error of this
kind will presently occasion much pain. Wherefore in this and all other
Diseases of the Bowels, Meats of hard Digestion are carefully to be avoided,
and things of easy Digestion must be taken only in such a quantity as will
suffice to sustain Life.

A certain kind of Hysterical Disease afflicts some Women, very like the
Bilious The Hysteric Colic.
Colic, both as to the sharpness and situation of the Pain, and also upon the
account of the Humors ejected by Vomit, of a Yellow and Green Color: I will
treat of it by the by, lest any one should take it for the bilious Colic just
now mentioned.

Those Women that are of a laxe and crude habit of Body, are chiefly afflicted
with this Disease, and they that have lately labored under some other
Hysteric indisposition, (or which is very often) those that have scarce evaded
a difficult and hard Labor, in bringing forth a large Child, whereby the
Mothers Nature and Strength has been almost spent. A pain as violent almost as
that of the Colic or Iliack Passion, seizes the region of the Stomach; and
sometimes it comes a little lower, and then violent Vomitings follow, and the
Matter which is cast up, is sometimes Yellow, and sometimes Green; and moreover
(which I have often observed,) there is a greater dejection of Spirit and
desperation than in any other Disease whatever. After a Day or Two the pain
goes off, and returns again a few Weeks after as violent as 'twas before.
Sometimes it is accompanied with the Jaundice, which is very visible, and which
goes off of its own accord in a few Days. When all the Symptoms are gone off,
and when the Patient seems very well, the smallest disorder of the Mind,
whether it be occasioned by Anger or Sorrow (to both which in this case Women
are very prone,) almost recalls the pain, which may be said of Walking or any
other Exercise used too soon; for by these means Vapors are elevated in a laxe
and weak habit of Body. When according to the vulgar Opinion, I say, Vapors,
whether they be so or no, or whether they are convulsions of particular parts,
the Phenomenon may be solved either way. These Vapors or Convulsions when they
invade this or that region of the Body, produce Symptoms agreeable to the part
they invade; and though they are one and the same Disease every where, yet they
cunningly resemble most of the Diseases Mankind is exposed to, which is
manifest from this Symptom, which when it seizes upon the parts near the Colon,
imitates exactly the Bilious Colic, which is also as apparent in many other
parts of the Body afflicted with this Disease. For instance, Sometimes it
seizes one of the Kidneys with a violent pain, from whence arises violent
Vomiting, and being oftentimes conveyed by the passage of the Ureter, it
resembles the Stone; and being exasperated by Clysters and other Lithontriptick
Medicines designed to force away the Stone, it afflicts the Patient in the same
manner a long while, and sometimes (contrary to its nature, for left to it
self, it is no way dangerous) kills the Patient. I have seen moreover Symptoms
occasioned by it, exactly resembling the Stone in the Bladder. Not long ago I
was called up in the Night to visit a Countess, my Neighbor, seized suddenly
with a violent pain in the region of the Bladder, and with a suppression of
Urine; and having known that she was subject to various Hysteric
Indispositions, I supposed the Disease was not that they imagined, and
therefore I would not suffer a Clyster that her Maid had prepared to be
injected, lest the Disease should be increased thereby; and instead of this and
Emollients, namely Syrup of Marsh Mallows and the like, which the Apothecary
had brought, I ordered a Narcotick, which soon took off that Symptom. And
indeed there is not one part of the Body wholly secured from the assaults of
this Disease, whether they are internal or external, as the Jaws, Hips and
Legs; in all which it excites violent pain, and when it goes off, leaves a
tenderness behind, which will not bear touching, just as if the Flesh was
bruised with violent Strokes.

But now seeing I have delivered some things by the by, appertaining to the
History of the Hysteric Colic, lest it should be mistaken for the Bilious
Colic, I will transiently*touch upon some things relating to the cure of the
Symptom of pain which accompanies it. For the perfect Cure which takes off the
Disease, by removing the cause, comes under another Speculation, and belongs to
another place.

Bleeding and Purging repeated, which are plainly indicated at the beginning of
a Bilious Colic, are not to be used here, unless in the case to be mentioned
by and by; for experience teaches, that the pain is exasperated, and that all
the Symptoms increase by reason of the tumult which those things occasion; and
I have more than once observed, that the repetition of the gentlest Clysters
have brought on a long series of Symptoms. And reason as well as experience
dictates, that this Disease is rather produced by an inordinate motion of the
Spirits, than by vicious Humors, if we consider what things most commonly
occasion it; and they are such as these, large and unnecessary profusions of
Blood, violent motions of the Mind and Body, and such like: All which forbid
those Remedies by which a greater disturbance of the Spirits may be occasioned;
and instead of them Anodines are to be used, though the green and ill color of
the Matter vomited up may seem to indicate the contrary; for the speculation of
colors is too nice to authorize those Evacuations, which we find ipso facto
injurious. And I don't at all doubt that this Disease (which though it occasion
violent pain, is no way Mortal,) has proved deadly by reason of Errors
committed upon the belief of such Speculations. Moreover if any one should give
the strongest Vomit to Day, to eject that which he supposes to be the occasion
of the Disease, yet the next Day the Patient would vomit up Matter quite as
green or of some other ill color, as was the former.

But we must take notice, that there is sometimes so great a quantity of Blood
and Humors which so resists the operation of the Narcotick, that though it be
often repeated, it cannot quell the tumult, till the Patient is Blooded and
Purged, which I have observed in Women of a very Sanguine Constitution, and in
Virago's. If the case is so, Bleeding or Purging, or perchance both, must make
way for the Anodine; for either of these being used, a moderate Dose of the
Narcotick will perform the business, which otherwise would signify nothing,
though the largest Dose was given: But this seldom happens, and then these
Remedies must not be repeated; and when they are used when there is need of
them, you must proceed in giving Anodines in that Method which I have proposed
in the Bilious Colic, and they must be taken often or seldom, according to the
degrees of pain. Which Method indeed respects only the Symptom of violent pain;
for I don't now undertake to treat of that Method which takes off the cause.
But for as much as this Disease in Hypocondriacal as well as Hysterical People,
(for the reason is the same in both, as is said in another place,) often ends
in the Jaundice, and as this comes on, so that goes off; we must take notice,
that in curing this kind of Jaundice, all Catharticks are either wholly to be
omitted, or if they are given, you must use only* Rubarb or some other gentle
Purge* for there is danger lest by Purging, new Tumults should arise, and so all
the Symptoms return. And therefore in this case, nothing must be done
presently, seeing the Jaundice taking its rise on this account, generally
lessens of its own accord, and wholly vanishes in a short time; but if it
continues a long while, and seems to go off difficulty, Remedies must be taken
for it: I use the following.

Take of the Roots of Madder, of Curcuma, each i, of all the greater Celandine,
and of the tops of the lesser Centauris, each M i; boil them in equal parts of
Rhenish Wine, and of Fountain Water, to lb ij, in the straining Dissolve ij of
the Syrup de quinq. Radicibus, mingle them, make an Apozem; let the Patient
take lbss Morning and Evening, till he is well.

But if the Jaundice comes of it self, the Colic not going before, it is
necessary besides the alteratives just mentioned, to give Cholagoges, that is,
such things as purge Choler by Stool, namely once or twice before the Patient
enters upon the Apozem prescribed, and afterward once a Week as long as he
takes it.

As take of the Electuary of the Juice of Roses ij, of Rubarb finely Powdered
ss, of Cream of Tartar i, make a Bolus with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Rubarb, with Cichory; give it early in the Morning, and let the Patient drink
upon it a small Draught of Rhenish Wine.

But if notwithstanding the constant taking of these things a long while, the
Disease continues obstinate, the Patient must drink Tunbridge Water or such
like, from the Fountain every Morning 'till he recovers.

CHAP. III. Of the Hysteric Disease.
THIS Disease if I calculate right, is the most frequent of all Chronical
Diseases, and as Fevers with those Diseases that appertain to them, if they are
compared with Chronical taken all together make two Thirds, so Hysterical
Diseases (at least those that go under that Name,) are half the remaining
Third; that is, Chronical Diseases are half Hysteric, for very few Women
(which Sex contains the half of grown People) are wholly free from all kinds of
Hysteric Diseases, if you except those who being accustomed to labor, live
hardly. Yea, many of those Men that live sedentary Lives, and are wont to Study
hard, are afflicted with the same Disease. And though heretofore Hysterical
Symptoms were always reckoned to proceed from a vicious Womb, yet if we compare
Hypocondriacal Symptoms which we are supposed to proceed from obstructions of
the Spleen or Bowels, or from some other I know not what Obstructions, with
Women's Hysteric Symptoms, an Egg is scarce more like an Egg, than these
Symptoms are one another in all respects. But it must be confessed that Women,
are much more subject to this kind of Disease than Men, not for that the Womb
is more faulty than any other region of the Body, but for causes to be shown by
and by.

Nor is this Disease only frequent, but so wonderfully various, that it
resembles almost all the Diseases poor Mortals are subject to, for whatever
part it seats it self in, it presently produces such Symptoms as appertain to
it; and unless the Physician is very sagacious and very skilful, he will be
mistaken, and suppose that those Symptoms proceed from some essential Disease
of this or that part, and not from an Hysterical Distemper.

Sometimes for instance, it possesses the Head, and occasions an Apoplexy,
which also ends in an Hemiplegy, and is exactly like that Apoplexy by which
Corpulent and Ancient People are destroyed, and which happens by reason the
passages of the Animal Spirits are stopped, the Cortex of the Brain being stuffed
by a great deal of Phlegm, from which cause the Apoplexy that happens to
Hysterical Women, does no way seem to arise, for it seizes such very often
presently after delivery, a great quantity of Blood being at the same time
evacuated, or it is occasioned by hard Labor, or some violent commotion of the
Mind.

Sometimes it produces violent Convulsions, very like an Epilepsie, the Belly
and Bowels swelling toward the Throat, the Patient struggling so violently,
that though at other times her strength is but ordinary, she now can scarce be
held by all the strength of the by Standers, uttering some odd and inarticulate
sounds, and striking her Breast. Women who are accustomed to this Disease,
commonly called Mother Fits, are generally extraordinary Sanguine, and have an
habit of Body almost like that of a Virago.

Sometimes it possesses the outward part of the Head betwixt the Pericranium
and Skull, causing violent pain continually fixed in one part, which may be
covered with the top of your Thumb; and violent Vomiting accompanies this pain.
I call this Species, Clavus Hystericus, chiefly afflicting those that have a
Chlorosis.

Sometimes falling upon the Vital parts, it occasions so great a palpitation of
the Heart, that the Women who are afflicted with it may verily believe that the
by Standers may hear the sound of the heart thumping upon the Ribs; this kind
chiefly afflicts those that are of a thin habit of Body, and of a weak
Constitution, and who look almost tabid; and also Young Maids that have the
Green Sickness.

Sometimes it seizes the Lungs, and the Patient coughs almost without
intermission, but expectorates nothing; and though this sort of Cough don't
shake the Breast so violently as that which is Convulsive, yet the Explosions
are much more frequent: But this kind of Hysteric Cough is very rare, and
chiefly invades Women that abound with Phlegm.

Sometimes rushing violently upon the Colon, and the region under the
Scrobiculum Cordis, it occasions violent Pain, much like the Iliac Passion, and
the Woman Vomits exceedingly, ejecting a certain green Matter, somewhat like
that they call Porraceous Bile, and sometimes of an unusual color. And often
after the Sick has been almost destroyed by the said Pain, (which would tire a
Stoical Apathy,) and reachings to Vomit for many Days, at length the Fit is
carried off by the Jaundice, tincturing the Superficies of the Body like
Saffron. Moreover the Sick is oppressed by an anguish of Mind, and wholly
despairs of Recovery, with dejection of Mind, and as it were a certain
Desparation which as certainly accompanies (as I have observed) this kind of
Hysteric Diseases, as the Pain and Vomiting above mentioned. This kind chiefly
invades those that are of a Laxe and Crude habit of Body, and those that have
suffered much in bringing forth great Children. When this Disease falls upon
one of the Kidneys, it plainly represents by the pain it causes there, a
Nephritick Paroxism, and not only by that sort of Pain, and by the place it
rages in, but also by violent Vomitings, which accompany it, and also for that
sometimes the pain extends it self through the passage of the Ureter; so that
it is very difficult to know whether these Symptoms proceed from the Stone, or
from some Hysteric Disease, unless perchance some unlucky accident disturbing
the Woman's Mind a little before she was taken ill, or the Vomiting of green
Matter, shows that the Symptoms rather proceed from an Hysteric Disease, than
from the Stone. Neither is the Bladder free from this false Symptom, for it
does not only cause Pain there, but it also stops the Urine, just as if there
were a Stone, whereas there is none. But this last kind seizing the Bladder,
happens very seldom; but that which resembles the Stone in the Kidneys is not
so rare: Both used to invade those Women who are much weakened by Hysteric
Fits coming frequently* and whose health of Body is much impaired.

Sometimes falling upon the Stomach, it causes continual Vomiting, and
sometimes a Diarrhaea, when it is settled upon the Guts; but no pain accompanies
either of those Symptoms, tho oftentimes in both, that green Humor appears:
Both these kinds are familiar with those that are much weakened by Hysteric
Fits coming frequently.

And as this Disease afflicts almost all the inwards parts, so sometimes it
also seizes the outward parts, and the Musculous Flesh, occasioning pain, and
sometimes a tumor in the Jaws, Shoulders, Hands, Thighs and Legs, in which
kind that tumor which swells the Legs is more conspicuous than the rest; but
whereas in Hydropical Tumors these Two things may be always taken notice of,
namely, that the Swelling is most in the Evening, and that the Finger pressed
upon it, leaves a Pit. In this tumor the Swelling is most in the Morning,
neither does it yield to the Finger, or leave any Mark behind it; and for the
most part it only swells one of the Legs. As to other things, if you mind the
largeness of it, or its superficies, it is so very like Hydropical Swellings,
that the Patient can scarce be brought to believe it is any other Disease.
Neither can the Teeth free themselves from the assaults of this Disease, though
they are not hollow, and though there is no apparent defluxion that may occasion
the pain, yet is it no whit gentler, nor shorter, nor easier cured. But those
pains and tumors which afflict the outward parts, chiefly seize those Women
that are in a manner quite destroyed by a long series of Hysteric Paroxisms,
and by the force of them.

But among all the torments of this Disease, there is none so common as a pain
in the Back, which most certainly all feel, how little soever they are
afflicted with this Disease. Moreover this is common to the foresaid Pains,
that the place on which they were, will not bear touching after they are gone,
but is tender, and aches, just as if 'twere soundly beaten; but this tenderness
goes off by degrees.

And this is worth observing, that often a notable cold of the External parts,
makes way for these Symptoms, which for the most part does not go off till the
Fit ends; which Cold I have observed is almost like that by which a Carkas
grows stiff, yet the Pulse are good.

And moreover, almost all Hysteric Women which I have hitherto taken care of,
complain of a dejection and sinking of the Spirits; and when they would show
the place where this contraction or sinking of the Spirits is, they point to
the region of the Lungs.

Lastly, Every one knows that Hysteric Women sometimes Laugh excessively, and
sometimes Cry as much, without any real cause for either.

But among all the Symptoms that accompany this Disease, this is the most
proper, and almost inseparable, namely a Urine as clear as Rock Water; and this
Hysteric Women evacuate plentifully, which I find by diligent inquiry, is in
almost all the Pathognomonic sign of this Disease which we call Hysteric in
Women, and Hypocondriack in Men; and I have sometimes observed in Men, that
presently after making Water of a Citron color, (yea almost the next moment)
being suddenly seized with some violent commotion of the Mind, they presently
make Water as clear as Crystal, and in a great quantity, with a continued
violent Stream, and continue ill 'till the Urine comes to its wonted Color,
and then the Fit goes off.

And it happens to all Hysterical and Hypocondriacal People, that sometimes
they belch up ill Fumes as often as they eat, though they eat only moderately,
and according as they have an Appetite; and sometimes the Wind that comes from
the Stomach is sour, just like Vinegar when it comes into the Mouth, the
Concoction being much impaired, and the Juices quite differing from their
natural state.

Neither are they unhappy upon this account only, viz. that their Bodies are so
ill affected, and as it were tottering like ruinated Houses just about to fall;
for their Minds are more diseased than their Bodies, for an incurable
Desparation is mixed with the very nature of the Disease; they are in a great
rage when any one speaks never so little of the hopes he has conceived of their
Recovery, easily believing that they suffer all the miseries that can befall a
Man, foreboding the most dreadful things to themselves, entertaining in their
restless and anxious Breasts upon a slight occasion, or perhaps for none at
all, Fear, Anger, Jealousy, Suspicions, and worse Passions of the Mind if any
can be worse, abhoring all Joy, Hope and Mirth, and if any one of these do
chance to occur, it is rara Avis, and soon flies away, and does no less
exagitate the Mind, than the sorrowful Passions; so that they never observe a
mean, constant only to inconstancy: Sometimes they love beyond measure, and
presently hate the same without any cause; sometimes they design to do this or
that, then presently alter their Intentions, and begin the quite contrary, and
yet they don't perform that neither; so wavering are they, that their Minds
cannot be at all at rest; and that which the Roman Orator said of the
Superstitious, exactly agrees with these Melancholy* People* Sleep (says he)
seems to be a refuge for the Laborious and careful, but from thence cares and
fears arise. Whilst only Funerals and Apparitions of their Deceased Friends are
represented in Dreams, and they are so tormented in Body and Mind, that one
would think their Lives were a Purgatory, in which they were to purify
themselves, and to expiate Crimes committed in some other state. Nor does this
happen only to Mad People, but also to those who if you except these
impetuosities of Mind, are very Prudent and Judicious* and who much excel for
deep Thought and wisdom in Speech, others whose Minds were never excited by
these Provokements to thinking, so that Aristotle was much in the right, when
he said Melancholy People are most ingenious.

But this dreadful condition of the Mind which we have above described, seizes
on those only that have much and a long while conflicted with this Disease, and
have been at length wholly vanquished by it, especially if Adversity, Care or
Trouble of Mind, or hard Study or the like, joined with an ill habit of Body,
have added Oil to the Flame.

A day would scarce be sufficient to reckon up all the Symptoms belonging to
Hysteric Diseases, so various are they, and so contrary one to the other, that
Proteus had not more shapes, nor the Chamelion greater variety of colors: And
I think Democritus reckoned pretty right (though he mistook the cause of the
Disease,) when he said in an Epistle to Hippocrates, that the Womb was the
cause of Six Hundred Miseries, and of innumerable Calamities. Nor are they only
very various, but also so irregular, that they cannot be contained under any
uniform type, which is usual in other Diseases, for they are as it were a
disorderly heap of Phenomenon, so that it is very difficult to write the History
of this Disease.

The procatartick or external causes of this Disease, are either violent
motions of the Body, or which is much oftener, vehement commotions of the Mind
from some sudden assault, either of Anger or Grief or the like Passions;
therefore as often as Women advise with me about this or that disorder of Body,
the reason of which cannot be deduced from the common Axioms, for finding out
Diseases, I always diligently inquire of them whether they are not chiefly
afflicted with that indisposition which they complain of when they have been
disturbed in their Minds and afflicted with Grief, which if they confess, I am
sufficiently satisfied that the Disease must come under this Tribe we are now
speaking of, especially if Urine as clear as Crystal evacuated copiously at
some certain times, makes the diagnostick more manifest. But to these disorders
of the mind which are usually the occasions of this Disease, is to be added
emptiness of the Stomach by reason of long fasting, immoderate bleeding, and a
Vomit or a Purge that worked too much. Now having drawn the Picture of this
Disease according to its most vulgar Phenomenon, in the next place its internal
efficient causes are to be considered, as well as we can gather them from all
the circumstances joined together, which we have described: And in my opinion
those Diseases which we call hysterical in Women, and hypochondriacal in Men*
proceed from a confusion of the Spirits, upon which account, too many of them
in a crowd contrary to proportion, are hurried violently upon this or that
part, occasioning Convulsions and pain, when they rush upon parts endued with
exquisite Sense, perverting the Functions of the Organs, both of that, into
which they thrust themselves, and also of that from whence they departed; both
being much injured by this unequal distribution, which is quite contrary to the
economy of Nature.

The origin and antecedent cause of this Ataxy, is a weak constitution of the
said Spirits, whether it is natural or adventitious; for which reason, they are
easily dissipated upon any occasion, and their System soon broke. For as the
outward man is framed with parts obvious to Sense, so without doubt the inward
man consists of a due Series, and as it were a Fabric of the Spirits, to be
viewed only by the eye of Reason; and as this is nearly joined, and as it were,
united with the constitution of the Body, so much the more easily or more
difficultly is its frame disordered, by how much the constitutive Principles
that are allotted us by nature, are more or less firm: Wherefore this Disease
seizes many more Women than Men, because kind Nature has given them a more
delicate and fine habit of Body* having designed them only for an easy life,
and to perform the tender Offices of Love: But she gave Men robust Bodies that
they might be able to delve and manure the Earth, to kill Wild Beasts for Food,
and the like.

But that the said confusion of the Spirits is the cause of this Disease, the
Phenomenon now described, will sufficiently prove; the chief of which I will
only mention. And I begin with Mother-Fits, here the Spirits are crowded in the
lower Belly, and rushing together violently toward the Jaws, occasion
Convulsions in every Region through which they pass, blowing up the Belly like
a great Ball; which yet is nothing but the rolling together, or conglobation of
the parts seized with the Convulsion, which cannot be suppressed without great
violence. The external parts in the mean while, and the Flesh being in a manner
destitute of Spirits, by reason they are carried another way, are often so very
cold, not only in this kind, but in all other kinds of hysteric Diseases (as
was noted above) that dead Bodies are not colder. But the Pulse are as good as
those of People that are well; nor is the Woman's life in danger by this Cold,
unless it is occasioned by some very large evacuation going before.

The same may be said of that violent hysteric Disease, which to outward
appearance is like the bilious Colic or the iliack Passion, in which the Woman
is seized with a violent pain in the Region, about the Scrobiculum cordis,
together with violent Vomiting, by which a matter is cast up, in color like
Herbs, which Symptom I suppose, proceeds only from a vehement impulse of the
Spirits crowded together in the said parts, which occasions the Convulsion and
pain, and the total subversion of all the Faculties. Nor is it to be presently
concluded that this Disease resides in the Humors, because those things that
are evacuated upward or downward, are sometimes of a green color, or that the
violent pain is occasioned by the acrimony of some Humor tearing the part it
adheres to, which for that cause, we account the occasion of the Disease, and
therefore suppose it ought to be eradicated by Vomits and Purges; for it is
manifest that the Sickness which seizes People that go to Sea, (arising from
the agitation of the animal Spirits in the boisterous Sea) occasions the
vomiting up of matter as green as an Herb, from the Stomachs of those that are
in perfect health* when they first go to Sea, and are a good way from Land; in
whom, half an hour before, there was none of that Choler which is called
porraceous. And don't Infants in convulsive Fits in which the animal Spirits
are chiefly concerned, evacuate upward or downward, matter of the same color,
to which must be added that which almost daily experience teaches, viz. that
though such Women and Children should be quite exhausted by repeated Purges, yet
the said color would still appear in that which they evacuate by Vomit or
Stool; yea, the green matter increases by the frequent use of cathartick and
emetick Medicines, because by both, the confusion of the Spirits is heightened,
which I know not how either destroys or Perverts the ferment of those parts, or
throws into the Stomach or Guts, by the force of the Convulsions, some juice of
a strange nature, which is disposed to give the Humors such a Tincture. And
though Chemists are not so happy as to prepare better Medicines in their fruitful
Glass, than are made in a Mortar or a Pipkin, yet they know how to please the
vain Humor of the Curious, by showing two Liquors equally limpid and clear,
which being mixed together, presently change into some deep color, as if there
was conjuring in the case. And truly the speculation of colors is so uncertain
and vain, that we can learn nothing certainly from them, concerning the nature
of the Bodies they appear in; nor does it more necessarily follow, that those
things which are of a green color should be acrid, than that all acrid things
should be green. The thing therefore being thoroughly considered, it will
plainly appear, that the violent pain which almost destroys those that are
afflicted with the hysteric Colic, and the evacuation of green matter, are
wholly occasioned by the Spirits rushing impetuously upon the parts about the
Scrobiculum cordis, and contracting the same by Convulsions.

That Symptom which I termed above clavus hystericus, is to be attributed to
this enormity of the Spirits, in which the Spirits in all the compass of the
Body, are as it were concentrated in a cercain point of the Pericranium,
occasioning a pain, boring as it were through; just as if a Nail was driven in
to the Head, together with violent vomiting and casting up of green matter,
which Contraction indeed, of all the Spirits of the Body as i were to a Point,
is somewhat like that Collection of the Rays of the Sun, which is made by a
burning Glass: And as the force of these united, burns, so they for the same
reason occasion pain, by tearing the membranes with their forces joind.

And then from that inordinate agitation of the Spirits disturbing the Blood,
arises that Symptom, which as we have mentioned above, is frequent in
hysterical and hypochondriacal People, viz. clear, limpid and copious Urine:
For when the economy of the Blood is interrupted, the Sick cannot long enough
contain the Serum that is imported, but lets it go before it is impregnated with
saline particles, by which the citron color is to be imparted to it; whereof
we have a daily experiment in those that drink much, especially of thin and
attenuating Liquors, for then their Urine is very clear, in which case the
blood being overpowered by that quantity of Serum, and being wholly unable to
retain it, puts it off quite clear, not yet died by the juices of the Body, by
reason of its too short stay.

Three years ago a Nobleman sent for me, he seemed to labor under an
hypochondriack Colic, that was almost come to an iliack Passion, with pain and
violent vomiting, with which he was much and a long while afflicted and almost
worn out: I observed through the whole course of the Disease, that when he was
worst his Urine was always clear, but when he was a little better it was
somewhat of a citron color. Visiting him one day, I viewed his Urine made at
three times, kept apart in three Chamber-pots, of a citron color; he was then
merry and cheerful, and thinking of eating some meat of easy Digestion, and he
said he had a craving Appetite; but one coming in at that very moment, who vexed
him so much, that suddenly growing ill, he called for a Chamber Pot, which he
almost filled with Urine as clear as Crystal.

And perhaps that spitting which is common in hysterical Women, proceeds from
the Spirits so disturbing the blood; they spit thin for many Weeks, just as if
they were salivated by unction; for during this disturbed condition of the
blood, in which it is unable to perform evacuations according to Natures method,
the Serum by chance taking this contrary course, is not evacuated according to
the rules of Nature by the Reins, but is put off by the extremities of the
Arteries upon the Glands, and so comes forth by the salivary passages in the
form of Spittle. The same may be said of those violent nocturnal Sweats which
afflict hysterical Women, which proceed from no other cause than the ill
disposition of the Serum of the blood, by which it is inclined to be put off
upon the habit of the Body.

As to the cold by which the external parts are so often chilled in hysterical
Diseases, it is very manifest that that happens because the Spirits forsaking
their Stations, too officiously intrude themselves into this or that part; nor
is it to be doubted that weeping and laughing Fits, which often seize
hysterical Women withou any occasion, are procured by the animal Spirits
forcing themselves violently upon the Organs, that perform these animal
Functions.

And by the by, Men are also subject (though rarely) to Fits of weeping. I was
sent for sometime ago to an ingenious Gentleman, who but a few days before,
recovered of a Fever; he made use of another Physician, who blooded him and
purged him thrice, and forbid him to eat Flesh: When I came and saw him with
his clothes on, and heard him discourse judiciously, I asked to what purpose I
was sent for? One of his friends answered, if I would have a little patience I
should see; sitting down therefore, and discoursing with him, I presently
observed that his lower Lip was thrust out, and moved frequently (as froward
Children used to do to prepare for crying) and then wept so violently, that I
scarce ever saw the like; with such deep sighs as were almost convulsive: Which
sudden Torrent in a little time quite asswag'd. I supposed that this disorder
proceeded from a confusion of the Spirits, which was occasioned partly by the
long continuance of the Disease, and partly by evacuations which the method of
cure necessarily required; and partly also from emptiness and abstinence from
Flesh; which the Physician ordered for some days after he was well, to secure
him from a Relaps. But I affirmed he was clear from all danger of a Fever, and
that the foresaid Symptom was wholly occasioned by emptiness, and therefore I
advised, that a roasted Chick should be provided for his Dinner, and that he
should drink Wine moderately* which being done, and he returning again to the
eating of Flesh moderately, was never afterward troubled with this convulsive
weeping.

And now at length to come to a conclusion, (for I omit other Phenomenon which
belong to this Disease) that disturbance and varying Intemperies both of Body
and Mind, which prevails over hysterical and hypochondriacal People, is
occasioned by this inordination of the Spirits; for in both, that firmness of
Spirits being wanting, which is always found in the robust, and in those who
are continually invigorated by the assistance of brisk Spirits, they cannot bear
the impressions of cross accidents, but are soon moved by anger or pain, and
are as apt to be angry, as those to whom either Nature has given a soft and
weak Government of Mind, or when it has been rendered so by a long series or
continuance of Diseases. For the strength and constancy of mind as long as it is
confined in the Body, much depends on the firmness of the Spirits that are
subservient to it; which indeed, are made of the finest matter, and are placed
in the confines of immaterial entities; and as the frame of the mind, if it is
lawful to call it so, is much more curious and delicate, than the structure of
the Body, for it consists in the harmony of the most excellent and almost
divine Faculties; so if its constitution is any way spoiled, by so much the
greater is the ruin, by how much 'twas more excellent and more exquisitely
composed when 'twas whole. And this indeed is the condition of these miserable
and dejected People we have described, for which Disease, some obstinate Decree
of the most insolent Stoic would give no greater ease, than he that would
prevent the Toothache, by firmly resolving that he would not by any means
suffer his Teeth to ache.

And now I suppose that it is manifest that this whole Disease is occasioned by
the animal Spirits being not rightly disposed, and not by Seed and menstruous
Blood corrupted, (as some Authors assert) and sending up malignant Vapors to
the parts affected; nor from I know not what depravation of the Juices or
Congestion of acrid Humors as others think, but from those causes we have
assigned. For that the Fomes of the Disease don't lurk in matter, will plainly
appear by this one Instance, viz. a Woman that used to enjoy perfect Health
being delicate, and of a thin habit of Body, if she chance to be weakened and
exhausted by some Error, or by a strong Vomit or Purge, will certainly be
afflicted with some one of those Symptoms that accompany this Disease; which
would rather be removed than occasioned by such vomiting or purging, if the
Fomes of the Diseases was contained in a Humor. The same may be said of a
great loss of Blood, whether it is taken away by opening a Vein, or flows
immoderately in Labor, or of Emptiness, or too long Abstinence from Flesh; all
which would rather prevent Hysteric Diseases than occasion them, if the Fomes
of them was involved in some matter: Whereas on the contrary, nothing does so
constantly occasion this Disease as these Evacuations.

But though it is apparent enough that the original Fomes of this Disease, is not
lodged in the Humors, yet it must be confessed that the confusion of the
Spirits produces putrid Humors in the Body, by reason the Function as well of
these parts which are distended by the violent impulse of the Spirits, as of
those which are deprived of them, are wholly perverted. And most of these being
as it were separatory Organs designed for the reception of the impurities of
the Blood, if their Functions are any way hurt, it cannot be but a great many
feculencies will be heaped up, which had been eliminated, and so the Mass of
Blood purified, if the Organs had performed their Office; which they had
certainly done, if a due economy of the Spirits had invigorated them all. To
this cause I attribute great Cachexies, loss of Appetite, a Clorosis, and the
White Fever in young Women, (which I don't at all doubt, is a Species of
hysteric Diseases) and the source of all the miseries that overwhelm poor
Women, that have Languish'd a long while under this Disease; all which proceed
from putrefying Juices heapt up in the Blood, and flowing from thence upon the
various Organs. Of this kind is a Dropsy of the Womb in Women, which have been
long afflicted with this Disease, occasioned by depraved Juices cast from the
Blood upon the Organs, by which, their Faculties being perverted, they first
become Barren, the economy of the parts being wholly destroyed, and then Serum
and Sanies are generated, which don't only stuff the Eggs of the Testes, but
also insinuating themselves into the Interstices of the Coats, cause them to
grow very big, which is perceived by the dissection of those that dye of this
Disease: And the hysterical disposition, is the prime cause of these and other
Humors, though they are not of the same kind with it.

As in a quartan Ague, with which any one that is perfectly well may be seized,
if he continues two or three days in Moorish and Fenny Places; first some
Spirituous Venom of the Disease being imprinted upon the Blood, which
continuing a long while, and at length the economy of nature being hurt, it
infects all the Juices of the Body, and quite changes their Dispositions; so
that the Sick (especially if he begins to grow old,) is rendered obnoxious to
Cachexies and other Distempers which come upon long Agues; yet these Agues are
not to be cured by those Remedies that are proper to Purge off such Humors,
but by such things as cure Agues by a Specific quality.

From all that has been treated of, it is very manifest to me, that that is the
chief indication in this Disease, which directs the corroboration of the Blood
that is the Fountain and Origin of the Spirits; which being done, the
invigorated Spirits can preserve that tenor that is agreeable to the economy of
the whole Body, and the particular parts. And therefore when the Ataxy of the
Spirits (which we have allowed above may be) has vitiated the Humors by long
continuance, 'twill be proper first to lessen those Humors so corrupted, by
Bleeding and Purging, if the Patient has sufficient strength, before we
endeavor to corroborate the Blood, and which indeed we can scarce do, whilst a
feculent heap of Humors lies in the way. But forasmuch as Pains, Vomiting and
Looseness are sometimes so very severe that they will not bear a truce so long
until we have satisfied the first intention of fortifying the Blood, therefore
sometimes we must begin the cure, by quieting the effects, (the cause being let
alone a little while,) with some Anodine Medicine, and then we must endeavor
to rectify the Spirits, whose infirm Constitution is the cause of this
Disease, by which we may again endeavor to cure such kind of Symptoms; and
because experience teaches, that there are many stinking things that will repel
the inordination of the Spirits, and contain them in their Places, (which are
therefore called Hystericks,) we must make use of them when we would answer
such intentions.

According to what has been said, I order the Patient to be Blooded in the Arm,
and that after she be Purged Three or Four Mornings following, the Patient
thinks her self worse of those Days she is Blooded and Purged, for these
Evacuations promote the Ataxy, which I take care to forewarn her of, that she
may not despond, the Disease of it self being apt to incline her to do so; but
however those vicious Humors we suppose are heaped up by the long continuance
of the Disease, are in some sort to be evacuated before we can conveniently
answer the prime intention.

After these Evacuations, I prescribe some Chalybeat Remedy to be taken Thirty
Days to comfort the Blood, and so by consequence the Spirits that proceed from
it; and nothing will more certainly answer your intention in this case, for it
raises a volatile Ferment in the vapid and languid Blood, by which the weak
Spirits are roused that before were pressed down by their own weight: And this
is very manifest, for as often as Steel is given in a Chlorosis, the Pulse are
presently greater and quicker, and the outward parts grow warm, and the pale
and dead Countenance is changed, and becomes fresh and lively. But here we must
take notice, that Bleeding and Purging must not always be used before
Chalybeats; for when the Patient is weak, and almost worn out by the long
continuance of the Disease, they may and ought to be omitted; and you must
begin with Steel, which must be well minded.

But in my opinion it is most conveniently given in substance, and as I have
never observed nor heard, that so taken, it ever injured any Body, so I have
been fully satisfied by frequent experience, that the bare substance performs
the Cure sooner and better than any of the common Preparations of it, for busy
Chemists make this as well as other excellent Medicines, worse rather than
better by their perverse and over officious Diligence. I have also heard, (and
if it be true, it much strengthens our Assertion,) that the crude Mine as it is
dug out of the Earth, is more effectual in curing Diseases, than Iron that
has passed the Fire, and been purified by Fusion, so the Author affirms, but I
have not yet tried whether it is so or not. This I certainly known, that no
excellent and powerful Remedy has been any where made, which has not received
its chief Virtues from Nature; upon which account grateful Antiquity called
excellent Medicines, God's Handicraft, not Man's. And that some excellent thing
does produce wonderful effects by its native goodness and efficacy, may be
proved by Opium, or the Peruvian Bark. Nor is a Physicians skill so much
perceived by preparing Medicines, as by choosing such as are fit, which Nature
has prepared with her own Fire, and freely bestowed upon us; so that all that
we have to do, is to reduce Medicines into that form, whereby either their
substance, or their virtue and efficacy may be better imparted to our Bodies,
for the performance whereof we are sufficiently instructed. Next to the
substance of the Steel, I choose the Syrup of it, prepared with the Filings of
Steel or Iron infused in the cold, in Rhenish Wine, 'till the Wine is
sufficiently impregnated, and afterward strained, and boiled up to the
consistence of a Syrup, with a sufficient quantity of Sugar.

Nor do I use any Cathartick Medicine at set times during the whole Chalybeat
course; for I am of the opinion, that the virtue of Steel is destroyed by a
Purge, both in Hysterical and Hypocondriacal Diseases; and when my chief
dedesign is to reduce the Spirits to order, and to renew and confirm their
System, if I should use the gentlest Purge but once, I should undo all that I
had done in a Week before, and by pulling down what I have built, and by
building what I have pulled down, I should trifle with my self and Patient too;
and I believe Mineral Waters which participate of an Iron Mine, are rendered
less effectual by this means; though I know that some have been cured when
Purges have not been given only now and then; but daily with the Steel; which
does not so much prove to me the Prudence of the Physician, as the
extraordinary virtue of the Steel; for if they had been omitted, the cure would
have been performed in a less time.

Nor indeed do I see what advantage, or rather not what disadvantage Purges
often repeated may produce in many other Diseases besides that just mentioned*
for though it cannot be denied that they clear the Intestines of Impurities, and
likewise that they somewhat discharge ill Humors that are lodged in the Mass
of Blood, yet on the contrary, it is no less certain, that when they are
frequently repeated in weak Bodies, especially in the tender age, they do much
hurt, because upon this account a great many Humors are drawn to the
Intestines, and being put off upon these parts, occasion praeternatural
Ferments, whereby tumors arise in the Belly, increasing daily so much the
more, by how much the oftener the Sick is Purged; and at length it happens that
those parts by reason of weakness (being as it were overwhelmed with a burden
of Humors,) and by a defect of natural Heat soon become tabid and putrify.
And sometimes also the economy of the Bowels being quite destroyed by reason
of the Causes mentioned, preternatural Kernels, akin to the King's Evil, and
the like, grow to the Mesentery, and make way for Death. For these Reasons I
judge it is safest in Children after general Evacuations, and those but very
few, to direct the Curative Indication, so as to comfort the Blood and Bowels,
which may be done with Spanish Wine alone, or with Corroborating Herbs in it,
if Morning and Evening some Spoonfuls of it, (according to the Age of the Sick)
be given long enough. And because things outwardly applied can easily penetrate
the tender Bodies of Infants, and so can thoroughly affect the Blood with their
Virtue whatever it is, 'twill be convenient in Swellings of their Bellies,
whether occasioned by the King's Evil, or by the true Rickets, to use Liniments
that are proper to corroborate the Blood and Bowels, and likewise to cure any
Morbifick indisposition of them.

Take of the Leaves of Common-Wormwood, of the Lesser Centaury, of white
Whorehound, of Germander, of Ground Pine, of Meadow Saxifrage St. John's-wort,
Golden Rod, Wild Thime, Mint, Sage, Rue, Carduus Benedict. Pennyroyal,
Sothernwood, Chamomel, Tansie, Lilly of the Valleys, (of all fresh gathered and
cut) each Mi, of Lard lb iiij, of Sheep-Suet, and Claret Wine, each lb ij; let
them be steeped in an Earthen Pot upon Hot Embers twelve Hours, and then let
them boil till all the Moisture is consumed; afterward strain them, and so
make an Ointment, with which let the Belly be anointed Morning and Evening for
Thirty or Forty Days following, and also both the Armpits.

But as to the Rickets, this must be noted, that in those tumors that
afflicted the Bellies of Infants heretofore after long Agues, not much unlike
the true Rickets, Purges repeated seemed to be indicated; for before the use of
the Peruvian Bark, Agues continued a long while, and put off a Sediment, which
was the cause of tumors of this kind, which could be carried off only by
Purges repeated. But in the true Rickets, Catharticks are not to be used above
once or twice at the most, before the Patient enters upon the use of
Alteratives; and all the time the parts are anointed, let him take inwardly of
the Wine above mentioned; or if it may be, let him use for his ordinary Drink
Beer, with the foresaid Herbs, or at least many of them put up with it in the
Vessel. Lastly, this I have hinted ought to be carefully minded, for I am fully
satisfied, that many Infants and Children have been destroyed by Purges often
repeated, which perhaps were given to assuage the Belly: But this by the by.

If any one object that the Filings of Steel may hurt those that take them by
sticking in their Bowels, unless they are Purged now and then, I answer first,
that I never found any such thing in any one, and then it is much more probable
that being involved in the Slime, and with the Excrementitious Humors of the
parts, they should all at length pass away with them, than when they are
exagitated by Purging Medicines, which occasion unusual compressions, twisting
and contraction of the Guts, whereby the Particles of Steel thrust upon the
Coats of the Bowels may penetrate deeper into them.

When the Patient is in a Steel course, Remedies commonly called Hystericks are
to be used as 'twere by the by, (to comfort the Blood and Animal Spirits,) in
that manner and form which is most agreeable to the Patient; but if she can
take them in a solid form, they will more powerfully retain the Spirits in
their office and place, than things that are Liquid, that is, either Decoctions
or Infusions, for the very substance affects the Stomach longer with its
savor, and works more forceably upon the Body.

Upon the whole, being about to answer all the Indications which I have touched
upon above, I used to prescribe these few and common things, which though they
are not at all pompous, yet they most commonly do what I desire.

Let. viij of Blood be taken from the Right Arm.

Take of Galbanum dissolved in tincture of Castor, and strained iij, Tacamahac
ij, make an Emplaister to be applied to the Navel.

The next Morning let her enter upon the use of the following Pills.

Take of Pill Cocb. Maj. ij, of Castor powdered, gr. ij, of Peruvian Balsam
gutt. iv, make Four Pills, let her take them at Five in the Morning, and Sleep
after them; repeat them twice or thrice every Morning, or every other Morning,
according to their operation, and the strength of the Patient.

Take of Black-Cherry-Water, of Rue Water, and compound Briony Water, each iij,
of Castor tied up in a Rag, and hanged in the Glass ss, of fine Sugar, a
sufficient quantity, make a Julap, of which let her take Four or Five Spoonfuls
when she is faint, dropping into the first Dose if the Fit is violent gutt. xx
of Spirit of Hartshorn.

After the Purging Pills just described are taken, let her use the following.

Take of the Filings of Steel, gr. viij, with a sufficient quantity of extract
of Wormwood, make Two Pills, let her take them early in the Morning, and at
Five in the Afternoon for Thirty Days, drinking upon them a draught of Wormwood
Wine.

Or for daily use,

Take of the Filings of Steel, and of extract of Wormwood, each iiij, mingle
them, and keep them for use, let her take gr. xv, or i, made into Three Pills.

Or if she likes a Bolus better,

Take of Conserve of Roman Wormwood, and of the Conserve of the Yellow Rind of
Oranges each i, of Candied Angelica, and Nutmegs Candied, and Venice Treacle,
each ss, of Candied Ginger ij, make an Electuary with a sufficient quantity of
Syrup of Oranges. Take of this Electuary iss, of the Filings of Steel well
rubbed, gr. viij, make a Bolus, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Oranges,
to be taken in the Morning, and at Five in the Evening, Drinking upon it a
Draught of Wormwood Wine.

Take of choice Mirrh, and Galbanum each iss, of Castor, gr* xv, with a
sufficient quantity of Balsam of Peru; make Twelve Pills of every Dram, let her
take Three every Night, and Drink upon them Three or Four Spoonfuls of Compound
Briony Water, through the whole course of this process.

But if the Pills last prescribed move the Belly, which sometimes happens in
Bodies that are very easily Purged, by reason of the Gum that is in them, the
following are to be substituted.

Takt of Castor i, of Volatile Salt of Amber ss with a sufficient quantity of
extract of Rue, make xxiv small Pills, let her take Three every Night.

But here we must take notice, that Chaly beats in whatsoever form or Dose they
are taken, occasion sometimes in Women great Disorders both of Body and Mind,
and that not only on the first Days (which is usual almost in every Body,) but
also all the time they are taken. In this case the use of Steel must not be
interrupted at those times, but Laudanum must be given every Night for some
time in some Hysteric Water, that they may better bear it.

But when the Symptoms are mild, and it seems that the business may be done
without taking Steel, (namely when the Disease is small,) I think it sufficient
to Bleed, and to Purge Three or Four times, and then to give the altering
Hysteric Pills above mentioned Morning and Evening for Ten Days, which Method
seldom fails when the Disease is not violent; yea, the Pills alone, Bleeding
and Purging being omitted, oftentimes do a great deal of good.

Yet we must take great notice, that some Women by a certain ideosyncrasy do so
abhor Hysterical Medicines, (which give ease in most of the Symptoms of this
Disease,) that they don't only not receive Benefit, but are much injured
thereby; therefore they must not be given to such, for Hipocrates says, it is in
vain to do any thing contrary to Natures inclination.

Which ideosyncrasy indeed is so great and so frequent, that if we have not
regard to it, the Lives of the Sick may be hazarded, and not only by Hysterical
Medicines, but by many other, whereof I will at present mention but one thing,
viz. That some Women that have the Smallpox cannot bear the use of Diacodium,
for thereby Giddiness, Vomiting, and such Symptoms belonging to Hysterical
Diseases are occasioned, and yet Liquid Laudanum agrees with them very well.
Which I observed whilst I was writing this, in a Young Woman a Person of
Quality, to whom I had given the said Syrup on the Sixth and Seventh Night; the
Symptoms above mentioned invaded both Nights; nor did the Inflammation of the
Pustules duly proceed, but when afterward she used Laudanum, she was quite
freed from the said Symptoms* the Swelling of the Face and Pustules daily
increasing, the anxiety and restlessness of Body and Mind (which used to be as
it were a Fit of the Smallpox,) was wholly removed as often as this Paregorick
was given, the Patient being strengthened and revived by it: But this by the by.

And so Hysterical Diseases are most commonly cured, and most Obstructions of
Women, but especially a Clorosis, or Virgins pale Color, and also all
Suppressions of the Courses. But if the Blood is so very feeble, and the
confusion of the Spirits so great, that Steel ordered to be used according to
the Method prescribed is not sufficient to cure the Disease, the Patient must
Drink some Mineral Waters, impregnated with the Iron Mine, such as are
Tunbridge, and some others lately found out, for the Chalybeat virtue of these
is better mingled with the Blood, by reason of the great quantity that is taken
of them, and also because they are more agreeable to Nature, and they cure
Diseases more effectually than Iron, how much soever exalted by art, as
imprudent Chemists talk.

But this is more especially to be observed in Drinking of them, that if any
Sickness happens that is to be referred to Hysterical Symptoms, in this case
the Patient must forbear drinking them a day or two, 'till that Symptom that
hindered their passage is quite gone. For though these Waters are less apt to
stir the Humors, and so to cause a Confusion of the Spirits, than the gentlest
Catharticks of the Shops, yet they do somewhat exagitate them as they are
diuretic, though they often also purge by Stool too. But if the Waters
themselves hinder their own Passage by disturbing the Humors and Spirits, let
those consider how impertinently they act, who order Purging Medicines to be
given once or twice a Week, whilst the Patient is Drinking these Waters; or
which is yet more foolish, to be mixed with the Waters, by which means these
and other Mineral Waters pass more difficulty.

And here I must acquaint you, that though some think the Iron is in these
Waters in principiis solutis, (which is plainly the same as if we should
suppose Liquid Iron,) yet I don't at all doubt but that they are Simple Waters,
impregnated with the Mine through which they pass, which will be manifest to
any one, if he pour some Gallons of Water upon a sufficient quantity of Rusty
Nails, for then he will perceive that this Water, when the Powder of Gauls, or
the Leaves of Tea, or the like are put into it, will plainly appear of the same
color with the Waters of a Mineral Fountain, when such things are put into
them. Nor truly have these artificial or inartificial Waters (which you please
to call them,) when they are taken, different effects, if they are used in
Summertime, and in a good Air.

But however it is, if the Disease by reason of its obstinacy does not yield to
Steel Waters, the Patient must go to some hot Sulphurous Waters, such as is
our Bath, and when he has used them inwardly Three Mornings following, the next
Day let him go into the Bath, and the Day following let him Drink them again,
and so let him do by turns for Two whole Months. For in these and in others of
what kind soever they are, this must be carefully noted, that the Patient must
persist in the use of them, not only till he receives some benefit, but till he
is quite well, that the Symptoms may not return again in a short time.

Venice Treacle alone, if it is used often, and a long while, is a great Remedy
in this Disease, and not only in this, but in very many other Diseases that
proceed from want of Heat and Concoction or Digestion; it is perhaps the most
powerful that has been hitherto known, how contemptible soever it may seem to
most People, because it is common, and has been known a long while.

Spanish Wine Medicated with Gentian, Angelica, Wormwood, Centaury, the Yellow
Rind of Oranges, and other Corroboratives infused in it, does a great deal of
good, some Spoonfuls of it being taken Thrice a Day, if the Woman be not of a
thin and Choleric habit of Body. And truly a large Draught of Spanish Wine by
it self taken at Bedtime for some Nights, by my advice has been very
beneficial to some Hysterical Women, for by it the habit of the whole Body was
rendered stronger, and they who before were Cachectical, became fresh colored
and brisk.

Moreover sometimes we find that the Peruvian Bark wonderfully comforts and
invigorates the Blood and Spirits, whereof a Scruple taken Morning and Evening
for some Weeks, has as I have observed restored (both to Hypocondriacal Men,
and Hysterical Women that have been very Sick a long while, and when the
economy of their Bodies has been much weakened,) a firm and Healthy
Constitution. But it succeeds best in that kind of Hysteric Diseases, in which
Women are affected with Convulsions, wherein they struggle violently and beyond
the strength of Women, and at the same time beat their Breasts. Yet it must be
confessed that this Medicine does not so certainly, and so often cure this
Disease as Agues. But though (to mention this by the by,) the Peruvian Bark
does wonders in the cure of Agues, and though we use it freely our selves, and
give it to our Wives and Children, as often as there is occasion, yet there are
some now as much displeased with it, because it cures so certainly and suddenly
as they were heretofore, because it was but lately known among us; to which
fate the best Men, and most excellent Remedies have been almost always exposed.
But by this we may try as by a Touchstone our Dispositions, and from thence
judge whether we are good or ill Men, namely, according to the degree of our
joy or grief, as often as the welfare of Mankind is promoted by some common
benefit, or the Blessing of God.

But if any of the Remedies above mentioned don't well agree, which often
happens in Choleric and thin Constitutions, then a Milk Diet may be used; for
some Women (which one would wonder at at first) that have conflicted a long
while with Hysteric Diseases, and even such as have frustrated all the
endeavors of Physicians, yet have recovered by Dieting themselves for some
time only with Milk, and especially those that labor with that Disease I call
an Hysteric Colic, which cannot be appeased by any thing but Narcoticks, to
which repeated by intervals, these Women are much accustomed, the Pain
returning as soon as the Virtue of the Anodine fades; but this is chiefly to be
admired in this Method of cure, that Milk which yields only a cold and crude
nourishment, should notwithstanding by use strengthen and invigorate the
Spirits; and yet this will not seem disagreeable to reason, if you consider
that Milk affording only a simple nourishment, does not busy nature much in
concocting it, otherwise than Meats and Liquors more compounded use to do, and
that an equal temper of the Blood and Spirits necessarily follows that perfect
Concoction. For this must be also considered, that a bare debility of the
Spirits considered by it self, is not the cause of those Confusions they are
under, but the weakness of them compair'd with the state of the Blood. For it
may be an Infant has Spirits strong and firm enough with respect to it is Blood,
but yet not proportionable to the Blood of a grown Person. Now when by the
continual use of a Milk Diet, (though it is crude and weak) the Blood is rendered
more soft and tender, if the Spirits that are made by it, are only equal to it,
all is well. Yet all cannot undergo those Inconveniences which most commonly
accompany it the first days, namely, because it curdles in the Stomach, and is
insufficient to maintain the usual strength of the Body; but if they could,
they might receive benefit by it.

But nothing of all I have hitherto known, does so much comfort and strengthen
the Blood and Spirits, as riding much a Horse Back every day for a long while;
for seeing by this kind of Exercise the lower Belly is most forceably moved, in
which the Vessels for excretion (as many as are appointed by Nature to drain
the Impurities of the Blood) are placed: What disorder of the Functions or
other natural Impotence of the Organs, can be imagined so great as not to be
helped by the frequent jolting of the Horse, and that too in the open Air? Whose
innate heat is so extinguished that it cannot be stirred up by this motion and
ferment afresh? Or what preter-natural Substance or depraved Juice can there be
in any Creek of these parts, which cannot by this Exercise of the Body, be
either reduced to such a condition as is agreeable to Nature, or scattered
every way and ejected? Moreover, the Blood being perpetually exagitated by this
motion, and thoroughly mixed, is as it were renewed, and grows vigorous again.
And indeed, this method, tho it is inconvenient for Women that are accustomed to
a slothful and delicate way of living, for they may be injured by motion,
especially at the beginning; yet is it very proper for Men, and soonest
recovers their Health. One of our Reverend Bishops, famous for Prudence and
Learning, having studied too hard a long while, fell at length into an
hypochondriacal Disease, which afflicting him a long time, vitiated all the
ferments of the Body, and wholly subverted the Concoctions. He had passed
through long courses of Steel more than once, and had tried almost all mineral
Waters, with purging often repeated, and Antiscorbuticks of all kinds, and very
many testaceous Powders, which are reckoned proper to sweeten the Blood: And so
being in a manner worn out, partly by the Disease, and partly by Physic used
continually for so many years, he was at length seized with a colliquative
Looseness, which is wont to be the forerunner of Death, in Consumptions and
other Cronical Diseases* when the Digestions are wholly destroyed. At length he
consulted me. I presently considered that there was no more room for Medicine,
he having taken so many already, without any relief; for which reason I
persuaded him to ride a Horseback, and that first he should take such a small
Journey as was agreeable to his weak condition: Had he not been a very judicious
man, and one that weighed things well, he would not have been persuaded so much
as to try such a kind of Exercise. I entreated him to persist in it daily, till
in his own opinion he was well, going daily further and further, till at length
he went so many Miles, as prudent and moderate Travelers, that go a large
Journey upon business, use to do, without any regard to Meat or Drink, or the
Weather; but that he should take every thing like a Traveller as it happens. To
be short, he continued this method, increasing his Journies by degrees, till at
length he rode Twenty or Thirty Miles daily; and when he found himself much
better in a few days, being encouraged by such wonderful Success, he continued
this course a pretty many Months, in which time, as he told me, he rode many
Thousand Miles, till at length, he did not only recover, but also gained a
strong and brisk habit of Body.

Nor is this kind of Exercise more beneficial to hypochondriacal People, than
it is to those that are in a Consumption; whereof some of my Relations have been
cured by riding long Journies by my advice; for I knew I could not cure them
better by Medicines of what value soever, or by any other method.

Nor is this Remedy proper only in small Indispositions, accompanied with a
frequent Cough and Leanness, but in Consumptions that are almost deplorable;
when the Diarrhaea above mentioned, accompanies the Night Sweats, which is wont
to be the forerunner of Death, in those that dye of a Consumption. In a word,
how deadly soever a Consumption is, and is said to be, two Thirds dying of it,
which are spoiled by Chronical Diseases: Yet I sincerely affirm, That Mercury
in the French Pox, and the Peruvian Bark in Agues, are not more effectual than
the Exercise above mentioned, in curing a Consumption, if the Sick takes care
that his Sheets are well air'd, and that his Journies are long enough. But this
must be noted, that those that have passed the Flower of their Age, must use
this Exercise much longer than those that have not yet arrived to it. And this
I have learned by much Experience, which scarce ever fails me. And though riding
on Horseback is chiefly beneficial to consumptive People, yet riding Journies
in a Coach, does sometimes a great deal of good.

But to return to the business in hand, this is the general way of cure in this
Disease, which is applied to the original cause, viz. the weak crasis of the
Blood, and so is to be used only when the Fit is off; therefore as often as the
Fit invades, joined with any one of the foresaid Symptoms, if the Disease be
such, or so great a one, that 'twill not bear a truce, 'till it may be cured by
Medicines that corroborate the Blood and Spirits, we must presently make use of
hysteric Remedies, which by their strong and offensive Smell, recall the
exorbitant and deserting Spirits to their proper Stations, whether they are
taken inwardly, or smelt to, or outwardly applied; such are Assafaetida,
Galbanum, Castor, Spirit of Sal Armonicack: And lastly, whatever has a very
ungrateful and offensive Smell.

And in truth, whatever stinks is proper for this intention, whether it is
naturally ill sented, or made so by Art; and unless I am deceived, Spirits of
Hartshorn* of human Blood, of Urine, and of Bones, and the like; take their
chief Virtues from the force of the Fire, in their preparation contracting an
ill sented empyreuma, which is intimately joined with their Essence, which is
likewise in the Fumes arising from Feathers, and such kind of parts of Animals,
when they are burnt. For this is common to the Substances of all Animals, viz.
to emit a stinking Fume while they are burning; and if it is forced by Fire, and
received in Glasses, when it is condensed, it becomes those Liquors called
Volatile Spirits, which assume Faculties that were not primitively in their
Subjects; and are indeed, only Creatures of Fire, and their Virtues are really
all the same, from whatsoever Substance (so it is animal) they are extracted.

In the next place we must take notice, That if some intolerable pain
accompanies the Paroxysm, in whatever part it is, or violent Vomiting, or a
Diarrhaea; then besides the hystericks above mentioned, Laudanum must be used,
which only is able to restrain these Symptoms.

But in quieting these pains which vomiting occasions, we must take great care
that they are not mitigated either by Laudanum or any other Paregorick, before
due Evacuations have been made, unless they almost exceed all human Patience.
First, because sometimes there is so great a quantity of Blood and Humors
heapt up, (especially in sanguine Women and Men of a proper habit) that it is
able to withstand the Operation of the most effectual Narcotic, though it be
often repeated: And therefore in such, Blood must necessarily be evacuated from
the Veins of the Arm, and a Purge must be given before we come to use Laudanum.
For when these things are duly performed, that which before given in a large
Dose would do no good, will now perform the business in a moderate Dose. And
then because I have found by frequent Experience, that when the Sick has been
accustomed by little and little to Laudanum, and has not been duly evacuated
before, she was forced by reason of the return of the pain, presently after the
Virtue of the Medicine vanished, to take a Paregorick again; and so daily for
some years, the Dose being sometimes by degrees increased, so that at last they
can by no means abstain from Laudanum, though thereby all the Digestions are
vitiated, and the natural Functions weakened. Though I don't think that the use of
Laudanum does immediately hurt the Brain or Nerves, or the animal Faculties.
Therefore I judge, and I speak what I have found, that Evacuation ought to go
before Anodynes, viz. in Virago's, and in Women that abound with Blood, a Vein
must be opened, and the Body purged; especially if they have been lately seized
with the Fit. But if the weak Women and those of a quite contrary Constitution,
labor with such a Fit and Pain, and have been not long ago afflicted with it,
'twill be sufficient to cleanse their Stomachs with a Gallon of Posset Drink,
more or less, taken in and ejected by Vomit; and then to give a large Dose of
Venice Treacle, or of the Orvietan Electuary, and a few Spoonfuls of some
Spirituous Liquor, that is pleasing to the Taste; with a few Drops of Liquid
Laudanum* to be taken presently after it.

But if the Sick has vomited a great while before the Physician was called, and
there is danger, lest by a further Provocation by Emeticks, the Spirits should
be put in a rage, and the Sick too much weakened; In this case you must give
Laudanum without delay, and such a Dose as is not only equal to the violence
and duration of the Symptom, but such a one as is sufficient to vanquish it.

But here two things are to be chiefly noted. First, that when you have once
begun to use Laudanum after due and necessary Evacuations, it must be taken in
that Dose, and often repeated, till the Symptom is quite conquered; only such a
space must be betwixt each Dose, that we may know what the former has done,
before we give another. And then when we treat the Disease with Laudanum, we
must do nothing else, and nothing must be evacuated; for the gentlest Glyster
of Milk and Sugar, is sufficient to spoil whatever has been repaired by the
Paregoric, and to occasion the return of the vomiting and pain.

But though the pains above mentioned, as we have said, are apt to overcome the
Virtue of the Anodyne, yet violent Vomiting indicates the largest Dose of it,
and that it should be very often repeated; for by the inverted peristaltick
motion of the Stomach, (by which that which is contained in it, ought to be
carried downwards) the Paregorick is ejected through the oesophagus, before it
can do any good, unless after every time the Sick vomits, the Narcotick be
given afresh, and chiefly in a solid form; or if it be given in a Liquor, the
Vehicle must be so small, as that it may but just wet the Stomach, so that by
reason of the small quantity of the matter, it cannot be cast up; for instance,
some drops in one Spoonful of strong Cinnamon Water, or the like; and the Sick
must be admonished to keep her self quiet, presently after taking the Laudanum;
and that she keep her Head as much as is possible immovable, for the smallest
motion of the Head, provokes vomiting more than any thing else, and then the
Medicine just taken, is ejected. Yet when the vomiting ceases, and is as 'twere
tamed, it is expedient to give an Anodyne Morning and Evening for a few days, to
prevent a Relaps; which also ought to be observed after a Diarrhaea, or an
hysteric pain taken off by a Narcotick. And so at length by this method, we
may readily cure the symptomatick pain and vomiting, whereby, because they are
very often, like other Diseases, Physicians are easier imposed upon, than by
any other Symptoms whatever, that require their help; concerning which, I will
add a few things, for instance: In that kind of hysteric Disease now
described, which resembles a nephritick pain, is not the great Parity and
Similitude of both Diseases, apparent to any one, both because the pain in both
is in the same part, and also for that the Woman vomits in both Diseases? And
yet they proceed from causes differing from one another; and the methods for
the cure of them so unlike, that that which does good in this, is injurious in
the other, and so on the contrary. For whether a Stone or Gravel, fretting upon
the Substance of the Reins, occasions Pain, and by consent of Parts, vomiting,
nothing is so beneficial, as very large and frequent revulsion of the
antecedent cause by Phlebotomy, and Dilatation and Laxation of the Passages, by
which the Stone is to be excluded, by emollient Clysters very often repeated,
and inward Remedies of the same kind, to which are to be added Linthontriptick
and Diuretic Medicines. Now if the said Symptoms do no way arise from the
Stone, but from the animal Spirits rushing impetuously in a great quantity upon
the Reins, (in which case, Paregoricks are only indicated; nor is the gentlest
Clyster injected after the first Evacuations, without danger) in what great
danger the unhappy Woman is put into, whose Life is so triffl'd with, I need
not say. The same may be affirmed of that hysteric Disease, which resembles the
Bilious Colic, or the Iliack Passion, when it is taken for granted, that that
Disease, (though of a quite different, yea contrary nature) is the Bilious
Colic, and proceeds from a sharp Humor cast upon the Bowels, through the
Mouths of the mesenterick Arteries; (into which Error the intolerable Pain and
the green color of the Matter expelled by Vomit and Stool, easily seduces the
unwary and unthinking Physician) what method is so proper, as that whereby we
endeavor to attemperate the Acrimony of the Humors, by the help of cooling
and incrassating Medicines? And what is fitter than Catharticks frequently
given, besides Clysters daily injected to exterminate the Humous from the Guts,
especially Mercurius dulcis mixed with diagrydiate Medicines, to eradicate
perfectly the morbific Matter? But it is plain to every one, how ill the Patient
would be treated, and in what great Danger he would be, whilst we should insist
upon this method, if the Disease which is supps'd to be a bilious Colic,
should really prove an hysteric or hypocondriacal Symptom, when Experience
openly proclaims, that after the first general Evacuations (which are appointed
to remove the Rubbish of the putrefying Humors, which the Ataxy has
occasioned, whereby the Virtue of the Anodyne may be obstructed) nothing
remains to be done, besides the quieting the tumultuous Spirits, till the
Symptom goes off, and afterward 'twill be seasonable to give Chalybeats, or
any other Remedy, if there be any that by kindling and invigorating the Blood,
may eradicate the Disease. It Is not my business to reckon up those great
Calamities which I have known befall Women, when this hysteric Colic has been
supposed to proceed from Choler, notwithstanding I affirm, that Evacuations
often repeated, which are indeed indicated in the Bilious Colic, have been so
far from lessening the Pain and Vomiting, that they have irritated them more,
by promoting the Disturbance of the Spirits, which is the true cause of these
Symptoms. And at length the Disease being prolonged for some Months, ends in
Convulsions, there being a sudden Translation to the Brain, whereby the Sick
is soon destroyed; and especially when after other Evacuations repeated a long
time, by reason of the green color of those things that are vomited up, a
Vomit is given. In a word, if I have learnt any thing by Observation, I judge
we must chiefly take care, that those Symptoms familiar to hysteric Women, be
not supposed by a Mistake in the Diagnostick, to proceed from other Diseases,
which they often resemble.

And here I must acquaint you, that besides the Errors before mentioned,
whereby Women obnoxious to hysteric Diseases, are put in danger of their
Lives; very many moreover, suffer by these Diseases, by an Error no less fatal,
at a time wherein, though this Disease is not of its own nature deadly, yet by
reason of the Disasters that come upon it *and followed it, it is Destructive to
many: For instance, a Woman of a tender and infirm habit of Body, brings forth
a Child, and all succeeds well, and according to Nature. The Midwife, whether
Rude and Unskilful, or Vainglorious, to show how well she has performed her
business, advises that her Woman should rise a few days after she has been
brought to Bed, and that she should keep up a while; the Woman does so, and is
presently seized upon the first motion of her Body, with an hysteric
Indisposition, and according as the Disease increases, the Lochia are first
lessened, then they quite stop, whose Suppression, a long Series of untimely
Symptoms follow; which soon destroys the Sick, unless great Diligence and
Skilfulness interceed. And sometimes they are seized with a Frenzy on this
account, which growing daily worse and worse, occasions Convulsions first, and
then Death. But if they escape Death, they are maddish, and sometimes continue
so as long as they live. Sometimes after the Suppression of the Lochia, they
fall into a Fever, which either turns to that which is then epidemical, or
depends only on that beginning. Moreover, the same hysteric Symptoms which
were first occasioned by the Suppression of the Lochia, rage more now, as if
afterward they proceeded from it. I thought long ago, that of those Women that
dye in Childbed, scarce one in ten, to speak within bounds, dies, because she
has not strength necessary for Delivery, or from the pains that accompany
difficult Labor, but chiefly by reason they rise too soon, Hysterical Fits
being occasioned by that motion, whereby when the Lochia are stopped, a numerous
train of dreadful Symptoms follows* Wherefore they that are advised by me, keep
in Bed at least till the Tenth Day, if they are of a* weakly Constitution,
especially if they have been long since troubled with Vapors. For besides
that, the Rest which they have in Bed, frees them from those Dangers we have so
often mentioned; the warmth of the Bed not interrupted, likewise refreshes the
Spirits weakened and exhausted by the pains in Labor, and by the Evacuations
usual in this case, and recruits Nature, and digests and removes all those
Crudities which are heapt up during the time of Childbearing.

But if by reason of this error committed, any one of the said Symptoms
supervenes, the curative Indications are to be directed so, that the Spirits
disquieted by this motion should be appeased, and that the Lochia should flow
again, for as much as the suppression of them is the next and immediate cause
of these Symptoms. But we must not obstinately insist upon this method, but
having given a while those Remedies that are wont to be used with success in
this case, if they don't answer according to our desires, we must leave them
off; for as strong things must not be used, so neither ought we to persevere in
the use of gentler, by reason Women in Childbed so affected, are much
weakened, and their strength almost worn out. For instance, when it first
appears that the Lochia are stopped, it is convenient to put the Woman presently
to Bed, and then to apply an Hysteric Plaster to the Navel, and to order this
Electuary following to be taken forthwith.

Take of the Conserve of Roman Wormwood, and of Rue each i, of the Trochisc. of
Mirrh ij, of Castor, English Saffron, of Volatile Salt of Sal Ammoniac, and of
Assa Faetida, each ss, make an Electuary with a sufficient quantity of the
Syrup of the five opening Roots; let her take the quantity of a large Nutmeg
every third Hour, drinking upon it Four or Five Spoonfuls of the following
Julap.

Take of Rue Water, compound Briony Water, each iij, of Sugar Candy, s. q.
mingle them, make a Julap.

And if these things are given as soon as the suppression begins, the Disease
is most commonly conquered, but if having continued the use of the said
Remedies, till the whole quantity is taken, in this case we must try Laudanum
once. Here Laudanum though of its own nature it is astringent, yet by quieting
the disturbance of the Spirits whereby the usual Evacuation of the Lochia is
interrupted, does sometimes much good, and when Emmenagogs do no good, it may
recall the Flux of the Lochia; but Narcoticks are most conveniently given with
Hystericks and Emmenagogs. For instance, Fourteen Drops of Liquid Laudanum in
Compound Briony Water, or one Grain and a half of Solid Laudanum made into Two
Pills, with half ae Scruple of Assa Faetida* But we must be sure to take
notice, that if we don't hit the Mark at once, if the Lochia don't follow, we
must by no means repeat the Opium, as is usual in other cases, and ought to be:
For if here the Paregorick is repeated, 'twill so powerfully stop the Lochia,
that afterward they can by no means be provoked; for truly if this don't
succeed (some time being passed that we may know what it has performed,) we
must return to the use of Emmenagogs, mixed with Hystericks, and then inject a
Clyster of Milk and Sugar; and what was said above of Opium* holds good
likewise here of Clysters, for unless the first injected bring the Lochia,
nothing is to be expected from more, one being sufficient, by turning the
Humor gently, to cause the Lochia to flow, but more may divert them another
way. These things being performed (which are to be touched upon lightly,) it is
most safe and the duty of a prudent Physician, to wait and see what time will
do, for every Day the business of the Cure is more and more removed from
Danger, and if the Sick live beyond the Twentieth Day, she is in a manner out of
danger. For when the Woman has been recruited a little, and gained some
Strength, in a long Disease whatever it is, she will be able to bear that Remedy
which is fittest for the cure of that Disease, which was occasioned by a
suppression of the Lochia; whereas Medicines crammed in obstinately, the first
doing no good, may increase the Disease, and also the disturbance of the
Spirits from whence the Disease arises, which must be carefully noted.

Lately a Virtuous Matron of good Parentage sent for me, she upon the
forementioned occasion, presently after she was brought to Bed, was seized with
Hysteric Fits, and the Lochia stopped. I endeavored by the Medicines aforesaid
to provoke them, but in vain, the violence of the Hysteric Disease being too
powerful for the Medicines; and at length when I perceived she would be well if
I did nothing, I committed all to time, by much the best and most successful
Physician; and according to my Opinion things went well with her to the
Fourteenth Day: Visiting her daily, I found she was no day worse than she was
the Day before. After this the Women that had attended upon her, whom I had
hitherto kept from doing mischief by their over-officiousness, enforced the
Husband to have a Vein opened instantly in his Wives Foot, which being done,
the Hysteric Fits so far prevailed, that within a few Hours she was seized
with Convulsions, and soon after by Death, that ends all our Miseries.

And if it be lawful to speak what I think, I have been a long time of the
Opinion, that I have well performed the Duty of an Honest Man and good
Physician, (not only in the said Diseases of Women in Childbed, but also in
all other Acute Diseases, when I cannot certainly promise that a Cure will
follow this or that method I please to use), as often as I do nothing, when
visiting the Patient, I find he is not worse this day, than he was the Day
before, and when I can conjecture he will not be worse to Morrow than he is to
day; whereas if I proceed in curing the Sick with a method, the efficacy
whereof I don't yet know, he will be in danger both upon the account of the
Experiment I am about to make upon him, and also by the Disease, nor will he as
easily evade two Dangers as one. For though at present there is no manifest
sign of his beginning to be well, yet it is most certain that according to the
nature of Acute Diseases, no one can always labor with them. And besides every
Day will more and more secure the Patient, or yield an occasion to the
Physician, whereby he may more opportunely and certainly vanquish the Disease,
than he could before. Which as it may be truly affirmed of most Disease, so
especially of the Diseases of Childbed Women, wherein the least error may
prove fatal, and in which we are so little able to govern that natural
Evacuation, the suppression whereof occasions the Diseases we have been
treating of.

But forasmuch as Hysterical Diseases don't always owe their Original to the
prime cause, namely the native debility of the Spirits, but sometimes to an
adventitious weakness; therefore I design before I make an end, to discourse of
this sort of cause, which most commonly is the occasion of Vapors as they are
called; and it is an immoderate Flux of the Courses either in Childbed, or at
other times as to the first kind, that comes and is very troublesome the first
Days after hard Labor, accompanied with a numerous train of Hysterical
Symptoms; and as it only comes, and is troublesome on these first Days, so it
soon goes away, for a Diet that is somewhat thickening, easily drives it away,
for which also the following Drink may be used.

Take of Plantain Water and Red Wine, each thy, boil them together, till a
third part is Consumed; then sweeten it with a s. q. of White Sugar, whereof
when it is cold, give half a Pint twice or thrice a day; in the mean while some
very gentle Hysteric Julap may be taken now and then, and the following
Nodulus may be held to the Nose. Take of Galbanum, and Assa faetida, each ij,
Castor iss, of Volatile Salt of Amber ss, mingle them and make a Nodulus. Or,
take ij of Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, to which let her smell often.

But as to the Flux, when Women are not in Childbed, though that is wont to
happen at any time, yet most commonly it comes a little before the time the
Courses are about to leave them, namely about the Age of Forty Five if they
flow early, but about Fifty, if they come somewhat later; from these as is said
a little before they quite go away, (like a Candle burnt to the Socket, which
gives the greatest Light just as it is about to go out,) they flow impetuously,
and cast the poor Women into almost continual Hysteric Fits, by reason of the
great quantity of Blood which is continually evacuated. Now though in this
case, Hystericks both inward and outward must be used by the by (avoiding those
that are strong, lest they should promote the Flux) yet the chief intention
must be to stop the Courses, which may be soon done after this manner.

Let viij of Blood be drawn from the Arm, the next Morning give the common
Purgative Potion, which must be repeated every Third Day for Twice, and every
Night at Bed time through the whole Course, let her take a Paregorick made with
one Ounce of Diacodium.

Take of Conserve of Dried Roses ij, of Trochisc, of Terra Lemnia iss, of
Pomegranate Peel, and Red Coral, each ij, of Lapis Haematitis and Dragons
Blood, and Bole Armenic, each i, make an Electuary with a sufficient quantity
of Simple Syrup of Coral, whereof let her take the quantity of a large Nutmeg
in the Morning, and at Five in the Afternoon, Drinking upon it Six Spoonfuls of
the following Julap.

Take of the Water of Oak Buds and Plantain, each iij, of Cinnamon Water hor
deated, and of Syrup of dried Roses, each i, of Spirit of Vitriol a sufficient
quantity to make a pleasant Acid.

Take of the Leaves of Plantain, and Nettles, each a sufficient quantity, beat
them together in a Marble Mortar, and press out the Juice; then clarify it;
let her take Six Spoonfuls cold three or Four times a day. After the first
Purge, apply the following Plaster to the region of the Loins.

Take of Diapalma, and of the Plaster ad herniam, each equal parts, mingle
them, and spread upon Leather.

A cooling and thickening Diet must be ordered, only 'twill be proper to
indulge the Sick a small draught of Claret Wine, once or twice a day, whch
though it is somewhat inconvenient, because its apt to raise the Ebullition, yet
it may be allowed to repair the Strength. And as indeed this Method is very
beneficial to Women thus affected, so is it also as useful for those that are
in danger of Abortion, only the Purges and Juices must be omitted.

There is another cause, though it is not so frequent of Hysterical Diseases,
viz. a falling of the Womb by reason of a hard labor, its accompanied with a
large train of this kind of Diseases, yet is it soon and easily cured this way.

Take of Oak Bark ii, boil it in lbiiij of Fountain Water to lbij, add at
latter end i of Pomegranate Peel bruised, Red Roses, Granate Flowers, each Mij;
and then add lbss of Red Wine, strain it, bath the parts affected with Flannel
Clothes dipped in it, in the Morning Two Hours before the Woman rises* and at
Night when she is in Bed; continue the use of it till the Symptom is quite gone.
But enough of these things.

And now worthy Sir, I have mentioned the chief of what has been hitherto
observed in the History and Cure of this Disease, and have nothing else to do
but to beg your Pardon, if I have erred in describing these things not so
accurately as I ought to have done, and also to desire you to accept favorably
of this small Treatise, which was designedly written to return you thanks for
your approbation of my other Works: And indeed I have so seldom received any
thing of this nature, that either* I have deserved no such thing, or else those
candid and ingenious Men which Nature has framed with such excellency of Mind,
as to know how to be grateful, are very few, scarce so many as the Gates of
Thebes, or Entries of Wealthy Nile. Yet notwithstanding I endeavor all I can,
and will do so, to learn and promote the method of curing Diseases, and to
instruct those that are less conversant in practice than my self, let other
People have what Opinion of me they please. For having nicely weighed whether
it is better to be beneficial to Men, or to be praised by them, I find the first
preponderates, and much conduces to the tranquillity of Mind. But as for fame
and popular applause, they are lighter than a Feather or a Bubble, and more
vain than the shadow of a Dream. But if any one thinks that Riches got by such
a Reputation have something more of weight in them, let them enjoy what they
have scraped together with all my Heart, but let them remember that some
Mechanics of the most fordid Trades, get and leave more to their Children, yet
do they not exceed the Beasts in this, who take as much care as they can of
themselves and theirs* and if we except things honest, proceeding from the
judgment of the Mind and Virtue (whereof the Nature of Beasts is not capable,)
the* Beasts are plainly as good as these and all others who don't endeavor to
do all the good they can in their Generation.

CHAP. IV. Of the Gout.
WIthout doubt Men will think, that either the nature of the Disease we now
treat of is almost incomprehensible, or that I who have been vexed with it
Thirty Four Years, am a very dull Fellow, seeing my Observations about the
Disease, and the cure of it* do little answer their Expectation. But however it
be, I will faithfully deliver those things I have hitherto learnt, the
difficulties and intricacy, respecting either the account of the Disease, or
the Method of Cure, leaving them to be cleared and made plain by time the guide
of truth.

The Gout chiefly seizes those Old Men, who after they have lived the best part
of their Lives tenderly and delicately, indulging themselves freely with
splendid Banquets, Wine, and other Spirituous Liquors; and at length having by
reason of the Sloth that always accompanies Old Age, wholly omitted those
Exercises of Body which Young Men are accustomed to. Moreover they who are
obnoxious to this Disease, have large Skulls, and are most commonly of a Gross
habit of Body, Moist and Laxe, and of a Lusty and Luxuriant Constitution, the
best and richest Foundation for Life.

Not that the Gout only seizes those that are Corpulent, for sometimes also
though seldomer, it invades thin People; nor does it wait always till they are
old, for sometimes it seizes those that are in the flower of their Age, when
they have received the unhappy Seeds of the Disease from their Parents, as it
were ex traduce; or if this be not the cause, they have too early used Venery,
or have quite forsook violent Exercises that they used formerly; moreover they
have great Stomachs, and have drank Spirituous Liquors immoderately, and
afterward they have suddenly betook themselves to thin and cooling Liquors.

When it first seizes any one when he is very old, it never afterward has such
exact Periods, nor rages so violently, as when it falls upon a younger Man,
both because he dies most commonly before the Disease accompanied with its
natural Symptoms can come to its height, and also because the native heat and
vigor of the Body being lessened, it cannot be so constantly and violently shot
off upon the Joints. But if it seizes any one earlier, though it does not yet
fix upon one part, nor handle him so roughly, but comes with uncertain periods
upon occasion given, paining him lightly for a few Days, coming and going
without any Method, yet by degrees it formally besieges the Man, and proceeds
regularly, both as to the time 'twill come at, and as to the continuance of the
Fit, and moreover assaults him more violently than at first.

I will first Discourse of this Disease as it proceeds regularly, and
afterward of its anomalous and uncertain Phenomenon, when being put out of its
course, either by a praeposterous use of* improper Medicines, or by the
weakness of the Subject, it cannot attain to its proper and genuine Symptoms.
Therefore when the Gout is regular, it seizes the Patient most commonly after
this manner, about the latter end of January, or the beginning of February, it
comes suddenly, and for the most part without giving any notice, except that
the Patient has been troubled with indigestion and crudities of the Stomach
some Weeks before; moreover the Body is oppressed and puffed up with Wind,
which daily increases till the Fit thunders upon him; but a few Days before it
comes, the Thighs are benumbed, and there is as it were a descent of Wind
through the Flesh of them, with Convulsive Motions, and the day before the Fit
the Appetite is sharp, but not natural. He goes to Bed and to Sleep well, but
about Two a Clock in the Morning is waked by the pain, seizing either his great
Toe, the Heel, the Calf of the Leg, or the Ancle; this Pain is like that of
dislocated Bones, with the sense as it were of Water almost cold, poured upon
the Membranes of the Parts affected, presently shivering or shaking follow,
with a Feverish Disposition; the Pain is first gentle, but increases by
degrees, (and in like manner the shivering and shaking go off,) and that hourly
till toward Night it comes to its height, accomodating it self neatly
according to the variety of the Bones of the Tarsus and Metatarsus, whose
Ligaments it seizes, sometimes resembling a violent stretching or tearing of
those Ligaments, sometimes the gnawing of a Dog, and sometimes a pressure;
moreover the part affected has such a quick and exquisite pain, that it is not
able to bear the weight of Clothes upon it, nor hard Walking in the Chamber;
and the Night is not passed over in pain upon this account only, but also by
reason of the restless turning of the part hither and thither* and the
continual change of its place. Nor is the tossing of the whole Body, which
always accompanies the Fit, but especially at its coming, less than the
continual agitation and pain of the tormented Member. There are a Thousand
fruitless endeavors used to ease the pain by a continual change of the place
whereon the Body and the affected Members lie, yet there is no ease to be had,
'till Two or Three a Clock in the Morning (viz. a Night and a Day being spent
from the first approach of the Fit,) at which time the Sick has suddenly ease,
by reason there is a little Digestion of the peccant Matter, and some discussion
of it, though he undeservedly attributes it to that position of the affected
part he used last. And now being in a breathing Sweat, he falls asleep; when he
wakes, he finds the pain much abated, and the part affected swelled afresh; for
before there was only (which is usual in the Fits of those that have the Gout,)
visible, a Swelling of the Veins intermixed with the affected Member. The next
day, and perhaps Two or Three days after, if the matter apt to genetrate, the
Gout is copious, the part affected will be in pain, which will be violent too
toward Evening, but 'twill be eased about the time of the Cock's Crowing;
within a few Days the other Foot will be in pain, as the former was, and if the
former has left off aching, the weakness which rendered it infirm will presently
vanish, strength and perfect Health being so presently restored, as if it had
never been out of order, if the pain is violent in the Foot lately seized. And
yet it acts the same Tragedy in the other Foot as it did in the former, both as
to the violence of the Pain, and the duration of it* and sometimes on the first
Days of the Disease, when the Peccant Matter is so exuberant, that one Foot is
unable to contain it, it afflicts both at the same time with the like violence;
but most commonly it seizes them successively as we said: After it has vexed
the Feet, the Fits that follow are irregular, both as to the time of Invasion
and Duration, yet the pain always returns in the Evening, and is less in the
Morning, and of a Series of these small Fits, consists that which is called a
Fit of the Gout, longer or shorter, according to the Age of the Sick; for it is
not to be supposed, that when any one is afflicted with this Disease two or
three Months, that that is one Fit, but rather a Series and Chain of small Fits,
whereof every latter is gentler and shorter than the former, till at length the
peccant Matter being wholly consumed, the Patient recovers his former Health,
which in those that are brisk, and in others whom the Gout has rarely visited,
comes to pass often in Fourteen Days, and in those it has often afflicted in
Two Months; but in those who are more debilitated, either by the long
continuance of the Disease, or by age; it does not go off till Summer coming
pretty well on, drives it away. The first Fourteen Days the Urine is high
Colored, which after Separation puts off a red Sediment, and as it were full
of small Sand; nor does the Patient render by Urine more than the third part of
what he Drinks, and the Belly is most commonly bound the said first Days, want
of Appetite, shaking of the whole Body about Evening, heaviness and a
troublesome uneasiness of the parts that are not affected, accompanies the whole
Fit, a violent itching of the Foot affected, follows the departing Fit,
especially betwixt the Toes, and the Feet scale as if the Sick had been
Poisoned. The Disease being discussed, a good habit of Body and Appetite
return, according to the degree of Pain with which the Fit last past raged; and
so proportionably the following Fit will be hastened or deferred, for if the
last Fit was very severe, the following Fit will not come, till the same time
of the Year return again.

And in this manner, the regular Gout shows it self with its genuine and proper
Phenomenon, but when it is disturbed by improper methods of Cure, or by the
obstinate continuance of the Disease, the very substance of the Body being as
it were, perverted to the Nourishment of the Disease; and Nature unable to
eliminate the same by its wonted method, then the Phenomenon are much different
from those described. For whereas the Pain was hitherto only troublesome to the
Feet, (which are the genuine seat of the peccant matter, and if it possesses
any other Parts, it is most certain, that either the method of the Disease has
been altered, or that the vigor of the Body, is by little and little
diminished) now it possesses the Hands, Wrists, the Arms, the Knees, and other
regions, tormenting these, as much as it used to do the Feet: For sometimes
distorting one or more of the Fingers, it makes them like a bunch of Parsnips,
taking away the motion by degrees, and at length it generates Stony Concretions
about the ligaments of the Joints, which destroying the Cuticle, and the very
Skin of the Joints, renders visible, naked Stones, like Chalk or Crabs eyes*
which may be picked out with a Needle. Sometimes the matter occasioning the
Disease thrust upon the Arms, causes a whitish Swelling, almost as big as an
Egg; which is by degrees inflamed with Redness, sometimes falling upon the
Thigh, it feels as if there were a great Weight hanging upon it; yet without
any considerable Pain, but passing to the Knee, it handles that more severely,
so hindering all motions, that it is as 'twere, nailed to the Bed: So that it
cannot move a Hairs-bredth from the place wherein it is. And when by reason of
the restlessness of the Body, or to ease Nature, the Patient must be moved by
the help of others, there is need of great care, lest by chance, the least
contrariety of motion* should occasion Pain, which for this reason only, is
tolerable, viz. because it presently vanishes: And indeed, this carrying of
the Body, that must be performed so carefully and tenderly, is not a small part
of the Troubles, wherewith the Gout is burdened; for the pain is not violent
through all the Fit, if the part affected, be kept quiet.

Whereas the Gout before, did not use to invade before the latter end of
Winter, and was wont to go off, after two or three Months, now it continues
upon the Sick a whole year, excepting only two or three of the hot Summer
Months: And what is moreover to be observed, as the great and general Fit is
longer than heretofore it was, so those particular Fits, whereof the general is
compounded, rage longer; for whereas before those particular Fits did not
torment the Patient above a day or two, now wherever it fixes, especially if it
possesses the Feet or Knees, it does not cease, till the Tenth or Fourteenth
day, moreover the First or Second day after its coming, the Patient feels some
Sickness, besides the Pain, together with a total prostration of the Appetite.

Lastly, before the Disease was grown to such a height, the Sick did not only
enjoy longer Intervals of the Fits, but also during that Intermission, he was
well in his Limbs, and in the other parts of Body, all the natural Faculties
performing their Offices duly; but now his Limbs are contracted and cumbred, so
that though he can stand, and perhaps go a little, yet he creeps along so very
lamely and troublesomely, that when he walks, he seems to stand still; and if
he endeavors to walk beyond his strength, that he may the better recover his
Feet, the more he confirms them by walking, and renders them less apt to
receive the pain, so much the more the Fomes of the Disease not perfectly
dissipated by all this interval, hovers more dangerously about the Bowels, when
it cannot be so freely discharged upon the Feet, which at this time of the
Disease, are scarce ever free from pain, but are always uneasy more or less.

The Sick is also afflicted with many other Symptoms, as with a Pain of the
Haemorrhoidal Veins, with unsavory Belchings, resembling the taste of the Meat
last eat, putrefying in the Stomach, when something of hard Digestion is eaten,
or only so much as is requisite for People in Health, the Appetite Languishes,
and also the whole Body, by reason of a penury of Spirits. Lastly* He lives
only to be wretched and miserable, and not at all to taste of the Happiness of
Life. The Urine that used to be formerly high colored, especially in the Fits,
and rendered in a small quantity, now is like that, both for color and
quantity which is evacuated in a Diabetes: The Back and other Parts, itch
troublesomely about Bedtime.

And this Incovenience also happens in this Disease, when it is confirmed, viz.
that upon yawning, especially in the morning, the ligaments of the Bones of the
Metatarsus, are violently pulled, and seem to be hardly pressed with a strong
Hand; and sometimes when yawning does not go before, the Sick just dropping
asleep, suddenly feels a Blow as it were of a Club, breaking in pieces the
Metatarsus; so that he wakes crying out: The Tendons of the Muscles that
sustain the Legs, are sometimes taken with such a sharp and violent Convulsion,
that the pain which it occasions, if it should last but a little while, would
overcome all Humane Patience. After many and dreadful Torments, and long
execution, the following Fits as to Pain are more gentle, as a pledge of the
discharge which approaching Death is about to give, (Nature being partly
oppressed by the burden of the Peccant Matter, and partly by Old Age, is no
more able to expel it constantly and forceably to the extremities of the Body,)
but instead of the accustomed Pain, a certain Sickness with a pain of the
Belly, Spontaneous weariness, and sometime a propension to a Diarrhaea
supervene. These Symptoms ease the pain of the Limbs when they are violent, and
likewise vanish when the Pain is in the Joints; and sometimes the Pain* and
sometimes the Sickness afflicting alternatively, prolong the Fits much. For
it is to be noted, that when any one has had the Gout many Years, the Pain is by
degrees lessened every Fit* and at length he dies more of the Sickness than the
Pain: For the Pain which is in these Fits* though it is longer, yet is it not
the Tenth of that which he used to suffer when his Strength was more entire.
But this Severity of the Disease is compensated most commonly by the longer
space betwixt the Fits, and by the good Health he in the mean while enjoys. For
in this Disease, pain is Nature's most bitter Medicine; and the more violent it
is, the sooner will the Fit pass over, and the longer will be the intermission
and more perfect, and so on the contrary.

Nor does the Pain, the lameness, and the obstructed motion of the affected
parts, the Sickness and other Symptoms described, complete the Tragedy of this
Disease: For it breeds the Stone of the Kidneys in very many, either because
the Sick lies long upon his Back, or because the Organs of Secretion have
ceased to perform their due Functions, or for that the Stone is made of a part
of the same kind of Matter, but which is the cause I shall not determine;
whatever is the origin of this Disease, the Sick has sometimes many sad
Contemplations, to know whether the Stone or the Gout is most severe; and
sometimes the Stone hindering the passage of the Water into the Bladder through
the Urinary Passages kills him, not waiting any longer upon the Slow Gouty
Execution. Nor is it enough that the Sick is tormented in such a Miserable
manner, as that he cannot help himself, but wants the help of others, but this
is also added to the heap of his Sorrows* viz. that during the Fit, his Mind is
as it were affected with the Contagion, and so far suffers with the Body, that
it is difficult to say which of them is most afflicted, for every Fit may as
properly be called a Fit of Anger, as of the Gout, for the Mind and Reason are
so extremely enervated by the infirm Body, that they are disordered by the
least motion of the Affections, so that he is as troublesome to others, as to
himself: Moreover he is as obnoxious to the rest of the Passions, viz. to fear,
care, and others of the same kind, by which he is also vexed, till the Disease
going off, the Mind also has recovered its former tranquillity.

At length the Sick (that I may dispatch the Catastrophe of this dreadful
Disease,) his Bowels being so hurt by hatching and embracing the Peccant
Matter, that the Organs of Secretion can no longer perform their Office, upon
which account the Blood stuffed with Faeculencies stagnates, and the peccant
Matter is not as heretofore cast upon the extreme parts of the Body; at length
I say the thrice Miserable Wretch is so happy as to Dye.

But (which may be a comfort to me and others that are afflicted with this
Disease, though we are but moderately furnished with Money and the Graces of the
Mind,) so lived and so died great Kings and Potentates, Generals of Armies, and
Admirals of Fleets, Philosophers, and many such as these. In a word, this
Disease of the Joints (which can scarce be said of any other,) kills more Rich
than Poor, more Wise Men than Fools, Nature showing as it were with the Finger
how just the Parent and Disposer of all things is, and how little he sides with
Parties; for those that want something, are wont to be abundantly replenished
with an other kind of good, and he allayes profuse munificence, by mixing an
equal share of Miseries with it; so that it is every where inviolably decreed,
that no Man shall be perfectly happy, or completely miserable, but that all
shall partake of both Lots, which mixture of good and ill, so proper to our
frailty and mortality, is perhaps very fit for us.

Women are very seldom troubled with the Gout, and if they are, not till they
are Old or of a Masculine habit of Body: Thin Women who in their Youth or
Middle Age are troubled with Symptoms resembling the Gout, receive them from
Hysterical Diseases, or a Rheumatism which they were afflicted with heretofore,
the Fomes whereof was not well carried off.

Nor have I hitherto observed that Boys or Youths are vexed with the true and
genuine Gout, yet some that I have known, have perceived some small touches of
it, before they have arrived to that Age, viz. when their Fathers had this
Disease when they begat them. And here ends the History of the Disease.

Having very much contemplated the various phenomenon of this Disease, I
suppose it arises from the Concoction weakened, both in the parts, and in all
the Juices of the Body; for in those who are subject to this Disease, they
being either worn out by Age, or having by Intemperance hastened Old Age, the
Animal Spirits are decayed throughout the whole Body, being consumed by the
immoderate exercise of the brisk Functions in the heat of Youth, for instance,
by too early, or too much use of Venery, by Mad and Extravagant Labors,
whereby they unweariedly serve their pleasures; to which is to be added a
sudden intermission or cessation from the Exercises of the Body, to which they
have been heretofore accustomed, either by reason of Years or Laziness, (by the
use whereof the Blood was wont to be rendered more vigorous, and the tone of
the parts more firm,) upon which account the Body becomes now withered, and the
concoctions are no more rightly performed; but on the contrary the dross of the
Juices of the Body which were discharged before by the help of such Exercises,
are from henceforth laid up in the Vessels, as a Stock for the Disease. And
sometimes hard Study or Meditation concerning some serious and lasting Matter,
has increased the Disease, whereby the Fine and Volatile Spirits are too much
diverted from their business of Concoction, which they ought to perform.
Moreover they that are subject to this Disease, are not only most commonly
greedy of Meats in general, but chiefly of those that are hardest to digest,
whereof when they eat as much as they were wont to do when they exercised
themselves, they are unable to digest them. Nor does the said voracity or full
feeding, so frequently (though it does often) occasion the Gout, as the
immoderate and mad drinking of Wine, whereby the ferments appointed for various
Concoctions are wholly destroyed, and the Concoctions themselves, and the
natural Spirits are vanquished and dispersed by the great quantity of
adventitious Vapors. But when at one and the same time, the vigor of the
Spirits that are the Instruments of Concoction are lessened, and moreover a
great haep of Humors oppresses the Blood, it is impossible that all the
Concoctions should be duly performed, when all the Viscera are so overwhelmed,
upon which account the Spirits long ago weakened, are now suffocated. For if
this were occasioned only by a weakness of the Spirits, Women and Children, and
those which long Sickness has wasted, would likewise be invaded by it; whereas
for the most part it seizes the Strongest, and those that have the most robust
Principles of Nature: Yet it does not seize them, 'till Humors are heapt up,
by reason of the defect and declination of the Natural Spirits, by which joined
together the vitiated Concoctions are perverted.

Moreover as every one of the causes we have mentioned, promote indigestion, so
most of them occasion a Looseness of the habit and muscules of the Body, by
which means a passage is opened for the receiving crude and indigested Humors,
as often as they are protruded to the outward parts, and when lying long in the
Blood, they increase in bulk and contract an ill Disposition, and at length
acquire a putrefying heat, and can no longer be governed by Nature, they break
forth into a Species, and fall upon the Joints, and by heat and sharpness
occasion most exquisite pains in the Ligaments and Membranes covering the
Bones, which being either weakened and loosened by Age, or by Luxury, or
Intemperance, make room for them, when they make an attempt; but this falling
of the Humors that generate the Gout, which constitutes the Fit, happens
sooner or later, as occasion is offered for putting these Humors into motion.

As to the cure, (I will first mention those things that are to be omitted,)
though if we respect the Humors and the Indigestion whereby they are
occasioned, it may seem at first, that the curative indications are chiefly to
be directed for the Evacution of the Humors already made, and for
corroborating the Concoctions; so that the heaping up of other Humors may be
prevented* forasmuch as these are the more general Indications, whereby we
should do the business in most other humoral Diseases; but in the Gout there is
a kind of prerogative in Nature, for exterminating the Peccant Matter after its
own way, by putting it off upon the Joints, and by discussing it by insensible
transpiration.

About Three ways are proposed, whereby we may eject the containing cause of
the Gout, viz* Bleeding, Purging and Sweating, and yet neither of these Methods
will ever perform the business.

First, Though Bleeding may seem both to Evacuate those Humors that are just
ready for a descent, and also those that have already besieged the Joints, yet
it plainly opposes that indication, which the antecedent cause, that is,
indigestion, arising from a depravation and defect of the Spirits, (which
Bleeding lessens and oppresses more) requires, and therefore Bleeding is not to
be used, either to prevent the Fit which is feared, or to mitigate that which
is now present, namely, in* those that are old; for though that Blood that is
drawn out, is most commonly like that of Pleuriticks, and of those that have a
Rheumatism, yet Bleeding does as much hurt to the Sick in this Disease, as it
does good in the Two just mentioned* for if Blood is extracted in the
intermission, though a good while after the Fit, there is danger lest by the
agitation of the Blood and Humors, a new Fit should be occasioned more lasting
than the former, and accompanied with more violent Symptoms, the strength and
vigor of the Blood being blunted thereby, by the help of which the nourishment
of the Disease should have been diligently and constantly expelled.

And this inconvenience happens as often as Bleeding is used at the beginning
of the Fit, and if it be used presently after the Fit, there is great danger,
lest Nature, the Blood having not yet recovered its former strength, weakened
by the Disease, should be so much dejected by this unseasonably used, that a
Dropsy should be occasioned thereby. But if the Sick is yet Young, and has
been overheated by hard Drinking, Blood may be drawn at the beginning of the
Fit; but if in the following Fits it is continually used, the Gout is soon
confirmed even in Youth, and will more propagate its Tyranny in a few Years,
than otherwise in a great many.

And then as to Purging, whether upward or downward, this must be noted, that
whereas by the inviolable Law of Nature annexed to the very essence of this
Disease, the Fomes of it ought to be expelled always to the Joints; Emetick or
Cathartick Remedies will do nothing else, but recall into the Blood the Peccant
Matter, which was put off by Nature upon the Extremities of the Body; upon
which account that which ought to be cast upon the Joints, rushes perhaps upon
some of the Viscera, and so the Patient's Life is in danger, when before 'twas
not in danger at all. Which is often observed to be fatal to those who have
been accustomed to Purging Medicines, that they might prevent the Gout, (or
which is worse,) to lessen the Fit: For when Nature is put by her usual method,
whereby as being best and more secure, she drives the Morbifick Matter upon the
Joints, the Humors are turned inward upon the Intestines, and instead of Pain
in the Joints, where there is none at all, or certainly but very little, the
poor Wretches are almost destroyed by Stomach Sickness, Gripes and Faintings,
with a great troop of irregular Symptoms.

Therefore I am fully persuaded, having learnt by continual and repeated
experience, that all Purging whether by gentle or strong Medicines, such as are
usually designed to purge the Joints, do much hurt, whether it is used in the
Fit to lessen the Peccant Matter, or at the end to dissipate the Relics of the
Disease, or in a perfect intermission or good health, to hinder the approaching
Fit. For I have found at my own peril, as well as of others, that Catharticks
administered at any of these times, have been so far from doing good, that they
have hastened the Mischief they should have prevented. First therefore Purging
when the Fit rages, disturbing Nature when she is busied in separating the
Morbifick Matter, and in putting it off upon the Joints, sometimes occasions a
great confusion of the Spirits, so that the Fit is not only increased thereby,
but the Patient's Life also is not a little hazarded; and then Catharticks used
at the end of the Fit, instead of removing the Relics of the Disease, bring on
another Fit afresh, as bad as the former, and thus the Sick being vainly
deceived, contrives Misery for himself, which he had not felt, if the Humors
had not been enraged again: Which inconvenience I have found often, having
preposterously craved for Medical help, to expel as I thought the relics of
the Disease. Lastly, As to Purging to be repeated at certain intervals, and in
perfect Health, to prevent the Fit, though which must be confessed, there is
not so much danger of a new Fit, as in the case just mentioned, when the
Patient was not wholly freed, yet at this time it produces a Fit; and if by
chance the Patient is not presently seized, yet it does not at all free him
from the Disease, though he take this or that Purge constantly at due
distances, for I have known some obnoxious to this Disease, who have not Purged
only at Spring and Autumn, but also Monthly and Weekly, that they might recover
their Health, and yet none of these have escaped the Gout, for most commonly it
handled them more cruelly afterward, and with worse Symptoms than if they had
taken no Physic at all. For though the said Purging might take away some part
of the containing cause, yet no way conducing to the corroboration of
Concoction (so far from that is it, that it debilitates the same, and wounds
Nature afresh,) it opposes only one cause, and so is wholly unable to cure the
Disease.

But this must be noted moreover, that from the same defect of the Spirits,
whereby the Concoctions are vitiated, in those who are wont to have the Gout,
the frame of the same Animal Spirits is rendered less firm and vigorous, so
that it is presently disturbed by any cause, whereby the Mind or Body is
somewhat violently moved, and so very fleeting and shattered is it, as it
happens to those that are subject to Hysteric and Hypochondriacal Diseases.
From which inclination of the Spirits to be disturbed, it comes to pass that
the Gout most commonly follows the least evacuation. The tone of the Body being
dissolved, which the firmness of the Spirits whilst they continue vigorous,
keeps compact and brisk, the Peccant Matter moves without resistance; and by
this injury to the Body a Fit is presently occasioned.

But how pernicious soever this Method is, yet some Empericks are much esteemed
for it, by cunningly concealing the Purging Medicine they use; for it must be
observed, that during the Purging, the Patient has little or no Pain at all;
and if Purging could be continued many Days, and no new Fit supervene, the Sick
would presently recover of that he has now upon him; but truly he will be
dreadfully punished afterward by the confusion into which the said agitation
of the Humors has precipitated Nature.

Lastly, The Evacuation of the Peccant Matter by Sweat, though it does less
hurt than the foresaid Evacuations, yet it plainly appears to be injurious, for
though it don't draw back the Fomes of the Disease into the Bowels, but on the
contrary, drives it to the habit of the Body; yet for these Reasons it does
hurt. First indeed because when the Fit is off, it forces the Humors as yet
crude and not prepared for Separation, upon the Limbs, by which means it brings
the Fit before its time, and contrary to Nature's consent; and then because the
forcing of Sweat in the Fit, does cast the Morbifick Matter too violently upon
the affected Member, and occasions at the same time an intolerable pain; and
if the quantity of the Peccant Matter is greater than can be contained in the
affected part, it forces it presently upon other Members, and upon which
account there is a great Ebullition and Fury of the Blood and other Humors;
and if the Body abounds very much with serous Matter, fit to generate the Gout,
there is danger lest an Apoplexy should be occasioned. Wherefore in this Disease
as well as in all other, wherein Sweat is provoked by Art, to cast forth the
Morbifick Matter, and does not come naturally, it is very dangerous to force
them out too violently, and beyond that degree of Concoction whereunto the
Humors to be evacuated have come of their own accord. And that excellent
Aphorism of Hippocrates, that things concocted, not crude, are to be medicated,
is of as much use in provoking Sweat, as in Purging the Belly, which is very
apparent in that Sweat that uses to come at the latter end of Agues, which if
it is moderate and agreeable to the concocted quantity of Febrile Matter of the
preceding Fit, much relieves the Sick; but if it is forced beyond Nature's
bounds, by keeping the Sick continually a-bed, a continual Fever is occasioned,
and instead of extinguishing the former Fire, a new one is kindled. In like
manner in the Gout, that gentle Breathing Sweat which most commonly comes in
the Morning of its own accord after each of the small Fits, whereof as I have
said the great Fit consists, mitigates both the pain and restlessness,
wherewith the Sick has conflicted all the Night. But on the contrary, when at
any time this gentle breathing Sweat that naturally soon goes off, is provoked
longer and more violently than the proportion of Peccant Matter requires, the
Disease is increased thereby. Therefore in this Disease and in all other I have
ever seen, except the Plague only, it is not so much the Physicians, as Nature's
business to force Sweat, because we cannot know by any means what part of Matter
is already prepared for such a Separation, and by consequence what Measures we
are to take in provoking it.

Now seeing it plainly appears from what has been said, that it is not only in
vain to endeavor the cure of the Gout by Evacuating Medicines, but that they
are also injurious to Gouty People, it remains, that we inquire to what other
end the curative Indications are to be directed. I indeed having accurately
weighed, and diligently examined the foresaid Phenomenon, gather from thence
that we must have respect to two causes chiefly in the cure of this Disease;
the first is the Antecedent cause, or the indigestion of the Humors arising
from a defect of heat and natural Spirits; the other is the containing cause,
or the heat and boiling of the Humors, when they are putrified and grown sharp
by remaining too long in the Body, which their delay is occasioned by the
indigestion above mentioned: These Causes are so absolutely contrary one to the
other, that those Remedies that do good for this, are injurious for the other;
upon which account this Disease is so very difficultly Cured. For when we
endeavor to remove Indigestion by hot Medicines, there is danger lest on the
other hand we increase the heat of the Humors; and when on the contrary we
would mitigate the hot and acrid Humors, either by cooling Remedies or Diet,
we occasion Indigestion, the natural Heat being weakened. But here by the
containing cause, I don't only mean that which actually besieging the Joints,
forms the Fit, but that moreover which lurking in the Blood, is yet unfit for
Separation; for all the Morbifick Matter is very seldom so clearly ejected, how
long and severe soever the Fit has been, as that there are no relics of it in
the Body, after the Paroxism is gone off, and therefore regard must be had to
this cause, as well when the Fit is off, as when it rages. But forasmuch as the
ejection of the containing Matter is wholly Nature's Business, it must be done
by her Method alone, for nothing can be in the mean time attempted to assuage
the hot and acrid Humors, without injury to the Digestions, only the Sick must
forbear hot Medicines and Diet whereby the Humors are inflamed; so that
certainly the greatest and chiefest intention of Curing, consists in helping
Concoction, by removing Indigestions, of which I will now treat, yet so as that
in the series of my Discourse, I may touch upon those Remedies occasionally,
which conduce to the asswaging of the Heat, and sharpness of the Humors.

Therefore whatever helps Nature in duly performing her offices, either by
strengthening the Stomach, that it may concoct the nourishment well, or the
Blood, that it may duly assimilate the Chyle brought into it, or by
strengthening the Solid Parts that they may the better convert the Juices
designed for their nourishment and increase, into their proper substance.
Lastly, Whatever preserves the Organs of Excretion, and the emunctories of the
Body, in that state whereby the Faeculencies of each part may in due time and
order be carried off, these and all things of this kind conduce to the
fulfilling this intention, and are properly called Digestives, whether they are
Medicines, or a Rule for Diet or Exercise, or any other of those things which
are called the Six Non-naturals.

These kind of Medicines in general, are those which moderately heat, and are
either bitter, or gently bite the Tongue, for they are very agreeble to the
Stomach, they purify the Blood, and comfort the other Parts. For instance,
they are such as these Roots of Angelica, Elecampane, the Leaves of Wormwood,
the lesser Centaury, Germander, Groundpine, etc. also those that are vulgarly
called Anti-scorbuticks may be added, as the Roots of Horseradish, the Leaves
of Garden Scurvy Grass, Watercresses, and the like. But yet these acrid and
pungent Herbs, how pleasing soever they are to the Stomach, and how much soever
they help Concoction, are to be used more sparingly than others that
corroborate the Stomach by their gentle heat and bitterness, and render the
Mass of Blood more brisk and lively, for they stir up the Fomes of the Disease
that has been long formed, and increase the Heat.

Some Species of them neatly mixed, are better in my Opinion to concoct the
Humors, than any one Simple of their Tribe. For though when we have need of
the Specific Virtue of any Medicine, that Rule holds good, the simpler it is,
the better it is; but when we design to cure the Sick by satisfying this or that
Indication, every Ingredient contributes somewhat for the cure of the Disease;
and in this case the greater the number of Simples is, the more powerfully does
the Medicine work; therefore various forms of Medicines tending to this end,
may be neatly framed of the foresaid, and of the rest of the Materia Medica of
this sort. I prefer an Electuary before the rest made like Venice-Treacle, as
the most excellent, for that a mutual Fermentation of the Simples, increases
the virtue of them all, as if it produced some third thing, which in the things
so joined, has greater virtue than any one of them in the same quantity. But I
willingly leave the choice of such Ingredients, and the forms wherein they are
to be given, to the prudent Physician; for I never thought it my business to
write Receipts as they call them, but rather to note the Indications, according
to which the Methods of Cure are to be directed; and this being not well
minded, is the cause why Empericks boast that they are the chief of the Medical
art.

But for the benefit of Beginners, I will set down the remedy I am wont to use,
which is compounded after this manner.

Take of the Roots of Angelica, of the sweet Smelling Flag, of Masterwort,
Elecampane, of the Leaves of Common Wormwood, of the lesser Centaury, of white
Whore-hound, of Germander, of Ground Pine, of Scordium, of common Calaminth, of
Feverfew, of Field Saxifrage, St. John's-wort, Golden-Rod, Thime, Mint, Sage,
Rue, Carduus B. Pennyroyal, Sothernwood, of the Flower of Chamomel, Tansie,
Lilly of the Valleys, English Saffron, of the Seeds of Treacle Mustard, Garden
Scurvy Grass, Carraway, Juniper Berries, each a sufficient quantity; let the
Herbs and Flowers and Roots be gathered when they have most virtue in them; let
them be dried, and kept in Paper Bags till they may be finely powdered; to six
Ounces of each well mixed, add a sufficient quantity of purified Honey and Canary
Wine, to make an Electuary; take ij Morning and Evening. Or for want of this,
use the following.

Take of the Conserve of Garden Scurvy Grass iss, of Roman Wormwood, and of the
Yellow Rind of Oranges, each i, of Candied Angelica, of Nutmegs Candied, each
ss, of Venice Treacle, iij, of Compound Powder of Wake Robin ij, make an
Electuary, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Oranges; let him take ij
twice a day, drinking upon it Five or Six Spoonfuls of the following Water.

Take of the Roots of Horseradish sliced iij, of Garden Scurvy Grass, M. xij,
of Water Cresses and Brook-lime, of Sage and Mint, each M. iiij, the Peel of
Six Oranges, two Nutmegs bruised, of Brunswick Mum lb xij, distill them in a
common Still, and draw only Six Pints of Water for use.

Among the Medicines commonly known, Venice Treacle is the best to corroborate
the Concoctions; but because it contains a great many Species that heat too
much, and besides, a great deal of Opium, the Electuary abovementioned may be
more commodiously prepared of the chief heating Vegetables; but we must take
care to choose such Simples as are pleasant to the Taste, for the Sick must
take it a long while, viz. almost as long as he lives, and therefore it is very
requisite that they should be palatable; among the Simples; the Peruvian Bark
is the best, for it strengthens the Blood, and renders it vigorous, if some
Grains of it are taken Morning and Evening.

And truly as in this Disease we now treat of, so in most other Chronical
Diseases, these and such like Remedies that strengthen the Blood, and render it
Brisk (if their heat don't consist of Vinous Spirits, for reasons to be shown
hereafter,) do most good, forasmuch as every Disease of this kind, if I
conjecture right, ought to be referred to one and the same cause, viz. the
indigestion of the Humors.

But it can no way be made more apparent and better proved, than by setting in
view the difference that is betwixt Acute and Chronical Diseases; wherefore I
hope the Reader will not take it amiss, if I do a little digress from the
business in hand. As therefore those for the most part are accounted Acute
Diseases, which either soon kill, or are brought to Concoction, so those are
Chronical Diseases which either are not Concocted at all, or require a long
time for their Concoction; and indeed the very nature of the thing, as well as
the words by which it is expressed, plainly signify as much; but the cause of
this difference which is perceived betwixt these two kinds of Diseases, is more
obscure, and not easily to be cleared. I suppose 'twill be worth our labor, to
spend a little time in the search after it, for the clear and distinct
knowledge of these things, contributes much toward the finding out true and
agreeable Indications for the cure of these Diseases.

Whether the innermost Bowels of the Earth, if it is proper to say so, undergo
various changes, upon which account the Air is infected by Vapors exhaling
from thence, which seems very probable to me, or whether the whole Atmosphaere
is infected by an alteration occasioned by a certain Conjunction of Heavenly
Bodies: It Is most certain, that for this space of time, the Air is stuffed with
Particles which are injurious to the economy of the Human Body; and that at
another time it is impregnated with such Particles, as are Enemies to the Bodies
of some species of Beasts. When at these times we breath into the naked Blood,
the noxious Venom that is an Enemy to Nature, and fall into those Epidemical
Diseases which that is apt to produce, Nature produces a Fever, its usual
engine to free the Blood from any disagreeable Matter that lodges within; and
such Diseases are commonly reckoned Epidemical, and are therefore acute and
short, because they have so quick and violent a motion. But besides these
Diseases occasioned by an External cause, there are others as acute, proceeding
from this or that peculiar Inflammation of the Blood, which don't depend on any
general cause from the Air, but on a particular irregularity or intemperies of
particular Bodies, which kind of Fevers I call Intercurrent and Sporadick,
which happen almost in all Years.

But Chronical Diseases have quite another genius, for though an unhealthy Air
of this or that kind may conduce much to the generating these Diseases, yet
they don't so immediately take their rise from the Air, but most commonly to
the indigestion of the Humors, the common Parent of them all. For when any one
has the Principles of his Nature weakened and worn out, either by Old Age, or
by great and continual errors in the Six non-naturals, especially in Meat and
Drink; or if the Secretory Organs have been so debilitated, that they are
wholly unable to purify the Blood, and to carry off its Superfluities: In
these cases a greater stock of Humors being heaped up than a Man's strength is
able to digest, the said Humors by long continuance undergo various
Fermentations and Putrefactions, and at length break out in specie, and
occasion various kinds of Diseases, according to the variety of Depravation;
and as these depraved Juices have a various disposition, so they variously fall
upon this or that part which is fittest to receive them, and at length by
degrees they show their long train of Symptoms, which are wont to arise partly
from the nature of such Juices, and partly from the Confusion brought upon
those parts, which two joined together, constitute the irregularity of Nature,
which is marked with the name of some Disease.

Now 'twill plainly appear, that such an impotency of Nature for the concocting
the Humors, is the chief cause of Chronical Diseases, if we consider that Old
Men whose Concoctions are weakened, and the Spirits the Instruments of them
wasted by the repeated functions of a long Life, are more subject to these
Diseases than Younger People, whose flame of Life being more kindled, scatters
those Feculencies heaped up, and whose Secretory Organs are constantly assisted
by the natural heat, that they may not be deficient in purifying the Mass of
Blood, unless they are oppressed, and as it were suffocated by too great a
quantity of Humors. Moreover that such an indigestion of the Humors, is the
cause of most Chronical Diseases, is manifest from hence, viz. because Winter
is much more apt to breed such Diseases than Summer; though some of them don't
actually break out till the latter end of Winter, yet the stock of Humors on
which they depend, increasing all the Winter, is enlarged by that cold and raw
Season, weakening Nature, so that she is not so able to preserve the economy
of the Body. Upon which account it happens, that they who are very well in
Summer, seldom escape those Diseases in Winter whereunto they are most
inclined. For instance, the Gout or Asthma, and a Cough, and the like. And from
hence we may learn the reason why traveling into more Southerly Regions does
so effectually vanquish those Diseases, the cure whereof is vainly attempted in
colder Climates. The truth of what I have said already concerning the general
cause of Chronical Diseases, will moreover manifest it self by that great and
incredible relief which those that are afflicted with most Chronical Diseases,
especially with a Phthisis, receive by Riding on Horseback, which kind of
Exercise invigorates and strengthens all the Digestions, the natural Heat being
revived by the continual shaking of the Body, and the Organs destined for
Secretion, assisted in duly performing their Office of purifying the Blood, so
that a Renovation of the ruined Digestions must necessarily follow, and by
consequence, the best Constitution of Body.

Wherefore it is manifest enough by the reasons already alleged, that not only
in the Gout, but also in other Chronical Diseases, where no manifest Symptom
contraindicates; such kind of hot Herbs are sometimes very beneficial, for they
procure the heat of Summer, in the middle of Winter; though if we accustom our
selves to the use of them in Summertime, they will the better prevent those
Diseases, which the contrary Season is wont to occasion: And truly if they are
deferred till Winter approaches, at which time a great deal of Matter is heapt
up, it is to be feared, we may fly too late to this Refuge. But though (as I have
discoursed largely above) the Gout by a peculiar Disposition, is made worse by
Catharticks; yet in most other Chronical Diseases, Bleeding repeated as often
as there is occasion, and Purging is to be ordered, before these digestive and
corroborating Medicines are to be used; but when the Patient has once entered
upon the use of these, he must persevere, without Purging betwixt whiles; for
this must be constantly maintained, that as often as the Cure of any Disease is
assayed by corroborating Remedies, all Evacuations are wholly injurious.
Lastly, I don't affirm that these digestive Medicines now mentioned, are better
than all others; but this I say, that he that can find out the best Remedy to
answer this Intention, will do much more in curing Chronical Diseases, than he
would imagine he was able to do.

But this must be first taken notice of, and chiefly observed above all the
things I am about to mention concerning the Cure of the Gout, namely, That all
digestive Remedies whatsoever, whether Courses of Physic, or Diet, or
Exercise, are not to be taken up by the by, but must be used constantly and
daily with the greatest Diligence; for whereas in this Disease, as also in most
other Chronical Diseases, the cause of it has passed into an Habit, and is
become as it were a new Nature: No Man in his right Senses, can think that some
small and short alteration, superinduced upon the Blood and Humors, by any
sort of Remedy or Diet, can perfect the Cure; for the whole Habit of the Body
must be changed, and the whole Man must be as it were new framed; for it is not
so here, as in some accute Disease, where he that even now was strong, and
perfectly well, is suddenly seized with a Fever, and precipitated from the best
state of Health, into the most dangerous Disease. No, the case of the Gout is
quite different, where he that for many years together, by immoderately
indulging himself in Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and neglecting his wonted
Exercises, is worn out by Sloth and Negligence, or by hard Study, or continual
and intense Thinking, or by some other Errors of Life; as if he had designedly
perverted the various Ferments of the Body, and oppressed the animal Spirits,
(which are the chief Instruments of Digestion) by which means the preternatural
Humors that were heapt up, break out at length, when they are arrived to the
highest degree, and confound all, the Flesh being softened, and the Joints
weakened, so that they readily receive the Humors falling upon them. And so at
length another Nature is as it were, superinduced by degrees, the pristine and
natural economy of the Body being wholly subverted, and destroyed: And those
Fits about which unwary and unthinking Men are so busied, are indeed nothing
else but the Series and order of Symptoms, depending on that method which
Nature is wont to use in driving out the Matter that occasions the Disease;
wherefore he labors in vain, that endeavors to drive away this Disease, by
this or that Medicine or Regimen now and then used. For this Habit being
chiefly founded, and consisting both in the weakness of all the Digestions, and
in the want of the natural Strength of the particular Parts, we must provide
against both these Ills, and the strength of Concoction, as well as the
Soundness of the Parts, must be reduc*d and restored by degrees to the former
state and accustomed economy of the Body, though to do this fully and perfectly,
may not seem possible, not only because any Habit is difficultly changed into
the quite contrary, but also because Old Age which most commonly accompanies
this Disease* violently opposes; yet the Cure is to be endeavored as much as
the Strength and Years will permit: And the nearer or farther from this Mark
the Patient is, he will more or less avoid the Tyranny of the Gout.

And it is moreover to be noted, That digestive Remedies, either medicinal or
dietetic, are chiefly to be used in the Intervals of the Fits, and as long as
may be before the next Fit; for by reason of Old Age, much time is required,
and a constant use of Remedies, before the corroboration of all the Concoctions
and the Restoration of the enfeebl'd Ferments of the Body, and such a
Soundness as is requisite for the Blood and Viscera can be obtained.

But tho these Remedies and other things of the same kind, may do good, yet
this intention of corroborating, cannot be answered by these things alone, but
respect must be also had to those things which don't properly belong to
Physic. And he will be most certainly deceived that thinks he can perform the
Cure of this, or some other Chronical Disease, by Medicines alone. First
therefore, a Mediocrity is to be observed in Meat and Drink, so that neither
more Nourishment be taken in, than the Stomach can concoct, lest the Disease
should be heigthen'd by it; nor on the contrary must the Parts, by too much
Abstinence, be defrauded of that Proportion, whereby their Strength and Vigor
ought to be sustained, for by so doing, they will be more weakened, for either
is alike injurious, as I have often found in my self and others*: Moreover, as
to the quality of the Meat, though things of easy Digestion considered by
themselves, are to be preferred before things of hard Digestion; yet regard must
be had to the Patients Palate: For we must take notice, That that which the
Stomach earnestly craves for, though of difficult Digestion, is sooner conquered
by Nature, than that which is accounted to be of easier Digestion, if it be
offensive to the Stomach; but those things that are reckoned of hard Digestion,
are therefore to be eaten more sparingly; and I suppose the Patient ought to
feed upon one sort of Meat at a Meal* for various sorts of Flesh eaten at once,
disturb the Stomach, more than one sort eaten in the same quantity. As to other
things beside Flesh, let him eat at Pleasure, if they are not Sharp, nor
Salted, nor Spic'd; which though they don't hurt Concoction, yet are they
injurious, for that they exagitate the Fomes of the Disease.

As to the times of eating, a Dinner is only necessary; for the Bed being most
proper to digest the Humors, that time ought not to be wasted about concocting
the Meat; therefore they that are subject to the Gout, should not eat Suppers,
yet they may allow themselves a large Draught of small Beer, for such are also
most commonly inclinable to breed the Stone in the Kidneys, the Concretion
whereof, is much hindered by such a kind of Liquor, drank at this time* the
Reins being cooled and cleans'd thereby.

The drinking of Milk, or a Milk Diet, either crude or boiled, without any
thing else, except perhaps a piece of Bread with it once a day, has been much
used these Twenty years, and it has done more good to many, than any other sort
of Remedy for this Disease, as long as they kept to it: But as soon as they
returned to common Diet, though of easy Digestion, the Gout returned more
violently than before, and held them longer; for the Principles of Nature being
weakened by this method, the Sick was rendered less capable to repel the
Disease, upon which account 'twas more dangerous and lasted longer. Therefore
he that intends to betake himself to this method, ought first to consider
seriously whether he can persist in the use of it all his Life long, which
perhaps is not in his Power, how resolved so ever he may be. For I knew a Noble
Man, who after he had been dieted with Milk only, a whole year with Pleasure,
(all which time, he went to Stool daily once or oftener) was forced to leave it
off, by reason he was suddenly bound in Body, and the Temper of his Body
altered, and because his Stomach at length nauseated Milk, though the inclination
of his Mind still continued. But some hypochondriacal People of a gross habit
of Body, or who otherwise have accustomed themselves much and a long while to
spirituous Liquor, can by no means bear a Milk Diet. Moreover, that very short
and fading Benefit that they receive by this Diet, to whom Milk is agreeable,
proceeds hence, viz. not only for that this Diet is most simple, (for I don't
doubt but that Barly-Broath, if the Stomach will bear it, may do as well) but
also because it renders the Blood more mild and sweet by quelling the Acrid
Particles in it; and moreover, which I suppose is most considerable, Milk being
a sort of aliment very unfit for grown People, suppresses that Turgescency of
the Humors, which occasions the Gout; and for that reason those few with whom
a Milk Diet agrees, are so long free from the Gout as they feed upon it, and no
longer; for by being wholly contrary to the original cause of the Gout, viz.
the weakness of the Ferments and Concoctions, it is much more injurious than
beneficial. And because this has not been sufficiently regarded, some unwary
People have fell into great and fatal Errors; for by endeavoring to oppose the
containing cause, viz. the heat and sharpness of the Humors, they have
destroyed the concoctions and all the natural Functions.

As to Liquors, those in my opinion are best, that are neither as strong as
Wine, nor as weak as water, of which sort is our London Small-Beer, with or
without Hops; for extremes on either hand are hurtful. First as to Wine, though
the Proverb says, Drink Wine and have the Gout, and drink no Wine and have the
Gout: Yet it is without Controvesie, and confirmed by various Experiments of
gouty People, that Wine de facto is injurious. For though it may be supposed to
do good by helping the Concoctions, the Disorders whereof, I have long
accounted the antecedent cause of the Gout; yet with respect to the containing
cause, it mst be reckoned wholly injurious, for that it fires and exagitates
the Humors, the Fomes of the Disease, already prepared to give Battle: Yet I
don't grant that Wine used for ordinary drink, does promote Concoction, but
rather spoils it, unless in those that have been accustomed to Wine a long
while; for though as it passes by it imparts some Heat, yet it certainly injures
the Ferments of the Body, and destroys the natural Spirits; and for this reason
I suppose, great Drinkers dye of the Gout, Dropsy, Palsy and other cold
Diseases. Moreover, a continual and immoderate swilling of Wine, renders the
Body soft like Women's Bodies, whereas temperate Liquors strengthen and confirm
the Tone of all the Parts; for which reason, they that have always used small
Liquors, seldom know what the Gout means. It Is moreover to be noted, That those
Men are most inclinable to this Disease, who though their natural Concoction is
lessened, are nourished more than enough by reason of a certain Luxury of the
Blood, and they grow bulky by some indigested Matter, instead of good Substance
and well compacted. And drinking of Wine does more increase this Luxury of the
Blood; and moreover, heaps up a new Stock of Matter, and actually occasions the
Disease, by firing as it were the Fomes of it, which has been laid up a long
while. And besides, the Blood of gouty People, being very like that which is
taken from those that have a Pleurisy, or some other inflamatory Disease;
'twould be a mad thing to inrage it more with spirituous Liquors. Nor on the
contrary, are Liquors too much cooling to be used; for these by quite spoiling
the Concoctions, and by extinguishing the natural Heat, occasion the greater
Mischief; not Pain as Wine does, but Death it self: As Experience teaches in
those who freely indulging themselves in drinking Wine, till they are Old, and
betaking themselves suddenly to drink Water or small Liquors, have soon
destroyed themselves.

Therefore those that are subject to the Gout, must take care that they use
those Liquors, that can neither cause Drunkenness when they are taken in a
large quantity, nor yet injure the Stomach by chilling it; of this kind as I
said, is our Small-Beer, and a proper Liquor may be made in other Countries, by
mixing a little Water with a great deal of Wine. I count Water by it self,
crude and injurious, and I have found it so to my hurt. But Water may be safely
drunk by young People, wherewith at this day, the greatest part of Mankind
quenches Thirst, being more happy with their Poverty, than we with Plenty and
Luxury. To confirm which, I produce that great Train of Diseases, whereby our
Bodies on this accout are tortured, viz. the Gout, Stone, Apoplexy, Palsy and
the like; and that Violence upon the Mind, whereby it is driven contrary to its
native Rectitude, while the adventitious Spirits of such Liquors, complicated
with the animal Spirits, serving for the forming Thoughts, disturb the Mind, by
volatilising it too much, suggesting vain and frivolous Fancies, instead of
things that are solid and of some moment; and so makes us Jesters and merry
Fellows, instead of Wise Men, between which, the difference is almost the same,
as betwixt a Substance and a Shadow: But enough of this.

But now, though it may be sufficient for him that has the Gout but a little, and
at some times only, to use Small-beer and diluted Wine, the degree of his
Disease not requiring a more sever usage; yet when the whole Substance of the
Body is as it were, degenerated into the Gout, he will be less able to conquer
the Disease, who does not wholly abstain from any sort of fermented Liquors,
though Small and Mild; for all these contain a pungent Spirit, and some degree of
Sharpness, and what is worse, as they have a Ferment in them, (even as Yeast
put into Liquors, imparts a fermentative Virtue to the whole Mass) so they
incline the Humors to a perpetual Fermentation. Therefore a Dietetick Drink
must be prescribed of the Ingredients commonly known and appointed for this
use, for ordinary Drink, if it be not too strong, for if so, the Humors will
be almost as much enraged as by Wine: And on the contrary, it must not be so
small, as to injure the natural Functions, by overcooling them. This sort of
Drink if it be made of such Ingredients as are least displeasing to the Sick,
though the constant taking them, may cause some loathing for a Week or too, will
afterward be as pleasing and as acceptable, as any other Liquors to which he
has been most accustomed. And by this kind of Liquor, the Appetite will be
increased, and become more natural than it used to be with fermented Liquors.
And moreover, there will be this advantage, that he that uses this dietetick
Liquor for his ordinary Drink, may the freer indulge himself in other Diet,
than when he drank Beer or Wine, for the Errors in Diet (all which it is almost
impossible for a Man to avoid) will by this means, be somewhat corrected and
amended. But which is the chiefest of all, the Sick may prevent the Stone by
this means, which is usually the constant companion of the Gout; for all sharp
and attenuating Liquors, occasion a Fit of the Stone, as well as generate it.
The following Liquor being of a pleasant Taste and Color, pleases me best.

Take of Sarsaparilla vi, of Sassaphras, China, and the Shavings of Hartshorn,
each ij, of Liquorish i; boil them in Two Gallons of Fountain Water for half an
hour, afterward let them stand covered upon hot Ashes 12 hours, afterterwards
boil it to the consumption of a Third part; as soon as it is taken from the
Fire, infuse half an Ounce of Anniseeds, after 2 hours strain it, and let it
stand till it is clear; keep the clear Liquor in Glass Bottles well stopped for
use.

This Liquor is most conveniently used at first, when the Patient recovers of
the Fit, and he must persevere in the use of it all the rest of his Life as
well when he has the Fits, as at other times. At the same time the foresaid
Electuary must be used daily, as well in the Fits, as when they are off; the
Heat of this will somewhat allay the Waterishness of the dietetick Drink,
affording a due degree of heat to the Blood and Bowels, without that agitation
which used to be occasioned by the heat of fermented Liquors.

If any one should object that that Life is scarce vital, wherein a total
Abstinence from Wine and other fermented Liquors is observed: I answer, it must
be considered whether it be not much more miserable and less tolerable, to be
racked and dreadfully tortured by the Gout, grown strong by continuance, (for
when the Disease is gentle, this is not requisite) than to be confined to this
Liquor; the use of which being continued, he may indulge himself in almost all
sorts of Food: Not to repeat now that this Drink (as all other things) grows
pleasant by custom. Certainly he that has felt this Disease, if he be a Man,
will not long dispute which is best.

Yet notwithstanding, if the Sick by reason of a long and too great use of
intoxicating Liquors, or by reason of Old Age or Weakness, cannot concoct his
Meat without Wine or some other fermented Liquor, he cannot leave it off
suddenly without great danger, the doing whereof has been fatal to many.
Therefore in my opinion, he should not use the dietetick Apozem above
described; but if he be resolved to use it, let him be accustomed to it
leisurely, (drinking a Draught of Wine at Meals for some time) more like a
Remedy than a Diet, till the Decoction becomes more familiar: But Spanish Wine
is to be preferred in this case before French or Rhe^^sh Wine, the two last
being apt to inrage the Humors, and to increase the Fomes of the Disease, though
they are very grateful to the Stomach. Moreover, they are almost as crude, and
scarce more concocted than our Syder, and besides they are not so cordial and
hot, as the case requires. And so much may suffice for the Meat and Drink of
gouty People.

There Is another thing which though it may seem small, yet is it of great moment,
as well for digesting the Fomes of the Disease, when the Fit is violent, as for
hindering the generation of the Matter, when the Fit is off; namely, that the
Sick, especially in Winter, go to Bed early; for besides, Bleeding and Purging,
nothing does so much destroy the strength of Nature, as watching a Nights,
which every sickly person can affirm by Experience, if he considers how much
brisker and more cheerful he rises* when he goes to Bed early, and how languid
and faint he is when has sat up late; and though it may seem as well, if he lies
a Bed so many hours, whether he goes to Bed sooner or later: For instance,
whether he goes to Bed at Nine, and rises at Five, or goes to Bed at Eleven,
and rises at Seven; yet it is not so, and I suppose chiefly for this reason,
viz. in the Daytime the Spirits are dissipated, either by the Exercise of the
Body or Mind, which in People that are sickly, are so infirm and weak, that
they have need of Rest earlier in the Evening; for the approach of Night
occasioning as it were, a kind of Relaxation of the Economy of the Body, which
was kept up in the Daytime, by the influence of the Sun; it is necessary that
the heat of the Bed should supply the want of the Sun, especially in Winter.
But in the Morning, the Spirits being refreshed and invigorated by the rest of
the foregoing Night, and the warmth of the Bed, (besides, for that the
supervening day adds Firmness and Strength to the Tone of the Body) rising
early at this time, though an hour or two is taken from the Morning Sleep, Nature
is not so much injured as by Evening Watchings protracted an hour or two.
Wherefore I would persuade those that are subject to the Gout, to go to Bed
early; especially in the Winter, and to rise early, though Sleep somewhat
shorter, may entice them to lie longer; for sleeping in a Morning, prevents so
much Sleep the next Night, and so at length, a force being brought upon Nature,
and its wise Institutions despised, Night is turned into Day, and Day into
Night.

Moreover, Tranquillity of Mind, must by all means be obtained; for all
Perturbations, when they break the Bounds, mightly dissolve the frame of the
Spirits, that are the Instruments of Digestions; and so by consequence, much
promote the Gout. Therefore the Sick should prudently consider his own mortal
Condition, and not foolishly imagine that he is freed from those Troubles, that
necessarily follow it; for whether he suffers this Affliction of Mind, either
by his own Fault, or Fault of others, he can never prescribe Laws to the World,
who has not been always obedient to any one, how Potent and Wise soever he has
been; nor does ever all things fall out so exactly, according to any ones Mind,
as he fondly imagines, but suddenly as he is busied in Mind about the ordering
of things, he becomes the Specimen of humane Frailty, having unreasonably
deprived himself of the Enjoyment, of the fading Fruits of Life. The same
Inconvenience, follows too great an Application of Mind to Study and serious
things* for Melancholy always accompanying this Disease more than any other,
those that are subject to it, are wont to tire and overwhelm the Animal
Spirits, by thinking much and long, without the artificial help of Books; and
they do so mightly overthink, that the economy of the Body, cannot any longer
preserve it self whole: For which reason in my opinion, this Disease seizes
(except my self if you please) very few Fools.

But the Exercise of the Body is more profitable, than all other things that
are used to hinder the Indigestion of the Humors, (which I reckon the chief
cause of the Gout) and to corroborate the Blood, and to restore strength to the
Parts: But it must be noted, which I have mentioned above, that as in this
Disease, more than in any other Chronical Disease, the Habit of the whole Body
ought to be changed,; the Exercise of the Body, unless it is daily, will do no
good; for this kind of Exercise intermitted by turns, as it does scarce conduce
any thing* to the change of the Habit of the Body grown Languid and Esseminate,
by Sloth and Indulgence, so perhaps it may prove injurious, by occasioning the
Fit when the Patient has disused it a long while. But this exercise ought not
to be violent, but such as is agreeable to Old Men, which are most usually the
subjects of the Gout. For too violent a motion of the Body does too much
dissipate the Spirits, and by consequence hurts the Concotions, whereas
constant and moderate Exercise strengthens them. Though this may seem hard to a
Man, who besides Old Age and Sloth, and the unfitness of the Body for motion,
which is as it were natural in this Disease, is moreover punished with Pain;
and yet if this be omitted, nothing which has been already found out will do
any good. And as the Intervals of the Fits without constant Exercise of the
Body cannot be long, so such a one will be more prone to breed the Stone, which
is more dangerous and more tormenting than the Gout.

Moreover (which is of great moment) the Stony Matter is much increased by long
rest in the Joints of the Body, especially of the Fingers, so that at length
they are wholly deprived of all motion. For how confidently soever some People
affirm, that the Matter* of these Stones is nothing else but the Tartar of the
Blood put off upon the Joints, yet 'twill easily appear to any one that does a
little weigh the thing more seriously, that when a great deal of unconcocted
Matter causing the Gout, flows upon some of the Joints, and renders the
neighboring parts tumid a long while, at last it happens that partly by reason
the assimulative virtue of these is choked, and partly by reason of a
suffocating obstruction which this dull Humor breeds in them, the said Matter
is generated, which is turned into this kind of Substance by the heat and pain
of the Joints, and is daily increased, changing the Flesh and Skin into its own
nature, which now lies naked, and may be picked out with a Needle, and is like
Chalk, or Crabs Eyes, or some such thing. But now this ill may be prevented by
daily exercise, by which the Humors causing the Gout, which are apt to seize
on one part, are duly scattered through the whole Body. So that it come to pass
as I have observed in my self, that long and daily exercise does not only
hinder the generation of this Stony Matter, but also dissolves the Stones when
they are hard and old, if they have not prevailed so far, as to change the
outward Skin into their own Substance.

As to the kind of Exercise, riding on Horseback, when Old Age or the Stone
does not hinder, is much to be preferred before the rest: And truly I have many
times thought with my self* that if any one knew a Medicine which he could also
conceal, as effectual in this and most other Chronical Diseases, as constant
and daily riding on Horseback, he might easily get a vast Estate. If this
cannot be used, riding in a Coach does almost as well; and on this account at
least it is well with Gouty People, for their Riches which enticed them to
Luxury* whereby the Disease was bred, can provide them a Coach, which kind of
Exercise they may use, when they cannot the other.

But it is to be observed, that it is best to use Exercise in a good Air, viz. in
the Country, and not in a City, where the Air is filled with Vapors exhaling
from the Shops of various Artificers, and thickened by the closeness of the
Buildings, as it is here in London, which is generally supposed to be the most
spacious City in the whole World. But how great the difference is betwixt
Exercising in the Country, and Exercise in Town, any one that has the Gout will
soon find.

As to Venery, he that is Old and Gouty (being now destitute of a stock of
Spirits, whereby the Concoctions ought to be promoted, and by consequence his
Joints and the neighboring parts to them are but too much weakened and
loosened without this adventitious destruction,) is equally as improvident in
my opinion, if he indulge himself in these allurements, as he that having
undertaken a long Journey, should consume all his Provisions before he sets
out; for besides the Mischief he brings upon himself by not restraining the
impotent desires of feeble Age, he deprives himself of the great privilege of
enjoying that Jubilee which is reserved as the great and special favor of
Nature for Old Men only, whereby in the last Scene of their Lives, they are at
length emancipated from the impetuosities of Lust, which like a ravenous Beast
worried them all the time of their Youth Night and Day: For the full
satisfaction of these Appetites, can no way compensate for that long train of
Miseries that either accompany or follow it. And so much for the Regimen.

But though Rules of this kind respecting Diet and the other Regimen, if they
are carefully observed by those that are subject to the Gout, may preserve them
from violent Fits of it, and may restore that strength to the Blood and Solid
parts* whereby they may be freed from the many Miseries, on which account this
Disease exceeds Humane Patience, and at length becomes Mortal; yet after some
intervals, especially at the latter end of Winter, they will be sometimes
seized with the Gout* for though in the Summertime, when the tone and vigor
of the Blood is excited and preserved in its state by the heat of the Sun, and
there is likewise a due Elimination of the Humors through the Pores, it is
reasonable to suppose, that the Concoctions should proceed much better than in
the Winter; yet when Winter approaches, the strength of the Blood being
lessened, and the perspiration through the Pores hindered, there must needs be
a great heap of indigested Matter, which by its long continuance causes a Fit,
as soon as occasion is offered, either by the Humors put into Motion by the
Patients so near approach to the Sun, or by drinking of Wine, or by violent
Exercise, or any other evident cause.

It Is manifest from what has been said, that he that endeavors to cure this
Disease, ought to make it his business to change the habit of his whole Body,
and to restore its old Constitution, as much as Age and other Circumstances
will permit, which must be endeavored in the Spaces betwixt the Fits; not when
the Fits are on, for when the Fomes is not only generated, but now is cast upon
the Joint, it is too late to strive to change it, or to cast it out any other
way, for it is to be ejected by no other method than Nature shows, wherein alone
we must acquiesce; which is observed in the Fits of Agues, and for which-reason
we do nothing till the heat is over: Nor is he more absurd, that is anxiously
busied about taking off the heat, drouth and restlefness, and other Symptoms of
these Fevers, than he that thinks he has cured the Gout, when he has only
labored to restrain the Symptoms; for by this means he has only made the cure
of it more difficult; for the more he eases the Pain, the more he obstructs the
Concoction of the Humors, and the more he takes off the Lameness, the more he
hinders the expulsion of the Morbifick Matter. Moreover the more the fury and
the sharpness of the Fit is suppressed, 'twill not only last longer, but the
space betwixt the Fits will also be shorter, and less free from every degree of
the Symptoms which accompany this Disease; which no one will deny that has well
considered what I have treated of above concerning the History of this Disease.

But now though no great Matter must be attempted during the Fit, only the
removing those Symptoms, which a false method of cure sometimes occasions, yet
seeing all allow that this Disease proceeds from an abundance and an exuberancy
of Humors, it may perhaps be convenient for the Patient to abstain from Flesh
for some Days when he is first seized, and instead of it, to use Simple Barley
Broth, or some such kind of Food, which sort of thin Diet conduces much toward
the lessening the Morbifick Matter, and will give Nature an opportunity to
digest it sooner. But forasmuch as there is a vast difference betwixt the Body
of one Person and another, some not bearing abstinence from Flesh, but by
reason of it are seized with a confusion of the Animal Spirits, with Fainting,
and other Symptoms which are wont to befall Women that are subject to Hysterical
Fits, these People are injured if they forbear Flesh any longer than their
Stomachs loath it, which seldom lasts beyond the first or second day of the
particular Fits, all which joined together as I mentioned above, make a whole
Fit; but whether any one eat Flesh sooner or later, great care must be taken,
that they eat no more during the Fit than is necessary to sustain Nature. Nor
is less care to be taken about the quality of the Diet; for as in the intervals
of the Fits, so more especially when the Fit is present, the Sick ought to take
the greatest care, that he don't at all err in the quality or quantity of his
Meat or Drink. And moreover, more than ordinary care must be taken in observing
every other Regimen, as well as this in the intervals; and though the pain as
well as the unfitness for motion, may seem to contraindicate Exercise which I
have commended above all others things, yet this labor must be undertaken. For
though at the beginning of the Fit it may seem impossible that the Sick should
bear to be carried into a Coach, and to be sure he is much less able to bear the
motion of it, and yet if he try it, he will soon perceive that he is less pained
by such a motion, than when he keeps at Home in his Chair. And moreover he has
this advantage, if he ride some Hours in his Coach, in the Morning, and after
Dinner, that whereas when he sat at Home all day, he lay awaked the greatest
part of the Night, now he can sleep away the pain a great part of the Night;
for very moderate Exercise does so weary a Gouty Man, that he falls asleep: And
besides the same Exercise does somewhat prevent the Stone, which an easy Life
most commonly occasions. But what is most considerable, the total impotence of
the Limbs for motion, is helped by constant Exercise, which happens to many
after the First or Second Fit, the Tendons of the Hams and Heels being
contracted; for when by reason of the tormenting Pain they have allowed
themselves to lie still a long time (being unwilling to extend their Legs when
the Pain has seized their Knees,) at length they are deprived of the motion of
their Legs and Feet all the rest of their Lives, as well when the Fits are off,
as when they are on, for they are not freed from them. Furthermore in Old Men,
whose Concoctions are much vitiated, and who by reason the Disease has
afflicted them many Years, have as it were the very substance of their Bodies
turned to the Gout, it is not to be hoped that the Disease without Exercise, can
ever be brought to Digestion; for when the Disease is too strong for Nature,
they often dye by Fainting and Sickness, which the abundance of the furniture
for the Disease that cannot be concocted produces, and they are destroyed by
this matter, that cannot be concocted as by Poison.

But notwithstanding what has been said of the Utility of Exercise in the Fits
of the Gout, yet if the Sick by reason of the violence of the Fit, is as it
were overwhelmed presently by the first assault of it, (which happens to those
for the most part in whom the Gout has now come to its height, nor is yet grown
gentle by a course of many Years,) in this case if the Sick is confined to his
Chamber, 'twill also be convenient that he keep his Bed for some of the first
Days, 'till the violence of the Pain is abated, for the Bed does somewhat
supply the want of Exercise, for the continual use of it does more powerfully
digest the Morbifick Matter in a few Days, than keeping up in many, especially
at the beginning of the Disease, if the Sick can abstain from Flesh without
Fainting or other ill Symptoms, and can be contented only with Barley Broth,
Small Beer, and the like. But we must take notice that if the Gout is
inveterate, and inclines the Sick to Fainting, Gripes, a Looseness, and such
kind of Symptoms, he will scarce avoid being destroyed by one of the Fits, if
he don't use Exercise in a free and open Air: For a great many Gouty People
have perished by these Symptoms, to whom they have been obnoxious by being
confined to their Chambers, and especially to their Beds; whereas had they bore
the fategue of riding in a Coach the greatest part of the Day, they had not
died so soon. For though he that is troubled with Pain only in one of his
Limbs, may confine himself to his Chamber, yet another that instead of violent
Pain is afflicted* with Sickness, and the other foresaid Symptoms, should he do
the same, would endanger his Life; and indeed it is well for the Sick when the
pain is so violent, that he cannot bear motion, for then there is no great need
of it, the very pain which is the bitterest Remedy in nature, securing his Life.

But as to the Symptoms of the Gout, we must apply our selves to those whereby
the Life of the Patient is endangered; the debility and faintness of the
Stomach, with Gripes of the Belly as from Wine, is the most frequent of these
which befalls those who either have been subject to the Gout many Years, or
those who though they have not been long afflicted with it, have
notwithstanding invited this mischief too early, by suddenly changing
Spirituous Liquors for those that are thin and much cooling, or by applying
repelling Plasters, and other cooling Medicines to the Parts affected, to
assuage the Pain; upon which account the material cause of the Disease which
ought to have been put off upon the Joints, is cast upon the Bowels. I have
tried many things for the Fits of the last Years to lessen this Symptom; but
nothing did so much good as a small Draught of Canary Wine taken now and then,
when the Sickness and Faintness afflicts the Sick: Nor is Red French Wine, nor
Venice Treacle, nor any other Cordial thing which I have yet known, so
effectual. But we must imagine that neither this Wine, nor any other Cordial if
Exercise be not used, can wholly preserve the Patient.

But if any great Symptom scarce bearing a Truce comes suddenly by reason of
the striking in of the Gouty Matter, and threatens Death, we must neither trust
to the Wine, nor to the Exercise above commended; but in this case, if it does
not fall upon the Head, but upon the Natural or Vital Parts, we must presently
fly to Laudanum, namely, give Twenty Drops of Liquid Laudanum, mixed with a
small Draught of Epidemick Water, and let the Patient compose himself to rest
in his Bed. But if the Matter occasioning the Gout produces a Diarrhaea,
because it is not yet cast upon the Limbs, if it be not the Crisis of a
particular Fit, and if notwithstanding Laudanum above commended, and Exercise
of all sorts, (for this must be first used for the Cure of the Diarrhaea,) the
Looseness continues, accompanied with Sickness and Gripes, there is only one
Remedy that I know of, viz. to provoke Sweat, by a Method and Medicines
designed for this use, which if it be done Two or Three Days, Morning and
Evening, for Two or Three Hours at a time, it most commonly stops the
Looseness, and forces the Fomes of the Disease upon the Limbs. I cured my self
by this Method some Years ago, after I had imprudently cast my self into this
Disease by Drinking Water for my ordinary Drink, when I had used Cardiack and
Astringent Medicines of various sorts in vain.

There is another Symptom not so frequent, though I have seen it diverse times,
viz. a translation of the ^eccant Matter upon the Lobes of the Lungs, when a
Winter Cough by reason of Cold taken in the time of the Fit, has by degrees
drawn the Matter upon the Lungs, the Limbs in the mean while being wholly or
almost freed from the Pain and Swelling, by reason of the translation of the
Morbifick Matter upon another region; in this one case the curative indication
is not to be directed to the Gout, but this Symptom is to be treated as a true
Peripneumonia, viz. by Bleeding repeated, and Cooling and Thickening Remedies
and Diet; for the Blood drawn in this Symptom especially, is exactly like the
Blood of Pleuriticks. Moreover the Sick must be Purged betwixt the Bleedings,
whereby the Filth that is fallen upon the Lungs may be carried off. But Sweating
how powerful soever it is in forcing the Fomes of the Disease upon the Limbs,
does hurt in this case, by hardening the Matter that is thrust upon the Lungs;
upon which account small abscesses are generated, and at length the Sick
certainly dies.

Moreover it is to be noted, that almost all Gouty People, when they have
conflicted a long while with this Disease, are subject to the Stone of the
Kidneys; and that they are wont to be troubled with Nephretick Pains, either in
the state, but most commonly at the declination of a general Fit, which don't
only torture him much, but also weakens him much, whereas he was but too much
weakened and worn out before. In this case, setting aside all other Medicines,
let him presently take a Gallon of Posset Drink, wherein ij of the Roots of
Marsh Mallows has been boiled, and let the following Clyster be injected.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows, and Lillies, each i, of the Leaves of
Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Bears Breach, and of the Flowers of Chamomel,
each M i, of Flax and Fennugreek Seeds, each ss, boil them in a S. Q. of Water
to lbiss, dissolve in the straining of Brown Sugar and Syrup of Marshmallows,
each ij, mingle them, and make a Clyster. As soon as he has rendered all the
Posset Drink by Vomiting, and has rejected the Clyster, let him take a large
Dose of Liquid Laudanum, viz. to xxv Drops, or xv Grains of Mathew's Pill.

If any one inquires for External Remedies to ease the Pain of the Gout, I have
hitherto known none, (though I have tried many in my self and others,)
excepting things merely cooling and repelling, the use whereof I have showed
above is dangerous. And I considently affirm, that the greatest part of those
who have perished in the Gout, have not so properly been killed by the Disease,
as by an improper use of Medicines. But if any one will try the virtue of
External Remedies, which are certainly accounted Anodines, don't let him impose
upon himself, by applying them at the declination of a particular Fit, at which
time the Pain is about to cease of it self; but rather let him use them at the
beginning of a Fit, and then he will soon perceive how fruitless they are, and
how vain his hopes. For indeed these Epithems may do hurt sometimes, but they
can never do any good. For which reason I have used no External Remedies many
Years. The Pultis made with White Bread and Saffron boiled in Milk, adding Oil
of Roses in small quantity, did heretofore do me more good than other things,
and yet this signified nothing at the beginning of the Fit. Therefore if the
pain be very violent, 'twill be better for the Sick to keep himself a Bed,
'till the Pain is a little abated, than to use external Anodines. But 'twill
not be amiss to take a little Laudanum in the Evening, if the Pain is
intolerable, otherwise 'twill be better to omit it.

But seeing I am now speaking of External Remedies, I must say something of the
Indian Moss, called Moxa, greatly esteemed of late for the cure of the Gout, if
it be burnt a little upon the part affected. Though this kind of Remedy is said
to be received from the Oriental Indians, being wholly unknown by the
Europeans* yet 'twill appear to be known among us many Ages, to him that shall
consult the Writings of Hippocrates, published above Two Thousand Years ago. He
says in his Excellent Treatise of Diseases, That if the Pain continues
obstiuate in any one part, and cannot be expelled by Medicines, in what ever
part it is, you must burn it with crude Flax. And afterward speaking of the
Gout, he says, the same things are good, which are proper in the Diseases of
the Joints; and indeed this Disease is long and grievous, but not deadly. But
if the Pain remains in the Fingers, burn the Veins in the Fingers, above the
Joints, with crude Flax. Now I suppose no one will think that there is any
Specific difference betwixt the Flame raised by Flax, or by this Indian Moss,
no more than he can suppose that a Fire kindled with pieces of Oak, can do any
thing more than the Wood of the Ash-Tree. This Burning of the part affected may
be useful for mitigating the Pain, the most Spirituous part of the Morbifick
Matter cast off upon the Joints, being drawn out by it; but the benefit
obtained by this means, forasmuch as it does not any way cure Indigestion, the
antecedent cause of the Gout must needs be very short and fading, and to be
used only when the Gout is beginning. For when the Gout, as it sometimes
happens, is turned inward, either by its long Continuance, or by an
unseasonable and undue use of Medicines, and so afflicts the Patient rather
with Sickness, Gripes, and a great many other Symptoms of this kind than with
Pain, I suppose no one will think that Fire is to be used.

CHAP. V. Of the Bloody Urine from the Stone in the Kidneys.
THough it may seem imprudent to publish an Observation, whereof I have had
only experience in my self, yet I suppose no unprejudiced Person will be angry
with me, who have been so much and so long troubled with a Bloody Urine,
occasioned by the Stone in the Kidneys, for commiserating those that are
afflicted with the same Disease, and for discovering those Remedies that have
eased me; though they are vulgar perhaps, and lightly accounted of.

In the Year 1660, the Gout seized me more violently, and continued longer than
ever; and when on this account I laid continually for Two Months in the
Summertime, either in or upon a soft Bed; toward the latter end of the Fit I
began to feel a dull and heavy pain, especially in my left Kidney, and
sometimes, though rarely, in my right. And when I recovered from the Gout, yet
notwithstanding the Pain of the Kidneys remained, which made me fear the Stone,
though the Pain was not at all Acute, but tolerable enough; for I had not yet
had a Nephretick Fit, which is accompanied with violent Pain, stretching it
self through the Passage of the Ureters, and with violent Vomiting. But though
these signs of the Stone in the Kidneys did not appear, yet I had good reason
to believe, that I had a large Stone in the Pelvis of the Kidneys, which
because 'twas too large to pass into the Passage of the Ureters, did not
occasion the foresaid Symptoms. And many Years after I found I was not
mistaken; for when in the Winter, 1676, presently after the breaking of a
violent Frost, I had walked much and a long time, I immediately rendered Urine
mixed with Blood, and so I did as often as I walked much, or rode in a Coach in
Paved Streets, though the Horses went gently; but this did not happen to me,
how far so ever I traveled in the great Roads that are not paved The Urine
that I voided then, though it looked terrible as I rendered it, almost like
pure Blood, yet soon after 'twas limpid and like it self at the top, the Blood
clodding by it self at the bottom. For the cure of this Disease, I bled largely
in the Arm, and after general Purges, I used cooling and incrassating Medicines
of various kinds, and a Diet agreeable to these things, and carefully avoided
Acid and Acrid and Attenuating Liquors. But these and many other things which
it would be tedious to mention, doing no good, and fearing to provoke the Stone
forward, which I suspected was too big to be expelled by Chalybeat Waters, at
length I left off all hopes of doing any good by them, and chiefly because I
had observed, that some Old Men of my acquaintance had hastened their end,
while they were attempting in vain to cure this Disease by such Remedies.
Wherefore I resolved to try no more, only by avoiding as much as I could the
motion of the Body, to prevent this Disease. But at length considering how
wonderfully some praise the Lithontriptick Virtue of the Seed of the Ash-Tree,
I imagined that if the Seed of it had so much Virtue, 'twas very probable that
the Manna of the Ash, should have more; that as the Excellent Botanist Mr. Ray,
and many other Writers say, not being airy Honey or celestial Dew, but rather a
Liquor sweating out of the Leaves, the Trunk and Branches of Ash-Trees in
Calabria; the Truth whereof, was confirmed to Mr. Ray, (when he traveled
Italy,) by a Learned Physician, who oftten gathered Manna from the Branches and
Leaves, when they were exactly covered with Linen Clothes* See Ray's Catalogue
of English Plants. Therefore being about to make the Experiment, I drank ijss
of Manna dissolved in lbij of Whey, swallowing now and then a little of the
Juice of Lemons, while I was purging, to quicken this Cathartick, which used to
work slowly, and to render it more pleasing to the Stomach. It can scarce be
said how much Ease I received about the Region of the Reins, by the use of this
Remedy; for though before they did not alwas ache, yet they were affected with a
heavy and troublesome Pain. And because it succeeded so well with me, I took
the same Cathartick on a set Day once a Week, for some Months; and after every
Purge, I plainly found my self better and could bear the shaking of a Coach
when it went fast, and was indeed wholly freed from this Symptom till the last
Spring, at the approach whereof, having been miserably afflicted with the Gout
all the foregoing Winter, and by reason of my unfitness for motion, having
lived without Exercise more than I used to do, the Bloody Urine returned again;
and now I doubted whether I should betake my self again to purging, because of
late years, the whole substance of my Body being as it were, turned into the
Fomes of the Gout, the gentlest Purge did most certainly occasion a Fit of the
Gout; at length I considered, that if I gave a Paregorick every Night after
purging, to quiet the Tumult the Purge had raised, I might safely resume my old
method of taking Manna once a Week. Therefore in the Morning I took ijss of
Manna in lbij of Whey, and in the Evening xvi of liquid Laudanum in Small-Beer,
repeating the Manna and Laudanum in the said manner, twice a Week for Three
Weeks; afterward I used the Manna only once a Week, the Filth of the Humors
being so copiously discharged by the Cathartick, that the Gout was not greatly
to be feared, and my reason telling me, that if the Manna was endowed with any
Faculty that is dissolving, or any other way Lithontriptic, to be sure the
Virtue and Efficacy of the Remedy I trusted in, would be somewhat lessened by
such an astringent Medicine as Laudanum is; and therefore I thought it better
to omit the Hypnotic, seeing I purged only once a Week. I continued this method
some Months, always purging of the same day of the Week; nor would I break this
Custom, upon any account whatever. Though the pain of the Back remitted after the
first Dose of this Remedy as formerly, yet soon after purging repeated, made
the Gout appear, threatening War sometimes in the Limbs, and sometimes in the
Bowels; but Laudanum strongly repressed these Motions of the Disease: And this
method succeeding well hitherto, I thought I ought to continue it, both to
prevent the return of the Bloody Urine, and to lessen somewhat the Matter that
generates the Stone, which answered according to my desire, this Hemorrhage
wholly vanishing from the time I first published this Treatise, and therefore I
quite left off the Manna. Therefore as to purging, (if there is a Bloody Urine,
and if Manna be only used according to the method above delivered) I must
retract my opinion which I published concerning the Gout, viz. that it is no way
fit that People subject to the Gout, should be purged either at the beginning,
or at the declination, or in the Intervals of the Fit. For then it did not come
into my Mind, that the Fit occasioned by the Purge, could be restrained, by
giving an Hypnotic at Night. Yet with respect only to the Gout, all Evacuations
do much hurt, and therefore are not to be admitted, unless the foresaid Symptom
requires the use of them.

I will add these things concerning the Regimen and manner of Diet, which seems
to me, proper for those that are troubled with either of these Diseases; for I
would by no means pass by any thing that may be of use to those that are
afflicted with the same Diseases I am. In the Morning when I rise, I drink a
Dish or Two of Tea, and then ride in my Coach till Noon; when I return home, I
moderately refresh my self with any sort of Meat of easy Digestion that I
like; (for Moderation is necessary above all things) presently after Dinner
every day, I drink somewhat more than a quarter of a Pint of Canary Wine, to
promote the Concoction of the Meat in my Stomach, and to drive the Gout from my
Bowels: When I have dined, I betake my self to my Coach again, and when I have
leisure, I ride into the Country Two or Three Miles for good Air. A Draught of
Small-Beer, is to me instead of a Supper, and I take another Draught when I am
in Bed and about to compose my self to Sleep, that by this Julap I may cool and
dilute the hot and acrid Juices lodged in the Kidneys, whereof the Stone is
generated. And I prefer at this time, and at Dinnertime, Small-Beer that has
Hops in it, before that which has none. For though that which is not hopt, is
smoother and softer, and so fitter to carry off the Stone from the Kidneys, yet
that which is hopt, by reason of the stiptic quality which the Hops impart to
it, is not so apt to generate sandy and stony Matter, as that which is not
hopt; the Substance whereof, is more viscous and slimy. I take care to go to
Bed early, especially in Winter, than which nothing is better to render the
Concoctions perfect, and likewise to preserve that Form and Order which of
right, belongs to Nature. Whereas on the contrary, Night-works lessen all the
Concoctions of Old Men that labor with any Chronical Disease, and dangerously
wound their Vital Principle. And to prevent a Bloody Urine by reason of the
Stone, I take great care that as often as I am to ride a long way upon the
Stones, (for if I travel never so far in a Coach in the common Roads, I receive
no damage) to drink a large Draught of Small-Beer before I go into the Coach,
and also before my Return, if I have been abroad a pretty while, whereby I
secure my self very well from the Bloody Urine. But as to the Gout, I will add
this one thing, of late Years by reason of some Errors about the Six
Non-naturals, the Gouty Matter sometimes strikes in, the Signs whereof are
violent Sickness with Vomiting, and some pain of the Belly, the Limbs in the
mean while are suddenly free from Pain, and more fit for motion than is usual.
In this case I drink a Gallon of Posset Drink, or Small Beer, and as soon as
it is all rejected by Vomiting, I drink a small Draught of Canary Wine, with
Eighteen Drops of Liquid Laudanum in it to compose me to rest; and by this
means I have diverse times rescued my self from imminent Death.

Though perhaps it may seem ridiculous, (especially for one who is being well or
dead, is scarce of any consequence,) to make such frequent mention of one's
self, yet these things are said, to the intent others may be benefited thereby,
whose Lives or Health are of greater value or moment.

Lastly, it is to be noted into what great danger some that are afflicted with
the Gout and Stone cast themselves, by taking unadvisedly Manna dissolved in
Purging Mineral Waters; for though when it is taken this way, it works quicker,
and is not so nauseous, yet these little Conveniences cannot equal an Injury
occasioned by the Waters on another account. For if the Stone in the Kidneys is
so large, that it cannot pass through the passage of the Ureters into the
Bladder, these Waters most commonly occasion a Fit, which indures to the great
hazard of the Patient's Life, till the Stone returns into the Pelvis. Nor can
the Sick safely venture upon Chalybeat Waters, unless he can can certainly know
first that the Stone is not so large, but that it may either find or make a way
through the Ureters, which so far as I understand, can be known only certainly
this way; viz. If before he has been seized with a Nephritick Fit, (with
violent pain in either of the Reins, stretching it self through the passages of
the Ureters with violent Vomiting,) he has found that there is not so properly
a large Stone in the Pelvis, as a heap of small Stones, whereof one will now
and then fall into the Ureter, and so cause a Fit, which does not go off 'till
the Stone is thrust down into the Bladder. When the case is so, there is no more
effectual Remedy, either to prevent the increase of small Stones, or to drive
them from the Reins, than the Drinking freely of Chalybeat Waters a long while
every Summer.

But because it often happens, that one is seized with a Nephritick Fit, when
these Mineral Waters are not to be got, or when the Season of the Year is not
favorable for drinking of them. In this case you must proceed in that short
Method for the Stone in the Kidneys, mentioned at the latter end of the
foregoing Chapter. But if the Sick is of a Sanguine Constitution, and not
Ancient, x of Blood must be first taken from the Arm of the same side with the
affected Kidney.

But Old Men worn out by some Chronical Disease, and Old Women subject to
Vapors, (especially if at the beginning they void a black and Sandy Urine,)
must not bleed; but as to other things, they must proceed wholly according to
the Method now delivered.

But to return to the Stone when it is large, the business in Hand, if the
Nephritick Person was never seized with a Fit of the Stone, that being too
large to fall out of the Pelvis, Iron Waters cannot be used for Reasons
abovementioned, without present danger. Nor does the use of Mineral Waters
prove better in Gouty People, if they are old, as they are most commonly, and
of a Weak and Phlegmatic habit of Body, for in these the strengh of Nature is
so much lessened, that it is greatly to be feared that such a quantity of Water
may wholly overwhelm it. But whether this is the cause of the Injury that falls
upon Men of such a habit of Body or Constitution or not, I am sure many whose
Bodies have been much broken by this Disease, have been killed by these Waters.

FINIS.
Published by the same Author, and Sold by Henry Bonwicke at the Red Lion in
St. Paul's Churchyard,
COllections of Acute Diseases, in Five Parts: 1. Of the Small Pox and Measles.
2. Of the Plague and Pestilential Fevers. 3. Of Continual Fevers. 4. Of Agues,
a Pleurify, Peripneumonia, Quinsey, and the Cholera Morbus. 5. And last, Of the
Bloody Flux, Miscarriage, of Acute Diseases of Women with Child, a Rheumatism,
Bleeding at Nose, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and of several other Diseases.


