The REPLY OF RICHARD PIERCE, Farmer of the Duties of Package, Scavage,
Balliage and Portage; to a Paper Entitled, The Care of Thomas Kilner Relating
to the Duties of Package, Scavage, etc. lately Industriously Dispersed.
THAT the said Richard Pierce being the present Tenant to the said Farm, and
having been so for above 20 Years, and having, during that time, constantly
paid his Rent, and his Lease expiring in less than 12 Months, did on the 22th
Day of November, 1704, petition the Committee of City-Lands to renew his Lease.
It being a known Rule of the said Committee to receive Propositions from the
Tenants in Possession, to renew their Leases at any Time within three Years
before the Expiration of their Lease in being, without Publication, that the
Premises leased are to be let.

THAT the said Pierce did then exhibit to the said Committee, sundry Reasons in
Writing hereto annexed (to which the Reader is referred) to induce the said
Committee to renew his said Lease, which Reasons, the said Pierce had upon
another Occasion, lately proved before them to their Satisfaction; and the same
being fresh in their Memories, they the said Committee did then contract with
the said Pierce, to renew his said Lease for One and Twenty Years, to commence
from the End of his present Lease for 1000 l. Fine, and 950 l. per Annum Rent,
and in Confirmation of the said Contract, the said Pierce (according to the
usual Practice upon Conclusion of Contracts with the said Committee) put 5
Guineas into the Poors Box.

THAT the said Thomas Kilner, hearing the said Pierce had contracted for the
said Farm, petitioned the Court of Aldermen, and thereby prayed to be admitted
Tenant to the said Farm at 1200 l. Fine, and 1200 l. per Annum Rent, alleging
thereby, that the said Contract with the said Pierce was unduely obtained, upon
Suggestions which the said Kilner therein undertook to falsify; and the said
Kilner upon such his Petition obtained an Order from that Court, for the said
Committee to report the Case as it stood before them, and thereupon the said
Kilner had a Day assigned him by the said Committee, to hear his Council and to
produce his Evidence, to falsify the said Peirce's Suggestions, and
accordingly he appeared before the Committee with his Council, but could not,
nor did falsify one Article of the said Peirce's Suggestions, nor could he
produce any colorable Evidence for that purpose. He did indeed then produce
Wilmot's Letter and Affidavit (printed in his Case) and insisted to have them
read and admitted as Evidence, but (it being a known Rule in Law, that written
Evidence ought not to be admitted, where the Party could be produced to be
examined viva Voce, that so by cross Examination the Truth might be discovered)
that Letter and Affidavit was disallowed by them for Evidence.

THAT the said Letter and Affidavit of Wilmot are as malicious as untrue, which
the said Pierce can prove, but conceives it needless; the Subject Matter of
them wholly referring to Matters transacted before the said Committee in the
Year 1700. when the said Pierce made full Proof of his Case (set out and
printed in Kilner's Case) before the said Committee, which is now fresh in
their Memory; and had the said Pierce then complied with the said Wilmot's
unreasonable Demands, this Letter and Affidavit had never been heard of.

THAT the said Kilner, failing to falsify the said Peirce's Suggestions before
the said Committee according to his said Undertaking, attempted afterward to
prove the Charge of Bribery, set out in his Case upon the said Pierce before
the Court of Aldermen, and had a Day assigned him by that Court for that
purpose, but was therein as successless as in his former Undertaking, nor could
he make any Proof of any such Thing; he did indeed, produce one Richard
Bromley, Vide The Order of the Court of Aldermen below for Bromley's Character.
a Common Council-Man of one Year's standing only (who is by Trade a Potter,
but a Solicitor of Causes) and by him did prove (what the said Pierce admitted)
that after he had made his Contract with the said Committee, he had given the
said Richard Bromley a Guinea, which Kilner would have to be a Bribe, but
Pierce can prove it was for his Solicitation of other Matters for him (if
needful) but however that be, the giving Bromley a Guinea, could not be any
Inducement to him, or any of the Committee to make the said Contract with
Pierce; the said Guinea being given after the said Contract made, wherefore the
Honorable Court of Aldermen would trouble themselves no further therein.

REASONS why the Contract made by the Committee of City-Lands with Col. Pierce
ought to be confirmed, and Mr. Kilner 's Proposal rejected.
I. Because it was fairly obtained, and notwithstanding the Committee (after
the Contract made with Pierce) did admit Kilner to disprove Peirce's
Suggestions, yet Kilner was so far from doing it, that he could not falsify
them in the least Circumstance or Tittle; for the Truth of this, Pierce humbly
appeals to the Worthy Members of the Committee then present.

II. It is humbly apprehended to be more for the Interest as well as Honor of
the City, not to receed from their Contract with Pierce; for although Kilner
offers an higher Fine and Rent, yet in respect of the Hazard the City runs, in
putting this Office into the Hands of a Person, totally unacquainted with the
Nature of it. It consisting in the Collection of several Duties, due as well by
Ancient Custom and Usage as by Act of Parliament; and should this unexperienced
Gentleman prevail against the old Tenant, and receive more for the Duties than
he ought, or otherwise misbehave himself, it would be a Cause of Seizure into
the Queen's Hands, and so a Means whereby the City may lose the Duties.

III. As the Rent reserved upon this Lease from 400 l. per Annum, which it was
let at when the said Pierce first took it, has ever since (which is now above
twenty Years) answered to the City above 1000 l. per Annum, and as the Rent was
at first increased, and by good Management at the said Peirce's great Charges
and Expenses kept up at this Rent, so it may by ill Management be soon reduced
to 400 l.per Annum again.

IV. If any Favor ought to be shown to an old Tenant, who has hitherto
punctually performed his Bargain with the City, and who stands unimpeached of
any Misbehaviour in his Office, either in respect of oppressing the Merchants,
or in defrauding the City; Pierce humbly hopes himself entitled to it,
especially since he stands in competition with one, who has falsely reproached
the Honorable Courts of Aldermen and Common Council, and who bids so
desperately for an Office, of which he has neither Knowledge or Experience,
and consequently must be ignorant both of the Method and the Value of it.

EDWIN Major.
Jovis xv. Die September. School. Annoque Wilhelmi Tertij Angl' etc. Decimo.
THIS Court taking Notice, That Richard Bromley has Printed and Published
several Malicious and Libellous Papers, reflecting upon the Government and
Magistracy of this City, which are both False and Scandalous: It is Agreed and
Ordered, That the said Richard Bromley shall not for the future be Employed by
this Court, or Court of Common Council, or by any Committee of either, nor be
admitted to inspect any Books or Records in any of the Offices of this City,
nor be any ways Employed or Concerned in the Business of the same.

Ashhurst.

The CASE OF RICHARD PIERCE, Citizen and Grocer of London, and Collector and
Farmer of Package, Scavage, etc.
HE has been Tenant to the City near 21 Years, under Two several Successive
Leases, during which Time he has duly paid his Rent.

He was the Person that acquainted the City, that Sir Nicholas Butler had
(during the Time that the Judgment upon the Quo Warranto was in Force) Obtained
of the late King Charles II. a Grant of the said Duties at the Rent of 400 l.
per Annum, whereby the City by a timely Application prevented the said late
King's passing that Grant.

The said Pierce immediately took a Lease of the said Duties at 1200 l. per
Annum, and advanced a Year's Rent beforehand, which was three times the Rent
the same ever went at before, which he continued Payment of, under that and a
subsequent Lease till very lately, when the City was sensible of the
Excessiveness of the said Rent, and the great Expenses, Losses and Hardships
sustained by him, and abated 150 l. per Annum, for some few Years last past,
for the Reasons here-under-mentioned.

The said Pierce was at great Charges in suing Merchants to enforce them to pay
the said Duties, they pretending they were not liable to pay the same, during
the Continuance of the Judgment against the City upon the Quo Warranto.

The said Pierce was at great Charges in his Endeavors to get the Ancient
Charters Confirmed by the Act of Parliament which reversed the Judgment on the
Quo Warranto, and in soliciting that Affair when a former Bill for restoring
Corporations was depending, relating to Foreign Trade and Navigation, and other
Matters that would affect the said Duties if they had passed, in which he
received little or no Assistance from the then Members of the City.

The Necessity of Public Affairs ever since the Revolution requiring frequent
Parliaments, gave Opportunity to great Numbers of Merchants-Aliens to apply for
Naturalizations, which they did (and continually do) and many hundreds were
Naturalized, and so exempted themselves and Correspondents beyond Sea (whose
Goods they colored) from Payment of the said Duties, to the Farmer's very
Great Loss, in lessening the Profits of his Farm, besides his Great Labor and
Expenses in Opposing Private Bills of Naturalization, and successfully
preventing the Passing of a General Bill of Naturalization.

The said Duties are very much lessened by a late Act of Parliament, that takes
off the Queen's Customs of Woollen, and other Manufactures of this Nation
Exported, by reason that such Merchants-Aliens as are not Naturalized, because
of their Difference in Religion, enter such their Goods in the Names of their
Packers, Factors and Friends, Englishmen; there being no Penalty now given to
the Queen for preventing their so doing, by which Means they pass undiscovered,
and defeat the Farmer and City of the said Duties, which lessens the Farm
Considerably.

The Court of Aldermen have (since the said Lease granted to the said Pierce)
admitted many Denizens, and Sons of Aliens into the Freedom of the City, though
they had given him Promises to the contrary, by which Freedom they are Exempted
from Payment of the said Duties, which they were before liable to the Payment
of.

All which Matters and Things Considered, the said Pierce being the present
Tenant, and having been Interested so many Years in the said Farm, and well
behaved himself therein; hopes he shall have the Favor of Renewing the said
Lease for 21 Years; and that the City will Reduce his Rent, as his Case
deserves, and according to Equity and Good Conscience; that he may have an
Opportunity in some Measure to repair his Great Charge, Losses and Damages
aforesaid, and the rather because he has sequestered himself from all other
Employments, and betaken himself solely to the Managing of this Farm, which he
has for so many Years been versed in and inured to.

THE REPLY OF RICHARD PIERCE, the Present Farmer of the Scavage Duties, to
Kilner 's CASE.


