Sound Doctrine: OR, The Doctrine of the GOSPEL about the extent of the Death
Of CHRIST.

Being A REPLY To Mr. Paul Hobson's pretended Answer to the Author's Fourteen
Queries and ten Absurdities, With A brief and Methodical COMPENDIUM of the
Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, clearing up the riches of Gods love to all
mankind and his desires to save them that yet wilfully perish.

Also Of ELECTION and REPROBATION, whereon they do depend; and how the
Objections against the Truth hereof, may be Answered.

Whereunto is added, The fourteen Queries and ten Absurdities pretended to be
Answered by Mr. Paul Hobson, but are wholly omitted in his Book.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
1657.

To the Church of Christ at NEWCASTLE, in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus
Christ.
THe grace of our Lord be multiplied upon you all, and strengthen you in every
good word and work
You may remember that one Mr. Paul Hobson, who prosesseth and preaches up that
faith which teaches a man to doubt whether Christ died for him or no, did write
a little book by way of Answer to the fourteen Queries, and ten Absurdities
which I presented unto him

Which book I thought I was bound to answer, for the sake of truth, because he
does labor by so many subtilties to overthrow the very foundation of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ: And indeed, had there not been an urgent necessity
compelling me thereto, I should not have undertaken such a task, being I
confess very unable to manage so great a work, in such a public manner; which
I have done, though according to truth and my best endeavors, yet not without
some fears, lest my weakness should disadvantage the righteous and undoubted
cause I have in hand. I had also another discouragement upon my spirit, when I
considered how many most excellent works are now in Print already, about this
subject, so far transcending what I could say; Notwithstanding I was persuaded
to adventure, upon this consideration, That if I should have buried all in
silence, many of the Lords people might have stumbled, and fallen from the
truth of the Gospel, and the adversaries thereof would have triumphed, and so
have hardened their necks more and more against the light of the glory of God,
shining forth to all the world, in the face of Jesus Christ.

I desire you (dear Brethren) to accept this my small, and first work of this
nature, in right good part, and seriously peruse it over with an attentive eye;
I have endeavored as much brevity as would stand with plainness.

If any thing at first reading seem-strange to you, read it over again: I have
not willingly erred in any thing in this work, that I know of: I desire you to
shroud this little Tract under your protection, for it is not like to be the
safer for being innocent (I mean in the world) it was not the modesty of Susanna
that was able to secure her from the indictment of the Elders, and 'twas the
innocence of Joseph, that made his Mistress pronounce him guilty. But ye unto
whom God has given a spirit of discerning between truth and error, I trust
will defend this little book, because it labors to deffend the truth.

I pray God of heaven to increase in you all virtuous and sound Principles,
that from thence may spring, and also increase a holy and Godly conversation,
more and more, until we come to be perfect before our God in Sion, This is the
earnest request of

Yours in the Lord Jesus W.P.


To the Reader.
Courteous READER,
Daily experience makes me sensible that the Devil never wanted cunning
inventions to court men to the embracing of false Doctrine, and most commonly
such false Doctrine whose natural tendency is to carry on the great design of
Satan in the world, to wit, ungodliness, and unholiness of life and
conversation: For he always labors to counter-plot the Alnighty in all his
designs: We may observe throughout the whole stream of Gods word, Gods great
design is to destroy the works of the devil, that is sin, and to make men holy,
to the end that he might make them happy: Now Satan that arch-enemy of mankind,
be seeks above all things to hinder this work; for by hindering righteousness,
he knows he shall hinder the happiness of Gods creatures: and because he well
perceives that Gods design is to promote the work of righteousness in all
people, that so he might make all happy; Satan there projecteth always to
counter-plot God, laboring to promote sin in all, that so he might promote the
misery of all men: So large as Gods love extends in endeavoring to save,
even so far also does the envy of the Devil extend in his endeavors to damn.
And for as much as God has tied himself that he will not work Physically upon
man, nor irresistibly, but by gentle persuasions upon hopes of glory, and
fears of punishment, and the devil has not power to work otherwise then by
alurements, and promises, and threatenings, which he is not able to perform:

I say, because God will not, and the devil cannot work upon man, otherwise
then by persuasions, therefore it comes to pass that all men are neither saved
nor damned, but only those saved that are willing to let the Lord work on
them, and also are willing to work with him, in purifying and cleansing
themselves from sin; and only those damned, that refusing Gods work, do yield
themselves to the working and works of Satan. Now these things, though they are
most plain truth, and do sure right well with good reason, justice, and equity,
yet they are much opposed, by too many in our days, whose ^eal is too great
for their knowledge. I desire thee, most Kind Reader, to read this little Book
seriously, and weigh it (...) the balance of Truth and sound Reason, and see
whe^^ (...) I have not spoken to thy reason; and search those Scrip^^^^^ which
I have quoted, if they be not to the purpose in (...), and whether my design be
not to magnify the amplitude of Gods grace to sinners, by which they are
undoubtedly excited to amendment of life, upon a sure and certain hope of
glory, and not upon any uncertain sound of the Gospel; As they do that limit
the general promises of the Gospel unto a few only, and without condition,
making an unknown and secret decree of Election to be the ground of their
faith; and so it is no marvel if their faith be unstedfast, and full of fears
and doubts, when the foundation of it is no better.

But I will detain thee no longer from the book itself, lest I should make my
Porch too big for the Cottage to which it leads. But I commit thee to the
guidance of God, in the reading hereof, that thou may not only be brought to
the acknowledging of those truths herein contained, but also and chiefly that
thou may in the power and and strength thereof live according to that grace
of God which brings his salvation unto all men, for the same purpose that
they should deny ungodlyness and worldly lusts, and live soberly and
righteously in this present world.

W. P.

Sound Doctrine: OR, The Doctrine of the Gospel about the extent of the Death
of Christ.
DEar friend, I received your book, in which you prerend to answer my fourteen
Queries and ten Absurdities: which how well you have done, let the Godly wise
judge that have read it.

I am amazed to take notice how consident you seem to be, in so bottomless a
business as you maintain; and with what subtilty (not to say fraud) you pass
over the energie and force of my Arguments, without notice; and how you pretend
that it is an opinion very dangerous, to hold that Christ died for all alike;
and yet you your self maintaining he died for all: as if he died more for one
then another; and as if he died to save only some, and dyed for the rest to
damn them. I pray where do you learn that distinction of dying for all but not
all alike? was ever such a thing heard of among any that had the use of their
reason? I desire no greater advantage against you, then that you are
constrained (and so are all of your opinion) to speak without Art, without
Scripture, without Reason, and against all the best of Antiquities.

The holy Scriptures do indeed most plainly tell us, that Christ died for all,
as you have also quoted, Joh. 3.16. and 16.33. 2 Cor. 5.19.1 Jo. 2.2.1. Joh.
4.14. Heb. 2.9. but do any or all of these, or any other, say that he died not
for them alike, or that he died for some more then other?

I shall not take upon me to write an answer to all your impertinent
allegations, and particulars in your book, because I judge 'twill be a
mis-pence of time, and blotting of paper to no purpose. And were it not that I
feared my silence would occasion you to be wise in your own conceit, I would
not have troubled my self to make any Reply unto your feigned doctrine: for I
do not much fear that many considerate, good and sober men, will be misled by
such groundless conceits: But being persuaded that possibly some weak persons
may be misled by the pretended holiness of your self and Doctrine, therefore I
did resolve to write an Answer to your book: which if you will weigh seriously
in the balance of truth, I hope it may put a stop to the exorbitancy of your
Judgment; it being the most fit way (yea the way of our blessed Lord Jesus) to
reduce men's vile conversations, by first purifying their hearts by faith: and
he who is not first cleansed in the inside of his heart, no marvel if his
actions be unclean; he that judges not rightly of Gods ways, no marvel if he
order not his own aright: if I judge that God may pretend the grace of the
Gospel ( i.e. remission of sins and Salvation upon amendment of life) unto all;
protesting to them all, that he desires their weal, and yet intends it only to
a few of them: I say, If I judge God may do thus, and yet be just, no marvel
then if I do also deal so with men my self; this opinion altogether indulging
such a practice: for we are to follow the example of God, both in Justice and
holiness, and all other perfection: and it is notoriously known to all
considerate men, that the Doctrine of the Gospel in every part of it, is
calculated for the Meridian of Godliness; that being the great design of God in
the world, by all the Doctrines and preceps of the Gospel, to lay obligations
upon men to be holy in their conversations: now by this you may know Truth from
Error; for that Doctrine whose natural tendencie is to excite and provoke men
to good and godly life, is most assuredly from heaven; but that teaching, or
those opinions, that so much as but incline men to, or allow them in, any
unclean or unrighteous paths (as your Doctrine does) is certainly not from
heaven, but earthly, sensual, and devilish, as will afterward more fully appear.

I shall now begin with your first thing. You say, page a that I did not
propound my questions to be informed: and therein you were very right; for
indeed I thank my God, I was not diffident of, but believing in them, when I
put them to you; but I did it, to inform you, and to rectify your and others
Judgments, that judge not aright of God.

You say, That my Queries are founded upon a groundless supposition, to wit,
that you do not hold that Christ died for all; which you say you do, but not
all alike. I answer; My Queries have a good foundation: for if you maintain
Christ's dying for all in no other way then your nonsensical way, it is all one
as if you had said in terminis he had not died for all: for if he did not die
effectually for all, at least so far as to open a door of salvation for one as
freely as another, to what purpose was his death, and what benefit have most
men by his death? you say, They are freed from the curse of Adam: but is that
all? are you so carnal? have you such ignoble thoughts of the ever-blessed God?
and have you forgotten Joh. 3.17. Joh. 1.7. That all men might be saved, and
the many other places might be named, wherein the Lord declares his desire to
have all saved; b^ing grieved and troubled in spirit when they will perish?
according to these Scriptures; Ezekiel. 18.32. Chap. 33.11. Jer. 4.19. Judge.
10.16. Luke 19.41.

You make such a confused work in your proofs for Christ's dying for all as I
never heard.

First, you will not have it proved from these places, Joh. 3.16. 2 Cor. 25.19
etc. because you say the word World is taken diversely in Scripture: Sometimes
for the whole, sometimes for a part; sometimes for the wicked, and sometimes
(you say also) for believers also: but that is false: that the word World is
taken many times for less then the whole, I know, and you needed not so have
belabored your self to prove it. What if it be meant for less then all
sometimes? yet sometimes it does include all, as you also confess; and
whenever the death of Christ for all, or his desire to save all, is spoken
of, in this case it must be meant all, for several good Reasons and
Considerations, as you shall hear afterward: only take this one to chew upon
in the mean time.

It Is taken from Joh. 12.47. where our blessed Savior says, If any man hear
his words and believe not, he will not judge him (that is, now) rendering this
reason: For I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

By the word World here, which Christ came to save, and not to judge, cannot be
meant only believers, if at all; but such as hearing do not believe; or else
the text will not be sense, nor will the latter part be a reason to prove the
affirmation in the fore part of the verse: but the sense would then be this
(nonsense) If any man hear and believe not, I judge him not: for I cause not to
judge believers, but to save believers. I trow this reason may satisfy a man
of reason.

And whereas you say that the word World is sometimes taken for the believers:
that is most untrue; it being never taken for the better part, though many times
for the worse or greater parts Your three proofs for it are so weak, that I
think you might as fairly and to as much purpose have cited Matthew. 1. to 17.
the former of your three being grounded upon nothing but the malicious and
lying opinion of the Pharisees: what if the Pharisees did say (thinking a few
too many to follow Christ) That the world was gone after him; was it therefore
true, that they were a world, or might properly be called the world? see your
self now in this glass.

Your second place, Romans 11.12. does prove no more to a man that has any
brains, but that the Gentiles are there called the World; not the Elect only
among the Gentiles, but the Nations of Gentiles, who usually were called the
World in opposition to that one Nation of the Jews.

Your third place, Joh. 17.21, 23. is meant of the world, not of believers; our
Savior being there praying for his own disciples, that they might be so united
to the Father, and made one with him, that they might the better be enabled in
their great work of preaching the Gospel to all the world, that the world might
thereby be convinced to know that thou have sent me, and I sent them: for he
says, verse. 18. As thou have sent me into the world, so have I sent them into
the world (that is, into believers, quoth Mr. Hobson) Also he prays that they
may be kept from the evil of the world, verse. 15. (is that from the evil of
believers?)

Truly I have wondered that your understanding should be so infatuated as to
summon Scriptures together so unduly: but I remember it is said, The Lord
catches the wise in their own craft. God is just therein.

I pray God you seriously lay it to heart, for what cause the Lord has thus
blinded, or suffered your mind to be blinded, so as you are not able to
discern a Truth from an Error, nay to love Error rather then Truth, and would
bring Scriptures to prove it too; and for want of them, you bring them that
rather disprove it.

Next your come, (you say) to your affirmation, viz. that Christ died for all,
but not all alike, page 6.

First, you prove that he died for all, out of Tim. 4.10. Heb. 2.9. who denies
it? you might have as well proved it from those forementioned places which you
excepted against; the word every man, Heb. 2.9. being taken as diversely as the
word World; but that you thought you would have some new-sangled way (forsooth)
by your self to prove it: for I think truly we may give you the honor (or
rather dishonor) of inventing it; never any before having so much boldness, or
so little wit, as to maintain Christ's dying for all from those places, and not
from the other: or that held he died for all, but not all alike.

In the next place you bestir you most monstrously, and lay about you to prove
that which scarce any will deny, s^il. that Christ by his death has taken off
the curse due to Adam from all men, and freed all men from the killing power of
that state. And not contented with your Scripture-proofs, you still huddle in
more then a good many of a kind of Scholastical Arguments to back that which
will easily be granted: but this peradventure was to show your Scholarship, and
it may be your manliness, how courageously you can fight when none opposes
you; But what of this? what if Christ did do all this for all men? does that
prove he did no more for them? if not, you have labored in vain.

But it may be that shall be proved in the second part of your affirmation;
therefore I hasten to it, i.e. that Christ died not for all alike.

And this you say you will prove in eight particulars; some of which are so
notoriously untrue, and others so impertinently alleged, that they are scarce
worthy of an answer. Yet lest you should triumph, and cry Vicimus, I shall
give a brief reply to each of them in their order.

First, That there is a people, which God has chosen and Elected [in his Son]
(mark that) before the world was;

Who denies it? and yet what a quoil the man makes to prove it? do I deny
Election or choosing out of the world? no, I believe it, That God chooses (as
the Prophet very fitly says) the godly man to himself, Psa. 4.3. and also that
before the world was, he determined so to do; and that is as much of Election
as can be proved in Scripture that God does use.

And whereas you say, That Faith was an effect of ordination; and you bring
Act. 13.48. to prove: it I say, as it is most untrue, and against the current of
Scripture, and Reason; so particularly that of Act. 13.48. is directly and
plainly against you; and I shall retort it unavoidably upon you: The Evangelist
Luke there being about to let Theophilus know who, or what persons were
ordained to life, he does most plainly say they were believers; yea he
restrains it from any others but believers, in saying (As many as were ordained
to eternal life [believed]) not a man more was ordained but such as [believed.]
Let any man now ask his Reason which of these is first, Ordination or
Believing; and certainly Reason will tell him that Believing must be first,
especially if he consult with Joh. 1.12. Even to so many as believed on his
name, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God. But perhaps you may
fancy that Ordination must there be first, because the order of the words is
first. If you should be so senceless, then consider, would it not be a
ridiculous conceit, to think that a Bullock has horns, before he has hoofs
because it is said, Psalm. 69.31 This shall please thee better then a Bullock
which has horns and hoofs? and would it not be as ridiculous, to think that
men are saved before called, because it is said, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us,
and called us? If yet ye should be so dull as not to understand that Luke here
intends Believing was before Ordination, because he names Ordination first, I
shall give you a Similitude. Suppose the King of a Nation, having many Captives
at his will and mercy, do make Proclamation unto them all, that whoever humble
himself shall be ordained to life, they that refuse shall be pursued with fire
and sword unto death: now suppose that I being in that country, see diverse of
them humbling themselves, and so find acceptance with the King, and are
ordained to life; and I come over to you and tell you the story; I say thus,
And as many as were ordained to life (or had acceptance with the King) humbled
themselves; will you be so weak as to judge that their humbling was not before
their choice, though mentioned last in words, when as it is made a condition of
their acceptance?

1 Reas. Next you come to your Reasons, in which you most unreasonably say,
That whatsoever comes to pass, was before determined of God. Oh impudence! the
height of blasphemy.: what every thing determined of God? what if a man lies
with another man's wife? or be drunk? was that determined of God? every thing
was, then these things were; Oh! blush and be ashamed in maintaining such
sordid opinions as these are.

2. Reas. Secondly you say, Whatsoever God does for us, in relation to heaven,
before Grace was wrought in us, is done beforetime. But Election, or choosing of
us, is done for us before Grace is wrought in us, Ergo.

The bold assumption of this foolish Syllogism, is most notoriously false,
being against the current of Scripture; and those places you allege for
probation thereof, do prove no more, but that God loves us, and has given his
Son to die for us, even before we loved him, and so he has done for all. But
this is no choosing or Election such as you speak of from the rest, but only a
general loving of all, so as to endeavor their salvation by his Son Jesus
Christ. This shall be more fully cleared when I have done answering to your
particulars, when I come to speak of conditional Election made in intuition of
our being in Christ, and against irrespective decrees.

2. Your second particular, That God has a special design for the advancement
of his grace and love to carry on by Christ for them, and them only; is
directly false, and diametrally opposite to these Scriptures, Mat. 9.13. Romans
5.6, 18, 19. 2 Pet. 3.9. Ezekiel. 18.30, 31, 32. Chap. 33.11. and therefore I
shall return no more answer to it; his design being to work grace in all, that
he might save all; though most will not receive grace, and some receive it in
vain.

3. Your third particular being grounded upon the former false ones, must of
course be also false it self: and so much for it.

4. Your fourth particular, That Gods design was satisfaction for all sin, and
the purchase of eternal life, etc.

If you mean he have purchased these things conditionally, I assent to it, and
so he has done for all. But if you mean he has done it for any, other ways
then upon conditions performable by them, then I deny it, as most untrue;
according to the speech of our Savior to his Disciples, Matthew. 6.14. If ye
forgive not men, neither will your heavenly father forgive you: So that it is to
be noted that forgiveness is upon condition: and also it is to be noted, that
forgiveness and blotting out of sin, is not properly in this life, no other
ways then in a promise; we may be said to be forgiven, even as we may be said
to be now saved, see Act. 3.9. Sin being properly blotted out when there can be
no more remembrance of it; But now yet sin may be remembered against those
righteous men that turn from their righteousness, and all their righteousness
shall be forgotten.

That which causes you so plentifully to err in your next particulars, is
your not understanding what Christ came to do: you take it for granted, I see,
that Christ came to do all the work for the Elect, so that their sins are
pardoned, and they saved, ipso facto, and without any condition in them: if
that were true indeed, that those he died for, he had done so for them, then
his death indeed could not have been for all, unless all should have been
saved. But it is most evidently true, That he has not so died for any: What the
Father intended he should do by death, that indeed he did finish and complete,
viz. offer up himself a propitiatory sacrifice to God, that he might open a way
unto remission of sins, and salvation for all; but did effect it fully for none
without themselves.

And because the greatest part of the errors of your book are founded upon
this gross mistake, I shall speak a few things more to it, before I leave it,
although I have said enough already in a manner to a considering person: first
I will note wherein we differ in this point.

You hold, that when Christ was offered upon the cross, he took away, put an
end, blotted out, and utterly destroyed all his peoples sins for ever, and
presented them just, righteous, and holy, before God; now I for my part, do
distinguish between the cause and the effect, between the time of the one and
the time of the other; but you jumble both together. These things were done,
says your opinion, whilst Christ was on the cross; but I say they are indeed
doing, but are not completely finished till his second coming.

And now I will proceed to prove it: which if I do not, by plain and unwrested
Scriptures, then believe me not. The first place is 1 Cor. 5.21. He has made
him that knew no Sin, to be Sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him. This Scripture was wrritten by Paul after Christ's death: now
note here, he has made him sin, that we might be made righteous; he has been,
that we might be; past in him, and to come in us; he is sin in us first, we are
righteousness of God in him afterward; his being sin for us is the cause, our
being righteousness is the effect.

A second proof is Tit. 2.14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify, etc. Note here also that Christ's end in giving
himself was, that he might purify and cleanse, etc. and we are cleansed but in
part, then his end is acomplished in part; but when we are cleansed thoroughly,
then his end is wholly acomplished: he shall first travel, and afterward shall
see of the travel of his Soul, Isa. 35.11.

A third proof, is Col. 1.12, 21. You that were enemies he has reconciled in
the Body of his flesh through death, to make you holy, unblameable, and without
fault in his sight: from whence does appear plainly, 1 that Christ's death was
then past. 2 that their spirits were in part reconciled then. 3 that their
being without spot was yet to come.

A fourth proof, Ephesians. 5.25, 26.27. where note, he gave himself for his Church,
that he might cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, and that he
might present it not having spot or wrinkle etc. Mind it: he gave himself,
that he might cleanse, 2. cleanses that he might present spotless, etc. First,
he in love gives himself; second, he cleanses by his word; third, after
clensing he presents it without spot or blemish; but spotlesness is not before,
but at the appearing of Jesus Christ, as you may see yet further in 1 Cor. 1.7
8. That ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. See also 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. Act. 3.19.

But unto all this it is very like you will reply, He has taken Sin away
already for the Elect, and wholly blotted it out, for these Reasons (as some of
you call them.)

1. Because he was ordained to take away sin. 2. Because he is mighty to save.
3. Because he took flesh upon him for this purpose. 4. Because it is Gods will
that by bloodshedding he should sanctify his.
I answer, that though these are all truths, yet they are not Reasons to the
matter in hand; for with what Reason will it appear that we are saved already,
because he is mighty to save; or that sin is already done away, because he came
to take it away; or that his people were perfectly sanctified, as soon as ever
his blood was spilt, because that 'twas Gods will his blood should sanctify;
or that his people were spotless, just when he died, because he died that he
might do it? Reason tells me, that things are not done, while they are in
doing. Do you not know that presenting is after washing, and washing after
blood spilling, Ephesians. 5.25? and is not his blood (after it is spilt) sprinkled in
our hearts to cleanse? Heb. 10.22.1 Pet. 1.2. The blood of Christ which through
the eternal Spirit has been offered, shall purge your consciences from dead
works, Heb. 9.14. his blood that is already spilt, is still the blood of
sprinkling which does speak for us better things then the blood of Abel, Heb.
12.24.

I would fain know what Gospel your principle will admit to be preached to
unbelievers since the death of Christ? with what Reason can you say, Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ and ye shall be saved to such as saved are already? or to
say, Repent that your sins may be blotted out, Act. 3.19. to such whose sins
are already blotted out, or never shall be? for say you, The sins of the
reprobate never shall; but the sins of the Elect are already.

Also what reproof or dehortation against sin, can you (since the death of
Christ) give to those whose sins were utterly destroyed and done away at
Christ's death? can they be took away and remain too? no, no, this is against
Reason: when God has completely cleansed his people they shall defile
themselves no more at all: See Ezekiel. 37.23.

If yet any should stumble at this place, We have redemption through his blood,
the forgiveness of Sins; I answer, I have already showen that we have it
already in a promise, and so we have it by faith: but we have it not in
accomplishment yet; we yet walk by faith and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7.

But some of you yet further object, That God has promised his work should
prosper, Isa. 42.1^4. and 55.11.

I answer, his work shall certainly prosper, he has purchased what he was to
purchase, and will accomplish what he is to accomplish: but if the time when he
died, were the time not only to purchase, but also to effect an utter
destruction to sin, as you hold; then his work has not prospered: for neither
my sins nor yours, are utterly destroyed as yet: and truly if our sins should
not be otherwise washed away then yet they are, we should be in a sad condition;
and if Christ has presented us before God already, then has he presented us
faulty, not faultless: for if we say, (as yet) That we have no sin, we lie, and
truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8.

There are Objections yet innumerable, which I let pass, only answering one
more somewhat material.

Object. Christ would not answer the type, if he did not quite take away sin,
For as Adam brought all in him under sin and condemnation: So Christ has made
all in him righteous, Romans 5.12. So the priests are said, To make atonement for
the people, and to cleanse them from all their sins before the Lord, Levit.
16.30. So Christ has presented all his without spot also. So the peoples
transgressions were laid on the Scape-goats head; who carried them away.

Answ. First, as none finned in Adam before they were in Adam, so none are
righteous before they are in Christ. Likewise as we are in Adam by the first,
so are we in Christ by the second birth; our first being in Christ is by faith,
See Phil. 3.8, 9.

Secondly, we are in Adam before we are in Christ, and so are sinners before we
are righteous: we cannot be cleansed, till we are first unclean, That is not
first which is Spiritual, but that which is Natural, and afterward that which
is Spiritual. 1 Cor. 15. But if men should be in Christ by Election before
time, as you weakly (that I say not wickedly) affirm, then St. Paul had been in
Christ as soon as any other: but he directly says that Andronicus and Junia
his kinsmen were in Christ before him, Romans 16.7.

To the second Type I Reply, that the atonement was before cleansing: for says
the place plainly, The Priest shall make atonement for you, to cleanse you,
that you may be clean from all your sins before the Lord, Levit. 16.30. And not
only here, but everywhere in the Law, it will appear, that first sin was
committed.

Secondly, Blood was spilt.

Thirdly, sprinkled on the Sinner.

Fourthly, after all this, with other circumstances, the parties were clean.

So likewise, 1. We are sinners. 2. Christ's blood is spilt for an atonement. 3.
By faith it is sprinkled on our hearts, 4. After all this, we are cleansed.


To the third Type I Reply, That the peoples sins were laid on the scape-goats
head after the slain-goat was slain, and he carried them away after they were
laid on his head: apply this.

But I fear I have made too long digression, and yet I thought it needful; and
so much shall serve for your four particulars; now to the fifth.

5. That faith which is required of all them that enjoy him, is not a cause but
an effect of Election.

This you say you will prove three ways; 1. from Scripture. 2. From the nature
of causes. 3. From the nature of the thing.


First, for your Argument Act. 13.48. I have already turned the point of it
against your own breast. And for the other places, they prove no more, but that
God loves man before he loves God; but they do not prove that God does not love
him more after he loves God, then before. I grant, he loves all men first,
before they love him; but when they love him again, then he loves them with a
greater love, with a love of Election, as shall be more fully manifested
afterward.

Secondly, from the nature of causes, your Argument is such a medly-mess of
nonsense, that I know not what to make on it, which you begin with a direct
untruth, in saying, That you see I have drawn my Absurdities out of Hen.
Haggars book; when, as I never saw it, so I never heard of it till I read yours.

Thirdly from the nature of the thing (Election) you would prove Election to be
the cause of Faith: unto all which I shall speak jointly, and make the shame of
them appear to all men that read them: And herein I must be diametrially
opposed against you, because you bring in such a Hysteron Proteron. the Cart
before the Horse, that I must of necessity invert your order, or rather
disorder.

And therefore I do affirm, that Election is not the cause of faith and good
works; but faith and good works the cause of our Election or Gods choosing of us.

1. I prove it by Scripture. 2. I prove it from the nature of causes. 3. From
the Nature of Election.
1. From Scripture, I will only refer you to consult these places hereafter
named, Act. 13.48. Joh. 1.12. Psa. 4.3. Joh. 16.27. Rev. 3.10.

2. From the Nature of causes, I will observe this rule: if Election on should
be a cause of faith, and such a cause as cannot be resisted, (as you hold) then
Reprobation must be a cause of sin and damnation; and so God, blessed for ever,
will be made, not only a tempter to, but a cause, yea, the cause, of all sin
and wickedness in the world.

But let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; (as our Modern
Ranters are wont to do) for every man when he is tempted is drawn away of his
own lusts, and enticed. I dare not say as one did that had been a great sinner,
Quid si haec quispiam voluit Deus? What if some God has so decreed it? For St.
James makes me believe, that sin is both ingendered and conceived within me:
when my lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and if my lust be the
mother of it, sure the father is my own will.

It was David's saying of wicked Israel, That they provoked God to anger (not
with his will, but) with their own inventions: There are contrivers of
mischief, Psalm. 58.2. Devisers of lies, Eccles. 7.13. which cannot be imputed
unto any absolute decree in God. O how many Volumes have been written
concerning irrespective decrees, in the Latin tongue, which might even blush to
be named in English; and shall we yet in these days of light ascribe sin and
wickedness to God (as your opinion does?)

I am in such disorder and discomposedness of spirit, while I only but name
these bold expressions, that were it not for a good purpose (as I conjecture
and intend) I durst not venture to repeat them. O Lord righteousness belongs
unto thee; but unto us, confusion of face: for thou have made man upright; but
we have found out many inventions, Eccless. 7.29.

Next I will come to Reason, by which I hope to make it appear, that the
Almighty is so far from being accessory to sin, and does so many things to
hinder it, that he does not so much as permit it but in a equitable sense: and
amongst many Reasons that may be given, I will content my self with this one,
which seems to me the best.

That which assigns to every thing the kind; that which moderates the power,
and appoints the form and measure of working; that we properly call a Law.
Hence the being of God is a kind of Law to his working, because that
perfection which God is, gives perfection to that he does: So that he being
nothing but what is good, he can work nothing that is otherwise. It is
therefore an error (says judicious Mr. Hooker) to think that there is no
reason for the works of God, besides his absolute will; (though no reason is
known to us) for the Apostle tells he works all things (not simply and merely
according to his will, but) (...), according to the counsel of his will.

And because he does voluntarily set himself a Law whereby to work; it
follows, that that Law is no abatement to his freedom; if therefore he be
pleased to set himself a Law or Rule, not to reprobate any but upon pre-science
or foreknowledge of sin (because that is most conformable to the nature of his
goodness) can this be any prejudice to the perfection of his being? is his
nature the less absolute, because it pleases him that his will be conditional
in some things, as it is absolute in others? does he lose any prerogative, by
being unable to be the Author of sin?

We are Gods creatures, but sin is ours. God saw every thing that he had made,
and behold it was very good. We see the things that are made by the fiat of our
will, and behold they are very evil.

This creative power of ours, we justly reckon as the sequel of humane
weakness; and shall we heedlesly affirm it to be a jewel in the glorious
diadem of Gods Almightiness? Let this be seriously considered.

Thirdly, I shall prove it from the Nature of the thing, that Election is not
the cause of faith and good works, etc. but contrary, faith and good works of
Election.

This shall be proved and illustrated by these five considerations.

First of all, I consider, that there is no salvation but only to such as are
found to be in Christ Jesus in the day of death and of Judgment; which no man
living can be, unless he be qualified with such conditions, as without which it
is impossible to be so found (such as are faith, repentance, obedience, and
perseverance in well doing unto the end) that God will save none but such, is
all men's confession: and that he saves none but such as he decrees to save, is
as plain: therefore none but such are the objects of such decrees. For if he
decreed to save any without respect to their being such, he might actually save
them, without regard to their being such: Because whatsoever is justly decreed,
may be justly executed as it is decreed. But it is granted by all good men on all
sides, that God will save none but such as are found to be in Christ with the
aforesaid qualifications, and therefore it should be granted on all sides also,
that he decreed to save none but such persons as they: And what is that but a
respective, conditional decree? made in intuition of our being in Christ, and
so qualified, etc.

Secondly, I consider, that the decree of the Father to send his Son to be a
second Adam, was in respect and regard to the backsliding of the first Adam;
and the decree of God to save the first Adam, was in respect to the merits of
the second Adam; for God chooses never a child so as to give him eternal life,
unless it be for the sake of his only begotten Son.

1. God pitied a woeful world. 2. He loved what he pitied. 3. He gave his own
Son to save what he loved: and upon the condition of believing in his Son, he
gave them a promise of eternal life: For so believing is interposed betwixt
love and life, in Joh. 3.16.
Thirdly, I consider, There must be a difference before there can be an
Election: LOVE indeed is an act of favor, but ELECTION properly is an act of
judgment, a preferring of the better before the worse. They that say God
elected such a number of men without the least intuition of their
qualifications, by which they are differenced from the Reprobate crew, do speak
illogically (to say no worse) how much safer is it to say, that because such
men as are in Christ by faith, are better then such as are out of Christ by
infidelity; therefore those are taken, and these are left?

And it seems this very Argument, from the nature and use of the word Election,
did prevail with St. Austin, who says expressly, That Justification precedeth
Election: and his Reason is, Because no man is elected unless he differ from
him that is rejected.

Fourthly, I consider, That the whole tenure of Scripture (and that in the
judgment of all the Ancients) teaches no other predestination then in and
through Christ, which is respective and conditional.

First, the Scripture gives us none but conditional promises, such as, If any
man keep my saying, he shall not taste death: Whatsoever a man sows, that
shall he reap. And we shall reap if we faint not. If any man hear my voice and
open the door, I will come into him, etc. If ye be willing and obedient, etc.
If ye continue rooted and grounded, and be not moved away from the hope of the
Gospel, etc.

Nay, even the very texts which are wont to be urged for irrespective Election,
do seem very precisely to evince the contrary. For when God is said to
predestinate according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself, the
word (...) which is rendered good pleasure, does not signify the absoluteness,
but the respectiveness of his will; for it relates to something in which God
is well pleased, and that is Christ; it being impossible for God to please
himself with Mankind, any other ways then in him of whom it was said, [This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.]

Besides, all those Scriptures that do teach universal grace and redemption (of
which there is a multitude) do seem to me most clearly to infer a conditional
Election: For if it be true that Christ did die really for all; if he did
earnestly desire that every one would come in upon the preaching of his word,
and receive the benefit of his death and passion; if his warning were not in
jest, and his invitation were serious; if [depart from me ye cursed] was
therefore foretold, that every one might beware, and not obtrude himself upon
that sentence; if he is unwilling that any should be caught in the Serpents
snare, who shows to all (without exception) a certain way to escape; if he is
not desirous to strike, who bids us look to our posture, and stand upon our
guard; if he shows his power to punish none but only those that refuse his
mercy: Then his refusing of the Goats in respect of that which makes them
differ from Sheep, infers his Election of the Sheep, in respect of that
which makes them differ from Goats.

Unto this fourth thing let me add but this one thing more; viz. That since
our Savior upon the cross did very heartily pray even for those Menslayers.
Homicides that put him to death, we have no reason but to believe that he laid
down his life for those that took it away, and that he died for all, for whom
he prayed. And yet we reading of their murders, but not of their repentance; I
should be loath to say that those crucifying wretches were precious vessels of
Election (in compliance with your wicked opinion, that say, Christ died only
for Elect) and yet to him that has but a shallow judgment, he must needs die
for those he prayed for; and it is as plain that he died for those that cursed
themselves [ his blood be upon us (said they) and on our children,] and yet
(said he) Father forgive them; he made his murderers execration become his
prayer; he wished as well as they, that his blood might be both upon them and
their children; but in his most merciful, not in their barbarous and cruel
sense: for they meant the guilt, he the benefit of his blood: and yet I dare
not affirm that they were all a portion of Gods elect.

Fifthly and lastly, I consider, (which to me is an Argument of some weight)
That the main stream of those ancient learned men that are usually called the
Fathers, does run this way, as it is notoriously known to any man that is
acquainted with History: and because I would not overburthen my self in
writing, nor my Reader in reading, I shall not recite the innumerable
quotations that might be; I shall only refer you to the Paraphrases of
Erasmus, and the Confessions of Beza and Dr. Twiss. First, Beza in his Comment
upon Romans 11.2. rejects the Judgment of the Fathers, because they were not (as
he would have them) for the absolute and unconditional way. Secondly, D. Twiss
confesses, That all the Ancients before St. Austin, did place the Object of
God's Election in Foresight of Faith.
fide pravisa: at which Austin was so far from being displeased, as that (with
great Reverence to their Authority) he made it appear to be an innocent and
harmless Opinion: he affirmed, That all the Fathers, who lived before himself,
agreed in this. And because Dr. Twiss so readily subscribeth to it also, I
ought in reason to be secured from being guilty of novelty or singularity
herein; for truly, I am loath to forsake the Ancients, until I plainly see
them shaking hands to part from Truth. And so I will conclude these five
Considerations, only with desiring the Liberty of Conscience, to believe (from
what has been spoken) with St. Paul. That God is a Respecter not of persons,
but of works: That my sins are perfectly and entirely my own: and; That if I do
any thing that is Good, it is the Grace of God in me, yet so, as that I may do
all things through him that strengthens me; and who does so strengthen me that
I may do them, but not so force me as that I must.

If all this does not yet satisfy and convince you, I have small hope that any
thing will that is behind; yet because it may do much good to others, (as I am
confident it will to considering people) I will proceed to what does follow.

In the next place, you pretend to answer to some Objections which are made by
some of my Judgment. The first Objection made against Ephesians. 1.4. and such other
places, where it is said. That God ha^h chosen us in Christ before the world
was, you say, is this:

Object. 1. That God is pleased many times to cast things that are not as if
they were, Romans 4.17. as he did to Abraham. And so Christ is said to be a Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. So must Election be
understood, in posse, but not in esse.

The force of this Objection you think to take away with your threefold
distinction of Acts: 1. The life or virtue of the Act. 2. The fruit of the Act.
3. The form of the Act.


Whether or no you do understand these, or out of whose Book you ^ad them, does
not concern me much to examine.

But this I am sure of, That as it is most ridiculously alleged for this
thing, so your inference from it, is false: for you say, (by the help of your
foolish distinction) That Abraham was really a Father of many Nations, when the
promise was first propounded; and Christ really slain, when he was first
promised; which is most untrue, and it does destroy the life and virtue of the
actual crucifixion of Christ, and the life and power of our Gospel: for our
Christ, crucified sixteen hundred and odd years ago, is, by your silly
distinction, made to be a thing of little or no value; the life and virtue of
it, having been before, you say: and Election also done, and made sure before
time. Oh impudence in a superlative degree!

I fear you are a man that loves novel (that I say not, frivolous)
distinctions: why cannot you content your self with our ancient and known
distinctions, when they are good? why cannot we say, That Abraham was a Father
of Nations; and Christ was slain (as soon as the promise was made) in posse,
but not in esse; or in a promise, but not in performance; and, That persons are
elected before the world was in purpose; but yet with respect to their being in
Christ, and perseverance in good ways unto the end, as has been already
declared more fully?

A second Objection, 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God,
through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience. Unto which is joined, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. which place says, That we are elected through (or by the means
of) sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth, etc.

In your answering and opposing of this you do grant the thing you plead
against: for you say, pagine 45. That Sanctification, and belief of the Truth,
or Obedience, is the way or means to accomplish that end unto which Election
death intend. And unto this I agree, That Faith and Obedience is the way and
means unto the End, that is, eternal Life: Let me therefore ask you, whenever
means is appointed unto an end, if the means be not used, can the end be
accomplished? ^ if perseverance in holiness be the way and means unto life,
that without it no man can attain thereto, what does your unconditional (that I
say not, nonsensical) Election avail or amount to. So that I may say with
Esdras, 2 Esdras 7.5 6, 7. A city being built, and set upon a broad field full
of all good things, and the entrance to it narrow and very dangerous, etc. If
(says (...)) now this city were given to a man for an inheritance, if he never
pass the danger set before it, how shall he receive this inheritance? Read also
unto the 26 verse of that Chapter.

If against this some captious Critic should say, This is not canonical
Scripture:

I answer, I do not say it is: only then let it pass as the sayings of good
Men: for its greatest opposers do confess, That the Books called Apocrypha are
to be preferred before any other humane writings whatsoever yet truly I must
say I do not yet see the Reason why they are rejected, since that the Ancients
have had them in equal esteem with other Scriptures; and in the old English
Bible the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah being called by the same name, as if one
man had wrote them all four. But this by the by.

The third Objection: No men can be elected in Christ, till they be in Christ;
but no men are in Christ, till they believe or trust in Christ: For the elect
Ephesians were once out of Christ, Ephesians. 2.11, 12.

Your Answer to this is, Men are said to be truly and really in Christ two
ways: (but you do not tell where it is said so unless in your Book.) First, by
Election; and so we are all (you say) in Christ. What! has the man forgot
himself? are all in Christ by Election? I do not know where to find you: even
now you were for Election of a few, and now you say page 47. By Election we are
[all] in Christ, he being the public person in whom all elections were
comprehended: and then in the next word you seem to be against it again; for
there you say, All the Elect are really in him, before they are brought forth.
Unto all which I shall make no Reply, there being in your words nothing of
sense at all. But in the 48 page, you say, You agree with us, That men before
they are called, are without God, without hope, and by nature the children of
wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. and yet for all this you say, They were in
Christ by election before.

O wonder of wonders! what, a man really in Christ, and yet at the same time a
child of wrath? yea, as much a child of wrath, as others too: (for so says
the Text.)

To countenance this, you say, Christ would not else have said, Joh. 10.16.
Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them will I bring in. But what
is this to your purpose? All this does not prove, nor will you, nor any other
man be able unto the days of eternity, to prove that these or any others are
really Sheep or elect ones before conversion, though in Scripture fore-called;
so for the Scripture foreseeing their Faith and Obedience which they will have
toward God, does foretell also of their election and good acceptance with God
at that day; and that is as much as can reasonably be inferred from thence. But
you say, There is also an outward being in Christ, that men may be in, and
fall; according to these Scriptures, Joh. 15.2, 6. 1 John 2.10. 1 Timothy 1.19.20.

But you will not speak to that, you say: if you will not, I purpose to speak
to it in due time; and shall make it appear, That there may be a falling from
true Grace, and from Christ, after true ingrafting into him: and that falling
away you mention, John 15. is so too: for Christ there speaks to his own
Disciples, who you will confess were truly in Christ, yet if they did not
abide in him, should be cast forth as a branch, and withered, and burnt, etc.

In the next place you say, We have some other Objections about trusting in
Christ, and believing in Christ. But you say, You have said enough to it
already: I think so too, and too much, unless 'twere truer.

Next you come to the sixth thing, i. e. That the publishing of the
forementioned privileges of the Gospel, is God's way or means to produce
Faith, and other Gospel-Obedience in the hearts of his own: But in this there
is (you say) little difference between you and I. I think so too, unless herein
you say, It Is God's way to produce Faith in his own; and I and the Scripture
say, It Is God's way to produce Faith in all men, as shall afterward be more
fully declared.

Next you come to the seventh particular, i. e. That Faith which is produced in
obedience to T^ut^ by the discoveries of the Gospel of Christ, is not the
b^i^ging up of something that is in men before conversion; but it is a peculiar
work of God, which Nature in the highest improvement is not capable of, till
conversion or the new work of Grace be wrought, which is God's; not upon a
common, but special and Gospel-account wrought by him.

This particular consists of very strange uncouth phrases, such as I have not
met with: so truly I do not well understand them: you say, [That Faith is not
the bringing up of something that is in men before conversion.] Was ever such a
sentence uttered? what occasioned you to utter this? did you ever hear me say,
That Faith was brought up in men before conversion? can Faith be before
conversion? Do you not fully know, That I hold that Repentance is first, and
then Faith? and, That both these are done by the help of the grace of God in
men, by which a man is (as I have already proved) excited and gently inclined,
not forced, to believe and obey?

For my part, I am so far from making Faith to be before Repentance, that I
judge Repentance to be a means unto Faith; and therefore our blessed Savior
says unto the Elders of the Jews, Mat. 21.32. That they when they had seen,
repented them not, that they MIGHT believe. Mark that word, [repented them not
that they might believe.]

But yet I would have you know, That I am far from thinking, That either
Repentance or Faith, (though it be not attained only by Nature) yet it is not
wrought so irresistably as you judge; but so as may prove ineffectual, if the
creature does not well improve the means: for proof hereof, mind these
Scriptures, Mat. 25. about the unprofitable servant. Jer. 2.30. chap. 6.29.
chap. 8.8. 2 Cor. 6.1.

But before you come to your proof of this seventh particular, you seem to be
much afflicted and troubled at the abuse that is put upon these two Truths you
mention, page 51. For, say you, if we come to exhort those that profess the
Lord to activeness in duty, or reprove them for neglect in duty; they will
reply, We can do no more then we have power to do: which (you say) is a Truth,
but sadly applied: For (say you) when God has begun to work Grace in us, the
way to increase in strength, is to improve what we have, by careful watching
and waiting hourly and daily before the Lord, etc.

Now let the Reader judge whether all this do not hold forth as much free will
and power in the creature as I do. You say, They must watch and wait, etc. and
get power against sin. This I like well, for it is according to the Apostle, Let
us get grace, whereby we may serve God, etc. Heb. 12.28. But when you come to
the proving of your seventh particular in your four things, you utterly
overthrow this again: for you do so egregiously jumble Truth and Error
together, that it is fit to amaze the Reader.

First, you say. page 55. That the work of Faith is not gained by improving
Nature before conversion: and this you have said over and over, and I grant it.
But then page 59. you present the work of conversion and new birth in a strange
dress; you make it such an almighty thing, seizing upon, conquering and killing
the Soul, and that it is a supernatural light and life set up in the Soul, by
God's causing the creature to assent, etc. Now all these expressions I can well
enough swallow down provided you will let me take them with a grain of Salt,
that is, that God does all this that you say; but he does not do it
irresistably: I say, does it very powerfully and prevailingly, but not so as
cannot be resisted.

Say not, That then man is stronger then God, if he can resist the workings of
God's grace: for I would have you note this: If God's power herein be resisted
or frustrated, it yields not out of weakness, but out of will; God not
pleasing to put forth his power where he feels himself resisted or neglected.

Now because I have taken notice of many others besides your self, that run
much upon this strain, making conversion such an irresistible thing, I thought
fit to speak a few words to it, to rectify your Judgment herein, if it may
be, and all those that shall read it, if they be also out of the way. I
perceive there be of your judgment, many that delight in Metaphors, much
rather then in the simple term of conversion: and so they infer, that a man
does no more to his new Creation, then he did to his first; nor to his
Regeneration, then he did to his Generation; nor to his Resurrection from sin,
then Lazarus did to the raising of his dead Body.

From hence have issued such Doctrines as these, i.e. That the Seed of the
spiritual life, and the habits of Faith and Grace, (like a new Soul) are
infused into men, before they be so much as illuminated. Again, others upon 2
Cor. 5.17. Whosoever is in Christ is a new Creature, infer, that Grace cannot
be resisted, because no creature can resist his Creator in the creation
thereof, etc.

But all these novellists, together with your self, may be pleased to be
advised,

1. That this leans too much to an Enthusiasmus, such as all the judicious
learned in their suffrage do disclaim.

2. That Arguments taken from Allegories and Metaphors are weak and deceitful,
if they be extended beyond that to which the Scripture intends them.

3. That the new Creation extends not to the substance, but to the qualities
of a man: else if we press the letter, we may better defend a
Transubstantiation in a man's conversion, then the Romanists can do in the
Sacrament of Christ's body: or we may maintain the absurd opinion of those that
say original sin is the very substance of man. But I hope we have learned
better.

4. That this new Creation respects, 1. the universality of the change in
qualities to be diffused over the whole man. 2. it respects the necessity of
this change, Joh. 3. 3. it respects Divinum and Supernaturale principium; a
Divine and Supernatural principle, from whence this change must flow, else
there is no hope for us ever to be converted. This I grant: But


5. Now as to the manner and many circumstances; each Creation and generation
has its proper and peculiar manner: for he that made us without us, will not
save us without us. There the change is a non ente ad ens; Here, a non tali ad
tale: from no being, to a being, from not such, to such: There is a rude mass;
Here, in a creature already living, reasonable and moving: There, God wrought
immediately; Here, by means: There was never creature heard say, Create me,
renew me O Lord; Here, one is heard crave, Psalm. 51. Create in me a clean heart
O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. There it was never said to the
Creature, Make thy self; Here it is said, Make you a new heart and a new spirit;
for why will you die? Ezekiel. 18.31. Jer.4.4.Ephesians.5.14.

There was never any Creature blamed for not being made, nor reproved for being
as it is; but Here, to keep on the old man, and not to put on the new, is
counted a notorious fault in them that profess Christ Jesus and the Gospel.

Do but consider these things, and see if it be safe to compare the first
Creation with the second: for I conceive the mistaking of these things does
occasion many other absurdities in your self and others.

I find nothing more until I come to your eighth particular (page 74.) but
what has been already answered enough. You have indeed many particulars to
prove that which I do not deny, i.e. that the highest improvements of Nature,
without the help of Grace, will not enable a man to convert or become a new
creature: what need all this? do I say a man may convert without the help of
grace? But this indeed I say, With the help of Grace men may; but most do not:
Some refusing it, others receiving it in vain.

Now I come to your eighth Position.

8. That it is Gods mind and way; and then of necessity in must be so, for the
advancement of his grace, and the accomplishment of faith in the hearts of his
own, that this Gospel is to be presented or discovered unto all without
exemption, as to the declaration it self, unto which (you say) you will say
little, the thing being so clear.)

How now! what a bold attempt do you make upon the wisdom and holiness of God?
what must the death of Christ and remission of sins (for that is the Gospel) be
preached unto all, for the sake only of some? If there be not really remission
of sins for all men to be had in Christ, then they which preach remission unto
all, (as Christ commands his Apostles to do, Luke 24.47.) will be found to
preach an untruth to most, for the sake of some: Alas for you, these are low
and base thoughts of God: what do you judge the Almighty to have no better way
to bring about his designs but by lies, or by unreasonableness? what if Gods
design had been, as you say it is, to work faith only in some few, and in them
to work it certainly and unavoydably; could not he (think you) have provided a
better way to work this faith, then by telling all men he would have them all
repent, believe, and be saved, etc. telling them that he gave his Son to die
for them all, and is unwilling that any of them should perish?

Surely it would be a wild trick (and hypocritical) if Mr. Hobson should send
his servants to all the inhabitants in the Parts where he lives, to invite them
with great earnestness unto his feast, and when they come there to put most of
them back, saying, That he invited all, only for the sake of some; and this he
did for the magnifying of his grace? would not any man think that either Mr.
Hobson was distracted, or else he was desperately full of guile and hypocrisy?
and such actions would magnify his folly and wickedness, not his grace. Might
not Mr. Hobson with less deceit, and more honesty, have sent some private and
particular invitations to those particular persons he intended? yea, certainly
he would, if he were to make such invitations; and I think he would scorn to
invite all, and intend only some: with what face then can he affirm that of
the ever-blessed God, which he hates in man?

Surely God will not do that himself, which he cannot endure, and has
forbidden in man.

And whatever Mr. Hobson, or any others say, the Almighty will be found at the
great day of account to have invited none but such as he heartily and really
intended salvation unto, had they been pleased to accept, and not made light of
it, Matthew. 22.5.

In the next place you pretend to answer to this Objection:

Object. If the power of believing be solely of God, how can he justly condemn
man for not believing, seeing the power is not in them, but in God?

I must needs tell you in plain English, that your answer to this Objection is
not only impertinent, but vile. And while you devise new tricks and shifts to
clear up the justice of God (as you say) you do absolutely deny the plain
Scripture: for (say you, page 77.) God does condemn no man for not expressing
of a power to believe, but for exercising a power to reject Christ: when the
Scripture says, He that believes not is damned, because he believes not,
etc. Joh. 3.18. and Christ says, unless ye believe that I am he, ye shall dye
in your sins.

But you say, this is the declarative cause, not the meritorious cause: what a
sordid saying is this? what will God declare one cause and proceed by another?

Their not believing you say is the declarative cause; but that is not the
cause that God will go upon, you say.

This is indeed according to what you have already said of him, that he
declares and proclaims one thing, and means another. I grant that God condemns
men for rejecting grace, so does he also for not improving of that which they
are possessed withal, Matthew. 25.29, 30.

And he shall render vengeance not only to those that rejected and did despite
unto the Spirit of grace, but also unto those that know not God, and that have
not obeyed the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

In the next place (page 79) you pretend to discover my mistakes (as you say)
which is the cause of my stumbling. My first mistake, you say, is my measuring
man's ability by Gods power or authority: as when God says, Do this and you
shall live. etc. this say you does only imply Gods authority, not man's ability.
I will show you your weakness herein, if you will but grant me that God does
all things wisely, soberly, and discreetly. Judge now: would it be soberly and
wisely done, for a King to say to an impotent man, Do this impossible thing,
and I will reward you richly; and if you do not, I Will hang you. If no earthly
King will command, but where there is power to obey; much more will not the
King of heaven. And if this were a way for a King to manifest his power by over
his impotent Subjects, yet would it be no way to magnify his grace and favor
toward them; and that seems rather to be Gods design in the Gospel.

You must know and understand, that God will and does set forth his power and
his justice in no other way then may well stand with the glory of his grace and
mercy also:

2. My second mistake (you say) is my not distinguishing of causes * and I say
your mistake is the not understanding of causes. I do allow of as many
distinctions of causes as the Scripture does; but I am not so simple, as to
make several causes of one thing to be diametrially opposed against each other,
as ye do; but consentaneous to one another: so that Gods declared cause is
adequate to his essential, meritorious or final causes.

My third mstake (as you say) is my not understanding the extent of the word
[all] and the word [world] and in this you make a great puther and a stir to
prove that the word World is taken many times for less then all: Who knows not
that? but it is sometimes taken for all, as you, and all men confess: and in
this case touching the death of Christ, I am certainly assured it is meant all,
as I have already evinced from John 12.47.

Nay moreover, you grant it: for you also affirm that he dyed for all: and
therefore when you except against my large extending the word [world] it may be
conceived you are a little out of your self; if not, I am sure ye are out of
the truth. For what man that is compos mentis, would first assert that Christ
died for all, and for the world, and then except against the places that prove
it as not extending unto all, because sometimes those terms in other cases
extend not to all? I hope you will see your folly, and be ashamed.

4. My fourth mistake (you say) is my not understanding Ezekiel. 33.11. where the
Lord says, As I live, I delight not in the death of a sinner, For from this
place I conclude (you say) all sinners; and so indeed I do; yea, the worst, and
perishing sinners; and so the text says expressly, Ezekiel. 18. ult. I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies. Who told you that God makes three
sorts of sinners, and one of them he calls sinners in a Gospel-sence? have you
eaten of the forbidden fruit? if not, how come you to know more then is
written, and more then is true? that some sins and sinners are greater then
others, I do not deny; but to divide sinners into so many sorts, that exclude
the greatest part of them, from Gods desire of salvation to them, I allow not,
but detest it as abominable.

I am sure God tells us no such thing in his word, as that he would save only
sinners in a Gospel-sence: But he either says Sinners indefinitely, or else
particuliarly of such sinners as Mr. Hobsons wisdom excludes, as these
Scriptures will abundantly testify, Jer. 25.3. unto 8. Jer. 35.12. unto 17.
Chap. 29.19. Chap. 18.11, 12, Chap. 6.16, 17. Chap. 13.11. Isa. 48. 17, 18, 19.

Where you may see he endeavored with all earnestness (even unto admiration)
to save not only those that did accept, but those also that refused Salvation
and perished. That all this was done out of true compassion to them, does
appear, 2 Chro. 36.14, 15, 16.

That all this also was not a bare outward and helpless means which God used by
his Prophets, but a most efficacious, powerful and prevailing means, the Spirit
of God going with the word of the Prophet, and yet not received, does most
manifestly appear in that remarkable place of Zechariah 7.11. 12, 13. as also
Act. 7.51.

This is yet farther confirmed and illustrated by the ever blessed Son of God,
in his most pathetical expressions of sorrow and grieffor, and the shedding of
tears over, the miserable sons and daughters of Jerusalem, who had unavoidably,
(and full sore against his blessed will) brought themselves into an
irrecoverable estate, by not knowing the time of their visitation, when they
were most gently allured and earnestly called upon it being now too late to
reverse the Decree that was gone out against them; I say, yet did our Savior
weep for them, Luke 19.41. and weeping he most affectionately breaths forth
this most blessed wish and desire for them [ O that thou had known in this
thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, etc.] in which desire he is like
unto God his father: See Deuteronomy. 5.29. Chap. 32.29. Psalm. 81.13. Isa. 48.18.

Let all this be well weighed without prejudice, and see then if you you cannot
understand our Savior as he speaks; that is, That he came not to call the
righteous (that is, righteous indeed) but sinners to repentance (that is,
sinners indeed) his design into the world being more to amend that which was
amiss, to seek that that was lost, and heal that that was sick; then to those
that were already in a good way, and in a saveable condition, that had not need
of a Physician, Mat. 9.12. Mark. 2.17. Whoever do but mark upon what occasion
our Lord here speaks these words, they may with ease understand that he means
worse sinners then Mr. Hobsons Gospel-sinners: for our Savior being at meat
with Publicans and sinners in Levi's house, the Scribes and Pharisees complain
of it (thinking it is like, as Mr. Hobson does, that he was sent only to the
precise and Gospel-sinners; which when our Lord perceived, he said unto them,
They that are whole have not need of the Physician, but they that are sick: I
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Next you say, I mistake in putting one person for another, as in Heb. 10.29.
where the text says, Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be
thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the
blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, etc. Now
you say, my mistake is; That I take the word [he] for the party that treads the
blood of Christ under foot, whenas it is meant, (if all were true as you say) of
Christ himself, that was sanctified.

This fond (and I think your own) interpretation of this place is not only
against all the judicious learned, but against the scope of the Apostle, which
is both to aggravate the punishment and the sin of the person here spoken of
who trampled under his foot the blood of Christ; which he aggravates by
rehearsing the virtue of it, and what it had done for him; to wit, sanctified
him from his sins, which the party wickedly how slighted and rejected, though
formerly had embraced it, and been sanctified by it: and this right well
agrees with Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 1.9. and 2.20, 21, 22.

I am still filled with amazement, that you should be so void of reason, as to
interperet Scripture after such a heedless manner, as to confront all wise and
learned men, yea, and the truth also: Do you think it would aggravate the sin
of the sinner, to tell him that he has trampled under his foot that blood
which he had no benefit nor sanctification by, but that blood by which Christ
was sanctified? or do you think that Christ needed to be sanctified by his own
blood himself? I am well aware that sanctification is sometimes taken for
setting apart; but sanctification by Christ's blood; is never so taken, but for
cleansing: and therefore you cannot maintain that Christ sanctified and
cleansed himself by his blood, unless you hold that he did as the Priests under
the Law, who offered first for themselves, and then for the people; and then
you must hold also that he (as they) had sin of his own, and then you will be
found directly against Gods word, Heb. 7.27. for he was without sin.

Fifthly, my fifth mistake (you say) is, That I am not converted, nor
acquainted with the power of God in Scripture: but what if it shall appear at
the last day, that I am converted, and do know the power of God in the
Scriptures aright? then Mr. Hobson will be mistaken: and so much (until then)
for that mistake.

My Sixth mistake (you say) is my confining my judgment of Gods essential will,
to his revealed will in his word and actions (for that is your meaning in fewer
words.)

But I do not see how you can make it appear to be a mistake, but a sound
truth; for if I must not judge that God is grieved and troubled, and angry,
when he says he is, how then shall I know and be assured he loves me, when he
says he does? If I must not believe his meaning to be according to his saying,
how then shall I know that he means believers shall be saved, since he does but
say so? And though his general declaration in his word be, that good and holy
men shall be saved, and wicked damned, yet (according to your fond conceits) he
means to save the wicked, and condemn the just.

In the next place (page 89) you come you say to answer briefly to my queries
and absurdities; and so I think you do briefly answer them indeed, and so
brief, as that it is next unto none, if not worse then none, for you refer me
unto your false positions formerly laid down by you; and therefore I will make
no reply to you in this at all, as deserving none: my 14 Queries and 10
Absurdities standing yet in full force, I shall therefore here set them down
again in the conclusion of this work, partly that the Reader may judge how well
you have quitted your self in your answer, and partly, because you have
fraudulently recited them, presenting them to the Reader in as ugly a dress as
you could.

There remains yet only one thing more to be done, that is, to answer to your
Absurdities, which you say, will necessarily flow from my judgment.

1. Absur. The first is: you say I deny the prerogative of God* as if he had
not power to do with his own as seems good to him.

I Answer, it is false, I deny him not any prerogative over his creature which
he does challenge, for he may do with us as the potter with the clay, i.e.
advance some to places of honor in the house, and dash othersome in pieces, or
make them vessels of dishonor; but that is if they be marred in his hands, and
will not make vessels of honor, not else: he were an unwise potter that would
challenge that privilege over his clay, for to dash it in pieces when it is
made as he would have it: see Jer. 18.

2. Absur. Secondly you say, I do as much as give Christ the lie because he
says, He had finished the work that the Father gave him to do.

I Answer, in this you show much ignorance, for men are not saved by Christ's
death only, but by faith therein, and obedience thereunto; but this has been
more fully handled already by me, to which I refer you.

3. Absur. Thirdly you say, I do exceedingly undervalue God and the riches of
his grace and love, etc.

I Answer, you mistake now one person for another, for this is to be meant of
your self, that pinfold the grace of God into a narrow compass, whenas I extend
it unto all the world, and all generations.

4. Absur. Fourthly you say, I lay injustice upon God, because I say he
condemns some for whom Christ died.

I Answer, It were injustice to condemn them, if Christ did not die for them,
for not believing on Christ; there is great reason to condemn them, if Christ
died for them, and yet they refuse him, and their own salvation notwithstanding.

5. Absur. Fifthly you say, I change the nature of causes, putting the effect
before the cause.

I Answer, Here again you mistake me for your self, for I have already proved
it is you put the effect before the cause.

6. Absur. Sixthly you say, I strike down the great design of God, etc.

I Answer, I maintain his design, I hope, in his saving of good: and Godly men,
and reprobating obstinate and wilful sinners other Election and Reprobation I
know none from the holy Scriptures; if you do, it may look grim upon you
perhaps in the day of account.

7. Absur. Seventhly you say, My opinion destroys it self, etc.

I Answer, See what confidence will do: poor man! because you have not truth on
your side, you are fain to make up your arguments with confidence and
repetitions: how often have we had this, that Christ has satisfied for the
sins of the Elect? when as he has (in your sense) satisfied for no man's sins;
that is, so as that they are pardoned without any condition in them: see Matthew.
6.14.

You make a stir about the sin of unbelief, that Christ has satisfied for
that. I deny not but that he has satisfied for that as much as for any other,
that is (to speak plainly) he has done so much for all sins, and for all men's
sins, that if they continue not in unbelief and hardness of heart, they may
have remission of sins, one as freely as another: other satisfaction has he
made none, for any persons whatsoever, as has been already proved.

Now dear friend, I beseech you, for Christ Jesus sake read my Book without
prejudice and be not wedded to your own opinion: for it is most certainly a
rotten foundation, and will deceive you at last.

I beseech you search the Scriptures, and beg of God to give you light, that
your poor soul may not be deceived, nor God so sadly dishonored, or abused, by
bringing him and his eminent acts of love, grace, power and justice, under the
controwle of your low and Novel opinions: For the prevention of which, it shall
be the daily prayer of him, who in sincerity can say, He is a real lover of
your soul.

William Pedelsden.

FINIS.
FOrasmmuch as there be many persons that reading Mr. Hobsons Book, and my
short Answer to it, may yet remain unsatisfied, and be in doubt which of us is
in the truth, in the points now in controversy; I thought it expedient for the
benefit of all (as well as of Mr. Hobson) to take some pains about the clearing
up of the riches of Gods love to all mankind, his desires to save them, that
yet wilfully perish; the way and manner of saving them, and how Election and
Reprobation stands, and on what they do depend, and how the most considerable
Objections against the truth hereof may be answered.

In the prosecution whereof, I shall endeavor as much as I can, to use so
convenient a method, and plainness, and brevity also, as may neither burden
your understandings, nor your memory. Be it therefore presented unto you in
this Order.

CHAP I. And first of the Creation.
THE Creation of the world was the first Act of Gods power, we know of;
beginning then to execute in time, his counsel and decrees that were from
everlasting.

The world is that whole frame of Gods building, consisting both of heaven and
earth, with all things thereunto appertaining; according to the plat or model
in the mind and purpose of God, who has built all things, Heb. 3.4. in which
he has manifested the invisible things of his wisdom and goodness, to his own
glory, Romans 1.20.

Therein he made creatures of sundry natures, motions, and perfections, to
sundry ends.

Above others, he made Man, in more excellent perfections, to a more excellent
end.

For he created Man in the Image and form of God, as far as was meet for a
creature to partake of the Divine Nature; that was, to be good, but mutable.

He may be said to be in the Image of God in other three things, 1.
Understanding and Will, 2. in Holiness and Righteousness, 3. in Immortality and
Blessedness.
These three were subalternate one to the other: Understanding and Will to
Righteousness, Righteousness to Blessedness; Blessedness to be the reward of
Righteousness, and Righteousness to be the work of willingness; for Virtue is
not necessitatis, sed voluntatis.

CHAP. II. Of Gods governing Man.
AFTER Man was thus Created, Gods next Act according to his eternal counsel,
was, to govern Man thus created, as he might use his Perfections, and attain
his End.

In this Government, God as the Supreme Lord was to command, and Man as his
creature and vassal was to obey: yet God being a free and gracious Lord, and
Man not a brute, but a reasonable and free servant, it pleased his Lord to
descend and come into a Covenant with him, as is used between party and party.
The Sum of this Covanant was, Do this (viz. what I command you) and you shall
live; if not, you shall die.

The Law Natural, or Moral, written in the heart of man, comprehended all the
works that were to be done by him.

The Law Positive, namely, that one of abstaining from the fruit of the tree in
the midst of the garden Eden, was a trial and experiment of his obedience, and
the exercise of the duties of the Law Moral, in a particular: to man
appertained the observing of these Laws; to God appertained the performance of
the promise of life to man observing them, as being faithful in the Covenant.

CHAP. III. Of the fall of Man, and its effects.
ADAM being tempted by Satan, I did transgress that one easy Commandment, and
so became guilty of all; and loosing his Righteousness, he forfeited his
happyness by sin, the breach of Gods Commandment and Covenant.

This sin of his was voluntary, not necessary, (though he sinned being tempted
by another) for he had strength enough given him of God, and more was ready to
have been supplied unto him, if he had craved it: whereby he might have
vanquished the tempter, and have stood firm in his obedience: but he willingly
consented and yielded to the deceiver.

This fall was not caused by God (though foreknown) but only permitted, when
God if he would could have hindered it.

But God permitted it,

First, because he would not impeach the freedom of will that he had given unto
man.

Secondly, because he saw it would offer him a fair occasion to manifest his
wisdom and goodness yet more graciously then he had done in the Creation, which
also he had forethought on, namely by his Son Jesus Christ his suffering;
intending by the obedience of that one man to make many righteous, as by the
disobedience of one man, many were made Sinners.

Thirdly, because God knew it would offer unto man a just occasion (if he were
dealt withal again in a second Covenant) both to be more thankful, and more
wary and careful and so many more likely to be saved by a second Covenant, made
with man fallen, then would have been by the first, if Adam had stood: for
natural perfections easily beget pride and confidence in our selves, which is
the first degree of aversion from God, and the beginning of ruin; but wants
and weaknesses do humble us, and make us fly to God, and cleave more close to
him.

That the fall of man was known to God, before the decree of Creation, I deny
not; for the Creation it self does declare no less, where there are infinite
things prepared for man's use, only as fallen; as all Medicinal herbs prepared
for Pysick: Physic presumes sickness, and sickness presumes sin.

The effects of this fall of man are twofold: within him, and without him.

Within him, that which is called original sin, comprehending both the loss of
his original righteousness, and of his supernatural perfections, and also the
decay of his very natural faculties, from whence flows a continual lusting
after that which is evil, and a repugnance to that which is good; which loss is
repaired again by the grace of God, in the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The effects of the fall without man, are comprised under the curse of the
ground, the subject of man's labor, comprehending all the miseries of this
life; and under the sentence of death comprehending both death, and all the
miseries that belong unto it. I mean the first death.

These effects of the fall of Adam, took place not only upon himself, but on
all his posterity, because God held him as the whole nature of Mankind.

CHAP. IV. Of the Covenant of Grace
THe next Act of Gods eternal Counsel, was the restoration of man fallen; for
the most wise and mighty God having created the world for man, and man for
happyness in the fruition of himself, would not suffer either the whole
destruction of his creatures or the frustrating of his end, though he pleased
to permit the depraving of his creatures, and to forsake one ill succeeding
way, to take a better for the attainment of his end.

Now what by the remains of Gods Image left in man, and what by the supply
that God would make by his gracious help, miserable Man was reputed by God a
fit person once again to be a party in a Covenant, a Covenant of new conditions
suiting to the state of a sinner, but tending to the same ends, righteousness,
and life.

This Covenant is called the Covenant of Grace: 1. First, because it was freely
made with man, a sinner, utterly unworthy to have any more communion God. 2.
Because in this the righteousness and salvation of man, is wrought rather by
God then by himself; man being more in receiving then in giving, in believing
then in doing; yet has it the nature of a true Covenant, both parties having
something for either to perform.


God to send his Son and his Spirit to relieve the miseries and wants of man to
forgive sins, to impute righteousness, and to give life to such as obey his Son
and his Spirit.

And Man, to humble himself for his sins to God his Creator, to believe in
Christ his Redeemer, and to yield himself to be led by the word of God and
Spirit.

But here are two things affirmed, which may seem to require proof. First, that
the Covenant of Grace was made with all Mankind. Secondly, that he supplieth
by his Spirit whatsoever is needful to the keeping of this Covenant, on the
behalf of man, who is confessed impotent in himself through his former fall.

These two shall by Gods assistance be sufficiently proved afterward, when I
come to speak of calling and free will. In the mean time, let this suffice:

First, that we find here in the day of the first publishing of the Covenant,
all Mankind in Adam and Eve, receiving the promise of the Gospel at the same
time that they received their penances, which we see to be universal to all
their seed: it is therefore more then probable, that promises should be taken
as universal, since the wise do say, Ampliandi favores.

Secondly, that we find left after the fall, remains of some part of the Image
of God; as life, understanding of good and evil, liberty of will in natural and
civil things, conscience accusing or excusing, etc. Which though they were
given at first by Creation, and so belong to nature, yet the staying of them to
remain in man after his fall, was of Grace, both to make him capable to
contract and Covenant withal, and also to be some beginnings and principles in
order to his restoration: but since these alone are not sufficient to make him
able to rise again, or recover righteousness, it is decent to think of God who
does nothing imperfectly, and who in Covenanting is no hard Master, that he
would supply by his Spirit, whatsoever was needful more to the keeping of that
New Covenant: upon which depends the eternal woe, or the eternal happiness of
the party Covenanted with.

CHAP. V. Of Calling by the Word and Spirit.
CALLING is the Revelation and Proclamation of the riches of Gods Grace in the
Gospel to all sinners, commanding repentance toward God, and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ (Act. 20.21.) and promising of forgiveness of sins and life
everlasting to all that obey, Act. 2.38, 39.

Calling consists of two essential parts, both which are requisite to make up
one whole and perfect work of calling i.e. the outward preaching of the word,
and the inward operation of the Spirit accompanying the word.

There are many, and too many, that distinguish calling into two kinds, one
outward of the word only, another inward of the Spirit joined with the word:
That they say is ineffectual, This effectual: That, common to the Reprobate,
This, special and peculiar to the Elect; That, never obeyed with truth of
heart, This never disobeyed.

This Doctrine is to be examined before we give it a let-passe. For my part, I
distinguish not two callings, but compound one calling of the word and Spirit,
as it were of a body and Soul, supposing it to have in it self power to bring
forth effect in all that are under it: and if it do not so, the cause not to
arise from the Calling, but from the called that obey not.

1. For declaring of this point, we are to consider, that the Spirit does not
go with the word, to make the hearer perform that which he can do already by
natural strength (for the Spirit is given to help where nature fails) as to
keep waking, and to be attentive: for that which men can bring of their own
strength, God expects to find and to meet: one cause therefore why to many
the Spirit is not present to the word, is when they are not present to the word
through their sottish carelessness.

Secondly, it must not be thought that the concurrence of the word and spirit,
is as it were natural, necessary and inseparable, but voluntary and arbitrary
in the will and good pleasure of God, to such as heartily pray for it, for
themselves and others: hence the Church of Christ prays before Sermons for
the illuminations and power of the Spirit to come with the word: Another case
then where the Spirit is not co-working with the word many times, is when it
was not duly and diligently asked.

Thirdly, there are men that are past grace, to whom the Spirit is not present
with the word, such as for their former neglect and contempt of the time of
their visitation, when God did call them, are now given up to blindness and
hardness, and have the light of the Spirit, and the dew of grace, held back
from that word which is preached in their hearing by accident.

Fourthly, it must not be thought that the Spirit goes with the word, to work
any grace in any person whatsoever, but according to the order of divine
providence, who dispenses his grace wisely, which is thus to be declared: we
are to distinguish the word that calls, the persons that are called, and the
operation of the Spirit by the word: the word is either the Law or the Gospel:
The Law has two parts, and so also has the Gospel: a Commandment and a
Promise. 2. The persons called by God in the Gospel, are all manner of sinners,
but convicted, terrified, wounded, full of compunction and self-condemnation,
wrought in them by the Spirit in the preaching of the Law, Matthew. 11.28.3. The
operations of the Spirit upon these men by the ministry of the Gospel, are

First, to open their eyes, to see the marvelous light of Gods mercy to
sinners: of the infinite love of Christ in dying for sinners: of the powerful
gifts and graces, and aids of the holy spirit to help and relieve the impotency
and misery of sinners; to the end, that by this light, this opinion may be
begotten in them, that it is possible for them to be recovered.

Secondly, to pour into their hearts hope, or to stay them from desperate
sinning or sorrowing.

Thirdly, to inspire the grace of prayer, at least to wish or desire, Oh that
they might be so happy as to escape the wrath to come, and recover the love and
favor of God!

Fourthly, to give them repentance, that is, to sorrow for sin past with a
godly sorrow, and to purpose to break off sin, and to cease from further
offending God.

Fifthly, to work in them faith, that is, to run to Christ, and to cast
themselves into the arms of his goodness and power to be saved by him.

These graces, in this order, the holy spirit is present and ready to work by
the Gospel, upon a sinner convicted, humbled, and prepared by the Law. And look
what portion of power the Spirit had in the Law upon an unregenerate man to
humble him, the same has it in the Gospel upon the humbled, to work in him
hope; and him hoping, to win to wish and pray; and to him praying, to give
repentance; to him repenting, to instill faith, and so to justify him, being
justified by faith.

Now think not that the Spirit is present in the preaching of the Law to an
unregenerate man, to give him strength to new obedience presently, because it
is present then to convince and condemn his wickedness. The spirit is not
present in the preaching of the Gospel, to a man yet not penitent, to work in
him peace, joy, love, though it be present to work these in the believer: for
if it should work these in him before faith, it should work contrary to the
word.

The Sum of all is this, The Spirit of God is annexed to his word for such
gifts and operations, as to which the hearer is a fit disposed subject: there
is an order in the divine working: wherein there are things antecedent,
preparatives to things subsequent; which antecedents if they found no place,
and were not admitted, the subsequent are then suspended. Hence is there so
frequent and just separation of the Spirit from the word by the great Pastor of
our souls, who walks in the midst of the Churches.

Thus much for the declaration of this point: for confirmation of it, I allege
all the Elogia of the word of God, as Psalm. 19. The Law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul, etc. Heb. 4.12. The Word of God is quick and powerful,
Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them by thy truth: thy word is the truth, etc.

But that calling is the same, to them that obey not, as to them that obey, I
shall urge these two places more, Mat. 22.14. [Many are called, but few are
chosen] here many are distributed into two sorts; some that are called and not
chosen, some that are called and also chosen: for these few chosen are a part
of those many [called] so that the whole many are put under one and the same
calling, which calling is not by the outward word alone, for from that calling
arise none chosen, therefore the calling was by the word and spirit common to
both: and the few chosen excelled not in calling, but in something else to wit,
in obeying the calling, to come when others refused, or in coming worthily in a
wedding garment, according to the parable.

The other place is, Matthew. 12.41. [ The men of Nineveh shall rise up in
judgment with this Generation, and shall condemn it, etc.] from whence I
reason thus if Jonas preached to the Ninivites without the spirit, how did they
repent? if Jesus preached without the same spirit, how is he greater then Jonas?
nay how is he equal in the power of preaching? and if they that disobey be not
equally called with them that obey, how can these rise up in judgment against
them? when their answer is ready, We had not the same calling with you; ours
differed tote genere; you were partakers of an heavenly calling, we but of an
earthly; you were called by the voice of God speaking to your hearts, we but by
the bare voice of men speaking to the ear: If God had moved and excited us, as
much as he did you, we would have done as well as you. But God will not give
occasion for them thus to speak, for he will so effectually provide for all
them that perish, that they shall have no excuse, Romans 1.20. and 2.1.

Therefore I conclude that the distinction of outward and inward, of effectual
and ineffectual calling are vain, for these reasons also.

First, because it gives unworthily the name of calling to the bare outward
preaching of the word, which may be a commanding, but not a [calling] a
commanding as of the Law, but not a calling as of the Gospel; seeing that the
word of the New Covenant comes to call men to repentance and faith, for their
recovery, after notice taken of their impotency to rise again of themselves. It
seems an insulting mock, and not a call, to say to sinners, Turn, repent,
believe and live, unless there be some grace prepared for them, whereby they
may be able to repent and believe.

Secondly, because it attributes the effect of obeying the calling to the
kind of calling it self; as only to one cause, to wit, the operation of the
Spirit, as if many causes did not concur to produce one effect, and as if
obedience to the calling of God were not an act of the will of man, under the
aid of the Spirit of God; as if the aid of the Spirit were never refused, nor
the grace of God never received in vain. For though God be Almighty, and able
to draw all second causes unto his part and side, yet he does not use to
disturb or cross the nature of causes, nor the order of things, which himself
has established.

Thirdly, because this distinction makes Gods Covenant to differ from all
Covenants in humane affairs; I mean, even that which is essential to a
Covenant: for in a Covenant each party has something to perform; but by this
distinction, God is supposed both to provide infallibly to have the conditions
fulfilled, and also to fulfill his own promises: whereas all that he undertakes
for us, is to make the conditions possible, and not to be wanting in his help,
so far as is needful for us.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the question of two equally called.
When two persons are equally called, and one converteth, and the other no:
(these both being supposed possible) who is it that puts the difference, God or
man?

I answer, that it is man that puts the difference, and not God. I ground this
answer, first, upon the righteous judgment of God, Because God judges not his
own acts, but the acts of men: secondly, because every righteous judge finds a
difference, and does not make any between party and party.

Who put the difference between the Sacrifices of Cain and Abel but themselves?
both alike instituted in religion by their father; God a true witness,
testified of Abels gift, as better then Cains. Heb. 11.4.

Who put the difference between Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar? as to their nature
both were men, as to their dignity both were Kings; as to their cause, both
held the people of God in captivity; as to their punishment, both were mildly
admonished by chastisements: what then occasioned their different ends? nothing
else, but that one of them sensible of Gods hand, groaned under the memory of
his own iniquity; the other by his own free will fought against the most
merciful verity of God.

Suppose two persons be equally tempted by the beauty of one-fair body, whereof
one yields to the temptation, the other perseveres what he was before; what
else appears in these, but that only, that one would, and the other would not
loose his chastity.

The difference between the Ninevites repenting at the preaching of Jonas, and
of the Jews not repenting at the preaching of a greater then Jonas, if God put
it, how shall they rise up in judgment and condemn these?

But that which makes it so horrible to pious ears, to say a man makes himself
to differ from another, is the misunderstanding of that place 1 Cor. 1.7. Who
made thee to differ? as also they say, that many Absurdities will follow upon
this assertion.

Let us first examine this notable place of Saint Paul, and next those
Absurdities so much urged.

1. We are here to note, that the Apostle speaks here of Eloquence,
Knowledge, Tongues, and the like gifts; not of faith, charity, repentance,
conversion, and the like; we must not think, that because in immediate gifts
man does not put a difference, that therefore he in nothing makes himself to
differ.

I will demonstrate this by a Reason, why this text cannot be applied to gifts
necessary to Salvation.

Because in them God wills not that difference that is between believers and
unbelievers, under the word of faith; but would have all believe and obey the
Gospel: this difference offends and displeases God, and it proceeds as
much from the disobedience of him that believes nor, as from the obedience of
him that believes.

But of that part of the difference which is by disobeying, God I trow is not
the Author: For it is sin and shame to him that wants faith, after the mean
of faith afforded him, but no blame to him that speaks not with tongues, or
prophesies not; these were given suddenly and immediately, without labor or
means, but faith and the rest needful to salvation, had means by which God
gave them: about which means men might use different diligence.

Being secure of this place of Saint Paul, I come to the Absurdities which some
say will follow, if man make himself to differ: they are these, 1. That the
saints have no more to thank God for then the wicked. 2. That one man may glory
against another, for that he has done something more then another did.


To the first I answer, For matter of thankfulness, that as grace is not
therefore grace, because it is given to one and denied to another, but because
it is given to the unworthy (for grace were not the less but the greater, if it
were given unto all) so my thanks are not therefore given to God because he
has been merciful unto me more then to others, but because he has been
merciful unto me unworthy; and my thanks are not diminished because many more
are partakers with me in the same benefits, but greater, and should have been
yet greater, had more still been partakers than are. This is a good rule for
thankfulness: But take heed of Pharisees form of thanks for graces, with
comparison to other folks, "Lord I thank thee, I am not like other men, or as
this publican, etc. Indeed as some put the case of mankind like a company of
Rebels, out of which the King chooses whom he pleases to pardon, and executes
the rest with the sword. Those pardoned owe thanks for their pardon, more
thanks for culling them out, that were like to the rest in rebellion. But the
Scripture puts not the case of mankind so; but rather thus: God by the Gospel
as a King, mercifully proclaims a general pardon to all the Rebels in such a
County, upon condition that he that comes in and yields his sword, and takes at
the Kings Pavilion a ticket of his pardon, shall be free to go home and enjoy
the state of a good Subject; but they that stand out and refuse this grace, be
after such a day, pursued with fire and sword. They that submit, magnify the
amplitude of the Kings mercy, sorrow for such as stand out, and justify his
execution done upon stubborn and ungrateful Rebels. Mr. Hobson (and others)
think to win greater thanks to God, by amplifying his grace upon one
consideration of sparing some simply, but with prejudice to his truth
proclaimed to all. I think to win greater thanks to God by amplifying his grace
upon another consideration of sparing all upon favorable conditions according
to the Gospel, the most wise comprehension of the grace, mercy, justice, and
truth of the Almighty.

To the second absurdity I answer, For matter of glorying let this Rule stand
firm, Qui glorietur, in Domino glorietur, Let him that glories glory in the
Lord, or let him not glory at all. Remember again that the gifts of God are
either immediate proceeding from himself alone, as prophecy, tongues, etc. or
mediate, such as proceed from Gods grace, and man's will together; of the
immediate there is no glorying, I have already proved.

But for gifts mediate, as faith, repentance, and obedience, in any particular
duty, they must be considered as dona Dei, and as Debita a nobis, as the gifts
of God, and as our duties; as the gifts of God wrought in us by his grace,
preventing helping and strengthening us, there is no glorying of them neither
but in the Lord: so St. Paul glories, 1 Cor. 15.10. Plus omnibus laboravi, I
have labored more then they all; yet not I, but the grace of God with me,
which grace was not in vain, Phil. 4.13. I have the Art both to abound and to
want etc. I am able to do all things, through Christ that strengthens me: here
glorying is excluded also, because I do not do, without being helped by grace:
though I preach the Gospel (says Paul) I have nothing to glory of: for
necessity is laid upon me, and words me of I preach not the Gospel: So woe is me
if I believe not the Gospel (may the hearer say) what matter of boasting is it,
for a man to have kept himself from some detestable crime, whereinto another
rusheth himself to hell? Yet I pray do not exclude all kind of glorying, not
that which Saint Paul names in 2 Cor. 1.12. The testimony of a good Conscience,
is some comfort and joy; he that wants that, has an evil conscience: let
Innocence wash her hands without a check of vain glory, let Samuel call witness
of his integrity, and Nehemiah record his own good deeds, Neh. 5.15. The former
Governors before me had been chargeable to the people; even their servants bare
rule over them, but so did not I, because of the fear of the Lord.

I answer yet further, whatsoever have been our endeavors and labors more
then others, who is so void of piety and understanding, that does not ascribe
his good success unto God the fountain of all good, and the universal and
principal cause of all happy events? the form of the Saints rejoicing therefore
is thus conceived: -- Not unto us O Lord, not unto us but to thy name be the
glory, this [not unto us] implies that something has been done by us, and that
man's corrupt heart is too ready to claim some glory to it self for it: but true
wisdom and piety soon removes it, and says, Not unto us O Lord, but unto thy
name be glory.

Neither truly should these poor things of the will of man whether endeavor or
labor, yielding or obeying have been once named, the same day that Gods grace
and works are named, had there not been a necessity compelling thereunto. They
have compelled me, who under a color of magnifying the grace of God, and of
justly reproving those that have been adulatores Naturae, are turned themselves
adulatores Gratiae. So far forth, that by them Satan seeks to subvert the
truth and righteousness of God, and to extinguish and destroy all piety and
religion in men, bringing into the world a stupid sloth for some, a remorsless
infidelity and impenitency for others; and an invincible desperation and
hardness for othersome, being the natural offspring of that Doctrine, that
takes away all manner of will from men in matters of Salvation, that turns the
general promises of the Gospel into particular and private, that limits an
especial kind of grace, which is only effectual to a few secret ones by a
direct decree, the rest being left destitute of true grace, though they be
called by the word of the Gospel.

CHAP. VII. Of Free will.
COncerning free will, I thought good to speak a few words, and no more then I
have great Antiquity for, besides the word of God. The commands and threatenings
of Almighty God in Scripture, whereby man is called upon and put in mind what
God will have him do, most evidently does declare that man has free will,
still after the fall, as appears in such places as these, Be not overcome of
evil, Romans 12. Neglect not the grace that is in thee, 1 Timothy 4. Love not the
World, 1 John 2. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments, Matthew.
19. Which undoubtedly should be said in vain, if there were no faculty or
power left in man whereby he may (by the help of grace (if he will receive it
when it is offered him) understand and obey Gods commandments.

This free will we may conveniently describe thus, to be a certain power of the
will, joined with reason, whereby a reasonable creature without constraint
discerns and wills good and evil: but it wills not acceptable good,
except it be helped by grace; but that which is evil it wills of it self.

CHAP. III. Concerning falling from Grace.
THat a man who is really and truly in the state of grace and salvation may
fall, I will prove first by these two texts, Matthew. 24.13. and Ezekiel. 18.22. the
first has the promise of salvation to him that continues to the end: out of
which I collect two things. First, that he to whom salvation is promised if he
continue, is in the right in which he should continue, and is so ripe and fit
for salvation, that if he but continue such, he shall be saved. 2. That he who
is thus excited to continue, is presupposed possible to fall away, deny the
says, and embrace this present world: the answer that some rest in is to no
purpose, i.e. that means must be used in regard of our weakness; but in regard
of Gods Election, and Christ's intercession we cannot but stand; for if two
pillars be strong enough to bear up such a house as Sampson was in with the
Philistines, what need other supporter besides?


The second text, is that of Ezekiel. 18.21, 26, 27. Which by no evasion can be
avoided, if the comparison there between a righteous man and a wicked be well
observed: for deny you in any wise that a righteous man can turn from his
righteousness and die, and I will with the like reason deny that a wicked man
may turn from his wickedness and live; and so we shall solvere Scripturas,
make void the holy word of God: if a supposition puts nothing in the one, it
puts nothing in the other; if it be ever seen that a wicked man turns from
his wickedness and lives, then it may as well be seen that a righteous man
turns from his righteousness and dies.

Let me add this one Argument more, that the regenerate fallen into mortal sin
is not then filius Dei. It is taken out of 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God,
does not commit sin, for his seed remains within him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God.

I shall here do two things at once, overthrow the strongest Arguments of my
Opponents, and I shall retort the text unavoydably upon themselves, that is, by
giving the true sense of that place. The scope of Saint John is not to prove
that they that are born of God, cannot depart or change, from righteousness to
sin, or that there cannot be a succession of these two; for this in the
Apostles time was out of question: But his scope is to prove that these two
cannot consist or stand together, (which the will of the flesh would fain have)
to be born of God, and to commit (deadly) sin. They did admit for true, that he
that had been the member of an Harlot, might by repentance become the member of
Christ; and that the member of Christ might become the member of an Harlot, by
falling into adultery: But that a man might be at once a member of an Harlot,
and a member of Christ, that they denied, these expelling one the other. If we
have entertained Christ in the Inn of our hearts, we put the Devil to flight
presently: if we sin, and by the gate of sin give entrance to the Devil,
forthwith Christ departs; let them consider this, who defend David to be still
born of God, when he stood guilty of Adultery and murder; But they count it
ridiculous to say we be so often born of God, as we repent of sin: it is more
lamentable to fall often into such sins, then ridiculous to be often renewed by
repentance; because in our natural birth we are born but once, therefore they
will have it that in our Spiritual we are born but once: There is no necessity
in this consequence: it should seem then that Saint Paul was not aware of this
Argument, when he said, Gal. 4.19. My little Children, of whom I travel in
birth again, until Christ be formed in you.

This text of Saint John, may be understood with much ease, if we do but
consider the acceptance of the word [cannot] there, He that is born of God
[cannot] sin, rendering this Reason, because he is born of God; that is, He
cannot lawfully, because in his new birth he had so solemnly engaged himself to
Jesus Christ in Baptism, that if he should now return to sin, he would be
perjured and forsworn.

Like this is that of Saint Paul, Romans 6.2, 3. How shall we that are dead to
sin, (that is, by Baptism) live any longer therein? not, how shall we
[possibly] for 'twas possible, for he exhorts them verse 12. not to let sin
reign in their mortal bodies. But how shall we [lawfully] since that you have
covenanted against it, giving your selves up in Baptism to be dead to sin, and
to rise out from thence unto newness of life? you should do well to read this
Chapter seriously, as to this point.

It is ordinary in our common locution, if we see a man doing that which is
both unlawful, and which he has vowed against, to say to him, it is more then
you can do, meaning, with a good conscience. Like this Saint Paul has a
saying, in 2 Cor. 13.8. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.
But for further satisfaction to my ingenuous Reader, I refer him to that famous
and worthy work of Mr. John Goodwin of London, entitled Redemption Redeemed,
in which not only these Scriptures, but also all others that are usually
brought against the points now in controversy, are most amply handled, and the
truth evinced beyond all exception.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Foreknowledge in God.
THere be many that by foreknowledge will needs understand approbation and
love, rather then knowledge properly taken: but that cannot be, because then
the Apostle Paul and Peter's difference between foreknowledge, and to
predestinate, to foreknow, and to Elect, would be quite taken away. But if any
should contend to have it so notwithstanding, I will fetch a poor Almanac, to
wipe away this gloss by the common use of the word Prognostication.

Therefore though God approves not, yet he fore-sees all things, or rather
sees them as present to him.

Which foreknowledge, or knowledge, does not lay a necessity upon the things
so to be: for the very nature of knowledge does not imply a necessity that the
thing must, but a certainty that it will be: as for example: When I see a man
walk, and at the same time see the sun shine, I see the first as voluntary, and
the second as natural: and though at the instant that I see both done, there is
a necessity that they be done, (or else I could not see them when I do) yet
before they were done, there was a necessity but of only one ( i.e. the sun
shining) but none at all of the other ( i. e. of the man's walking) the sun
could not but shine, being a natural agent; the man might not have walked,
being a voluntary one: upon which it follows, There is a twofold necessity,
one absolute, the other on supposition: the absolute is that by which a thing
moves when it is forced, the Suppositive is that by which a man shall be damned,
if he die impenitent: the latter of these (though not the first) does mighty
well consist with the liberty of man's will, and Gods conditional decrees.

I am now writing, and God foresaw that I am writing; yet it follows not that
I must needs write, for I can choose. What God fore-sees will be, will certainly
come to pass; but it will come to pass so as he foresaw it, that is, I will do
it of choice.

If all things are present to God (as indeed they are) his foresight must needs
be all one with our sight. As therefore when I see a man dance as he pleases,
it is necessary that he does what I see he does: but yet my looking on does not
make it necessary; for, that a thing may be certain in respect of its event,
and yet not necessary in respect of its cause, is no news at all to a
considering person, who will but duly distinguish Gods Omniscience from his
Omnipotence.

They that make the foreknowledge of God to be the cause of all future events,
must needs father all the wickedness in the world upon him, for he fore-knowes
the evil as well as the good, he fore-knew that Adam would fall, that the Jews
would crucify Christ, that Judas would betray him, with all other wickedness
in other men: but his foreknowledge did not cause them to do it, for they were
voluntary agents, or else could not be said wickedly to have done what they did
do.

Queries on the universal love of God to all mankind.
1. IF Christ died not for all, what ground has any man to believe he dyed for
him? 2. How can God be said to be just, in case he condemns those persons for
whom Christ never died? 3. How can remission of sins be preached to those for
whom Christ never died? 4. Whether do men perish because Christ died not, or
because they believed not? if because Christ died not, it is not their unbelief
which destroys them: but they perish because Christ never died for them, or
because there is no Christ for them to believe in. 5. If Christ did not die for
all, wherefore do they exhort all to repentance, and call upon all men to
believe? or would you make some men believe and so be saved, which Christ never
died for? 6. Whether has not Christ given out a power or ability to all men,
to believe on him? 7. Whether the fault be in Christ or in the Creature, that
the Creature is not saved? if the fault be not in Christ that the Creature is
not saved, then, whether has not Christ given out a power or ability to
believe? 8. Whether unbelief be the condemning sin? if unbelief be the
condemning sin, and sinners be condemned for not believing which never had a
power to believe, where then is the fault? 9. whether God has not appointed
all to be saved, with this proviso or condition, if they believe? 10. Whether
was not Adam in a state of grace before his fall? which if so, whether did not
Adam fall from grace, and we in him? 11. What is the state of infants by
generation from Adam? whether are they in a state of salvation, or in a state
of damnation? 12. If infants are in a state of salvation, whether do they fall
from that state when they come to act? 13. If the elect can never fall from
their election by disobeying the Scripture, no more then the reprobate can be
saved by obeying them, to what purpose is the Scripture set forth? 14. Whose
names they are that are written in the book of life, whether be they the
Elect's or the reprobate's? if the elect's, whether they shall not be blotted
out, if they add or diminish from the word of God?
These Absurdities will unavoydably fall on those which deny Christ's death for
all.
1. IF Christ died but for some of the sons of men, then the devil destroys
not those men for whom Christ died not, but they perish for want of Christ, and
should so perish if there were no devil to devour them: contrary to this
Scripture, 1 Pet. 1.8. 2. If Christ died not for all men, then despair is no
sin in them who perish through it, seeing there is nothing for them to believe
in unto salvation for whom Christ died not. 3. If Christ died not for all men,
then I think it were a sin for some men to believe he died for them, because
they should believe a lie, if they should believe that Christ dyed for them;
seeing he did not, if they speak true which say he died not for all. 4. If
there were some persons for whom Christ died not, such persons should be
exempted or freed from the condemnation of unbelief, or treading underfoot the
blood of the Covenant by which they were sanctified, if it were true that
Christ had not once died for them: for how can that man crucify Christ afresh,
or tread underfoot the blood by which he was sanctified, for whom no Christ
died, or no blood was shed, if they say true that say, Christ died not for all?
5. If Christ died not for all, Satan in persuading people that Christ died not
for them, does not evil, if that be true that Christ died not for them, and
therein he were no deceiver, but rather persuades them to that which is truth,
if Christ died not for all, as they say. 6. If Christ died not for all men,
then it were no heresy for to teach some men to deny that Christ bought them,
contrary to that Scripture 2 Pet. 2.1. who said, Some men bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them bringing on themselves swift
destruction: But it is impossible for him who Christ died not for, to deny the
Lord that bought him, or to be a heretic in so doing, if Christ bought him
not. 7. If there be some whom Christ died not for, it is an error for them to
believe that Christ died for them, which say they he died not for. 8. If Christ
died not for all men, then some men for whom Christ died not do believe a
truth, in believing that Christ died not for them, which were a blasphemy to
say. 9. If Christ died not for all men, then some men shall be damned in hell
for not believing that which is not truth, because some men shall be damned in
hell for not believing that Christ dyed for them: yet some say that it is not
truth that Christ died for them, and so shall be damned in hell for not
believing a lie. 10. If Christ died not for all men, then their damnation is
not to be ascribed to their not believing, but to Christ not dying for them:
which is contrary to these Scriptures, Joh. 3.18, 36.
FINIS.

