A General TREATISE OF THE DISEASES OF Infants and Children, etc.

Books lately printed for, and Sold by R. Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THere is in the Press, and will speedily be Published, a Mathematical
Companion; or the Description and Use of a new sliding Rule, by which many
Useful and Necessary Questions in Arithmetic, Military Orders, Interest,
Trigonometry, Geometry, Geography, Gauging, Astronomy, Navigation,
Fortification, Gunnery, and Dialling, may be Speedily and Exactly Resolved,
without the help of Pen or Compasses, with an Exact Abridgment of the laws of
Excise. By Will. Hunt, ^^ilomath, and Superviser of his Majesty's Excise for
the County of Kent.

The whole Works of that Excellent Practical Physician, Docter Thomas Sydenham.
Wherein not only the History and Cures of Acute Diseases are treated of, after
a New and Acurate Method, but also the Shortest and Safest Way of Curing most
Chronical Diseases* Translated from the Original Latin* by John Pechey of the
College of Physicians in London.

The Family Physician, or a Collection of Choice, Approved and Experienced
Remedies, for the Cure of almost all Diseases incident to Humane Bodies, whethe
Internal or External; useful in Families, and very serviceable to Country
People; containing some hundreds of considerable Receipts an Secrets of great
Value, with Obsevations of great Cures. Togethe with the true English
Wine-Celler an the right Method of making English Wines, or Metheglin: With a
Colection of the Choicest and Safest Cosmetick Remedies for preserving the
Beauty and Complexion of Ladies: never before Published By George Hartman,
Phylo-Chymist, Author of the Preserver and Restorer of Health, who Lived and
Traveled with the Honorable Sir Kenelm Dighy in several parts of Europe, the
space of Seven Years, till he died. Price 2s. 6d.

Reflections on Ancient and Modern Learning, by William Wolton, B. D. Chaplain
to the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham.

Mrs. Behn's Novels Collected in one Vol. viz. Oroonoko, the sair Jilt, or P.
Tarquils Agnes de Castro, or the force of Generous Love. Love*s Watch, or the
Art of Love. The Ladies Looking-Glass. The Lucky Mistake. And Love Letters
never before Printed.

The Rover; or Banished Cavaliers* As it was Acted by His Majesty's Servants, at
the Theater in Little*Lincolns-Inn-Fields. Written by Mrs. Ann Behn. The second
Edition.

Unnatural Brother, a Tragedy* written by Mr. Filmer.

Spanish Wives, a Farce, by Mrs. Mary Pix.

Ibrahim, a Tragedy, by the same Hand.

Poems, on several occasions, by Mr. Robert Gould.

A General Treatise of Women's Diseases.

A Physical Storehouse, containing a General Practice of Physic.

A Complete Herbal of Physical Plants. The last three writ by John Pechey, etc.

Old Bachelor, a Comedy, by Mr. Congreve. And all sorts of Plays, Romances,
Histories, Novels, and Poetry, are Sold by R. Wellington, at the Lute in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1697.

A Discourse upon the Nature and Faculties of Man, in several Essays; with some
considerations upon the Occurrences of Humane Life. By Tim. Nourse Gent.

A General TREATISE OF THE DISEASES OF Infants and Children.

Collected from the best PRACTICAL AUTHORS.

By JOHN PECHRY of the College of Physicians in London.

LONDON: Printed for R. Wellington, at the Lute in St. Pauls-Church-Yard. 1697.

THE PREFACE.
CHildren, if they are virtuous, are great Blessings, and a public good. It is
therefore the duty of Parents to inure them betimes to a Regular course of
Life, nor ought Persons of the best Quality to think the guidance of their
Children beneath them. For Cornelia, the Mother of the Gracchi* and Aurelia the
Mother of Augustus Caesar, were Governesses to Children; and Cato, though he kept
a Tutor in his House, did himself frequently instruct his Son: So did Augustus
his Grandchildren, and the great Theodosius would often sit by the Tutor*
while he was instructing his Son. And certainly it is best and safest for
Parents to have their Children under their own Eye and inspection. But above
all, the Fathers Example is of greatest force to instruct the Son, and his
Actions Authorize the same in the Child, nor can the Father chastize him, for
what himself is guilty. But to come to the business in hand, Parents should
endeavor as much as in them lies, to provide for the health of their Children.
The Father must not enfeeble his body by excessive Drinking or any other Vice,
for thereby the Child suffers for the Fathers fault: nor ought such as have
hereditary Diseases to Marry. The Mother, during pregnancy, must observe a good
Diet suitable to her Temperament, Custom, Condition, and Quality, and the right
use of all the six Non-naturals. She must not lace her self so close as she was
wont to do, for strait lacing hinders the growth of the Child, and often makes
it either Abortive or Mis*shapen. If the Mother cannot or will not suckle the
Child herself, care must be taken to procure an healthy, strong, and vigorous
Nurse, of an Age not under twenty five, nor above thirty five, and her Milk
must be thoroughly purified after her lying in before she gives suck; her
Breasts ought to be pretty Big, Firm, and Fleshy, and her Nipples must be a
little raised, and of a moderate Bigness and Firmness, and well perforated with
many little holes; and she must have a sufficient quantity of Milk for the
Child's nourishment, and the color of it must be white, and the smell of it
must be sweet and pleasant: she must be merry and cheerful, and smile often to
divert the Child.

To conclude, the young Physician must take Notice that great caution must be
used in prescribing Opiats and Vomits for Children, for many dreadful Symptoms
have been occasioned thereby.

From the Angel and Crown in Bazing Lane, London, January 2d. 1697.
THE INDEX.
A.
ALmonds inflamed. Page. 86. Apthae, and Bladders in the Gums. ibid.
B.
Breeding of Teeth. p. 88. Breathing difficult. p. 93.
C.
Children Newborn, their Diet and way of Ordering. p. 1. Convulsions. p. 74.
Cattarrh, Cough. p. 93. Costiveness. p. 112. Childrens wasting. p. 158.
D.
Diseases, and Symptoms of Infants in General. p. 14.
E.
Ears inflamed, pains, moisture, Ulcers and Worms of them. p. ^3.
F.
Fevers of Children. p. 18. Frights in sleep. p. 69. Falling of the Fundament.
p. 137.
G.
Galling of Children. p. 147. Gripes. p. 103.
H.
Hickops. p. 98. Hydrocephalus. p. 64.
I.
Inflammation of the Head. ibid. Inflammation of the Belly and Hypochondres. p.
106.
L.
Looseness. p. 107. Loosening the String of the Tongue and the Ranula under it.
p. 91.
M.
Measles. p. 40.
N.
Navel sticking out. p. 132. Navel inflamed. p. 135.
R.
Rickets. p. 148. Ruptures. p. 128.
S.
Stone in the Bladder. p. 139. Squinting. p 82. Scabs, and Ulcers from Milk. p.
48. Syriasis. p. 66. Smallpox. p. 27.
T.
Tinea. p. 54.
V.
Vomiting. p. 100. Urine difficult. p. 142. Urine involuntary. p. 145.
OF Childrens Diseases.
CHAP. I. Of the Diet and Ordering of Children Newborn.
AFter the Navel-string is Cut and bound up, and the Infant is washed, you must
inquire about the Constitution of it: (...) which purpose you must first
consider whether the Mother was healthy at the time she was with Child; for
that is a sign of a healthful Child, esecially if the Father be also of a sound
onstitution: Afterward you must ind what is the color of the new born Infant;
it is best when the color is reddish all over the Body, for that by degrees
turns daily florid: but those Children that are at first Florid or White, are
most commonly of an ill temperament, Cold, Dull, and not long lived. The crying
of the Child new born, ought to be loud and clear, because it signifies plenty*
of Spirits, and a strong breast: But if the Child cries low, it is a sign that
the vital strength is small, and the Spirits few, and the Muscles of the Breast
weak: You must more over consider whether the magnitude, figure, passages,
situaon of all the parts be as they ought; and therefore the Midwife should
handle it gently, and search whether any thing be amiss in any part that it may
be rectified as much as may be: Let her often extend and contract the Arms and
Legs, and cleanse them from filth, and she must see whether the Eyelids, the
Ears, the Nostrils, the Fundament, and Privities are as open as they ought to
be, and she must take notice of the Fingers and Toes that they do not stick
together. She must put her finger into the Mouth and cleanse it from filth, and
see whether the Child be Tongue-tied or not afterward the Child must be
swaithed up, and laid in the Cradle. Galen says that before it is clothed, the
body must be sprinkled all over moderately with Salt, that the skin may be
rendered thereby more dense and solid than the inner parts; for he says, they
are all equally soft in the Womb: But it is to be feared that the salt by its
biteing quality should occasion itching and other inconvenienceis, and
therefore this custom was soon left off, and instead of it they washed newborn
Children with Wine, and what Galen says is not agreeable to reason; for the
skin in the Womb has a peculiar Constitution different from the internal parts;
nor is it safer to thicken the skin and to hinder transpiration, as Galen says
in another place, much less is the custom of some barbarous people to be
imitated, which was also used formerly in Germany, viz. the dipping the warm
Infant from the Womb in the next Brook, that thereby it may be rendered more
strong and lusty, and to try the strength of their Children, whom they chiefly
design for the Wars; for without doubt none but strong Children would survive
such a dipping.

Before the Teat be offered to the Child, some Honey or Oil of Almonds ought to
be given it, to carry off from the stomach and bowels some filth Collected in
the Womb; for a certain black and pitchy matter is contracted in the Womb, and
ought to be presently evacuated, for if it be not, sits are occasioned, and
some think the Child ought to be dieted three whole days with fresh Oil of
Almonds and Sugar, and others Order some other Woman to suckle, the child, till
the Mothers milk is pure. The child must be defended from all external
injuries, and it must be kept in an Air moderately hot; and if it be not of a
very good constitution, an Air inclining to the contrary must be chosen: But
respect must be had to the seasons of the year. The Cradle must be placed where
there is not too much light, and so as that the light of the Sun or of a Candle
may be seen directly, and great care must be taken that the child be not
frightened, and it must never be left alone, left it be injured, by venomous
Creatures, or some other external injuries, which they cannot resist, for it is
known that Scorpions, Serpents, and such like Creatures have crept into
Childrens mouths, or other wise injured them, or Cats by lying upon them have
suffocated them. Let th Child lie in a Cradle by it self and not with the
Mother or Nurse, till it has its hands and feet at Liberty to help it self,
lest, as has been often found, it be suffocated by the Nurse, or by the Bed,
and the Cradle should be so made, that it cannot easily be overturned by
Rocking.

Infants should sleep more then they do wake, that thereby Concoction may be
the better perfected, and the spirits invigorated, and therefore if watchings
are troublesome, sleep must be endeavored by Singing, Rocking, and offering
the Teat often: but care must be taken that the Stomach be not over burdened
with Milk

The new born Child must be Bathed once a day; and moderately rubbed; for such
frictions help Concoction, and the distribution of the nourishment, and serve
instead of exercise and motion, which the Infant by reason of its Tenderness
cannot undergo, and they strengthen the members and make them firm. After
bathing, the Infant must be swathed up, lest it should move its hands and feet
too freely, and thereby distort the bones, which are yet very flexible* but
after four months the hands and arms may be let loose, but the whole breast and
belly must be swathed for aabove a year to comfort the heart, and to defend the
parts, and you must be sure to cleanse the Child often, to prevent Itching and
Excoriation. And care must be taken that the body be kept open, which may be
easily done if the Milk be good, and in a convenient quaintity. But if the
Belly be bound, it must be anointed below the Navel with some Oils, or
emollient liniments, or an emollent glister must be injected.

Moderate crying Conduces to the evacuating the brain, to dilate and cleanse
the Lungs, and excites the Natural heat: but when it is immoderate it is wont
to occasion fluxions upon the eyes, Catarrhs, and Ruptures. It does least hurt
before sucking, and and when the milk is concocted, but because most commomly
Children do not cry without a cause, but are provoked by something that
disturbs them, a Prudent Mother or Nurse will endeavor to find out what is the
cause that that being removed, the Child may be at quiet: She will see whither
the Linen be foul'd for Children love to be clean, and will not sleep quietly
till filthy close are removed from them: the Mother will see whether they are
swaithed too hard, or whether they are not pinched by the wrinkling of the
Linen, or pricked by a pin, or whether gripes be the occasion.

As to the nourishment it must be fed with milk for some months, and it may
suck as often as it will, if it be not subject to a Vometing or looseness and
provided the Stomach be not overcharged, and in suckling of a Child you must
take notice to offer by turns the right and left breast, especially after it is
permitted to use its hands; for if you do not observe this, it will be
accustomed to use one hand. After some months you may feed the Child with Pap.

But it is not convenient to give solid meats before they have their Teeth; for
they cannot chew them: But after the Teeth are bred, it is convenient to
accustom them by degrees to solid food; yet notwithstanding you must not deny
them milk, bread, pulse boiled, and flesh, first chewed by the Nurse may be
sometimes given them, but hard meats must not be allowed. In this mixture of
aliment we must take care, while milk is in the Stomach that no acid or austere
thing be given, which may coagulate or corrupt the milk in the Stomach.

When the Limbs of the Infant are strong, and it begins to use its hands and
feet you must not too early allow of such motions, much less must you put them
upon their feet too soon, as some unskillfull Nurses do, and by that means
crook their Legs but when they are able to stand upon their Legs, they must be
somewhat sustained by the Leading-strings and afterward that they may be
accustomed to go alone, you must put them into running-Chairs, such as are
common in Families, and suffer them to push them along themselves, and by this
sort of playing exercise, they will be accustomed to their feet, and learn to
go, and to stop themselves: But when they begin to go without help, they must
not be left alone, and to prevent all danger it is best to put roll's about
their heads. As to bathing, a Child new born ought to be washed every day, but
from the third month, to the seventh month till they are weaned twice a week.
If the Child be apt to use its left hand, you must bind it up and leave the
right free, that by frequent use it may become agile and strong.

The Child must not be weaned before it has all its Teeth, for till then it
cannot chew solid Meats; besides, in breeding the Teeth, especially the
Dog-Teeth, Children are subject to Fevers* pains of the Gums, and other
Symptoms* and it is to be sear d that weaning them increases their misery. But
here can be no certain time set for weaning Children; for those that are brisk
may be sooner weaned, and those that are weak may suck longer, and sometimes
Children are to be weaned before they ought, by reason the Nurse or Mother are
sick, or have conceived; and therefore some are weaned in the tenth month, and
some in the twelfth, and yet it is most convenient that the Child suck a year
and an half, or two years; and it is proper to diet them with milk a little
longer; for the parts being strengthened by this agreeable aliment, partake of
the benefit of it for the whole life. but at what time soever the Child is
weaned, unusual meats are not suddenly to be offered to it; it ought therefore
to be accustomed to them by degrees while it does Suck; for all sudden changes
are dangerous, and a Man is offended by good Meats, if he be not accustomed to
them; therefore Pape and Chicken-broath are first to be given, and when they
have been weaned a while, Pulse, and flesh of easy digestion and good juice,
first chewed by the Mother or the Nurse. It is better so wean a Child in the
Spring or Autumn, than in the Summer or Winter, least to the alteration of the
body, which is occasioned by the new diet, another proceeding from the heat or
cold of the ambient air be added to it, and so the Child be prejudiced: Some
Women think, and not without Reason, that it is better to wean a Child at the
increase of the Moon, than at the decrease: and because it sometimes happens,
that Children cannot be drawn from the Teat by any means, the Papes must be
anointed with the juice of Wormwood, or with the following Liniment.

Take of Honey two Drams, of Aloes half a Dram, of the juice of Wormwood one
dram.

But these things must not be used too much, least the Lips and Gums of the
Children should be inflam d, or the Stomach hurt: and because sometimes some
Children dislike Honey and sweet things, you may anoint the Papes with them,
and so cause an aversion: but the best way of weaning them is for the Mother or
Nurse to get out of sight; for if the Children do not see them they will not
cry for the Breast.

As to the Diet of Children that are weaned till they come to be seven years
old, it ought to be very different from that of the adult; for Children are yet
weak, and their bodies tender, and so cannot easily bear errors in diet: at
this age they ought to be fed often, and so much meat ought to be given them,
as may not only suffice for their nourishment, but for their growth also, as
Hippocrates rightly observes, Children says he, are least able to bear Hunger,
and among such those especially that are of a quick Wit.

As to the Passions of Mind, we must endeavor that Children be not violently
moved with Anger; or affected with Sorrow, nor Frighted; for these violent
Passions of the mind make great impressions upon the Body, and so occasion the
falling Sickness and other Diseases* Iniquity is connatural to Infants, and
they are more prone to Evil than to Good, we must not therefore indulge them
too much, but from their tender years we must so endeavor to moderate all the
Faculties and Affections of their Souls, that they my be obedient to Reason;
for in this Age the foundation of a good Life is to be laid. Do we not see that
young Lions and Bears, when they are young, can be made so tame, as to obey the
very nod of the Keepers; whereas if you let them alone till they are grown up,
they will for ever after remain Fierce and Wild, why then should not the mind
of a Child be so tamed, as to obey Reason, and to harken to advice: but there
are not the appearances of all the affections in the first years; anger shows
it self first by crying and the like; and therefore you should endeavor to nip
this animosity in the bud, and they that will not be reclaimed by admonition,
must be disciplined by the rod, that in time to come they may be sit to perform
the Offices of a Man: Play must be allowed them to moderate their affections,
and indeed this age can scarce do any thing seriously, only you must take care
that their play does not injure their bodies; such exercises must be allowed as
are agreeable to their years, and they must not be bred up in sloth; for it
being necessary that they should be plentifully sed, as has been said, unless
they use exercise, the nourishment will not be well distributed to all the
body, and the native heat will be suppressed; In this Age they must be often
washed: They that converse with them must take a special care that nothing
blasphemous, scurillous, or immodest be said or done, so as to give an ill
example to them: About the sixth year of their age, they should be put to
School to a Master, who is to instruct them in all things necessary to a good
Life.

CHAP. II. Of the Diseases and Symptoms of Infants in General.
WHat ever diligence has been used for the right ordering of the Diet of
Infants, yet notwithstanding they are often subject to Diseases; for that blood
which was wont to be evacuated every month, and those vicious humors that were
wont to be carried off with it, being detained nine whole months in the Womb,
it may easily happen that the Child be injured there by, especially all Mothers
being not equally healthful, and besides many great errors being committed in
Diet, many vicious humors are communicated to the Fetus with the nourishment;
all which, tho not always, disorder Children in the Womb, and sometimes after
they are Born, occasion various Diseases and Symptoms; and sometimes the Child
is injured in the Birth, or by the cuting of the Navel-string, or by the change
of place; for when it was in the Womb, it was encompassed with peculiar
coverings, flesh, membrans, and humors all warm and soft.

The Diseases and Symptoms of Children are many, some common with the adult,
which being added by some Authors to Treatises of Childrens Diseases makes them
bulky; and therefore I will here pass them by, and treat only of such as are
proper and familiar with them.

In the cure of Infants a special regard is to be had to the Methods and
Medicines, for Children by reason of the weakness of their bodies, cannot under
go severe methods or strong Medicines: They do not well bear bleeding, nor
strong Purges, but where purging is required, a Suppository ought to be used,
or a Glister must be injected. For instance.

Take of the leaves of Violets, and Mallows, each one handful, of the Flowers
of Camomile, and Violets, each one pugil: boil them in a sufficient quantity of
fountain water. Take of the strained liquor four or five ounces, according to
the age, and add to it of Syrup of Roses solutive, half a ounce, six drams, or
an once of oil of Violets, half an ounce, make a Glister:

Take of the Whey of Goats-milk a sufficient quantity, add to it of Syrup of
Succory with Rubarb, or of Honey, or of Syrup of Roses solutive six Drams, of
Oil of Violets half an ounce, make a Glister.

But if there be occasion for other Purges they are most conveniently given to
the Nurse or Mother; for the purgative quality is imparted by the Milk to the
Child; or lenitive purges may given to Children, respect being had to their
age, as Syrup of Roses solutive, Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, Cassia, Manna,
or the like.

CHAP. III. Of the Fevers of Children.
THE first indication incuring Childrens Fevers is to prepare well the acid,
that it may be the easier ejected, but this preparation must not be endeavored
by Sudorificks, properly so called, that is such as heat the body, which are by
no means to be used for Infants or Children; but such things as absorbe the
acid, and gently restrain the Ebullition, are to be used the chief of these are
Crab's-eyes and Claws, Oyster-shells, Cuttle-bones, Egg-shells, Coral, Coraline,
Pearl, Mother of Pearl, both the Bezoarstones, Hearts-horn burnt, burnt Ivory,
the Bone of a Stags heart, Shavings of Harts*horn, Bolearmonick, Seald-earth,
Boodstone, and the like, and among compounds, compound powder of Crabs Claws,
the Goastone, and confection of Hyacinth.

Take of compound powder of Crabs Claws, and of Pearl prepared, each one dram,
mingle them, make a powder to be divided into six equal parts. Or,

Take simple powder of Crabs-Claws one dram, of Crab's-eyes prepared two
scruples, of Cochinel six grains mix them, make a sine powder to be divided
into six Papers; let one be taken as soon as may be, and another two hours
after, and afterward let one be taken every fourth hour for the first two
days, unless the Child be a sleep: but let the Powders be taken in a spoonful
of the following Julep, and give a spoonful presently after.

Take of the Aqualactis Alexiteria four Ounces, of black Cherry Water, each two
Ounces, of compound Peony and Epidemick Water, each two Drams, of pearled Sugar
half an Ounce; mingle them, make a Julep. Or,

Take of Sweet Almonds blanched, number ten, beat them in a Mortar, and pour
upon them gently half a pint of Barley water, or of Aqualactis Alexiteria;
strain it and add six Drams of simple Cinnamon water, half an Ounce of White
Sugar; mingle them make a julep.

Sometimes I am wont to use, other things being omitted, a julep that has much
Pearl in it, but I order that the Glass should be well shook, before it be
poured out.

Take of Black Cherry water, four Ounces, of the Water of all the Citron two
Ounces, of Aquamirabilis, and prepared Pearl, each two Drams, of White Sugar
half an Ounce; mingle them, make a Pearl julep, give three spoonfuls at a time.

But if the Child be troubled with a Cough, give half a spoonful of some
^ectoral mixture, or Linctus, and let him take less of the Powders above
prescribed.

Take of the Powder of Coraline, and simple Crabs claws, each one Dram and an
half, of the Syrups of Maidenhair and Marshmallows, each one Ounce, balsom of
Tolu half an Ounce, of red Popy-water half an Ounce, mingle them.

Bolearmonek is often properly mixed with such things to good purpose, it
powerfully stops Cattarhs flowing upon the Lungs. The juice of Pennyroyal
eated, and sweetened with Sugar-cany, is also better than most other remeies.
Oil of Sweet-almonds is very ood, if Children can take it, so is Brim^^one and
the Flowers of it.

The foresaid Powders are to be repeated seldom, or often, according to the
degree of the Symptoms: but it is here to be noted, the Gripes, Restlessness,
and Watchings of Children, are as easily apeased by testaceous Powders as Pains
nd Watchings by Narcoticks in grown eople.

The third day, unless the Smallpox Meazles, or Scarlet-Fever appear, I order
a Child of one year old to be purged in the following manner.

Take of Syrup of Succory with Rubarb (...) Drams, of choice Rubarb powdered
fifteen Grains, or a ^^uple, of Aqualactis ^^^lectiteria one Dram, of small
Cinnamon water thirty drops; mingle them. Or,

Take of Sweet-almonds blanched, number three, beat them in a marble Mortar,
and pour upon them gently an Ounce or an Ounce and an half of Barly-water: in
the strained liquor dissolve three Drams or half an Ounce of the best Manna^
mingle them, and make a purging Emulsion.

Sometimes I order this or the like Plaster to be applied to the region of
Navel, especially if Children are troubled with Worms.

Take of Succortrine Aloes, one Dram, of the powder of the leaves of Savin, of
the tops of the lesser C^ntaury, and of the Flowers of Camomile, each one
Scruple, with a sufficient quantity of Venice Turpentine, make a Plaster; let
the margin of it be spread with the Plaster of Cumin to make it stick the
better, and sometimes it may be converient to add to the other ingredients a
Scruple of Coloquintida.

There is no purging Medicine more ^oper for Children, and more innocent ^an
Rubarb, it gently and safely eva^ats the matter occasioning the Fever, ^d
gently purges off the Humors, that ^rthen the Stomach and whole Body, ^d it
strengthens, wherefore it is very ^oper for Infants, Children big belli^ Women,
Old Men, and such as have ^en weakened by Diseases.

After the Purge has done working, ^me Powder like the former must be ^ven in
the Evening, and afterward ^ust be repeated three or four times in day at fit
times for two days, and on ^e third day purging must be used, ^d it must be
dosed according to the ^eration of the former.

These things being performed, the ^orst Symptoms most commonlly ^ase.

As to Bleeding of Children, tho it ^ay be used, when the Febrile matter is
cast upon the Lungs, or for a hooping Cough, yet it is plainly a remedy not
agreeable to their nature.

A Child about three years and a^ half old was seized with a small Fever that
was continual, and accompanie^ with very irregular Exacerbations, she
complained of a great pain in the Head and sometimes in the Belly, she
nauseated all meat, and was very sleepy, (...) that the standers by thought she
would have the Smallpox: There was a twitching of the Nerves in sleep, and she
ha^ sometimes a dry Cough. I prescribe^ the following things.

Take of Aqualactis Ale^iteria six Ounce* of Epidemick-water half an Ounce*
(...) prepared Pearl one Dram, of the simp^ powder of Crabs-claws two Drams,
(...) Cristaline Sugar half an Ounce; ming^ them, make a julep, whereof let^
her tak^ three spoonfuls every fourth hour, shaking the glass before useing of
it.

Take of Succotrine Aloes one Dram, of the tops of the lesser Centaury, of the
leaves of Savin* dried, each* half a Dram, of Burgundy-pitch one Dram, of
Venice-turpentine a sufficient quantity; make a Plaster to be applied to the
Navel.

The next day she persisted in the use of the julep, and a Blistering Plaster
was applied to the Neck: A Glister with Milk, Sugar, and Salt was injected,
because the Belly was bound: At bed^ime she took the following Bolus.

Take Aethiops Mineral, and Merourius Dulcis, each fix Grains, of Marmalad^ of
Quinces, two Scruples, make a Bolus.

The next morning she took the fol^owing purging Syrup.

Take of Syrup of Buckthorn two Drams, of the Earl of Warwicks Powders six
Grains, of choice Rubarb powdered twelve Grains, of tincture of Saffron twen^y
drops, of Black-Cherry-water one Dram; mingle them.

On the fourth and fifth day, the fol^owing mixtnre was given by spoon^uls.

Take of Coraline two Drams, of the leaves of Mint dried and powdered, one
Scruple, of the simple powder of Crabs claws one Dram, of Balsamic Syrup, and
of the Syrup of Marshmallows, each one Ounce, of Orange-water half an Ounce;
mingle them.

The evening preceding the sixth day, the Bolus before prescribed was repeated,
and the morning following the purging Syrup, by the virtue where of the Child
vomited up a Worm, and soon after recovered.

The Fevers which are occasioned by corrupted Milk are known, for that the
Teeth are not come, and there are signs of corrupted Milk, grips, frequent
yellow or green stools: Fevers that come from breeding the teeth known by the
signs of breeding teeeth: these Fevers most commonly are not dangerous, for the
cause being taken away, they cease of themselves; but if the corruption of the
Milk continues long, the Childrens lives are in danger: Those Children, says
Hyppocrates, who have an Acute Fever upon breeding the Teeth are seldom
troubled with convulsions; yet they are sometimes destroyed by a Flux of the
Belly and Watchings.

If the Fever proceed from corrupted milk, you must use cooling and moistening
things, because such Fevers generally come from Choler, and therefore such
nourishment must be given to the Mother or Nurse, viz. Lettice, Endive Sorrel,
an Emulsion of the four greater told Seeds, and a Ptisan of Barley, and the
Mother or the Nurse must abstain from Wine, whilst the Child's Fever continues,
and the Nurse must be gently purged with Manna, Cassia, or Syrup of Roses
Solutive; and alteratives may be given to the Child, as the Juice and Syrup of
Violets, or the Syrup of Sorrel or Citron; the waters of Succory endive, and
Violets sweetened with Sugar, and the Spine must be anointed with an Ointment
made of the mucilages of the Seeds of Quinces and Flea^ane, of Oil of Violets
and a little Wax; or a Plaster made of Houseleek, Plan^ain, Nightshade, Rue,
Barley-Meal, and the White of an Egg may be applied to the Stomach; and it is
necessary when the Milk is corrupted, and ^urns to choler, to apply to the
Stomach ^ooling and astringent things, that the ^orruption of the Milk may be
preven^ed; and the Concoction helped.

Take of the Oils of Roses and Mastich, each half an Ounce, of red Sanders and
Coral, each one Scruple, of Wax a little; mingle them.

But if the Fever proceed from breeding the Teeth, we must endeavor to make
the eruption of them easy, but more of this, when we come to speak of breeding
Teeth, and the Alteratives mentioned before for the Fever occasioned by
corroupted Milk are of use here and do good.

CHAP. IV. Of the Small Pox.
THere are two sorts of them, the distinct and confluent the distinct begin
with a shivering, and coldness, which is presently followed with excessive
heat, a violent pain in the Head and Back, Vomiting, a great propensity to
Sweat in grown persons: But I have not observed, says Sydenham, any such
disposition in Children, either before or after they come out: A pain at the
cavity of the Breast, beneath the region of the Heart, if it be pressed with
the hand, dullness and sleepiness, especially in Children, and sometimes
convulsive fits, and if these happen to them that have all their Teeth, I
reckon the Smallpox are at hand, which, most commonly, coming out a few hours
after, sufficiently answer the prognostic^tion: For instance, if the Child has
a Convulsive fit in the evening, as it usually happens, the Smallpox appear
the next Morning; and more over I have very often observed, that when they come
immediately after these fits, they rise in large Pustles, and are mild, and
favorable, and seldom Flux* It is to be noted that sometimes the course of
separation is past over gradually without any sickness, but most commonly, as
we said before, the sickness before the eruption is most violent.

The distinct Smallpox usually come out on the fourth day inclusively, and
sometimes a little latter, but rarely before, at which time the Symptoms most
commonly abate, or totally vanish: The eruption is after this manner, first
pimples as big as small pins heads here and there show themselves, and first of
all in the Face, Neck, and Breast, and afterward in the whole body: At this
time the Jaws are afflicted with a pain, that increases as the Pustles rise,
which, growing daily bigger and higher, inflame the neighboring skin and
flesh; for about the eight day, from the first approach of the sickness, the
spaces between that before were somewhat white now begin to be red, and swell
more or less, according to the number of the Pustles, so that sometimes the
eyes are swelled up and the Patient is deprived of sight: Next after the Face,
the Hands and Fingers swell more or less, according to the number of the
Pustles* The Pustles that were smooth and red to this day, are now grown rough
and some what white, which is the first sign of their coming to maturity; more
over they cast out by degrees a certain yellowish matter. On the eleventh day
the tumor and inflammation of the Face manifestly diminish, and on the
fourteenth or fifteenth day totally vanish.

That s^rt of Smallpox which is called the Flux has the same Symptoms with the
distinct, only they are more violent: Moreover a looseness sometimes preceds the
erruption, and continues a day or two after it: This sort comes out generally
on the third day; and sometimes so like a Erisppelas or the Measles, that they
cannot be easily distinguished: These do not rise so high as the distinct,
especially those in the Face: After the eight day they begin to change into a
duskish-colour.

A Looseness afflicts Children in the Flux-Pox, but does not invade Children so
soon, as Spitting does grown people; But at what time soever it comes, if it be
not stopped by art, it continues through the whole course of the Disease.

I have always observed, that when the Disease was violent, the sick had as it
were a fit in the Evening, and then the Symptoms raged as it were more cruely.

As soon as the signs of this Disease show themselves, I keep the sick from the
open air, and forbid them the use of Wine and Flesh, and allow them Small bear
gentlly warmed with a Toast for their ordinary drink, and now and then permit
them to drink as much of it as they will. I order them for victuals, Oat-meal
and Barley-broths, and roasted Apples, and other things which are neither too
hot nor cold, nor hard to be digested, I forthwith prohibit an hot regimen, and
the use of all manner of Cordials: On the forth day I commit the sick to his
Bed, and then if the Pustles come not out well, some gentle Cordial may be
properly prescribed, at lest for once to drive them out. Among the Medicines
for this purpose, those they called Paregorick, such as liquid Laudanum,
Diascordium and the like, if they be mixed in a small quantity with some proper
Cordal waters, excel the rest: when the Pustles first come out, I then
carefully consider whether they be of the distinct or confluent kind, because
they differ exceedingly one from the other, though they agree as to some
symptoms; if therefore from the bigness and paucity of the Pustles, and the
slowness of the coming out, and from the vanishing of sickness and other
symptoms, which tire the Patient after the eruption of the Flux-pox, it appears
that they are the distinct sort, I take care that the sick be refreshed with
Smallbeer, Oat-meal and Braley gruel, and the like: and if the Smallpox be but
few, and in Summer time, and that very hot, I see no reason why the Patient
should be kept stifled in ^ed, and why he may not rather rise a few hours every
day, provided the inconveniences of too much cold or heat may be prevented by
the place and clothing: but if either the cold season of the year, or a large
eruption of the Puscles put the Patient under a necessity of keeping his Bed
continually, I take care that he lie not hotter, nor has more clothes on him,
than when he was in health, and that he have a fire kindled only in the Morning
and Evening, unless it be Winter, nor do I require, that he should be always
fixed to one place, least he Sweat, which I confidently affirm cannot be
promoted without great danger: when the Disease is going off, it is proper to
give some proper Cordial Medicine, and at the same time also a little hotter,
and more cordial-diet may be allowed: For instance Sugar-soaps, and
Oat-mea^-caudle, and the like; nor is there any need of any other thing at all
in the distinct and gentle sort, if the Patient be treated moderately with this
method and diet, unless by chance restlessness or watchings should now or then
persuade the use of a Paregorick.

But if the Smallpox flux, the case is very hazardous, for this sort is no
less different from the other, than the Plague is from this, tho among the
vulgar, who take names and words for things, the cure of both is said to be the
same; for toward the end of the Disease, the sick is in great danger, namely,
on the Eleventh day, in the common Flux-pox, on the fourteenth in a worser sort
and on the sevententh in the worst sort, and sometimes tho rarely* on the 21st.
day, the Fever, the restlessness, and other symptoms invading together, whereby
the sick is generally destroyed, unless art relieve him; wherefore seeing there
is so much danger, when they flux, the Physician should endeavor all he can to
hinder their fluxing, by bleeding presently in the Arm, if there be the lest
suspicion of the Flux-pox, and by giving a Vomit afterward, and by keeping the
sick up till the sixth day, from the first sickness, afterward he must be put
to Bed, and kept there till the end of the Disease: But he must have no more
Clothes on, nor a greater Fire in his Chamber, than he used to have, when he
was well, and he must drink freely of Small beer, or other coolling Liquors.
But because notwithstanding the Sick freequently grows hot, lightheaded, and
restless, I give an Anodyne every night, but a little earlier than is usual;
because in this Disease, a sit of heat and restlessness comes, almost every
day, toward the evening.

But, which is to be lamented, notwithstanding these, and all other physical
helps, the Sick is very often seized on the eleventh day, or on some other of
those days, which we said were most fatal, in the various kinds of Flux-pox,
with a violently Fever, difficulty of Breathing, and restlessness, and dies
suddenly: Therefore in this deplorable case, blood must be taken away,
according to the strength and age of the Patient; from a young man ten or
twelve ounces must be taken, and in the evening a large Anodyne must be given,
as before, and so afterward morning and evening, and sometimes oftener: but it
is to be diligently noted, that in some the fury of the Disease is so high,
that a very large dosed Anodine cannot stop its force in twelve hours; in which
case it is necessary to repeat the Anodyne every sixth or eighth hour.

And because it happens often at the lattor end of the Disease, that the Body
is bound up so much, that the Sick is like to be suffocated, and consequently
is in great danger; in this case I have given successfully to grown people an*
ounce and an half of Lenitive Electuary dissolved in four ounces of Succory
water, or the like, which draught generally gives some stools before night: but
if it does not, an Anodyne must be given in the evening, and sooner
notwithstanding the Purge, if great restlessness, or some considerable sickness
threatens danger: if therefore the Purge does not answer the first day* it must
be repeated the next, and then it seldom fails: and in this manner Bleeding and
Purging may be repeated by intervals, as occasion requires. But it is to be
noted, that the sick must not be purged till the thirteenth day, or after, nor
then, unless bleeding has gone before.

For spitting of blood and bloody Urine coming upon the Smallpox (for both
these Hemorrhagies come sometimes at the beginning of the Disease) after
Bleeding largely once, give an Anodyne.

Take of red Poppy-water two Ounces, liquid Laudanum, 14 drops, of distilled
Vinegar three Drams, of Diacodium half an Ounces; make a draught to be repeated
every night at bed time.

Note that bleeding must be ordered and prescribed according to the age and
condition of the Patient: The like is to be observed in giving Anodyens, and
dosing other Medicines.

Take of Troches of Lemnian Earth, Bloodstone, Dragons Blood, and red Coral
prepared, each half a Dram, of Dragons Blood, and red Coral prepared, each half
a Dram, of Mastick, and Gum Arabec^, each one Scruple; mingle them make a fine
powder, whereof let him take half a Dram every third hour, drinking upon it
four or five spoonfuls of the following julep.

Take of the waters of Plantain, and Oakbuds, each three Ounces, of Cinnamon
water hordeated, two Ounces, of Syrup of dried Roses one Ounce, make it a
little accid with Spirit of Vitriol.

Emulsions also of the four greater cold Seeds, with white Popies do a great
deal of good. After the Hemorrhagy is quite stopped, you must proceed, according
to the method prescribed in the Smallpox.

The looseness in Children must be permitted in the Flux-Pox, because it
evacuates the morbisick matter.

At last when the Pustles are crusty and hard, anoint the face often with Oil
of Sweet-Almonds.

Note, if in the distinct Smallpox, the Face does not swell, you must give an
Anodyne presently: But if the Patient be light headed, and very Sick, and makes
water often, but little at a time, he can be relieved no other way, death being
near at hand, than by giving Narcoticks freely, or by taking away a large
quantity of Blood, and exposing the Body to the Air: But I would not be so
understood here, as if in every frenzy coming upon the Smallpox, there being
no symptom more frequent, that I should advise bleeding presently, but only in
that which therefore happens, because the Face does not swell in the distinct
kind, tho there be a great number of Pustles.

Note also, for a suppression of Urine, which sometimes a^flicts young and
brisk people, nothing does so well as taking the sick out of Bed, and after he
has walked twice or thrice cross the room, by the assistance of the by
standers, he will presently make water freely, and be much relieved thereby.

Note, the symptoms arising from catching cold, or by evacuations unduly used,
whereby the Smallpox are struk in, must be removed by Cordials, and an
agreeble Regimen: But they must not be continued after the symptoms are gone
off, the chief of these are flatting of the Pustles, and a looseness in the
distinct Smallpox; for in the Flux a depression of the Pustles is natural, nor
is a looseness dangerous in Children: In both these cases, a Cordial Portion
made of distilled Waters, Diacordium liquid Laudanum, and the like, is proper,
not only to remove these symptoms, but also at any time of the Disease, if the
Sick complains of a pain at the Heart, or of Sickness: But to speak the truth,
symptoms of this kind are very rare compared with those that owe their original
to the other extreme, which is more fatal, tho less blamed.

When the Patient is mending, and and the Pustles are falling off, after he has
eat meat a few days, namely, about the 21st, or 22d day, I think he ought to be
blooded, if the Disease has been violent, and after bleeding, he must be purged
three or four times.

CHAP. V. Of the Meassels.
THis Disease chiefly invads Infants and all those that are together in the
same house: it begins with shaking and shivering* and with an inequality of
heat and cold, which mutually expel one another the first day: the second day
it ends in a perfect Fever with violent Sickness, Drowth, and want of Appetite,
the Tongue is white, but not dry; there is a tickling Cough, with a heaviness
of the Head and Eyes accompnied with perpetual drowsiness, and for the most
part an humor distills from the Eyes and Nose; and this effusion of Tears is a
certain sign of the approaching Measles, to which this is to be added, no less
certain, viz. that tho this disease shows it self most commonly in the Face,
after the manner of little swellings in the Skin, yet in the Breast, rather red
Spots than swellings are perceived, arising no higher than the superficies of
the Skin: The Patient sneezes as if he had taken cold, and the eyelids swell a
little before the eruption; he vomits, but is oftener troubled with a looseness
with greenish stools; but this chiefly happens to Children, that are breeding
their teeth, and they are frowarder in this Disease, than they are commonly
wont to be: The symptoms increase till the fourth day, at which time generally
(tho sometimes they are deferred) little red spots like fleabites begin to come
out about the Head, and other parts of the Face and being increased in number
and magnitude branch into one another, and so paint the Face with large red
spots of various figures, which are occasioned by little red wheals, not far
distant one from another, that are elevated a little above the Superficies of
the Skin, and their Protuberancies may be perceived by a gentle touch, tho they
can scarce be seen: These spots spread themselves by degrees from the Face,
which at first they only possessed, to the Breast, Belly, Thighs, and Legs: but
they affect the Trunk and Members with redness only, without any sensible
inequality of the skin: The symptoms of the Measles do not abate by the
eruption, the Cough and Fever increase, with difficulty of breathing, weakness
of the Eyes, and the defluxion on them, and the drowsiness, and want of
Appetite continue the same as before: On the sixth day, or there about, the
skin breaking, and the Pustles drying off, the forehead and Face grow rough;
and at that time the spots in other parts of the body are very large and very
red: About the eight day, the spots in the Face vanish, and are scarce
perceived in the rest of the body* but on the ninth day, they totally
disappear, and as we said, the Measles most commonly vanish on the eighth day*
at which time the vulgar, being deceived by reckoning upon the time, the
Smallpox used to last, affirm they are struck in, tho they have really
finished their Course, and they think that the symptoms, which come upon their
going off, are occasioned by their being struc^ in so soon; for the Fever, and
difficulty of breathing are increased at that time, and the Cough is more
vexatious, so that the Patient cannot sleep night nor day: Children are chiefly
subject to these ill symptoms, which appear now at the going off of the
Measles, by reason of two hot a Regimen, ^r hot Medicines, that were used to
^orce them out, and by this means ^hey are cast into a Peripneumonia, which
destroys more than the Smallpox; and yet the Measles are not at all
dangenerous, if they are skillfully managed: Among the rest of the ill
symptoms, ^ looseness often happens, which either presently succeeds the
Disease, or continues many Weeks after it, and all its symptoms are gone off,
not without great danger to the Patient; and sometimes after a very hot
Regimen, the Measles are first lived, and afterward black, ^ut this only
happens to grown people, and they are utterly lost, when the blackness first
appears, unless they are presently relieved by bleeding and a more temperate
Regimen.

As the Measles are much of the same nature with the Smallpox, so is the
method of cure much the same, hot Medicines, and a hot Regimen are very
dangerous, how frequently soever they are ^sed by ignorant Nurses to drive the
Disease from the Heart: The Patient must be kept in his Bed only two or three
days after the eruption, that the blood may gently breath cut according to his
own genius through the Pores of the Skin, the inflamed Particles, which offend it;
he must have no more Clothes nor Fire, than he is wont to have when he is well.
I forbid all flesh, and allo^ Oat-meal and Early-broaths and the like and
sometimes a roasted Apple* hi^ drink must be either Small-beer, or Milk boiled
with treble the quantity of Water. I oftentimes mitigated the Cough which
almost continually accompanies this Disease, with a draught of some pectoral
decoction, or with a Linct^^ fitted for the purpose; but above all the rest I
took care to give Diacodium every night through the whole course of the Disease.
For instance,

Take of the Pectoral Decoction, one pi^ and an half, of Syrup of Violets, and
Maidenhair, each one Ounce and a^ half; mingle them and make an Apozem, take
three or four Ounces three or four times a day.

Take of Oil of Sweet-Almonds, two Ounces, of Syrup of Violets and Maidenhair,
each one Ounce, (...) a sufficient quantity; (...) them and make a (...) us,
let the Sick (...) often of it* especially when his Cough troubles him.

^ke of Black-Cherry-water three Ounces, of Diacodium one O^nce; mingle them
for a Draught to be taken every night: But if the Patient be an Infant, the
Dose of the Pectorals, and of the Narcotick is to be lessened with respect to
the Age.

But if by means of two hot Cordials, ^d too hot a Regimen, the Patient be
danger of his life, after the Measles off, which is very frequent, by rea^ of
the violence of the Fever, and fficulty of breathing, and other accints, that
use to afflict those, that ^e a Peripneumonia, I have bled the ^allest Infants
in the Arm, and have ^en away that quantity of Blood, which ^ir Age and
strength indicated with ve^ great success, and sometimes when the ^ease has
been obstinate, I have not fear^ to repeat bleeding; and truly it is not few
Children that have been at the ^nt of Death, by reason of this symp^n, whom by
God's blessing I have ^ed by bleeding, nor have I found as ^, any other certain
way to vanquish This happens to them, after the ^asles go off, and is so very
fatal, that may well be counted the chief Minister of Death, destroying even
more the the Smallpox: And the loosne^ which, as we said, follows the Measles
is also cured by bleeding; for wherea it ows its rise to vapors of inflame^
blood rushing in upon the Guts, (which is also common in a Plurisie,
Peripneumonia, and other Diseases, that are occasioned by an Inflammation)
whereby they ar^ stimulated to excretion; it is bleedi^ alone that gives
relief, by causing a revulsion of these sharp humors, and b^ reducing the
Blood to a due temper.

Nor is there any reason, why any on^ should wonder, says Sydenham, that bleed
young Children, whereas, for what I have hitherto observed, says he^ it may be
as safely performed on them as on the adult: And truly it is so necessary, that
we can neither cure the symptom above mentioned, nor some other that happen to
Children without it. For instance, by what means can w^ deliver those, that are
breeding Tee^ from Convulsions, which seize them i^ the ninth and tenth month,
with a swelling and pain of the Gums, whereby the Nerves are oppressed and
enraged, an^ from whence also, these Paroxysms arise but by bleeding, which
alone is much to (...) preferred in this case, before the most ^elebrated
specificks whatever, that are ^et known, whereof some do hurt by their
adventitious heat, and whilst they are ^hought to Cure the Disease by a certain
^ccult faculty they promote it by their ^anifest heat, and kill the patient,
not ^o mention at present, that wonderful ^elief which bleeding gives in the
hoop^g Cough, wherein it far surpasses all ^ectoral Medicines whatever.

CHAP. VI. Of Scabs and Ulcers from Milk.
OF all the particular diseases of the parts of the humane body, that are
proper to, and familiar with Children, if we begin with the Head, and so
proceed to all parts of the body, these Scabs and Ulcers are first to be
considered; they come at the time when the Child sucks, and perpetually emit a
Sanies, or purulent matter. The Scabs are white, but the Ulcers are of another
color: The Scabs are also all over the body as well as in the Face, whereas
the Ulcers are chiefly in the Head: But because the causes of them do not much
differ, and the method of cure is the same, we will treat of them together in
this Chapter: they arise from excrementious humors which are serous, and
accid, and they occasion itching: These humors are collected partly in the
Womb, and they arise partly from a fault in the Mothers or Nurses milk, and
afterward are cast out by nature upon the habit of the body: It is commonly
held that these Ulcers keep Children in health, and not without reason; for by
this means nature expels the vicious humors from the inner parts of the body
to the habit of it, and if they vanish, Children are subject to Fevers and
other Diseases, and Hippocrates says, that if there be Ulcers in the Head,
about the Ears, in the Face, or in any other part of the body, Children will be
free from fits.

These Scabs generally go off of themselves in time, but if they continue long,
^ Tinea is occasioned, and the hairs fall off, and it is to be feared, that
these Ulcers may foul the Skull, if the matter be very filthy; for it has been
observed, that the Skull has been so corrupted by these Ulcers, that it has
fallen off, and the Meninges have appeared.

But when there is no danger to be feared, especially when the Face is not
deformed, nor the Eyes hurt, the Ulcers ought to be left to themselves, yea we
ought to endeavor that the other matter be expel d, and if the Ulcers vanish,
and the Child fall sick upon it, we must give Fumitory, Scabious,
Carduus-Benedictus, Hartshorn, or the like to drive the humor out again, and
cooling and astringent things, which repel the matter must not be used: But the
Nurse in the mean while ought to observe a good Diet, and to abstain from Salt
and acid things, and all things that generate ill juries, as* Onions, Garlic,
Radish, Pulse, salted Meat, and the like; and if her body be foul, the vicious
humors must be purged off; for otherwise the Child will be prejudiced, and the
Disease increased: but if the ill humors are evacuated, these Ulcers will soon
go off; wherefore these humors should be altered and prepared with Medicines
made of Borrage, Bugloss, Fumitory, Succory, Hops, the roots of Polypody, sharp
pointed Docks, and afterward they must be purged off with the leaves of Senna*
Epithymum, Rhubarb, Black Hellebore, or with Diacatholicon, tryphera, Per^^ca,
or the like; and afterward you must give such things as strengthen the
Viscera* and attemperate and expel the other humors. As,

Take of the Conserves of Borrage, Bugloss, Violets, Fumitory, and Succory,
each (...) Ounce, of the candid roots of Succory and of the bark of Citron
candied, ^cah half an Ounce, of the Sp^cies Diarrhodon, Abatis, Diamargarit
frigid: Hartshorn prepared, each one Scruple, with a sufficient quantity of
Syrup of Gilliflowers make an Electuary. Or,

Take of Hartshorn prepared two Drams, of Magistery of Goral, one Dram, of the
Species Diamargarit, Frigid, half a Dram; make a Powder, whereof give the Nurse
daily half a Dram, or a Dram.

^ome of these Medicines* may be also given to the Children, as Syrup of
Borrage, Fumitory, Polypody, and Hops, and the Child's Body may be evacuated,
respect being had to its age, with Glisters, with Manna, or laxative raisins or
the like.

But if the Disease continue long, and here is danger that great putrefaction
^ill arise under the Scab, and so foul he Skull, we must use Topics, and first
he head must be washed with a Deoction of Mallows and Barley, or ^ith a
Decoction the roots of sharp ^ointed Doke, the leaves of a Mallows, he greater
Celandine Wormwood, the Seeds of Fenugreek, Vetches, Lupines, and Beans: If you
would have it abstersive, you must boil the Herbs in Wine, or you may make a
Lotion with roots of Marshmallows boiled in child's urine alone, or mixed with
Barley-water, afterward anoint the part with the Oil of Roses, and
Bitter-Almonds mixed with a little Lytharge: Or,

Take of the Ashes of Myrtles, and Nutshells, each one Dram, of Tutty one Dram
and an half, of old Butter washed in Rosewater one Ounce; mingle them. Or,

Take of the juice Beets, of greater Celendine, each one Ounce, Hogs-lard two
Ounces, Sulphur, one Dram, mix them. Or,

Take of Lytharge moistened with Oil of Roses, one Ounce, Ceruss half a Dram,
Aloes and Frankencense, each one Dram and an half, Myrrh on Dram, Oils of Roses
and Rue, each a sufficient quantity; mix them in a Mortar. The following is
stronger.

Take of the powder of Red-roses, of the roots of Briony, Pidgeons-dung,
Verdegrease, and Sulphur, each two Drams, Oils of Junipir, and Wall-flowers,
each a sufficient quantity, mix them in a Mortar, and anoint the part with it
every other day: Or,

Take of Cerass and Lytharge, each two Drams, Balaustins, and Agarick, each one
Dram, with Oil of Roses, and a little Vinegar, make an Ointment: Or having
rubbed the affected part with soft Soap, wash it off with a proper decoction.

If the Skull be hurt by the Ulcers, the Scab must be first taken off, and
mollified with Mallows and Violets boiled in May Butter, or in Lard: Afterward
the Ulcer must be washed and dried with a Lee made of the ashes of the Vine
Beetch, and Ash, ^a little Butter being added to it; when the Skull appears you
must apply Honey of Roses mixed with spirit of Wine; afterward you mnst apply
the powder of the roots of Birthwort, and Peruvian Balsam, or you may ad
Turpentine washed in Tobaccowater.

CHAP. VII. Of a Tinea.
IF the Ulcers continue long, or are ill cured, they turu to a Tinea, viz.
crusty and fetid Ulcers of the Head, corroding the skin: It is properly
reckoned amongst the dieases of Children, tho the adult have it too; for tho
grown people are sometimes afflicted with this disease, yet it has its
beginning in their Infancy, it is called Tinea from the Moths that spoil
Clothes; because these Ulcers corrode the skin as Moths do Clothes: It differs
from Scabs, and the Ulcers treated of in the foregoing Chapter, by being dry
and crusty, whereas they are moist and have always an humor flowing from them,
and they sometimes possess other parts of the body as well as the Head, but
this only the Head: The cause of it is a Salt and acid humor degenerating to
melancholy, taking its rise from the Mothers blood, wherewith the Child was
nourished, or from the ill milk of the Nurse, or Mother* and by progress of
time, and the long continuance of the disease, and neglignce, (for it most
commonly befalls poor peoples Children) it turns to this disease. Moreover it
is easily imparted to Infants, when the cap of that which has it, is put upon
another infant: This disease is not always the same, for sometimes it is scaly,
sometimes viscous.

This disease plainly appears to sight and is commonly known, for some crusty
and dry Ulcers are seen upon the Head, sometimes they are green, sometimes
yellow, and sometimes of an ash color, scarce any thing flows out of them, and
that which does is very fetid.

It is very difficult to cure; that which is new, and of a yellow color, and a
little moist is easiest cured: But that which is old, ^uite dry, of an
ash color or black, is very hard to cure: If it seiz a Child in its infancy,
it can scarce be cured till the Child come to an age fit to bear the Medicines
the Disease requires, and the severity of the Cure* and when it is cured, Hair
seldom grows upon the place, especially if the skin be hard and testatious, and
does not look red when it is rubbed: but if the skin be soft, and looks red
upon rubbing, there is hopes hair may ow again, tho not without difficulty.

The indications are the same with over Ulcers, namely magnitude lessen*
requires Medicines that in^arn, the lution of the continuity requires things
^at conglutinate; but we cannot satisfy hese indications, unless the corroding
humor be taken off, and this must be done by strong cleansing Medicines, that
you may go to the root of the disease, and therefore the crust must be first
taken off by such things as cleanse and corrode: And because the humors are
dry and adust, and the skin is thereby dried and thickened, moistning things
must be also used, to loosen and open the pores of the skin.

But because tender Infants cannot bear these Medicines, lest the disease take
too deep root, you must in the mean while apply to the ulcers leaves of Cabbage
or Beet, greased with Butter or Lard, to mollify and to make a passage for the
matter.

Take of the juice of Fumatory, Cabbage, sharp pointed Dock, Elecampane, each
one Ounce and an half, of Litharge half an Ounce, with a sufficient quantity of
Lard, Oil of Rue, and Wax, make a foft Ointment: Or,

Take of the shells of green Wallnuts burnt a sufficient quantity, a little
Turpentine, and with Oil of Eggs make a Liniment.

But when the Child is arrived at such an age, as to be able to bear strong
Medicines, and the severity of the cure, you must first sufficiently evacuate
the body with Senna, Rubarb, Agarick, or the like, and then you must take off
the crust with things that cleanse strongly: As,

Take of Sulphur two Drams, of Mustard half a Dram, Staves-Acre, of the roots
of Briony, each one Dram, of the sharpest Vinegar, one Ounce, of Turpentine
half an ounce, with a sufficient quantity of Bears fat, make a Liniment. Or,

Take Watercresses, and beat them, and fry them with Hogslard, and apply them
in stead of a Cataplasm to the Head, let it continue on twenty four hours, to
make the crust fall off, and if you continue the use of it, it will cure the
disease. The scaby crust being taken off, you must pull out the Hairs by the
roots; for the venomous matter sticks most to them, and this may be done by
Nippers, or by Medicines that take off the Hair: A pitch Cap is ordinarily used
for this purpose, the which they apply either to the whole Head, or only to the
part where the Ulcers are; they keep it on some days, and afterward pull it
off with the Hairs with it. Or,

Take of fine Wheaten-flower two ounces, of Rosin half an ounce, boil them in
water to the form of a Pultis, spread it upon strong linen cloth, and apply
it to the S^abs, let it lie on a night and a day, then pull it off.

Afterward emolliment things must be used, which may correct the dry
intemperies of the skin, and open the pores, and drive away the Excrements that
lie deep in the skin: As,

Take of the roots of Marsh-mallow, sharp pointed Docks, and White Lillies,
each one ounce, of Mallows Fumitory, and Sage, each two handfulls, boil them in
a Lee, and add to it a little Vinegar, and wash the Head with it every day
twice. Afterward.

Take of the roots of Briony, sharp pointed Dock, Elecampane, each one ounce,
of t e leaves of Fumitory, greater Celandine, and Scabious, each two handfulls,
of the flowers of Camomile and Melilot, each one handful, boy them in Lee, and
wash, or foment the head with it twice every day, afterward with a course
Cloth, or with the oil of Staves-acre, or radish, or with the juice of Onions,
rub the Head till it looks red, that the vicious humors that lie deep may be
drawn out: Or,

Take of live Sulphur, one ounce, of White Hellebore, Staves-arce, each two
Drams, of Lard a sufficient quantity; mingle them* Or,

Take of both the Hellebores, Sulphur, Vitriol, quick Lime, Allom, Galls, each
half a Dram, of Verdigrease, two ^rams, with a sufficient quantity of liquid
Pitch and Wax, make a Cerate: Or,

Take of burnt Allom, and Vitriol, on ounce and an half, of round Birthwort,
and Verdegrease, each two Drams of Ship-Pitch one ounce, of Horse Fat, one
ounce and an half, of old Butter half a Pound, mix them.

Some use Arsenick, Aurepigmentum, Quicksilver and the like: but because the
asslicted part is so near the Brain, some say these things ought not to be
used, lest a venomous quality should be imparted to the Brain, and so the
Patient should be destroyed; but Quicksilver is much safer than Arsnick, and
therefore being killed with fasting spitle, it may be mixed with the Medicines
above mentioned.

The Children so affected must forbear Salt and acid Meats, Garlic, Onions,
Pease, Cabbage, Pork, and other things that breed ill juice.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Lousy Disease.
THO grown people, if they live nastily and wear foul Clothes, and do not
change often their Woolen, as well as their Linen, are subject to lice, yet
this nasty disease is most familier to Children, nor can Gentlemen's Children be
free from them, for they breed in their Heads: They are occasioned by
putrefaction: It is a troublesome and nasty disease, and occasions great
itching, and is dangerous, if they possess the whole body; for some have died
of them.

Lice forsake people when they are a dying, and run away in Troops; they being
offended with the ill vapors that arise from dying bodies.

To prevent Lice, Children must be kept clean, and have an orderly diet, They
must abstain from meats of ill juice, especially Figs: But if Lice are
generated, they must be removed by universal remedies, if their be occasion;
but first such external Medicines must be used, as take of the matter that
breed Lice, and kill them when they are bred, as Staves-acre, Wormwood,
Scordium, Rue, the leaves of Pine, and Cypress, the roots of Elecampane, Long
Birthwort, Lupins, the Seeds of Nettles, Black Hellebore, Coloquintida,
Sulpher, Bulls-Gall, Soap* Seawater, of all which Lotions or Liniments may be
made. As,

Take of long Birthwort and Lupins, of the leaves of Pine and Cypress, each
equal parts, boil them for a Lotion to the Head. Or,

Take of the roots of Elecampane two Ounces, of Briony half an Ounce, of Beets,
Mercury and Soapwort, each one handful, of Lupins one Ounce, Nitre, half an
Ounce, boil them for a Lotion for the Head.

Or you may make perfumed Washballs for the same pupose.

Take of Venice Soap six Ounces, of the powder of Cinnamon, half an Ounce, of
Oil of Aniseeds one Dram, of Musk grains five; make Balls.

After washing the Head, anoint it with such an ointment as Follows.

Take of the powder of Staves-aere three Drams, of meal of Lupins half an
ounce, of white Agarick three Drams, of live Sulphur two Drams, of the Gall of
an Ox half an ounce, with a sufficient quantity of Oil of Wormwood, make a
Linement. Or,

Take of Staves-acre one ounce, of Wormwood and Rue, each half an ounce, of
Sulphur, and Nitre, each two Drams, make a powder, and with Oil of Laurel make
an ointment.

The stronger Medicines are white Hellebore, Quicksilver killed with fasting
Spitle. Some use Arsnick, but this is dangerous. As,

Take of the Seeds of Staves-acre one ounce, white Hellebore three Drams, of
Quicksilver killed with fasting Spitle two Drams, with Lard and Oil of Laurel,
make an ointment.

But some think that Quick-si^ver ought not to be used to tender Infants,
because it may occasion ill symptoms, besides there are other more gentle
Medicines that are sufficient to Cure this Disease.

CHAP. IX. Of an Hydrocephalus, and Inflation of the Head.
AN Hydrocephalus is a watery Tumor of the whole Head, it sometimes seises
grown persons, of which Carolus Piso has two observations; but it most
freequently befalls Infants, their heads being so soft, as that they may be
easily extended. Some Children have had this Disease in the Womb, but many have
been afflicted with it after the birth. Rhasis says he saw a Child, whose head
was so increased in length and breadth, that the body was not able to bear it.
Pareus says he saw four such Children, and cured them.

If the water be contained within the Skull, it is much more difficult to cure
than when without, and is most commonly deadly: The indication is to evacuat
the waters, and to dry them up* This may be done by medicines applied to the
Head, Ears and Nostrils.

Take Snails in their Shells number Thirty, of Marjoram and Mugwort, each one
handful, and beat them, and add to them one scruple of Camphor, and half a dram
of Saffron with oil of Camomile make a Cataplasm, and inject the following
water into their Nostrils.

Take of Nutmegs, Cloves, and Cubebs, each one scruple, of common sweet
smelling Flag, and of the bark of Frankincense, each half a Dram, of the water
of Marjoram, three ounces, mingle them.

Or with the balsom of Marjoram, Cloves, and Nutmegs, Musk, and Ambre the
Nostrils may be anointed; and hot Oils may be injected into the Ears.

But if the water be not carried off in this manner within twenty days,
incision must be attempted, and the brain must be opened, and the water
extracted, but by degrees, and by turns, lest the Child's strength be too much
djected, and care must be taken, that the cold air does not hurt the Brain.

Authors make mention of another Tumor in the head, which they call inflation,
which is generated by wind contained under the skin of the head, or membranes
of the brain, and so it distends the head, and increases the bulk of it; but
wind alone without water can scarce be collected in so great a quantity in this
cold part of the body, as to make an inflammation here, but if water be
collected here, it is not impossible but some of it may turn to wind; and if so
rarifying and discussing Medicines must be applied to the head, as Oils of Rue
and Camomile, the Seed of Rue, Anise, and the like.

CHAP. X. Of a Siriasis.
THis disease is known by a heat in the forepart of the head, and by the cavity
in it, by the hollowness of the Eyes, redness of the Face, dryness of the body,
want of Appetite, and Sleep; this disease is dangerous and most commonly
deadly, according to the opinion of the women, and they suppose any disease
will be so, if this bone, or the membrane subside, and make a hollowness; and
indeed the Children so affected generally dye in three days, and many apply the
50 th Aphorism of the 7 th Section of Hyppocrates to this disease, quibus
cerebrum sideratum est, intra tres dies interiunt, si vero hos superaverint,
sani fiunt. Because there is a hot intemperies with matter, it indicats
refrigeration; but the humor that flies to the part discussion: But to prevent
the flowing of more matter, it is proper to purge, which may be conveniently
done by a Glister, or by Syrup of Roses solutive, or by Syrup of Violets.
Cooling things may be prepared of the juice of Lettice, Gourds, or Melons, or a
fresh Gourd may be cut in slices and applied: but you must take notice in the
use of these things, that they must be applied actually cold, and when they
grow hot, they must be renewed: but at the same time care must be taken, that
the brain which is but just under, and only covered with skin and membranes, be
not hurt by the too great use of cooling things; therefore it is safest to
anoint the part with Oil of Roses, Or,

Take of oil of Roses half an ounce, Populeon Ointment, two Drams, the white of
one Egg of the emulsion of Poppy seeds made in rose water, two drams, mingle
them.

When the fluxion is over, and the inflammation is stopped, things that discuss
made of Cammomile, Dill and the like must be used: As,

Take of Camomile, one ounce and an half, of Dill half an on ounce, the yelk of
an Egg; mingle them.

When the fluxion is over, and the inflammation is stopped, things that discuss
made of Cammomile, Dill and the like must be used: As,

Take of oil of Camomile, one ounce and an half, oil of Dill half an ounce, the
yelk of one Egg; mingle them.

Take of the tops of Dill, half an handful, of the Flowers of Camomile, one
Pugil; boil them in water; add oil of Camomile one ounce; mingle them.

Or you may apply the waters of Camomile or Dill. The Nurse must observe a good
diet, whereby the heat of the Milk may be attemperated; therefore let her use
cooling diet, as a Ptisan of barley, an Emulsion of the greater cold Seeds,
Poppy, Lettice, Endive, she must wholly abstain from wine, and strong beer, and
she must either drink water, or small-beer: The Child must be kept in a cool
air, and the Nurse avoid all great commotions of the body and mind, especially
anger.

CHAP. XI. Of Frights in Sleep.
TO come now to the symptoms of the animal faculty, in the common sense, and
imagination two symptoms happen, viz. Frights in sleep, and great watchings:
and first as to frights in sleep, they are nothing but sleep disturbed by
terrible dreams, according to Hippocrates, parvis and nuper natis puerulis
accidunt pavo res inter dormiendum. Tho Aristotle says that Children do not
dream before they are four years old: but experience teaches us otherwise; for
it appears plainly, by their laughing and frights in sleep.

The cause of frights are impure vapors mingled with the animal Spirits, that
disturb them, and represent to the imagination terrible Phantasms: These
vapors arise from the Stomach, and are caused by ill concoction, and therefore
this disease chiefly happens to such Children, as suck greedily, and more than
the Stomach can Concoct, upon which account the milk corrupts, and raises
vapors to the brain, that disturb the animal spirits, and it is not absurd to
think that these vapors are sent to the head by the veins as well as by the
Oesophagus: For as in the Nightmare, that is generated by a too great quantity
of food, affording blood filled with gross wind, thick vapors ascend through the
vessels to the brain, and occasion this disorder; so if Infants fill their
Stomach with too much food, blood also full of gross vapors may be generated,
which being elevated to the brain occasion this disease. These frights also
happen in Fevers, and in the Smallpox, and Measles, and they also sometimes
come from Worms.

This disease is easily known by the standers by; for the Children groan and
shake in their sleep, and cry out of a sudden, and a hot and fetid vapor
exhals from their mouth most commonly.

This disorder must not be contemned, for it is often the forerunner of sits,
wherefore you must endeavor to remedy it in time, by removing the vicious
humors from the stomach, that corrupt the meat: In order to which, the Nurse
ought to be healthy, and to eat moderately of meats of good juice, and to
abstain from all, that yield an ill nourishment, that the milk which the Infant
sucks may be good: The Infant also ought to suck sparingly, that the Stomach be
not burdened, nor must the Infant after sucking or feeding be presently laid
asleep, but must be kept up a while, that the meat may descend to the bottom of
the Stomach, and be the easier concocted, and that the corrupt meat may be
removed from the Stomach, or vomited up: Oil of Sweet-Almonds may be given to
the Child, or you may give a spoonful or two of Honey of Roses solutive, to
carry off the vicious humors by stool.

The cause of the disease being taken off, the Stomach must be strengthened,
which may conveniently be done with magistery of Coral, and consection of
Hyacinth given in milk, and you may anoint the Stomach with the Oils of
Wormwood, Mint, Mastick, or Nutmegs: And before sleep it is good to give the
Child a Lozenge of Diamosch dissolved in Milk: If this symptom proceed from a
Fever, you must take care of that, if from Worms proper remedies must be used.

Some in this case use Amulets, as Coral, or the tooth of a Wolf hung about the
neck.

CHAP. XII. Of Watchings.
ALL the while the Child is in the Womb, it is almost perpetually asleep, and
for some times after it is born, if it be well, it is always almost asleep, for
the brain is yet very moist, and abounds with a great deal of humedity,
therefore when it watches much, and cannot be brought to rest, either by
rocking, singing, or giving the breast, nor by any other way, it is to be
reckoned of a sickly constitution. This Disease is very dangerous, and
especially to children, because it is so contrary to the nature of them, and
occasions, Convulsions, Fevers, and Catarrhs, and other Diseases.

If those acid Vapors that disturb sleep, and occasion watchings proceed from
the corruption and fault of the milk, care must be taken for a Remedy.

If a Fever, or some pain be the cause, it must be removed and the child must
be cleansed, but Medicines that provoke sleep are not so safely used in
Children, as in grown-persons. Some Nurses indeed are wont to give Infants at
bed time Sy^up of Poppies, or the like, but this is very injurious to them; but
if there be occasion, the Nurse ought rather to take things that cause sleep
moderately, as sweet Almonds, Lettice, the seeds of white Poppie* and the like.
As to externals, the feet may be washed with a Decoction of the tops of Dill,
of the flowers of Camomile, and the heads of Poppies, and it is very good to
anoint the soles of the feet with the marrow of Stag's bones, but strong
Narcoticks must not be applied to the head; for the moist and weak brains of
Infants will be thereby offended. It is safest to use fresh oil of Dill for
anointing the Temples, or you may anoint them with the oil of Roses mixed with
a little oil of Nutmegs, or you may apply a Cataplasm made of the seeds of
white Poppies, a little Saffron, and Woman's milk, and the ^ostrils may be
anointed with a little ^yl of Violets; if the brain be dry, a ^ag dipped in
Violet, or Lettice water, and pressed out, may be applied to the head.

CHAP. XIII. Of Childrens Convulsions.
CHildrens Convulsions are so frequent that they are almost the only species of
Convulsions; they are chiefly subject to them in the first^ months, and at the
time they breed their Teeth, but they also happen at other times, and proceed
from other causes, in such as are disposed to them. Sometimes they do not come
presently after the Birth, but lie hid until the breeding of Teeth, or not till
a great while after, and take their rise from other evident causes, as from an
unhealthy, or big bellied Nurse, from milk coagulated, or corrupted in the
Stomach, from a Feverish disposition, from Ulcers or Scabs in the head, or
other parts, suddenly disappearing, from changes of the air, or from the
conjunction, or opposite aspects of the Sun and Moon. We must endeavor to
prevent these Convulsions in Children and Infants, o^ to cure them, when they
are come; for if the former Children of the same Parents have been subject to
Convulsive Fits, this Disease ought to be prevented by the early use of
Remedies, in such as are born after. To this end it is customary to give to
newborn Babes, as soon as they begin to breath, some Medicine proper for
Convulsions, as some drops of pure honey, a Spoonful of Canary Wine, sweetened
with Sugar, oil of swee^ Almonds fresh drawn, a drop of oil of Ambre, or half a
Spoonful of Epileptick water; besides these things used at first, which
certainly do good, some other Remedies ought to be administered. For instance,
give a Spoonful twice a day of the following Liquor.

Take of the waters of Black Cherries and Rue, each one ounce and an half, of
Langiuses, Epileptick water, one ounce, of Syrup of Coral, six drams, of
prepared Pearl fifteen grains; mingle them in the Vi^l.

The third or fourth day after the Birth, make an Issue in the neck, and if the
countenance be florid, evacuate by bleeding an ounce and an half, or two ounces
of blood from the ingular Vein: But take care that too much blood do not flow
out in sleep. Rub gently the Temples with the following Linement.

Take of oil of Nutmegs by expression, two drams, of balsam of Copiaba, three
drams, of Ambar one scruple; mix them.

Hang round the neck the roots, and seeds of male Peony, and Elks-hoof sewed up
in a rag. Moreover Medicines proper for Convulsions must be given daily to the
Nurse. Let her take morning and evening a draught of Whey, wherein the roots of
male Peony, or the seeds of sweet Fennel have been boiled.

Take of the Conserves of the flowers of Bettony, Male Peony, and Rosemary
flowers each two ounces; of the roots and flowers of Male Peony, each two
drams; of red Coral prepared, and white Ambar, each one dram; of the the roots
of Angelica, and Zedoary prepared, each half a dram, with a suffient quantity
of Syrup of Peony. Make an electuary; let the Nurse take the quantity of a
Nutmeg of it morning and evening, and be very orderly in her diet.

But if the Infant be actually seized with Convulsions, you must apply a
Blister to the neck, or behind the ears, and if the Infant be of a hot
Constitution, Leaches must be applied to the jugular Veins, and Linements must
be used to the temples, nostrils and neck, and to the soles of the feet, and
glisters, which empty the belly plentifully, must be injected, and every sixth
or eighth hour, specific Remedies must be given.

Take of oil of Copaiba, and Castor, each two drams, of oil of Ambar, half a
dram; make a Liniment.

Apply to the soles of the feet the P^^ist^r with Euphorbium spread on Leather.

Take of prepared Pearl, of the Powder de Guttita, each one dram, mingle them
for twelve Papers, whereof let the Child take one morning and evening in a
Spoonful of the following julep, drinking after it one or two Spoonfulls.

Take of the waters of black Cherries, and of Lilly of the Valleys, each two
ounces; of Fennel water and Compound Peony water, each two drams; of Syrup of
red Poppies six drams.

Take of the powder of the seeds of Rue, of Castor, and Asasetida each a
sufficient quantity, mingle them, and tie it up in a rag sprinkled with
Vinegar, and put it often to the nostrils.

Vnzerus Commends much the gall of a sucking kitling, all the juice being taken
out out of the bladder, and mixed with a little water of Lime-flowers and given
to the Child; and an excellent Physician says, that he knew several Children
cured with this Remedy. When by reason of breeding Teeth difficultly
Convulsions happen, this symptom is secondary, and less dangerous, and
therefore does not require the first and chief work of healing; in this case we
are more solicitous to ease the pain, and to take off the Fever; and therefore
we order a thin cooling diet, and the eruption of the Teeth is to be
endeavored, either by rubbing, or cutting the Gums, and things that are
annodyne are to be applied to the swelld and pained parts, and blisters and
bleeding are to be used* often, and we ought to procure sleep, and to qualify
the fury of the blood: But in the mean time temperate Medicines for
Convulsions, and such as do the least stir the humors are to be used, and
blisters often do also give relief.

But Children are sometimes seized with Convulsions, from other occasions and
accidents; the cause most commonly of such, is either in the head or in the
bowels; when the former is suspected, as is wont to be known by the signs,
which show watery humors heapt up in the brain, the Medicines abovementioned
must be used. Moreover for those who bear purging well, a vomit, or gentle
purge must be prescribed, Wine and Oxymel of Squills, also Mercurius Dulcis
Rhubarb, and Rosin of Jalap are of good use. When the cause of the Convulsions
seems to be lodged in the bowels, or where Worms or sharp humors in the belly
are the cause; for Worms, a purge of Rhubarb or of Mercurius dulcis with the
rosin of Jalap, must be given, and the following Medicines are also of use.

Take of the roots of Virginia Snake-weed powdered, one dram; of Coral calcined
till it is white, half a dram; make a powder. The dose is half a scruple, or a
scruple twice a day for three days following, drinking upon it the d^^oction of
the roots of grass.

Take of Hiera Piera, and of Venice Treacle, eachone dram; make a plaster for
the (...)

If the Convulsions are thought to proceed from sharp humors, disturbing the
bowels and stomach, purging upward or downward is to be ordered by turns; to
this end a gentle vomit of Wine of Squills, or falt of vitriol is to be given,
if the Child is inclined to vomiting of its own accord.

Take of Syrup of Peony three ounces; Salt of vitriol two scruples, of Compound
Lavender-water one dram. Mingle them, give a Spoonful three or four times in
an hour, till the Child has once vomited, or went to stool once.

But if evacation downward seem most proper, give the infusion of Rhubarb, or
the powder of it, or Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, or Syrup of roses with
Agarick; and with these remedies, seasonably used, Convulsion fits have been
often cured in Children; and moreover Glisters are to be used frequently, and
external Medicines, namely Fomentations Linements, or Emplasters must be
applied to the belly.

Take of the leaves of Camomile cut small, two handfulls, put them into two
bags made of fine Cloth, or of Silk, which being dipped in hot milk, and pressed
out, are to be applied successively to the Belly.

CHAP. XIV. Of Squinting.
SQuinting belongs to animal Actions hurt, wherewith new born babes are seized.
This Disease is either natural, by reason of an ill conformation of the eye, or
is co tracted by custom, the Infant turning its eye often in the Cradle to a
Candle, or the light ill placed, or it is occasioned by a Disease, when after,
frequent sits, the muscles of the eyes are distorted.

If it be from the very birth, it is hardly cured, or when it proceeds from
sits; but if it arise from an ill custom, it may be cured, if it be taken in
time; but when it is let alone a long while, it is in a manner incurable.

It is cured by placing a Candle opposite to the part, whereunto the Eye is
preternaturally inclined, or fine Pictures or the like may be offered to the
sight in the same manner, and by constant and daily use, the eye may be reduced
to a right position, or a mask may be so made that the sight may be directed
right.

CHAP. XV. Of the Pain, Inflammation, Moisture, Ulcers and Worms of the Ears.
AMongst Childrens Diseases, Hippocrates reckons the moisture of the ears; for
the brain of Children being very moist, part of the humidity is sometimes
evacuated by the ears: And this is seldom done without an inflammation; for most
Commonly, if superfluous humors flow plentifully to the ears, an inflammation
is occasioned, and pain arises from thence, and when it is not discussed by
reason of the moisture of Childrens bodies, but turned to matter, afterward
blood, matter and senies flow, out, and sometimes Worms are bred in the ear.

These D^seases are not to be neglected, for the pain which is most commonly
joined with them, may kill a grown person in seven days, says Hippocrates, and
much easier a Child, or may occasion fits, or great watchings; besides because
Childrens ears are very moist, Worms are are apt to be generated in them, and
sometimes by a continual flux of humors, and by foul Ulcers, the bones of the
ear are at length corrupted, and if the Ulcer is not cured in time an incurable
deafness arises, and therefore the cure must be begun early. And first, if the
pain be very violent, care must be taken to quiet it; but Childrens bodies
cannot bear strong Medicines, it is sufficient for them, that their ears be
fomented with warm milk, with oil of Roses, or Violets, or with a decoction of
poppy heads, or you may put into the ear the white of an Egg with a little
Saffron.

And to cleanse the care from moisture it is good to use honey of Roses, or
water of honey which must be put into the ear with a tent; and if these things
are not sufficient, Allom diluted with Wine must be put into the ear with a
little soft wool it; is also good to put into the ear with soft wool the roots
of Orris, Myrrh, and Saffron, Nitre, Allom, and Saffron mixed with Wine and
Honey. Or,

Take of Virgin-honey half an ounce, of red Wine two ounces, of Allom, Saffron
and Nitre, each one scruple. Or the fresh oil of Hempseeds mixed with a little
Wine, may be dropped into the ear.

CHAP. XVI. Of Aphthae, Bladders of the Gums, and and an instamation of the
Almonds.
ULcers arise often in the mouths of Children, which are called Aphthae; they
are occasioned by ill milk, or by corruption of the stomach; for the internal
parts of the mouths of Children being very soft and tender, and unaccustomed to
meat in the Womb, if the milk be sharp or any otherwise faulty, their mouths
are soon Ulcerated, or if acid vapors arise from corrupted milk in the
stomach, their mouths may be easily Ulcerated this way; for the tunick of the
Jaws is common to the Osophagus, and so the faults of the stomach are easily
communicated to the jaws.

The bladders of the Gums are much the same with the Aphthae, and are also
occasioned by corrupted milk, and the cure is the same.

Take of Lentils excorticated, what quantity you please, powder them, and chew
them, and apply them to the Gums. Or,

Take of the flower of Millium, half an ounce, of Rose water, and Omphacine
oil, each a sufficient quantity; make a Linement.

Hippocrates reckons an inflammation of the Almonds amongst Childrens
distempers, they are most subject to it from the eleventh year of their age to
the thirteenth. As to the cure, you must endeavor to keep the belly open, if
there be occasion, you must give a Glister, and in the beginning repellents
must be used, afterward resolvents must be used with them at length resolvents
only in a manner. The part affected must be anointed with honey of Roses, Syrup
of dried Roses, Syrups of Myrtills, Pomgranats, or Diamoron, according as the
state of the Disease requires; and the neck must be anointed with the oils of
Almonds, Camomile, or St. John's wort. In some cases it is necessary to apply a
blister to the poll.

CHAP. XVII. Of breeding Teeth.
AMongst all the Diseases and Symptoms which are wont to happen to Children,
breeding of the Teeth is the most proper; for though many other Diseases are
familiar to Children, yet there are very few, that are unavoidable, excepting
the breeding of the Teeth. Although the breeding of Teeth be Natures work, yet by
reason of the Diseases and various Symptoms, which easily accompany it, it is
reckoned amongst Childrens Diseases. As soon as Children are born, they have
Teeth, but they lie in the gums: Yet some Children have been born with Teeth,
appearing as Pliny relates in his natural History of Marcus Curious, who was
therefore called Dentatus. But the Teeth most commonly do not come forth till
the seventh Month; first those that are called Incisores, afterward the Dog
Teeth, and at length the Grinders. There are many preternatural disorders, that
arise from the solution of continuity. Frst a great itching is perceived in the
Gu ns, afterward pricking as it were of needles, and this occasions great
pain* wachings, inflammations of the Gums, Fevers, Looseness, Convulsions, and
these commonly happen upon the coming forth of the Dog Teeth, commonly called
the Eye Teeth, and therefore it is commonly said, that Parents should not
reckon much upon their Childrens lives, till the Eye teeth are come forth. The
first Teeth fall away about the seventh year, and new ones come in their room,
without pain, because the Gums were perforated before.

Though Children cannot tell the pain they suffer in breeding Teeth, yet it may
be known, first by the time they use to come out in, which is about the seventh
month; and then because Children frequently put their fingers in their months
to assuage the pain; thirdly, because the Mother or the Nurses perceive they
squeeze the nipple harder than they used to do; fourthly, the Gums are white in
the place where the Teeth endeavor to come out, and sometimes at length
various ill Symptoms arise, as pains, watchings, Looseness, Fevers, and
Convulsions.

As to the progn^sticks, breeding of Teeth is often very dangerous, and many
Children dye of the Diseases and Symptoms that are occasioned thereby. Those
Children that have a Looseness in breeding of Teeth, are least subject to
Convulsions, and when an acute Fever happens, it most commonly prevents
Convulsions, because the matter occasioning Convulsions is carried off by the
Fever. Children breed their Teeth best in winter.

As to the cure, we must endeavor to ^oo^en and mollify the Gums, that the
Teeth may come out the easier, and we ought to use cooling t^ings to ease the
pain and inflammation: But they must be mixed with Emollients; therefore rub the
Gums with the finger dipped in honey, or with honey mixed with butter; or let the
child bite a Candle made of Virgin Wax, or anoint the Gums with a mucilage of
Quince-seed made in Mallow water, or rub the Gums with the brains of a Hare.

Foment the Jaws without with a decoction of Marsh mallow flowers of Camomile,
and Dill, or with the mucilage of the seeds of Quinces, and Marsh mallows mixed
with the yolk of an Egg, if the Gums are inflamed, the juice of Nightshade or
of Lettice must be added to the former things. The Nurse must observe a good
diet, rather cooling than hot, she must use Oatmeal and barley broaths, porched
Eggs, Prunes, Indive, Lettice, and the like; she must abstain from salt and
acid meats, and from Wine.

CHAP. XVIII. Of loosening the String of the Tongue, and of the Ranula under
the Tongue.
IT happens often in Infants, that the Tongue is bound so strait by the string,
that it cannot well or freely move and sometimes in the place where the bridle
of the Tongue is, a soft and white swelling appears, which they call Ranula.

The binding of the Tongue is most conveniently removed by Surgery; for though
Midwifes often break the string as soon as the Child is born, or cut it with a
groat, yet they often err in the operation, and do it many times when there is
no occasion, therefore it is much safer to use a skillful Surgeon; afterward
apply the following Linement.

Take of barley meal half an ounce, mingle it with a sufficient quantity of
Clarified honey, and over a gentle fire let all the humidity exhale, that it
may be reduced to a powder, and with honey of Roses make a Linement.

As to the Ranula under the Tongue; there are large and conspicuous Veins under
the Tongue, which are sometimes filled with ill blood; therefore if a
flegm^tick humor be gathered here, and sweats out thence, and sticks there
within the passage of the flesh, a tumor is occasioned by it and the blood
like a Fungus generated upon a Tree; and if it continue long and increase, it
hinders the speech; and therefore ought to be timely remedied; wherefore the
tumor is to be removed by the application of Salt and Frankincense mixed, or
with powder of Sage mixed with honey of Roses and a drop or two of spirit of
Vitriol. Or,

Take of Cuttle bone, Sal Gemma and Pepper, each one dram; of burnt sponge
three drams; make a powder, wherewith rub the tumor or with the foregoing
powder and honey make a Linement, and anoint the tumor with it, and apply
under the chin a Plaster made with equal parts of Goose-dung and honey boiled
in Wine to the consumption of the Wine.

CHAP. XIX. Of a Catarrh, Cough, and Difficulty of breaking.
CAtarrhs arise in Children from their natural constitution, and moist temper
of their brains, whereby many excrements are heapt up there; for too great a
quantity of milk burdening the stomach sends vapors to the head and sill the
brain, and Children being unaccustomed in the Womb too cold, the extreme
coldness of the air, or too much heat, or much Clothes upon their heads, pour
the matter upon the Nostrils Jaws, or Lungs, and if the excrementitious humors
cannot be evacuated by the Nostrils they fall upon the Aspera Arteria, and
cause a Cough; but if they fall upon the Bronchia of the Lungs, they cause
difficulty of breathing.

These Symptoms are easily discovered, but whether the humor be cold or hot,
may be known in the following manner: if the humor be hot, the Catarrh is
thin, the Children often sneeze, the face is florid, and the jaws look red, and
a hot vapor exhales from their mouths, and the Nurses perceive it when the
Children suck. If the humor be cold* it is thick, and the Children do not
sneeze, nor is there any redness in the face or jaws nor heat in their mouth.
But whether the difficulty of breathing arise from matter coming from the head
or from phlcgmatick blood, may be known as follows: If it come from the head,
there is a Catarrh, and also a Cough, and in breathing a noise is perceived,
the air not passing freely through the obstructed Bronchia: But if it be
occasioned by a phlegmatic humor arising from the hypochonders, there is no
Catarrh nor Cough, and the hypochonders appear inflated and tumid.

Catarrhs, Coughs, and difficulty of breathing are not to be neglected in
Children; for Coughs do not only occasion Watchings, and frequent Vomitings but
also ruptures; and Catarrhs occasion suffocations, and sometimes kill.

They are not easily cured, because children cannot bear all sorts of Remedies,
and besides they do not know how to spit up the matter.

We must principally endeavor, that the intempers which occasions the matter
be rectified, and the fluxion of the humor to the breast hindered. But because
children cannot take or bear many Medicines, and nature it, self without the
help of Medicines, does most commonly concoct the cause of the Catarrh, and so
stop it, if a good diet be observed; therefore great care must be taken that
neither the Child or Nurse commit any error in diet; wherefore the Infants
stomach must not be filled with milk, or any other meat, and the nurse must
abstain from Acid Salt, and acid things and all other things which send many
vapors to the head, and it is useful to give a Pectoral decoction to the nurse.

Take of figs and jujubs, each number ten, Sebestins number thirty, raisins
stoned, ten drams, Liquorish two drams, Maiden Hair, Hyssop and Violets, each
half an ounce; boil them in three pints of Fountain water to the Comsumption of
a third part.

Care must be taken to keep the belly loose with honey, Syrup of Roses,
Solutive, Cassia, Manna, or with Glisters* it is al^ convenient to give a
Spoonful of oil of sweet Almonds fresh drawn, and mixed with Sugar Candy; for
it loosens the belly, and eases the cough: or vomiting may be provoked by
putting a finger in the child's mouth: But you must take a special care to keep
the belly loose if difficulty of breathing arise from an repletion of the
stomach, or Hypochondres, then it is also proper to give flax-seed with honey,
and a little cummin-seed; afterward give the juice of Fennel with milk or
Syrup of Jujubes and Maidenhair, and if the matter be thick, Syrup of Hyssop,
or an emulsion of sweet Almonds and Pine Nuts made in Scabious water: or some
other convenient water, and sweetened with Sugar Candy; or a Linctus may be
made of the species Diaireos, or Diatragacanth: Frigid, Penidiat Sugar, and
with Syrup of Jujubes, or with honey, oil of sweet Almonds, and the juice of
Liquorish and Fennel.

But if the Catarrh be hot, an emulsion of the four greater cold seeds may be
prepared in Mallow-water, and the species of Diatragacanth frigid, may be added
to it; and to dry up the Matter of the Catarrh, hot linen stups sprinkled with
red Roses and Frankincense may be applied outwardly, and the Childrens feet may
be washed with Beer, wherein Cephalic Herbs have been boiled; afterward
anoint the soles of the Feet with Deers-suet, or the O^l of Laurel.

And because the Catarrh sometimes falls upon the Jaws and Aspera Arteria,
because the Nostrils are stopped, anoint them with Butter, or with the Oil of
Bitter, or sweet Almonds often in a day. Or,

Take of the Juice of Beets and Majoram,, each two drams, of Chickweed half an
ounce, of Oil of sweet Almonds one ounce, mingle them, and anoint the Nostrils
therewith.

Or, put up the Nostrils Butter to the bigness of a Pea; or you may apply
Marjoram to the Nostrils, that sneezing may be provoked, to evacuate through
the Nostrils the matter which flows upon the Aspera Arteria.

To conclude, some anoint the Breast with Butter, Hens-fat, or Oil of Camomile,
and Oil of Almonds, to render Respiration more easy.

Chap. XX. Of the Hickops.
THe Hickops happen to Children, by reason of the coruption of Meat in the
Stomach, or by the repletion of the stomach with Milk, or because of the
refrigeration of the stomach by external Air, whereby the expulsive faculty of
the stomach is so much offended, and irritated to expel that which troubles it.

The Hickops, for the most part, are not dangerous in Children; but if the
cause of it be so great, as to be communicated to the rest of the Nerves, and
to occasion other Convulsions, it is most commonly deadly.

If the Hickops be occasioned by a corruption of the Meat, it ought to be cast
up by Vomitting, to which end, put your Finger in the Child's mouth, or a
feather dipped in Oil: afterward strengthen the stomach with things that heat,
and lessen the Child's diet.

If the Hickops are occasioned by a corruption, and fault of the Milk, it must
be amended with proper Remedies, and the corrupted Milk must be carried off
from the Child's stomach, with syrup, or Honey of Roses solutive; and afterward
Conserve of Red Roses, with Powder of Coral, and Bole-armonick must be given*
If the Hickops are occasioned by Refrigeration, the stomach must be heated by
external and internal Medicines, give the Infant syrup of Mint, or of Bettony;
foment the stomach with a decoction of the Leaves of Mint and Wormwood, and
with the Roots of Cyperus, and afterward anoint with Oil of Mint, Mastich, or
Dill; or apply a Cataplasm made of Mint and the seeds of Dill beaten up with
Oil of Mastich, or Mastich and Frankincense mixed wi^^ the White of an Egg, may
be applied to the Orifice of the stomach. Or,

Take of Mastich one ounc^, of Frankincense, and the seeds of Dill, each two
drams, of Cummin-seed one dram; powder them; and mix them with the Juice of
Mint; apply a lenient stup dipped in it to the Stomach.

Chap. XXI. Of Vomiting.
THis is occasioned in Infants most commonly by sucking too greedily, or by
reason of Worms: it may also proceed from phlegm in the stomach, and sometimes
from a weakness of it.

If Vomiting proceed from too great a quantity of Milk, the Nurse may soon know
it, and the Child is at ease presently after vomiting: if it be occasioned from
the corruption of the Milk, it may be known by what is brought up and it is
either yellow, green, or some other vicious color, and it smells ill. Worms
may be known by their proper signs.

Vomiting in Children, is most commonly not dangerous, and Women commonly say,
that those Children are longest lived, who Vomit sometimes from the very Birth;
and this opinion is not irrational; far Infants having collected some vicious
Humors in the Womb, that lie in their stomachs, which is moreover laxed,
humid, and weak, they easily generate crudities, by sucking too much, and so
the Milk is corrupted; therefore if the vicious humors collected in the
stomach, are ejected by vomiting, it is much better, and more for their health,
than if these humors were retained, and distributed to the innermost parts of
the Body.

If Vomiting proceed from a great quantity of Milk, there is little danger; for
most commonly the Children are better after it: but if it proceed from
corruption of the Milk, it is ill; for many other symptoms are apt to accompany
it. If it*continue long, it is dangerous; for it causes a Consumption, and
often kills. If that which is rejected be white and s^egmatick, it is better
than that which is of a safron, green, or blackish color.

If the Vomiting proceed from a great quantity of Milk, the Child must not suck
often, nor never fill the stomach. If the Vomiting proceed from a corruption of
the Milk, it must be rectified by proper Remedies, and that which is corupted,
must be carried off with Syrup, or Honey of Roses solutive; and to strengthen
the Child's stomach, you must give Syrup of Mint, or Syrup of Quinces. Or,

Take of the Wood of Aloes, Mastich, Coral, each half a dram; of Galingal, half
a scruple; mix them with the Syrup of Quinces, or the powder of them may be
taken in the Nurse or Mother's Milk.

If the Humor be acid and hot, give Syrup of Pomegranates or Syrup of Coral:
apply to the stomach the Stomach Cerate, or a Toast dipped in Malago Wine. Or,

Take of the Oils of Mastich, Quinces, Mint, Wormwood, each half an ounce; of
Oil of Nutmegs by expression, half a dram; of Powder of Cloves, one scruple.
Or, Take of Red-Roses, half an handful; of Mint one pugil; of the Roots of
Cyperus, and of Myrtle-berries, e^ch two drams; boil them in Red-wine, dip a
Spung in the Wine, and apply it to the stomach. Or,

Take a White-bread-Toast, moistened with Vinegar, three Yolks of Eggs boiled
till they are hard; and of Mastich, Frankincense and Gum-Arabick, each a
sufficient quantity, with the juice of Mint, make a Plaster. Or,

Take of Mastich, Frankincense, Red Roses, each two drams; Cloves one scruple,
with the Juice or Water of Mint, make a Cataplasm.

If the Milk be hot, anoint the Stomach with the Oils of Roses, Myrtles,
Quinces; As,

Take of the Oils of Roses and Myrtles, each one ounce; Sperma Ceti two drams;
of the Powders of Coral, and of all the Sanders, each half a dram; mingle them.
Or,

Take of Mastich, Red-Roses, each two drams; Balaustins one dram; of a Toast
muistened with Rose-Vinegar, one ounce and an half; with a sufficient quantity
of Oil of Roses, make a Cataplasm. Coral is counted a Specific in this case,
and therefore is hung about Childrens Necks to prevent Vomiting.

Chap. XXII. Of (...).
GRipes frequently happen to (...) either with a Looseness, or without it: They
most commonly proceed from the Milk, Wind, and acid Humors being generated by
it; for if too great a quantity of Milk burdens the Stomach, Crudities and
Wind are occasioned, and sometimes the Nurses eating windy things is the cause,
or cold Air that offends the Child's belly; and if the Milk be corrupted in the
Stomach, when it descends to the Guts, it gnaws, and vellicats them, and so
causes pain. Worms in the bowels oftimes causes pain.

The Gripes in Children are known by their restlessness, and continual crying,
and refusing to suck, and by throwing themselves hither and thither. I^ the
Pain be occasioned by Wind, it sometimes remits, and sometimes increases* the
Belly i^ inflated, the Child belches* and breaks Wind backwards; if it proceed
from an Humor, the Pain is almost continual; and if the humor be phlegmatic
and viscid, the Belly is most commonly bound, and the Excrements are slimy. If
the Pain proceed from corrupted Milk, or from bilious and choleric humors,
there is most commonly a looseness joined with it, and the Excrement is of a
saffron, or green color. If the Pain proceed from Worms, there are signs of
Worms.

The Gripes, if they continue long, weaken Children, and occasion Convulsions,
but the worst Gripes proceed from corrupted Milk, and acid Humors, and those
which proceed from Worms, are also dangerous.

If the Gripes take their rise from Wind and crude Humors, and the belly is
bound, it is convenient to inject a Glister.

Take of Pellitory of the Wall, and of the Flowers of Camomile, each half a
handful, boil them in the Broth of Flesh; take of the strained Liquor three or
four ounces; of Honey of Roses strained an ounce, half the Yolk of an Egg, make
a Glister. This Glister may be given to a Child of a Month, or two Months old,
or you may give the Child Oil of Sweet-Almonds fresh drawn, an hour before it
eats, for it loosens the Belly, and eases the Pain.

Heurnius says, That he has found that a scruple of the Seed of Anise grossly
beaten, being given to Children newborn, mixed in a spoonful of Pap, has freed
them from green Choler, and filthy Phlegm, and that it eases the Gripes. We must
apply outwardly such things as gently heat, attenuate, dissipate and loosen*
and are also anodyne; to which end you must anoint the Belly well with Oil of
Dill, or Pellitory bruised and mixed with Oil of Camomile; or you may make a
Fomentation of the Flowers of Camomile. Or,

Take of the Flowers of Camomile, and of the tops of Dill, each one handful; of
the Seeds of Flax and Fen^greek, each half an ounce, boil them in Wine, and
foment the Belly with it twice a day.

But if the Gripes proceed from corrupted Milk, and acid Humors, things that
cleanse must be used; give therefore Syrup of Roses solutive, or Honey of Roses
solutive, or Syrup of Succory with Rhubark, or a Glister may be injected made
of a decoction of Bran and Pellitory, and Syrup of Roses solutive. Or,

Take of Barley-Water three or four ounces; of Oil of Dill one ounce, or one
ounce and half, the Yolk of one Egg, make a Glister.

Outwardly apply Oil of Roses mixed with the Oils of Dill and Camomile*

Chap. XXIII. Of the Inflation of the Belly, and Hypochondres.
IT often happens, that the Hypochondres and Belly of Children under the short
Ribs swell, and are as it were inflated. These Swellings arise from sucking, or
eating more than they can well concoct; upon which account crude Humors and
Wind are heapt up in the Stomach and neighboring parts, and so occasion this
inflation of the Hypocondres.

The Disease is known by the inflation and hardness of the Stomach, and the
Hypochondres, and the Children are afflicted with a narrowness and contraction
of the mouth of the Stomach, and they breath difficulty.

This Disease is easily cured, if a good Diet be observed; wherefore the
Children must feed sparingly, that the Crudi^ies may be concocted; nor should
they suck or eat, till that which was eaten before is concocted and it is good;
to purge off the crude Humors with Honey of Roses solutive, and the Powder of
the Roots of Paeony, Orris, and the Seeds may be given, or a Linctus may be
made of the Powders with Honey, or the Oil of Sweet-Almonds and Sugar, and the
Hypochondres may be fomented with a decoction of the Flowers of Camomile, and
the Seeds of Cummin; or they may be anointed with the Oils of Camomile, Rue, or
Laurel.

Chap. XXIV. Of a Looseness.
A Looseness is very common to Children, and it most commonly happens about the
time they are breeding their Teeth but sometimes also when they are not
breeding their Teeth, when either their Stomach or Bowels are cooled by the
external Air, and so a due concoction is hindered; or it may happen though the
Stomach be very well, when it is overburthened with too large a quantity of
Meat or Drink, which breeds Crudities, and corrupts the Meat, and Meat that is
crude, unconcocted and corrupted, if it be not rejected by Vomit, causes a
Looseness. A Looseness may also happen by a fault in the Milk or Meat, from
whence ill chyle is generated in the Stomach, which provokes Nature to frequent
Evacuations; the humidity and looseness of the Bowels may be also a cause.

A Looseness appears of it self, but whether it be occasioned by breeding of
Teeth, or from some other cause, may be known by the signs of breeding Teeth.
If it proceed from an Intemperies of the Stomach and Bowels, some external
causes went before, which might occasion a cold or moist Intemperies in the
Stomach or Bowels. If this Flux proceed from an Humor falling from the Head,
it may be known by a Catarrh being present, and what the matter is, which is
evacuated, may be easily known; for if the Humors are crude, the Meat is
evacuated Unconcocted, the Child is troubled with belching, and the Excrements
are slegmatick and white; but if the Humors are hot, and the Meat is
corrupted, those things which are evacuated, are yellow or green, and stink,
and the Child is much griped.

What Celfus says in general of Fluxes in the Belly, is also true as to
Children, viz. That a Looseness for a day or more is often good for the health
if no Fever accompany it, and if it go off within seven days; and therefore a
Looseness in Children, if they bear it well, must not be presently stopped; for
corrupted Humors in the Stomach are often commodiously evacuated thereby,
whereas if they were retained, many grievous symptoms would arise; and
therefore Hippocrates says in his Book of breeding Teeth, that those Children
that have a looseness in breeding Teeth, are least subject to Convulsions.

But if Children do not well bear their Looseness, and it takes away their
Stomach, and makes them weak, it must be stopped; and a Looseness is dangerous in
Children, if it come upon an acute Fever, and if that which is evacuated be
black.

In the Cure, we must first consider, whether the Child sucks or not, and next,
whether it be breeding the Teeth, or not; for if the Child yet suck, the cure
must not be directed to the Child, but to the Mother, or Nurse; and we must
consider whether the Milk be good, or not; for if the Milk be bad, it must be
amended, or if that cannot presently be done, the Nurse must be changed. The
Nurse must use an astringent Diet, and must abstain from Fruits, and crude
Meats, and such as are of difficult concoction. But if the Infant does not
suck, the cure must be directed to it: but whether it suck or not, the vicious
Humors that are evacuated, must not be unseasonably stopped, especially when
Children are breeding their Teeth; for that which would otherwise occasion a
Fever, and other mischief, is thereby evacuated; and therefore the business
must be left to Nature, especially if the Flux be not large, and if the Child
bear it well: but if it does not bear it well, the cause on which it depends
must be removed, and the Humors must be carried off by such Medicines as
afterward bind, as by Syrup or Honey of Roses solutive, or with Conserve of
Roses made with Manna. Or,

Take of the decoction of the Seeds of Millium, and all the Myrobalans, each
two or three ounces; of the Simple Syrup of Roses, one or two ounces, make a
Glister, when the Humors are cleansed away, if the cause be hot, give the
Syrups of dried Roses, of Quinces, Myrtles, or Coral, or the Powders of Pearl,
Coral, Mastichs, Hartshorn, and Red Roses, or the Powder of Myrtles with a
little Dragons Blood. Or,

Take of Nutmeg, and Mastich, each one scruple, give them mixed with Syrup of
Quinces.

Let the Belly be anointed with the Oils of Myrtle, Roses, and Mastich. As,

Take of Oils of Myrtle one ounce, of Oils of Mastich and Roses, each half an
ounce, wax a little and mingle them. Or foment the Belly with a decoction of
Red Roses, Mullein, and Plantain made in Red Wine Or,

Take of Red Roses and Mullein, each one handful; of the Roots of Cyperus, two
drams; of Mastich, half an ounce: make a Linen Bag, put these Ingredients into
it, and boil it in red astringent Wine, and apply the Bag to the Belly. Or,

Take of Quinces boiled in Red Wine, and pulped through a Sive, four ounces; of
a Toast sprinkled with Vinegar, one ounce and an half, with a sufficient
quantity of Oil of Mastich, make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take of the Roots of Comfrey, one ounce; of the Leaves of Platain and Mullein,
each three handfuls; of Red Roses, one handful; of Balaustines, half an ounce,
boil them in Water for a Bath.

But if the Looseness proceeds from a cold cause, and the Excrements are white
give Syrup of Mastich, or Syrup of Quinces, mixed with Mint Water; and
outwardly apply Medicines made of Mint, Wormwood, Mastich, or Cummin. As,

Take of the Oils of Nard, Mastich, Mint, each half an onnce; of the Powder of
Coral, half a dram; of Oil of Nutmeg by expression, two scruples, with a
sufficient quantity of Wax, make an Ointment.

Or you may apply to the Belly, Mint boiled in Wine, or a crust of Bread
moistened with Mint-Water, or a Bag of Mint, Wormwood, and Red Roses, Mastich,
Nutmeg, and Cloves.

Chap. XXV. Of Costiveness in Children.
IT often happens that Children are bound in their Bodies, or go to Stool
seldomer than they ought, which happens by reason of a cold and dry Intemperies
of the Bowels, or because the Humors are viscid and phlegmatic; but this
chiefly happens by a fault in the milk, when the Mother and Nurses use a gross,
viscid, and astringent Diet, and drink too sparingly. A hot Intemperies of the
Liver, Spleen, or Reins, may also occasion Costiveness, or an obstruction of
the Gall, which should stimulate the Guts to excretion.

This Disease is manifest of it self, but what is the cause of Costiveness, or
of going to stool seldom, must be carefully considered. If a natural dryness of
the Guts is the cause, the Belly is scarce ever orderly discharged, if gross
and viscid Phlegm is the cause, the Excrements when they are evacuated, are
covered with it; if any error in Diet of the Nurse or Mother be the cause, it
may be known by them. If a hot and dry Intemperies of some neighboring part be
the cause, it will be manifested by the signs of them; if Choler, which
irritates the Guts to excretion, does not flow to them, the Excrecrements will
not be tinctured, but be white, or of an Ashcolour, and the color of the
Child's body will be yellow.

Those grown People, whose Bellies are bound, are sometimes very healthy,
Nature being accustomed to evacuate the liquid parts of the Excrements, or to
discuss them insensibly: but it seldom happens that Children, whose Bellies are
bound, are very healthy; and it is best for Young People to have their Bellies
open; for when they are bound, Vapors from the Excrements are cast upon the
whole Body, and gripes, pains of the Head, and other ill Symptoms are
occasioned.

The cure of Costiveness in Children is to be performed two ways; first by
removing the Cause, and then by loosning the Belly. First we must endeavor
that the cause of Costiveness be removed, and if the temper of the Bowels be
cold and dry, Children must be frequently washed, and when the Intemperies is
cold, you must use a Bath of hot Stomach-Herbs; when it is dry, you must use
things that moisten, as Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall, and
Bears-breech.

If the Mother or Nurse have used meats, which bind the Belly, as Quinces,
Medlars, Pears, Beans, or the like, they must for the future, abstain from all
such things, and instead of them, they must use such things as molli^ie the
Belly, as Mallows, Raisins, Pruns, and the like.

If the Infant be pretty big, and eats as well as sucks, it must abstain from
all astringent things, and use such things as loosen. If viscid Phlegm stick to
the Guts, and the Excrements are covered with it, things that incide and
cleanse, must be used, as Honey of Roses solutive, or Syrup of Horehound, or
the like: If any neighboring part be hot and dry, the Intemperies of it must
be corrected with the Syrups of Violets, or Succory, or with a decoction of
Barley, or with an emulsion of the four greater cold Seeds, and the like. If the
Choler does not pass from the Gallbladder to the Guts, the obstructed passages
must be opened with a decoction of the roots of Grass, of Fennel, Asparagus,
Maidenhair and the like.

But we must not always wait till the Causes are taken away; for the Belly must
be seasonably loosned to prevent ill symptoms, which may be done by external
and internal Medicines. Amongst Externals are Suppositories, which may be made
of Honey and Salt, or with crude Honey put into a Rag, or with Lard, Soap, or
the root of Mallows besmeared with Butter. Or,

Take Mouse-dung, half a dram, with Goats-suet, make a Suppository.

But Nature must not be accustomed to the too frequent use of Suppositories*
for if so, she will not ease the Belly, unless she be provoked by them: it is
therefore better to use Glisters, and other external things, which may also
remove the cause of the Disease, and correct the dryness of the Guts, or carry
off the viscid Phlegm, according as their is occasion. As.

Take of common Oil three or four ounces, of brown Sugar two or three drams,
the Yolk of one Egg, of Salt three grains, make a Glister. Or,

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows, half an ounce; of Mallows and Pellitory of
the Wall, each half an handful; of the Flowers of Camomile, one pugil; of the
Seeds of Flax and Fenugreek, each one dram, boil them in Water. In three, five,
or six ounces of the strained liquor, according to the age of the Child,
dissolve two or three drams, or half an ounce of Cassia, of common Oil one
ounce, or one ounce and an half with the Yolk of one Egg; ^ake a Glister. Such
things may be ap^lied to the Navel, as loosen the Belly, ^ Oil of Sweet*
Almonds alone, or with grain or two of Scammony, or Colouintida, or Butter, or
Hen-fat, with ulls gall, or with the Juice of Sowread. Or,

Take of Aloes, two drams; of the Gall of Bull, one dram; of Scammony, one
^ruple, with a sufficient quantity of Butter, ^ake an Ointment; fill a
Walnut*shell with ^, and apply it to the Child's Navel.

And the whole Belly may be anointed with an emollient Ointment. As,

Take of fresh Butter, and of Hens and ^ucks Grease, each half an ounce; of
Oils ^f Sweet-Almonds and of Flax, each three ^rams; of Calves Marrow, of
Ointment ^f Marshmallows, each two drams, with ^ little Wax, make an Ointment.
Or,

Take of the Leaves of Mallows and Marshmallows, each one handful; of the
^eeds of Flax and Fenugreek, each half an ^unce; of Figs, number six; boil them
in Water, and pulp them through a Sive, and add of Butter and of Hens-fat, ^ach
one ounce; of Ointment of Marshmallows half an ounce; of Saffron one Scruple;
mix them, make a Cataplasm, to be applied to the Belly. If you would have it
loosen more forcibly, you must add Aloes, and other Purgers; or you you may
make a Cataplasm of fine Flower, and Juice of Dwarf-Elder. But you must take
notice, that these Cataplasms, and other Purging medicines applied to the
Belly, must not touch the stomach.

To the Children that are pretty big, you must give a scruple, or half a dram
of Cyprean Turpentine; or a decoction of red Cabbage with Honey; or Syrup of
Violets, Roses solitive, or loosning Raisins, or Cassia from two drams to six,
or Manna, which may conveniently be dissolved in milk. Or,

Take of the Pulp of fat Figs, and of Raisins stoned, each two drams; of
Jujubes number seven; of Cassia, half an ounce; of the solutive Electuary of
Sebestins and Pruns, each two Drams, with the Syrup of preserved Myrabolans
called Chebuls, make an Electuary. The Dose is one Dram.

Young Children make take suggared milk, or they may lick Honey, and such
purging medicines as are agreeable to the age, and constitution of the Child,
may be given to the Nurse.

Chap. XXVI. Of Worms.
WOrms are chiefly bred in the bowels of Children, and some have them in the
Womb after they are born, they are generated by eating too much, and by the
confusion of the milk with other meats, and by reason of their hot and moist
constitution, which is very apt to produce Worms; and the sweet things which
Children eat, and are delighted with, are apt to generate Worms; but they are
chiefly generated by Fruit, which Children eat greedily.

There are three sorts of Worms, round and long, like Earthworms; broad and
knotted, and the small which are called Ascarides. The first sort are most
frequent to Children.

If Worms are ejected by stool or vomit, there is no need of other signs: but
because they often lie hid a long while, before they are evacuated, and because
Children do not understand, or cannot discover what they all, there is need of
signs to find out Worms. And first in general, when Worms lie hid in the
Bowels, the mouth is full of Spittle, which often runs out, and a peculiar
stink exhales from the Mouth; they have terrible Dreams, as may be known by
various motions in Sleep, they grind their Teeth after an unusual manner in
Sleep, their Sleep is disturbed, they put forth their Tongues, scratch their
Noses often, and seem to Chew, they have a dry Cough, sometimes they are
troubled with Nauseousness, Vomiting, and Hickops, sometimes they have too
great an Appetite, and sometimes none at all; and they are most commonly
Thirsty, the Belly is swelled; sometimes they are bound in their Bodies, but
most commonly they are loose, their Urine is most commonly thick and white,
they are gripped, especially when the Belly is empty, and when the Worms want to
be fed: The Body is thin, by reason of the defect of Nourishment, which the
Worms consume. The Children are often troubled with cold Sweats, and sometime
they have Flushing in their Faces, and presently again they are Pale. Sometimes
they are seized with Convulsions, and often with ill Fevers: But these Signs
belong chiefly to long and round Worms; for broad Worms, and the little ones
called Ascarides have other signs; for those which have broad Worms have too
great an Appetite, and unless they are supplied, they perceive a gnawing and
pain in their Bellies, and sometimes they faint away, if they are not presently
fed; but otherwise, the Gripes are very gentle; for the broad Worm is slow, and
sticks to the Bowels, and so does not easily move from place to place. The Body
is much extenuated and weak, and sometime also, some of the Signs
abovementioned are present: But the following is the most certain Sign, viz.
if with the Excrements, some Corpuscles like the seeds of gourds are ejected.
When there are Worms called Ascarides, there is a violent Itching in the
Fundament, and a continual endeavor to go to Stool; for, sticking in the right
Gut, they continually provoke it.

Children have Worms often a long time without any great Detriment; but
oftentimes grievous Symptoms come upon them, such as we mentioned above. The
Ascarides are the least hurtful; for they are small, and stick in the right
Gut, a place far distant from the noble Parts, and they are easily cast out;
yet sometimes they occasion Ulcers in the right Gut. The broad Worms are very
difficultly cured, and often grow old with the Man, yet they do not occasion
girevous Symptoms, nor Death. The long and round Worms are the most hurtful for
they induce sometimes various Symptoms, and it has been found, that they have
eaten through the Guts, and Belly too. Those that are thin and extenuated, are
not so bad as those that are thick and great, and full of Blood; for if they
are thin, it is a sign that the matter wherewith they are nourished is not very
copious; on the contrary, it is an Argument, when they are big, there are many
excrementious humors in the Body: White Worms are better than Yellow, Livid,
Red, or Blackish. Those that are of a plain Figure are better than those that
are of a Serpentine, or other prodigious Figure: It is better that they should
be evacuted by Stool, than upwards; and worst of all when they eat their way
out. Worms are dangerous when they are accompanied with a Fever; if
Convulsions, and a grinding of the Teeth come upon Worms, it is dangerous. If
dead Worms cannot be expelled by the force of Remedies, or by the defect of
Aliment, it is dangerous.

It is better to prevent the Generation of Worms in Infants, than to kill and
expel them, when they are Generated. The Generation of Worms is to be prevented
by Diet and Medicines; the Diet ought to be such, as no way conduces to the
Generation of them, namely, Meats of good Juice, sprinkled sometimes with the
Juice of Pomgranats, Oranges, or Citrons; sweet, fat, and viscid things are to
be avoided, especially the frequent use of Milk or Fish; also Summer Fruits,
and Figs, Wine and clear Beer, is good against the Worms, it is good also to
put into the Beer shavings of Hartshorn.

As to medicines, we must endeavor that the matter which generates Worms, be
either evacuated, or rendered unfit to generate them; and therefore the Belly
must be kept open, that the matter may be gently Evacuated. Some perseribe for
Children Aloes, Hiera Pi^ra, and Rhubarb in the form of Pills, or in a Bolus,
but how they make them take it, I know not; for the Children* now a days, will
not take any such thihg, unless they are well grown. A decoction of Sebestins
is more palatable, or Table^s of Diaturbith, with Rhubarb, or some syrup made
of Plants that kill Worms, with the Leaves of Senna, Agarick, and a little
Rhubarb. Amongst Medicines, which resist the generation of Worms, bitter things
are most proper, as Wormwood, Scordium, and the like: But because Children will
not easily take them, those things that are more pleasant, may be sometimes
given, as a Decoction of the Roots of Grass, and of Mouse ear, the juice of
Lemons, and Citron, and sometimes a drop or two, of Spirit of Vitriol, may be
given in a convenient Liquor.

But if it plainly appears, that Worms are generated, we must endeavor to
expel them.

Amongst the Medicines, which may be conveniently given to Children, the
following are the chief, Coralline, Wormseed, the Roots of white Dillany,
Hartshorn, the Water and Decoction of Grass Roots, and Mercurius dulcis: As,

Take of Worm-seed, two Drams, of Coralline and Hartshorn prepared, each one
Dram, of the Roots of Peony, white Dittany, and Magistery of Coral, each one
Scruple, make a Powder: Or,

Take of Worm-seed, Coralline, each one Dram and an half, of the Roots of white
Dittany, and Tormentil, each half a Dram, make a Powder, or give the essence of
Peach Flower, or half an Ounce, or an Ounce of the Water, or Decoction of Fern,
or half a Scruple, or half a Dram of the Powder of Fern.

But you must consider, whether a Fever accompany the Worms; for if there be a
Fever, you must use cooling things, and add to them such things as resist
Malignity, as the juices of Lemons, Pomgranats, Oranges, Vinegar, Hartshorn,
Bezoar, and Confection of Hyacin^h; or the following Potion may be given:

Take of the Water of Grass, four Ounces, of Syrup of Sorrel, and Citron, each
one Ounce, of Syrup of Violets, half an Ounce, of Spirit of Vitriol, two or
three Drops, mingle them, give a Spoonful or two at a time.

Moreover you must observe, that Medicines to kill the Worms, especially bitter
things, must be taken in by the Mouth, and that sweet things must be injected
after the manner of a Glyster; for the Worms, hating bitter Medicines, will go
downwards, and will be allured thither, by the sweet things, and so will be the
easier ejected; and therefore, when Medicines are given to kill the Worms, a
Glister of Milk must be injected: Or,

Take of Raisins, number Ten, of Figs, number Seven, Boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Water, in four, or six Ounces of the strained Liquor, disolve an
Ounce, or an Ounce and an half of Sugar, and so make a Glister.

It is to be noted also, that you must not always keep to one Medicine, for the
Worms will be accustomed to it, and so will not be driven away.

Apply outwardly to the Belly, especially about the Navel, Medicines that are
Proper to kill Worms, as the Leaves of Peach Tree, Wormwood, and Lupins, of
each a like quantity; or, apply to the Belly Cummin mixed with Bulls Gall, or a
Cataplasm made of Wormwood, St. John's Wort, Bulls Gall: Or,

Take of the Powder of Wormwood, Nigella, the lesser Centaury, Wormseed, the
Meal of Lupins, each half an Ounce, of Oil of Wormwood a sufficient quantity,
of Wax half an Ounce, mingle them over the Fire, make an Ointment, wherewith
anoint the Belly: Or,

Take of the Powder of the Seeds of Nigella, and of Wormwood, each two Drams,
of the Meal of Lupins two Ounces, of the juice of Rue one ounce and an half, of
the juice of Wormwood four ounces, or if you cannot get the juices, make the
Cataplasm with Oil of Rue and Wormwood; apply is to the Navel in a Rag, as
large as the Palm of the Hand: Or.

Take of Venice Treacle, half an ounce, dissolve it in the juice of Wormwood,
and anoint the Belly therewith; or, take of the Meal of Lupins four ounces, of
the Powder of (...) Myrrh, Tansie, Wormseed, each two drams, of Scordium
Vinegar two ounces, of Bulls Gall half an ounce, with a sufficient quantity of
the Juice, or Oil of Wormwood, make a Cataplasm: Or, the following Bath may be
prepared:

Take of the Leaves of the Peach Tree, and Wormwood, each a sufficient
quantity, Boil them in Water, and let the Child sit up to the Navel in it.

But if there be a Fever, more temperate things must be used: As,

Take of the Juices of Purslain, and of Peach Leaves, each three Ounces, of
Vinegar one ounce; of the Meal of Lupins, a sufficient quantity, make a
Cataplasm.

Chap. XXVI. Of Ruptures.
CHildren are afflicted with Ruptures, by the fall of the small Guts into the
Scrotum, the Peritoneum being relaxed, or broken by violent crying, a cough,
and much straining in going to Stool: But grown Children are sometimes bursten
by violent motions of the Body, and indeed the Peritoneum in Children is
tender, so that it may be easily relaxed, or broken.

There is another Tumor, which often happens in the God of Children new Born,
which is commonly reckoned amongst Ruptures, and yet the Peritoneum is sound;
it proceeds from watery Humors abounding in the Belly. A Rupture, or Tumor of
the Scrotum appears to sight: But we must carefully mind, whether the Swelling
be occasioned by the falling of the Gut into the Scrotum, or from a watery
Humor that flows thither; in a Rupture the Swelling is most commonly in one
side of the Scrotum; for the Peritoneum is seldom broke in both sides, and you
may percieve that by touching with your Finger, and the hole, through which the
Gut falls may be felt with the Finger: But the watery swelling of the Cod is
most commonly on both sides, and the Scrotum is more inflamed than when there
is a Rupture, and no Hole can be perceived in the Peritoneum, and no cause,
that might produce a Rupture, went before, and there are signs of Crudity
present.

A Rupture in Children is easier Cured than in grown persons, for the
Peritoneum in them is soft and easily unites.

Some say, that all watery Swellings in the Scrotum, are harder cured than a
Rupture, but this is false in Children; for experience Testifies, that this
watery Swelling is easily Cured by Discutients, nay, it often goes away of it
self, in progress of time, the Humors being dried up.

In the Cure of a Rupture, we must endeavor to keep the Childrens Bodies open,
that they do not fill their Bellies too much, nor cry much, and if they are
some what grown, they must abstain from all violent Motion.

You must lay them on their Backs, and gently put up the Gut, and apply a
proper Plaster, or Cataplasm, and bind it on with a Truss.

Take of Plaintain, Sanicle, each half an ounce* of the Meal of Lentils, and
Lupins, and red Roses, each two drams, of Frankincense one dram, Alum half a
dram, make a Powder, and with a sufficient quantity of it, beaten up with the
white of an Egg, make a Cataplasm to be applied to the part ^ffected: Or,

Take of Frankincense, Cypress, Nuts, Aloes, and Acacia, each two drams, Myrrh
one dram, make a Powder, mix it with Iseing-glass, and apply it in form of a
Plaster: Or,

Take of Cypress-Nuts, two drams of Balaustins, of the Powder of the Root of
Comfry, Thorrow-wax, Sanicle, Rupturewort, each one dram, Bdellium one dram and
an half, Bole-Armentick two Drams, Dragons*Blood four Scruples, Greek Pitch one
ounce, Rosin of the Pine six drams, with Turpentine-wax, and Oil of Eggs. make
a Cerate: Or,

Take the green Leaves of Thorrow-wax, and the fresh Roots of Comfry, beat them
them small, and with a third part of new Wax, make a Plaster, and apply it to
the part affected: Or,

Take the Roots of Comfry cleansed, beat them, and heat them, and apply them in
a Linen Rag, and change them every twelve hours.

At the same time, inward Medicines must be used, which may help to
Conglutinate. As,

Take of Sanicle, Plantam, each half an handful, of Agrimony, half an handful,
of the Roots of Comfry, half an ounce, boil them in a pint of Water, in a
double Vessel, strain the Liquor, and sweeten it with Sugar, and let the Child
drink often of it hot.

Mouse-ear also is very good, gathered in May, the Powder of it being taken
every day in Broth.

The Powder of the lesser Moon-wort, is also good, taken in red Wine, or in a
Decoction of Comfry. Thorrow-wax is also good, taken in a Powder, or in a
Decoction, so are Rupture-wort, and the Roots of Comfry.

If the swelling of the Scrotum be occasioned by a watery Humor, anoint the
Scrotum with the Oils of Laurel, Elder, or Rue, and apply a Cataplasm, made of
Bean-Meal, of the Seeds of Flax, and Fenu-Greek, of the Powder of the Flowers
of Camomile, and Elder, and of the Seeds of Cumin.

Chap. XXVII. Of the sticking out of the Navel.
THe sticking out of the Navel is near a kin to a Rupture; it happens when the
Navel is not rightly bound, or when the Peritoneum is relaxed, and Humors, and
Wind are collected there.

If the Midwife has not rightly cut the Navel, but left it longer than it ought
to be it is incurable, but it is rather troublesome than dangerous; but if the
Navel, being consolidated after the Birth, is afterward two much extended or
Bursten, or Ulcerated, it is often incurable, if it be neglected at first, and
if it be not cured in Infancy, it may in the adult age occasion a deadly Iliack
passion, if the Guts that lie upon it are inflamed.

If the Peritoneum be only relaxed, things that bind and strengthen must be
used* if it be Bursten, you must use things that unite, and consolidate; and if
the Causes which extend, relax, or break the Peritoneum are present, they must
be removed. You must therefore endeavor to keep the Child from crying, and as
quiet as possible, and to hush it to sleep as often as you can; if there be a
Cough, you must endeavor to stop it, and all violent motion must be avoided.
Baths are not convenient, for they relax the Navel, the Child and Nurse must
abstain from windy Meats: the Belly must be kept open; for straining in going
to stool is injurious.

If the Peritoneum be too much dilated, and wind extends the Navel, make a
Cataplasm in red Wine, with equal parts of the Powder of the Seeds of Cumin,
Lawrel-ber^ies, and the meal of Lupins, and apply it to the Navel; or make a
bag of the Seeds of Cumin, and Celtick-Spike boiled in red Wine, and apply it
to the Navel: afterward apply Astringents, and a Bolster, and bind it on with
a swaith. But if the Peritoneum be Bursten, you must first reduce the Guts, and
afterward use those Medicines which are proposed in the foregoing Chapter, and
you must apply a Bolster to the Navel, and bind it on strait with a swaith, to
prevent the falling out of the Guts again.

Take of Cypress-nuts, Frankincense, Myrrb, Mastich, Sarc^cole, Alom, and
Ising-glass, each one dram, with the whites of Eggs make a Cataplasm; or you
may apply to the Navel Mint beaten with the white of an Egg, and you may give
the Child such Medicines as are proper for Ruptures, as one scruple of Comfry
root. Or,

Take of the root of Comfry, red Coral, Mastich, Shephords-purse, each one
dram, make a Powder.

If the Navel be Ulcerated, the cure must be ordered, as shall be said in the
following Chapter* and to the Navel must be applied Oil of Roses, wherein
Ceruss washed has been rubbed, or the Plaster called Gryseum.

Chap. XXVIII. Of an Inflammation of the Navel.
THe Navel is sometimes inflamed in Infants, chiefly after the Abscission, for
by reason of the Pain, especially when the Ligature is not rightly made; and by
reason of an injury from the external air, the Blood flows to it, and occasions
an inflammation; it may be known by the swelling, hardness, redness, heat, and
pulsation.

If care be taken of this inflammation at first, it is easily cured, otherwise a
Fever usually happens, which endangers the Child. If it turn to an Abscess it
often kills.

As to the cure, as in other inflammations, so here, The pain must be mitigated,
and the Fluxion stopped, and that which flowed in must be discussed; apply the
following Cataplasm to ease the pain.

Take of Mallows boiled and bruised one unce, of Barly-meal, half an ounce, of
Lupins, and Fenugreek, each two drams, with a sufficient quantity of Oil of
Roses, make Cataplasm: Or,

Take of Coltick Spike, half an ounce, of Turpentine three ounces; with Oil of
sweet Almonds, make an Ointment.

To repel the Blood, use the following:

Take of the Powder of Frankincense one dram, of Acacia and Fleabane, each half
a dram, with the white of an Egg, make a Cataplasm, to be applied to the Navel.
Suppuration must be hindered as much as is possible; but if it will come to
Suppuration, use the following.

Take of Turpentine half an ounce, the yolk of one Egg, Oil of Roses two
ounces, mingle them.

Chap. XXIX. Of the falling of the Fundament.
THe falling of the Fundament*sometimes happens to Children, either by reason
of the looseness of the Muscle which shuts it, or by the too great moisture,
and softness of it, which frequently follow upon a looseness; or it sometimes
happens by the too great endeavors in going to Stool, or in a Tenesmus.

It is easily known, but whether it proceeds from too great moisture, and from
humors following to the Belly, or from too great endeavors in going to Stool,
may be easily known, by the Bystanders. If it proceed from too great
endeavors in going to Stool, it is easily cured, if it be taken in time; for
the longer it is out of its place, the more it is altered, and the more
difficultly put up: but if it proceed from too great moisture, it is
difficultly cured, especially if a looseness accompany it; for it can scarce be
perfectly cured, till the Flux be stopped: besides Medicines that are necessary
are not easily retained, and the virtue of them is apt to be spoiled by the
Excrements.

The whole cure consists in putting up the Fundament, and retaining it in its
place; it ought therefore to be presently put up; but if it be so swelled that
it cannot easily be put up, it must first be fomented with a decoction of
Mallows and Marshmallows, and anointed with the Oil of white Lillies; or the
Infant must sit in a bath made of the same Herbs; and afterward the Fundament
must be retained in its place by astringent Medicines.

Take of red Roses, Balaustines, Cypressnuts, Pomgranate-pe^l, each half an
ounce, of Sumach, Frankincense, and Mastich, each two drams; boil them in rough
Win^, and foment the Anus with a sponge dipped in it.

After the Fomentation, use the following Powder:

Take of red Roses, and Balaustines, each half a dram, of Frankincense,
Mastich, and Myrrh, each one scruple, make a Powder, put it in Cotton, and
apply it to the Fundament; or you may make a fume of the Powder.

But because it cannot well be received by the Child, fume rags dipped in
Alomwater, and apply them to the Anus; and le^t it should fall down again, the
Child must keep its Legs together: and if they are very young, their Legs must
be bound with a swaith.

Chap. XXX. Of the Stone in the Bladder.
THe Stone is frequently generated in Childrens Bladders, and very seldom in
their Reins: whereas, on the contrary, old Men are generally afflicted with the
Stone in the Kidneys.

The Stone in the Bladder in Children is chiefly generated by Milk, and if it
be impure, not only Stones but also other Diseases are generated; but all
impure Milk does not breed the Stone, but only that which is made of gross and
viscid Meats, and of such as are apt to breed the Stone, especially if the
Child suck greedily, and burden the Stomach with those things that generate
crudities: But because we see many Children fed with Milk, and with Pap, and
yet are not troubled with the Stone, other Causes must be added, namely first,
some weakness of the Liver and Stomach, upon which account, the Meat is not
well concocted, and that which is unprofitable is not separated, but much of
the earthy, and Stone making Juice remains in the Chyle, and moreover the hot
intemperies of the Reins is a cause.

As soon as there is any rudiment of a Stone, new Matter gathers about it
daily, and grows to it; but Boys are more subject to the Stone, than Girls,
because the urinary passages in Women is shorter, and more open than in Men;
and therefore the Matter which is apt to produce the Stone is easier ejected in
Women.

You may know the Stone in Children by the following Signs; they make water
with pain, and often render it drop by drop, yea, often the Urine is quite
suppressed, and that Urine which is evacuated is sometimes clear as water,
sometimes as white as Milk, or like Whey, and sometimes some Blood is evacuated
with the Urine, and Sand appears with the Urine; Moreover Infants perceive an
itching in the virile Member, and therefore they frequently scra^ch it, and at
length there is sometimes an erection.

The Stone in the Bladder is a very desperate ^is^^s^; for though it does not
presently kill, ^e^ if it be not presently cured, it incre^ses daily, and
afterward it cannot be reme ie^ any other way, than by cutting o extraction of
the Stone, which is very dangerous; for if the Stone be large, Children many
times dye as well as grown People.

If from the difficulty of Urine, and other signs it appear, that the Child is
disposed to the Stone, we must endeavor all we can to prevent the breeding of
it; and therefore the Stomach must not be filled with too much Meat, and the
Nurse and Infant must abstain from all Meats, that are gross and viscid, and
apt to generate the Stone, and the Belly must be always kept loose, and the
breeding of the Stone must be prevented by external and internal Medicines; and
therefore a Bath must be prepared forth Infant, made of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Pellitory of the Wall, Parsley, Dill, and of the s^eds of Flax and Fenugreek.
After the Bath, the parts about the Bladder must be anointed with Ointment of
Marshmallows, and Oils of white Lillies and Scorpions, and a Cataplasm must be
afterward applied, made of green Pellitory of the Wall boiled in the Oil of
white Lillies, and Camomile, and give the Child a scruple or two of the Powder
of Crabs-eves, or of white Amer, or of Goats-blood prepared in Parslywater: and
it may be useful sometimes to give half a dram of Cyprean Turpentine.

Chap. XXXI. Of the difficulty, and retention of the Urine.
SOmetimes Children render their Urine with difficulty and pain, and often by
drops, and sometimes it is quite stopped. In Children there are two causes of
this, namely that gross humor whereof the Stone is generated* which also
occasions a Stranguary and disury, and then the Stone which occasions a
suppression of Urine: the causes which generate this gross humor, are gross
and viscid Milk, Pap made o^ Flower and Milk, and Cheese.

The retention of the Urine plainly appears, if there be a difficulty of Urine,
it may be known by being rendered by drops, and by the crying of the Child, and
the Urine is gross and turbid: if there be a Stone, that may be found by the
Catheter, and thereby it may be removed from the Orifice of the Bladder, to
make a passage for the Urine.

This is a very dangerous Disease; for if it proceed from gross Matter, it will
turn to the Stone, if it be not timely removed If the Suppression of Urine
proceed from the Stone, it is as dangerous as the Stone it self, and
suppression of the Urine it self, is dangerous, especially in Children, because
no natural evacuation in them can be suppressed without danger.

The cure therefore must be begun early, and it is in a manner the same with
that which was proposed in the foregoing Chapter of the Stone, namely the
causes of the difficulty, or suppression of the Urine must be removed;
therefore care must be taken in the first place, that the Nurse and Child use
such Meats, which do not conduce to the production of the humor that generates
the Stone, and then Medicines must be given that purge these humors, as Honey
of Roses solutive, Cassia and Turpentine: afterward Baths, Fomentations, and
Unctions made of those things, which are proposed in the foregoing Chapter; and
let such Medicines be taken inwardly as are mentioned there; for those which
can expel the Stone can carry off the humor that generates it; and the water
of Sea-grass, Rest-harrow, Filipendula, and a decoction of Vetches are useful.

If the Stone obstruct the Orifice of the Bladder, it must be removed thence by
laying the Child upon its Back, and shaking its Legs, or by the Catheter.

Chap. XXXII. Of Incontinence of Urine.
CHildren when they are very Young, and when they lie in the Cradle, and know
not what is filthy or neat, make Water in their Clothes, and so by custom, they
sometimes do so, when they are grown up in sleep, and some also when they are
awake; for the Muscle that shuts the Orisice of the Bladder is accustomed to
let the Urine go, when it is irritated by the quantity of it. But sometimes
there is also a weakness of the Muscle, proceeding from a Cold, and moist
Intemperies of it, contracted from abundance of gross and cold Humors, which
are in the tender Age; or it may proceed from an Obstruction, and Compression
of the Nerve of the Sphincter, and sometimes a Stone hinders the shutting of
the Bladder.

This Disease is not easily known in Infants; for then it is reckoned to
proceed from their tender Age, and when they are a little grown, it may proceed
from custom: But if it be from the Stone, it may be found by the Signs of the
Stone.

If the occasion be custom, it most commonly goes off, in time of its own
accord; for they being ashamed of it, restrain it: But if the custom grow to a
habit, or if some Disease be joined with it, it seldom leaves them as long as
they live. If it proceed from the Stone, it cannot be cu^ed, till the Stone is
taken away.

If it proceed from an ill custom, Children must be admonished to make Water
often. If it proceed from a cold and moist Intemperies, such things must be
used as alter it, and the Flegmatic Humor must dried and carried off, and the
Nurses Diet must be hot and dry, and she must eat with her Meat, Sage, Hyssop,
Marjoram, Fennel, and Savory, The Child must not drink much, and care must be
taken, that its Belly be kept open, and the Region of the Bladder must be
anointed with Oil of Orris, and the like, or a Bath must be prepared of
Sulphur, Nitre, and Oak-Leaves, unless some Natural, Sulphurous, or Alom bath
can be had; and let the following Powder be given.

Take of an Hog, or Boar's Bladder dried, the Testicles of a Hare dried, the
Throat of a Cock dried, each half an ounce, of Accorns, two Scruples, of the
Leaves of Catmint, and M^^e, each one Scruple; make a Powder, give a Scruple,
or half a dram, in the Water of Oak-Leaves.

Chap. XXXIII. Of the Galling of Children.
IT frequently happens, that the Skin of the Hips, and the parts there about,
in Children, is fretted off, which occasions pain, and makes them restless. It
is caused by the Accimony of the Urine, when the Linen is not often changed;
for if they are kept clean, and the Linen often changed, this seldom happens:
But those Children that have an Acridurine, and are fat, are most Obnoxious to
it.

It is easily Cured, but if it be let alone, it occasions Ulcers in those
parts; therefore the Children must be often wa head, and cleansed with a Bath
made of Mallows, marsh Mallows, Pellitory, Roses, and Bran, and after the Bath,
the parts may be sprinkled, or touched with a Rag, filled with white Pompholix;
or a fine Powder may be made, with Lytharge of Silver, Roses, Frankincense, and
Burnt-Alom, or the part may be anointed with the Ointment called Drapompholigos.

Chah. XXXIV. Of the Rickets.
THis Disease began about sixty Years ago, in the West of England, it seizes
Children when they are about half an Year old. The proportion of the parts is
Irregular. The Head is bigger than ordinary, so is the Face; the Wit is sharper
than is usual in such an Age, the Members are thin and wasted; the Skin is
loose; the Bones are most commonly bowed, and the Joints knotted. The Breast is
narrow and sharp; the Ribs are knotted, and the Belly is big. These things are
observed outwardly.

As to the inward parts, the Liver is larger than usual, the Stomach and Bowels
are larger, than in those that are well; the Mesentery is affected with
Glanduls, that are larger than ordinary, the Lungs are stuffed and swelled, and
sometimes Purulent, and often stick to the Pleura. The Jugular Veins, and the
Carotide Arteries are sometimes larger then they should be. All the parts are
weak, and unfit for motion; and such Children will Play only sitting, and do
not care to stand: And at length, the Head cannot be sustained by the weak Neck.

Though this Disease is not commonly deadly, yet the Symptoms growing to a
height, it sometimes degenerates into a Con sumption, hectic Fever, Dropsy of
the Lungs, or an Ascites, and so at length is deadly.

The sooner it comes, the worse it is, if it be not Cured before Children are
five Years old, they are ever after very Sickly. An Itch coming upon this
Disease, much conduces to the Cure.

As to the Cure, we must begin with Purging; because most commonly, there is
abundance of Phlegmatic Humors heaped up in the Belly, and the Bowels are
frequently afflicted with Scrophulous Tumors.

If the Belly be bound, or the Bowels troubled with Wind, or Gripes, Glisters
must be used frequently, which must not be only Solutive, but sometimes
Alterative, and Corroborative, for instance.

Take of the Leaves of Mallows, one handful, of the Flowers of Melilot,
Camomile, and Elder, each one Pugil, of the Seeds of Anise, and Fennel bruised,
each half a dram, boil them in a sufficient quantity of new Goats-Milk; to
four, five, or six ounces of the strained Liquor, add of brown Sugar, and Syrup
of Violets and Roses, each one ounce, make a Glister, inject it warm a good
while after Eating.

Corroborative Glisters may be make in the following manner.

Take of fresh Stone, Hors^dung, one ounce and an half, of the Flowers of
Rosemary, and Sage, each one Pugil, of Juniper Berries, two drams, of the Seeds
of Anise, and Fennel, each half a dram, infuse them close and warm in a
sufficient quantity of Whey. In four ounces of the strained Liquor, dissolve
one ounce of brown Sugar, and six drams of fresh Butter; mingle them, make a
Glister. There may be also added, if it seem convenient, six drams of Manna.

If the Stomach be burdened with vicious Humors, and they tend upwards,
Vomits may be given: But in the Prescription of them, respect must be had to
the tender Age, and they should rather consist of Salt of Vitriol, and the Wine
of Squills, than of stybeat Medicines; for it is not safe to give these to
Infants, for fear of Convulsions.

Give of Wine or Oxy^el of Squills, half an ounce, or an ounce; half an hour
after, give a large quantity of Posset drink, and provoke Vomitting with the
Finger, and let it be repeated now and then.

Some days after Vomitting, or if Vomittnig be not to be used, gentle Purging
must be instituted, and repeated by intervals. As,

Take of the Augustan Syrup, or of Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, six drams, or
an ounce, of Cream of Tartar, ten or fifteen grains, mingle them, let them be
taken early in the morning, either by themselves, or in a draught of Posset
drink.

If the Sick be affected with Worms, or the King's Evil, the following Bolus
may be given by intervals.

Take of Mercurius Dulcis, from six to ten grains, Rosin of Jallup or Scammony,
two or four grains, of the Chemical Oil of Juniper, one drop, make a Powder,
which may be made into a Bolus with the Pap of a roasted Apple; let it be taken
early in the morning.

After gentle Purging, if the Sick be of a Sanguine constitution, Blood-letting
is of use. Issues are also very effectual in this Disease, especially an Issue
made betwixt the first and second Vertebra of the Neck. Besides Purging and
Chyrurgical Remedies, Specific altering Medicines are to be used; to which
sometimes Diuretics, and Diaphoreticks are to be added. The Specific Remedies,
that are found most effectual to cure this Disease, are either simple or
compound. Among Simples the following are most approved; Wood of Gujacum, and
its Bark, Sassafras, Lentisk-wood, Rosemary, the knotty part of Firr, the Roots
of China, and Sarsaparilla, the three Sanders, the Roots of Osmund Royal, or
rather the Cloves of the Roots, the Roots of Sea-fern, or rather the Buds of
them. Grass roots, the Roots of Asparagus, Eringo, Succory, Burdock, the Barks
of the Roots of Capers, the Capillary Herbs, and chiefly Trichomanes, Ceterach,
Wall-rue, Hart's-tongue, Liverwort, Male-speedwell, Agrimony, Brooklime,
Watercresses, the Leaves and Flowers of Sage; Rosemary, Bettony, dead Net^le,
and of Tamarisk. Also Steel prepared, or its Salt, or Vitriol, Tartar, Castor,
Flowers of Sulphur, Earth Worms, Millepedes prepared, and the like, whereof
Compositions may be made in the following manner:

Take of the Cloves of the Roots of Osmund-Royal, or the Roots of Sea-fern, or
the Twigs of the Roots of it, scarcely sprung above ground, one handful, boil
them in a pint of Milk, or Spring Water, to the consumption of a third part,
let the strained Liquor with Sugar be drank twice or thrice a day.

Take of the Leaves of Tea, one dram, of the Flowers of Sage and Bettony, each
half a dram, put them in a convenient Vessel, and pour on them a pint of
boiling water, let them stand close and warm about an hour; sweeten the
strained Liquor with Sugar, and let it be drank in the same manner as the
former.

Take of Lentisk-wood, Rosemary, of the Ro^ts of Sarsaparilla, flowering Fern,
or male-fern, each three ounces, of the Herbs Agrimony, Maidenhair, Speedwell,
Haris-tongue, Sage, Bettony, each two handfuls, of the tops of Fern and
Tamarisk, each two handfuls, boil them in so^r Gallons of Ale, till one is
consumed; when it has done working in the Vissel, put into a bag two hundred
Millipedes washed in white Wine, and gently bruised, of Juniper Berries, two
ounces, of Nutmegs sliced, number two, hang the bag in the Vessel, and put a
piece of Steel in it to make it s^^k. If there be any suspicion of the Scurvy,
you may add of Watercresses and Brooklime, each two handfuls, after a
fortnight, let it be drunk for the ordinary drink.

But the Medicine, which is most approved in this Disease, is Ens veneris, five
or six grains of it may be taken every Night at Bedtime in half a spoonful of
Syrup of Gill^flowers.

If the Lungs are stopped with viscid Humors, as happens often, and the
Mesentery with scrophulous Glands, three or four drops of Balsom of Sulphur
mixed with Sugar Candy powdered, may be given Morning and Evening.

Note, Steel must not be given in Coughs, Plurises, a stoppage of the Lungs,
nor when there is a Hectic Fever.

The Bath water is very proper, and is excellent to take off the swelling of
the Belly; the following artisicial Bath as much commended. Place the Sick in a
large Vessel, and put round him warm Barley Fermented, which has been a while
infused in boiled water, as is usually done for making Beer, cover him well,
and let him abide in it to provoke sweat.

Regard must be had to the Symptoms coming upon this Disease, the most frequent
whereof is a Looseness: for the cure of which, gentle Purgers, as an infusion
of Rhubarb, Tamarinds, and Sanders, or a Bolus made of them is of use, and
sometimes astringents and gentle Opiats may be used; but Purging must go
before. Sometimes immoderate sweating afflicts the child, which if it follow a
Feverish Fit is critical, and ought not to be rashly stopped: but if it flow in
ordinately, it is a sign, that the Body is oppressed with ill Humors;
therefore this sort of sweat must be corrected by a gentle Purge, especially
with Rhubarb. Apperitives also, and such things as help Concoction must not be
omitted.

Breeding of the Teeth difficultly is familiar to this Disease, and often
occasions a Fever; in which case, gentle evacuations, especially by Glisters,
must be made; and sometimes it is necessary to cut the Gums, to make way for
the Teeth, and to apply a Blister behind the Ears; and if there be great pain
and watchings, Hypnoticks must be used, as a dram or two of Diacodium in a
spoonful of Cowslip water.

External things must be used, as Exercises of all sorts, and if the Child be
able, walking srequently, if not, he must Play sitting, or be carried about in
the Nurses Arms, or the like. Frictions are also good in this case, with warm
Flannel the Parts to be rubbed are the Spine, which is primarly affected, and
the Muscular parts: but you must not rub the Bones where they stick out, the
Concave parts of the Bones, you must.

Ligatures are also of use, which are to be made above the Knee, and above the
Elbow; but they ought to be soft and loose. Boots are also of use: but you must
take care that they press a little upon the Protuberant part of the Bone, and
scarce touch the Cavity. Bodice are also to be used, to keep the Body up-right.
Swinging is also necessary.

A Formentation of all sorts of Wine, and common Aqua Vita is also very good
for this purpose to corroberate the nervous Parts, which must be used for the
weak Parts, and especially for the Spine: which being done, the Parts must be
^^ointed with Oil, or some proper Ointment, which we shall mention by and by;
and instead of Wine, the following Decoction may be used.

Take of the Roots of Osmund Royal, or of Male-fern, three ounces, of the
Leaves of Bettony, Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, Watercresses, each one handful,
of the Flowers of Cammomile, Melilot, and Elder, each one pugil, of the Berries
of Laurel, and Juniper, each half an ounce; boil them in a sufficient quantity
of Fountain water to a quart, add of white Wine, or of common Aqua Vitae, one
pint. Keep the strained Liquor for use.

Take of the Leaves of Elder, Laurel, Marjorum, Sage, Rosemary, Bettony, and
the tops of Lavender; each two handfuls, of the Berries of Juniper, and Laurel,
each one ounce; cut them and bruise them, and put them into a pot, with three
pound of May Butter, or of Fresh Butter, and add to them half a pint of Aqua
Vitae, and while the strained Liquor is hot, add half an ounce of Oil of
Nutmegs by expression, and one dram of Peruvian Balsom, mix them, make an
Ointment. Instead of May Butter, Beef Marrow, or Deers Suet, and Oil of Worms,
or Oil of Foxes; each one pound and an half may be used. The Ointment must be
applied warm, before a hot Fire, and the Parts must be rubbed with a warm hand,
till they are dry.

If the Belly be hard and swelled, the following Ointment must be applied.

Take of the Oils of Capers, Wormwood, and Elder, each one ounce, of the
Ointment above prescribed, one ounce and an half; of Gumm Ammoniacum dissolved
in Vinegar, half an ounce, make a Linement whilst the Ointments are applied to
the Hypochondres, the Bowels must be handled by the Nurse.

If the Lungs are affected, the Breast must be anointed with some pectoral
Ointment, or with the Ointment of Marshmallows, and at the time of Unction, a
little Oil of Nntmegs by expression may be mixed with it.

Chap. XXXV. Of Chilarens Wasting.
THough the wasting of Children may be reserred generally to the Diseases of
Children, yet I think it necessary to mention it here; because Children wax
extremely Lean, without any manifest cause, whereas the adult seldom grow Lean,
but by reason of a Fever, a Consumption, or some other manifest Disease.
Perhaps it may happen by a fault in the Milk, or for want of Milk; and
sometimes Children wast much with one Nurse, but being remove to another,
thrive well. Worms may be also the cause, for they destroy the nourishment; and
so sufficient Blood cannot be generated for the nourishment of the Body; and if
Blood should be generated, and transmitted through the Veins to the whole Body,
yet if there are Worms in the Back, Arms, Legs, and almost over the whole Body,
and there are so sometimes; the nourishment will be devoured by them. These
Worms are very small, and are bred in the Skin, and the Heads of them appear
like black hairs upon Priction in a Bath; they are generated by vicious Matter
shut up in the Capillary Veins, turned into Worms, when transpiration is
hindered.

If the wasting be occasioned by a fault in the Milk, the Milk must be amended;
if Worms in the Bowels are the cause, Medicines prescribed in the Chapter of
Worms must be used. If small Worms in the Back, Arms, and Legs are the cause,
the Children must be bathed* and Honey must be mixed with the Bath, and the
Musculous parts must be rubbed with a Liniment made of crumbs of Bread and
Honey.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Richard Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1. SIR Samuel Moreland's Vade Mecum: Or Necessary Companion; containing a
perpetual Almanac. 2. A Table of the Kings Reigns, from the Norman Conquest,
compared with the Years of Christ. 3. Directions for every Month in the Year,
what should be done in Orchard, Kitchen, or Flower-Garden. 4. The Reduction of
Weights, Measures, and Coins, with a Table of the Aslize of Bread. 5. A Table
of any number of Farthings, Half pence, or Shillings, are ready cast up, of
great use to all Traders. 6. The Interest and Rebate of Money, the Forbearance,
Discompt, and Purchase of Annuities. 7. The Rates of Post Letters, Inland and
Outland. 8. An account of the Penny Post. 9. The principal Roads in England;
showing the distance of each Town from the other, in the Measured and Computed
Miles, and the distance from London; also the Market Towns on each Roads; with
the days of the Week the Markets are kept on; also the Hundred and County each
Town is Seated in. 10. The Names of the Counties, Cities and Borough Towns in
England and Wales, with the number of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, and
Burgesses chosen therein to serve in Parliament. 1^. The usual and Authorized
Rules and Fairs of Coach-men, Car-men, and Watermen. The Sixth Edition much
Enlarged. Price Two Shillings.

Ovid Travestie: Or, a Burlesque on Ovid's (...) By Captain Alexander Radcliff,
late of (...)- Inn. The Third Edition, with Ten Epistles, never before Printed.
Price Two Shillings.

The Works of that Excellent Practical Physician Doctor Thomas Sydenham,
wherein not only the History of acute Diseases are treated of, but Chronical
also; with the best Remedies against them. Price Five Shilling.

C^eker's Decimal Arithmetic, wherein is showed the Nature and Use of Decimal
Fractions, in the usual Rules of Arithmetic, and the Mensuration of Plains and
Solids, together with Tables of Rebates and Interest for the Valuation of
Leases and Annuities, Present, or in Reversion, and Rules for Calculating those
Tables. To which is added his artificial Arithmetic, showing the Genesis or
Fabric of the Logarithms and their use in Extraction of Roots, the solving
Questions in Anotocism, and in other Arithmetical Rules in a Method, not
usually practiced. Also his Algebraical Arithmetic; containing the Doctrine of
Composing and resolving Equations, with all other Rules requisite for the
understanding of that misterious Art, according to the Method used, by Mr. John
Kersey in his Incomparible Treatise of Algebra. The second Edition Corrected by
John Hawkins, Writing-Master at St. Georges Church in Southwark. Price Three
Shillings.

The Works of that Excellent and Ingenious Poet, Captain Alexander Radcliff,
containing his Ovid Travestie or a Burlesque on Ovid's Epistles: Likewise his
Ramble: An Anti-Heroic Poem, with many other Miscellanies; never before
Printed. Price Bound Four Shillings.

The Novels of Mrs. Behn, Collected into one Volume, viz. Oroonoko: Or, The
Royal Slave* The Fair Jilt: Or, Prince Tarquin. Agnis de Castro: Or, The Farce
of Generous Love. Lovers Watch: Or, The Art of Love. The Ladies Looking-Glass.
The Lucky Mistake, and Love Letters, never before Printed; Together with the
Life of Mrs. Behn. Price Four Shillings.

Contemplations, Moral and Divine, in Three Parts: Written by the Lord Chief
Justice Hale, to which is added the Life of the Author; By Gilbert Lord Bishop
of Sarum, each Part may be had single. Price of the First and Second, Five
Shillings, the three singly, Three Shillings and Sixpence.

The saurus Geographicus: Or, A New Body of Geography; containing an exact
Description of the Earth. 1. By way Introduction, the general Doctrine and
Geography, being an Account of the Situation and Bigness of the Earth in
respect of the rest of the World, etc. Together with the Doctrine of the
Sphere, the use of Globes, and Maps. 2. A Description of the known Countries of
the Earth, an Account of their Situation, Bounds, Extent, Climate, Soil, and
Production, chief Rivers, Mountains and Seas, with the History and Succession
of their Princes, and the Religion, Manners and Customs of the People. 3. The
Principal Cities and most considerable Towns in the World, particularly and
exactly described, showing the Magnitude, Principal Buildings, Antiquity,
State, Condition of each Place; as also the Situation with its Distance from
other Towns, for the easier finding it in the Map. 4. The Maps of every Country
of Europe; and general ones of Asia, Africa, and America; fairly Engraven on
Copper, according to the best and latest Extant; likewise, particular Draughts
of the chief Fortified Town of Europe, with an Alphabetical Table of the Names
of the Places. Price Bound, Fourteen Shillings.

Plautus's Comedies Englished, By several Hands. Price Three Shillings.

Reflections on Ancient and Modern Learning: By William Wootton, B. D. Chaplain
to the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham.

The Family Physician: Or, a Collection of Choice Approved and Experienced
Remedies for the Cure^ of almost all Diseases incident to Humane Bodies whether
Internal and External; useful in Families, and serviceable to Country People.
Containing some Hundreds of considerable Receipts, and Secrets of great value,
with Observations of great Cures; Together with the true English Wine-Coller,
and the right Method of making English Wines, or Metheglin, with a Collection
of the Choicest and Safest Cosmetick Remedies for Preserving the Beauty and
Complexion of Ladies, never before Published: By George Hartman,
Philo-Chymist, Author of the Preserver and Restorer of Health, who Lived and
Traveled with the Honorable Sir Kenelm Digby till he Dyed. Price Three
Shillings.

Plays Lately Printed.
SPanish Wives, a Farce: Written by Mrs. Mary Pix.

Ibrahim, the Thirteenth Emperor of the Turks: Wirtten by the same Author.

Old Bachelor, a Comedy: By Mr. Congreve.

Cyrus the Great: Or, The Tragedy of Love* Written by Mr. Banks, where you may
be likewise furnished with most sort of Plays, Poetry, Letters, or Romances.

The Antiquities of Palmya is this day Published; containing the History of the
Cities and Emperors, from its Foundation to the Present Time; with an Appendix
of Critical Observations of the Names, Religion and Government of the Country,
with a Comment on the Inscriptions lately found there.

The History of Britain; that part especially called England: Written by John
Milton.

This Day is Published, a New Tragedy, called, The Unnatural Brother, written
by Mr. Filmer, Gent. Printed for Richard Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's
Churchyard. Price one Shilling.

FINIS.





