THE ANTIQUITY OF THE Protestant Religion: WITH AN ANSWER TO Mr. Sclater's
REASONS, AND THE COLLECTIONS Made by the Author of the Pamphlet ENTITLED NUBES
TESTIUM

In a Letter to a Person of Quality.

The First Part.

LONDON, Printed for Ben. Griffin, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall. 1687.

IMPRIMATUR.

Hen. Maurice Rmo. P. D. Wilhelmo Archiepiscopo. Cant. a Sacris.
Dec. 13. 1686.
ERRATA.
PAge 15. l. 6. for Aeneus read Aeneas, in the Margint (...), p. 22. l. 14. f.
Canon r. Canons, p. 31. l. 20. f. where r. were, p. 41. l. 7. f. moduling r.
modelling, p. 59. l. 11. f. Contro-sie r. Controversy.

THE ANTIQUITY OF THE PROTESTANT RELIGION; With an Answer to Mr. Sclaters
Reasons, and the Collections made by the Author of the Pamphlet entitled Nubes
Testium.
SIR,
WHEN I received your Letter, I did at first a little wonder, that such a
knowing person should desire me to give a plain and particular proof of that
Point which we Protestants do stand upon, that our Religion was Anciently and
Generally professed in the Christian World, before the Reformation. For the
matter seems so clear to those who converse with Books, and will not suffer
themselves to be governed by partiality of judgment, that we may well be amazed
at the great confidence of the Divines in the Church of Rome, who would fain
persuade you to believe the contrary; whether out of a design, or by means of
their violent Passions and prejudices, I will not say.

It is indeed taken for granted by people on that side, that at the Reformation
their Church was the only Catholic Church in the World; and that their Faith
was undoubtedly True and Primitive in all its particulars; because otherwise
the Church (as they conceive) must have failed; and the Promises of God,
touching his preserving and assisting his Church to the Worlds end, must have
come to nothing. Upon which false suppositions they run away at all rates with
many strange notions of Us, and of the Reformation, believing and giving it
out, that we forsook the True Church which was entitled to Gods Patronage and
Guardianship, and did set up a new Religion which no good Christians ever
owned; and therefore that we must needs be in a miserable and lost condition.

Seeing then the difference between us is so wide, either They or We must
necessarily be under a very great mistake: And therefore in compliance with
your commands I shall endeavor to satisfy you, that the mistake lies not on
our side; especially, since the Author of the Nubes Testium, and Mr. Sclater in
his Consensus veterum, have taken so much pains to possess the World with a
Notion to the contrary.

In the prosecution of this matter I shall,

1. First, take as short and as particular a view as I can, of the State of
Christianity, from the Primitive times to the Reformation; and show you how the
Doctrines, we profess, were generally professed and owned from Age to Age, in
those Churches which are nearer home.

2. That at the Reformation and before, the Faith of those Churches, which are
more Remote and distant from Us, was the same with Ours, in most of those
material points which lie now under debate. And when these Two things are
cleared, several inferences will easily follow, which will abundantly serve to
justify Our Reformation, and to discharge the Protestant Religion from those
Imputations, which are commonly but unjustly cast upon it.

1. First, let us look into the condition of Religion from the Primitive Ages
to the time of the Reformation; and see, if those Doctrines, which we
Protestants profess, were not professed and owned from Age to Age, before ever
the Name of Protestant became a characteristical note of Distinction. And for
the clearing of this, I think it too tedious to gather up Sentences, and ends
of Sayings out of the Ancients, as Mr. Sclater, and the Author of the Nubes
Testium have endeavored to do. For they know well, that we have a Catalogus
Testium, to which their Nubes is but as it were of a Hands breadth. And besides
the latter of these does ingenuously confess, That many things in the Ancient
Fathers are Obscure; that their Preface page 3.
Names have been prefixed to Books, of which they were never the Authors; and
that additions have been made to some of their writings; besides the diverse
mistakes of Transcribers in the publishing of their Works.

The most effectual way therefore will be to observe the Doctrines of the
Ancients in their Disputations and Controversies with the Adversaries of the
Truth, and that, either when they purposely wrote against some known Error, and
generally used the same arguments, as so many Received Principles; or when they
met together in Councils to settle matters by public Canons and Definitions.
These observations will more readily, and more certainly help us to understand
the sense of the Ancient Church, than our having recourse to this or that
passage in particular Authors. So that if it be made appear, that our Religion
is agreeable to that which the Ancients did in their Disputations and
Assemblies maintain, as the Primitive Faith, you need not enquire further for
your satisfaction, nor trouble your self with Heaps of quotations out of single
Authors; unless you have a mind to gratify your Curiosity, and for that you
may consult Bishop Tailors Disswasive, or Bishop Mortons Appeal, or Bishop
Vshers Answer to the Jesuits challenge; which the Writers in this Age would do
well to try if they can Answer.

But to go to our business: It is notorious, that the first great Controversies
in the Church were about the Common Doctrines of Christianity; a great many
Heretics for diverse Ages, from Simon Magus downward to Pope Honorius, and the
rest of the Monothelites, violently opposing, some the Reality of Christ's
Humane Nature; some his Divinity, some, the Distinction between his two
Natures; some, the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, as a distinct Person from the
Father and the Son, and the like general Principles which the Christian Church
held. Against these Seducers, not only Books were written by the Primitive
Fathers severally, but diverse Councils were called; the first a Local Synod at
Antioch against Paulus Samosatenus, who taught that our Savior was a mere Man.
After this, Six general Councils met: The First at Nice against Arius, for
asserting that Christ Jesus was a Creature: The Second at Constantinople
against the Eunomians and Sabellians, and the rest that affirmed the Holy Ghost
to be a Creature too: the Third at Ephesus against Nestorius for reviving the
Arian Heresy: The Fourth at Chalcedon against Eutyches, who owned the Divine
and Humane Nature too, yet taught that upon the Union of them, both were mixed,
Absorpt and Transubstantiated into One: The Fifth at Constantinople again, to
stifle a fresh the Nestorian Blasphemy: and the Sixth there also against Pope
Honorius, and his Associates, who owned, as but one Nature (as Eutyches did) so
but one Will neither.

Now what was the business of all these zealous Fathers, but to confirm the
Apostles Creed, which had been handed, down to them from the beginning? They
looked upon it to contain all things necessary to be believed; they reckoned it
the saving, and the Only short Rule of Faith; the Faith that is Immovable (as
Ignatius the Martyr called it;) the unmovable and Irreformable Faith (as
Tertullian;) the Perfect Faith, that unites all Ignat. Ep. ad Smyr. Tertul. de
veland. verg. Iren. l. 1. c. 3.
Churches throughout the whole World into one body (as Irenaeus thought;) the
Right Catholic Faith (as Athanasius and the rest of the Ancients did esteem
it.) This was the reason, why they were so very industrious and careful to keep
Super haec autem iidem in Chalcedone sancti Patres anathematizaverunt eos qui
aliud Symbolum. tradiderunt aut tradunt, praeter hoc quod expositum est a
trecentis december and octo sanctis Patribus* and explanatum a centum quinquaginta
sanctis Patribus. Justinian. in Quintae Synodi Collat. prima, Council Tom. 4.
part. 2. page 47. Edit Bin.
the common Creed inviolable: So that, as Justinain the Emperor tells us, the
Fathers of the Council at Chalcedon, anathematized all those that had
delivered, or do deliver any other Symbol, besides that Creed of the Apostles,
which was explained by the two first general Councils, that at Nice, of 318
Fathers; and the next at Constantinople consisting of an hundred and fifty.

I know not what the Men of Trent thought of this heavy Anathema, when they
Added to the Ancient Creed a great many New Articles of their own, as equally
Necessary to Salvation. But by this, Sir, you may see that the Apostles Symbol,
as it was explicated in the first General Councils, was that and that only,
which the Primitive Fathers so zealously contended to maintain; which you
cannot conceive, why it should have been, had not they concluded it to be a
Perfect Summary. And this I note, not only to show their great and most
unreasonable uncharitableness, who condemn all that stick to this Primitive
Creed only: But moreover to vindicate our selves, who own and teach the very
same Articles of Faith, and necessary principles of Christianity, which was the
only thing contended for by the old Catholic Fathers. Upon which account we
are no more Heretics, than They were, our Creed being the very same with
Theirs: So that there can be no color of Reason for any to forsake our
Communion, as if our Faith were unsound or Defective; or to be dissatisfied in
their minds, as if there were any danger of their Happiness, if they be but
careful to adorn this Faith with a suitable conversation.

And hence I cannot but look upon it, as a strange piece of weakness (at least)
in the Divines of that party, that they are so grossly mistaken in their notion
of of the Catholic Faith. For they quite overlook the Common Creed, as if
that were not it, (whereas in Truth, that alone is the Catholic Faith;) and
give that Title to the Trent-confession, which is the Roman Faith only; and yet
whoever denies any part of that Confession, though he owns the Apostles
Symbol, must be hooted at presently as an Heretic.

Nor can it be thought any less than strange Inconsideration in Mr. Sclater,
that he should leave our Church for that of Rome, upon an Idea he has formed
in his own fancy of that Churches Unity in the Faith. For is not our Church in
most perfect Unity as to the Christian Faith? Were the Apostles Creed professed
only in the Roman Church, we might all go thither. But is not our Faith the
same with Hers, in those points wherein it is truly Primitive and Catholic? If
Mr. Sclater can show us, wherein we contradict any of those principles of
Christianity, which so many Ancient councils confirmed as the One Catholic
Faith, we will not blame him for thinking, that we have broken the Unity
thereof. But we are so far from offering an hundred Faiths (as he unworthily
Page. 5.
insinuates) that we teach but One, and the same, which is Common to all the
Churches in the World. Therefore his little quotations out of Ignatius,
Cyprian, and the supposititious Clemens Romanus, are nothing at all to his
purpose. But his Allegation out of Irenaeus (page 8) is grossly impertinent. For
Irenaeus evidently speaks of the Apostles Creed, and of that alone. Pray
consult the place, and see if Irenaeus does not expressly and distinctly repeat
the substance of that Confession, the Articles whereof we repeat daily in our
Churches; and then he presently subjoyns, in the very next Chapter, This
Doctrine and Faith the Church keeps with all care, as if she dwelt in one
House, although she be disseminated over the whole World. Her Faith is
agreeable to these Doctrines, as if she had one Soul, and one and the same
Heart. These Articles she does consonantly preach, teach and deliver, as if she
had but one mouth. For though there be different Languages, yet the Faith
delivered is one and the same. Neither do the Churches in Germany believe or
teach any other Faith, nor do those Churches in Spain, nor those in France, nor
those in the East, nor those in Egypt, nor those in Lybia, nor those in the
middle parts of the World: But as the Sun is one the same in the whole World,
so the Doctrine of Truth every where shines, and enlightens all men that are
willing to come to the knowledge of the Truth: He adds too (which Mr. Sclater
disingenuously conceals) that none of the Governors of the Church, though
never such able men, do teach any other Doctrines than these (for no man is
above his Master) nor does the weakest diminish the Faith delivered: But the
Creed being one and the same, the greatest man does not add more, no does the
meanest man believe less.

And now Sir, what is all this for the advantage of the present Roman Faith,
which is superadded to the Apostles Symbol? This passage is so far from
countenancing, that it utterly condemns that Addition. Or what is all this
against Us, who believe and teach that very same Faith which all Christian
Churches did adhere to in Irenaeus time? Or what encouragement is all this for
any man to leave our Communion, as if we had violated the Unity of the Faith?
The truth is, Irenaeus and the rest of the Ancients said (as we do) that Christ
has but one Catholic Church on Earth; that all Churches make up this
Catholic Church; that they are all united in one by one common Faith, and that
the Apostles Creed, is that one and only Faith. Now this Faith is uniformly
believed by us; and therefore Mr. Sclater needed not to say (as he does page
10.) What would I have once given to have found such Unity among Protestants?
Let him but give us our Due, and we desire no more, and this he cannot deny
without denying us our due, that in England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweedland,
Geneva, Zurick, etc. we have one common Creed, and the same which United all
Local Churches into one Catholic Church, in the Days of Old. But though we
Protestants are United into one Faith, yet because we are not United under one
Pope (no more than the Primitive Churches were) Mr. Sclater leaves us. Avery
stout Reason! If yet that be one of the True Reasons: But by what we have seen
of his Reasons yet, we have some cause to believe, he has some other reasons
that are stronger than this; some Reserved Reasons, among those which he calls
(Page 5.) his Reserved Principles.

But to let Mr. Sclater go at present, till we meet him again. The Author of
the Nubes Testium would persuade you to think, that in those By-opinions
wherein we differ from the Roman Church, the Primitive Fathers are on their
side.

For the clearing therefore of this Matter, I shall take a very short course;
by giving you an Historical account of the Series of Affairs from the Primitive
Ages, as Controversies about these Points did happen to arise: And by this
account you will easily discern, that our Opinions are the most Ancient and
Catholic Opinions.

After the Catholic Faith had been onfirm'd, and the Controversy with Arius
determined at the Nicene Council about Anno 325. another Controversy arose
about Primacy, some Bishops of Rome pretending to Supreme Authority, and
Universal Jurisdiction over the rest. But this was clearly an Innovation: for
an Ancient Canon had (...), etc. Can. Apostol. 34.
been provided (which was the Churches Rule, during the Reigns of Heathen
Princes) That the Bishops of every Country should submit to him that was their
Primate, and own him for their Head, and do nothing (of Moment) without his
Approbation. By which Canon the Primacy was fixed in the Archbishop of every
Province, and all Metropolitans throughout the World, stood upon the same
Level, and had the same Supreme Authority in their Respective Jurisdictions and
Countries. You cannot but smile to see what a Marginal Note there is upon this
Canon in Binius's Edition of it: Jurisdictio Episcoporum, praeterquam Romani,
certis and finitis limitibus circumscripta est.
The Jurisdiction of Bishops (except the Roman Bishops) is Circumscribed within
certain and determinate Limits. But there is not the least ground or color for
that exception: the continual practice of the Church in those times shows it to
be a forced Interpretation of the Canon; for the Jurisdiction of the Roman
Bishops was limited, as all the others was; so that Aeneus Sylvius (afterward
Pope Pius the second) ingenuously confessed, that before the Nicene Council,
little respect was had to the Church of Rome.

Nor did the Nicene Council give the Roman Bishops any Title to their pretended
Primacy. For in the sixth Canon of that Council the Fathers decreed, that the
Ancient Customs should hold; that the Bishop (...), etc.
of Alexandria should have power over them who were in Egypt, Lybia, and
Pentapolis; because this was likewise the custom for the Bishop of Rome. Also
that Antioch and other Provinces should have the same Privileges preserved to
their Churches. Whence it appears, that in those times the Jurisdiction of the
Roman Patriarch was limited and bounded; and that to the Suburbicary Churches
in Italy (as Ruffinus rightly understood that Canon.) 2. That other Provinces
had the same equal privileges within themselves, that the Roman Church had. 3.
That those privileges were every where founded on ancient Customs. 4. That
those Customs should still continue in force.

But all this could not bound the Ambition of some Bishops of Rome, who
endeavored and hoped to enlarge their Jurisdiction by the great Interest they
had in the (now Christian) Emperors, who expressed much tenderness to the Church
in lieu of those hardships she had endured in times of Persecution; and thought
it no little Piety, out of Veneration to the Memories of St. Peter and St.
Paul, to be kind to their Successors: and this was one thing that by degrees
brought the Church of Rome into great request. Besides, Schismatics and
Heretics who lay under Church Censures, were wont to appeal to the Emperor for
redress, as the Donatists did to Constantine in the Pontificate of Melchiades.
The Emperor thinking it proper for him to commit the cognizance of Church
Causes into the hands of Churchmen, did use to depute and delegate the Bishop
of his own See, with some more of the Clergy, to examine the matters. And as
this gave encouragement to Factious men, ever and anon to have recourse to the
Church of Rome, so it gave encouragement also to the Bishops of Rome to
incroach upon the Privileges of other Countries, where such causes should
regularly have been heard and determined in public Synods. Yet it is
observable, that for a long Tract of time, the Bishops of Rome never attempted
to execute their usurped power, but still they met with great Opposition from
those who asserted their own Canonical Privileges and Rights: Thus when Julius
endeavored to interpose in the case of Athanasius, who had been unjustly
condemned by the Oriental Bishops in the Synods of Tire and Antioch, though
Julius pretended only, that 'twas not Canonically done, but that himself and
other Bishops ought to have been interessed too in an affair of that High
nature; yet Julius his appearing in this cause put the Oriental Bishops into a
rage, as you may see by his letter to them; wherein he takes notice of their
Passion and opposition; and Council. Tom. 1. page 391.
confesses, that they charged him with kindling a flame of Discord; and that
they were Qu^ dicendi sunt flamina discordiae accendisse; si quidem id nobis in
vestris literis objicitis? Jul. Ep. Vere parem eundemque honorem in omnibus
Episcopatibus censetis esse, neque ex magnitudine civitatum (ut vos Scribitis)
honorem ejus rei crescere arbitramini. Id. ibid.
positive in their Opinion, that in all Bishoprics the Honor was really equal
and the same, and that the Honor (much less the Power of a See) did not
increase by the greatness of Cities. This was point blank to stop the growth of
the Pope of Romes power as a mere Usurpation upon the Authority and Rights of
other Bishops, when yet all that Julius seems to have contended for, was that
Athanasius his case might be re-considered in a general Council, wherein he
himself and other Western Bishops might be concerned.

But when Innocent the first made a trial of his skill upon the African
Churches, by occasion (as it is thought) of an Appeal made to him by Caelestius
the Pelagian Heretic, who had been condemned at home in Africa; the Africans
to maintain their own Privileges, and the Canons of the Catholic Church
decreed at the Milevitan Council, that when Presbyters, Deacons, Council.
Milevit. cap. 22.
or other inferior Clergymen did appeal from their own Bishops, some
neighboring Bishops should hear the cause: and if they appealed from them too,
they should not appeal, but to the African Councils, or to the Primates of
their own Provinces. But whosoever should appeal beyond the Sea, should not be
received into Communion by any in Africa. Which decree, though it speaks
particularly of Presbyters and Deacons, yet it reaches Bishops also; as is
clear from the 31. Canon of the Carthaginian Council (Three years after this)
that the same thing against Appeals beyond the Sea, had been often decreed
concerning Bishops too. And this cuts (...). Can. Carth. 5. 31.
off the common subterfuge of the Romanists, who are wont to pretend, that the
Milevitan Canon concerned the inferior Clergy only; as if the Pope had not
power of Jurisdiction over Presbyters and Deacons too, if he had any over
Bishops, especially if he has it (as they say) by Divine Right.

Notwithstanding all this, the Successors of Innocent, (Zozimus, Boniface and
Caelestine) pretended still successively to this claim of Jurisdiction in the
African Churches: whereby you may see, what an ill use they made of that
favor, which the Emperors showed some of their Predecessors; for now instead
of being the Emperors Delegates, or their Neighbors, friendly Arbitrators,
they pretended to be the most rightful Judges of foreign causes.

During the time of the Three forementioned Popes, the great case about Appeals
to Rome was depending in Africa; and for the determining of the Controversy,
the Carthaginian Council was called, consisting of 217 Fathers, whereof St.
Austin was one, Anno 419. The Pope grounded his claim of Jurisdiction upon a
pretended Canon of the Nicene Council: to which the Africans answered, They
knew nothing of any such Canon, nor could find any thing to that effect in
those Copies they had of the Acts of that Council. But being not willing either
to make a Rupture in the Church, or to lose their own Privileges, they
condescended to let the matter rest, till they could procure the most
Authentic Copies of the Nicene Canons. For which purpose they dispatched away
Messengers to Constantinople, to Antioch, and to Alexandria, supposing it
impossible for them to miss of the True Copies in those Churches. No sooner did
they receive those Copies, but presently they found how they had been imposed
upon by the Bishops of Rome, for their whole pretense was a Forgery: Whereupon
they confirmed and enlarged the former Milevitan Decree, against any
Clergy-man's appealing to the Sea of Rome; and to justify their Acts, they
sent a Synodical Epistle to Pope Caelestine; wherein they call those Appeals,
Improba Refugia, Wicked Refuges; they pleaded, That no Councils had ever taken
away the Ancient Rights of the African Churches, but that the Council at Nice
had left, not Presbyters only, but all Bishops also, to the Judgment of their
own Metropolitans; they showed the Reasonableness of this Decree, it being
impossible for any man to be tried so fairly as at home, where every man was
known, and Witnesses were ready at hand. For all this they referred themselves
to the Nicene Canons, the True Copies whereof they had now received; and in the
End they chid his Holiness for his Usurpation; earnestly Ne fumosum typhum
Seculi in Ecclesiam Christi, videamur in ducere. Vide Council. Carthagin. Can.
31. and* Epist. Synodicam in fine Canonum; Council. Tom. 1. page 757.
exhorted him, neither to encourage such Appellants to him, nor to send any
Legates abroad in such cases, lest it should be a means of bringing (as they
call it) the swelling Pride of the World into the Church of Christ.

This manifestly shows on our side, that the Bishop of Romes pretense to a
Primacy over the whole Christian World is an Innovation, and incroachment upon
the just Liberties and Canonical Privileges of all other Churches. And before
I go on, I cannot but note it as great Weakness and Ignorance (for I am loath
to call it a Fraud) in Mr. Sclater; who, to support the Universal Pastourship
of that Italian Prelate (to whose Foreign power he has subjected himself
contrary to his Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance too) cites the Canon of the
Nicene Council, and for the Authority of them sends us to a pretended Epistle
of Athanasius ad Marcum. You may Page 12.
observe, that the Author of the Nubes Testium was Wiser than to quote either
those Canons, or that Epistle; because there is no Canon to that purpose among
the Acts of the Nicene Fathers, nor was ever such a Canon pretended, but what
was Forged and Supposititious. And as for the Epistle ad Marcum which goes
under the name of Athanasius; the Learned men in the Church of Rome have been
ashamed long ago to own its Authority, knowing it to be a Spurious piece.
Baronius and Possevine both reject that E-Epistle; and so does Bellarmine, and
the Abbreviator of Baronius, Henricus Spondanus, Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. Lib.
2. c. 25. Spondan. ad. Anno. 325. Number. 42.
rejects the Epistle and Canons both, though Mr. Slater is pleased to lay such
stress upon them. It Is pity, that when he had thoughts of writing his Reasons,
he did not consult some knowing Friend, what Authors he should use, and what
Books were Genuine, and what Spurious; for when he quoted that Epistle ad
Marcum, and called it Athanasius his, he might as well have quoted the
Narrative of Titus Oats, and called it the History of Titus Livius.

But to go on to our Business: Soon after these transactions in Africa, a
General Can. 8.
Council of 200 Fathers was held at Ephesus, and there it was decreed again,
That no Bishop should invade another Province, but that every Metropolitan
should retain his due power, and every Province should have its Ancient Rights
and Privileges preserved. Of which Decree they expressly gave Three reasons. 1.
Lest the Canons of the Church should be transgrest. 2. Lest the Churches of
Christ should unawares lose their Liberty. 3. Lest the Pride of Secular Power
should be brought into the Church; which was the very Reason and Expression the
Africans had used a little before against the encroachments of Pope Caelestine.

About Twenty years after this, a New Scene of Affairs appeared, which is well
worth your Observation. A great Synod of 630 Fathers met at Chalcedon: and
there, notwithstanding the Opposition of the Popes Legates, they confirmed the
Canons that had been made at the Council of Constantinople, and gave the Bishop
of Constantinople, equal Honors and Privileges with the Bishop of Rome;
meaning, not any Supremacy of Power or Jurisdiction, but Vide Con.
Constantinop. Can. 2: and 3. Item Council. Chalced. Can. 28.
an Honorable Precedence for Order sake. The Reason of this was, because the
Imperial Seat was now removed to Constantinople: It was called, New Rome, and
enjoyed the same civil Privileges that the Old did: and because an Honorable
Precedence had been given to the Bishop of Old Rome (not upon any pretense of a
Divine right he had to it, but out of respect to the Imperial City, as the
Fathers at Chalcedon plainly declared) therefore they thought it reasonable,
that the like Honorable precedence should be granted to the Bishop of New Rome
also. Upon this there were strait very strong fears in Italy, that in a little
time the Power would go along with the Honor; and that the Bishop of
Constantinople would carry away that Universal Supremacy and Jurisdiction,
which some Bishops of Rome had hitherto contended for. Now it is very Useful and
Pleasant to observe what a strange Change this presently wrought. For as other
Chruches had hitherto bestirred themselves against the pretenses of the Church
of Rome, so now the very Church of Rome bestirred her self against the
pretenses of the Church of Constantinople, and with the same Arguments. Now the
Note was altered on a sudden, and even the Bishops of Rome were vehemently set
against Pride and Ambition. They urged our Saviors precepts of Humility, and
especially in Bishops: They insisted upon the Privileges of all Christian
Churches; they stood stiffly for the Canons, especially for those of the Nicene
Council (though some of their Predecessors had broken them.) So that could
Authority alone for ever baffle the claim of Universal Pastourship, 26we need
use only the Authority of Three Bishops of Rome, that in their turns undertook
the Quarrel with the Constantinopolitans.

First Pope Leo engaged in it with all imaginable Zeal. He wrote to Anatolius
himself, the then Bishop of Constantinople; rebuked him for his Insolence and
Ambition; pleaded the Canons against him; vindicated the Privileges of all
Primates; told him that every Primate should keep within his own bounds,
without invading the Vid. Ep. Leonis ad Anatol. and ad Marcian. and ad Pulcher.
and ad Syn. Chalced. ex. in Binii Council. Tom. 2.
Rights of others, and what not? He wrote likewise to Marcian the Emperor,
complaining heavily of Anatolius for breaking the Churches peace, for violating
the Decrees of the Council of Nice, and the like; and therefore desired the
Emperor to pull his Pride down. He wrote too to the Empress Pulcheria, accusing
Anatolius to Her also, and begging her assistance against him. He wrote to the
very Synod at Chalcedon, and told them (though they cared not for it) that he
would not look upon their Acts, as to Anatolius, to be valid. Besides all this,
he wrote also to the Bishop of Antioch, desiring him likewise to be a Party,
and to engage the rest of the Oriental Bishops against Anatolius: but I do not
find that they would be concerned, because 'twas only an Honourary matter
which was granted to the Constantinopolitan See, being now the Imperial Seat;
and they could not but understand what was the bottom of Leo's grudge.

Above an Hundred years after this, it seems a Synod at Constantinople gave
John, the Bishop of that place, the Title of Ecumenical or Universal Bishop.
Indeed the thing was evil, and it had grown to an Head by degrees; like a
noxious Humor, that first gathers, then Suppurates, and at last comes to plain
Impostumation. And now another Pope appeared in the Controversy, Pelagius the
2d. He inveighed bitterly against John; and in a Letter to him charged him,
with the most severe rebukes, to forbear that Rash, Proud, and Superstitious
Title (as he called it.) And in Vide Gregor. lib. 4. Ep. 38. and lib. 7. Ep.
71. item Epist Pelagii ad Synod. in Binii Council. Tom 2. Par. 2. page 257. It.
Gratian. decret. Page 303.
an Epistle to the Synod that had granted it he dealt very roundly with them,
condemning the Title as a Devilish Usurpation; as injurious to the Honor of
all Patriarchs, and to the power of all Bishops, and as that which violated the
Nicene Canons, and would bring the Members of Christ into Slavery: In which
particular Pope Pelagius was too much a Prophet.

Pelagius dying, the quarrel was left in the hands of his Successor, Gregory
the Great. Now he tells us, that this New Title, which John of Constantinople
had Usurped, Scandalized all men; that all the Bishops were enraged at it, and
all their Greg lib. 4. Ep. 32, 36, 38. and lib. 6. Ep. 28.
Mouths were opened against it; that the Universal Church was disquieted about
it; that the peace of the Church was broken, and that the whole Church was rent
in pieces by the Scandal it had given. Such great and strong opposition did
that Arrogant name presently meet with: and yet the Title of Universal Bishop
was in those a Title of Dignity only, without any Power of Universal
Jurisdiction: It was nothing in comparison of that which some have usurped a
claim to Since. And if a vain Name made such work in that Age, it is past
imagination to conceive what clamours and disturbances would have been then
throughout the whole Church, by a Newer pretense to Universal Power and
Authority; a thing that is full of the most Terrible and Mischievous
consequences.

But of all men then living, none seemed to have been set more fiercely against
the Title of Universal Bishop, then Pope Gregory himself was. Concerning whom I
observe briefly Three things. 1. That he declaimed against the Bishop of
Constantinople, as a Robber, as a Wolf, as an Incroacher upon the Rights of all
the Bishops; Lib. 7. Ep. 71. Lib. 4. Ep. 32. and 38. and lib. 6. Ep. 30.
as the Imitator and follower of Lucifer in his Pride, and as the Forerunner
of Antichrist. 2. That he wrote several Letters to Mauritius the Emperor, to
the Bishops of Alexandria, Antioch, Thessalonica, and diverse more, to
strengthen his interest against the Usurping Patriarch, that he might take down
his greatness before it swelled too High. 3. That he loaded his ill-gotten
Title with the most odious and reproachful Characters he could invent, calling
it a Vain, Novel, Profane, Blasphemous, Wicked, Foolish, Proud, Presumptuous
Name, and I know not what besides. This was the fine Livery, wherewith he
endeavored to disgrace his Rival, John; not dreaming, I belive, that in a very
short time, it would be due to his own Successors, and would much better become
them.

However we have the Judgment of no less then Three great Popes against the
Title of Universal Bishop: nor are we concerned to enquire, whether they had
not some By-ends of their own, which provoked them to use these Expressions.
That they were unwilling any others should be Partners with them in their
Authority, is very reasonable for us to believe; though I am apt to think, that
Gregory spoke his thoughts sincerely; partly because he declared solemnly to
the Emperor, that 'twas not any respect to his own cause which moved him; and
partly because he used so many severe expressions to render the thing it self
Invidious and Odious; which a man so zealous for the Honor of St. Peter's
Chair, as Gregory was, would not have done, had he but dreamed of His, or his
Successors having that Title: It Is not likely that he would wittingly have
branded himself or his See, with so many Ugly and Infamous Characters.

The true account of it therefore seems to be this. Some Roman Bishops longed
for Superiority over the other Churches, and might Hope in time to accomplish
their desires. But in Gregory's days, and somewhat before, Rome began mightily
to sink, by the great Oppression of the Lombards, and by the Translation of the
Imperial Seat. Constantinople flourisht at a great rate: the Court was there:
the Emperor favored it: the Patriarch of it had now gotten a very High Title;
and the Bishops of Rome might fear, that Universal Authority would follow by
degrees, and that their Cause was going apace. Therefore they might think it in
vain for them to smother and conceal the truth any longer; and so to be
Revenged upon the growing Patriarch, they speak at last their thoughts freely.
In short, if these Three Bishops of Rome where sincere in what they said, their
memory is the more valuable for asserting the Truth: if they looked upon any
Sinister ends of their own, the Glory of Truth is the greater, for being
justified even by those who were no friends to it.

You will perhaps wonder now, how this Title should go unexpectly and so
suddenly from Constantinople to Rome? For it was obtained of the Usurper Phocas
by Boniface the 3 d. who was the next Successor (but one) to that Gregory, who
had condemned the Title with so much bitterness. Why, thus it was in short:
Phocas had barbarously Murdered his Prince, Mauritius the Emperor, and his
Children. Cyriacus then Bishop of Constantinople, hated and opposed him for his
execrable Villainy. Boniface of Rome presently strikes in, makes use of this
Opportunity, sues for the Title of Universal Bishop, hoping now to invade the
Church, by the help of a Tyrant that had invaded the State; and Phocas grants
his request, partly out of Hatred to his enemy Cyriacus; partly, for fear lest
Boniface should raise up some evil against him in the West; and partly too,
because he saw, the Bishops of Rome, were ready to crouch and sneak to him,
though a bloody Usurper, as long as they could gain any thing by their base
Submission; of which he found a plain experiment in Gregory himself, who wrote
a flattering Letter to him, which begins thus, Gloria in excelsis, etc. Glory
to God in the highest; and so he goes on, Let the Heavens rejoice, and the
Greg. Regist. Lib. 11. Ep. 38. aa Phocam.
Earth be glad, and let all the People that have hitherto been much afflicted,
be cheerful for your kind actions. This he thought might very well Merit
something at the hands of Phocas; and so Boniface obtained the Title of
Universal Bishop; and that too just about the time when Mahomet stepped into
Christendom; then it was that Oppression got into the Church; God punishing the
Pride and Factions of Christians with Two Scourges at once, which ever since
have made the Christian World to Smart severely.

By this account you may see the Rise and Progress of the Popes Supremacy: What
an Innovation it is, and how strongly it was opposed by the Catholic Church in
the Primitive times for above 200 years together after it was first pretended
to: Before I pass from this Topic, I shall lay hold on this opportunity to
satisfy you touching those Allegations, which the Author of the Nubes Testium
has collected, to prove (if he could) that the Bishop of Rome has the Primacy
over the whole World, and that by Divine Right too, and by Commission granted
him by Christ himself in the Person of St. Peter. Now I observe in general,
that this Author has wholly omitted that Historical account which has been now
given you, because it evidently clears the point against him; but instead of
that, he has picked up some ends and shreds out of some of the Ancients, which
may seem Specious to Ignorant people; but signifies nothing with a man that is
rightly acquainted with the Series of the Controversy. Whereas he pretends to
give us an History of the Donatists, of the Gnostics, of Berengarius, of the
Iconoclasts, etc. (which I shall take notice of hereafter.) he takes no notice
at all of those Fathers and Councils in Africa, and the East, which resisted
the first encroachments that tended to the introduction of an Usurped
Supremacy. He knew, that such an History would burn his Fingers, and therefore
thought fit, not so much as to touch it; but throws the whole matter, and that
very briefly, upon the Donatists; as if the Page 22.
Donatists were the only men that denied the Popes Supremacy, and broke with
him upon that account: whereas indeed the Donatists were They, who gave the
Bishop of Rome the first unlucky occasion to claim Juridiction out of their due
bounds, by their Appeals at Rome, and by their running from their proper Judges
in Africa; witness their Appeals in the Papacy of Melchiades. So that it was
not those Schismatics, that were the first or the only men that opposed the
Popes Usurpations, but the Catholic Fathers, who were forced to stand up in
defense of their own just privileges.

Now it is not imaginable, that any of the Fathers would (especially during
that Controversy) say any thing that might really serve to strengthen the
unlawful pretenses of the Bishops of Rome, against themselves: and therefore
you may very rationally conclude, that those passages which are gathered out of
the Fathers in favor of the Popes Supreme Authority, are forced and wrested to
a sense which they cannot naturally bear. But to examine particulars:

If you please to peruse (for it is tedious to Transcribe) all the Authorities
this Man cites, you will find that they are concerning Four things: 1.
Concerning those high Characters which some of the Ancients gave of S. Peter
himself. 2. Concerning those honorable Titles which they gave to the Bishops
and See of Rome 3. Concerning those Applications which were sometimes made to
the Bishops of Rome upon emergent occasions. 4. Concerning the Acts of the
Bishops of Rome upon such Applications. And upon a full and impartial
consideration of these several things, you will easily find, what false grounds
they go upon, who endeavor so eagerly from these Observations to prove the
Universal supreme power of the Pope, especially by Divine Right.

1. These Authorities are concerning the high Characters, which some of the
Ancients gave of S. Peter himself; as that he was the Prince, the Head of the
Apostles, and the like. Now what does this mean, but that S. Peter was the most
Eminent Apostle, in respect of his age, in respect of his zeal, in respect of
his courageous Professions of his Constancy and Love to his Master, in respect
of the Precedence he might have for Order-sake, and in respect too of the
Honor he had in Founding Christ's Church; for the First Converts were made by
his Preaching, 'Twas he that gathered at once those Three thousand Souls, which
were called, The Church, Act. 2. 42; and because he was the first Founder of
the Church, he was very fitly called a Rock; But does all this import, that he
was above all the other Apostles in Power? Or that he had Supreme Authority and
Jurisdiction over them? S. Paul speaks twice of the very chiefest Apostles: and
what if S. Peter was the chiefest of all? Does it follow that he was the
chiefest in Authority? No, S. Paul's power was as great as His; and therefore
he says in one place. I was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles, 2
Cor. 11. 15. and in another place, in nothing am I behind the very chiefest
Apostles, 2 Cor. 12. 11. So the Ancients allowed S. Peter a pre-eminence of
Honor, but not a Supremacy of Power; as it is clear from that single passage
which our Author cites out of S. Jerome (and I wonder he did not better
consider it) As Plato was Prince of the Philosophers; Page 34.
so was Peter, of the Apostles. Had Plato any Authority or Jurisdiction over
the Rest? No; all that is meant is, that Plato was the most Eminent and
Renowned Philosopher. S. Gregory called Peter the chief Greg: lib. 4. Ep. 38.
Member of the Holy and Universal Church: and (says he) Paul, Andrew and John,
What were They but the Heads of particular Churches? If the word Head always
imports Authority; then had those three Apostles as much Authority over Peter,
as Peter had over Them. But the Truth is, the Ancients ever thought, all the
Apostles had authority alike: And so St. Cyprian (for instance) tells us, that
what Peter was, that were the rest of the Apostles too, endued with an equal
Partnership Hoc erant utique and ceteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari
consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis. S. Cyprian. de Unit. Eccles. Ep.
ad. Quintum.
in Honor and Power. And elsewhere he says plainly, that Peter, whom the Lord
chose first, and on whom he built his Church, in his dispute with Paul about
Circumcision, did not insolently claim, or arrogantly assume any thing to
himself, as if he held the Primacy, or ought to be obeyed rather then those
Disciples who were called after him. Whence it is clear, that though some of
the Ancients styled him the Prince and Head of the Apostles, yet they did not
ascribe to him any Superior Authority or Power, but only an Honorary
Precedence, like that which is given to the Chairman of a Committee, who is
above the rest in Eminence, but in Power the same with the rest, that are
equally and jointly in Commission with him. And thus all our Authors
Collections touching St. Peter's great Characters, are answered in short.

2. Other of his Authorities are concerning those Honorable Titles, which some
of the Ancients gave to the Church and Bishops of Rome; as that There was the
most potent Principality (or, the Imperial Seat of the Emperor) that the First
Chair, and the principal Church was There, that it was the Head Church, that
the Bishop of it was a Great Pastor, and the Head, to whom Antiquity had Given
a Pre-eminence of Priesthood (or, the Precedence before all other Bishops.) And
what is all this, and Ten times more, to the Popes pretended Authority over all
Churches, and all Bishops, and that by Divine Right too? Antiquity bestowed
upon the Bishop of Rome a Pre-eminence, says our Author out Page 45.
of the Emperor Valentinian's Letter: and who doubts it? But it was nothing but
a Civil Respect, and an Honorable, yet voluntary Deference to him, because he
was Bishop of the Chief City, and was near the Emperor, and was capable of
doing the Catholic Church (by his Interest in the Emperor) more good Offices,
then other Bishops could do; therefore they were willing to Complement him with
great Titles, and to give him the upper hand, and the precedence, for Order and
Peace-sake. To the Episcopal Chair at Old Rome, because it was (...). Council.
Calced. Can. 8.
the Imperial City, the Fathers very fitly gave an Honorable pre-eminence, as
those 630 Fathers professed at the Council of Chalcedon; But this was a
Frank-gift, a voluntary Act, and Courtesy of the Catholic Church; and from
these Respectful compellations and Honorary Grants of Precedence, to argue,
that the Bishop and See of Rome had Authority over the rest, is the same thing
as if you should say, that because among our Magistrates the Mayor of London
has the Title of Lord, therefore all other Majors and Headboroughs are under
his Command: Or, because among our Cities, London is the Chief and Head-city,
therefore all other Cities and Corporations are under its Jurisdiction: Or,
because among our Peer's there is a Primier Duke, or a First Earl, therefore
all other Peers are in subjection to him: Or, because amongst our Bishoprics
that of Durham has some singular Favors granted to it, therefore the Prelate
of that Diocese is in his Episcopal Power and Authority Superior to all the
rest. The Ancients did not begrudge that fair Pre-eminence, which upon the New
moduling of the Roman Empire they found it necessary for them to give to some
Patriarch or other, and for some special Reasons thought it best and most
proper for them to give to the Patriarch of Rome; but they did not give away
their own Authority, or that Power they had at home, in respect whereof all
Bishops were his Equals: No, says St. Cyprian, The Episcopal Authority is one
and the same, Episcopatus unus est, cujus a Singulis in solidum pars tenetur.
S. Cyprian de Vnitate Ecclesiae.
whereof all particular Bishops are equal and joint-possessors, like
joint-Heirs in Fee. And St. Austin (whom our Author cites) says clearly
against him, that though the Bishop Page 41.
of Rome had the Pre-eminence, yet the Episcopal power was common to all that
were of that Function: and therefore Optatus called Pope Siricius his Fellow;
Socius, is the word (which our Author has very ignorantly, or very
disingenuously rendered, Contemporary; but the plain meaning is) our Fellow, or
Equal. The Ancients distinguished between Priority in point of Honor, and
Supremacy or Primacy in point of Jurisdiction. The former they denied not the
Bishop of Rome; but when once he went about to take advantage by their free
concessions, to incroach upon their due privileges, they resolutely opposed
his Usurpations, though at the same time they gave him an Honorable deference.
This was the ground of that Controversy whereof I have given you a short
account; and for your further satisfaction you may consult the vehement
Epistles of St. Cyprian to the Bishops of Rome, and particularly that to
Cornelius, where he stoutly defends the privileges of foreign Churches and
their Right of judging matters at home, against all Appeals to the Roman See;
and if anything be needful to be added, it shall be only what St. Cyprian said
afterward at Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcop^ se Episcoporum constituit,
aut Tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adigit, etc.
Cyprian. de baptizand. Haeret. in initie.
the Carthaginian Council; None of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, or by
any Tyrannical Threats, compels his Colleagues to a necessity of Obedience;
in regard that every Bishop has by virtue of his own Liberty and Authority, a
Power of Judgment in himself, and can no more be judged by another Bishop, than
another Bishop can be judged by him. This he spoke designedly against the
Bishop of Rome; and if you consider the place, you will find it to be such a
pregnant Testimony against the pretended Supremacy of the Pope of Rome, as I
believe the Author of the Nubes Testium will be puzzled how to answer.

3. Next we are to consider those his Quotations which relate to those
Applications which Foreigners were wont to make to the Roman Bishop upon
special Occasions; and examine whether these did import and argue that
Supremacy, which it is pretended he had in the Primitive Ages. 1. Then it is
true, that other Bishops were anciently wont to acquaint the Bishop of Rome
with the state of Church Affairs in their several Provinces; especially if any
new thing happened. And this was all that the Sardican Fathers meant, when
writing to Pope Julius, who had excused himself for his absence from the Synod,
in regrad they had accepted his excuse, they sent him an account of what they
had done; because they thought it most proper for the Bishops from several
Provinces to relate or communicate their proceedings to the Head, that Si ad
Petri Apostoli sedem, de singulis provinciis domini referant Sacerdotes.
is, to St. Peter's See (the sense of which place our Author has perverted by
rendering it so, as if they thought it best for them to Page 25.
have recourse to the Bishop of Rome: an unjust innuendo, that he was not so
much their Brother as their Judge.)

Now what can any man get by this, that the Bishops in those times would not
keep one another in Ignorance? In order to the Peace and Unity of the Catholic
Church, it was absolutely necessary for them to hold a mutual, brotherly,
correspondence: And why should they pass by one that was Bishop of so eminent a
City as Rome was? Yet this is no argument of any Authority he had over them for
he was wont to do the same thing himself; as other Bishops communicated the
affairs of their provinces to him, so he communicated the affairs of his
Province to Them too; and so, this is no more an argument for the Authority of
the one, than it is for the Authority of all the rest.

2. It is true too, that the Primitive Fathers did many times consult the
Opinion of the Bishop of Rome, in points that were controverted and good reason
they had to do so; for the Church of Rome was then incorrupt; men of great
Learning and Note flockt thither, some out of curiosity, and some upon
business; because, Rome was the chief Seat of the Empire (which is the Genuine
sense of Iraenus, as he is cited Page 22.
by our Author) And where was any Controversy so likely to be determined, as
at Rome? But what of all this? Does it follow hence, that they looked upon the
Pope as the supreme Judge? You know, many of the Reformers did either go or
send to Geneva, to consult Calvin's Opinion; but did any of them think, they
were under his Jurisdiction? This is as strong an Argument on the behalf of the
Presbyterians for the Supremacy of their Pope, as it is on bethe behalf of the
Romanists for the supremacy of the Pope of Rome. And yet we would not take away
any of his due Honor from him: Let him cleanse his Church from those Errors
and Corruptions we justly complain of; let him keep within his own bounds,
without invading the Liberties of other Churches, and the Rights of Princes;
let him make Rome the Seat of true Piety and Literature: let him be, as he
should be, like a right Primitive Patriarch; and then he shall see whether we
will not give him the same deference, that the Primitive Christians did.

3. It is true also, that foreign Bishops were wont, as occasion did require,
to give the Bishop of Rome an account of their Faith. But what then? Did they
not give the same account to the whole Church, and to other Bishops, as well as
to the Roman? It was a common Cause; and every Bishop was deeply concerned to
be satisfied, whether such as were of the same Order, were sound in the same
Catholic Faith. And therefore when they were newly Ordained, or were at any
time suspected of Errors, they were obliged to satisfy all their
Fellow-Bishops, and did often give an account of their Faith, under their hands
for the satisfaction of the whole Church. Nay it is notorious that even the
Bishops of Rome did the same thing (and some of them were commanded to it in
open Synods) and the Learned and Moderate Archbishop of Paris, Petrus de Marca,
ingenuously tells us, That Pet. de Marca de Concord. Lib. 6. Cap. 5.
'twas usual in those times for a Patriarch, and for the very Bishop of Rome,
when he was newly chosen, to send Letters abroad concerning his Ordination; to
which was added a Profession of his Faith. So that it is impertinent what our
Author Page 28.
alleges, of Dionysius of Alexandria giving his Namesake of Rome, a
Declaration of his Faith; for if this was an argument of his subjection to the
Pope, it is as strong a proof, that the Pope himself was in subjection to other
Bishops.

4. Nor is it to any more purpose, what our Author has collected touching the
Popes hearing of Plantiffs Causes, though he seems to lay a great deal of
stress upon it. For what the Bishop of Rome did of this kind, he did either as
the Emperors Delegate, or as an indifferent Referee, or as a friendly
Neighbor, whose Mediation and intercession in foreign parts (especially when
other Bishops concurred with him, as commonly they were wont) might and did go
a great way toward the Righting of those who were supposed to have been
unjustly or hardly dealt with at home. But that Applications were made to him
upon this ground, that he was the sole Head of the Catholic Church, and so
might by virtue of his unlimited Judicial power, command Redresses to be made
in any case, upon his own hearing of it, is more than our Author has as yet
proved, or is able to prove with the help of all his friends. And for the
clearing of this, I shall, 1. Give our Author a General answer; And then, 2.
Consider the particulars, touching the Applications made to the Bishop of Rome
by Eustathius Sebastenus, by Athanasius, Chrysostom, and others, whose cases
he is pleased to instance in.

1. Then in general, it is certain that every man's Cause was in those times to
be heard and determined in his own Province, without any Liberty given him to
appeal to any foreign Bishop whatsoever, as to a superior Judge. This is
proved already by the foregoing Historical account: but for your further
satisfaction I shall referr you to the Learned Writer Petrus de Marca himself,
whose observations had our Author read and considered, he would hardly have
collected any thing of this nature, unless he had designed to abuse and impose
upon his Readers Ignorance. For that Learned Writer does of set purpose prove
these Seven things, which utterly overthrow what the Author of the Nubes
Testium drives at. 1. That all Causes Ecclesiastical were anciently determined
by Definitive and Decretory sentences in Provincial Synods, De Concord. Lib. 7.
Cap. 1. 2, etc.
as the supreme Authority. 2. That when an Ecclesiastical person thought
himself wronged by a Povincial Synod, though he had no power of Appealing from
it, yet he might use his endeavors to get the actions of the Synod reviewed.
For that great man does excellently distinguish between an Appeal, and a
Review. An Appeal (says he) is, when a Cause is entirely removed to the
Cognizance of a superior Judge; but a Review is, when the Judgment of a Cause
is left to the same Court to be reheard and re-considered, some other Judges
being joined with those, who before past the Definitive sentence, for the
reversing of it, in case upon a review, there appeared new and sufficient
reasons for it. 3. That in order to such a review, Applications were wont to be
made to the Emperor himself, until the time of the Sardican Synod, which was
about Twenty years after that at Nice. 4. That though the Sardican Synod
allowed Applications to be made to the Bishop of Rome (out of respect, as I
suppose, to the Emperors quiet, and to save him a great deal of trouble and
vexation) yet they gave him no power to decide or hear the Cause himself, but
only that power of ordering a review, which the Emperors had. 5. That the
Synod which granted the Pope this power, consisted but of Eighty Western
Bishops. 6. That even this little power thus freely given by those few men, was
not grounded upon any right the Bishop of Rome had to it, either from
Scripture, or Canon, or so much as Custom, but a thing of Courtesy only; and
therefore it was put to the Vote in that Synod by Hosius and Gaudentius, If it
please you, if it seem Can. 3. and 1 Synod. Sardic.
good unto you, let us grant unto the Bishop of Rome, out of respect to St.
Peter 's Memory, etc. 7. That these Canons of the Sardican Synod were not
received in the Oriental Churches, which still stood stiffly to it, that neither
the Bishop of Rome. nor any other Bishops of the West had any thing to do with
the proceedings in the East, so as to overruled those Determinations which were
made in Provincial Synods. These things are so strongly and evidently proved by
Petrus de Marca himself, that every man of sense must rest satisfied in the
ingenuous account he has given touching this point. And therefore, though our
Author pretends by his Collections to prove, that in those ancient Times the
Bishop of Rome had an unlimited power over Synods, so that he could rescind
their actions Authoritatively, and as a supreme Judge, yet what he says, is
nothing but Banter.

2. As for those particular cases, which he has instanced in, if you consider
them rightly, you may easily discover the fallacy. For what if Eustathius
Sebastenus Ad Annum. 365. 3*
applied himself to Pope Liberius? Does this argue that he looked upon him as
the supreme Judge? No surely; for it is notorious, and Spondanus himself does
acknowledge it, that he applied himself also to several other Bishops in Italy,
France, Africa, Sicily, and Illyricum, and that with Letters from all these he
addressed himself to the Synod at Tyana, for his restitution to his Bishopric:
So that according to this rate, a great many other Bishops were supreme Heads
of the Church, as well as the Bishop of Rome.

As to the case of Athanasius, what if he applied himself to Pope Julius, when
he had been unjustly cast out of his Bishopric by his enemies at the Tyrian
Synod? Our Author does acknowledge out of Sozomen, that Julius sent for
Athanasius to Rome, because 'twas not safe for him to continue in Egypt: and
cannot you invite any distressed man to your House for protection, but
presently you must be his Judge? Again; what if Julius did afterward cite him
and his Adversaries to appear at Rome? This is no argument that he was by his
Place and Office supreme over all, but that he was only an indifferent Referee
in that particular Cause. For Petrus de Marca himself does tell us, that the
Oriental Bishops, who had deposed Athanasius, did by joint Consent refer the
reviewing of the whole matter to the Bishop of Rome; and yet not to him only,
but to a Synod of Western Bishops together with him; and that Pope Julius
called a Synod at the request of those who were Legates from the Oriental
Bishops: So that all this was nothing but an Arbitration; nor was the Pope sole
Arbitrator neither, but a great many other Bishops too were desired to be
Vmpires with him, because it was unreasonable that so great a man as
Athanasius, Bishop of so eminent a See as Alexandria was, should be deprived of
his rights by a Factious party after a clandestine manner. For the removing of
this Scandal, the whole business was by Mutual Agreement left to the
consideration of a Synod at Rome; which argues not at all, that the Pope or
They had an inherent Authority to Judge in that case; no more than it argues,
that every select number of Referees and Arbitrators in London, have the
decretive power of my Lord Chancellor in Westminsterhall.

I shall only add, that our Author has perverted the sense of Pope Julius, in
translating his Epistle: For whereas he renders it thus, Are you ignorant, that
according to the received Custom, you ought first to have writ to us, that
hence what was just might have been determined; it ought to be translated
according to the importance (...).
of the words in the Greek Copy, thus; Are you ignorant that this is the
Custom, first to write to us, that so afterward things which are just may be
determined. Whence it appears, that all the right which the Bishop of Rome
claimed to the Complement of an Epistle, was grounded upon mere Custom; and
that the consideration of Athanasius his case did belong not to him only, but
to other Bishops also, that Right might be done him (not hence, or from Rome,
but) afterward, by the concurrence and common Suffrage of all. And therefore
Petrus de Marca reprehends Cardinal Perron, for abusing Pope Julius, and for
perverting and wresting his sense, after the same fallacious manner, as our
Author has done: And De concord. Lib. 7. C. 4. 8.
for his reprehension I referr him to that excellent Writer.

I shall not need to detain you with a long answer to what he says concerning
Paul Bishop of Constantinople, Marcellus Page 30.
of Ancyra, and the rest, who were ejected as Athanasius was. For their case
was the same with his; and several Bishops (and the Bishop of Rome among
others) were pitched upon by the Consent of all Parties to re handle it; and
empowered (as Petrus de Marca does confess) to send for them to Rome, for the
Ibid. 2.
re-examination thereof: and all this does amount to no more, than a friendly
and neighbourly Reference. I shall only note, that the Eastern Bishops were so
far from owning any Authority in the Pope to decide the Controversy himself,
that because he presumed so much as to receive Athanasius, and the rest into
his Communion, before the Cause had been determined in a Synod of Western and
Eastern Bishops too, they fell out with him horribly, and grew out ragious, as
you may see in their Synodical Epistle, in Binius.

Much like to this was the Case of St. Chrysostom, which our Author does
instance in too, as if St. Chrysostom, being unjustly deposed by Theophilus of
A^exandria, had Appealed to the Bishop of Rome, as the supreme Judge. But the
vanity of all this is sufficiently proved by the ingenuous Petrus de Marca, who
bestows a whole Chapter upon this case only; where he shows, that St.
Chrysostom De concord. Lib. 7. Cap. 9.
appealed, not to the Pope, but to a general Council; that he wrote indeed to
the Pope, but not to him only, but also to the Bishops of Milan and Aquilea;
that the end of his writing was, that the Italian Bishops would consent to the
calling of a Council, and would help to persuade the Emperors to call one, and
that nothing can be drawn from St. Chrysostom's case to prove the Popes
Supremacy. And the Truth is, St. Chrysostom disowned the Jurisdiction of a
foreign Bishop, as you may easily see by his Epistle to Pope Innocent.
Therefore our Author falsifies the sense of St. Chrysostom; Chrysostom. Epist. ad
Innocent. Tom 7. page 154. Ed. Savil.
for toward the end of that Epistle he speaks, not to Innocent only, but to
other Bishops of Italy too, calling them his most honored and Religious Lords:
and that which he desires of them all, is, that they would write to Theophilus
and the rest, to convince them, and (...), etc.
let them know that such irregular proceedings as had been carried on by a
Party against Chrysostom, when he was absent, and did not decline a fair Trial,
ought to be looked upon as null and void, as indeed they were in their own
nature; and that such men ought to suffer according to the Ecclesiastical Laws.
To which he adds a further request, that Innocent and the rest of his
brother-Bishops would own him for a Brother; that he might receive
communicatory Letters from them, and have their love, and the love of all
others, as formerly he had. And what is all this to the supreme and sole
Jurisdiction of the Pope over all other Bishops? Suppose some eminent Divine of
a Protestant Church abroad in Denmark, or elsewhere, should now be in St.
Chrysostom's hard case, and should send to my Lord of Canterbury, and the rest
of the English Bishops, to declare their minds against the uncanonical Actions
of his enemies, and to tell them that such proceedings were not binding, and
that they would be pleased, till his cause was duly tried, to let him continue
in their good esteem, and to look upon him as a Brother, and vouchsafe him
their love and communion; would this argue, that our Archbishop and his
Suffragons, are the supreme Heads of the Catholic Church?

4. By all this you may see, that those Applications which were upon occasion
made to the Bishop of Rome by foreign Bishops, are no good argument to prove
that his unlimitted power over all Churches, which is now contended for. Let us
now consider the last point, whether any such thing can be concluded from those
Acts, which did sometimes follow after such Applications. For the Author of
Nubes Testium does Appropriate diverse acts to the Bishop of Rome, for which his
Collections cannot bear him out. As, 1. The sole power of deposing other
Prelates, that which was anciently the proper business of Synods, as Petrus de
Marca abundantly shows, and which he confesses was not obtained by the Pope
till about Eight hundred years ago. As for Nestorius (whom this Author does
instance De Concord. l. 7. Cap. 1 7.
in) he was Deposed by the Ephesine Council; nor was the Pope concerned in it
more than any other Bishop. Because he was such a notorious and obstinate
Heretic, all the Bishops of the Catholic Church were engaged in a common
cause against him. St. Cyril of Alexandria would have Excommunicated him
before, as he signified in his Epistle to Pope Caelestine, who in his Answer to
Cyril concurred with him, and consented to it, as any other Bishop might have
done. He did not delegate any power which St. Cyril had not of himself, so
making him his Substitute (as this Author is please to Romance) but only went
hand in hand with him, joining the Authority of the Roman See with his. And
(...). Ep. Caelestine ad Cyril.
when the Ephesine Council deposed Nestorius, it was the Authority of the
Church-Canons they went upon; and though they took notice of Pope Caelestine's
Letter to them, it was only in commendation of him, that they might extol him
for his Readiness in that matter, as they said in their Synodical Epistle to
the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian. Nay, though Caelestine had censured
Nestorius before that Council met, yet he did it in a Synod at Rome, with the
consent and joint-concurrence of a great many Bishops more; so that in all that
affair the Pope used no more Authority, than other Bishops did.

2. Besides this, our Author appropriates to the Pope the power of restoring
Bishops that had been outed of their Bishoprics; and so he pretends that he
restored Eustathius, Athanasius and the rest. But as for Eustathius, he was
restored by the Synod at Tyana; and that at the instance, not of the Pope
only, but a great many other Bishops in Italy, France, Africa, Sicily, and
Illyricum; nay, at the instance of the Emperor himself; for he went to that
Synod with Letters from all these, as it is acknowledged. It Is true, the Western
Bishops concurred, and gave occasion to the rest to do so too, for which St.
Basil blames them. But if the Pope had the sole power in his hand, why did
Eustathius go to any other? What need had he to give himself so much trouble,
having once made a friend of the Pope? And as for Athanasius, and the other
Eastern Bishops, who our Author says Page 30, 31.
were restored to their Sees, by Pope Julius, it is evident by the whole story,
and honestly confessed by Petrus de Marca, that De Concord. Lib. 7. C. 3. 7.
their Restitution was decreed by the Sardican Council, and was actually
procured and effected by the Emperors command. It Is true, Pope Julius received
those Bishops into his Communion, because he believed they were unjustly
deposed by the Arian Faction. It Is true too, that he wrote into the East for
the restitution of those Bishops: but it is as true, that he pretended not to
any power of doing this himself, but that those great men ought not to be
ejected without the knowledge and consent of himself and other Bishops of the
East and West. This Petrus de Marca proves undeniably, and Ibid. Cap. 4.
quarrels with Baronius, Bellarmine and Perron, for wresting the sense of
Julius his Epistle to their own Opinion (just as our Author has done) And as
touching Sozomen's words, which our Author quotes, that Learned Writer shows in
the same place how they are abused; and that they are to be understood, not as
if the restitution of those Bishops was effected directly, or by virtue of
Julius his supreme Jurisdiction, but by Consequence only; that is, Julius his
Example and Intercession had such an Influence upon other Bishops and the
Emperors, that it become the means and occasion of the Restitution of
Athanasius and his injured Brethren. And now what is all this to prove, the
sole supreme Authority of the Bishop of Rome? Especially since Athanasius
himself acknowledged, that he was restored by the suffrage of no less than
Three hundred forty and four Bishops.

Sir, if you think I have been too prolix upon this Theme, I must entreat you
to consider that it is one of the most Principal of those points which are in
Controversy between Us, and the present Roman Church, and a point of great
consequence. I hope that by what has been Written, you will be able rightly to
understand those passages which the Author of the Nubes Testium has collected
upon this Head; and before I pass on to the the next point, I shall take notice
but of Four passages more.

1. He says, the General Council of Chalcedon owned the supreme Authority of
the Page 44.
Pope; inasmuch as the chief accusation against Dioscorus was, that contrary to
the Tradition and Practice of the Church, he had presumed to call a Council,
without the consent of the Bishop of Rome; as appears from the words of
Lucentius, Legate from the Sea Apostolic, Act. 1. But this he falsisies
wretchedly. For the Crimes alleged against Dioscorus, (Bishop of Alexandria)
were, that he was a Favourer of the Heretic Eutyches, and was guilty of
Outrages and bloodshed. This made the great Outcry in the Council, that he
should be turned out of it. Indeed Lucentius (the Popes Legate) pleaded, that
Dioscorus had called a Synod without the Popes Authority. But this allegation
was not admitted, nor taken notice of by the Council; they required Lucentius
to show, wherein Dioscorus had offended? And when Lucentius persisted in his
allegation, the Fathers reprehended him for accusing him; and so Dioscorus was
commanded to keep his place; which he did till he was cast out for other
reasons. If you consult the first action of the Chalcedon-Council, you will
find what I say to be True; and by that you may judge, whether they looked upon
Lucentius his allegation to have been any Crime in Dioscorus, as this Author
would make you believe.

2. He tells us, that the Monks of Syria, called Hormisda the Pope, the Head of
all. And can we believe, that those men, who were then persecuted by the
Eutychians neglected by the Emperor, would apply themselves to Hormisda without
complementing him with an Honorable Title? Yet that Title imports no more, but
that he was one of the principal Bishops of the Catholic Church; and such
Titles were usually given to any very Eminent Bishope specially if he was a
Patriarch. For so St. Basil himself said of Athanasius the Patriarch Basil. Ep.
52.
of Alexandria, that he had the care of all the Churches; and that he thought
it most convenient for them to fly to him, as the Head of them all, and to make
use of him as their Counselor, as their Captain and Prince in the government
of their affairs. What a noise should we have about our ears, had St. Basil
said so much of the Patriarch of Rome? And yet St. Basil did not mean, that
Athanasius, was the supreme Universal Pastor.

3. He says, that the first Council at Constantinople desired their Decrees to
be confirmed by Pope Damasus; especially as to the deposing of Timotheus, an
Apollinarist. But this does not appear: for all that the Council required of
him was, that he, being absent from the Council, would concur with them in the
condemnation of the Heretic. Now this was no argument of Damasus his
Supremacy: For all Bishops were bound to do the same thing: all of them were
engaged against an Heretic, as in a common Cause, and as against a common
Enemy. Thus Novatian was excommunicated by several Synods in Rome, Italy, and
Africa; nay, by all the Bishops over the World, as Petrus de Marca does confess
out of St. Cyprian. And the reason given is this, because all the De Concord.
Lib. 7. C. 2.
Bishops were but one body; an Order of men that were United together; so that
if an Heretical Bishop arose in any Province, all the Bishops were presently to
lend their help and assistance against him. And besides, it is notorious, that
by the Canons of the Catholic Church, no Bishop was to receive any man into
his Communion that had been justly Excommunicated by another. So that when the
Council of Constantinople required Damasus (for that is the word) to concur
with them against Timotheus, they only required him to observe the Laws and
Practice of the whole Catholic Church. It was no token of his Jurisdiction
over them, but of his fraternal Communion and Unity with them.

4. Last of all, our Author produces the definition of the Florentine Council,
that the Holy Apostolic See, and Bishop of Rome has the Primacy over the whole
World, etc. But surely a man that entitles his book, A Collection of the
Primitive Fathers, should have left out this Council, which was not Three
hundred years ago, far from a Council of Primitive men. And as for those
Fathers (if they must be called so) every one knows, that there were not Thirty
Greek Bishops among them; nor were the Latins any other, than such as were
packt and shuffled together, to play the Popes Game for him. Nor was the Popes
Primacy debated at all among the Legates: No, the great business was about the
manner of the Procession of the Holy Ghost: And when some of the Greeks were
persuaded at last to subscribe to that Article, the poor Greek Emperor being
wearied out by delays, subscribed the Doctrines of Purgatory, of the Popes
Primacy, etc. himself, not so much as imparting the matter to the Greek
Legates. This was the fine Council of Fathers, whose definition our Author
reckons among the rest; though perhaps with a design to make up that by Tale,
which was wanting in Weight. I say no more of that Council, because you may see
enough to invalidate the Authority of it, by that account which our Learned Dr.
Stilling-fleet has given, out of Sguropulus, in his defense of the Greek
Church. But having said thus much concerning this Controsie, I shall the next
time endeavor to satisfy you in that point concerning Images and
Image Worship, about which the next great Controversy was in the Ancient
Church.

FINIS.

