PROVIDENCE Bringing Good out of Evil, IN A SERMON, PREACHED On the Ninth of
September, being the Day of Thanksgiving for the Discovery of the late
Treasonable Conspiracy against His Majesty's Person and Government.

By RICHARD PEARSON, Rector of St. Michaels Crooked-Lane.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. and J. A. for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red-Lyon, in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1684.

PSALM. LXXVI. 10. Surely the Wrath of Man shall Praise Thee, etc.
WHoever was the Author of this Psalm (which seems to have been Composed, not
by David, but some other Holy Writer after his time) or to whatsoever
particular History it may more immediately relate; thus much is however most
certain, from the very Genius and Contexture of the Psalm, that the occasion of
its Composure was some signal Victory and remarkable Deliverance, by which God
was pleased to rescue his People out of the hands of their Powerful Enemies;
and that it was Penned also for the standing Use and Comfort of God's Church,
in all such Circumstances. And accordingly, after the Divine Author has
Magnified God's wonderful Power and Wisdom from the Representation of his so
remarkable rescue of his People, in that particular Defeat of their Enemies, he
falls at last upon this general Conclusion here in my Text; Surely the wrath of
Man shall Praise. Thee --

From which Words I shall take occasion to do these two Things.

First, I shall consider the Truth of the Proposition, and what sufficient
Grounds we have to be assured in the General, that all the outrageous Actions
of wicked and ungodly Men, are by that Overruling Providence which knows how
to bring Good out of Evil, constantly forced (quite contrary to the designs and
intents of the Persons so Acting) toward the accidental Promotion of God's
Glory, and the good of his Church. I shall endeavor to show Briefly, what
sufficient grounds of Reason we have to be assured of this in the General, even
though we had no such clear Examples of the thing, nor were able to give any
account of the particular manner how this should come to pass.

Secondly, For our more abundant satisfaction in so comfortable a Truth, I
shall endeavor, by the help of Scripture, more particularly to demonstrate
some of the chief ways and manners how the outrageous actions and wicked
enterprises of the Enemies of Religion are at last forced to turn to God's
Praise, and the real Benefit of his faithful People.

First, I am to consider the Truth of the Proposition, and what sufficient
grounds we have to be assured of this in the general, though we had no clear*
Examples of the thing, nor were able to give any account of the particular
manner how this should come to pass. That it is, that it must be so in the
general, and cannot be otherwise, we have as much, we have the same Reason to
be certain of, as we have that there is a God who Governs the World, a Supreme
absolutely perfect Being that Rules and Disposes all Events so as is most
agreeable to such the Essential Perfection of his Nature. So that as sure as
God is Infinitely Wise, and therefore infallibly knows what will, and what will
not, make for his own Glory and the good of his Church; as sure as he is
Infinitely Good and holy, and so willing to promote the same* as sure as he is
Infinitely powerful, so that he can easily bring about whatsoever he desires,
and not only hinder but perfectly annihilate whatever other Being goes to
resist him? no less sure is it, that neither Man nor Devil (let their Malice
and cursed Purposes be what they will) are ever suffered to proceed to outward
Act, to put any thing in Execution, but only what God can and does so Overruled
by his Providence, as that it shall be subservient to his own Holy and Wise
ends, and be actually made use of by him, sooner or later, so as to turn to his
Glory, and the real advantage of his faithful Servants. Very remarkable to this
purpose is that great saying of St. Augustine; God, who is the Supreme Governor
and disposer of all things, would by no means suffer any Evil to be in the
World, were he not so Infinitely Wise and Good and Powerful as to make Evil it
self become beneficial, by bringing good out of it. God's Infinite Power and
Providence Overrules and sets Bounds to the Rage of the Devil and all his
wicked Instruments; so that while they Persecute and Design utterly to destroy
God's People, and though several of Christ's Members may, for the present,
suffer under their Rage, God in his Infinite Wisdom so Restrains them, that
they can go no farther than accidentally tends to the real advantage of his
Church in general. They build up and strengthen what they would destroy; their
own designs contradict and recoil upon themselves, and, in the event, defeat
their own Intentions. The Devil himself is forced, against his will, to do
God's Work, and to promote his Glory, while he intends nothing less. The Rage
of Man turns to God's Praise, and as for the remainder of wrath which would not
do so, which cannot be made use of nor converted to this purpose, God is sure
always to restrain it, and never suffers it to take effect by putting its
designs in Execution. Howsoever unprofitable or destructive the wicked actions
of Men may be to themselves who commit them, and howsoever immediately offensive
to God and contrary to his Will the irregularity and immorality of the same is;
yet when the thing is done, God is sure to make some good use of it, and to
have his own Will out of the very worst action that Men commit, and would not
otherwise ever permit it to be done. It Is impossible indeed, that we poor,
weak, finite Creatures should be able, in a Thousand Instances of this Nature,
to discover the particular manner how this should be brought about: but God
sees not as Man sees; he beholds things at once and together; he is perfectly
well acquainted with all the several circumstances, connection, and dependences
of things upon each other. He sees what will be the last end of such or such an
Adversary; what influence the alterations he is permitted to work will have,
and upon what Persons, and how far distant; how many Years, or (sometimes) Ages
after, the benefit will accrue. Of all this now, and a Thousand other
Circumstances we are wholly ignorant and unable to consider. So that we must
needs be much to seek concerning the particular manner how God will bring Good
out of such an Evil; but yet that he will do so in the general, we can no more
question, than we can doubt of God's Goodness, Omniscience and Omnipotence;
that is, whether there be indeed a God. If we be satisfied of this, we shall
also find Reason to conclude, That all things (that is, all Afflictions and
Persecutions, which are the effects of other Men's Wrath) shall work together
for good to them that love God; and that the Wrath of Man shall turn to Gods
Praise, though we were not furnished with so many Examples of the thing, nor
were enabled to give any account at all, concerning the manner how this should
be brought to pass.

But Secondly, For our more abundant satisfaction in so comfortable a Truth, I
shall, in the next place, endeavor more particularly to domonstrate some of
the chief ways and several manners how the outrageous Actions and wicked
enterprises of the Enemies of Religion are, at last, forced to turn to the
Divine Praise, and the real benefit of God's faithful People.

And this may come to pass, First, As such ruggid dealings with them, tends
more effectually to antidote them from being tainted and infected with the
Errors and Corruptions of such Enemies. For, should wicked Men and false
Worshippers, ceasing to Persecute the true Professors, allow them fair
quarter, and behave themselves kindly and courteously toward them, there would
then be far more danger of their being seduced and enticed to partake of the
same Abominations, and to enter upon such a familiarity as might prove very
destructive, and of the worst consequence. But now, the many injuries and ill
turns which the Enemies of the Truth do usually offer to the Godly, That Rage
against them, and Hatred, which they are ready upon all occasions to show, is
generally in it self, a very powerful security from the former danger. And this
may be (among many others) one good Reason why God is pleased to permit those
that are born after the Flesh, to malign, and Persecute those that are born
after the Spirit, viz. that thereby, they might be free from the many
Temptations and occasions of seduction, which might attend a familiarity with
such Men: and be less subject to take the Infection of their Errors and bad
Examples; so that if no other good did accidentally come to us, from the Rage
of such Men, this is certainly to be looked upon as no small advantage.

But Secondly, The Rage of such Persons is forced to turn to God's Praise, as
Persecutions tend to correct the failings of good Men, and to exercise and
illustrate their several Graces and Virtues. By these, good Men are usually
made much better and more approved, while they tend to exercise our Patience,
to quicken our Devotion, to Evidence our Zeal and Christian Fortitude, and to
show to the whole World what Love we bear to the Truth, and how much we are
willing to undergo for the Honor of God. Till they have suffered something for
it. Truth is too apt to grow Cheap and be less prized many times, even by those
that are good Men, for the main; whereas we are Apt on the contrary, never to
value it at a higher Rate, or to be more Zealous for it, or to make better use
of it, than when it is opposed and persecuted. What more truly Beneficial
therefore or tending to the Divine Glory, than for God, Who uses to bring Good
out of Evil, To make use also of the Opposers of his Truth, to Rouse up his
Servants, whom he sees growing more Remiss and Negligent than they should be
and to Suffer such Temptations to assalt them, by which their Drousie Minds may
be Spurred on into a greater Love and Zeal for the Truth, and a deeper Sense of
the Divine Benefit in it; and in general, Excited to the more Diligent
performance of their Duty. In short, so unable are Men generally to bear long
prosperity, without being the worse for it, and of such Excellent use is
Adversity to Purge away the ill Humors, which the best Men are too Apt to
contract, that God sees it highly convenient, for the general good of his
Servants, sometimes to make use of this Method; and does therefore ever and
anon, within some few Ages, permit ill Men to become the Rods and Instruments
of Correction to his People, and use them as Pruning Hooks in his Vineyard.

Outward Trials and Adversities do usually most of all promote the true inward
Spiritual Prosperity of God's Church. Nor does any thing conduce more, either
to restore it, or to keep it Sound and in Health, than the due Exercises and
Breathings of Persecution. I shall Conclude this particular, with that Notable
passage of St. Hirom, who in one of his Books has these Words; Scribere
disposui, si tamen Dominus vitam dederit, etc. I determine with my self, (if
God shall give me Life) to write a History from the coming of our Savior, to
our present Times; that is, from the Times of the Apostles to the Dregs of this
Age; in which I design to show at large, how, and by whom the Church of God was
Replinished; how it was still increased by Persecutions, and crowned by
Martyrdoms; and when it came to Christian Princes, How strangely it was
diminished in Virtue, while it increased in Riches and Ease, in External Power
and Prosperity.

Thirdly, Another manner after which the Wrath of Man is forced to turn to
God's Praise is, when he makes the very Execution of the Malice of Wicked Men
against his Servants, become the Effectual means, or occasion of promoting
their welfair, and of bringing about that very good thing, which the other
desired and designed, thereby, to hinder. And now, as there are few good Men,
I Am persuaded, who diligently observe and take Notice of God's Providential
dealings and wise disposal of Things, but can readily find some happy Instances
of this, in their own Experience, either in Relation to themselves, or some
other of their acquaintance; so shall we not fail (however) of meeting with
variety of Examples of this kind, in Holy Scripture. Thus while the Envy and
Malice of Joseph's Brethren moved them to sell him to the Ishmaelites, out of a
design to prevent and hinder that Exaltation of his, which had been signified
to him in a Dream, God was pleased, in his wonderful Providence, so to order
all Circumstances, as that they thereby put him into the direct Rode of his
Preferment, and far more Effectually (tho Ignorantly indeed and full contrary
to their own Will) contributed thereto, than if they had all laid their Heads
together and Studied most industriously how to Effect the same. And accordingly
Joseph was so thoroughly Sensible of Gods Overruling Providence and Gracious
design, from the very first, in permitting them to put their Wicked design in
Execution, that he calls their Selling of him by the Name of Gods sending him
into Egypt Genesis 45. 5. Be not Angry with your selves, that you Sold me; For God
sent me before you, to preserve Life. And Genesis 50. 20. As for you, you thought
Evil against me, but God meant it unto Good. And thus also whilst Wicked
Pharaoh, contriving how to hinder the Children of Israel from so Multiplying
and growing so mighty, as that they might at last depart from him, by a strong
Hand, and cast off the Yoke from them, Commands his People to cast all the
Male-Children of the Hebrews into the River, God was pleased to make use of
this very decree of the Bloody Tyrant, as the Happy means and occasion, not
only of Moses Preservation and Preferment, but also of the whole peoples
Deliverance. For, with him, in an Ark of Bul-Rushes, Swims also the whole
Fortune of Israel, and certainly Arrives at a safe Harbor. And little did
Pharaoh think that this Command of his should prove an Effectual Recommendation
of that very Person to the Care of his own Compassionate Daughter, and help him
to the Education of his own Court, who should thereby be better prepared and
qualified to become the Prince and Leader of the People Israel, and prove at
last the happy Instrument to Effect that Deliverance, which the Tyrant
endeavored so much to prevent. And so afterward, though Pharaoh designed
nothing but the securing them to himself for ever, by dispiriting of that
People, and keeping them under in the hardest Bondage; God was graciously
pleased to permit this Oppression for a while, as a good means (and perhaps the
only Effectual one,) to prepare and make them willing to follow Moses, and to
forsake the Land of Egypt and those Habitations, which long Time and Custom had
so much endeared to them. And we may easily guess how very hardly they could
ever have been persuaded to have thought of any such thing, had they but been
suffered to enjoy any Tolerable Condition among the Egyptians; when,
notwithstanding all their former Extreme hard usage, and miraculous
Deliverance, and when, notwithstanding their being Fed with most Delicious
Manna in the Wilderness, and the hopes of Possessing a Land Flowing with Milk
and Honey, they could yet, after all this, find in their Hearts to hanker after
the Fleshpots, and pine for the Garlic and Onyons of Egypt, and wish that
they had Lived and Died there.

But to proceed to other Instances; what can we think of Readiness Envy and Rage
against David, the many hazardous employments he put him upon, and the attempts
he made to destrov and hinder him from Succeeding him? what were all these, but
as so many several steps which providence made use of, to mount him to the
Throne? while they served effectually to make him both more gracious and
renowned among the people, and more fit and better qualified to Reign ovre
them. In short, all Readiness Rage against him served only to make a more speedy
way, for David, while the other ran furiously upon his own destruction, in
opposing him.

Again, how little did Saint Paul think, whilst yet Saul, and breathing out
Threatenings and Persecution against Christians, that by permitting him so to
Rage, God was fitting him to become a more Eminent Instrument for the
propagation of the Christian Faith? and that his so Persecuting should
afterward prove a most effectual means to confirm and build up that Church
which he designed, thereby, to destroy? And yet, is not the consideration of so
violent a Persecutour, all of a sudden, converted into the stoutest Champion,
an undeniable Evidence of the reality of his miraculous Conviction, by Christ's
speaking to him from Heaven; and so both enough, of it self, to convince, or
confound the obstinate Jews then, and to be always a standing irrefragable
Argument, to all Posterity that well consider it, of the Truth and Divinity of
the whole Christian Religion in general? I shall give only one Instance more
of this kind, whereas I might be yet numerous. The greatest wickedness that
ever was committed by the Sons of Men, proved an occasion of the greatest glory
to God, and of the most singular benefit that could befall Mankind. I need not
tell you, that I mean the putting to Death of our blessed Savior, toward the
effecting of which, whilst Judas was moved out of sorded Covetousness; the
Scribes and Pharisees and chief Priests, out of implacable Malice and Envy;
Pontius Pilate, out of base Ambition and fear of offending Caesar; and others,
to satisfy other vile ends of their own; God was pleased to permit all these
sinful motions of the several Persons therein concerned, and to order such a
concurrence of circumstances, as that nothing should hinder them from putting
their wicked design in execution; God himself making use of them, as
Instruments, for the effecting of his own most holy and gracious purposes
therein.

Fourthly, (which seems also to be the most direct Meaning and Relation of my
Text) The Wrath of Man turns, at last, to God's Praise, while it gives occasion
unto all of magnifying and admiring the Divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness
toward his Servants, in restraining the force of their Persecutors; in
wonderfully supporting and preserving them under their Pressures, and in his
remarkable Deliverances of them out of all their Dangers, by the total Defeat
and Overthrow of their Adversaries. Thus the Fury of Nebuchadnezzar, which
caused the Furnace to be heated Seven times hotter than usual, what did it else
effect or serve for, but only to make God's Glory shine so much the brighter,
in his Miraculous Preservation of the Three Childeren? by which, as they became
Living Martyrs, so does the consideration of the same, force the Haughty
Monarch to become himself a kind of Confessor, and extort from him this
Notable Magnificat and Acknowledgment, Dan. 3. 28. Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke
and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Mishach and Abednego, etc. So while
the Malicious Presidents endeavored to destroy Daniel, by geting him cast into
the Den of Lions, what did they procure thereby, but the Prophets greater
Exaltation and Favor with the King, and the utter Ruin of themselves and their
whole Families? And what an occasion did it prove of God's being generally
Glorified, while, in consideration of the so Miraculous Deliverance, King
Darius makes this following Decree and Acknowledgment, Dan. 6. 26. That in
every Dominion of his Kingdom, Men should Tremble and Fear before the God of
Daniel: for he is the Living God, and* Steadfast for ever, and his kingdom that
which shall not be destroyed, and his Dominion shall be ever unto the End. He
delivers and rescueth, and he works Signs and Wonders, in Heaven, and in
Earth. I might also remind you of the History of Proud Pharaoh, whose Insolence
and Prodigious Obstinacy had at last such a Conclusion, and his in Rage against
God's People procured him so Miraculous an overthrow, as that he was (though
unwillingly) the occasion of more Glory unto God, than, perhaps, any the most
Religious Prince, by his greatest Piety. I might also* Instance in the
Wonderful Defeat of Senacherib's Numerous Army; which, as it was (probably) the
occasion of this Triumphant Psalm in general, so may it serve likewise as a
standing Monument of the Truth of my Text in particular. Which I might* have
still illustrated, by some farther considerations: but I proceed rather to a
particular Application, in reference to the present occasion. In the Management
of which I shall confine my self to these Two Generals,

First, I shall briefly consider the Horror and Hainousness of that late
Barbarous Conspiracy, which the Hellish Wrath and Fury of Phanatick Spirits
engaged them to enter into, against the Life of our Dread Sovereign, and for
the destruction of all his Faithful Adherents, their Brethren and
Fellow Subjects, who were at quiet in the Land.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to show how the Cursed Designs and Attempts of
this their Rage against us, thus clearly discovered and Miraculously defeated,
may Naturally tend, by the Divine Grace and Blessing, to the Praise and Glory
of God, and the real welfare and singular Benefit of this Church and Nation.

As to the First of these, In considering of this Conspiracy, I shall not think
it needful to go about to show the certainty of the thing it self; which has
been so abundantly proved, by all sorts of Evidence, that indeed nothing of
this Nature is capable of more, or better; nor could there have been made a
more clear Discovery or Confirmation, unless by the Actual Accomplishment of so
Damnable a Design. One of the Accomplices, out of mere Guilt and Horror of
Conscience, lays Violent Hands upon himself; very many of the rest Fly, as
afraid to stand the Just Trial of our Laws; and those who have been Condemned
and Suffered for the Crime, have all of them confessed the Thing, in General. In
short, there is no Man, I Am persuaded, will pretend in the least to question or
disbelieve it, but only such Persons, who themselves full well know it to be
true, and could also, if they pleased, give us their own Evidence in the Case.
I cannot think it requisite neither, that I should much Act the part of an
Historian, by endeavoring to represent all the matter of Fact (so far as yet
discovered) or give you a Complete Scheme of the whole Contrivance, since this
has been done already Sufficiently, by Reading to you the King's Declaration,

I shall pretend no farther at present, but only briefly to remark, and Point
out to you some few of the many* Aggravating Circumstances of this Conspiracy,
and such as are big with the fowlest Deformity, the blackest Horror and
Ingratitude.

And here I might first remark the Monstrous Impudence of these vile
Miscreants, who were not ashamed thus, in the same Age, and by the same Ways
and Methods, to attempt the Destruction of the Son, by which they had before
Ruined his Father of ever Blessed Memory; that they should so far Affront their
own Reason, and bid such defiance to Heaven it self, as to dare to design upon
the Life, of a Prince so abundantly forewarned so signalized by the particular
Care of Providence, so wonderfully Restored, so all along preserved by almost a
continued Series of Miracles. I might also remind you of the no less Monstrous
Ingratitude of these wicked Wretches, both toward God and His Sacred Majesty.
For several of the* chief Conspirators, were such as had been raised to their
Height, by His Majesty's special Favor and Bounty, such upon whom he had
heaped Honors, or Obliged by the greatest Benefits; and yet nothing was*
enough to Satisfy their Greedy Covetuousness and Ambition. And most of those
who were to be the main Instruments in this black Tragedy, were such as had
been in Arms* and so active in the former Rebellion, as that they had long ago
received according to their Deserts, had it not been for the wonderful Clemency
of the Kings Act of Oblivion. And yet these scrupled not, in requital, to
deprive him of Life, who had so graciously given them their own.

I might tell you how they first prepared the way for a general Rebellion, by
bespattering and disabling the Kings most Faithful Subjects, and representing
all his firm Friends under the Odious Character of Papists, and Popishly
Affected; by rasing Tumults, Riots, and Sedition; by contiually sending forth
whole Swarms of the most false and Venomous Libels; by every where spreading
Fears and Jealousies; by the most Malicious Lies and Slanders; by the most
Horrid Perjuries and Subornations. In short, by so Obstructing the due Course
of the Laws themselves, and Debauching the Execution of them to their own vile
purposes, through the Corruption of some Officers, that Loyalty was made the
only Crime to be punished, and none so sure to go free, and be applauded too,
as those who had made themselves, in the highest manner, Obnoxious to the
Government. And when at last a stop was put to these proceedings, so that they
perceived they could not, by these Methods, so speedily Effect what they
Designed; then they contrive presently how to Murder the King and his Royal
Brother, after the most Barbarous manner, and to follow that with a General
Massacre of all the most Loyal Nobility and Gentry of the Land. And, which
still heightens this Villainy even to Astonishment, all these black Designs were
underhand promoted and carried on, by the pretense of Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, under color of Securing the Kings Person, and the Prevention of
Popery and Arbitrary Government.

Thus, had not God's Miraculous Providence prevented, when once the Fatal Blow
had been stricken, and all the King's Faithful Subjects Butchered, the
Conspiratours (of so different Parties and Opinions that nothing now Unites
them, but their Common Hatred against, and desire to destroy the present
Government) would then most certainly have soon quarreled among themselves, and
a new Scene of Blood and Confusion have followed, till at last this miserable
Land weakened to so high a decree, with her own unnatural Convulsions, must in
all probability, have become an easy Prey to a Foreign Conqueror; and so
that Popery and Slavery have been indeed Introduced, which these Men all along
so much only pretended to Fear. For let such Men talk what they will, I cannot
think that they are really afraid of Popery; but are glad only to Create, and
then manage* and promote the Fears of it, in order to the* Destruction of our
Established Religion and Government; which they seem to hate far worse than
Popery it self. As to their Loyalty toward Princes, I Am sure, there is no great
difference betwixt the Principles of a Phanatick, and of a Jesuit. They are
both well enough agreed about the thing it self, and Quarrel only, which of
them should have the sole privilege of Murdering Princes. And in this last
Plot, they thought (as it is usual said) to wrong the very Devil; and have
indeed thereby made themselves far worse than the very worst Papists, by
designing to Murder the King themselves, and then to cast it, and pretend to
revenge it, upon them, and all those they should think fit to brand with that
Character. By which unparalled Villainy, they seem, at last, to have found out
a new Expedient, to Rid this Land of Jesuits; who may now think themselves so
perfectly out done in their own Trade, as, perhaps, out of mere shame and
dispare of ever equalizing these, they may resolve to show their Heads here no
more. But however, let them do what they please; this Conspiracy is, in it
self, such a Master-Peice of all Iniquity, such a Monstrous Complication of the
greatest Villainy, as cannot but Astonish all those who consider it, at present,
and will, perhaps, scarcely gain Credit with Posterity, that ever any Humane
Creatures should be capable of such Degeneracy from their Nature. In the mean
time, it is to be hoped, that the same God, (whose Infinite Wisdom uses to
bring Good out of Evil, and who has been pleased, in greatest Mercy, to prevent
so sad Desolalation) will also turn the Discovery of this Plot, to his own
Glory, and the lasting Peace and Security of this Kingdom.

Which brings me now to the Second General thing I was to endeavor to show,
viz. How, the Cursed Designs and Attempts of this their Rage against us, thus
clearly discovered and Miraculously defeated, may Naturally tend, by the Divine
Grace and Blessing, to the Praise and Glory of God, and to the Real Welfare,
and Singular Benefit, of this Church and Nation.

And to this Excellent purpose now, it tends, as it may Justly serve, to strike
Terror and Confusion into the Hearts of all those who have been any ways
concerned in, or Abettors and Promotors of this Unnatural Conspiracy; who may
well be moved, from hence, with deepest Shame and Sorrow, to consider and
reflect upon what they have done; what extreme Folly and Madness they have been
guilty of; and forever be deterred, for the future, from undertaking or
engaging themselves in any such wicked Enterprise. Whilst, from the
Consideration of the so remarkable Detection and Baffle of their Designs,
together with the Just and Exemplary Punishment of several of their
Fellow-Criminals, they are Furnished with a most sensible Argument and
Demonstration of the Vanity of such Attempts, and what a tender Care and
watchful Eye, Providence has for the Security and Preservation of his own
Vicegerents; so that the Counsels and Attempts of such as go about to Violate
the Persons of their Lawful Princes and Governors, are Commonly Vain and
Insuccesful; their Wrath proves, at last, Impotent, and Destructive only to
themselves; they do but Fight against God himself, in divising how to put him
out whom God will Exalt. And indeed, our present Sovereign has been so often
and remarkably preserved, and, from this last Conspiracy, by such an
Astonishing, and (almost) Unparalled Instance of the Divine Providence, that
it may seem hard even for the most Atheistical Spirit, not to be Convinced
thereby; and should be enough to strike such an Awe into the Minds of all those
who have any remaining Sparks of Religion, or the least Suspicion of a Deity,
that, for the time to come, one would think it should be altogether as
Impossible to find any willing to Attempt, as it has proved hitherto to Effect,
His Destruction. And this very Consideration of God's so Wonderfully
interposing to blast their Hellish Plot, Just when they had made all so sure,
that in all Humane Judgment, it was Impossible for them to fail of Effecting
it, had such a strange Influence upon the mind of one of the Conspirators, that
(according to his own Confession) he was ready to relent, and give over
thereupon. Nor could he have prevailed with himself to have gone on, against
such a Flaming Sword as stood in the way to deter him, had it not been for the
Company and Encouragement of a far more false and wicked Prophet than Balaam,
who so Thirsted after Royal Blood, and the Rewards of Unrighteousness, that he
could neither* see nor hear any thing, but soon stopped the Mouth of his Creature
that talked to him of going back, and Spurred him on again, by a most Impious
and Presumptious Misinterpretation of that Wonderful Providence, which ought to
have deterred them.

If such true Protestants had* but as much Religion as the great Turk (whose
cause they so much Favor at present, and wish for his Success against
Christians) they would, from the consideration of God's so strange and
remarkable Deliverances of our King, Learn, if not (as it is said that Barbarian
does) to Entertain a high esteem of his Majesty; yet at least out of mere
despair of Success, (especially after this last Defeat,) to be afraid to think
any more of lifting up their Hands* against Him. Treason, I confess, has in it
such a Complication of other grievous Sins, and the main Contrivers and chief
Agitators* of it, have usually such strangely Debauched Understandings, and
Hardened Hearts, by a long Custom in other Sins against Conscience, that
though, through the Prince's Clemency, they Escape and be Pardoned again and
again; yet they seldom truly Repent, or leave off their Disloyal Practices;
scarce any Defeats are Sufficient to Discourage them; but still, as soon as
ever they think they have an Opportunity, they enter upon Fresh Conspiracies;
and when they come at last to Suffer for their Crimes, scarce any sort of
Sinners seem to be more left to themselves, and a Reprobate Sense, or may be
generally* observed to go out of* the World, with less Sign of any true
Penitence. And I wish* the Observation had not been too* much verified in the
Behavior* of those Traitors, who Suffered for the late Conspiracy.

They showed* themselves more Solicitous not to Discover their Accomplices,
that others might still have an Opportunity to carry on the Work, which
themselves failed of, than about any great Sorrow for, or a Detestation of
their own Crimes. And I could wish too, that most of our* Dissentors did not,
both by their Talk and Behavior, still show* themselves (as far as they dare)
so much well-wishers to the accursed Cause. But yet I hope that many, even of
those who have been deeply enough concerned in the General, and would have been
ready to have approved of the thing, had* it Succeeded, will yet now* take
occasion, from the so Wonderful Defeat of the Horrid Design, to review those
accursed Opinions and Principles, which moved them to be so much concerned; and
so being more Sensible of their Duty, and Heartily sorry for the Breach of it,
become for the Future truly Loval and Obedient Subjects. By which means, the
Defeated Wrath of our Adversaries, will turn (as it Naturally tends) to God's
Praise, and not a little to the Benefit of these Nations.

But Secondly, Though all of the chief Actors, who know themselves directly
concerned in the Treason, should still (which God forbid) continue Obstinate
and Impenitent; yet the Wrath of these Men will still accidentally tend to
God's Praise, and the good of the Church and Commonwealth, in as much as the
so clear Discovery and Prevention of the Conspiracy must needs open the Eyes of
all Impartial and well-meaning Men, who were before apt to entertain too good
an Opinion, and subject to be drawn aside with the fair pretenses of these
cunning Incendiaries and Seducers. When once Honest Men come plainly to
understand what they would be at, that under the pretense of Zeal for Religion,
and God's* Glory, they Harbor nothing but Worldly Interest, Covetuousness, and
Cruelty, and make Liberty a mere Cloak for Maliciousness, for Rapine, Treason,
and Rebellion; they are then Sufficiently Antidoted and Secured against the
Poisonous Infusions of their Destructive Principles. God has been pleased, once
more, to Suffer these vile Hypocrites abundantly to unmask themselves; to
proceed so far, as to show their Wolves Teeth from under the covering of the
Sheepskin, though they have not now been permitted to Bite. They have now so
plainly discovered to the World their Bloody Nature, that all Sincere hearted
Persons Will beware of such false Prophets, and equally abhor their Practices,
and the Cursed Principles which lead to them. Men will Suffer themselves to be
no more afrighted out of their Christianity and Allegiance, into some of the
worst Errors of Popery, and into the immediate Danger of Perpetual Slavery*
and Confusion, by the Mere Fears of Popery and Arbitrary Government. Can any
Man, who has the least Conscience, himself, any longer believe these to be Men
of tender Consciences, who can thus strain at a Gnat, and Swallow a Camel; that
can startle at the use of an Innocent Coremony, and yet be so far from making
the least Scruple at the Horrid Murder of their most Gracious Prince, and the
most* Barbarous Massacre* of their Fellow Subjects, that ever was Designed, as,
on the contrary, to count it an Action most Heroic and highly Meritorious *
Must not he himself be perfectly out of his own Wats, who can any more be
tempted to think, these Men and their Favorers, to be the only Sober, Godly
party of the Nation, merely, because they have the Modesty to call themselves
so?

After a Plot of this Horrid Complexion, so clearly Discovered, so Miraculously
Defeated, a Plot, in which the whole Body of Dissenters seem to have been, more
or less, Engaged, and which so Evidently proceeded from the Poison of
Phanatical Principles; one would think* the main Ringleaders* should now give
over of their own accord; and that mere Shame and Despair (had they not long
ago quite forgotten how to Blush) should be Sufficient, without any other Law
or Magistrate, to suppress their Seditious Conventicles, those Schools of
Hypocrisy and Rebellion; or, at least, that they should now be forced to give
over the Trade, meenly for want of Customers. The Implacable Wrath and
Villainous Attempts of these Men, have done enough to inlighten the
Understandings, and open the Eyes of all Men, who have any; so that it now
seems scarcely possible that any should be longer deceived by them, who are not
resolved to deceive themselves; their Fault can no longer be excused, by any
such thing as Ignorance: but must be Attributed to the most Affected Malice and
Obstinacy.

Whilst all Men who have any Sense of Religion left in them, any Love to their
King or Country, any Regard to the Welfare of their own Souls, or Bodies, will
be careful to avoid the Masters of such Infectious Assemblies; and returning
again to the Bosom of the Church from which they have so wickedly departed,
join with other Faithful Christians, in the sincere Worship of God, and in
Honoring and Obeying of the King, and Live together with us in Peace, in Unity
and Brotherly Love.

Than which, what can tend more to the Praise of God, or the Benefit and
Edification of the Church?

And if any shall still be so Stupidly weak, or Prodigiously Obstinate, as to
be willing to run after these Men, notwithstanding all this; yet I hope, (which
is the Third manner how their Wrath may tend to God's Praise) that the late
Attempts of these Men, will Effectually awaken all Conscientious Magistrates,
in their several Places, to put those wholesome Laws in Execution, which the
Wisdom of our Governors has long since provided in this Case. And I hope we
are now better acquainted with things, and with the true meaning of both those
Words, than that any should still be afrighted from doing of their Duty, by the
Odious Name of Persecution for Religion; by which, such Malefactors have all
along endeavored to discourage Men's Charitable Diligence in this kind. We
have formerly experienced, to our cost, and have now again Learnt, with a
Witness, what such Men mean, by their Religion; under the Specious pretense of
which, they are used to Meditate nothing else but Violence and Rapine, Murder
and Rebellion; any just Penalty upon, or necessary restraint of them from the
Commission of which Crimes, they presently call by the Name of Persecution for
Religion.

They that would disturb the Peace of a whole Nation, and endeavor to take
away the Life of their Lawful Sovereign, are certainly Guilty of a Crime, of a
far higher Nature, than they who Commit a Common Felony or Murder upon a Pivate
Man: and yet these latter usually Suffer, without Pity; who (if they had but
the same Impudence) might, with equal Right, pretend to Religion and Conscience
in the Case, and cry out of Persecution too. And why should then the far
greatter Criminals be spared or Connived at, merely for such Impudent
pretenses, as indeed render them infinitely more Dangerous to the
Commonwealth, and more Justly Abominable both to God and Man? Such a Religion
as this, (if it must needs be called so) the Devil himself is of; Who was a
Murderer and a Lier from the Beginning. So that with what Face can such Men say
they are Persecuted merely because they ate restrained from truly Persecuting
of others? whereas, for Magistrates not to endeavor to hinder them from this,
by all Lawful Methods, would be indeed to Persecute, and (in Effect) to destroy
all the most Faithful Subjects of the Land, by giving these Men an Opportunity
to do so. And since our Schismatical Conventicles have ever proved themselves
such Schools of Hypocrisy and never-failing Seed-Plots of Sedition and
Rebellion, it is truly an Act, no less of the highest Charity, than Justice (for
all those more immediately concerned by their Office) to endeavor, as they are
Bound both by the Law of God and Man, and to use all due means, to suppress
them. Which till it be Effectually done, in vain is it to hope for the least
quiet, or to see good days in England. Why should Men, under the pretense of
Religion, be Suffered to destroy it? Why should they be permitted to Poison the
Minds of those, who might otherwise prove good Subjects and Christians, with
Principles of Sedition and Disloyalty; to undo their Souls, and endanger the
bringing of their Bodies to a shameful and untimely End; in a Word, to involve
the whole Nation in Ruin and Confusion, and to Propagate Schism, and lay the
Foundation of Blood and Massacres to all Posterity? Nor shall I be afraid to
say, that we well Remember, what Juncture of time it was, and by what kind of
Representatives, and are now also Sensible upon what design, it was voiced a
thing grievous to the Subject to have Laws against Dissenters put in Execution.
Upon all which, and much more of the like Nature, the late Hellish Conspiracy
has furnished us with such a lively Comment, as may justly awaken Magistrates,
to put those very Laws in the most Vigorous Execution, as ever they desire the
Preservation, either of the Religion or Government now Established.

And let such Men, who may thus Suffer as Evil Doors, cry out falsely of
Persecution, as much as they please; it is far better they should do so, than
all Honest Men feel their Persecution indeed; Which can no ways, likely, be
prevented, but by such Timely and Legal Restraints of the Ringleaders of the
Faction.

And if the Discovery of this Damnable Plot might (as well it may) have this
good Effect, the Wrath of our Adversaries would (I make no Question) very much
tend to God's Praise, and the lasting Peace, and Security of these Nations.

But however, in the Fourth Place, This Plot must needs prove of no
inconsiderable Advantage, in as much as it has enabled us most clearly to
distinguish, betwixt Persons; to know our True Friends from our Foes. It has
been for the revealing of the Thoughts and Inclinations of many Men's Hearts;
and has Taught us Sufficiently both to discover and beware of a most Dangerous
sort of Enemies among us, because False, Treacherous, and such pretended
Friends to the Church and State. Such Masquerade Church of England-Men have now
been Encouraged to cast off their Visards, and by their Behavior in all the
late Seditious Transactions, have Sufficiently betrayed their
Hollow-Heartedness, and how ready they are, upon all Occasions, to warp, and
(as one of them, who has himself done so, Phraseth it) to Play the Government
a Slippery Trick. These Men are so far only, of our Church, as may Enable them
to do it more Mischief, than if they were it is. Professed Enemies; and seem
indeed, for no other End, willing to Communicate with us at all, but only to
Obtain a better Opportunity thereby of working our Destruction. And yet after
they have joined with the Dissenters in all their ill Designs against the
Government, and happen at last (any of them) together with the other, to be
Discovered and Punished for their Crime; the whole Body of the Phanaticks
endeavor presently, from hence, to Acquit or Excuse themselves, by Impudently
shifting off the Reproach upon us; giving out that it is not so much a Plot of
the Dissenters, but such in which those of the Church of England also have
been, at least, no less concerned.

But, God be thanked, as such Practices are wholly Inconsistent with our
Principles, so Slander it self has not, cannot pretend to taint any true Son of
our Church, as the least concerned in this Conspiracy. They must needs own,
that they were their own true Fellow-Protestants only, that were in it; not one
Man of us, whom they wickedly call the Papists of the Church of England.

Thus we have been at length surprised with a True and most Excessive
Superlative, that has, all along, lain Lurking, even in those who so much Pride
themselves with the Title of Moderate Men; and we are well assured that, in
whatsoever else they may answer that Name, they have not done so, even in the
lowest and most Moderate degree (if any such their could be) of Honesty. And it
is some Comfort to consider, that most others also of this Motley Tribe, who
have not, perhaps, been directly concerned in this Conspiracy, have yet, by
their greatly Favoring those that were so, and by their other ill Behavior
toward the Government in this Juncture, given such Sufficient Indications of
their Falseness and Insincerity, that now all Men may easily see what they are;
and our Governors both Civil and Ecclesiastical come plainly to understand
what kind of Snakes we have hitherto Nourished in our Bosoms.

And certainly, as it is good that all Honest Men should know one another; so
is it moreespecially Advantageous to the Phblick, for those who are in
Authority to be well acquainted, what Persons may safely be relied upon and
encouraged, and who they are that can never be Obliged nor Trusted.

But Fifthly and Lastly, (which is indeed the more proper and immdiate work of
the Day.) This Wrath of theirs does turn to God's Praise, as the Discovery and
Prevention of so Horrid a Design Administers a very Powerful Occasion, to all
Sincere Christians, of Magnifying and Blessing God's Holy Name, and returning
all Possible Praise and Thanks for so Wonderful a Deliverance. As the
Consideration of this, may Justly move us to Admire and Adore God's Infinite
Mercy and Goodness, his Faithfulness, Power, and the Incomprehensible Wisdom of
his Providence; Who disappointeth the Devices of the Crafty, so that their
Hands cannot perform their enterprise; who takes the Wise in their own
Craftyness, so that the Counsel of the Forward is carried Headlong.

It Tends likewise to God's Praise, as the Consideration of the same affords
great Encouragement to all Faithful Persons, of proceeding on Cheerfully in the
Regular ways which they have chosen; of keeping closely to their Known Duty
both toward God and Man; Teaching them likewise not to be Frighted out of
their Religion or Loyalty, by the Loud Clamours, Fears, or Threatenings of any
unreasonable Men in a Prevaling Faction: but to rely firmly upon God's good
Providence, in the Faithful discharge of their Duty; we having, from hence, a
Sensible Experiment and Example, how both able and willing God is to preserve
the Simple, and ready, in his Good time, utterly to confound all the
Machinations of Wicked Men against them; so that there is no Preservative like
to that of Integrity, and he that walks uprightly, walks surely. To
conclude, it must needs much promote God's Glory, as the Consideration of it
will Effectually move, all well disposed Persons among us, to express their
Thankfulness to God, for so great a Deliverance, by Seriously endeavoring to
walk answerably to the Mercy; by duly Reforming their Lives, and ordering their
Conversations aright, and firmly resolving upon a more strict Obedience in all
the Holy Laws of so Gracious, so Faithful and Bountiful Master.

This, this is the true Praise, the Genuine Fruit which God expects from us,
and the particular Mercy so lowdly calls for at our Hands; and without which
indeed, we are delivered but to little purpose. But if we use our best Care, to
let it have this due Effect upon our Hearts and Lives, we may then be most
confident that the same God, who has been now our Rock and Defense, and mighty
Salvation, will still be so. If their Defeated Wrath prove but thus to Gods
Praise, in us; we need not in the least Question, but that he who has, and
does, will still deliver us. And let the same, or any other Enemies, continue
to Plot, what they can, for our Ruin* let them still bear never so Tyrannous a
Hate against us* yet the great Governor of the World will not fail to blast
all their* Designs, and the Remainder of their Wrath most certainly Restrain.
Which God Grant of his Infinte Mercy, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. lin. 2. make (;) for (?) p. 9. 1. 6. after it make (,) p. 9. last line
but two, after duty make (?) p. 18. 1. 13. for in Rage read outrage p. 37. l.
18. for doors read doers.


