A Letter from the Jesuits in the Savoy to the Jesuits at S. Omers, giving an
Account of the Affairs of England, taken from the Priests in the Dover Coach,
together with 200 Guineas.
OUR last gave you a full History of what we had done in the Reigns of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, King Charles I. and II. for the introducing our Holy
Catholic Religion into England; and tho our Powder Plot, and our Fireing the
City of London had not the success we proposed to ourselves, yet our late
Methods prosper daily so happily, that we can now send you the glad Tidings of
our perfecting the Grand Design: The present Scheme and Model of this our Great
Work, shows it self in these Parts and Figures:

I. We have got a great Body of Protestants that cry up a Jus Divinum of our
good King, Passive Obedience, Non-resistence, etc. so from them we can have no
Opposition, especially of Blows or Arms; and as for their Paper-War, we value
it no more than Sugar-Plums, or a Fart.

II. We have always in readiness a Herd of Addressers and Flatterers, who upon
the first notice, will thank us for what soever we think fit to declare, tho
Contradictions and Impossibilities.

III. We have at hand a Set of Judges, who declare our will and pleasure for
Law; besides two or three Couples of Bishops who open and hunt all the Game we
start.

IV. We have erected an Ecclesiastical Court of Protestants, who never stick to
Suspend and Deprive all the Protestants we send them. We have got into our Shop
the universal Sale of all sorts of Offices and Employments, which brings us in
all the Money of the Land.

V. We have put our Faithful Roman Catholics into all Places of Trust, Civil
and Military in all the Three Kingdoms, for which we have made them pay well.
And an Irish Army is coming over to purge the English Army. We Closet and
Cashier the Protestant Officers as fast as you supply us with Catholic ones
from the several Parts of the World, to which our Fathers have sent their
Circular Letters. We are Planting the Two Universities with Catholic Rectors
and Seminaries: In a word, We are Catechizing and Threatening all sorts of
People both in Church, State, and Army, to comply with our Designs; we punish
the Refusers, and yet for all this we have a strong Party both in City and
Country, who write and talk up and down of our glorious intention to settle
Liberty of Conscience. But these our Abettors, as Mr. Pen and his Enthusiastic
Sectaries, have a Mental Reservation in this Case, for they mean only the
Liberty of our Catholic Consciences to do whatsoever we please with the Laws,
the Religion, the Estates, and Lives of the Damnable Heretical Protestants. Our
Brother Pen and his Disciples have done us signal Services; for under a Mask of
Gravity, of Purity of Manners, and Liberty of Conscience, they have entangled a
great number of busy gadding Women, and some dressing and visiting Gentlemen,
who snuff up the Jesuits Powder as fast as the Ladies swallow their French
Sweetmeats.

VI. We have packed and regulated all the Corporations to our hearts desire, in
order to have good Parliaments. We daily model our English Army and the Militia
for our purpose. We have Money to bribe all the Protestant Knaves, and Wit to
cheat the Protestant Fools, or in case at any time they prove stubborn, we have
power to force them; for we have a K --, Judges, Bishops, L. Lieutenants,
Justices of the Peace, P. Council, and Army, at our command; so the Devil is in
it, if we miscarry. Pray send us over all the Priests you can take together
from all Parts of the World, we shall want them all, for we have not as yet
12000 in this Kingdom, and we shall stand in need of above 30000 Regulars and
Seculars.

Ireland and Scotland are our own as secure as England; we suppose our Fathers
there give you an Account of the Posture of Affairs in those Countries; the
Scoth and Irish are all Beasts of Burden, born for our Yoke. Tyrconnel and
Perth (those Glorious Patrons of our Cheats and Designs) have brought the
Natives to Obey without Reserve, and the English are already very easy Pads,
only if we curb them too hard, and spur too often, they will kick and unsaddle us
fometimes, and afterward run over to the Dutch, who (according to our
undoubted Advice, just now come since we writ the foregoing Lines) are
preparing to unkennel us and all our Cubs; so that we are now hasting to you,
pray provide us good Dormitories and good Cheer, for we have fared very
deliciously in England, and hate to think of returning to out Cells again.
Adieu till we see you.

From our College in the Savoy, September. 28, 1688. Reverend Fathers, your most
Affectionate Brethren, R. P. T. B. R. S. F. P. F. D.



