A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE Reverend Doctor AMBROSE ATFIELD.

Late Minister of St. Leonard Shoreditch.

PREACHED In the said Parish Church, March 19. 1683/4.

By RICHARD PEARSON, Rector of St. Michael's Crooked-Lane, London.

LONDON, Printed by R. Holt, for D. Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultrey,
1684.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Reader is desired to take Notice, that the Publication hereof was chiefly
occasioned, and, in some sort, made necessary, through the Lawless Insolence of
One, who, by the help of a Shorthand man (though confessing himself not able
to write the same) some Weeks ago made bold to print the pretended Substance of
this Sermon. By which unfair Practices of the same Person, in the like kind, as
the Doctor had suffered not a little, while living; so this Zealous
Penny-catcher knew no other way of making him amends now, but thus to wrong his
Memory also, and the Credit of the Person who endeavored to do right to it, by
setting forth that ridiculous and most nonsensical Pamphlet, calling it self,
and bawled about for Dr. Atfield's Funeral Sermon.

1 THESE. 4. 13. But I would not have you be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them
that are asleep, that you sorrow not even as others, that have no Hope.
I Shall at present, without enquiring into the more particular dependence or
occasion of these Words, consider them only as a general Caution or Direction
for Christians, how to moderate their Passions, upon the death of Friends and
Relations; what to avoid, and how to behave themselves upon these occasions.

And in the handling of the Words, I shall observe and endeavor to show (so
far as the Time will permit) these following Things.

First, That all sorrow, upon the death of Friends, is not unallowable in, or
forbidden Christians.

Secondly, That there is yet a great deal of difference in such cases, betwixt
the sorrow of a true Christian, and that of others; and in what this difference
chiefly consists.

Thirdly, That the Belief of a future State, or hopes of a joyful Resurrection,
which the one is endued with, and the other void of, is the main cause of this
Difference.

Lastly, That in order to the exercise of such a lively Hope, as may enable men
to moderate their Grief, it is very necessary that Ministers of the Gospel
should, according to the Apostles Example here, endeavor to correct in men all
mistakes, concerning the State of the Dead, and take care that they be well
acquainted with, and often reminded of the right grounds of such Hope. But I
would not have you be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them that are asleep, that
you sorrow not even as others, that have no Hope.

First, I am to show, (as supposed in my Text) That all sorrow, upon the death
of Friends, is not forbidden Christians. If we look into the Practice and
Examples of the best Saints of God under the Old Testament, we shall find them
far enough from being strangers to this affection of Grief, upon such
Occasions. But on the contrary, we read both of Abraham's weeping and mourning
for Sarah, Genesis 23. 2. and of Joseph's doing the like for Jacob, Genesis 50. and
of King David's Lamentation over Saul and Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. 17. and of the
Prophet Jeremiah's for King Josiah, 2 Chr. 35. 25. Nay, it was customary, among
the Jews, to allow no less than seven days of mourning to private Persons for
their Relations; and for Princes and great Prophets, the whole People used to
mourn thirty days; as appears upon the departure of Moses, and Aaron, and
others. Nor do we any where in the Word of God, find the least prohibition or
reprehension of this Practice; but on the contrary, though we do indeed meet
with several places, wherein the Jews are forbidden to follow the Example of
the Heathen, and carefully to avoid their Extravagancies and Superstitions,
both as to the measure and manner of their mourning and expressions of Grief;
yet so far is the Scripture from countenancing or encouraging any such thing,
as a Stoical Apathy or Stupidity; in these cases; that the Prophet seems to
complain of the same, as no small fault, and to reprove people for not being
sufficiently affected, upon such occasions, Is. 57. 1. The Righteous perishes,
and no man lays it to heart, But still, lest any one should object, that
though under the Jewish Eiconomy men were indulged in some infirmities, and
several things then permitted, which under the Gospel (that must be
acknowledged to introduce and oblige to a greater Perfection) are not now
allowable, and that all grief for the dead is to be looked upon and excluded
under this Notion: Lest any such thing, I say, should be suspected; I answer,
that besides there being no place in the New Testament, that can give any
tolerable countenance to such an Opinion, in this particular, there is enough,
methinks, to make us conclude quite otherwise, from the consideration of what
is expressly recorded in Holy Writ, concerning our Savior himself, whose
Example in this (as in all other like cases) may abundantly determine and
satisfy us, concerning the innocence and lawfulness of things for us. But now
we read of our Savior himself, in the case of his Friend Lazarus, that though
he resolved to raise him from the Dead, and at other times when he meant to do
the like, he thought fit to suppress the Extravagancies of the Mourners tears
(as Luke 8. 52. and Luke 7. 13.) yet now he does so much assert and countenance
the lawfulness and justice of their sorrow, as to he himself a Companion to
them in the same, and it is accordingly expressly recorded of him, John 11. 35.
That Jesus wept. Nor is it sufficient to conceit (as some have done) that our
Savior's weeping here, was not at all, in respect of Lazarus, or that he might
first show himself true man by his compassion, and partaking of our innocent
infirmities, as he was presently to demonstrate himself the Son of God, by his
raising him from the Dead; nor that he might satisfy us of the lawfulness of
moderate Grief, upon such occasions; but that, on the contrary, his tears
proceeded, merely from the consideration of the Infidelity of the standers by,
and out of a foresight of the little success this great Miracle would have
upon them; or else that they were tears not of Grief, but Joy for the Glory
that would redound to his Father, upon this occasion: For suppose this
assertion to be true (which is indeed highly improbable) yet had all grief for
the death of Friends been unlawful for Christians, we may conclude that our
Savior would have taken care so to avoid all appearance of evil in himself, as
to have expressly told them that he did not weep upon the account of Lazarus;
especially since we cannot but grant him to know, how they both would and did
interpret his tears, that stood by him; for (as it immediately follows in the
36 verse) Then said the Jews, behold how he loved him.

But still, if this Argument should not yet be thought convincing; what shall
we think of another place, where all sorrow for the Dead, is so far from being
reprehended, that they are expressly commended, by the Spirit of God, under the
character of Devout men, Acts 8. 2. Who carried Stephen to his Burial, and made
great Lamentation over him?

To this we may further add, that what is purely natural, cannot, without some
reflection upon the God of Nature, be thought unlawful: But to express some
sorrow at the death of Friends, seems to be so natural, that generally all
People of the World, have ever agreed, both in the practice and decency of the
thing, though most indeed have erred in the excess of this Passion, and
unreasonable manners of expressing it. And as for that Nation, which was of
old, the only one remarkable for expressing no kind of sorrow, upon this
account, they were also no less remarkable for their giving no good reason, of
their so different Practice. The Stoic Philosophers also loved to vapor and
amuze others with their impracticable Doctrines, whilst all the Perfection they
could arrive at themselves in that kind, was only to play the Hypocrites, by a
little concealing, rather than truly conquering their Passions, and by seeming
to triumph over Nature. Whereas that of Antoninus Pius the Emperor, was a sober
saying, and such as showed him to have well considered human Nature, who when
young Antoninus, afterward his Successor, was diswaded, by the Courtiers, from
lamenting the death of the Person that had brought him up, Suffer him (says the
Emperor) to be a man; for neither Philosophy, nor a Crown ought to root out
our Affections. In short, the Christian Religion it self does not destory, but
only polish Nature; does not require that we should wholly extinguish, but only
rightly govern our Passions and Affections, and keep them within the compass of
Sobriety and Moderation, so that indeed it seems impossible that a man should
continue wholly unaffected with the death of a near Relation, unless he have
first in him, more than a tincture of that Vice, which St. Paul calls by the
name of a being void of natural Affection, Romans 1. 31.

And as moderate Grief, upon such occasions, seems to be natural, so is the
same also not a little useful toward the Purposes of Religion; as disposing
Men toward a more serious and through Consideration of the Vanity of the World,
the Frailty of Humane Nature and their own Mortality. A moderately Warm Grief
for a newly deceased Friend, helps Men to a more full Conviction of the
Necessity and Wisdom, of neglecting to do no kind Offices to our Relations,
whilst they continue with us, but of endeavoring all we can, both by our own
good Examples and Instructions, to farther them in the ways of Piety; since
when they are gone, of all the good turns we have done them, this is the only
Substantial Benefit that will still remain with them, and we see that we are
afterward no more able to profit them by all we can further do, than if they
had never been. Such Sorrow puts Men upon a more lively sense of the great
folly of doting upon any worldly thing, which we are sure so shortly to leave
for ever; how mad it is to lay up treasure for our selves here, without
endeavoring to be rich toward God. In short, it is very Conducive toward Men's
entertaining such sober, true thoughts of things, as may make them set loose to
the World, and become more ready to part with their Superfluities, toward the
relief of those that need; insomuch that while they continue thus affected,
they seem to be quite other kind of Men than they were before.

Thus even the covetous Egyptians while their grief was kept fresh, by the
dead Carkases of their Sons and Daughters and other Relations, that lay before
them, they so little valued their choicest Treasure, that they readily parted
with it, and lent all their richest Jewels to the Israelites. And indeed what
kind of Men might we be, would we but endeavor to cherish always the like
thoughts, which our Grief, upon such Occasions, does, for a time, almost
whether we will or no, put us upon? So great is the benefit of such kindly
Sorrow, that the wise Solomon makes no Scruple to affirm, Eccles. 7. 3, 4. That
the heart of the wise is in the House of Mourning, and that by the sadness of
the Countenance, the heart is made better.

To conclude, so far is some sober previous Grief, upon such just Occasions,
from being offensive to God, or Inconsistent with that Conformity of our Wills
to his, which is attainable and required of us in this imperfect State, that
indeed self-Resignation, does rather, from hence, take its rise and
opportunity. For all Resignation seems to suppose some former Reluctance, or a
foregoing Velleity, at least, of having the thing otherwise; for I cannot be
said properly to resign my self, when I am only contented with that thing which
I never had naturally any aversion to, nor could have wished that it might have
fallen out otherwise; there is no Resignation in offering up unto God of such
Things only as cost us nothing. For it is no great matter to be ready to kiss
that Rod, of which we never yet felt the smart, or to be contented with that
Loss or Afflication, of which we were never sensible, or at all Affected with;
this is rather Stupidity than Resignation. Whereas this seems to be the
Progress of genuine Resignation. I perceive that, by giving me this occasion,
upon which it is natural for Flesh and Blood to be affected, God sees it best
that I should be now sorrowful; I will therefore meekly own his Hand and Answer
his call, and think it best for me also to be so affected: but I will take care
to grieve so as becomes a Man and a Christian not beyond the due measure, nor
with the least repining; but fully approving in my Judgment, that choice which
God has made for me, howsoever unpleasing it may be to my Sensitive Appetite
and inferior Faculties. Thus you see, a Man may be truly contented and
thankful, and yet sufficiently sensible of an Affliction; nor does Resignation
exclude all, but rather suppose some Grief. And as in other Afflictions, so for
the loss of Friends, a man may grieve lawfully. And therefore the Apostle here,
does not say, That ye grieve not at all, but only, that ye grieve not
immoderately, not as Heathen men used to do, not as others, who have no Hope.
Which brings me now to the

Second thing I was to show, viz. That there is a great deal of difference in
such Cases between the Sorrow of a true Christian, and that of others, and in
what this Difference chiefly consists. And now in order to this it will be
first necessary for me to give you some brief account, how these others, that
is, the Heathen, used to behave themseves in such Cases. Whose Grief we shall
find to exceed all bounds, to have beenboth highly extravagant and excessive,
as to the measure of it, and for the manner of expressing it, both unnatural,
foolish, cruel, and full of the highest Impiety and Irreligion. They were
generally so far from endeavoring to moderate their Grief, by Reason, that
they used all the Arts imaginable to highten and promote it, even to
Ostentation, and a Priding themselves in the greatest Excesses of the same.
They used not only to rent their Garments, but also to pluck off their Hair and
make themselves Bald; to tear their Cheeks, and Breasts, to beat their Heads
and cut their Flesh, in Token of the most desperate Lamentation. As is partly
intimated, Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Where the People of Israel are forbidden, to cut
themselves or to make Baldness between their Eyes, for the Dead, as the Heathen
used to do. To which Customs also, both that of Ezekiel. 7. 17. and Jer. 16. 6.
and Deuteronomy. 21. 3. and several other places, have an Evident Relation. Nor were
they contented only to be thus excessively Mad themselves, but that the Folly
might be effectually carried on with greater Pomp and Solemnity, the Relations
of the Dead used to hire others, who were always ready at hand, upon such
Occasions, and made it a common Trade, to run howling up and down, and to
mangle themselves in the most desperate manner.

And as they dealt thus unnaturally with themselves, so their most unreasonable
Grief, put them upon the most monstrous Cruelties toward others. For both the
Greecians and from them, the Romans, used to cut the Throats of living Men, at
the Sepulchers of their Dead Friends; several Captives being frequently kept,
or bought for that purpose, to be so murdered at the Funerals not only of
Magistrates, but many times of private Persons. But when this Custom began to
seem to savor of too much Cruelty, they afterward thought fit a little to
change the same, for what they accounted less Barbarous; not performing this
Butchery by their own Hands, but forcing their Captives, called by them
Gladiators; to fight with, and kill one another, whilst themselves looked on;
giving those only their Lives as a Reward, who happened to be most expert or
successful in the Art of Murdering.

Nor still did the mad Grief of these Heathen Mourners suffer them to stop
here, but so sullen did it make them, and full of the highest Indignation and
Impatience, that, as if they were fallen out with Heaven it self, and were
resolved to revenge the loss of their Dead Friends, upon their Idols and
supposed Gods, 'twas usual with them, when they Mourned for some great Persons,
both to batter and throw Stones at their Temples, to offer no Sacrifice, but to
overturn the Altars of the Gods, and to cast their Houshold-Gods out of Doors;
all which Extravagancies were generally practiced (as Suetonius relates) upon
the Death of Germanicus. Such impious Frenzies did they fall into, whilst they
freely indulged themselves to the utmost, in this most unreasonable Passion.

Nay (to speak the truth) even their more common Grief upon such Occasions, was
usually expressed by and accompanied with such Ridiculous Follies, that some few
of the wiser sort among themselves seem to have been ashamed of the same; as
Tully in particular, in his Tusculan Questions, and Lucian in his Book de
Luctu; who both more particularly acquaints us with their Custom, and wittily
represents the Ridiculousness of it. Of which Passage, because some even among
us who should show themselves Men and Christians, are apt enough to fall into
the like Extravagancies, I shall therefore think it worth the while here,
briefly to acquaint you with the Substance. It is a Custom (says he) for the
Father and Mother, coming forth from the rest of the Kindred, to spread
themselves over the dead Body, and to accost it in a drawling and most
Lamentable Voice, after this manner; (...), etc. Alas my dear Son, thou art
dead, snatched away before thy time, leaving me alone; thou shall no more Eat,
nor Drink, nor wear Clothes; thou shall never Marry, go to War, or exercise any
Trade, no more Walk, or be merry with thy Equals; no coming to be an Old Man.
To which Lucian himself replys: Since you seem to be so Ignorant, I will teach
you how to lament more truly; for why had you not as good say thus? Alas! dear
Child, thou shall no more Hunger, Thirst, or be acold; poor Wretch! thou shall
never be afraid of War, or of the Tyrant; never more be weary, or feel the
smart of Diseases, never come to experience the Infirmities of Old Age; etc.
Would not such a Lamentation now as this, be most Ridiculous? and yet all this
is indeed employed in the former.

But thus much now may be sufficient, as a taste, to acquaint you, how these
others used to sorrow, and what great Extravagancies the Heathen were guilty of
therein. To all which, they who profess themselves Christians ought to be so
far strangers, that (in the judgment of both Tertullian and St. Cyprian) they
who can afford to indulge themselves in the like Excesses, are guilty of
offering the highest scandal to others, do affront their own Principles, and
disgrace their Profession, and may be justly suspected not indeed to believe
what they pretend, but, secretly and in effect, to have as bad as renounced the
Christian Faith. For the sincere Believer's Grief, in such cases, is sober,
moderate, natural, and silent, endeavoring to keep it self secret, and far
from all manner of Ostentation; far from putting Men upon the Exercise of any
such unnatural Cruelties, either upon themselves or others, but rather
inclining them to be more open, tenderhearted and extensive in Almsdeeds, and
Acts of Beneficence, toward all those who need their Charity. Much less will a
true Disciple of Christ ever suffer his Sorrow so far to extinguish the Force
of his Reason and Religion, as that he should sullenly murmur or repine at
God's dealings with him, or foolishly charge Providence: But on the contrary,
though he be duly sensible of the Affliction, and can thereupon experience in
himself something of the common Weaknesses of Humane Nature; yet he never
allows his Passion to rise to such a hight, but that in his Mind and Judgment
he can both approve of and rest heartily satisfied with what Providence sees
best should befall him; and in the midst of all his Sorrow, can, ever and anon,
with a comfortable mixture of the Tears of Joy, say; Good, and Wise, and
Gracious, is this Dispensation of the Lord; Thy Will, O Father, not mine be
done; or with holy Job, in the same case, The Lord gave and the Lord has taken
away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. Thus you see how wide a difference there
is betwixt these two; even as much as betwixt the Grief of those who have yet a
Substantial Support and Comfort at Hand, and that of those who utterly despair,
and have therefore lost all Patience.

Which brings me now to the third and last Proposicion that the Time will give
me leave to prosecute, and that too briefly, viz. That the Belief of a future
State, or the Hope of a joyful Resurrection which the one is endued with, and
the other void of, is indeed the main cause of this great Difference. It Is no
great wonder that the poor Heathen should be so carried on by the Tide of their
Extravagant Passions, so billedged with the Flood^s of Tears, and even sunk by
the most desperate Grief; since they wanted both the Compass of God's Word to
stear themselves by, and the Advantage of that sure Anchor of Hope, with both
which we Christians are so abundantly furnished. For bare natural Reason,
especially whilst it was so clogged and prejudiced, by the force of prevailing
Custom, was too weak sufficiently to correct the Extravagancies of their
Passions, and keep them within their due Bounds. For with what Anguish and
extreme Despair must they needs be posses't, while they beheld those dear
Relations snatched from them, who, whilst living, were the very joy and comfort
of their hearts, and had no sufficient Grounds to hinder them from more than
suspecting, that they should never have an opportunity of enjoying them any
more forever, but that they were lost and utterly extinguished to all Eternity?
what unsupportable Grief must needs be consequent under the disadvantage of
such black and melancholic Apprehensions?

But we Christians are thoroughly assured, that there is most certainly a State
beyond the Grave; and that, as to the Righteous, there is Hope in his Death,
Prove. 14. 32. We are naturally apt to lament the Death of the best Men most;
but now to prevent all Excesses in this case especially, the Gospel has
furnished us with the most effectual Remedy; unless we can find in our hearts
either to lament or envy their being removed to a State of so infinitely
greater Happiness and Perfection. We are assured that they are not perish't,
but only gone before; that their Spirits are presently received into the hands
of God their most faithful Creator; and that those Carcasses also which we now
see laid in the Grave, and sown in Corruption, shall in due time be raised
Spiritual Bodies and in Incorruption, every way fitted for such a Reunion with
the Soul, as may render the happiness of the whole man most perfect and
complete.

In the mean time therefore though Nature and Decency do seem to allow some
moderate tears, upon these occasions, yet how can we find in our hearts, even
now, to be excessive? since we who survive may consider, that after a few more
days dreamed over, separate Friends shall meet again, to part no more forever;
and that too, (if we do but now take care duly to prepare our selves for the
same) in such a blessed State, as that we shall hereafter wonder at our former
frailty and weakness, that we should ever be so loath to part from each other
here, in order to it; and so apt to deplore the loss, the Privilege of those
who went but a little before us.

That there is indeed a future State, and that the Dead shall be raised to live
forever, we believe, we know, as sure as that Christ himself is already risen;
for because he lives, we shall live also; and that he indeed so lives, we have
as much reason to be assured of, as it is possible for us to have in the very
nature of the thing, and at this Distance. Let us not therefore shame and
contradict the Faith we profess, by any unagreeable Practices: But whilst
others, who know no better, indulge themselves in immoderate Grief, and
Profane and Effeminate Lamentations, seasonably dry up our Tears; and,
behaving ourselves as it becomes those who profess themselves Children of the
Resurrection, breaking other into those Triumphant W^^^^ of St. P^^^ (which our
Church also fitly Remind^ (...) such Occasions) 1 Cor. 15. 55 O Death, where is
thy Sting, O Grave, where is thy Victory? Thanks be to God, who gives us the
Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ, or in that of 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant
Mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the Dead. To conclude, Brethren, we shall show our selves to be far
worse than ignorant, as concerning them that are asleep, if, upon these
Occasions; we do not take care so to moderate our Grief, as becomes Christians,
but give our selves leave to sorrow, even as others, that have no Hope.

And now, having done with my Text, I shall only say something, with a more
Particular Regard to that sad and Afficting Providence, which has, at present,
brought us here together, to perform that last Office for our dear and Reverend
Friend.

By whose Decease, indeed, I must needs say, we are presented with no ordinary
Occasion for the exercise of a truly Christian Sorrow; and that too perhaps,
even to the highest Degrees of Grief, which may be well consistent with such
exceeding good Hope, as (God be praised) we have every way so just reason to
entertain.

He was a Person generally well known, and had the Happiness as well as Merit
to be as generally well beloved and respected; and the loss of him now will,
I Am confident, be no less universally Lamented.

For indeed, how can it be expected, that he, who was so dear and singularly
useful, in all his several Relations and Capacities, both Private and Public;
that he, who was so excellent and agreeable a Husband, so sweet and tender a
Father, so Affectionate and Beneficial a Kinsman, so sincere and faithful a
Friend, so constant a Reliever of and so many ways a Benefactor to the Poor;
and in a Word, so innocently Pleasant, so admirably Courteous and Obliging in
his Conversation, and (to his Power) so really Beneficial unto all; how can
such a Person, who was all this, and much more, be now snatched away from us,
and not leave many a heavy Heart and weeping Eye behind him?

And what Reason have you of this Parish to deplore the loss of so Diligent,
Pious, and Faithful a Minister? And may I not also say, the whole City in
General, in that they are deprived of the Benefit of so constant and frequent,
so ready and very useful a Preacher?

Could he at all, need it, or had I any Talent at giving Characters, I might
certainly have a safe and fruitful Opportunity to exercise the same, at
present: But yet, as it would be more easy, so it is withal less necessary, to
be large in the Commendations of such a Person, whom every Body else also has
been so ready to value and commend, that, perhaps, scarce any other Honest
Regular Clergyman of his Time in England, ever came nearer, than himself has
done, toward the making a happy Exception to that General Woe denounced
against those, of whom all Men shall speak well. For now and then a most rare
Example is to be found, of a Person that shall Faithfully and Impartially
continue to discharge his Duty toward all, and yet not happen to make any,
thereby, his declared Enemies: But have the peculiar Happiness so to charm or
silence even the worst disposed Persons, as that Malice it self shall not once
dare to open it is Mouth against him; but, out of mere shame, or despair of
gaining Credit, forbear saying that, which it cannot be so blind as not to be
sensible, would serve to no other purpose, but only to procure to it self the
General Hatred and Disgrace of others.

And so, as to our deceased Brother, thus much I dare affirm, that very few, if
any, either have, or will say any other than well of him.

The only Instance of any thing like an ill Reflection that I could ever hear
so much as Attempted to be cast upon him (and which, to do right to his Memory,
I think it not inconvenient, at this time, to take notice of) was such a thing,
as, when thoroughly understood, will, I make no question, tend rather every way
to his deserved Commendation.

Now some have been ready to Object it, as an Argument of something of a greedy
Temper, that he should hold several Lectures, in the City, and more especially
his Sunday-night Lecture.

But God forbid that his Triple-pains and Diligence in Preaching should, in it
self, be looked upon, by any, as a fault in him. And that he was far from doing
this, out of any such Sordid Motive, there needs no other Argument or
Demonstration, than this, That he did not put up any thing of the Money, but
constantly gave away the whole Forty Pound per Annum toward the uses of a
generous Charity. And he afterward as readily desisted from that Employment,
as soon as he understood, that Authority thought it not so convenient, in some
respects, that it should be, at that Time and Place, any longer continued.

But I need not have said any thing of this, had it not been for the sake of
some, who may happen to have been less acquainted with him.

As for those of this Parish, they know full well, and, I hope, will always
gratefully remember, how ready he was both to give, and forgive, so much
commonly every Year, as amounted to no inconsiderable Sum. To say nothing of
how Cheerfully he, at all times, bestowed his Charitable Pains among the Poorer
sort, not only freely forgiving them his Dues, but frequently also, as he saw
Occasion, adding more out of his own Pocket, instead of receiving from them. I
spare to add much more of what was highly Commendable in him, and might
evidence him to have been a Person truly faithful in his several Relations, and
Eminently Serviceable in his Generation; since the Consideration of these
things does, in it self, naturally tend only to Aggravate our Sorrow for the
loss of him. Which yet that it may not, in any one, exceed the due Bounds of a
Christian Moderation in these Cases, we are therefore also to consider, that
the same things which make us so sensible of our own loss, are turned to his
unspeakable Gain and endless Happiness; who having behaved himself like a good
and faithful Servant, is now entered into the Joy of his Lord; and having been
so Instrumental, by his godly Example as well as Doctrine, to turn (as we have
good reason to hope) many, unto Righteousness, is now called from us, to take a
Place among those other Stars of Glory.

Thus, unless we be willing too much to indulge our selves in a fond kind of
self-love, rather than to show a discreet Love toward him, such good Hope as
this, must needs be of it self sufficient, to mix such Substantial Comfort with
our Sorrow, as will be sure to keep it within the just Limits of a truly
Christian Decorum.

In order to which end of moderating our Grief, though it may seem Impertinent,
after this main Foundation of Comfort, to add any thing else, to the same
purpose; yet one Consideration more, I cannot well tell how to forbear; since
it so naturally offers it self from the peculiar Temper, and most Remarkable
Example of the Person himself deceased; in which, indeed, he has left us all,
who were well acquainted with him (if we do but take care, not to deprive our
selves of it, by want of endeavor to imitate) a very rare and most valuable
Legacy.

For he was a Man whose Mind was always so Calm and even, of a Temper so Serene
and well Composed, his Heart so Christianly Resigned to Providence, and so
admirably fortifyed against all the usual Cross Occurrences of Humane Life,
that, as I much question whether any one can say, that ever he observed him
Transported with the Passion of Anger, so I scarcely believe that ever he was
seen oppressed with any thing of excessive Grief, upon any Occasion.

He had learnt to bear the Death of other Friends, with such wonderful
Patience, and would so Familiarly and Reconciledly talk of his own, that I am
bound to be a grateful Acknowledger, of how excellent Influence his very
Conversation was, toward the Satisfaction and Composing the Minds of others,
in the like Cases.

Nor was his Temper or Beheaviour, in the least, altered, when he came to be
Actually Exercised, by his last and most painful Sickness: But tho he had
before enjoyed constant good Health for a great while together, which usually
makes Men less able to bear the Trial of such Pains; yet I cannot remember that
ever I beheld any Instance of a more Exemplary Patience. Perfectly resigned he
was, either for Life or Death, as God should see fit to dispose of him; and
when at last he perceived his Time drawing near, took his last Farewell of his
Relations, with most Pious Exhortations to them, and useful Counsels; and then,
meekly resigned up his Spirit, into the Hands of him that gave it.

Thus Calmly he lived, and thus he died, an Eminent Pattern of a meek and quiet
Mind, of admirable Tranquillity and Resignation. So that I am half persuaded,
that even his Cheerful Air, and composed Countenance, strongly impressed on our
Memories, and the due consideration how he used constantly to demean himself in
the like Cases, may prove no insuccessful Antydote against, or be enough to
shame one out of any Extravagant Passion, of what sort soever.

And methinks, at least, (if Grief will admit of Teaching) the most Calm and
Manly sort of Sorrow, should best befit the Funerals of Dr. Atfield. Nor will
it become us now, (if we rightly value his Memory or Example) to sorrow as
others, who have no Hope; nor yet to sorrow for him, as for others, even where
there is the same good Hope.

And now, to conclude all; There is but one thing more remaining, which
(besides the Christian Office we are going to perform) we are still capable of
doing for him; for our selves I should say; and yet, why may I not say, for
both?

Since it is reasonably supposeable, that his Joy, even in the other State; may
be more increased to all Eternity, by our seasonable Practice, of what I am
going to direct you to. Which is no other, in short, than this, that we would
all take special care, to let his Godly Example, and wholesome Doctrines, all
his pious Counsels and good Advice, whether Private, or Public, have
Respectively their due Influence, and Effect upon our Minds, and Lives.

This, this is the way, the only way to make him still live among us, tho he be
gone from us; by this means, tho he be Dead, he will yet speak not only to, but
in us. And so when we our selves come also (as he has already done) to put off
these Earthly Tabernacles we may Joyfully meet him again, to part no more for
ever; and not only him, but also all other of our Friends, departed hence in
the true Faith, and fear of God; when we shall be truly come unto Mount Sion,
to the City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an Innumerable
Company of Angels, to the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn; and
to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and to
Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant; and there be for ever present with the
Lord, in that blissful State; where God shall wipe away all Tears from our
Eyes, and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow nor crying; neither
shall there be any more Pain; but all these former things being passed away,
there shall succeed a new Scene, of Joys unspeakable, and Life and Happiness
Everlasting. To which, etc.

FINIS.

