Concerning God's seeking out HIS ISRAEL Likewise Concerning the Principle OF
LIEF Whereby he seeks them and the way of their closing with His Spirit
therein.

As also Concerning the two COVENANTS, UNDER One whereof he pleases to
exercise and prepare them for the life and inheritance, which he has treasured
up for them in the other.

WITH A Postscript relating some things necessary for lost man to be acquainted
with in his travels from his lost Estate.

By Isaac Penington.

Printed for Robert Wilson in the Year 1663.

To such in Godmanchester and thereabouts, who bear the reproachful name of
Quakers, whose religion began in the power, and who still abide and walk on in
the power waiting to be perfected in the full manifestation and appearance
thereof.
Dear friends in Gods pure Eternal truth,
IT was my lot once to be among you in a meeting, together with I.C. where I
had a word unto you from the Lord, while I. C. was declareing. But being
exceedingly bowed down in spirit, and afraid to interrupt the service in him
(whom I looked upon as far more abundantly grown up in the life, and fitter to
Minister from the life) I waited till the life in him should stop. But then
those words which had often sprung in me before, sprung not again; and I durst
not then speak them from a bare remembrance of them, not finding the spirit of
the Lord then giving them me to speak. So I went away with a burden on my own
soul, and also with a sense of some lose to you of some part of the good, which
the Lord intended you. Since that time, I have often remembered the thing with
grief, crying to the Lord that, that which has so often stopped the life in
me, and my service in the life, might in his good time be removed; and that the
day might come, wherein the man might never more be or appear, as of himself,
or as a determiner concerning the things which flow from the life, but that the
life might have its free course and current through me, in its own pure
streamings, to the delighting of my own heart in the Lord, and the refreshing
of others. And indeed this day I exceedingly long for, that nothing of self
might be left to be brought forth, and that all which is of the life might
spring up and flourish, both in me and every where.

Now one morning, as my heart was breathing toward the Lord, not having a
thought either of you or this thing, the very same words (which were given me
in that meeting) sprang up again livingly in me, with a pointing to write them
down, with what ^he Lord should please to give in further, and send them to
you, together with a Paper which was a little before written cencerning the two
Covenants. And when I had almost finished what was then given me to write, I
was further directed to annex to the first paper, another concerning the
principle. How the Lord shall please to improve them to your advantage or to
the advantage of any others, I have to him, it being the earnest desire of my
heart, that his work may prosper in his hand, and that the light and power
which issues forth from him for the salvation of souls may be effectual
thereunto; and that nothing of love, of mercy, of goodness, of life, of
Salvation, of his searching and healing virtue may be held back by him, which
the state or condition of any of his sheep or lambs (whether lost or gathered)
calls for: that his Israel may become the glory of the earth and all Nations
may be refreshed with beholding the beauty and tasting the sweetness of life
and righteousness, which shall assuredly flow forth from his sanctuary. And
surely the time is not far off (whatever the eye of sense may judge, and
however things may appear to man's understanding) wherein Israel shall be no
more compelled to worship in the Temples of men's building and dedicating but
shall in the beauty of holiness for the day is come (yea the blessed day is
come) wherein the Lord God of life will build up his Sion, and appear there in
his glory Amen, hallelujah.

Concerning God's seeking out his Israel.
THis is the word, which was given to me; THE SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL IS SEEKING OVT
HIS SHEEP, EVEN THE LOST SHEEP OF THE HOUSE OF ISRAEL: Concerning which, these
three Questions sprang up in me one after another, as I was about to write and
writing.

Quest. 1. Who are his sheep.

Answ. His sheep are the sons of men; the lost sheep of the house of Israel are
those among the sons of men, who have felt touches of his life, begettings into
his nature, and were in some measure gathered into some appearance and
dispensation of his life by his holy spirit, wherein they felt warmth from God
in their spirits, and a delight and joy in what they felt, and a longing after
a further manifestation of him. These were his sheep, in a gathered estate in
some degree, by those dispensations of life in the darkness, which had some
strength in them to gather from under the darkness, and did gather into that
measure of light and life, that was then dispensed. But the sheep cleaving to
the dispensations (which were very weak and imperfect, and had little of
spirit, but very much of flesh in them) and not following the Lamb out of them
into the further dispensations of life, into which he stood ready to lead, the
Lord brake them in pieces, departed from them, and left the life to be made a
prey of and brought under the captivity of death: so that the sheep were
scattered upon the mountains and every beast of prey was ready to fasten his
teeth on them and devour them. O the precious buddings forth of the virtue and
power of God, that was to be found in several sorts of professors, while they
sought the Lord only, and the knowledge of one another in the breathing spirit,
and minded not the outward form, but the feeling of life in their duties and
ordinances!

But when they began to mind the form, and cry up several forms; the Lord also
began to loath the forms, and did not give forth that among them, which
formerly they met with, but took away the kernel and left them the shel: And oh
how dry and barren have they become since! Where is the feeling of life? where
is the love to one another in the living sense? Where is the zeal after and
earnest seeking of the power of Religion? where is the nature of the sheep to
be found in them? and where is the presence of the shepherd among them? Are
they not lost sheep indeed lost to God? lost to themselves? have they not lost
the holy, pure, sweet, meek, heavenly, tender, gentle nature of the sheep? have
they not lost the pasture and the fold, whereon they were wont to feed and
wherein they were wont to lie down safe? have they not lost the preserver of
their souls from the devouring spirit? nay, have they not lost the very seed of
life, which the good husbandman did sow in them? And do not evil seeds shoot up
in the stead thereof, to the poisoning of their hearts and blemishing of their
conversations? And are not some of them insencible of their lose, and lie still
drowned in their forms, thinking to confine the appearance of the freelife and
unlimited spirit there? others of them sick, and deeply wounded and
languishing, not knowing where to meet with the good shepherd, nor how to make
shift without him? O the cries of the desolate and mourning souls, which love
God at theit hearts and have the relics of his Nature left in them in a seed
still, which he once begot and brought forth in some freshness! Oh their deep
anguish, their miserable lost condition for want of meeting with the Physician,
their pantings, their tears, their distresses, their roarings out, their
over-whelmings, their several kinds of Captivities, and the cruelties exercised
upon their spirits by the Captiver even break my heart, that I am almost
overwhelmed in the sense of their misery. But my heart is somewhat comforted
with the freshness of this testimony, which has often risen up in the
immediate life of God in my heart, and I have heard his voice speaking it, even
that he will seek them out. And I know he has the skill to find them, in
their several mourning holes, wherein they lie hid; and the pits where into
they are tumbled; and the Briars and Thorns of the wilderness, wherewith they
are torn, and wherein they are twisted and entangled, and held pining to death;
and in the prisons, and Chains, and Fetters of their Spirits, wherein they are
closed up and bound down by the Enemy of their Souls.

Quest. 2. How will he seek them, and how will he find them out?

Answ. By the light of his spirit shining in their hearts, by which he will
touch and quicken the Sheep's life, and open the Sheeps care and persuade the
heart to know and believe that it is he, that visits in his tender mercy, and
that he will have mercy on and show compassion to that, which has long been
cast off and forsaken; and that he will be their God, and they shall be his
people, even the House of Israel that had departed from him: and that he had
not forgotten them, but waited for the hour of mercy, and for the season of the
bringing forth of that life and power, whose searching and healing virtue will
reach to the utmost extremity of their conditions.

Quest. 3. What will he do with them, when he has sought after and found them
out?

Answ. He will gather them into the fold of life, and lead them into the
pastures of life, and feed them with the food of life, as their conditions are
able to bear; he will be fitting them by the exercises of his spirit, for their
passages from death to life, and as they are capable, so he will be still
translating them from the one into the other. He will bring them from their
several fals-built states in the Land of Egypt (or Babylon) into a true
wilderness state: and there, as he wears out the old nature in them, so will he
speak comfortably to them and build up the new, and nourish the true
Israelitish Babe there with Manna from Heaven; and after he is grown up to a
man's Estate, and has received the inward Circumcision, lead him into the
pleasant land, where there are the rich pastures, and the sweet still Waters,
and the precious Milk and Honey of the living, with which the land flows
naturally, and which yields pure nourishment to all the living Offspring. O my
heart is not able to contain the sense of all that God will do for Israel, or
of what he will be to them, or of what they shall be to him, when he has
finished his work upon them, and brought them forth (through the strength of
his Covenant) in the Nature and into the possession of his life.

But sure I am he has begun his work, the light of the day (even of the
everlasting day) has sprung and visited many, the Principle of Life has been
revealed in the hearts of many, and many are gathering into it, and find the
man sinking and dying, and the life rising and living in them day by day. And
though the passage be bitter, and the Passover still eaten with bitter herbs,
and the devourer often let loose and suffered to nip and destroy, yet out of
the Eater at last comes forth meat, and out of the strong one in the issue
comes forth sweetness. Yea, though there be no faith found to close in with the
light, nor any strength left to obey or follow, because of the deep foregoing
breakings (wherein both nature and spirit were all dashed in pieces, and
swallowed up in confusion) yet the breath of life and the power of the light
(in process of excercises, and after much deep misery, and impossibilities, to
the sight and judgment of sense) at length raises up a little seed in the
longing Soul, which receives and brings forth after an hidden way that,
which it could not. And here life is indeed of Grace and wholly of the Seed, in
this state. Only wait to learn and know in Spirit (and then take heed of
dispising) the weak beginnings and dawnings of light, in the secret stirrings
and movings of the principle of life: and wait also for a watch to be set up
in thee against that fleshly wisdom and understanding, which will be apt to be
judging about the work of God in thy heart; for if it prevail so far, it will
then also be begetting in thee dispisings of and turnings from the low
beginnings thereof, and so divert thy feet from the path of life. For the
prevention whereof, and for the furtherance of thy Soul, in its closing with
and traveling on in the light and guidance of the Spirit of the Lord this
following Paper is added.

Concerning the Seed or inward Principle, whereby life is begotten and
maintained in the heart.
THe Lord God, who is full of everlasting Bowels of compassion toward mankind
in general, but more especially toward those, in whom he has begotten a sense
of the want of him, with breathings and desires after him, has chosen a Seed
or inward Principle of Life to appear in, toward the breaking the bonds of
their Captivity, and the bringing them from under the power and misery of death.

This, many who have been overwhelmed with misery, and whose spirits have
melted and failed with the want of the sense of their God, and have felt that
life, which was formerly built up in them, broken down and laid wast, and their
communion with God swallowed up in the ruins thereof, and their Souls ready
utterly to perish and be devoured by the Enemy every moment; after the cutting
off of their hopes, and the shutting up of their eyes toward all ways of
releif, I say, after all this and much more than can be expressed, in the
tender mercy of the Lord, have they felt this principle revealed in their
hearts, and their hearts by degrees through the skill and same mercy of the
Lord, which revealed the principle (and not from any worthiness, or faith and
obedience of theirs: for that was as freely given and preserved, as the
principle it self was revealed) gathered into the principle, where the Life
reigns, and where the strength and Dominion of death is broken in all those,
who by the allurings and guidings of the Spirit of the Lord are led thither.

Now the main thing necessary toward the Redemption of the Soul is, after the
revealing of this principle, and some sense and feeling of it, and the turning
of the mind toward it, to wait to be made more and more acquainted with it,
that in the stirrings, movings and leadings thereof, there be a ready giving up
to be gathered into it, and to be guided by it.

For though this principle be all life, yet it is at first but as a seed, and
the appearance of the Lord in it, is but as in a Seed, very little, low, weak;
hard to be discerned; easy to be over-looked and despised, and some greater
and m^re undeniable appearance expected. Yet that is not the way, but the Soul
must become subject unto and ^owed under this little appearance: and so as the
Seed gets advantage and grows bigger and larger in thy heart, the appearance of
the Lord will be greater and fuller there. But to look for the greater
appearance, before the Seed be owned and received in its lesser appearance (and
the Vessel thereby fitted for the greater appearance) is not the way of God,
but the deceit of the Enemy, whereby he would destroy the Soul, and cut it off
from the Lord for ever; which he certainly will do, if he can keep the seed
from growing there, and the Soul from joining with and growing into it.

Therefore watch to feel the savor of life in thy heart day by day, and
therein to feel leadings, and drawings from the life, suitable to thy state:
for in this savor, and in these drawings rises the true light, which leads
into the way of life. And then watch against the reasonings, and disputations
which the Enemy will raise in thy mind, who will strive to make thee a Judge
over these drawings; whereas the Light, which arises in the savor and in the
drawings, is thy King (though in this low appearance) and not to be judged by
thy mind, thoughts and reasonings, but to judge them all down, and be bowed
unto and obeyed by thee. And consider, in the weight of thy spirit, art thou
(in thy darkness and with thy earthly mind) fit to be a Judge concerning the
Light which arises in thee? or rather is not the Light, in its lowest and
weakest appearance, appointed and fitted by the Lord to judge thee, and make
thee bow down in fear and trembling before it; and thy crown (thou in thy
highest exaltation) is to be cast at the lowest footstept thereof: And then it
will in some measure, thou lying at the foot thereof and bowing in Spirit
before it, enter into thee, and enlighten and quicken thee. But in thy being
wise about it, or taking upon thee to judge concerning it, it will stand at a
distance from thee, and leave thee in thy darkness and Captivity.

Therefore consider where thou art, and breath unto the Lord to reveal that
unto thee, which is proper for thee at present, and to bow thy spirit under his
present will and manifestation to thee.

And be content to be little and low, and to receive little and low
instructions from God, and to walk in the path of brokenness and humility
before the Lord: for this is his way of fitting for, and advancing into the
high and glorious power of his life. And this my Soul is assured of, that none
shall enter into or abide in his Kingdom, but as they become little, poor and
naked, and as they are led by the little child of God's begetting, who not at
all answers the wisdom of man and his expectations, but still confounds them,
and leads on in such a path, as if the eye of man's wisdom be open, it will
still be crying out, it can never bring to life. Yet that which disputes not,
but beleiveth, at seasons feels a progress, and that the growth of life had
advantage in the heart by those very things, which at present seemed to give
death the advantage.

Therefore watch against thy understanding, and all the workings thereof, as
ever thou desire life: for it will still betray thee, and either keep thee
from the way, or turn thee out of the way, when ever thou hearkenest to it. And
mark this, That which God sowes and brings up in thee is a sensible plant, not
a knowing mind; and thy right judgment is only in the sensibleness of that
Plant, and not in the understanding or comprehension of thy mind: yea that
sensible Plant (which thy wisdom will be very apt to despise and perk over)
must batter down and bring to nothing thy understanding, and grow up in the
stead of it, if ever thy Soul be made an habitation for the Life. Therefore
sink into the feeling, and dwell in the feeling, and wait for the savor of the
Principle of Life, and the touches and drawings of the savor, and walk along
in it toward the land of Life, parting with all, and leaving behind thee,
whatever the savoury of life disrelisheth, and entering into and taking up
whatever the savor of the Life relisheth, that thou may be prepared for the
Lord, and for the glorious appearances of his spirit in thee.

And as thou art led into this, and becomest subject to this; so thou will
taste the Lord, and feel the sweetness of his Ointment, and the peace of his
nature, and the joy of the beginnings of his Kingdom in thy heart, and the
blotting out of thy iniquities for his own names sake. For though the Enemy may
lay load upon thee, and fill thee as much as he can with his filth, and lay it
close to thy charge, insomuch as thou art not able to acquit thy self at all,
but art as ready to charge thy self therewith, as the Enemy is to charge thee:
yet the Lord considers the Seed he has sown in thee, and the desire which he
has wrought in thy heart to be joined thereunto; and he knows whence the
stirring of this mind is, and how weak thou art in this hour of thy darkness
and Captivity; and the intent of his heart is to deliver thee from all this,
and not to condemn thee for it.

But oh take heed of limmitting the Lord to give forth so clear a Light, as the
natural understanding will be judging necessary: but be content with the Light
which arises in the savor, and shines inwardly to thy spirit in the drawing,
and be subject and bowed under the Light of the drawing, though never so much
against the Light of the creaturely understanding and the reasonings thereof.

Clearness of Light is a state, which is to be grown up into: but before thou
come to this, thy understanding must be darkened, confounded and brought to
nothing; and thou can not have such a clearness there, while it is
confounding. There is indeed a true clearness in the Principle of Life
(proportionable to its state and growth) even then: but the reasonings of thy
dark m^nde will be continually overclouding and overbearing it (as if it were
darkness, and not the Light) and will prevail, unless thou be kept in the
savor, and suffer not thy understanding to judge, but keep it under the
judgment of the savor. Mark therefore heedfully this which follows,

The first work of the Lord is to confound the knowledge and understanding of
the creature, especially in those, who have been deep in wisdom and experience
of things: for if they were not closely pursued with darkness and confusion,
they would presently be gathering a stock into the old storehouse again, and
so grow wise after the flesh, and never learn the Life of the Spirit. Now in
this work of confounding, how can the leadings of God's spirit be manifest and
clear after the flesh, and to the fleshly understanding? yea, if they were
manifest after this manner, how were it possible to withhold the fleshly part
from drinking them in, and so the man would live again, but the Seed not live,
which gains its life (and being, and form and perfection) in the man, by the
death of the man: even by the man's being hunted, and battered, and broken out
of his wisdom, and knowledge, and reasoning, and comprehension; and becoming
as a fool or child, being able to know nothing, nor retain nothing, nor
perform nothing, nor keep his standing, but still as he is led, and taught,
and created, and preserved in the power and by the presence of the Life.

Concerning the two Covenants.
WHat is the Covenant of the Law? Does it not contain and hold forth Eternal
Life to man, upon his faith in an obedience to the spirit of God?

What is the Covenant of the Gospel? Does it not contain the promise to the
Seed, and Life to man through the Seed, and forgiveness of his sins for the
Seed sake, and the uniting of his heart to and preserving it in the Seed
through the grace, as also repentance, faith and obedience from the grace?

Mark then the difference between the two Covenants. The Covenant of the Law is
all of works and according to works, yea even the faith that is there found
(which is begotten and brought forth in man by virtue of that Covenant) is of
the man or of the working Principle. The Covenant of the Gospel is all of
grace; and the very works that are there found, are from the grace, and the
Seed bestowed and conveyed by Promise.

Now mark, The Seed (or standing Principle of Life) in both Covenants is the
same. It is the same Christ by which Adam stood before the fall, and which was
the promised Seed after the fall. The light of both the Covenants is the same,
even the eternal Light of the Spirit. The Life and power is the same, even the
life and power of the Spirit. The end or mark, at which man aims, and toward
which he travels in both is the same, even the land of rest and peace in the
Spirit of the Father, who begets a living soul under both Covenants. But the
terms of the Covenants, and the manner of dispensing them are different; and
the wombs, whereof the children of each Covenant are born, are different
likewise, the one being the working Nature (which also came from God, and has
its blessing from him in its obedience and subjection to him) the other the
womb of grace, which brings forth the Child of grace in man according to and by
virtue of the promise; and does not find a will in the day of man's choice and
liberty, but creates a will in the day of God's powerful appearance in it.

Yet this Seed of promise, or this new man begotten by the Seed of Life
according to the promise, must walk through the Law, and travel through all the
dark paths of that Covenant, before it come to inherit the promised Land; where
the rigor of the Law and weakness of the flesh will be thoroughly felt, and many
transgressions and many stripes, yea many Captivities and cuttings off from the
life may be felt also: yea the Seed of the first Covenant may live and
flourish, and enjoy and boast much of God, while this Seed is miserable. But
when this womb is visited with the strength of grace, and free power of Life,
and brings forth her children therein; and no more is called for from the
working part of man, but all brought forth in the free, full and fresh power or
Life; then shall the Seed of Israel after the promise, become an everlasting
habitation for, and a perfect joy in the Life.

Therefore distinguish in spirit between the Law and Grace, and the Covenants
of each, and the dispensations of each, and how they are mixed and
intermingled, both toward man and toward the Seed, in the several
dispensations in which each are brought forth. For there has been no perfect
Covenant brought forth, either of Works or of Grace (in a way of public
administration) since the fall of Adam. Had there been a perfect Covenant of
works, there had been no capacity of salvation thereby to fallen man. Had there
been a perfect Covenant of grace there had been no possibility or capacity of
destruction: for grace in its perfect going forth, cannot but overcome and save
the man. But God orders both these Covenants, both toward the man and
toward the Seed, according to the state of the man and the state of the Seed,
and according to what (in his eternal wisdom) he judges meet to work upon
them thereby.

Man being fallen, and having lost his strength of Faith and obedience in and
to the requirings of Gods Spirit, the visitation of him is now by grace, and
not merely to call forth what is left in him, but to help him with light and
power, and by the influences of the grace and of the power to quicken him
toward God. Yet man in the receiving of this, is apt to overlook the grace,
and attribute too much to his own strength, thinking himself somewhat because
of the grace and power which has visited him, and new refreshed the strength
and nature of his principle in him again. Hereby he is apt to fix his standing
on his obedience to the Spirit or appearance of the grace, and so in effect
builds his life and hopes again on his own principle, or on a new-received
power, as held or kept to by him (which he may fall from now, as well as he did
at first) and not on the free begetting and free preserving of a principle of
life in him.

This visitation of grace is to all mankind, there being none upon earth, whom
the Lord does not thus seek and visit with the light of his eternal life, thus
administered through the grace: which so far as they fall in with, the Lord does
receive them and beget life in them, engrafting them into the living Vine, and
preserving them according to their abiding in it, and according to their
obedience to him in the springings up of the sap of the Vine in them.

But besides this common administration of the grace to all mankind, God
formerly picked out a people after the flesh of Abraham, and afterward a
people after the spirit of Abraham, toward whom in a more peculiar way his
grace did administer it self, and whom he dealt with, not as with other
Nations, but chose to love and work up into life and communion with himself, by
a more especial administration and visitation of his love and grace. The one of
these were that people of the Jews, the other the believing Christians.

With the Jews he remembered the Covenant with Abraham. By virtue of that he
loved and chose them to be his people after the flesh, (or his outward people)
by virtue of that he brought them out of Egypt, led them through the
Wilderness, brought them into Canaan, giving them an inheritance therein, and
delivering them from their Enemies time after time.

Yet he also made another Covenant with them (even that of the Law) which was
suitable to their state, and which their nature desired, and chose to walk with
God in, but hardly ever kept it, and so brought the curse and misery due
thereby upon their heads, and at last were utterly cut off, so far and so long
as the Lord pleases to let the curse of that Covenant have power over them,
until he shall please again to remember to them his Covenant with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, and breath life through it into their dry bones.

Now though God did make this Covenant with them, because they were fleshly,
and their present state required it; yet he did not disanul or make void the
other to them, all the while their day lasted; but remembered loving kindness
and mercy toward them in it, often delivering and redeeming them for his own
Names sake, pointing them also to the word in the heart and the gracious
administration thereof: But they were blinded and held captive in the earthly
nature and principle, and in the Law thereof, and held their marriage and union
with God thereby. And so, though this administration to the Jews (wherein God
did strive with them by his Spirit, and sometimes stir life and beget a true
sensibleness in many of them, calling to them for the circumcision of the
heart, and pointing them to the principle of life in the heart, whereby it
might be circumcised) though this advanced them far above the Heathen; yet they
through the flesh and the letter, at last fell below the very state of the
Heathen, proving greater enemies to and persecuters of the life than they. And
so the Lord brake them off from the Olive tree into which they were engraffed,
and cut them off from the Covenant which he had made with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, whereas hitherto (though he had been often provoked by, and sorely
offended with them, yet) he had still loved them for the Fathers sake.

After them and in their stead he chose the believing Gentiles, engraffing them
into the stock from whence these were broken, letting them into a sweeter, and
fuller, and more spiritual and abiding estate and influences of the Covenant.
For here the life was manifested, and the light did shine in great beauty and
clearness, and they were gathered into the true Fold of the Shepherd (besides
that outward state, which was also built up by the Lord and preserved for a
season among them:) and they saw their standing to be by and in the grace, and
were established in the grace, and could feel the good pleasure calling, the
good pleasure working, the good pleasure being and doing all in them, and could
cry grace, grace to this building and say, Not for any works that they had
wrought, or for their faith in or, obedience to the light of life, which was
made manifest; but of his own mercy he saved them, who wrought in them both the
will and the deed of his own good pleasure, and preserved them by his power
through faith (which was of his gift and begetting) unto salvation.

Yet for all this, there was somewhat of the Law or light eternal to be
administered unto them, which was suitable to the natural part or first
principle, through which they were to travel, even until the man or first
nature was wholly wasted; whereby some of them were in danger of falling away
wholly, others of coming under chastizement and judgment, with which the Lord
pursued them, that they might not be utterly condemned with the world. Mark
therefore this brief sum of the matter.

1. Man fell under the first Covenant. His restitution is never to be thereby,
but by the second; through which God works up vessels into a state of life and
glory in the administration of his grace.

2. But in this working up of the vessel, he sees necessary to make use of the
other Covenant, according to the capacity that is left in man to answer it: and
so as that capacity wears out, the Covenant of the Law wastes and passes away
by degrees, and the Covenant of grace succeeds and fills up the room thereof.

3. There is great danger of falling from the life for some, as also of
chastizements and judgments to others, while this capacity remains, even while
the earthly nature, spirit and principle is not worn out by the entrance, death
and resurrection of the principle of life in the heart.

4. When the first principle is wholly dead, and the heart perfectly formed in
the life, and all perfectly raised and renewed in the life; then there is no
danger of falling or fear of chastizement; but perfect life, and peace and joy
with God in his spirit of power and glory for ever more.

5. Though God begin with man in a Covenant of grace, and bring in a Covenant
of the Law to man (suitable to his present state) only in subserviency to the
Covenant of grace; and would not have man stick there, but cling to him in the
grace, and seek remission through the grace for his own names sake: Yet man
through the prevalency of the first principle in him (and his looking on God
through that) is apt to fix on this Covenant, and draw comfort or
discouragement to himself from his own obedience or failings, and not live on
the freeness of Gods love, and the faithfulness of his heart to the soul to all
conditions, for his Christ's sake.

This has been the great error of Israel (even of Israel after the flesh, and
of Israel after the Spirit also) that while God lays hold on them by his love,
promise, mercy and grace; yet they lay hold on him by another Covenant, even
their obedience to the Laws he gives forth: not knowing, that the obedience to
the first Covenant must be a fruit of the second; and that they are not beloved
or accepted for that, but that that flows into them and is brought forth in
them, through the love, and through the free and powerful workings thereof in
them. I say, This (to wit, their obedience) is not the ground of their
acceptance or being loved, so far as they are in this Covenant: though as far
as the other has yet an influence, it has some force in this respect. But
this the eye is to pass through, and to be be fixed on the other Covenant,
still waiting for the revealing and manifesting the riches of the mercy
thereof, and to feel the washing and cleansing thereof from all the guilt,
which under the remainers of the first Covenant will be daily contracting,
while any thing of the earthly principle and offending part is left standing.

There has been in this day, a very glorious administration of life to the
sons of men (after the long foregoing night) wherein both these Covenants have
been again administered in Spirit, suitable to the state of the persons, whereto
they have been administered. And because of the necessity of faith and obedience
in the new Covenant (both to the seed and to the man) the man is so apt to fix
his eye and build his hopes upon them (and not upon the free love of him that
works them in him) that he is in danger of falling from and dishonouring the
free grace (which is the hope of Israel) and of losing his state, which is not
sure (how far so ever it be advanced in a present power and dominion) further
than it is built upon and fixed in the grace. And therefore is this given
forth, that the life in Israel may be sure and lasting, and that they may grow
up perfectly (out of the principle of nature) into the principle of grace, and
know the difference between their being united to and living in God, either in
the fear, faith or love, so far as they can receive or retain them; and God's
living in them, and creating continually the fear, faith and love in them, and
bringing forth all the fruits thereof in and from himself.

For though the Covenants are and have been still the same from the beginning,
yet the manifestations of them have been still greater and greater. And a
greater manifestation may yet be of the love and life of God (and the sweet,
free nature of his Covenant) than has hitherto been, or yet is, which Israel
is to wait for and feel the need of, before it be brought forth. And though all
those forementioned (to wit, of fear, faith and love) are precious states,
which God works his Israel up to, in and by the Covenant of his grace,
according to their several growths and capacities, yea and according to which
the delight and pleasure of his soul is in them: yet the absolute assurance is
only in the latter, even where the Creature is so gathered into the life of
God, that its state depends not at all upon what it self is, or does, but only
upon what God is and will be to is freely of himself and for his own names sake.

This is written in love, for preservation; and not for discouragement or
destruction: but that that which stands, may feel where to fix. For in the
highest state that man can be advanced to, yet if any of the creaturely
principle be left in him unsubdued, and not yet buried with the Seed into its
death, there is so far a capacity of falling: and his fall (in case the Lord do
suffer his feet to slip) will be the greater, by how much the higher and more
exalted he was in the Dominion and presence of the power, and by how much the
more it was unexpected by him.

And this my heart has often said within me, and still says to a weary soul,
which has felt the touches of life, and desireth-everlasting unity with it;
yea to all that desire to walk with God, and to abide in the power of his life
in any dispensation; Keep the eye of thy mind to the grace which visits thee:
not so much to the light which comes from the grace, as to the grace from which
the light comes; and daily look for help and remission from it, as freely as
thou had at first. And in all losses, and darknesses, and ^^sings up of guilt
and condemnation, cast thy self at the foot of it, saying in thy heart, if thou
had not freely visited me at first, I had not set one step in the path of
life; and if thou do not as freely visst me still, and renew life in me daily
of thine own accord, and from the same love and goodness, I cannot but be
liable to miscarry. O that I might obey every beam of thy light, and every
moving of thy life, but I dare not undertake it, O that thou would undertake
for me. My righteousness my obedience, my love to thee, my faith in thee is
like the morning due, which soon passes away, and I cannot find or come at it
again: O raise up life from an everlasting Seed, and gather my heart into it
and preserve me in it, not according to what I am or have done, or yet can be
or do; but for thine own names sake, and in thy love to thy Seed, and to thy
creature in and through thy Seed by the Promise.

Thus as any grows into the Covenant of grace, through the Covenant of works
(which is necessary to be dispensed in some measure, till the man's Nature and
Principle be wholly worn out by it) they will find sure footing there and
building upon that, from which the Soul (that cleaves to it in the virtue and
nature that flows from it) can never be removed. Yea the peace and safty of
Israel in there travels (fixing here) will be greater, and there assurance
greater, and their falls and the prevailings of the Enemy not so dangerous
(that being had recourse to, which never fai^es of healing that soul, which
lies at the foot of it and in heart waits its season) however they may be
hurred and driven about with Tempests, through the violence of the Enemy and
good pleasure of him, who sees it fit for the present state of the soul, to
have it thus exercised.

The intent of God in the salvation of man, is to magnify the riches of his
grace and the freeness of his love. And this is effected, as man is broken in
his natural principle and power of beleiving and obeying, and a Seed of life
freely raised up in him, and he freely gathered into it and preserved in it.
And where is the Boaster here? or where is he, who in this state, can throw a
stone at another because of his transgressions? Nay, nay; He that is freely
forgiven, and lives merely and for ever by mercy alone, he is formed and
brought forth in the tenderness of the bowels which begat and nourish him: and
he cries mightily for the spreading of the same bowels over other sinners,
waiting for the season of their visitation and gathering into the same love,
and by the same powerful hand, if it may be.

O my God, bring up the power and sweetness of thy life in Israel, and show
mercy to all Nations. Purge the Earth with thy fan, scatter the corruption
there of from the hearts of the sons of men, and make them the Paradise of thy
pleasure: that thou, O living God, may dwell in and shine forth from thy
Temple, and it may no longer lie wast, nor the abomination of desolation defile
it, to the dishoner of thy name, and to the ruin and misery of thy Creation.

Postscript.
SOme things are exceeding necessary for lost man to be acquainted with, in his
travels from his lost estate, into the life and peace of God. As,

1. To his lost estate and misery for ever, unless the Lord pity and help him.

2. To know the light, wherewith the Lord visits the souls that sit in
darkness, that he may wait for the shinings thereof, and in them travel with the
leading spirit of life, from the darkness and death of sin, toward the land
of the living.

3. To breath unto the Lord and wait to have his heart joined to the light and
power of life daily, and separated from the powers of death and darkness, under
which he was and still is a captive, but as the Lord appears for him and
delivers him.

4. To put forth all the strength of his soul and mind, and all the members of
his body in the service of the Lord. For as he is, in any measure, set free by
the Lord from the service of sin; So is he to serve and obey the Lord in
righteousness.

5. To wait daily to receive the strength from the Lord, wherewith he serves
the Lord. For though by the Redemption of the Lord, he feels the creaturely
part (in some measure) renewed and restored, and an ability received to serve
righteousness, which before he had not: yet this is not so given to him, as
that the Lord has it not still in his hand who can stop or let it out at his
pleasure. And happy is that man, who looks not upon himself as somewhat,
because of what in any kind he has received, but feels his dependence upon
the Lord.

6. To feel the grace and mercy of the Lord, in whatever he receives from the
Lord, or whatever he does for the Lord. It is all of the Lord: happy is the man
that sees it. It is the mercy of the Lord that man is not consumed. It is the
mercy of the Lord, that any man in any state (or degree of life and redemption)
is preserved. The mercy of the Lord endures for ever, therefore is Israel
safe. This will be the song of praise in the house of the Lord for ever.

7. To wait for the wasting of the man, and the raising up of the seed day by
day: that that to which the Covenant of works is nanatural, and which cannot
but desire it and seek to live by it, may be worn out; and that to which the
Covenant of grace is as natural (if not more) and which alone lives by the
promise, and through the faith and in the grace which freely flows from the
eternal fountain, may be raised up and succeed in the place and stead thereof.

Here is safety indeed. Here is everlasting righteousness so brought in, as
that it can never be removed out of the heart more. Here everlasting life and
the Soul are one for ever. Here is no more going into captivity, which Israel
settled in Canaan, and enjoying the sweetness and rest thereof, under the first
Covenant may. Here are no tears, nor sighing, nor departing from the ^^fe, nor
grieving the holy Spirt of the Lord, nor being grieved by it any more: but what
the heart desires of God and what God desires of the heart mutually received,
and the going forth and the coming in and the abiding one and the same for
ever, the same life and power and love and eternal sweetness being all and in
all for ever. This is the mark of Israel, and the haven of its eternal rest, to
which the Lord is leading the poor, hungary, empty, mourning, afflicted, lossed
Souls, to whom it is as sure in the love and good will of God (and in the
council of his heart determined thereupon) as if they were already in it.

THE END.

