AN ACCOUNT OF THE Blessed End OF Gulielma Maria Penn, AND OF Springet Penn,
The Beloved WIFE and Eldest SON of William Penn.

Printed for the Benefit of his Family, Relations, and particular Friends, in
Memory of them, and the Lord's Goodness to Them.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Blessed End Of my Dear Wife Gulielma Maria Penn.
The Memory of the Just is Blessed, Prove. 10. 7.
MY Dear Wife, after eight Month's Illness (though she never perfectly recoved
her weakness the Year before, which held her about six Months) Departed this
Life the 23 d of the 12 th Month, 1693/4 about half an hour past two in the
Afternoon, being the sixth Day of the Week, and the Fiftieth Year of her Age,
and was sensible to the very last.

During her Illness, she uttered many living and weighty Expressions, upon
diverse Occasions, both before and near her End: Some of which I took down for
mine and her dear Childrens Consolation.

At one of the many Meetings held in her Chamber, we and our Children, and one
of our Servants, being only present, in a tendering and living Power, she broke
out, as she sat in her Chair, Let us all prepare, not knowing what Hour or
Watch the Lord comes. O I am full of Matter! Shall we receive Good, and shall
we not receive Evil things at the hands of the Lord? I have cast my care upon
the Lord, he is the Physician of Value; my Expectation is wholly from him: He
can raise up, and He can cast down. A while after she said, Oh what shall be
done to the unprofitable Servant?

At another Meeting, before which much Heaviness seemed to lie upon her Natural
Spirits, she said, This has been a precious Opportunity to me, I am finely
relieved and comforted, Blessed be the Lord.

At another time, as I was speaking to her of the Lord's Love, and Witness of
his Spirit, that was with her, to give her the Peace of Well-doing; she
returned to me, looking up, For, said she, I never did, to my a knowledge, a
wicked thing in all my Life.

To a Friend, Aged 75 Years, that came to see her, she said, Thou and I, to all
appearance, are near our Ends. And to another, about 65 Years old, that came
also to see her, she said, How much older has the Lord made me by this weakness
than thou art? But I am contented; I do not murmur; I submit to his Holy Will.

In the strength of her Fits and Vapors, she said, It Is the great Goodness of
the Lord, that I should be able to lie thus still. He is the Physician of Value
to me, can I say: Let my Tongue set forth his Praise, and my Spirit Magnify
Him whilst I have Breath. O I am ready to be transported beyond my strength.
God was not in the Thunder, nor in the Lightening, but he was heard in the
Still Voice. She did at several times pray very sweetly, and in all her
Weakness manifested the most equal, undaunted and resigned Spirit, as well as
in all other respects; she was an excelling Person, both as Child, Wife,
Mother, Mistress, Friend and Neighbor.

She called the Children one day, when weak, and said, Be not frighted
Children, I do not call you to take my leave of you, but to see you, and I
would have you walk in the Fear of the Lord, and with his People in his Holy
Truth; or to that Effect.

Speaking at another time solemnly to the Children, she said, I never desired
any Great Things for you, but that you may fear the Lord, and walk in his
Truth, among his People, to the end of your days, etc.

She would not suffer me to neglect any public Meeting, after I had my
Liberty, upon her Account; saying often, O go my dearest! Don't hinder any Good
for me. I desire thee go, I have cast my care upon the Lord: I shall see thee
again.

About three hours before her End, a Relation taking leave of her, she said
again, I have cast my care upon the Lord: My dear Love to all Friends, and (
lifting up her Dying Hands and Eyes) prayed the Lord to preserve them and bless
them. About an hour after, causing all to withdraw, we were half an hour
together, in which we took our last leave, saying all that was fit upon that
solemn Occasion. She continued Sensible, and eat something about an hour before
her Departure; at which time our Children, and most of the Family, were
present, she quietly Expired in my Arms, her Head upon my Bosom, with a
sensible and Devout Resignation of her Soul to Almighty God. I hope I may say,
she was a Public, as well as Private Loss; for she was not only an excellent
Wife and Mother, but an Entire and Constant Friend, of a more than common
Capacity, and greater Modesty and Humility; yet most equal and undaunted in
Danger, Religious as well as Ingenuous, without Affectation. An easy Mistress,
and good Neighbor, especially to the Poor. Neither lavish nor penurious, but
an Example of Industry, as well as of other Virtues: Therefore our great Loss,
though her own Eternal Gain.

Sorrow and Joy IN THE LOSS and END OF Springet Penn.
MY very Dear Child and Eldest Son, Springet Penn, did from his Childhood
manifest a Disposition to Goodness, and gave me hope of a more than ordinary
Capacity, and time satisfied me in both respects. For besides a good share of
Learning, and especially of Mathematical Knowledge, he showed a judgment in the
use and application of it, much above his Years. He had the Seeds of many good
Qualities rising in him, that made him Beloved, and consequently Lamented; but
especially his Humility, Plaineness and Truth; with a Tenderness and Softness
of Nature, that if I may say it, were an improvement upon his other Good
Qualities. But though these were no Security against Sickness and Death, yet
they went a good way to facilitate a due Preparation for them. And indeed the
Good Ground that was in him, showed it self very plainly sometime before his
Illness: For more than half a Year before it pleased the Lord to visit him with
Weakness, he grew more Retired, and much disengaged from Youthful Delights;
showing a remarkable Tenderness in Meetings even when they were silent: But
when He saw himself doubtful as to his Recovery, he turned his Mind and
Meditations more apparently toward the Lord; secretly (as also when they were
in the Room that attended upon him) Praying often, with great Fervency to the
Lord, and uttering very many Thankful Expressions and Praises to him, in a deep
and sensible manner. One day he said to us, I am Resigned; what God Pleases;
he knows what is best. I would live if it Pleased him, that I might serve him:
But, O Lord, not my Will, but thy Will be done.

One speaking to him of the Things of this World, and what might Please him
when Recovered; He answered, My Eye looks another way, where the truest
Pleasure is. When he told me he had Rested well, and that I said it was a Mercy
to him; he quickly Replied upon me, with a serious, yet sweet Look, All is
Mercy, dear Father, every thing is Mercy. Another time when I went to Meeting,
at Parting, he said, Remember me, my dear Father, before the Lord: Though I
cannot go to Meetings, yet I have many good Meetings; the Lord comes in upon my
Spirit, I have Heavenly Meetings with him by my self.

And not many days before he died, the Lord appearing by his Holy Power upon
his Spirit, when alone, at my Return asking him how he did, he told me, O I
have had a Sweet Time, a Blessed Time! great Enjoyments; the Power of the Lord
overcame my Soul, a sweet Time indeed.

And telling him how some of the Gentry that had been to visit him, were gone
to their Games, and Sports and Pleasures, and how little Consideration the
Children of Men had of God and their latter End, and how much Happier he was in
this Weakness to have been otherwise Educated, and to be preserved from those
Temptations to Vanity, etc. he Answered, It is all stuff, my dear Father: It is
sad stuff. O that I might live to tell them so! Well, my dear Child, I Replied,
Let this be the time of thy entering into secret Covenant with God, that if he
Raise thee, thou will dedicate thy Youth, Strength and Life to him, and his
People, and Service: He returned, Father, that is not now to do, it is not now
to do; with great Tenderness upon his Spirit.

Being ever almost near him, and doing any thing for him he wanted or desired,
he broke out with much Sense and Love, My dear Father, if I live, I will make
Thee amends. And speaking to him of Divine Enjoyments, that the Eye of Man saw
not, but the Soul, made alive by the Spirit of Christ, plainly felt; he, in a
lively Remembrance, cried out, O I had a sweet Time yesterday by my self! O the
Lord has preserved me to this day! O Blessed be his Name; my Soul Praises him
for his Mercy! O Father, it is of the Goodness of the Lord that I am so well as
I am!

Fixing his Eyes upon his Sister, he took her by the Hand, saying, Poor Tishe,
Look to good things: Poor Child there is no Comfort without it: One drop of the
Love of God is worth more than all the World. I KNOW IT, I HAVE TASTED IT: I
have felt as much or more of the Love of God in this Weakness, than in all my
Life before. At another time, as I stood by him, he looked up upon me, and
said, Dear Father, sit by me, I love thy Company, and I know thou love mine;
and if it be the Lord's Will that we must Part, be not troubled, for that will
trouble me.

Taking something one Night in Bed, just before his going to Rest, he sat up
and fervently Prayed thus. O Lord God, Thou whose Son said to his Disciples,
Whatever ye ask in my Name, ye shall receive; I Pray thee, in his Name, Bless
this to me this Night, and give me Rest, if it be thy Blessed Will, O Lord! And
accordingly he had a very Comfortable Night, of which he took a Thankful Notice
before us, next day.

And when he at one time more than ordinary, Expressed a desire to Live, and
entreated me to pray for him; he added, And dear Father, if the Lord should
Raise me, and Enable me to serve him and his People, then I might Travel with
thee sometimes, and we might Ease one another (meaning in the Ministry.) He
spoke it with great Modesty: Upon which I said to him, My dear Child, if it
please the Lord to Raise thee, I am satisfied it will be so; and if not, then
in as much as it is thy Fervent Desires in the Lord, he will look upon thee
just as if thou did Live to serve him, and thy Comfort will be the same: So
either way it will be well. For if thou should not Live, I do verily believe
thou will have the Recompense of thy good Desires, without the Temptations and
Troubles that would attend, if long Life were granted to thee.

Saying one day thus, I am a resolved I will have such a thing done; he
immedately caught himfelf, and fell into this Reflection, with much
Contrition, Did I say I will? O Lord forgive me that irreverent and hasty
Expression! I am poor weak Creature, and live by thee, and therefore I should
have said, If it pleases thee that I Live, I intend to do so or so: Lord
forgive my Rash Expression.

Seeing my present Wife ready to be helpful, and do any thing for him, he
turned to her and said, Don't thee do so, let them; don't trouble thy self so
much for such a poor Creature at I am. And taking leave of him a few Nights
before his end, he said to her, Pray for me, dear Mother, thou art good and
innocent, may be the Lord may hear thy Prayers for me, for I desire my strength
again, that I might live, and employ it more in the Lord's Service.

Two or three days before his departure, he called his Brother to him, and
looking Awefully upon him, said, Be a good Boy, and know there is a God, a
Great and Mighty God, who is a Rewarder of the Righteous, and so he is of the
Wicked, but their Rewards are not the same. Have a care of Idle People, and
idle Company, and love good Company, and good Friends, and the Lord will Bless
thee. I have seen good things for thee since my Sickness, if thou do but fear
the Lord: And if I should not live (though the Lord is All-sufficient) Remember
what I say to thee, when I am dead and gone: Poor Child, the Lord Bless thee,
come and Kiss me! Which melted us all into great Tenderness, but his Brother
more particularly.

Many good Exhortations he gave to some of the Servants, and others that came
to see him, that were not of our Communion, as well as those that were, which
drew Tears from their Eyes.

The day but one before he died, he went to take the Air in a Coach; but said
at his return, Really Father I am exceeding weak, thou can not think how weak
I am: My dear Child, I replied, thou art weak, but God is strong, who is the
Strength of thy Life: Ay that is it, said he, which upholds me. And the day
before he departed, being alone with him, he desired me to fasten the Door, and
looking earnestly upon him, said, Dear Father, thou art a dear Father, and I
know thy Father, come let us two have a little Meeting, a private Ejaculation
together, now no Body else is here. O my Soul is sensible of the Love of God!
And indeed a sweet time we had, like to Precious Ointment for his Burial.

He desired to go home; if not to Live, to Die there; and we made Preparation
for it, being Twenty Miles from my House; and so much stronger was his Spirit
than his Body, that he spoke of going next Day, which was the Morning he
departed; and a Symptom it was of his greater Journey to his longer Home. That
Morning he left us, growing more and more Sensible of his extreme Weakness, he
asked me, as doubtful of himself, How shall I get Home? I told him, in a Coach;
he answered, I am best in a Coach. But observing his decay, I said, Why Child?
Thou art at home every where; Ay, said he, so I am in the Lord. I took that
Opportunity to ask him, If I should remember his Love to his Friends at
Bristol, London, etc. Yes, Yes, said he, my Love in the Lord; my Love to all
Friends in the Lord: And Relations too? He said, Ay to be sure. Being asked, if
he would have his Ass's Milk, or eat any thing? He answered, No more outward
Food, but Heavenly Food is provided for me.

His Time drawing on a-pace, he said to me, My dear Father, Kiss me, thou art a
dear Father; I desire to prize it; how can I make thee amends?

He also called his Sister, and said to her, Poor Child, come and Kiss me;
between whom seemed a tender and long Farewell. I sent for his Brother, that he
might Kiss him too, which he did, all were in Tears about him. Turning his Head
to me, he said softly, Dear Father, have no hope for me? I answered, My dear
Child, I am afraid to hope, and I dare not despair; but am, and have been
Resigned, though one of the hardest Lessons I ever Learned: He Paused a while,
and with a Composed Frame of Mind, he said, Come Life, come Death, I am
Resigned. O the Love of God overcomes my Soul!

Feeling himself decline a-pace, and seeing him not able to bring up the Matter
that was in his Throat, some Body fetched the Doctor; but so soon as he came
in, he said, Let my Father speak to the Doctor, and I Will go sleep; which he
did, and waked no more; Breathing his last on my Breast, the 10th Day of the 2d
Month, between the Hours of Nine and Ten in the Morning, 1696. in his One and
Twentieth Year.

So ended the Life of my Dear Child, and Eldest Son; much of my Comfort and
Hope, and one of the most Tender and Dutiful, as well as Ingenuous and Virtuous
Youths I knew, if I may say so, of my own Dear Child: In whom I lost all that
any Father can lose in a Child, since he was capable of any thing that became a
Sober Young Man: My Friend and Companion, as well as most Affectionate and
Dutiful Child.

May this Loss and End have its due Weight and Impression upon all his dear
Relations and Friends, and those to whose hands this Account may come, for
their Remembrance and Preparation for their great and last Change, and I have
my End in making my Dear Child's thus far Public

William Penn.

FINIS.

