Invisible Realities THE REAL CHRISTIAN'S Greatest Concernment. In several
SERMONS On 2 COR. 4.18.

By HENRY PENDLEBURY, A. M. late Minister of the Gospel at Rochdale in
Lancashire; Author of the Plain Representation of Transubstantiation.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Ann Vnsworth of Manchester; and sold by Jonathan
Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1696.

To the Right Honorable HUGH Lord Willoughby of Parham.
My Lord,
THE favorable Aspect your Lordship is pleased to afford to the living
Ministers and Members of Christ, encourages me to address unto your Honor
these worthy remains of a Reverend Minister now with God. And as I would humbly
implore your Lordship's kind and noble Patronage to these Discourses, so I do
with the profoundest Deference and Submission, commend them to your Perusal and
Practice. Your Lordship is not without a just Apprehension of the Caution and
Vigilance which they more especially stand in need of, who possess an high
Station, and manage great Concerns in this visible World, lest they should be
diverted thereby from seeking that which is Invisible and Eternal. The
Considerations presented in the following Sheets, will contribute no small
Assistance to your Lordship's Christian endeavors in this weighty Affair: They
do not only make future Invisible Things a match to cope with those that have
the Advantage of a Sensible, Visible Presence; but, if duly attended to, may by
the Blessing of God, give them a victorious Sway and Empire in the Thoughts and
Affections of Men.

That your Lordship's Conduct may entirely correspond with the Profession you
make of a most holy Religion, and with the clear Knowledge of Divine Things,
wherewith it has pleased God to endow you; that to your noble Extraction and
great Abilities, you may add many honorable Achievements, and happy
Performances, for the Glory of God, the Good of his Church, and the Prosperity
of your Native Country, to the everlasting Honor of your Person and Family in
this World, and to the Salvation of your precious Soul in the World to come, is
and shall be the Prayer of,

May it please your Lordship, Your Lordship's most humble and most obedient
Servant, JOHN CHORLTON.

A Brief ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.
MR. Henry Pendlebury, the Reverend Author of the ensuing Discourse, was born
the 6th of May 1626, at Jokin in Bury Parish in Lancashire: His excellent
Memory is owing to the following Account. He was from his Childhood of a solid
and reserved Spirit; there did then appear in him an aversness to Vanity, and
an inclination to Seriousness; he had an aptness for, and love to Learning, and
pursued it with great Closeness and Diligence. There then seemed to be an early
Foundation laid in him, upon which afterward a high Fabric of Learning and
Goodness was to be erected. He was at several Schools, but perfected for the
University at Bury School. After he had taken his Degrees at Cambridg, he
returned into Lancashire, and preached his first Sermon at Ashworth in the
Parish of Midleton, August 16. 1648. where afterward he spent some time as
Probationer in the Ministry.

He was set apart to the Office and Work of the Ministry at Turton-Chappel, in
the Parish of Bolton in the Moors, October. 3d 1650.

The Reverend Ministers that invested him in the Ministerial Office, were Mr.
John Tilsley, Mr. Thomas Pitts, Mr. Jonathan Scolefield, Mr. Toby Furness, Mr.
Robert Bath. They who were present, observed him to make his Ordination-Vows
and Promises with great Humility of Spirit.

After his Ordination, he preached near a Year at Horrigde-Chappel, in the
Parish of Dean. From thence he removed to Holcombe Chapel in the Parish of
Bury, October 16. ^651. where he labored hard in his Master's Work, till he
was excluded from the public Performance thereof in that Place on Black
Bartholomew Day 1662. when about 2000 Ministers were turned out for
Nonconformity. The Adjacent Ministers and People had him in high Estimation
for his Life and Labors. When he was there, he had a Call from the People at
Ringley, but they at Holcombe being sensible what a burning and shining Light
he was amongst them, would not be brought to give up their Title to him. He had
a large measure of natural Gifts and Parts, which furnished him with great
promptness and readiness for all his Ministerial Performances; but they did not
render him the less studious, for he would not serve the Lord with that which
cost him nothing. Much of his Time was spent in his Closet, where he gave
himself to Prayer, Reading, and Meditation: This was the only Place upon Earth,
where he took the greatest Pleasure, next to his Pulpit. He did not concern
himself in any secular Affairs pertaining to his Family, but devolved the whole
Management of them upon his virtuous Consort. All his Sermons both as to the
Heads and Enlargement of them, were premeditated and penned, and afterward
preached with little variation without the help of his Notes; which manifested,
beside the strength of his Memory, the vastness of his Pains to fix them
therein, considering the variety of Matter, and the number of the Texts
contained in them.

So great was his Industry, that in his Weakness, when there were some small
Hopes of his Recovery, he set himself to study a new Discourse suitable to his
own and his Hearers Condition. Before his Exclusion from this Work in Public,
beside his constant Preaching every Lord's Day at Holcombe among his People, he
preached much to other Congregations both far and near, in the Country which
had their Monthly Exercises; and after he was silenced, he continued as
Laborious in Preaching as before. And indeed the Dissenting Party of
Protestants in all the Parishes adjacent to him, were very desirous of his
Labors amongst them; and he was free to spend, and be spent for the promoting
of their Souls good. He was ever mindful of his Ordination-Vow, and could not
think that any Power upon Earth could null his Commission which he had received
from Christ to preach the Gospel. He was most eminent for Humility, Meekness,
and Self-denial; herein he shined above his Fellows.

His Modesty was such, that tho he was one of the tallest of his Brethren for
Ministerial Seize and Performances, yet he did really esteem himself the
least of them all: his Humility cast such a Vail over all his Abilities, that
he could not discern them though they were very conspicuous to others. He was
able to maintain the Truths of the Gospel committed to his Trust, against the
Opposers and Subverters of them. The Controversies both as to Faith and
Worship, between the Protestants and Papists, were thoroughly understood by him;
his small Treatise of Transubstantiation is a sufficient Evidence of his
Ability to defend the Protestant Cause: And he has left behind him another
piece on the Sacrifice of the Mass, not inferior to it in Worth and Excellency.

He had a Transcript of all those Divine Truths and Graces upon his own Heart,
which he disclosed unto others; the scope of all his Studies, Prayers, and
Sermons, was directed by him to the saving of himself, and those that heard
him. And in his Conversation were so expressed the Power and Life of all his
Ministerial Acts in a Holy Imitation of his Lord and Master Jesus Christ, as
did show him to be really persuaded in his Heart that there was more than
ordinary Care required of him to keep himself in all Respects pure from the
Blood of Souls: and the Lord who is the searcher and trier of the Heart, and
who loves Truth of Grace in the inward parts, did crown his Ministerial
Endeavors with great Success. He did not run in vain, nor labor in vain, nor
spend his Strength for naught; but he had Seals of his Ministry all along, from
the beginning to the close thereof; and the Lord ordered it so wisely in his
Providence, that sometimes the notice, or the saving Success of his Ministry
was then brought unto him, when it conduced most to his inward Support and
Consolation. Then (to give one Instance of many) when he was banished by the
Oxford Act, at the first House he took up his Lodging as a poor Exile from his
own Home, he who saluted him as his Spiritual Father, related to him that he
was the Instrument of his Conversion, by preaching a Lecture-Sermon at Leigh
Church. Mr. Nathaniel Hilton of London, gave a Stipend for a Weekly Lecture at
Bolton every Monday, of the most eminent Ministers in the County, to four in
their Courses, among whom this worthy Servant of Christ was chosen one, other
two were Mr. Roger Baldwin, and Mr. Henry Newcome, who are both sometime since
removed by Death. Cease Lord, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? He
was a great redeemer of his Time, there was not so much as a Day spent by him
in Idleness; the sense of unseen things was so deeply impressed upon his Spirit,
as made him fill every Leaf in the Book of his Life, with those great and
weighty Works which were incumbent on him in his Place.

When Persons that had been converted by his Ministry gave notice to him
thereof, he would with great Humility lift up his Eyes and Hands toward
Heaven, and say, Lord, who am I, that I should be so far honored as to be the
Instrument in the converting of one Soul!

He was Eminent for Contempt of the World, he never sought great Places for
himself, and when they were offered him, he declined them; he was content to
move in an obscure and low Sphere, so he might but be an Instrument of doing
good to Souls; he would not be drawn nor driven away to any other Business, but
continued in his laborious Course of Preaching twice every Lord's Day,
administering the Lord's Supper Monthly.

He was a constant Mourner for the Sins of the Nation; and was greatly
concerned for the rising Generation, and bent his Discourses t^ establish them
in the true Religion.

He welcomed his last Sickness with deep Submission to the Will of God.

He expressed his Contentedness, if his Lord and Master whom he served with his
Spirit in the Gospel, had any more Work for him to accomplish in the Church
below; but if not, he was willing to depart, desirous to have his own
Blessedness among the Saints above, and to be with Christ as being far better.

He had little pain in the beginning of his Sickness, and was much in blessing
of God for dealing so gently with him, and carrying on his long Visitation with
so great ease to him. He kept his resigned Frame to the Will of his Heavenly
Father, and said, I have had more Time to work for my own and others Souls,
than I made account of when I was Young, and so if God have no more Work for me
to do, I am free to go to my Rest; I have had enough of Living, and am filled
and satisfied with this Life upon Earth.

There came Friends from all Places where he had preached to visit him, to whom
he always dropped some word of suitable Counsel. He advised those who told him
they were converted by his Ministry, to give God the Glory, and to walk worthy
of the Vocation wherewith they were called.

He exhorted those who had profited, and were built up in Grace by his Labors,
to go on their way rejoicing, tho they should see his Face no more.

He cautioned rich and trading Professors to take heed that they lost not their
Souls in a crowd and hurry of earthly Business; he charged them to remember the
Saying of Sir Thomas Moor, there is a great Truth in it, as well as a Scum of
Wit; There is a Devil that is termed Business, that carries more Souls with
him to Hell, than all the Devils in Hell beside. O beware of the Devil; when
you come to be in my Condition, your full Bags, your full Shops, and full
Houses, will stand you in no stead.

Some of his Reverend Brethren in the Ministry did visit him, with whom he
freely conversed, and whom he always desired to pray with him as he did all his
other Christian Friends; and amongst the rest Reverend Mr. O. H. was with him,
and in his Discourse propounded these Queries here inserted, to which be
returned with great composedness of Mind the following Answers.

What are your Thoughts as to Justification by Christ's imputed Righteousness?

I look only to be justified by Christ's Righteousness received by Faith.

Being asked, What Evidence he had for Heaven?

He said, he had good grounds of Hope many Years ago concerning his State of
Grace: tho be was full of defects, yet the Merits of Christ were alsufficient,
on which he trusted.

Are you satisfied that you have delivered in your Sermons nothing but such
Gospel Truths, as you can own at the Tribunal of Christ?

Excepting humane Frailty, so far as I can remember I have never delivered any
thing to my Hearers but what I dare die with, and go with to Judgment.

Mr. H. continued, Whether have you any comfortable Seals of your Ministry?

He answered, I bless God I have, and have had more Fruits appearing since my
Lying down, than I knew of before, especially many young Persons have appeared
hopeful.

What are your Thoughts now as to your Nonconformity? Do you repent of it?

I bless God I am abundantly satisfied with it, and if I was to make my choice
over again, and if it were possible for me to see all the Sufferings which I
have undergone for it, (which are nothing to what many of the precious Servants
of God have suffered) and if they were all laid together, I would make the same
Choice which I have made, and take my Nonconformity with them; and I bless God
that I never so much as tampered with them.

What Legacies have you to leave?

I am unfit to give Counsel to you my Brother, but the words of the Apostle I
leave with you, Be not weary of Well-doing, and you shall reap in due Time if
you faint not.

In the latter end of his Sickness, it pleased his Heavenly Father to visit him
with a complication of painful Distempers, under all the Tortures of which he
yet glorified God with great Patience, and expressed his Hope of his future
Blessedness, saying, I am not sick unto Death, but unto Eternal Life. He would
often say, In a little while all will be well. As to the Estate and Condition
of his Soul, he expressed himself to some Friends thus; I can now look back
upon my Way and Work in the Ministry, and say, I have been Faithful; and I can
look within, and say I have Peace; but after all, the bottom I would fix on is
Christ and his Righteousness, I would make him all in all.

When his Body was brought exceeding low, yet he would be left alone sometimes
in the Day, (as was concluded) that he might with less distraction enjoy
Communion with God in secret Prayer and Meditation.

A little before he died, some of his Hearers coming to him, and inquiring of
him how he did? he said, I long after your Spiritual and Soul-Welfare.

He departed this Life the 18th of June 1695. about eight of the Clock in the
Morning, and in the 70th Year of his Age. His pious Soul, which through the
whole Course of his Life had been bent toward God, did show her readiness and
preparedness for the full and eternal Fruition, by the sweet and ardent
Breathings which it had that Night and Morning after him, which were often
expressed in these words, Father, come and take me Home to thy self.

His Body was interred in Bury Churchyard (being the Parish Church where he
lived) close by the Chancel-Wall, on the South side, June 20. Anno Dom. 1695. A
vast Concourse of People appeared at the Funeral, and made great Lamentation
over him; the Reverend Mr. Robert Seddon of Bolton, preached the Funeral Sermon
at Mr. Pendlebury's own Chapel. The Subject of his Discourse was in the 12th
of Daniel and the 13th Verse, But go thou thy way till the End be; for thou
shall rest and stand in thy Lot at the end of the Days.

Thus have we sorrowfully brought to the Grave this excellent Minister of
Christ, who was truly a Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed, a Gracious, Humble,
Meek-spirited Christian, that lived as he preached, and preached as he
believed: his exact Life was an accurate Comment on his Doctrine; his Doctrine
was sound and Scriptural; he was a solid, judicious Divine, that thoroughly
studied what he preached: he was not forward in speaking, but what was wanting
in Number was made up in Ponderousness of words, they had all their full
weight. He was beloved of all, and reverenced especially by Brethren in the
Ministry, and his People whom he labored and spent himself for about 44 Years,
who will be ready to say of his Worth, what the Queen of Sheba said of
Solomon's Wisdom, That the one half thereof is not here published to the World.

Invisible Realities the Real Christians greatest Concernment.
SERMON I.
2 Cor. 4.18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal.
THE blessed Apostle having described the great Sufferings and grievous
Persecutions which the Corinthians had endured, and were enduring for the
Gospel's sake, in the 8, 9, 10, 11 Verses of this Chapter, proceeds in the
following Verses to annex the Grounds of their Patience, Confidence, Constancy,
and Consolation, in all the Pressures they went under. And these may be reduced
to two Heads; two things bore them up, and bore them out under all.

First, A certain Hope and Expectation of a glorious Resurrection to
Everlasting Life, after all the ignominious Sufferings of this Life, Ver. 13,
14. We having the same Spirit of Faith, according as it is written, I believed,
and therefore have I spoken: we also believe, and therefore speak; knowing,
that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, and
shall present us with you. As if he had said, this is our Corroboration and our
Consolation, the Assurance that we have of a happy Resurrection, by this we are
kept from sinking under Discouragements, while we are always delivered unto
Death, Ver. 11.

The 15th Verse contains a Reason of his Confidence, of being the Companion of
the believing Corinthians, after his many Sufferings, for as much as they were
endured for their Good, and the Glory of God; For all things are for your
sakes, that the abundant Grace might, through the Thanksgiving of many, redound
to the Glory of God.

This is the first Ground of the Apostle's Constancy and Comfort, ver. 16. For
which Cause we faint not; but though our outward Man perish, yet the inward Man
is renewed day by day; i. e. upon the confident Hope of Eternal Life we faint
not, knowing this, that he which has raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up
us also, etc.

2. The Persuasion and Assurance they were settled in, that they should not be
losers by the Sufferings and Afflictions which they were enduring: But that
they should all tend and turn, (1.) To their present Good; (2.) To their future
Glory.

1. To their present Good. Though our outward Man perish, that is, we faint not
for this Cause, as knowing that while our Bodies, with all those things that
tend to the maintaining and adorning of this present Life, as Health, and
Wealth, and Credit, fall into decay and moulder away, by the various
Tribulations we are crushed under; yet our inward Man (to wit) our Souls, or
our spiritual Estate, is renewed, (...), is made new again day by day, is daily
restored more and more to its primitive Form and Beauty. So that we are not
losers, but gainers by our Sufferings; if we lose our Externals, lose our
Health, and lose our Strength, and lose our Peace, and lose our Liberty, and
lose our Livelihood, yet all this loss is not without a Compensation, we have
it made up, we have it recompensed with Internals, and things of Eternal
Concernment: Our outward Losses are recompensed with inward Gain, the decay of
our temporal Good compensated with the augmentation of spiritual Grace; while
the things of Earth are going from us, the things of Heaven come into the room
of them.

2. To their future Glory, ver. 17. as they were tending to their present Good,
so they turned to their future Glory: ver. 17. For our light Affliction which
is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory. Here the Apostle shows,

1. What their Afflictions were now; 1. They were light; 2. Short.

2. What they wrought. Now these light and short Afflictions, which are but for
a moment, work for us, 1. Glory; 2. A weight of Glory; 3. An exceeding weight
of Glory; 4. A far more exceeding weight of Glory; 5. A far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory. So that here is a threefold most excellent Antithesis.
I say,

1. For Affliction here is Glory, future Glory for present Affliction.

2. For light Affliction, here is a weight (magnitudo) of Glory; not only so,
but an exceeding weight, a far more exceeding weight of Glory. Weigh
Afflictions, the weightiest Afflictions, all the Afflictions of a Christian
with Glory, and there will be no proportion betwixt them; Romans 8.18. For I
reckon, that the Sufferings of this present Time are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory which shall be revealed in us.

3. For short Afflictions, Afflictions for a moment, here is eternal Glory, an
eternal weight of Glory. This is the other Ground of their Patience, Confidence
and Consolation: And now upon this the Words I have read come in, While we look
not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the
things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen, are
eternal. In the whole Verse you may take notice of two things.

1. How they came to make this Judgment of their Afflictions, to reckon of them
as light and short: This was by looking; our Affliction is light, while we look
at things not seen.

2. Why this looking made them thus to account, this was the vast Difference
which they hereby discovered to be between the present Affliction and future
Glory: For the things which are seen, are temporal; but the things which are
not seen, are eternal; i. e. Our present Afflictions and Sufferings, which are
seen things, are Temporal, for a short time, of short continuance; but our
future Glory and Happiness, which are unseen things, are endless and eternal.

The Words may be considered, either, 1. Relatively, as they refer and have
relation to the Context; and so they carry in them an Account of the Way and
Means whereby they came to this stability under their Afflictions, viz. by
eying unseen things. Or,

2. Absolutely in themselves, and so they carry in them an Account of their
Carriage and Practice; or show what it was they made their great Business in
the World, viz. to eye and mind eternal unseen things. I shall look on them at
this time under the latter Consideration; and so you have in them,

1. An Act expressed, we look, looking.

2. The Object described: And this is done,

1. Negatively; We look not at things seen, Res hujus seculi, the Matters of
this present Life.

2. Affirmatively; We look at things unseen, Res futuri seculi, at the things
of another World, and within the Vail; these are our Object, Scope and Aim, to
these we look. But how could they look at things not seen? Oculus fidei longius
penetrat quam omnes humanae naturae sensus: and fides etiam ideo vocatur rerum
invisibilium Aspectus. Calvin. in locum. By the Eye of Faith they might look at
them.

There are several things very observable in the words; I shall only at this
time observe this from them.

Doct. It is the great Part and Duty of Christians in this Life, to look at
things which are not seen: Or, it is the great Concern of Christians to be
looking at unseen things.

In this we shall,

First prove, that there are unseen things, things which are not seen, which
are, (...), not visible, don't appear to Eyes of Flesh.

And this will be evident from these five or six things:

1. From general Assertions in Scripture, that hold out to us a Being of things
which are not seen, do not appear; see for this Heb. 11.1. Faith is the
Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not seen. Fide
convincimur ad credenda quae non videmus, perinde ac si manifesto in luce
viderentur. Faith is an infallible Argument, a clear Conviction, a convincing
Demonstration of their Existence, Reality and Certainty, that they are no
Figments and Fancies, but Realities. So then you see hence, that there are
unseen things; Quae mente nostra cernimus haud secus ac si praesentia essent;
Things which through Faith we see with our Minds as if they were present.

Again, Romans 8.24. We are saved by Hope: but Hope that is seen, is not Hope:
for what a Man sees, why does he yet hope for? As the antecedent and
consequent words show, it is as if the Apostle had said, We have a certain
Apprehension of Redemption, Glory, and final Freedom from all Calamities here,
in Hope and Expectation, not in present Possession; for Hope that is seen, is
not Hope; i. e. if we had them in hand, we could not be said to hope for them:
So that here again you see, there are unseen things, the things of Hope; the
things that Hope waits for are unseen; Ver. 25. We hope for that we see not.
Hence Believers are said to have their Hope laid up for them in Heaven; Col.
1.5. For the Hope which is laid up for you in Heaven; the Substance of which
things is Faith, Heb. 11.1.

Again, Isa. 64.4. For since the beginning of the World Men have not heard, nor
perceived by the Ear, neither has the Eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he
has prepared for him that waits for him.

Mark, (1.) Here are things prepared. (2.) These prepared things are unknown
things, Ear has not heard them, Eye has not seen them. (3.) They have been
unknown things from the beginning.

The Ear of Man has heard of many things, and the Eye of Man has seen many
things up and down the World, in those many Ages that the World has stood; yet
behind all these things, that so many thousands and millions of Ears (now
stopped in the Grave) have heard, and so many Eyes (now sunk down in their
Holes) have seen; I say, behind all these there are things that Ear has never
heard, that Eye has never seen; that Time, which uncovers many things, has not
uncovered, in its manifold Revolutions, since the beginning. It may appear
there are unseen things,

2. From the particular Enumeration which we have in the Scripture, of things
which have not been seen, or are unseen.

The Holy Ghost mentions many things in particular that are (...), do not
appear. As in a word only to instance in a few things.

(1.) The Holy Ghost makes report to us of a Life of Saints that is hid; Col.
3.3. Your-Life is hid with Christ in God; not only the Life of Grace, but
especially the Perfection of that Life, the Life of Glory, this is hid.

Hiding implies two things; 1. Safety; that the thing is in safety; so is this
Life, for it is hid with Christ in God. 2. Secresy; that the thing hid is
covered and out of sight; such is the Life of Glory, it is a hidden Life, the
Glory of it is covered, and out of the sight of all Mortals.

(2.) We read of manifestation of Sons; Romans 8.19. For the earnest Expectation
of the Creature, waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God. And also to
the same purpose, in 1 John 3.2. It does not yet appear what we shall be. In
both these places we have a Discovery that is to be made of the Sons of God.
Behind all that is yet manifest, or does yet appear, there is a Manifestation
of the Sons of God, it does not yet appear what we shall be. O Sirs, the Sons
of God shall be manifested with, and appear in much Glory, much internal Glory
in their Souls and Bodies, much external Glory in their Privileges and
Possessions, that is not yet manifest, neither does yet appear.

(3.) Glory to be revealed; Romans 8.18. 1 Pet. 5.1. And also a Partaker of the
Glory that shall be revealed. Here is a Glory to be revealed, to be opened and
uncovered, that is yet covered and unseen; a Glory to be thus revealed in us,
or among us, us who are now suffering among Men.

(4.) Wrath to come on Sinners; 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Matthew. 3.7. O Generation of
Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the Wrath to come? Wrath to come in
another World, and in an eternal Estate, besides and behind all that comes, and
is seen in this World and present Time.

(5.) Second Death, that poor Creatures (dead in Trespasses and Sins) have to
pass under, when through the Door of the first Death. Rev. 2.11. He that
overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second Death. Rev. 20.6. Blessed and Holy
is he that has part in the first Resurrection; on him the second Death shall
have no Power. There is then you see such a thing as a second Death. O think on
it, poor Sinners, it is an unseen thing, but an unquestionable thing; there is
such a thing certainly, and it is a dreadful thing: the first Death is nothing,
the breadth of it is but a step, the length of it is but a moment of Time, or
two; but the second Death is something, there are the Chambers of Death, where
you shall be led from one Misery to another, and where you shall dwell for ever.

3. The Being of unseen things is manifest from the special Distribution, or
Distinction, that the Scripture makes of things, into two ranks or sorts. This
is another thing that will yet put this Truth out of question. We find the Holy
Ghost distributing things,

(1.) Into things present and to come; Romans 8.38. For I am persuaded that
neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, or things
present, or things to come, etc. 1 Cor. 3.22. there again you read of things
present and to come.

(2.) Into those of this Life, and of the Life to come; 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness
has the Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come.

(3.) Into things of this World, and that to come; Luke 20.34, 35. The Children
of this World marry, and are given in Marriage; But they which shall be
accounted worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection from the Dead, etc.
Ephesians. 1.21. Every Name that is named, not only in this World, but in that which
is to come.

(4.) Into things Above, and things on Earth; Col. 3.2. Set your Affections on
things above, not on things on the Earth.

(5.) Things in Heaven and in Earth; Col. 1.16. For by him were all things
created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth.

(6.) Things Temporal and things Eternal; 2 Cor. 4.18. The things which are
seen are Temporal, but the things which are not seen are Eternal.

(7.) Things Visible and Invisible; Col. 1.16. For by him were all things
Created, visible and invisible; i. e. all the Creatures, for they are all
visible or invisible; and as there are visible, so there are invisible unseen
Creatures. Thus things are distinguished, into things present and to come. Now
the things present, the things of this Life are visible, are seen things; and
the things to come, the things of the other Life are (...), invisible and
unseen.

4. The Being of unseen things is evident from the Examples or Experience of
those that have been brought within some sight of unseen things; thus Peter,
James, and John had a Praeludium, a Prefiguration of the unseen Glory of
Heaven, in Christ's Transfiguration, Mat. 17. So Stephen, when dying, saw the
Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right Hand of God, Acts 7.55. Mark, he
saw into Heaven, and beheld Christ there in his Glory. If any would enquire
here, de modo, how the Heavens were opened, and how he saw the Glory; it is both
beside my present Work, and above my Ability to satisfy their Curiosity. Res
patet, modus latet.

Again, Paul tells us, that he was caught up into the third Heaven, into
Paradise, the Place of God's Glory, the Habitation of Saints and Angels; and
that there he heard wordless words, things impossible to be uttered, 2 Cor.
12.2, 3, 4. Mark pray, he tells us again and again, whether out of the Body, or
in the Body, I cannot tell, God knows; but this he can tell, that he was in
the third Heaven, in Paradise, and heard unspeakable words. So on the other
side, as Stephen a little before his Death, had a foresight of the unseen Glory
above, and dying, went into the full Possession of it: so Judas a little before
his Death had a foretaste of the Woe and Worm below, and dying went to the full
Experience of it; Acts 1.25. From which Judas by Transgression fell, that he
might go to his own place. So the Sodomites are set out, Jude 7. not only for
an Example of Admonition, to warn other Sinners, but as an Example of
Conviction, to convince other Sinners that there is an eternal Fire; or for an
Example of this Truth, that there are Sufferings not seen; remaining for
impenitent and secure Sinners, as those that hear these words shall see and
find one day, if Repentance and Grace prevent not.

5. From Scripture-Visions, wherein the Lord has made clear discoveries, and
visible representations of invisible things, things not seen, unto his
Servants. The unseen Judgment to come, was thus seen by Daniel in a Vision;
Dan. 7.9, 10. I beheld till the Thrones were cast down, and the ancient of days
did sit, whose Garment was white as Snow, and the Hair of his Head like the
pure Wool: his Throne was like the fiery Flame, and his Wheels as burning
Fire. Verse 10. A fiery Stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before
him: the Judgment was set, and the Books were opened. By John in another
Vision, Rev. 20.11, 12, 13. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on
it, from whose Face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no
place for them. Ver. 12. And I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God,
and the Books were opened; and another Book was opened, which is the Book of
Life, and the Dead were judged out of those things which were written in the
Books, according to their Works. Ver. 13. And the Sea gave up the Dead which
were in it; and Death and Hell delivered up the Dead which were in them, and
they were judged every Man according to their Works. The triumphant Church was
seen, Rev. 21. That there be unseen things, may be proved from the very
Confessions of Pagans and Heathens; those who have not had the Light of the
Word, have yet had some confused, obscure, and imperfect Apprehensions of
unseen things, or that there are invisible things. Says Plato, Extabat lex de
hominibus sub Saturno, and semper and nunc etiam extat apud Deos; and quicunque
homines just pieque vitam egissent, cum e vita migrarent, ad beatorum insulas
profecti, in omni foelicitate viverent, a malis long sejuncti: qui vero
injuste impieque vixissent, in punitionis justique supplicii carcerem quod
appellant Tartarum irent: in Gorgia, page 356. Qui ob scelerum magnitudinem
insanabiles esse videntur, hos omnis conveniens sors mergit in Tartarum, unde
nunquam egrediuntur. Idem in Phaedone, page 84.

Socrates rejoiced that he was to die, because he should then go to see Homer,
Hesiod, and other Worthies that were gone before.

Yea, Bion of Boristenes the Atheist, who all his Life time had denied the
Gods, and derided their Worship, yet when Death came was extremely afraid of
dying, and that not so much because of the loss of Life, or Pains of Death, but
for fear of what followed after Death.

I might much enlarge here: from this Principle those things took their Rise
that we find either in Poets or Philosophers concerning the Elysian Fields, the
Stygean Lake, etc.

From these Arguments we may see that there are unseen things. The next Enquiry
we shall make is,

Secondly, What these things are which are not seen, and which Christians are
to look at.

Now the Holy Scripture (which must be our Guide in this Enquiry) brings us
tidings of many things, that to us and all the Living are not seen, do not
appear. I shall at this Time confine my self to, and sum up all I shall say as
to this in four Heads; there are these four things which are not seen, and that
it concerns us to look at.

1. Death, 2. Judgment, 3. Heaven, 4. Hell.

1. The things of Death are unseen things, things not seen: as in a word,

(1.) The time of Death is unseen. The Living know that they shall die, Eccl.
9.5. but they know not when they shall die. Genesis 27.2. I know not the Day of my
Death: So thou and I may say, I know not the Hour, Day, Week, Month, Year,
wherein Death will come, it is unseen. When an Hour is past, or a Day over, we
may say that was not the Day or Hour; but we cannot say of the Day or Hour
which is yet to come, that it shall not be the Time. Prove. 27.1. Boast not thy
self of to morrow, for thou know not what a Day may bring forth: the Day
thou art now in, and spending on, may bring forth unseen Death. The time of
Death is one thing unseen, this is one, no Man knows when it will be, at what
Day, in what Year it will come, whether in Youth, or in old Age. O think on
this, Sirs, the Time will come when you must die; but when this will be, is
covered from you, you see it not, it may be at any Instant, in any Moment. Mark
13.35. Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the House comes,
at Even, or at Midnight, or at the Cock crowing, or in the Morning.

(2.) The Place of Death is unseen; this is another. As we see not when, so we
see not where we must die, in what Place, whether at Home, or Abroad, in the
House, or in the Field, in the Bed, or at the Board. It may be thou have been
showed where it was that thou wast born, in what Place thou came into the
World and took thy first Breath; ay but they that have showed thee this, cannot
take thee again by the Hand, and lead thee to see the Place where thou must
take thy last Breath and die, and go out of this World into another; this is
unseen, thou cannot say, lo it is here, or lo there it is; or if thou will, yet
it may be neither here nor there, but somewhere else that thou never think of.

It Is said of Eschilus the Poet in Sicily, that on a Day walking out of the
Town where he dwelt to take the Air, he sat him down upon a high Place, and
having his Head (being bald) bare and uncovered, an Eagle flew over him in the
Air, with a Tortoise in her Talons, and seeing his white Head, took it for a
Stone, and so let it fall from a great Height thereon to break the
Tortoise-shell, which broke his Scull, whereof he died presently. One would
have thought that this could not have been the Place of such a Death, but
rather that it was impossible for any thing to fall on his Head, unless the
Heavens themselves had dropped down: but alas, Death can come on us any where, we
are no where out of its reach, neither know we where it will meet us; when we
think our selves most safe, or never think of it, it may thus drop on our
Heads. When Bibulus the Roman General was riding in Triumph in all his Glory
through the Streets of Rome, a Tile fell from a House and beat out his Brains.
Many have seen Death where they have never thought of seeing it, and thou
know not where thou may see it. Psalm. 89.48. What Man is he that lives
and shall not see Death? That Is the Psalmist's Question, it may be mine, What
Man is he that lives (of you that are here to day) that can tell, where it is
he must see Death? which he cannot escape seeing somewhere; and it is a Question
you can none of you answer. O that you would think of it, and labor to be
such, as you may be ready to see it in any Place.

(3.) The manner of Death is unseen: as we see not when or where, so we can as
little see how we must die, by what kind or manner of Death we must go out of
this World: there is but one way of coming into the World, one Door that we all
came in at at our Entrance, but there are many ways out of the World. Mors est
bellua Centiceps, and comes a hundred ways. The Jews reckon 903 kinds of Death;
but among all the kinds that we may observe, we cannot see our own so as to
single it out, and say, by this kind of Death I shall go into another World;
this is covered from the Eyes of all Flesh. Jacob died in his Bed; Josiah by
the Sword; Job's Children by the fall of the House where they were eating; Eli
by a fall from the Seat where he was sitting: Death began with Asa in his Feet,
and struck him there e're it came to strike him at the Heart, 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
Death begun with the Murmuring Israelites at the Heart, and struck them with
their Meat in their Mouths, Numb. 11.33. We see daily some die a natural,
others a violent Death; some by this, some by that, and some by the other kind
of Sickness: some go out of the World by a Death that gives them long Warning,
others short Warning, and others none at all; and in this respect (I say) Death
is an unseen thing with you and me, we know not which of the many kinds of it,
whether this or that, or the other, is a coming to let us into another World.
Rev. 6.8. there we have Death riding on his pale Horse, described in the 7th
verse, we may see whence he came, And when he had opened the fourth Seal, I
heard the Voice of the fourth Beast say, Come and see: and I looked, and
behold, a Pale Horse, and his Name that sat on him was Death. Mark, he came
from under a Seal, broke out upon the opening of a Seal. Death is sealed, thy
Death and my Death are remaining under the Seal of the Everliving God,
concealed from thee and me and all Mortals, and not to be known till he open
the Seal and send them out. Death, I say, is sealed; and as no Man knows what
is in a Letter till the Seal be opened, so no more do we know at what Time, or
in what Place, or by what manner of Death we must go out of this World, before
the Lord break open the Seal, and send Death on Horseback to our Doors.

(4.) I might add the nature of Death is unseen; we hear much of the Name, but
alas we see little of the Nature of Death: we are acquainted with the word
Death, O but we have little Acquaintance with the work or thing, Death: now we
talk of it, and discourse of it at a distance, but verily, Sirs, when that
which is called seeing Death, and tasting Death, meets us, Death will be
another thing than now it is commonly taken to be with many. Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that
they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their
latter End. Well this is the first; Death, as I told you in the entrance on the
Particulars, is the Door, the Way, to things which are not seen; and I tell you
here again in the close of it, that this Door to things unseen, is also unseen.
Pray think of it you that are here to day; 1. You believe you must die. 2. This
thing that you call dying or Death, is I tell you a Door, an Inlet to unseen
things, things behind all that have ever been seen in the World. 3. This Death
that is thus a Door to those unseen things, is it self an unseen thing; the
Time of it is unseen, and the Place of it is unseen, and the Kind of it is
unseen: you know neither when, nor where, nor how it will come upon any of you.
Therefore certainly, Sirs, it concerns you to look at this, and to look how you
are provided to meet this unseen thing, that is the beginning of unseen things;
Unseen Judgment is next behind this, an unseen Heaven or Hell, Salvation or
Damnation is next behind that; you know not when or where you may see Death,
but as soon as ever you have seen Death, you must see Judgment; and as soon as
ever you have seen Judgment, you must see Heaven or Hell for ever. I pray you
think of it; art thou not a Drunkard? why the next Time thou go to the
Alehouse thou may see Death there, and so never see House more, but
Hell-house. Art thou a Fornicator, or Adulterer? Art thou a Swearer? art thou a
Profaner of the Lord's Day? O remember Death that is now unseen may surprise
thee in the very act of thy Sin, this is the Porch and Door to the unseen
things of another World, and it is also an unseen thing, a thing not seen, that
leads to things not seen, an invisible thing that is an Introduction to
invisible things, that are Eternal; the things of Death I say are unseen.

SERMON II.
2 Cor. 4.18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal.
SEcondly, The things of the great Day of Judgment are unseen things, things
which are not seen. There shall be such a Day as this, a general Judgment of
all Men; Acts 17.31. Because he has appointed a Day in which he will judge the
World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained; whereof he has
given Assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised him from the Dead. 2 Cor.
5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad. Mat. 12.36. but I say unto you, That every idle word
that Men shall speak, they shall give Account thereof in the Day of Judgment.
There shall then be such a Day, a Day of Judgment; and I say, the things of
that Day are unseen, are things which do not appear, therefore it is called the
Day of Revelation; Romans 2.5. But after thy hardness and impenitent Heart,
treasurest up unto thy self Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of
the righteous Judgment of God: (...), Patefactionis, the Day of the
Manifestation of the righteous Judgment of God; in this Day the righteous
Judgment of God shall be fully manifested, and appear to all Men in this World.
Eccles. 8.14. There be Just Men unto whom it happens according to the work of
the Wicked: again, there be wicked Men to whom it happens according to the
work of the Righteous. And upon this the Justice and Equity of God is oft-times
questioned, and accused, by the Rash and Preposterous Judgment of Men; Good Men
are apt to think they have hard Measure, and ill Men are ready to think that
God is such a one as themselves; but there shall be such a Revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God, as shall set all Matters and Men too to Rights, and
it shall appear to all that the Judgment of God is Righteous, and the Heavens
shall declare his Righteousness; for God is Judge himself, Psalm. 50.6. i. e. (as
Diod.) God's Justice shall in this Judgment of his be manifested to all the
World, as plainly as those things which from Heaven are seen here upon Earth.

And when these things are tried,
The Heavens shall record
That God is Just, and all must bide
The Judgment of the Lord.
It will be, I say, a Day of Revelation, Ambae civitates (terrena and
coelestis) temporalibus vel bonis pariter utuntur, vel malis pariter
affliguntur, donec ultimo Juditio separentur, and percipiat unaequaeque suum
finem, cujus nullus est finis. Aug. De Civit Dei, Lib. 18. Cap. 54. O the
righteous Judgment of God shall be seen as clear as the Light at Noonday, in
that Day: So this Day is in Scripture called, 1. (...) 2. (...) 3. (...)
(...) The Revelation Appearing Manifestation
of Christ.

All which Phrases import a detection and uncovering of Christ in that Day,
behind what has been or is seen in this Life: It will be (I say) the (...), the
Revelation of Christ; 1 Cor. 1.7. Waiting for the Revelation of our Lord Jesus
Christ; 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. The Lord shall be revealed from Heaven; 1 Pet. 1.7. At
the appearing of Jesus Christ; ver. 13. At the Revelation of Jesus Christ. The
original word in all these Places, signifies an opening, an uncovering, a
drawing the Vail from over that that is covered, that it may be seen. Such will
this Day be, detectio occultarum rerum Christi, an uncovering of his hidden
Glory.

2. The (...), the appearing of Christ; 1 Timothy 6.14. 2 Timothy 4.1. The word
signifies a bright or clear Appearing, or shining out; and it will be a
glorious appearing, or (...), as the words are, Tit. 2.13. the glorious
Appearing of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

3. The (...), the Manifestation of Christ; Col. 3.4. 1 Pet. 5.4. 1 John 3.2.
But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see
him as he is. The Word imports an Illustration, a Manifestation by clear Light,
of something hid in Darkness; Christ shall at this Day come as out of Darkness
into Light. O Sirs, there will be thus a glorious Revelation, a glorious
Appearing, a glorious Manifestation of Christ in this Day, such as was never
seen in the World to this Day, nor ever shall be seen before that Day. Remember
this, my Friends, there will be a great and notable Day of Judgment, and the
things of that Day are unseen things. There was a great Discovery of things at
Christ's first coming in the Flesh, that had been hid from Men of all Times and
Ages, and kept unseen till then; Romans 16.25. According to the Revelation of the
Mystery which was kept secret since the World began; here (...), an opening of
the Secret, that there had been Silence about, that there had been nothing said
of in the World, from the beginning to that Day; So Col. 1.26. Even the
Mystery, which had been hid from Ages and Generations, but now is made manifest
to his Saints: here again we have a Mystery which has been, (...), a hidden
Secret: Thus the Redemption of the World, the calling of the Gentiles were a
Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, and either not known at all as among the
Gentiles, or opened more obscurely in the dark glass of Types, Shadows,
Prophecies as to the Jews: but this great Mystery thus covered from all, was
opened and uncovered at his first Coming; and therefore, Luke 10.23, 24. says
Christ, Blessed are the Eyes that see the things that ye see. For I tell you,
that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and
have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard
them. 1 Timothy 3.16. God manifest in the Flesh, the accomplishment of Types, the
fulfilling of Prophecies. And as there was thus a great seeing of things before
unseen, at the first Coming of Christ in the Flesh, so there shall be a greater
opening of things at Christ's second Coming to Judgment, that have been hid
from all Ages ((...) mundi initio) from the Beginning, are hid from the present
Age, and that shall be hid from all following Ages, and not be seen till that
Day, that Great Day of the Lord reveal them. O, Sirs, the things which the
Scripture reports unto us of this Day, are all to us unseen things.

I. 1. The coming of Christ riding through the Clouds on his Chariot of Glory.
2. The thousand thousands of Angels that shall minister unto him. 3. The
Multitude of Saints that he shall bring with him. 4. The Glory that he shall
appear in, are things which are not seen.
II. 1. The great White Throne. 2. His sitting upon the Throne of his Glory. 3.
The sounding of the Trumpet. 4. The opening of the Graves. 5. The rising of the
Dead in numberless numbers all the Earth over; When the Sea shall give up its
Dead, Rev. 20.13. are things which are not seen.
III. 1. The gathering of all Nations, all Men that ever were, now are, or
hereafter shall be, before him. 2. The separation of the Sheep. 3. The
Collocation, the placing of them. 4. The opening of the Books, that will lay
open all the Thoughts, Words, and Works of all Men. 5. The standing of the Dead
both great and small at the Judgment Seat of Christ. 6. The Judging of the
World in Righteousness. 7. The Promulgation of the final Sentence. 8. The
Execution of it, in sending away one part with a Go ye Cursed into everlasting
Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, in welcoming another part, with a
Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World; are things which are not seen: O Sirs, these, these
are unseeen things.
IV. 1. The Wailings of Sinners, when they shall see the Lord Jesus revealed in
flaming Fire from Heaven. 2. The wringing of Hands when they shall see the
Books opening before all the World. 3. The fearful Tremblings, when they shall
hear themselves doomed to everlasting Burnings. 4. The dreadful Cries and
horrible Noise of Wailings and Lamentations that they shall go away with, when
they are going to the eternal Prison, are unseen things. We see enough and too
much of the mad Mirth, and ringing Shouts of Profane Creatures now, when they
are met about their Recreations: O but we see not how their Cheer will change,
the Cry, the Cry, the doleful Cry, that will be among this sort of Persons, in
this great Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God
Almighty.

These things, Sirs, and many other things of this great Day, which the
Scripture tells us of, are to us things which are not seen. This is the second
thing, pray remember it, there shall be a Day of Judgment, and there are great
things to be seen at that Day, which now are not seen, which shall not be seen
till this Day appear and bring them into Sight: Saints shall see that they have
never seen before; Sinners shall see that they have never seen before, all the
World shall see that which was never seen before.

Thirdly, The things of Heaven are unseen things, things which are not seen;
these are chiefly meant in the Text, by the things which are not seen, as both
the antecedent and consequent words show; and these are unseen things, I say,
things within the Vail, as the Apostle's Phrase is, Heb. 6.19. an expression
used in Allusion to the most Holy Place in the Tabernacle and Temple, wherein
were the Ark of the Testimony, the Mercy-Seat, the two Tables, the Pot of
Manna, Aaron's Rod, the Golden Censor, before which there was a great Vail
drawn, that none might see them, but only the High Priest, who entered once a
Year; Exodus 26.31. And thou shall make a Vail of Blue, and Purple, and Scarlet,
and fine twined Linen of cunning Work: with Cherubims shall it be made. In
allusion to this (I say) the things of Heaven are said to be within the Vail,
i. e. covered and unseen. As there was a Vail between the People, and that
which was in the most Holy Place, so there is a Vail between us, and that which
is in Heaven.

1. The things in Heaven which are set down in Scripture by the Names; (1.) Of
a better Country, Heb. 11.16. A Country where there is no Hunger, Rev. 7.16.
no Death, Rev. 21.4. no Night, Rev. 21.25. no Curse, Rev. 22.3. (2.) By the
Name of Paradise, the Place where there is fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16.11. (3.) By Christ's Father's House, John 14.2. In my
Father's House are many Mansions. (4.) By a City which has Foundations, whose
Builder and Maker is God; a City whose Foundations are precious Stones, Gates
Pearls, Streets pure Gold, Porters Angels, and that has no need of the Sun,
neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God does lighten it, and
the Lamb is the Light thereof, Rev. 21.23. (5.) By an Inheritance, an
Inheritance that is incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4. (6.) By a Kingdom, a Kingdom of Heaven, a
Kingdom of God, a Kingdom of Christ, a Kingdom that cannot be moved, a Kingdom
that is Eternal, Everlasting. (7.) By a Crown of Righteousness, of Life, of
Glory. (8.) By Glory, Heavenly Glory, an exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory.
I say, the things of Heaven set out by all these Names and Titles, are all
unseen things.

And so also, Secondly, the things which are shadowed out to us,

(1.) By the World to come; (2.) The New Heavens; (3.) The New Earth; (4.) The
Throne of God, and the Lamb; (5.) The Temple of God; (6.) The pure River of the
Water of Life, clear as Crystal; (7.) The Tree of Life, which bears twelve
manner of Fruits, Rev. 22.2. are unseen things.

And, Thirdly, the things set out,

(1.) By sitting down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven;
(2.) By sitting with Christ in his Throne, as he is set down with his Father in
his Throne; (3.) By being called to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb; (4.) By
eating and drinking at his Table in his Kingdom; (5.) By eating the hidden
Manna, are all hidden unseen things.

Fourthly, we see not yet what it is,

(1.) To see God; (2.) To see his Face; (3.) To see him face to face; (4.) To
know as we are known; (5.) To be before the Throne of God; (6.) To have him
that sits on the Throne to dwell among us; (7.) To walk with him in White;
(8.) To follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; (9.) To have the Lamb which is
in the midst of the Throne to feed us, and to lead us unto living Fountains of
Water; (10.) To be made Pillars in the Temple of God, and to have the Name of
God, and the Name of the City of God, which is new Jerusalem, and Christ's new
Name written upon us; (11.) To be ever with the Lord; (12.) To have him all in
all: all these things are things which are most clearly reported to, and most
surely believed among the Saints, but are not yet seen*

Fifthly, And so;

(1.) The Life of Saints that is hid with Christ in God; (2.) The Hope of Saints
that is laid up in Heaven; (3.) The Glory to be revealed in Saints in Heaven;
and (4.) The Inheritance of all things, are yet out of sight.

O Christians, (1.) You that are going for Heaven to Day, have not seen what a
Country, City, Kingdom, Company you are going to, what things you are going to
see. (2.) You that have seen something of the workings of Grace in your Hearts
from Heaven, have seen nothing of the Preparations of Glory for you in Heaven.

These are things which Eye has not seen. O be steadfast, be immovable,
stablish your Hearts until the Day break, and the Shadows fly away, the Day
when all these unseen things shall be seen and enjoyed for evermore: this Day
will bring to light and into sight more than our thoughts can at present reach.

Fourthly, The things of Hell are unseen things, things which are not seen: as
Heaven, so Hell is hidden from the Eyes and sight of all the Living. The Greek
word (...) denotes a place unseen; and our English word Hell is from Hill, an
old Saxon word, that signifies to be hid, hilled over or covered: such is that
Place, such are the things of that Place, things which are hill d over, things
which are not seen.

1. The things in Hell which are set out in Scripture by the Names of,

(1.) The second Death; (2.) The bottomless Pit; (3.) Of Perdition; (4.) Of
Destruction; (5.) Of Damnation; (6.) Of the Wrath to come; and (7.) Of the
Wine Press of the Wrath of God Almighty, are things which are not seen.

These dreadful Expressions are Expressions that carry in them Rivers of unseen
Woes, Seas of unseen Vengeance; yea whole Oceans of unseen and unutterable
Torments.

2. The things shadowed out to us,

(1.) By Darkness, outer Darkness, everlasting Darkness; (2.) By Chains, Chains
of everlasting Darkness; (3.) By the Wine of the Wrath of God; (4.) By a Worm,
a Worm that shall never die; (5.) And by a Fire, a Fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, a Furnace of Fire, a Lake of Fire, a Furnace and Lake of
unquenchable and everlasting Fire; I say, the things shadowed out by all these
to us, are unseen things.

O Sirs, you that live impenitently and securely in Sin, that Scoff, and Swear,
and Drink, and Whore, and profane the Lord's day, and make light of
Threatenings, Warnings, Admonitions, as if you had made a Covenant with Death,
and were at an Agreement with Hell, as they who said, Isa. 28.15. We have made
a Covenant with Death, and with Hell are we at Agreement: when the overflowing
Scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have made Lies
our Refuge, and under Falsehood have we hid our selves: that is, as if they had
said, Death and Hell are at amity with us, we fear no more harm from them than
we do from those that are in League with us, than we do from Confederates, we
are at Agreement with Hell, Hell shall not hurt us: or as if they had said, we
are in no more fear of Hell, than we are in fear of our Confederates; for Hell
is but a Fable, a Bugbear, to fright Children and Fools; let Preachers say
what they will, we care not for Hell, either it is not, or it is not so
terrible as they tell us. Are you of this Temper, Sirs? do you live loosely and
profanely, securely and carelessly in a sinful State and Way, and yet say we
have made a Covenant with Death, and are at an Agreement with Hell, we fear not
Hell, we care not for Hell?

(1.) Either it is not; Or (2.) we shall escape it; Or (3.) it will not prove
so hot as we are told: why I say your Covenant with Death shall be disannulled,
and your Agreement with Hell shall not stand; you will find there is a Hell, and
this Hell will be what now you are told of.

Alas, alas, you have not seen what it is, (1.) To be turned into Hell; (2.) To
go into Perdition; (3.) To be punished with everlasting Destruction from the
presence of the Lord; (4.) To fall into the Condemnation of the Devil; (5.) To
be thrown into the great Wine Press of the Wrath of God; (6.) To be cast alive
into the Lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone; (7.) To be tormented Day and
Night for ever and ever; (8.) To feel an endless Rain of Snares, Fire and
Brimstone, and a burning Tempest; (9.) To suffer the Vengeance of an Eternal
Fire; (10.) And to have the Smoke of your Torment ascend for ever and ever.

You have not seen these I say, you see not what is lying in their Womb, but
they will come in sight; and know to day, that as light as you make of them,
they will cause you change Cheer for ever; Mat. 25.30. There shall be Weeping
and Gnashing of Teeth: this is their Case who are now in outer Darkness; and
tho you may laugh at it now, it will be your Case there, there is no laughing or
jesting in Hell, but only weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Pray think of it you
that are going for Hell, you little think what a Place and Things you are going
to, what you shall both see and feel there: the things thereof are things that
are not seen; and it is not safe to make light of that you see not, nor good to
praise Hell before you have tried it, and woe to you if you come to try it once,
for that once will be for ever.

Thirdly, The third Question under the Doctrine is, how these things are
unseen. You see there are unseen things, and what these unseen things are, the
things of Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell. Now the next inquiry may be this,
in order to the clearing of the Point, (viz.) How they are unseen, or what this
imports or implies that they are not seen.

Now this Phrase implies these four or five things, (viz.) That they are things
which,

1. Are not seen with Eyes of Flesh, they are not seen, that is, they are not
visible to our bodily Eyes, not beheld with the Eye that looks upon visible
Objects, and things under the Sun; Eye has not seen them. My Beloved, your Eye
has seen a great Number, and a great variety of Objects, you are not able to
tell how many Things, and how many kinds of Things you have seen since you
begun to look out at these Windows; but I can tell you what you have not seen:
among all the Things which you have seen Day after Day, you have never seen the
things of Death, the things of Judgment, the things of Heaven, nor the things
of Hell, these have all along been out of your sight.

(1.) Have thou seen great Things, great Transactions, great Revolutions? thou
have seen no such great Things, as the Things of the great Day of the Lord.
(2.) Have thou seen good Things, Things that were exceeding amiable, lovely,
and desirable in thine Eye, that thine Eye was much taken with? yet thou have
seen no such good, lovely and desirable Things, as those of Heaven and Glory
are. (3.) Have thou seen ill Things, Things that have been Dreadful, Terrible,
Astonishing and Amazing to thee, that have frighted thee, that have put thee
into a Consternation? why, yet for all that thou have seen no such terrible or
astonishing Things, as the things of Hell and Damnation: this is one, these
things are not seen by the Eye of the Body.

2. It imports, that these unseen things are n t known, they are not seen, that
is, they are not fully known and understood by us: as they are things which are
not seen by the Eye of Flesh, so they are things which are not seen fully by
the Eye of the Mind; the Eye sees them not, neither does the Mind reach them
proportionably to the Nature of them. Alas, it is but a little that we
understand of these things, our Knowledge of them is mighty obscure, dark,
confused, and imperfect, as Job says of the Knowledge of God; Job 26.14. Lo,
these are but parts of his Ways, and how little a Portion is heard of him? the
Thunder of his Power who can understand? i. e. all that we hear and know, and
conceive of God, is little, low, and nothing to what he is; all our Thoughts,
Meditations, Apprehensions, are infinitely below his infinite Majesty. So may I
say of these unseen Things, lo, these are part of them, these Things we have
hinted at; but how little a Portion is heard of them? it is but little, very
little, exceeding little, that we do or can conceive of unseen Things to what
they are, and what we shall find them to be. The Italians have a Proverb, Qui
Venetias non videt non credit, and qui aliquandiu ibi non vixit non intelligit.
So it is in this Case, he that has not seen these Things not seen, cannot
believe enough of them; and he that has not had some Experience of them,
cannot understand them as they are.

One of the Fathers branches things under three Heads.

1. Things that are known. 2. Things that are knowable, that may be found out
by Search and Enquiry. 3. Things that are neither known, nor knowable, but
reserved for another World: and of this sort are these unseen Things, they are
not now known, or knowable, but the Knowledge of them is reserved for another
World. Alas, the Secrets of Nature are much above us, there are many thousand
Things there that we either have no Knowledge of, or know but very darkly; the
Secrets of Grace are more above us, but the Secrets of Glory are most of all
above us, the Knowledge of them is too wonderful for us, we cannot attain unto
it. Says Zophar, Job 11.7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching find out God? can
thou find out the Almighty unto Perfection? It is as high as Heaven, what can
thou do? deeper than Hell, what can thou know? The Measure thereof is longer
than the Earth, and broader than the Sea.

It Is as high: What Is as high? Why God's Perfection, this is as high. So may I
say here, can thou find out unseen Things by searching to Perfection; alas,
no, no, they are as high as Heaven, what can we do? deep as Hell, what can we
know?

Paul, who was a Man of eminent Seize, extraordinary Revelations, and
stood on a higher rise of Ground than any now living; yet tells us, that he saw
but (...), (modo imperfecto) in part, he saw but the back-parts of unseen
Things; 1 Cor. 13.9. We know in part, and prophesy in part. Ver. 11. When I was
a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child. He
compares all the Knowledge he had attained of these Things, to that he had of
things in the World when he was a Child. Children have but weak and shallow
Conceptions and Apprehensions of things, such as they are ashamed of, when they
grow up to be Men. Why there is (in many respects) as great Difference between
the Apprehensions we have of unseen Things now in this World, and the
Apprehensions we shall have of the same Things in the other World, as there is
between the Apprehensions of Persons whilst but Children, and when come to be
Men. Alas, Sirs, when you hear Men of the largest Abilities discoursing of
these Things, they do but even lisp, and stammer, and speak half words, and
bits of Sentences, as Children; they do but talk of them as blind Men do of
Colors, or as you do of far Countries, and Rarities in them that you have
never, never seen.

O the things of Heaven are other things, and the things of Hell are other
Things than you or I think, unknown Things! we see not (when our Conceptions
are most accurate and elevated) a thousandth thousandth part of that Glory that
is prepared for the Saints in Heaven; nor yet a thousandth thousandth part of
that Shame, Woe, and Wrath, that is prepared for Sinners in Hell. Heaven is not
only commensurate to our greatest Hopes, but as far above them, as it is above
the Earth; and Hell is not only answerable to our greatest Fears, but as far
beyond them as the East is from the West. Says Moses, Psalm. 90.11. Who knows
the Power of thine Anger? according to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath. That is, the
Wrath of God is every way answerable to the Fear that Men have of it; and not
only so, but it is behind what we either fear or can know. Think on this under
the most dreadful Considerations imaginable; and yet (when thou have thought
the worst, and all that is possible) according to thy Fear, so is his Wrath,
and more than so when poured out to the utmost. This is the second, they are
not seen, that is, not known.

3. They are not experienced, they are not seen; that is, they are not tried
and felt by Experience, we have not had a trial of them by Taste or Feeling.
This Phrase of seeing, is often put thus for feeling in Holy Scripture, as
Lament. 3.1. I am the Man that has seen Affliction by the Rod of his Wrath; as
if he had said, I have felt, endured, born Affliction. So Psalm. 90.15. The
Years wherein we have seen Evil; suffered, felt Evil and Affliction. Jer.
20.18. Wherefore came I forth out of the Womb to see Labor and Sorrow? Rev.
18.7. Psalm. 27.13. and 106.5. and in many other Places, to see is to feel, and
not to see is not to feel or experience. And thus this Phrase may be taken
here; and so in this Sense, these things are unseen things to us; there is not a
Man among us to day, that has once seen them, that has tried and had experience
of them in himself, that can come out and say, I have gone through Death, I
have been in Heaven, or I have been in Hell, and tried Things of another World.
O Sirs, these things not seen are things we have not had an Experiment, a
Proof, and Trial of; you have not had an Experiment of the things of Death, nor
of the things of Judgment, nor of the things of Heaven, nor of the things of
Hell. O think of it you that are drooping Saints, and Servants of God; you have
not yet tried, (1.) What it is to have God to wipe away all Tears from your
Eyes. (2.) What it is to enter into the Joy of your Lord. (3.) What it is to
receive your Inheritance, to put on your Crown, and to possess your Kingdom.
(4.) What it is to see God face to face, and to follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goes. (5.) What it is to be with Christ your Lord and Love in Heaven. I
say, all these, and all the unutterable things of Heaven, are things you have
not tried: a Trial of them would make the whole World of seen things a
Wilderness, a Weariness to you. And O think of it, you that are daring Sinners,
you that make nothing of Death, of Judgment, of Heaven, or Hell, I say again,
think of it: you have not tried the things you are making thus light of; you
have not tried, I say, (1.) What it is to lie down in Sorrow. (2.) What it is
to be driven away into outer and eternal Darkness. (3.) What it is to dwell
with the devouring Fire, to dwell with everlasting Burnings. (4.) What it is to
be tormented with the Devil and his Angels. (5.) What it is to be punished with
everlasting Destruction; had you ever tried these things, you would have other
thoughts about them: they that are this Day trying them, and feeling what they
are, are not making light of them; and O if you had been but a Year, a Week, a
Day, or a Night, or an Hour in Hell, and seen what others are seeing, and felt
what they are feeling, you would not think it a small Matter to be damned. This
is a Third; these things are unseen, they are such things that we have no
present experimental Acquaintance with.

4. They are not present and entered on; they are not seen, that is, they are
not yet in being as to us, we are not yet begun with them, and entered on them,
we have them not present with us. This Phrase of seeing, is used thus for
enjoying, possessing, or having the Presence of a Thing; John 3.3. Except a Man
be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Videre regnum Dei idem est ac
intrare in illud; therefore it is said verse the 5th, Except a Man be born of
Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Deuteronomy. 3.25.
Moses prayed that he might see, i. e. enter into and come to possess that good
Land. So also, Psalm. 36.9. In thy Light we shall see Light, (i. e.) have or
enjoy Light. So Luke 17.22. The Days will come when ye shall desire to see one
of the Days of the Son of Man, and ye shall not see it, that is, when you shall
desire to enjoy one of these Days, to have the presence of one of these Days,
and ye shall not see it, that is, ye shall not enjoy one of them, ye shall not
have the Presence of one of them with you. And so in many other Places, to see
a Thing, is to have it present and in possession; and not to see a thing, is to
have it absent and unbegun with us. And in this respect also these things are
unseen things; that is, they are not begun with us, we are not entered on them,
you and I are not yet entered on the things of Death, or the things of Judgment,
on the things of Heaven, or on the things of Hell. O Sirs, the Saints Heaven,
Harvest and Happiness is not yet begun, but to begin; the Saints Kingdom is not
yet come, but to come. Tertullian in his Book de Spectaculis, dissuading the
Servants of God from them, has this Motive, Nostrae coenae, nostrae nuptiae
nondum sunt; So I say, the Saints Happiness is not yet, it is yet out of sight,
and to come: And so, Sirs, the Sinners and Ungodly's Hell, and Horror, and
Torment, is not yet begun, but to begin. Do you see them Ranting and Revelling,
Swaggering and Gallanting it out from Day to Day? O think it not strange, for,
I say, their Hell is not yet begun, they are yet in their Heaven, and their
Hell is to begin; their Time, nay, their Eternity of Darkness, and Chains, and
Fire, and Weeping, and Gnashing, are yet to enter on. O consider it you that
live ungodly, I may say to you, as the Apostle, James 5.5. Ye have lived in
Pleasure on the Earth, and been wanton; and nourished your Hearts as in a Day
of Slaughter. Ay but where is it, Sirs, that you have lived? is it not on
Earth, that you have lived thus in Pleasure? is it not on Earth, that you are
living? it is on Earth, it is on Earth only, and beyond Earth there is an unseen
Hell. How will you live there? will you live in Hell as you have lived on
Earth, in Pleasures, in Jollity, in Delicacy? will you take up a sensual Life,
a delicate way of living, when you are in Chains, in everlasting Burnings,
suffering the Vengeance of an eternal Fire, and drinking whole Cups, nay Rivers
of the Wine of the Wrath of God Almighty? O those will be no Delicacies then,
your Heaven will be past, as Luke 16.25. Thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy
good Things, and Lazarus evil Things: but now he is Comforted, and thou art
Tormented.

5. I may add this: Unseen things are things which are not considered,
observed, or regarded; they are not seen, that is, they are not minded and
regarded, or taken notice of by many. This Phrase of seeing is used thus, for
taking notice of, and care about a Matter; Psalm. 66.5. Come and see the Works
of God, observe and mark them. So Mat. 22.11. And when the King came in to see
the Guests, he saw there a Man which had not on a Wedding Garment, when he came
in to take notice of his Guests. Mat. 27.4. See thou to that, i. e. take thou
care about that, look thou to that. So also verse 24. See ye to it. And so
here, we look (says the Apostle) at things not seen, that is, we look at
things that are little looked at in the World, that are out of sight, and out
of mind with many; that many never regard, or once trouble themselves about.
This is another, and in this respect also, these things of Death, Judgment,
Heaven, and Hell, are as to many unseen things; they mind them not, they take
no more notice of them than if they were not: among the multitude of Thoughts
that are within them and pass through them every Day, there are none of this
sort, no serious pondering Thoughts of the things of Death, the things of
Judgment, of Heaven, or Hell. O, Sirs, how many be there who have gone over
twenty, thirty, forty Years, and yet, it may be feared, the Time is yet to come
that ever they spent one single Hour, Day or Night, Night or Day, one time or
another, in serious Thoughts about unseen things? pray look home, Sirs, to your
own selves, and see what you have done in this Case. These are, I say, with
many unseen things, things they are mindless of, and careless about.

SERMON III.
2 Cor. 4.18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal.
FOurthly, We shall inquire, what Looking at these unseen things imports and
implies.

You see (1.) That there are unseen things. (2.) What these unseen things are.
(3.) How they are unseen. Now the next inquiry may be, what it is to look at
unseen things, or what this looking at unseen things (which is the great
Concern of Christians) includes and implies. Now this Phrase includes and
carries many things in it; I shall only at this Time point at these five that
are bound up in it.

To look at things which are not seen, is a Phrase that implies,

1. A real Valuation or Estimation of unseen things, as things meet to be
minded, and deserving to be regarded by us. This Phrase is thus used to denote
that which deserves to be regarded and valued; 2 Kings 3.14. And Elisha said,
As the Lord of Hosts lives, before whom I stand, surely were it not that I
regard the Presence of Jehoshaphat the King of Judah, I would not look toward
thee nor see thee; that is, I would not have mattered, nor set by thee, it is
Jehoshaphat that I look at, and regard in the Matter. So here to look at unseen
things, is to reckon of them as valuable things, as things to be mattered and
made account of by us. And this now, Sirs, is our Concern and Duty; it concerns
thee and me, and lies on us, not to slight these unseen things, as many do, as
if they were poor, worthless, inconsiderable Matters, not worthy to be taken
notice of or regarded; take heed of this, reckon not of Death, of Judgment, of
Heaven, of Hell, as sorry, as inconsiderable things, as things too little and
mean to be minded; but look at them, that is, make them Matters of Moment,
Matters of Concernment, of greatest Moment and Concernment of any Matters in
all the World; for so they are, and such they will be found with every one of
us another Day. If there be nothing in Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell, to be
minded or mattered by us, who are on the way toward Death, Judgment, Heaven or
Hell; then there is surely nothing, nothing in the World, nor any thing out of
the World, to be made any Matter of. What is it that you make a Matter of, that
you look on as valuable, if these be nothing with you? surely, Sirs, these are
things to be looked at. And this is one, we must look at unseen things, that
is, get, and keep a home, a lively and affecting Impression upon our Hearts, of
the Weight and Concernment of unseen things.

Art thou a gracious Person, look at, that is, get and keep a-foot an
affecting, an abiding Sense of the Height of unseen Glory thou art going to, of
the Depth of unseen Wrath thou art delivered from, and it will teach thee
(whatever comes) to reckon as the Apostle our light Afflictions, etc. If Shame,
if Loss, if Tribulation, if Persecution: O what a small Pain is this to the
Glory to come? Art thou an ungodly profane Creature, O look at unseen things,
i. e. get and keep a-foot an abiding affecting Sense of that eternal Glory thou
art losing, of that everlasting Punishment thou art in danger to drop into
every Day, and every Hour. Either this would startle thee out of thy present
Security, or I know not what will.

2. Serious Meditation on them. This Phrase is thus used, not only to denote
something that deserves to be minded and regarded, but also to denote the
minding and regarding of it, the employing of our Thoughts about it. Prove.
24.32. Then I saw, and considered it well: I looked upon it, and received
Instruction: I looked with a serious, observing, considering Eye. 1 Samuel 16.7.
Look not on his Countenance; consider it not, conclude not by that. James 1.25.
But whosoever looks into the perfect Law of Liberty, i. e. bends his Mind to
meditate on it, and consider it. So Isa. 51.1, 2. So here to look at things not
seen, is to admit them into our serious Thoughts, to take them into our solemn
Consideration, and to set our musing Minds at work about them. And this is our
Concern and Duty, it concerns me, and it concerns thee, and every one that is
here to day, to reckon of these things as M tters to be minded, and to mind
them; to mind them, I say, and to transfer our most serious Thoughts to them.
It Is not enough to confess that they are Matters of Moment, a Thing that I
think few will deny, but we must also mind them, and have our Thoughts
exercised about them as Matters of such Moment, a thing I fear that few
practice. This is another thing that is implied in this looking, viz. serious
thinking at unseen things: pray think of it, Have thou never thought of Death,
Judgment, Heaven, or Hell, or at most only glanced at them, and cast an Eye on
them by the by, while thou have been minding other things? why know this Day,
that it is thy Duty to look at them, to look, to fix the Eye of thy Mind and
Meditation on them, as thou do the Eye of thy Body on the Object thou would
look narrowly upon, or accurately at. O they are things to be looked at, and
not to be glanced at, things to be eyed with all Diligence, and not only on the
by. Our Morning Thoughts, and our Evening Thoughts, our Day Thoughts, and our
Night Thoughts, our Company Thoughts, and our solitary Thoughts, should be
meeting at these unseen things, and spending themselves on them, in thinking
what a glorious blessed thing it will be to see the unseen things of Heaven,
and Glory we have hinted at, to see God, to see him as he is; and what a sad
and fearful thing it will be, to see the unseen things of Hell and Damnation,
to see the Worm that never dies, the unquenchable Fire, the Wrath to come.
These, Sirs, are Subjects that we should look at, that is, our Thoughts should
fix, settle, and dwell much on them.

3. Fixed Intention or Proposal of them to our selves, as our great End or Aim:
the original word (...) here used, signifies such a looking as a Watchman uses
that stands on a Tower to descry Enemies and Dangers and marks every Corner
diligently; or such a looking as an Archer when he is shooting, tho he have
many Objects about him on this side, and on that side, yet he looks neither on
this side, nor on the other side, but straight before him at the Scope or Mark
he aims at. This, I say, is the import of the Word; and so to look at things
not seen, is to make them our Scope and End, our great Mark and Aim in the
World: and this now, Sirs, is our Concern and Duty also, it concerns me, and it
concerns thee, and it concerns every one, not only to value unseen things, and
to think on unseen things, but also to aim at unseen things; to make unseen
things our Mark, to eye unseen things as the great Mark we shoot at. This is
another thing, I say, that is implied in this looking, to wit, a steady aiming
at unseen things; we should look on all other things, viz. seen things, as if
we looked not, as By-businesses; but we should look at these unseen things as
our main Business, and End that we propound to our selves. Pray remember this,
have you been making seen things, the seen Profits, or seen Pleasures, or seen
Honors of the World, your great Matters, your great Marks that you have mainly
designed and aimed at? why, alas, you have been looking the wrong Way; and all
the while that you have been making this your Matter, how to get Estates and
Wealth, or how to raise your Names and Families, or how to take your fill of
sensual Pleasures; it has, I say, all the while concerned you, and lain on you
as your Duty, to look at things not seen, to make unseen things your greatest
Matters. I say, it has concerned you to make these your Business, these, these
things should have been your Matters, your Marks, your Aims, Sirs, viz. (1.)
How you might get into a readiness to see unseen Death. (2.) How you might
escape the things that are coming on this World, and stand before the Son of
Man at his coming. (3.) How you might avoid the seeing of the unseen things of
Hell, the bottomless Pit, the Wine Press of the Wrath of God, the Darkness,
Chains and Prison of the Damned. And (4.) How you might be admitted to the
seeing of the unseen things of Heaven, in the Paradise, the City, the Temple of
God; these are the things, the things you should have been looking and aiming
at all this while, and this is yet your great Concern and Duty in the World.
Well, this is another; unseen things are the things that we should look at,
that is, aim at.

4. It implies vigorous Prosecution or earnest Endeavor, that we should pursue
them with all care and diligence. Isa. 56.11. it is said of the blind and greedy
Watchmen, They all look to their own way, every one for his Gain from his
Quarter, i. e. it is their great Matter they have in pursuit, and are
continually driving on. So here to look at things not seen, is to pursue them
as our great business in the World. As Paul, Phil. 3.14. I press toward the
Mark, for the Prize of the High-calling of God in Christ Jesus; (...), Scopum
versus feror, that is, I have Eternal Salvation (which is my Scope, or Mark, or
End) in chase, I am making toward it up Hill and down, through thick and thin,
as one resolved never to rest till I have attained unto it. This is to look at
unseen things, and this now Sirs, also is our Concern and Duty; it concerns me,
and it concerns thee, not only to aim at, but also to lay out for unseen things
with all our Might: we must look at them as the Traveller that is on a Journey
looks at the End of his Journey, or as a Runner that is in a Race, looks at the
Scope or Mark he is to come to; the one runs with speed, and the other rides
with haste, and both make toward the Mark. Thus I say, and on this fashion we
should look at things not seen, as those that are traveling or running toward
them by earnest Endeavor, in a diligent Use of all Means and Ways leading unto
them. O, Sirs, we have many that are running and riding, that are up early and
late, that are toiling and moiling all the Day long, and of whose Labor there
is no end. But what is all this about, what is it for? why alas, seen, seen
things, these are the Matters they are seeking; and as for unseen things they
either look not at them, or only so coldly and remi^ly, as if they cared not
which end goes forward: but, Sirs, it concerns you and me to be up and doing
about unseen things, to be looking, i. e. taking great Care, and seeking by all
Means, early and late, to get a sure-Title to, and to assure our Interest in
the unseen things of Heaven and Glory. O these are the great Matters that Men
and Women should be, (1.) tirring about; (2.) Striving about; (3.) Laboring
for; And (4.) pressing after in this World. This is another, unseen things are
the things we should look at, that is, seek for, and pursue.

5. It implies earnest Expectation, that we look at them as the great Object
that we expect and desire to obtain, and come to. Looking is thus put for
Expecting; Isa. 5.2. He looked that it should bring forth Grapes. Verse 7. He
looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression. Jer. 8.15. We looked for Peace, but
no good came; and for a time of Health, and behold Trouble. 2 Pet. 3.13. We
look for a new Heaven and a new Earth. In all which places Looking is put for
Expecting. So here to look at unseen things, is to look for unseen things: we
look not at the things which are seen, that is, we expect not seen and Temporal
things, as the things that our Portion and Happiness lies in; but unseen and
Eternal things, are the things we are looking at, i. e. that we are waiting
for, that we are in expectation of, that we are tarrying for; and this is also
our Duty, to look at, that is, make things not seen our Expectations. Many look
at seen things, and no further, having nothing either beside them, or beyond
them that they do indeed look for; seen things, something or other that is seen,
is the utmost thing that they have in their Eye: but, Sirs, our looking should
be over, beyond, past all that is seen, to that that is not seen. 1 Cor. 1.7.
Waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Phil. 3.20. We look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.12. Looking for the coming of the day
of God. Why thus we should look over, look past all that we are seeing, to that
which is unseen, as the great Matter we are in Expectation of. This now is the
fifth thing; you see what looking at unseen things imports, it carries these
things in it. (1.) A valuing of. (2.) Thinking on. (3.) Aiming at. (4.) Seeking
for. (5.) Expecting of things not seen. It Is our Duty to look at things not
seen; and to look at them, is to value them, to think on them, to aim at them,
to seek after them, and to live in expectation of them: then we look at these
things when we make Account of them as Matters of the greatest Moment, when we
mind them as Matters of such Moment, when we propose them to our selves as our
great Business in the World, when we pursue them as our great Matter, and when
we expect them as our Portion; all these are bound up in this looking, and meet
in this great Duty: from which we may see (by the way) that this Duty is a Duty
that very few are living in at this Day.

Fifthly, Why is it the Part and Duty of Christians to look at unseen things?
You have seen, (1.) That there are unseen things; (2.) What these are; (3.) How
unseen; (4.) What Looking imports. Our next Inquiry may be this, Why is it a
Duty, and does so much concern us to look at, (i. e.) to eye, aim at, seek
after, and to expect things which are not seen?

Now this is our Duty, because these unseen things are,

1. Certain and indubitable: they are not imaginary things, that consist in
Notion and Speculation only, but certain Verities; it is true, they are to us
invisible, but it is as true that they are as indubitable and unquestionable: we
see them not now, but it is as sure that they remain to be seen, as that there
was a World to be seen, when we were lying in the Womb of our Mothers, and saw
it not. Our Parents then saw a World that we were coming into, but we saw not a
Heaven, an Earth, a Sun, these were out of our sight; and many of them are now
also seeing a World that we are going into, but see not. Sirs, there is a great
certainty in these unseen things, as in any thing that you see. (1.) Are you
sure there is a Sun in the Firmament, because you see it with your Eyes? (2.)
Are you sure there is an Earth under your Feet, because you see it and feel it?
(3.) Are you sure there are Men and Women besides your selves on this Earth,
because you see them and converse with them every Day? Why I tell you, it is not
more sure that there is a Sun an Earth, a Man or Woman besides your selves,
than this is, that there is an unseen Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell before
you. I have before hinted at many things of Heaven, and many things of Hell
that are unseen, that there is a Paradise, House, City, Crown, Kingdom,
reserved for Saints in Heaven; and that there is a Darkness, Chains, Worm,
Wrath, Fire, prepared for the wicked in Hell: and, Sirs, these are no Dreams or
Fancies, but most certain things; it is not more sure that I am speaking of
them, that you are hearing of them at this Time, than it is that there are such
things (tho we have never seen them) as we are now speaking and hearing of.
Therefore this may be one Reason why we should look at them, they are certain,
therefore certainly it concerns us to look at them. If it were a Matter only
probable, that there are unseen things; if as much might be said against them,
as for them, then mindlessness of them, and carelessness about them, might be
somewhat excusable; tho in that case it would be a wise Man's part to take the
surest side, and say, well I see it is a Question, it is a Matter that is
doubtful and dark, but I Will carry it so as I may not be at a loss, and not know
what to do if things prove so. I say, if these things were thus doubtful, yet
it would be the part of a Wise Man to look at them: and then what shall we do
when they are unquestionable, what shall we do, I say? do thou believe (Soul)
that these unseen things are certain, are unquestionable? and do thou not
think it concerns thee to look at them? how can it be but thou must think so?
Think on this, unseen things are sure things, all that I have been telling thee
of is sure, see thou to it.

2. Unseen things are very great, great in themselves, of great Moment and
Concernment to us; yea the greatest things and of greatest Concernment to us:
this may be another Reason. Sirs, unseen things are not only sure, but they are
also very great things; they are no poor and trivial Matters, no light and
inconsiderable things that are unworthy to be regarded, which are yet unseen,
yet invisible, but (I say) great, greater than any thing that is seen, has been
seen, or shall be seen before they come into sight. This you may see
sufficiently from what is gone before. (1.) The Day of Judgment will be a great
Day. Acts 2.20. The Sun shall be turned into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood,
before that great and notable Day of the Lord come. O it will be such a Sight
as this World never saw, to see Christ riding through the Clouds on his Chariot
of Glory, to see the thousands, ten thousands of Angels, and all his
Attendants. (2.) The things of Heaven are great things: to see God, and to see
his Face, and to see him Face to Face, will be another manner of sight than any
of the things that are now seen. (3) The things of Hell are great things: the
most tremendous things that have ever been seen in the World, are but very
Nugae, to the Darkness, and Chains, Worm, and Fire of Hell. This, I say, may be
another reason why you and I should look at them, that is, mind them, they are
very great things: if you be not looking at them, you are looking at something
else; and whatever it is that you have in your Eye, I tell you that it is very
low, little, and inconsiderable; yea, nothing to those things out of your
sight: go over all visible things under Heaven, and the greatest of them is
less than the least of those invisible things; the greatest of the things
called Good in this World, are nothing to the Good things of Heaven and Glory.
Minima aeternae vitae Corona praestantior erit quam mill mundi, omnia ibi
clara, omnia ibi chara, omnia ibi rara; ad illud coelum coeli etiam terrae
nostrae coelum terra est.

The Apostle, Col. 1.16. having divided all things into visible and invisible,
does again divide things invisible, the things of Heaven, into Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities, Powers: mark here, he subdivides the Invisibilia,
quae etiam exornat (as Beza in locum) iis nominibus quibus summa quaeque inter
homines significantur. And 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
neither have entered into the Heart of Man, the things which God has prepared
for them that love him. There is scarce any thing more vast and boundless than
the Thoughts of Man, yet the things of Heaven are not only above what we see,
but also above what we can think, and go beyond all our thoughts of them. And
as to the greatest of the things called ill in this World, they are nothing to
the Ills of Hell and Damnation; this one word Hell or Damnation, Sirs,
comprehends greater and more dreadful things in it, than all the amazing
things that were ever seen in this World. O, Sirs, we speak much of unseen
things every Day; but the Truth is, we speak little of them as they are; our
Expressions, our Apprehensions, our Thoughts of them are low, many of them
unworthy, none of them reaching their Perfection. The Queen of Sheba had heard
much of Solomon's Glory and Magnificence, such things had been reported to her,
as were very wonderful, nay, incredible; she could not believe them till she
came and her Eyes had seen them; but then when she saw, she was forced to
confess that the one half was not told her, 1 Kings 10.6, 7. Why thus the
Ambassadors of Christ tell us much of Death, and Judgment, and Heaven, and
Hell, such things as (I fear) many look on as incredible, and not to be
believed by them. But alas, when we come, and our Eyes have seen them, we shall
cry out, O the one half, the thousandth part was never reported to us of that
we now see; if thou go for Heaven, choose what thou have heard, or may hear ever
thou come thither, of the Glory of the Place, Company, Enjoyments, and
Employments, it is not the one half, nay, not the thousandth part of what thou
shall see: if thou go for Hell, choose what thou have heard or may hear ever thou
come thither, of the Shame and Sufferings, there is not the one half, nay not
the thousandth part of what thou shall see there. Thus these unseen things are
Magna, maxima, Great, and greater than all other; therefore certainly it is our
Duty and Concernment to look at them, that is, to mind them.

3. Unseen things are unavoidable: as they are certain in themselves, and as
they are very great, so they are also unavoidable. Unseen things will come into
sight, are things that must be seen, you and I must see them: as it is
unquestionable that there are things lying out of our sight, so it is as
indubitable that they will all come into sight, and you and I must see the
unseen things of Death, of Judgment, of Heaven, or of Hell.

(1.) Death is inevitable. Psalm. 89.48. What Man is he that lives and shall
not see Death? shall he deliver his Soul from the Hand of the Grave? What Man?
no Man. Psalm. 49.6. They that trust in their Wealth, and boast themselves in
the Multitude of their Riches: Ver. 7. None of them can by any means redeem his
Brother, nor give to God a Ransom for him: Ver. 8. (For the Redemption of their
Soul is precious, and it cease for ever) Ver. 9. That he should still live
for ever, and not see Corruption.

(2.) As it is appointed for all Men once to die, so for them after Death to go
to Judgment, Heb. 9.27. (1.) The particular Judgment of every Man immediately
after Death. (2.) The general Judgment of all Men at the great Day; and as
there is no way to avoid the seeing of Death, and Judgment after Death, no more
(3) Is there any way to miss seeing Heaven or Hell, after Death and Judgment.
Of all that are gone before us, from the beginning of the World to this Day
through so many Generations, there is not one that has not seen what we see
not, that is not seeing Salvation or Damnation this Day; and of all that are
here to Day, there is not one Son or Daughter, not one Man or Woman that shall
never see them; no, no, we must all see them: choose whether you will look at
them or not now, you shall certainly look on them one Day. And therefore, Sirs,
it does surely concern us to take them into our Eye: if it were either a
Question whether there be any such things, or a Question whether you or I
should see them, then to lay them out of our Eye might be somewhat excusable.
Ay, but Sirs, both these are out of all question, and therefore questionless
it is a Matter that concerns us. This may be another reason why we should look
at them; unseen things will come in sight, other things are questionable: if
thou be Sick, and would have Health, it is questionable whether thou must ever
see it again; if thou be Poor, and would have Wealth; if thou be Persecuted,
and would have Peace, it is questionable whether thou shall ever see these
things: many in these and many other cases, have never seen that which they
have desired to see, and many have escaped the seeing of that which they have
been unwilling to see, and that would have been unwelcome to them, as in 2
Kings 22.20. Good Josiah was taken away from seeing the Evil that God would
bring upon Jerusalem. But here is, Sirs, no uncertainty in this Case; it admits
of no Peradventure, or may be. It is a Question whether ever thou must have
Health, or Peace, but it is no question whether thou must die and come to
Judgment. It Is a Question whether thou must ever see the Good in the Land of
the Living thou would see, or escape the Evil thou would not see: but it is
no question but if thou be a gracious Person thou shall see the Goodness laid
up in Heaven; and if thou be graceless, and die so, thou shall without question
see the Fire, and Worm, and Wrath prepared in Hell: these are sure things. And
now, Sirs, if unseen things be thus certain, great, unavoidable, and things
that must most surely be seen, then is there not a great deal of Reason that we
should look at them, and keep them ever in our Eye? And how sadly do many
miscarry in this Matter, who only carry those things in their Eye, that may and
often do never come, and lay those things out of their Eye that will most
surely come?

4. Unseen things are near: they are certain, they are great they are
unavoidable, and they are also very near unto us, and therefore it does
certainly concern us to look at them. This may be another ground; suppose some
great Matter in the World of much Concernment to you, tending to your making or
undoing while you live, were now coming upon you, would you not look upon your
selves as concerned to look at it? no question but you would. Now this great
seeing of unseen things is not a great way off, but at Hand, and hard by every
one of you. As the Apostle says, Romans 13.12. The Night is far spent, the Day
is at Hand: So I may say to you, it is but as an Hour or two to Daybreak, to
Sunrise, that will inlighten things that are in Darkness. O, Sirs, you and I
stand at the Door of these unseen things; and if Death do but once open it by
any one of its many thousand Keys, we shall immediately see that which we have
never see. Death (as I have told you) is an unseen thing, and it is Ostium
invisibilium; here will be a beginning of them, and O how soon will this be
here? Is there any more than a few Days, a Hand's breadth of Time, a Wind, a
Breath, a Vapor, between any of us and this? why verily there is no more. Job
14.1. Man that is born of a Woman is but of few Days. Psalm 39.5. Behold, thou
have made my Days as a Hand's breadth, and mine Age is as nothing before thee;
ver^ly every Man at his best State is Vanity. Job 7.7. O remember that my Life
is Wind. Isa. 2.22. Cease from Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils. James 4.14.
For what is your Life? is it not a Vapor, that a^peareth for a little Time,
and then vanishes away? Do you not see many about you dropping away, one to
day, and another to morrow, and a third the next Day? why all, all these go to
see things not seen. Many, Sirs, are seeing these things to day, who saw them
not Yesterday; and many shall see them to Morrow who are not yet seeing them to
Day; and there are but yet a few, a very few Days, and there shall not be one
of us who are here to Day, but we shall be landed on the Shore of unseen
things, to see them for ever, and never to see seen things more. Pray think of
this, if unseen things were a great way off, a long while too; if there were
some Ages or Ce turies to go over us e re we should see them, why it were
something b t alas, we know not, neither can we say, that there is another
Year, another Week, or another Day, between us and them; when we go out, we may
see them e're we come in again; and when we come in, they may follow us at our
back, and come in sight as we are sitting at our Boards, or lying on our Beds:
shall we not then take them into our Eye, and mind them? O if we would but
weigh the Certainty, the Concernment and Propinquity of these things not seen,
how could we ever lay them out of our Eye?

5. Unseen things are eternal. (1.) They are certain. (2.) They are momentous.
(3.) They are unavoidable. (4.) They are near, and they are also eternal and
unchangable, therefore it does unquestionably concern us to look at them; it
will be but a while e're they come into sight. Ay, but when once come into
sight, they will tarry eternally in sight; this is the Reason the Apostle lays
down here, why they looked not at seen but at unseen things; For the things
which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.
Here, my Beloved, we have the Difference between the seen things of this World,
and the unseen things of the other World; the seen are temporal, the unseen are
eternal: a Difference that puts an infinite Weight upon unseen things, and
makes them of infinitely more Concernment to us than any, than all things that
are seen. I say, 1st. The things which are seen are but temporal; many have
seen Health, and Peace, and Plenty, and Pleasures, and Prosperity, who are now
gone from seeing them, and must never see them again: And many have seen Want,
and Labors, and Travel, a Multiplicity and Variety of Troubles, who are also
now gone from seeing them, and shall never see them more. And whatsoever we are
now seeing in this World, whether of Comforts or Crosses, of Peace or Trouble,
we must see them but a while, and shall soon be sailed out of their sight for
ever. All these seen things are only (...), for a Season, as the same word is
rendered Heb. 11.25. The Pleasures of Sin for a Season; for a time, as the same
word, Mark 4.17. and have no Root in themselves, and so endure for a time; for
a while, as Mat. 13.21. Thus seen things, whatever they are, are but for a
season, for a time, for a while; as Job 11.16. Because thou shall forget thy
Misery, and remember it as the Waters that pass away, i. e. as that which is
quickly gone, and shall never return again. When sudden and great Showers of
Water fall, they make great Torrents and Inundations in Brooks and Rivers; but
these soon pass away, and being once past they return no more. Why, on this
fashion the godly Man's Misery is as Waters, and the ungodly Man's Prosperity
is as Waters; and all these seen things are as Waters that pass away. But now,
2dly. The things which are not seen are eternal and everlasting, not for a
season, or a time, or a while, but for ever and ever, for Eternity. The things
not seen in Heaven are Eternal: As,

1. There is Life, and this Life is eternal; Mat. 25.46. But the Righteous into
Life eternal.

2. Salvation, and this Salvation is eternal; Heb. 5.9. And being made perfect,
he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him.

3. Inheritance, and this Inheritance is eternal; 1 Pet. 1.4. An Inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away.

4. A Crown, and this Crown is eternal; 1 Pet. 5.4. And when the chief Shepherd
shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away.

5. A Kingdom, and this Kingdom is eternal; 2 Pet. 1.11. For an Entrance shall
be administered to you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

6. Glory, and this Glory is eternal; 2 Cor. 4.17. For our light Affliction
which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
Weight of Glory.

And the things not seen in Hell are eternal, as there is,

1st. A Pit, and this Pit is a bottomless Pit; Rev. 9.1, 2. And the fifth Angel
sounded and I saw a Star falling from Heaven unto the Earth; and to him was
given the Key of the bottomless Pit; and he opened the bottomless Pit, and
there arose a Smoke out of the Pit, as the Smoke of a great Furnace.

2dly. Damnation, and this Damnation is eternal; Mark 3.29. But he that shall
blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, has never Forgiveness, but is in danger of
eternal Damnation.

3dly. Destruction, and this Destruction is eternal; 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Who shall be
punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from
the Glory of his Power.

4thly. Darkness, and this Darkness is eternal; Jude 1^. To whom is reserved
the Blackness of Darkness for ever.

5thly. A Worm, and this Worm is eternal; Mark 9.44. Where the Worm dies not.

6thly. Fire, and this Fire is eternal; Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye Cursed
into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Well thus Sirs,
you see the Difference between things seen and unseen. (1.) Seen things are in
continual Motion, unseen things are immovable. (2.) Seen things pass away as
Waters swiftly, unseen things stand still as Weks through all Generations. (3.)
The things we see here in this World, we see them but for Hours, Days, Weeks,
or Years, and then they are no more. The things we must see hereafter in the
other World, we shall see for ever. Now Time determines and puts an end to our
seeing of all that comes into sight; then Eternity will never determine or put
any Period to what shall be in sight. And this Duration, this Eternity of
unseen things, puts (as I have said) an infinite Weight upon them, and makes
them of infinitely more Concernment to us than all seen things whatsoever. I
say again, there are many things that call on us to keep an Eye on unseen
things, the Certainty of them calls us to take them into our Eye, and the
Greatness of them, and the Unavoidableness of them, and the Nearness of them;
but this their eternal Duration above all renders them to us as Objects that we
are most concerned to eye. Here in this World we regard and matter things very
much according to the Duration and Continuance they are of. Things that are of
short Continuance and soon gone, we make no great reckoning of, whether great
or small, good or evil. A Flower, if never so sweet and beautiful, if passing
Solomon in all his Glory, is not much valued, because we know it is fading, and
will shortly lose both its Sweetness and Beauty. An Ague, tho it make all the
Body tremble, yet it is not much regarded, because it will have but a few
Paroxisms or Fits, and then be gone; but things that are durable and of long
Continuance, we use to account of: Whether good or evil, their Duration makes
them considerable in our Eyes; and shall we not then make a Matter of the
unseen things in the other World, that will not only be of long and lasting,
but of endless and everlasting Duration? O then what will we mind or matter? O
Sirs, their Eternity, their Eternity, Eternity makes them things to be looked
at before all temporal Matters: for Aeternitas in bonis infinitum bonum, in
malis infinitum malum: This makes unseen good things to be infinitely good and
desirable, and unseen evil things to be infinitely evil and formidable. O think
on this, if thou drop into Damnation, there thou must see endless Woes and
Wrath: If thou get to Heaven, there thou shall see the Pleasures that are for
evermore. Now does it not concern thee to think how thou may come to an
everlasting Happiness, how thou may escape an everlasting Misery? This may be
another Ground of this Truth, the things not seen are interminable. And now I
have done with the 5th Particular in this Point, and endeavored to show you
why it is that we must look at unseen things; and you see that the unseen
things are, (1.) Certain. (2.) Great. (3.) Unavoidable. (4.) Near. (5.)
Eternal. And therefore upon all these Accounts it cannot but appear to us as a
Matter of very near and great Concernment to our selves, to look at unseen
things, if there be any thing either of Religion or Reason, Faith or Fear,
Understanding or Sense in us.

SERMON IV.
2 Cor. 4.18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal.
WE now come to improve the Doctrine. The first Use shall be an Use of
Information. Is it the great Duty and Concernment of Christians to look at
unseen things? Then we may hence learn what things they are,

1. That our great Concernments are lying in; a Matter that few understand or
take notice of as they should, and therefore let their Time, and Thoughts, and
Cares, and Endeavors, run out on that that is not the Matter, the Business,
that their great Concern lies in, but on by-Businesses and inconsiderable
things, that are all nothing to the main. Pray Sirs, let us think of it, we are
all busy every day; one is planting, another is building, another is
purchasing, another is trading, another is tilling; one is doing this, another
is doing that, and every Body upon the Matter is taken up with something or
other, of the things which are seen; yet, alas Sirs! our great Matters, our
great Concerns, lie neither in one or another of these seen things that are
temporal, but in unseen things which are eternal. Think on it Soul, to day, I
say to thee, that whatever it is which thou art about, and most taken up with,
amongst things which are seen, this is not thy Matter, this is not thy
Business, this is not thy Great Concern, thou have a greater Matter, a greater
Concernment than this to mind and tend, viz. thy future unseen eternal Estate.
I say, Soul, the thing is, what shall be thine eternal Condition, what thou
shall see in another World for ever. Thy great Concernments lie in the things
that are yet out of sight. This is one thing we may learn hence; and O that you
would take it into your Thoughts, and say to your selves, where are we, what
are we doing? what is this we are busying our selves about? are we not out, and
off our great Concernment? O our Matter is not, 1. Where we dwell, what our
Habitation is while among seen things, but where we shall take up our Lodging,
and make our Abode when we are come to unseen things. 2. Nor how we are
accommodated with Lands, Meat, Drink, Clothes, Money and other Conveniences
now while seen things are present, but how we shall be accommodated, what shall
be our Portion, and where our Lines shall fall when we go to enter on and begin
with things not seen, that we shall never end with. 3. Nor who are our
Neighbors, our Friends and Relations, that we are now living and sojourning
among, conversing and companying with, but who we must come to see, and be in
Company of, and spend Eternity with, when we go to change seen Neighbors,
Friends and Relations, for others that are yet unseen: They are thus our unseen
things, and not our seen things, our eternal things, and not our temporal
things, that are our great Concernments; our main Matters lie in Matters that
are beyond all that our Eyes see under the Sun. Alas, Sirs, it is a common thing
with many to say, upon meeting with some smarting Cross, or sad Loss in their
Estates, Comforts, or Relations, O now I am undone, I am quite broken! and on
the other side, if they meet with any special Success in any of their Matters,
or compass any of their Designs according to their Desire, to say, O now I am
made, now I shall be happy! But truly this is a great Mistake, and you are much
out when you say or think on this fashion, for seen things can neither make you
nor undo you, no body to this day was ever made or undone by them: they are
unseen things that will be a making or undoing to you; the unseen things of
Death and Judgment, of Heaven and Hell, are the making and the undoing things;
and when these come in sight, then you will indeed be made, or undone, and that
for ever.

2. We may hence see that we have been and are a great way out of the way of
our Duty many of us, it has been our Duty to be much in looking at unseen
things. O but, Sirs, have we not been little in our lookings this way, and to
these things? Pray, Sirs, look a little back and take a serious review of what
is past, and what you have been eying and minding all along, and then tell me
if among the many things that you have looked at, these unseen things have not
had the least room in your Eye; and then I fear there will be but few, very
few, exceeding few (if they will deal truly) who must not confess that they have
been very guilty in this particular.

Alas, Sirs, not only our Rabble of profane and dissolute Persons, or our
Crowds and Companies of mere Worldlings have been Strangers to the Practice of
this Duty; but many that have looked toward Religion, have yet looked little
toward this Duty: the Truth is, Sirs, there is little looking at unseen
things. O who almost, (1.) Puts a Price on these? (2.) Who carries them in his
Thoughts? (3.) Who set them before them as their Mark and Aim? (4.) Who goes
after them? Or (5.) Who is waiting with an earnest expectation for them? Alas,
seen things stand between us and unseen things; and as they stand between us
and unseen things, so they come between us and looking at them; we look but
little over them, or behind them. This is another thing; this Truth may
convince a great many of us, that we are not looking the right Way, we are not
looking at the right Object, or that which is our grand Concernment. Alas,
Sirs, do we not Dine and Sup at our accustomed Times, go to Bed and rise at our
Hours, Converse and Commune one with another as we were wont, Trade, and Till,
and tend our Occasions and Matters in the World Day after Day; but among all
suffer Death to creep on us, Judgment to come toward us, and another World
approach and hasten every Day, without taking them at all into our Eye, or
looking at them on that manner that Matters of that Moment deserve to be looked
at? Truly, Sirs, this Text and Truth speaks enough to shame us all: for where
are the Men, the Women, the Christians, the Professors Young or Old, in one
Condition or another, that can say, we look not at the things which are seen,
but at the things which are not seen?

3. We may hence learn, that there are other things to be seen than those that
we have yet seen, or are seeing; we have not seen all that we must see: it was
Solomon's Observation in his Time, that there was no new Thing under the Sun;
Eccles. 1.9. The Thing which has been, is that which shall be; and that which
is done, is that which shall be done, and there is no new thing under the Sun:
q. d. All things in this World have in all Ages been the same for Nature and
Substance; there has been no Diversity, Variety, and Novelty, save in outward
Circumstances and Appearances of things; that that is now, is but the same over
again (in another dress) which has been before, and that which shall be, will be
no more but the same over again which now is; and there is nothing new under
the Sun. This he puts to Men that may seem otherwise minded, viz. to name the
thing that may seem to be new; Ver. 10. Is there any thing whereof it may be
said, see, this is new? and then constantly affirms that it has been in former
time, it has been already of old Time, which was before us, and only seems new
to us because length of Time, and shortness of Life have put it out of our
remembrance, as they will also do things that now are out of the remembrance of
those that are to come after: Ver. 11. There is no remembrance of former
things; neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are to come, with
those that shall come after. Thus there is no new thing, but a circular
Revolution and return of the same things in several Ages, something diversified
in their Circumstances. Ay but there are new things above the Sun in the other
World, things that have never been seen, nor ever shall be seen under the Sun;
you and I have things to see that have not yet been seen by us at any time.
This is another thing we may learn hence; and O take notice of it every one of
you that are hearing it, both Saints, and Sinners; remember it you that fear
God, and let it encourage you, you shall see other things than you are seeing
now from Day to Day in this Life. (1.) Are you seeing Creatures below your
selves? you shall see your and their Creator in his Glory and Majesty. (2.) Are
you seeing Men made in your own Form and Likeness, compassed about with
Infirmities, Corruptions, Temptations? you shall see the Holy Angels, and come
to an innumerable Company of them. (3.) Are you seeing Sinners running to
excesses of Riot, and living without God in the World? you shall see Glorious
Saints standing before the Throne, and serving God Day and Night in his Temple.
(4.) Are you seeing Shame, and Reproach, and Contempt? you shall see Glory, and
Honor, and receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away. (5.) Are you seeing
Want, meeting with Poverty, Necessities, and Straits? you shall see endless
Fullness, a blessed Country, where you shall never see Want of any thing again
for ever. (6.) Are you seeing Labors and Travel? you shall see everlasting
Rest. O, Sirs, you that are going for Heaven, have that to see that will make
amends for all the Evil and Trouble you are now seeing: Heaven, Heaven
comprehends all that Good that can possibly fall within the Compass of your
Thoughts or Apprehensions. And O remember this, you that forget God, you have a
fine time of it (as you think) now, while you walk in the ways of your Heart,
and in the sight of your Eyes; and it were something if you were never to see
any thing but what you are now seeing. O but there are unseen things, and you
must see other things than those you are now seeing from day to day: You are
now seeing Peace, and Plenty, Pleasure and Prosperity: Ay, but you have Trouble
and Want, Pain and Torment to see. I pray think of it, you know the King of
Babylon, when he was seeing the Pomp and Glory of his Royal Feast, had
something that he never thought of coming into his sight, which put him under a
great Consternation; Dan. 5.5, 6. In the same Hour came forth Fingers of a
Man's Hand, and wrote over against the Candlestick, upon the Plaster of the
Wall of the King's Palace; and the King saw the part of the Hand that wrote.
Then the King's Countenance was changed, and his Thoughts troubled him, so that
the joints of his Loins were loosed, and his Knees smote one against another.
And now this strange, this sudden Sight, marred all his Mirth and Music: Lords
and Ladies, Crowns and Kingdoms could not relieve him; but his Countenance
changed, his Joints loosened, and his Knees smote one against another. Why,
Sirs, this is your Case, your very Case this day; you are seeing your Comforts
and Pleasures, but have that to see that will mar all your Mirth for ever. O
that you would consider it this Day, if his Countenance was thus changed only
upon seeing the Fingers of a Man's Hand writing over against him; O then how
will it be with you, when you have the bottomless Pit, and all the tremendous
things therein coming into your sight? Well, Sirs, this is another thing you
may learn hence; there are other things to see than are now seen.

Second Use, of Reproof. Is it the great Duty and Concernment of all to look at
unseen things? then this may reprove those,

First, Who look only at seen things, things which are in sight, as the Gain,
and Glory, and Pleasures of this present World, but never look so far as
another World, as unseen things. And this is a very common thing many do on
this manner: A great many must say, (if they will say the Truth, and their
Practices say it for them every Day) we look not at the things which are not
seen, but at the things which are seen. These are the things which we eye, and
mind, and pursue, and are in travel after, early and late, how we may compass
them, and come by them; I say, this is the common Case of a great many: I fear
there is no want of those here to day, who do on this fashion, that have
something or other in their eye of the things that are seen. Now if thou be one
of them, I would tell thee, and pray thee consider it, that this Course is a 1.
Brutish, 2. Paganish, 3. Faithless, 4. Foolish, 5. Ruining,
Course.

1. This Course is a brutish Course, proper for Beasts, who have only Sense to
lead them, but no Reason to guide them; not at all becoming Men who are
reasonable Creatures. I say, it is the part of Brutes, who have no higher part
than Sense, only to look at seen and present things: thou degradest thy self
from the Degree and Excellency of a Christian; nay, thou degradest thy self
from the Degree of a Man, and putst thy self into the Form of a Beast, while
thou lookst only at seen things; nay, thou throwst thy self below some Brutes
in this, that being void of Reason, yet look further than only to what is just
seen, and present. The silly Ant in Summer looks as far as Winter, Prove. 6.6,
7, 8. and the Stork, Jer. 8.7. knows its season. And will thou be like the
Beasts? nay, worse than the Beasts that perish? Shall the weak Ant, the poor
Stork, the small Crane, and the Turtle, and the Swallow, silly and contemptible
Creatures, condemn thee? What an Absurdity, what a Shame is this? What have
thou Reason for, if thou will make no use of it, nor distinguish thy self by it
in thy Practice from a Beast, when God has by giving it to thee, distinguished
thee from them in thy Being? Psalm. 8.6. Thou made him have Dominion over the
Works of thy Hands, thou have put all things under his Feet.

2. This Course is a Paganish Course: if thou were a very Pagan, one of the
worst of the Heathens, and among a Nation of Barbarians, thou could but do on
this Fashion. Mat. 6.32. For after all these things do the Gentiles seek: After
these present things, and after these seen things, these poor Pagans who are
either wholly ignorant, and know nothing of these unseen things, or at best
have but very dark and imperfect Apprehensions of them, and do but give a faint
and weak Assent to them, are taken up with, and acquiesce in seen things: and
shall there be no Difference? Shall Christians who differ so far from Pagans in
Profession, agree with them in Practice? Shall Christians now justify Heathens,
and Heathens hereafter condemn Christians? How great will that Condemnation be?
O think of this you that never look further than you can see with Eyes of
Flesh; what a foul and gross thing is it, that you who have the Gospel, the
lively Oracles of the living God, plain, open, Noonday Discoveries of unseen
things, of unseen things that are so great, so unavoidable, so near and
Eternal, should as the Gentiles only look at seen things?

3. This Course is a faithless Course. I know that you will profess to have Faith,
and say, that you are Believers: but pray, Sirs, what have you Faith for, or
what use make you of it? Is not Faith the Evidence of things not seen? Does it
not lead to look at things not seen? Why, verily this is the Work of Faith, the
Office of Faith: and therefore while you only look thus at things seen, and
make them your Matters and Marks, you do proclaim your selves to be Men and
Women void of Faith. O there is hardly a greater Argument of Infidelity than
this; any thing that does more speak Persons to be very Infidels than this; I
would you would think of it. If you had but Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed,
there would be some looking beyond things that are in sight. And surely Sirs,
if you be a faithless Generation now, you shall be a Christless and Heavenless
Generation to Eternity.

4. This Course is a foolish, a very foolish Course; this is another, it is
brutish, and it is also foolish: for pray what are these seen things that you
are setting in your Eye? they are but,

1st. The Footstool of God; Isa. 66.1. The Earth is my Footstool. Sirs, all the
Crowns, Thrones, Scepters, Robes, and other great things of the World, are but
the Footstool of the God of Heaven. Whatever thou lookst on, and art set on
here under the Sun, why it is but a piece of God's Footstool; it is but what he
puts and keeps under his Feet; and will thou set thine Heart on that he sets
his Feet on? What is Folly if this be not, to neglect looking after a Place
before the Throne of God, only to gather up and fill thy Bosom with some Chips
of his Footstool, when and while thou have as fair an Opportunity for that as
for this? None but Children and Fools would take up with painted Pebbles when
they have pure Gold before them. What are they that choose to lie at the
Footstool, when there is open way of ascending before the Throne?

2dly. This World is the Walk of the Devils, where God permits the Devil to
have his Rounds from one Generation to another; Job 1.7. And the Lord said unto
Satan, From whence come thou? and Satan answered the Lord, and said, From
going to and fro in the Earth, and from walking up and down in it. This is
Satan's Walk, and here he walks not as an idle Spectator, but as a busy Tempter
and Destroyer, making it his continual Business to seduce, blind, harden,
ensnare Men, and make them both as bad and as miserable as himself. I say, the
Earth is his Walk, and seen things in it are his Baits, his Snares, his Tools,
whereby he destroys hundred thousands of Souls: yea, while we look at seen
things, rest in seen things, content our selves with our seen things, he walks
among them, and can in a Moment (if God but loose his Chain) turn us out of all
our seen things, as we may see in Job's Case; Job 1. 6, 7. And the Lord said
unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine Hand, but save his Life. So went Satan forth
from the Presence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore Boils, from the sole of
his Foot unto his Crown, etc.

3dly. Seen things are the World's Portion, the Crust that God casts out to
Dogs, as Luther said of the Turkish Empire. Job 9.24. The Earth is given into
the Hand of the Wicked: he suffers them to have a possession and use of the
things thereof, and reserves nothing of the things of the Earth from them, as
things they may not share in; what can thou name of the things here, that
Wicked Men of the World have not had? The Apostle reduces the things that are
in the World, that are seen, to three Heads, 1 John 2.16. The Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life; i. e. Pleasures,
Possessions, Honors: Now all these are the World's Portion, and Wicked Men
have had a Fullness of them. (1.) Pleasures; James 5.5. Ye have lived in
Pleasure on the Earth, says the Apostle, speaking to wicked Men. (2.)
Possessions; Job 21.13. They spend their Days in Wealth. Psalm. 73.7. Their Eyes
stand out with Fatness, they have more than Heart could wish. (3.) Preferments;
Dan. 4.17. The Most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of Men. Wicked Men have
all along had, and have all these, O Soul, the things thou now see, even the
sinest, and fairest, and fullest of them, are but things that many a Man has
had, who is now in Hell, and things that many have who must never come to
Heaven. (1.) Is it a fine House that thy Eye is on? many a one has dwelt in a
fine House, who is now dwelling in Darkness. (2.) Is it fine Clothes thou
lookst at, how thou may go Gallant, and be all in the Mode? Why, alas, many
that have been clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and decked with all manner of
Ornaments, are now swimming naked in Rivers or Fire and Brimstone. (3.) Is it
great Possessions thou art looking at, Houses, Lands, Treasures? why many a one
has laid House to House, and Field to Field, and Heap to Heap, that now lack a
drop of Water. Now is it not a foolish Course to look only at, and keep an Eye
on that which is no better than the Portion of the World, of the Men that must
never come to Heaven? What think thou of it? art thou doing wisely, while
thou art going after nothing but what is seen, when there is nothing of that
that is seen, but God allows it to those that are going for, and must to Hell?

4thly. Seen things are the Subject of God's Curse; this was laid upon these
seen things as soon as Man was fallen. Genesis 3.17. Cursed is the Ground for thy
sake; the Ground, that is, all this visible World, for thy sake, propter te, i.
e. propter peccatum tuum, vel quod attinet ad te (Piscator.) Under this Curse
it lies to this Day, to the Men of the Earth, and with this it comes
accompanied to their Door. (1.) Their Treasures carry a secret Curse in them.
(2.) Their Possessions have a Curse resting on them. Prove. 3.33. The Curse of
the Lord is in the House of the Wicked. These seen things are left to be as
Fuel to their Lusts, as Food to their Pride, and Covetousness, and Luxury, as
Snares to their Souls. Now, Sirs, is it not a foolish thing for Men to set
their Eye on nothing but a Babylonish Garment, an Achan's Golden Wedg, an
accursed thing?

5thly. Seen things are Fuel prepared for Burning, combustible Stuff that
Doomsday will make an end of; all these things that are now seen, are things
that must all be burnt up before our Eyes. 2 Pet. 3.7. The Heavens and the
Earth which are now, are reserved unto Fire against the Day of Judgment. Ver.
10. The Earth also, and the Works that are therein shall be burnt up. Thus all
these seen things are kept for Fire, a Fire is kindling in their Bowels that
will turn them into cold Ashes; think on this pray, a Fire is coming, a Fire is
coming upon all the Gain of the World; a Fire is coming upon all the Glory of
the World; a Fire is coming upon all the Possessions of the World; a Fire is
coming upon all the Habitations of the World, nothing shall be left, nothing
saved, not a penny of thy Money, not a Stick or Stone of thy House, not a Foot
of thy Land.

Well, this is a fourth thing; this Course is a foolish Course, for all these
seen things are but the Footstool of God, the Devils Walk, the World's Portion,
the Subject of God's Curse, Fuel for the Fire at Doomsday; and is it not a very
poor sorry Business, for Men and Women then to look no further than these, no
further than the Footstool? O that Men should so far lose themselves, is both
sad and strange!

5. This is a ruining and an undoing Course, many have been undone by it; and
it is marked out as a way to Perdition, Phil. 3.18, 19. (For many walk, of whom
I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the Enemies
of the Cross of Christ; whose End is Destruction, whose God is their Belly, and
whose Glory is in their Shame, who mind earthly things): Here the Apostle
shows, that there were many who were walking toward Destruction, and whose Way
would end therein. And he does further particularly name several sorts of them;
and among the rest you see this sort of Persons are one, who mind earthly
things, who are wise about earthly things. Thus minders (I pray you take notice
of it) of earthly things are marked for Destruction; that is, such as only look
after, are busy about, taken up with, and aim at these Presents and Visibles.
O, Sirs, this looking at seen things, is the losing of the Soul and unseen
things for ever. It was a Saying that Sir Thomas Moore used, There is a Devil
called Negotium, Business, that carries more Souls to Hell, than all the
Devils in Hell besides. O this Business, this minding of earthly things, this
looking at seen things, undoes thousands. Sirs, if you could speak with many
now in Hell, and ask them what was their undoing? they would surely tell you it
was this: O this, this was our ruin.

(1.) We were thinking what we should eat, and drink, and wherewithal we should
be clothed, when we should have been making provision for our Souls.

(2.) We were plodding for Posterity, when we should have been preparing for
Eternity.

(3.) We were surveying our Estates, when we should have been looking into our
Hearts.

(4.) We were casting how to drive on our Bargains, to contrive our Business,
and compass our Ends, when we should have been working out our Salvation. And
these, these things were our undoing; while we were thus busy, early and late,
about Earth, we lost Heaven. When we were in the World, we minded seen things,
we loved seen things, we were set on seen things; and when we came to leave the
World, God told us we had that which we chose: this would be the Language of
many a Soul! And now, Sirs, will you take the way that many have met with ruin
in, that is marked as a way to Destruction?

This is the first Word by way of Reproof, to those who look only at seen
things, at things which are in sight. You see it is a Brutish, a Paganish, a
Faithless, a Foolish, an Undoing Course: Will you continue in such a Course?
will you follow Pagans and Brutes? will you live as Men without Faith and
without Knowledge? O learn this Lesson, this Duty, to look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen.

Secondly, Those are to be reproved by this Doctrine, who live as if there were
no unseen things, no Judgment to come, no Heaven, no Hell, nothing but what is
seen, and what is present. My Beloved, there are multitudes of these in our
Day: you shall not meet with many who will say, there are no unseen things. But
as one says, Impurissima and profanissima illa vita quam maxima pars hominum
sectatur, perspicue indicat quod non sentiant esse vitam post hanc. They live
just as if they had no more to do, than to rant, and drink, and roar, and
revel, and die, and so an End of all for ever; or as if they had nothing to do,
but rake as much as they can of the World together, whether by Right or Wrong,
and then die; behind which there is nothing. My Friends, are any of you of this
Make of Persons, such as are lying in Wickedness, as giving your selves up to
Profaneness? Pray tell me, what have you thought, what are you thinking of?
Have you ever thought, or do you ever think in earnest of unseen things, or
that there are any unseen things; that there is any such thing as a Judgment to
come, or a Hell that the Wicked are to be turned into? I say, what do you
think? Are there any unseen things, or are there not? If you say that there
are, and be persuaded that there are things out of sight, as you are told of,
and as have been hinted to you from this Subject, then how can you, dare you
live on such a fashion? Do you believe that the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who
shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord,
and from the Glory of his Power? as you have it 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. Do you
believe that the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men, and the rich Men, and
the chief Captains, and the mighty Men, and every Bondman, and every Freeman,
shall hide themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains; and say
to the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the Face of him that
sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb: For the great Day of his
Wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. Do you
believe that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? nor
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Do you believe that the Fearful, Unbelieving and Abominable, and Murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their
part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone? Rev. 21.8. Why then you
must believe also, Sirs, that you are by these your doings, undoing your
selves, damning your selves, sinking your selves to Hell for ever. You must
believe there is a time a coming on you, when you will be put to cry to the
Mountains and Rocks to fall on you, when you must be excluded from an eternal
weight of Glory, and lie down in everlasting Flames.

And if you say, or think there are no unseen things, you will be sadly
disappointed and deceived, for (as you have here seen) they are both sure and
unavoidable, and also near unto you; and it is but a while and you will all be
convinced, (and that beyond any possibility of ever making a question of it
again to Eternity) that Death is not the End of all things with you, that all is
not done when the Body falls into the Dust, but that there is then a Beginning,
a beginning that shall never have ending, of things that now are out of sight:
pray think of it; and as you would not see everlasting Sorrows, everlasting
Weepings, everlasting Damnation, break with your present Courses, and live as
those that look for the coming of things unseen.

SERMON V.
2 Cor. 4.18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal.
Thirdly, IT may reprove Christians, those that have made Religion their
Business more than others, that they have not made this their Business more,
been no more careful,

(1.) In looking at unseen things; (2.) In aiming at; (3.) In seeking of; (4.)
In following after; (5.) In clearing their Title to the unseen things of Heaven
and Glory.

Alas, Sirs, this is verily a Fault among Christians, we are much in looking at
seen, but we are little in looking at unseen things. That you may not live in
this Neglect, but be more in looking this way, pray consider,

1. That you are not much concerned to look after seen things, for they are but
(...), they will not last as long as Eternity lasts; nay, they will not reach another
World, not go one step with you in another World: As soon as ever you are
passed into another World, The former things are passed away, Rev. 21.4. i. e.
all the things that are present, both good and bad: none of the ill things of
the present World will follow the Saints into another World; nor will any of
the good things of the present World, follow Sinners into another World: Seen
things last but a while, reach but a little way.

2. Unseen things are the best things, better than any thing that is seen;
weigh what you will against them, and you will find they can bear no weight with
the things of Heaven. As,

(1.) If you weigh against them Riches, Gold, Silver, all the Treasures of
Darkness, and hidden Store of secret Places, yet they will all be inconsiderable,
and amount to nothing, less than a Drop of Water to the Ocean, than a lump of
Lead to a Mountain of Pearl; they are things of no worth in Heaven, things that
have no place in Heaven: It Is a Country (as the Martyr said) where Money bears
no mastery, where that that goes here for Hundreds and Thousands, will not go
for Pence and Farthings.

(2.) And if you weigh against them Honors, and Powers, and Greatness, why as
little is there in them to bear any proportion with the things of Heaven; add
these to the former, and put both together ( viz. all the Treasures, and all
the Crowns and Kingdoms under Heaven) in the Balance with the Crown and
Kingdom of Heaven, and they will be less than little to them.

(3.) If you weigh Pleasures against them, you shall still find they weigh
nothing; add these to the two former, even all the Delights of the Sons of Men,
and put all three together in the Balance with the unseen things of Heaven,
and they will be of no weight; unseen things are the best things, there is no
worth in Riches to the Riches of Glory, there is no weight in Crowns to the
Crown of Glory, there is no sweetness in Pleasures to the Pleasures, the Rivers
of Pleasures at God's right Hand.

3. Nothing short of unseen things is of any moment, or worth looking at;
unseen things are not only the best things that you or I can look at, but there
is nothing else we can look at that is of any moment. The Holy Ghost speaking
of seen things, uses most diminishing Terms, he calls Wealth thick Clay, Hab.
2.6. Woe to him that ladeth himself with thick Clay. The Dust of the Earth, Amos
2.7. They pant after the Dust of the Earth. Wind, Eccles. 5.16. What Profit
has he that has labored for the Wind? Grass, and the Flower of the Grass,
James 1.11. The Sun is no sooner risen with a burning Heat, but it withers
the Grass, and the Flower thereof falls, and the grace of the fashion of it
perishes: so also shall the rich Man fade away in his Ways. He styles Power,
and Pomp, and Glory, Fancy, Acts 25.23. The whole World a Surface, an Outside,
an empty Shadow, 1 Cor. 7.31. For the Fashion of this World passes away. A
vain show, Psalm. 39.6. Surely every Man walks in a vain show. On this fashion
the Holy Ghost speaks of these seen things; and surely on this fashion, they
who are seeing unseen things, are thinking of seen things to day; the best, the
greatest, the choicest of them, are but Clay, and Dust in their Eyes. Alas,
look but on seen things in the Glass of Scripture, and you will see there is
nothing in sight that deserves to be looked at; they are either unseen things,
or nothing that you must make your Object, Eccles. 1.2, 3.

4. All your Happiness lies in things unseen. Those Grecians lost the Comfort
of their Lives, (says the Historian) who saw not Alexander sit in Darius's
Throne. I may say, those lose the Comfort of their Lives, that don't lift up
their Minds to the high things belonging to the heavenly Throne. Nisi ad haec
admitterer, non fuerat operae pretium nasci. Alas, there is no true and solid
Happiness to be had in seen things; all the things that are under the great
Vault of Heaven, and on this side the Sun and Moon, (how fair soever they look)
are but the drossy part (as we say) of God's Creation: Like the Goats-hair and
Badgers-skins on the Tabernacle without, that was overlaid with Gold within;
Gold within, and Skins without; so, I say, these seen things are but very sorry
things, poor Shadows, empty Vanities, broken Cisterns; nothing to unseen
things, nothing that can make us happy.

5. Your unalterable and unchangeable Happiness lies in unseen things, not in
any thing that is in sight. It Is true, sometimes seen things may have such a
kind and favorable Aspect toward you, as may tempt you to say as David once,
Psalm. 30.6, 7. That your Mountain is made to stand strong, and you shall never
be moved. But as he was presently convinced of his Mistake, so will you find
yours; for, alas, this World is the Stage of Changes and Revolutions, wherein
all things are on a Wheel and in motion. (1.) The Sun rises and sets; (2.) Seas
ebb and flow; (3.) Winds rise and fall; (4.) Rivers run Day and Night; (5.)
Cities and Kingdoms are up and down; (6.) Persons and Families are coming up
and going down; (7.) Rich and Poor are meeting. 1 Samuel 2.4, 5. The Bows of the
Mighty are broken, and they that stumbled are girt with strength. They that
were full, have hired out themselves for Bread; and they that were hungry,
ceased: so that the Barren has born seven, and she that has many Children is
waxed feeble. All things are (as we say) on their Feet, none can sit or lie;
some go backward, some go forward: it were endless to enumerate the Changes
that are acted every day upon the Stage of this World; here is no constancy, no
stability in any thing, this is only to be found above in the unseen World, and
there all things are unchangeable and unalterable for ever. (1.) God the
Portion and Happiness of his Chosen, is unchangeable; (2.) Angels unchangeable;
(3.) Saints unchangeable; (4.) The heavenly Mansions unchangeable; (5.) The
Riches of Glory; (6.) The Joy in God's Presence; (7.) The Pleasures at his
right Hand, are for evermore; here will be an unchangeable unalterable State of
Rest and Happiness, without any Flux or Reflux, Change or Variation, for ever.
O therefore Christians, check your selves that you have not looked, that you
are not looking more at unseen things, and longing more to come unto the seeing
of them. It Is reported of great Aristotle, that he should say when he was
dying, I rejoice that I am now going out of a World of Contraries. How much
more may the serious Christian rejoice, to think of going out of a World of
Contraries, and off a Stage of Changes, to unchangeable Blessedness?

The third Use, is a Use of Exhortation. Is it the great Part, Duty, and
Concernment of Christians to look at unseen things? then it may be for
Exhortation to Christians, in these three things.

First, Look at and fix your Eye on unseen things, this is the first.
Christians, be persuaded to look at things which are not seen, above, beyond,
and past all that is now in sight, over all that is present, to the future and
unseen Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell, that are yet out of sight, yet
unseen. Consider, this looking at unseen things will be of very great Advantage
to you on many Accounts; it is your Duty, as you have seen, and it will be your
Gain and for your Good, as you may see, if you consider these seven or eight
things: this looking at unseen things will help very much,

1. To mortify your Hearts to seen things, to the World and the things thereof.
Seen things are full of Snares, the World has been the Destruction of a world
of Souls; it is a blessed thing to have a Heart that is loose from, and dead to
it: Any thing that tends to part, and keep the Heart and the World asunder,
deserves to have a Room and Place in our Hearts. Now nothing is more sovereign
in this Case, than a close and constant practice of this proposed Duty, a
looking at unseen things. Aeternis inhianti in fastidio sunt omnia transitoria;
He that looks at unseen eternal Things, will make light of seen temporal
Things; this will take Affections off things below, up to things above. It Is
said, that the great Cities of Campania seem but small Cottages, to them that
stand on the top of the Alps: So truly all the great and specious, and precious
things of the World, that so many Eyes admire, and so many Hearts dote on, all
the Thrones, Crowns, Pleasures, Profits, Beauties, Braveries, and Glories of
this World, seem but little to them that have an Eye looking at that within the
Vail. If you look but a little upon the Sun, why when you look down again upon
the Earth, you can scarce for a time see any thing of all the things about you;
the Light and Beauty of that which you have seen, makes these things disappear:
Why so, a looking at unseen things, will hugely darken and lessen seen things
in our Eye, and make that we shall see little in them to be much set by. Some
Writers say, that after Lazarus was raised from the Dead, he was never seen to
smile, or make any matter of the Matters of the World; he had seen that which
did keep his Heart dead to these things, as poor and worthless. My Beloved, if
we might suppose, that some of the Saints now in Heaven should be sent back
again to us in this World, what would they do? how would they look on all these
things? Do you think they would be taken with them, or press after them? (1.) Would
they fall in love with your Houses, or Fields, or Gardens? (2.) Would they set
by your Gold and Silver? (3.) Would they make any thing of that you make most
of? Surely, no, the whole World would be no other than a Wilderness to them;
they that tread the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars under their Feet, would surely
trample all that is specious in the Earth under their Feet as so much Dung. And
as they would make nothing, so surely Christians (who are going to share with
them) would make less than ordinarily they do of all seen things, if they
looked but more to unseen things, to the Place and Possessions of the Saints in
Light. Would thou be accompanied with a mortified Heart to the World; (1.) To
the Lusts of the World; (2.) To the Pleasures of the World; (3.) To the
greatness of the World; (4.) To the Gain; (5.) To the Glory of the World? then
look, look at unseen things.

2. It will help to make you Content in every Condition, (this another) and
with whatsoever is your Portion in this World. The Holy Apostle had his
Conversation in Heaven; Philip. 3.20. For our Conversation is in Heaven* And
had learned, Chap. 4.11. in whatsoever state he was, therewith to be Content.
His Converse with Heaven, had taught him to be Content with his Condition on
Earth. O Sirs, believing views of the things above, that a Believer is going
to, are enough to make a Christian say, when in the worst, most needy and
wanting outward Condition in the World, with David, Psalm. 16.6. The Lines are
fallen to me in pleasant Places; yea, I have a goodly Heritage: yonder is better
Country, where there is no Curse, no Night, no Hunger; yonder Inheritance that
is incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away; yonder Kingdom, Crown,
and weight of Glory will make amends for all. Wants are now hanging on me, but
I shall want nothing when I am come to my Father's House, to the new Heavens,
and the new Earth, to the pure River of the Water of Life, and to the Tree of
Life in the midst of the Paradise of God; all will be well in the World to
come, and I shall have enough when I am called to the Marriage-Supper of the
Lamb, and brought to eat and drink continually at his Table in his Kingdom.

I remember Jerome, comforting a young Hermit that was sad, bade him look up
to Heaven, and Paradisum mente deambulare, and says he, tamdiu in Eremo non
eris: So may I say to you that fear God, when you are in a Wilderness, when
Wants are on you, and discontented Passions are ready to rise, then look up to
Heaven, look at unseen things, and so long you will not be discontent; the
Thoughts of seeing God, and following the Lamb whithersoever he goes, will be
enough to make you at Peace with your present States.

3. It will help to lessen all the Losses of the World, and of seen things. The
believing Hebrews did not only bear the spoiling of their Goods, but took it
joyfully, Heb. 10.34. But how came it to be thus? how came they to take this so
cheerfully, that has broken the Heart of many a one in the World? Why their
Eyes were looking upwards as high as Heaven, and the things of Heaven took away
their Discontent; knowing in your selves that you have in Heaven a better and
an enduring Substance. Mark, their Eye, the Eye of Faith and Hope was on the
Eternal Riches in Heaven's keeping for them; and this was their Encouragement,
this made them, non modo aequis animis sed etiam laetis, to take their Losses.
Do Losses come upon me? do I lose this, and that, and the other Comfort and
Enjoyment? why, while I look at things not seen; (1.) I see I shall not need
them. (2.) I see I shall have better in the Room of them. (3.) I see I shall
have Comfort that will not be losable. When the Danites had taken away Micah's
Idols, and Priest, he cries out after them, Judges 18.24. What have I more?
that is, (as tho he had said) you have taken all, you have left me nothing:
thus it may be with a carnal Person, he may lose this to day, and that to
morrow, and so on till it come to this, what have I more? Ay, but it can never
come to this with a gracious Person, let Losses come on him as thick and as
fast as on Job; yet after, and at the End of all, he can look up and say, I
have a Treasure more, I have a Crown more, I have an everlasting Kingdom more,
I have a whole World more, out of sight and danger too; that and the other
thing is gone, but it is not Christ, it is not Heaven, Christ is left, and Heaven
is left: and this now cannot but very much lessen any Loss.

4. It will help to lighten all the Crosses and Afflictions in the World. Our
Savior himself went through the Sufferings and Shame of the World, with an Eye
set on the Joy set before him: Heb. 12.2. Who for the Joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down at the right Hand
of the Throne of God. Mark pray, for the lightning of the Cross, and Shame, he
took the Joy in his Eye, and this Joy in his Eye took the Weight out of the
Cross, and the Shame out of the Shame of the World, for the Joy that was set
before him. And Christians are here called to look at him herein, as their
Pattern and Example that they are to follow in like Cases, looking at Jesus the
Author and finisher of our Faith. The Apostles here in this Place had their
Sufferings lightened by this; in the Verse foregoing the Text, you have them
weighing their Affliction and finding it light, measuring their Affliction and
finding it short: but how came it to be thus in their Account? why this you
have in the Text, While we look not at things which are seen which are
Temporal, but at things which are not seen which are Eternal: their present and
seen Affliction was light, while they weighed it with the Weight of unseen
Glory, and it was likewise short while they measured it with the Eternity of
unseen Glory. O Sirs, there is enough in unseen things to lighten any Cross,
Suffering, or Affliction a Christian can come under, and to make him quiet,
silent, and patient under all: the unseen things of Heaven are enough to quiet,
the unseen things of Hell are enough to silence under all: look, Soul, but
either of these ways when thou art going under any Cross, and so long sure it
cannot be heavy on thee; are Sufferings now on thee? look at the Prison,
Chains, Darkness, Worm, Fire of the Damned, what they are suffering on whom God
is raining Snares, Fire, Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest; and thou can not
think them heavy: or look at the Rest, Joy, Goodness, Glory, laid up for the
Saints in Heaven, and thou can not but say with the Apostle, Romans 8.18. For I
reckon that the Sufferings of this present Life, are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory that shall be revealed.

5. It will be a remedy against all Temptations: while Moses his Eye was upon
the recompense of Reward, the Riches, Honors, and the Pleasures of Pharaoh's
Court were easily overlooked. Heb. 11.25, 26, 27. Choosing rather to suffer
Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
Season; esteeming the Reproaches of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures in
Egypt: for he had respect to the recompense of Reward. By Faith he forsook
Egypt, not fearing the Wrath of the King; for he endured as seeing him who is
invisible. This sets a Christian above Temptation as it were, it mortifies to
the World as before; and this is commonly the Matter of Temptation, the great
Baits that Satan makes use of are the things of the World; he tempts sometimes
with the Beauty, sometimes with the Gain, sometimes with the Glory, and
ordinarily with something or other of the World. Now, I say, this looking to
things unseen, helps to crucify to the World the Matter of Temptation, and so
is a special Antidote against Temptation; for when the Heart is dead to the
Matter of a Temptation, it will not easily fasten on the Tempted: besides, the
looking at unseen things brings greater things into sight, than any that can be
presented in a Temptation. Does the Tempter come with specious and alluring
Temptations, as he came to our Savior with all the Kingdoms of the World, and
all the Glory of them? why an Eye set on unseen things, sees greater things
than all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them. Does he come with
terrifying and affrighting Temptations, as Bonds, or Banishment, or Tortures?
why an Eye set on unseen things, sees worser: Unseen Glory in Heaven is greater
than all the seen Excellencies on Earth; and unseen Torments in Hell are worse
than all the seen Tortures of this Life. This is another Privilege of looking
at unseen things; would you be out of the way of Temptations, Temptations that
have cast many a one down, and cost them much of their Peace and Comfort in the
World? then be much in this Duty, keep an Eye on unseen things. When a
Temptation comes in its Power, look before you as far as Death, as Judgment, as
Heaven, as Hell; and while these are in your Eye, they will keep your Heart and
the Temptation asunder. As long as the Bird keeps above in the Air, she is out
of the way of Snares, her falling into these is by lighting on the Earth.

6. A singular Remedy against Sin in these sinning Times, wherein Iniquity
abounds: Solomon prescribes this to young Men, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, O young
Man, in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth; and
walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes: but know thou,
that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment. Mark, that they may
be stopped in these Courses, he calls them to look over their present ways, to
the unseen Judgment before them. O Sirs, these unseen, unseen things have much
weight in them, if Christians would but carry them on their Hearts, and look at
them when Sin is at the Door. I have read of a young Woman, who being pressed
by a Gallant to gratify his Lusts, answered him, if you will but grant me one
request I will do what you desire: What is that said he again? why, says she,
it is but this, do but hold your Finger one Hour in the Blaze of this Candle: he
replied, No: then said she, will you not for my sake hold your Finger one Hour
in this Candle, and would you have me throw my self into an everlasting Fire
for you? and this silenced him. Why Christians, pray try this Course, when Sin
is at the Door, when you are ready to go out to any Evil, take unseen things
into your Eye, look at Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell; and see if you can,
if you dare meet or meddle with that Sin, with these in sight, or while they
are in sight: Surely, Sirs, this would be a mighty great Preservative: and if
you would but walk more as seeing things invisible, you should be more
undefiled in the Way.

7. It will make you more fit to live any where, in any Place, among any kind
of Persons. He that has filled his Eye with unseen things, is prepared to live
among a Generation, (1.) Of profane Creatures, without being drawn to run with
them to the same excess of Riot. (2.) Among a Company of Worldlings, that are
crying up the Mammon of Unrighteousness, without being enticed to approve their
way by seeing them hurry and rake this World together by all means. (3.) Among
Persons of mutable and temporizing Spirits, that are off and on, one thing at
one time, another at another time: he that looks at unseen things, has that in
his Eyes which will keep him one and the same at all times, and in all Places;
a Noah in the old World, a Lot in Sodom, a Job in Vz; a God-fearing Person
wherever he comes or is cast.

8. Looking at unseen things will make you more willing to die, and go to the
seeing of unseen things: whence is it that many Christians are so loath to leave
and go from seen things, to part with seen Relations, and seen Possessions, and
seen Comforts? is it not from a want of lively Apprehensions, and believing
Views of the unseen Provisions made for them in Heaven? I remember I have read
of a devout Pilgrim traveling to Jerusalem, who in his way passing through
many Cities, and seeing many rare and choice Monuments, yet took no content in
any thing that he saw, but would still say, this is not Jerusalem, this is not
Jerusalem: why so truly if we had but our Eye as the Apostle, on things unseen,
we should among all our seen Comforts, say, this is not Heaven, this is not
seeing of God, seeing his Face, seeing him Face to Face; this is not being
before the Throne, this is not the inheriting of all things; and our Hearts and
Souls would be more there, more set on going thither.

Secondly, This may serve to exhort us to prepare for unseen things, for a
seeing of things yet unseen: are there such? O then, Sirs, let it be your great
Matter now Day and Night, Night and Day, to get into a readiness for a
comfortable seeing of these things which are not seen. This is the next word I
would leave with you, I pray take it up into your Practice, and make it your
Work. Heb. 11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet,
moved with Fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his House. My Beloved, I may
say to you, (1.) You have been warned of God this Day (by the Hand of one of
his Messengers) of things not seen as yet. (2.) You have been told that these
things not seen as yet, are certain and great, greater than the things that
Noah was warned of, and unavoidable, and near, and Eternal: O do as Noah here
in this Case did, i. e. (1.) Believe the coming of these things not seen as
yet. (2.) Fear, fear being taken unready by them at their Coming. And (3.)
prepare an Ark to the saving of your selves; make Provision, timely Provision
for the Coming of these things; that as Noah and his House were saved when the
Deluge came, so you may be saved in the Day when these things begin to come to
pass. I might tell you, (1.) That you are warned of them for this. (2.) That
you are called to this, to prepare an Ark. (3.) That you have Means and Helps
betrusted with you for this. (4.) That you have your Time for this. (5.) That
you must not tarry long with seen things (6.) That dreadful things will come in
sight, and continue for ever in sight, if you have no Ark, no Provision ready.
(7.) That glorious things will appear at th s Appearing of things not seen as
yet, to them that have made due and seasonable Preparation for them; only let
me give you a word by way of Direction: If you say, but how may we prepare an
Ark to the saving of our selves? How may we provide and get into such readiness
as when unseen things come into sight, we may see God? Why in a word I would
tell you;

1st. Negatively.

1. That seen things will be no Provision for unseen things, will not serve to
meet them with. I pray you take notice of it, they are seen things now that we
spend most of our Time on, that we lay out most of our Care about, that we make
the greatest stir about; yet alas, I tell you, none of them all, neither one,
nor another, will be Provision to meet these unseen things with. Dear Sirs,
when you have done all that ever you can, and laid up the seen things together,
they will all serve for and signify nothing; you cannot, you cannot meet Death
with Houses and Lands, you cannot go to Judgment with Gold and Silver, you
cannot go to Heaven by Master, and Sir, by Titles and Greatness among your
Neighbors: think a little of it, I pray, with your selves when alone, seen
things will be no Provision for unseen, they may be your undoing when you come
to enter on unseen, as they have been to many thousands who are gone before,
but they cannot be any Provision for them: remember this, while you are hurrying
up and down among seen things for seen things, you are wearying your selves for
things that will not profit when unseen things come upon you.

2. Only unseen things are Provision for unseen things: things that will serve
to meet them with, as an Interest in Christ, a new Creature, a pure Heart, a
good Conscience, a Treasure of saving Grace laid in; these are the things that
will be Provision to meet the things not yet seen with. When the Flood came
upon the old World, Houses, and Lands, and Treasures, and Multitudes of
Friends, and all seen things they had about were nothing; many a one then
perished, that had a fine House, a fair Estate, that was living in the midst of
Pomp and Pleasure, and Plenty; and only Noah and his House that had the Ark,
and were got into it, were saved. So, Sirs, when these things begin to come
into sight, all seen things (as I have said) will be nothing; it will be all
one, whether you have Houses or no Houses, Riches or Rags, all will be if you
have the Ark, i. e. if you have Christ, if you be in him; only this, an
Interest in Christ will carry through unseen Death, through unseen Judgment,
and to unseen Glory, to the new Heavens, and the new Earth, to the Throne of
God and of the Lamb, to the Temple of God, to the Crown of Life, the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Inheritance of all things. 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son
has Life, and he that has not the Son has not Life; Life in Death, Life at
Judgment, Life in Glory, and shall live with God for ever. This, this is the
Provision that will not fail. So that if you would be in readiness for this
seeing of unseen things, see that you get into the Ark, I say; that you hang
not about it only by a general Profession, but that you come into it; that you
get a Possession of Christ, a part in Christ, and then you are safe; then, and
never till then you shall be ready. A Man in a Market is then ready to go Home
when he has done all his Business that he came about, when he has bought in
Provision for his House, etc. and so a Person is then ready for this great
opening of unseen things, when all his Time and worldly Businesses are ended,
and his Provision for Eternity are in readiness; and this is when he is got
into the Ark, Christ.

3. We may hence be exhorted, to desire and seek to come to the seeing of these
unseen things. This is the third Word. (1.) Look at; (2.) Prepare for; (3.)
Seek and long to go to the seeing of them. If looking at them was such a
Cordial and Corroboration to the Apostles among their many Pressures: O then
what, what is this seeing, the enjoying of them? It Is said of the Patriarchs,
that they were Strangers and Pilgrims, Heb. 11.13. These all died in Faith, not
having received the Promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded
of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims
on the Earth. Ver. 16. They desired a better Country. Of Abraham, Ver. 10.
it is said, he looked for a City that had Foundations.

Why on this Fashion Christians, (1.) Live as Strangers and Pilgrims on the
Earth. (2.) Seek a City, and look for a better Country. (3.) Desire to go to
see the things that God has prepared.

O methinks this News of unseen things should set afoot great Desires,
Longings, and Breathings in Christians after Heaven, where they are to be seen.
But O the Unbelief and Carnality that lodges in us! if we were told of
wonderful things that were fallen to us in far Countries, (1.) What haste would
we make toward them? (2.) How loath would we be to tarry from them? (3.) How
long should we think it e're we came to them? But alas, the Holy Ghost has
made great Discoveries to us, to us of glorious things within the Vail, of
Crowns, and Kingdoms, and Rest, etc. and yet we, we linger here among unseen
things, make little haste toward unseen things, or think it long that we are
from them. Pray consider, in a word, Christians, that your Desires after this
seeing of unseen things may be warmed and raised, I say, consider these three
things.

1. Who and what is there ( viz. in Heaven) this may quicken you to this
longing for: I may tell you,

(1.) That all your best Friends are there, your Father is there, and your
Christ is there, and your Comforter is there, and your Brethren are there; all
the Sons, and all the Daughters of God, who have been going hence from Adam to
this Day, are gone thither, and are now there. Is it not very desirable to go
to, and to be with them? Where should a Child of God choose or desire to be, if
not there where his Father and all his best Friends are?

(2.) Consider that your best Estate is there; as your best Friends live, so
your best Estate lies there, your Rest, your Inheritance, your Crown, your
Kingdom, your World, and all lies there. It may be, (1.) Here you have no Rest,
and there you shall have no Labor. (2.) Here you have Shame, and there you
shall have a Crown of Glory. (3.) Here you have no Inheritance, not so much as
whereon to set a Foot, or at most but a poor, narrow, and dirty one, full of
Encumbrances; there you have a full and fair Inheritance. (4.) Here you are
pent up in a narrow Compass; there you have a whole Kingdom, a World of your
own to turn you to; where should you desire and choose to be?

(3.) Your everlasting Home is there, your eternal Abode, the Place where you
shall be for ever and ever. Here you are as Strangers in a Foreign Country, as
Travelers in an Inn; there is your Country, there is your Home; how should you
long to be there! This is one.

2. Consider what there is not, what you shall not see there. The Jews that
were left of the Captivity, were set on going into Egypt, because there they
hoped to be exempted from the Dangers and Wants that attended them in their
present Station: Jer. 42.14. We will go into Egypt, where we shall see no War,
nor hear of the sound of the Trumpet, nor have hunger of Bread, and there will
we dwell. O Sirs, how should Saints be set on going for Heaven, where they
shall see no War, nor hunger of Bread! O think of it. (1.) There you shall see
no Lusts to entice; (2.) No Devil to tempt; (3.) No World to seduce; (4.) No
Afflictions to load; (5.) No Labors to weary; (6.) No Cares to perplex; (7.)
No Losses to vex; (8.) No Evils to exercise and disquiet: All these things that
are now seen, shall then be unseen things for ever. Saints now in Heaven are
seeing none of them, shall never see any of them again for ever. Do you now,
Sirs, conflict with all, or most of these, Day after Day? Do you groan and sigh
under, are your Lives embittered by them? Why should you not long then to be at
the unseen things, where these will be unseen for ever?

3. Consider what you shall see there. But how can I tell you this? They are
unseen things that are to be seen there; beyond all that has been seen, and
past all that can be thought by the Sons of Men! Expect not to be told, till
you come to see: Only I may tell you, that when you are come to the seeing
these unseen things; Then,

1. You shall see God; John 1.18. No Man has seen God at any time; the only
begotten Son which is in the Bosom of the Father, he has declared him. A sight
of God is beyond all that is attainable here: But there you shall see him Face
to Face: 1 Cor. 13.12. For now we see through a Glass darkly, but then Face to
Face: Now I know in part, but then shall I know, even as also I am known. Then
(i. e.) in Heaven, 1 John 3.2. But we know that when he shall appear, we shall
be like him; for we shall see him as he is. You shall then see the Divine
Essence, the Trinity of Persons, the great Mystery, God manifest in the Flesh,
the personal Union of the two Natures in the Son of God, the glorious
Attributes of God. 1. His almighty Power. 2. His infinite Wisdom. 3. His
boundless Goodness. 4. His bottomless Mercy. 5. His endless Love, etc. And O
this will be another manner of Sight than any that ever has come in sight!

2. You shall see the Angels, the holy Angels of God; 1. Their infinite Number;
2. Their beautiful Order; 3. Their blessed Work; 4. Their glorious Properties
and Perfections. O what a sight will this be! If when only one Angel appeared
to the Shepherds (in his Night-clothes, as I may say) they were surrounded with
so great Glory, that it is said, Luke 2.9. The Glory of the Lord shone round
about them, that is, a transcendent and surpassing Glory; I say, if the
presence of one Angel was accompanied with so great a Glory, then what will it
be to see the thousand thousands that minister to Christ, and the ten thousand
times ten thousand that fall down before him!

3. You shall see all the Saints of God, all that are gone to God, and are with
God this Day in Glory. If, my Beloved, but one of these were sent from Heaven;
if but Abraham, or Moses, or David, or Peter, or Paul, should come again into
this World, how far would you not go to see this one? When Lazarus was raised
from the Dead, it is said, John 12.9. And they came not for Jesus sake only, but
that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the Dead. The rarity
of the sight, viz. a Man that had been in, that was come out of another World,
brought many from far and near: Why so would you not go a great way to see such
a Man? Why how willing then should you be to go to Heaven, where you shall come
to see, not one but all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors
and Saints out of every Nation under Heaven: Here you shall see Abraham, and
Moses, and David; here Parents shall see their Children again, and Children
their Parents; Husbands shall see their Wives again, and Wives their Husbands;
Pastors shall see their People again, and People their Pastors.

Quos modo miramus Regione videbimus illa,
Et veteres inter fuscipiemus Avos.
Bapt. Mantuanus. And you shall not only see them thus, but see them without
all those Afflictions, Burdens, Blemishes, Corruptions, Imperfections, and
Infirmities that did accompany them in this State, and clothed with glorious
Perfections.

4. You shall see all those great things, which the great God has prepared for
his Saints before the Foundation of the World; the things that are (as before)
set out by the Names and Titles of a better Country, Paradise, a House, a City,
an Inheritance, Crown, Kingdom, and the rest. You shall see all, all these, all
the things wherein the Purposes and Counsels of the Father, the Purchases and
Performances of the Son, the Workings and Operations of the Spirit, meet in
their Perfection, and have their full, perfect, and eternal Accomplishment and
Consummation. O who would not long for such a sight? Who would be unwilling to
go from seeing Sin, and Sorrow, and Want, to see such a sight as this for ever?

5. I might further tell you, that you shall there see a clear and satisfying
Resolution of all hard and doubtful Questions, a full determination of the
voluminous Controversies and Disputations about the great Mysteries of
Election, Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, the Resurrection,
Consummation, Judgment, etc.

6. A plain and full Exposition of all dark and obscure Places in the
Scripture; the true and full meaning of every Text, even those that now the
numerous and voluminous Commentaries of the most learned and eminent Writers of
all Ages, leave us in the dark about. There are (...), things hard to be
understood; and (...), Knots that cannot be untied: But then dark things shall
be perfectly cleared, and doubtful things fully resolved to a plenary
Satisfaction.

This is the third thing, to exhort us to desire and seek to come to the seeing
of these unseen things.

FINIS.

