CONCERNING THE CHURCH: OR, Of the Church State Under the GOSPEL.

Whereby it may appear what a miserable Apostasy from the Truth has overspread
and covered the Earth for many Ages and Generations, and how gross and thick
the darkness yet lies upon it, though the Light of God in his tender Mercy has
broke forth and shined upon the People of his gathering, and through them has
also visited the World.

The guidance of this in my heart, was particularly and chiefly toward the
Papists, but I afterward had a true sense, that it also extended to the state
of such Protestants, as had not waited on the Lord, for him (in his Wisdom and
Power) to rear up his own Building, but had ventured to build of themselves,
and so had reared up Churches in the same spirit of Error, Darkness, and
Apostasy, which they seemed to depart from: against all which the Lord will
fight, and all which he will break down, in the day of the revelation of the
glorious Light and Power of his Truth, which will overcome, subdue and reign
over the Earth, not after the manner of men, but in the heavenly dominion of
his Life.

Written in Alisbury Prison about the middle of the 6th Month, 1666.

By ISAAC PENINGTON.

Whereunto is annexed, Some Observations upon the Eternal Judgment, as it is
expressed by Christ, Mat. 25.31. to the end of the chapter.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1666.

The Preface.
BEcause the corruption of the Christian Doctrine and Worship has been great
(yea indeed very great) since the days of the Apostles; and the Judgments
also are to be very great, because of this Corruption, even dreadful Woes,
Plagues, Cups of Wrath and Thunders unutterable, as is expressed in the Book of
the Revelations. Therefore, that men may avoid the terrible Wrath of God, which
is breaking and to break forth, by discerning and forsaking that, which his
Wrath is against; therefore, I say, in tender bowels was it in my heart to
discover somewhat of that, which the Lord has made manifest to me (among many
others) concerning the creeping in of this corrupt state, and its getting up
after the days of the Apostles, with its continuance to this day; that Men and
Churches may consider their state, see their nakedness, and look after the pure
Garment, that they may be clothed with the Spirit of the Lord, and found in
the righteousness thereof, that so they may stand boldly before him, when the
transgressors and hypocrites (of all sorts) shall have their fig-leaf coverings
ripped off, and lie open to the strokes of his Indignation. And this I say to
all; Take heed of two things, in this Day of the LORD'S Love and Vengeance;
Take heed of retaining or setting up any thing, which the Lord is coming forth
against; and take heed of slighting or appearing against that, which the Lord
is preparing to set up. The appearance of his Spirit, the shining of his Day is
precious, even in the meanest glimmerings of it. O who shall be guiltless
before him, who defends or sets up any thing of man's will or wisdom (his
Sun, Moon and Stars, in all their glory, being to fall and lose their shining)
or who debaseth the lowest appearance of his Seed! And if the Jews suffered so
deeply, for refusing and despising Christ's appearance in flesh, what will
light on those who refuse and despise his appearance in Spirit? I know this,
that Christians now overlook and slight this, as the Jews did that, and by the
same snare, even by a prejudice they have drunk in, that this is contrary to
the Scriptures, as the Jews then did conclude, that that coming of Christ then
was not agreeable to, but different from what the Scriptures had said
concerning his coming. But what said Christ then? Wisdom is justified of her
Children. They, who then were of the Spirit, and in the Spirit, knew the voice
of the Bridegroom then. And such also know it now, and rejoice in it; though
the wise in another wisdom (according to the Scriptures, as they think) refuse
and disdain it; and not knowing the Righteousness of Christ in Spirit, set up a
Righteousness of their own in flesh: for their believing (and applying to
themselves the Righteousness of Christ) out of the true limits of Life,
according to their own apprehension of things, is no other. And this must fall.
Man's knowledge of Scriptures, the faith of man, through his own apprehensions,
must fall; and man appear naked underneath; that the glorious Righteousness of
Christ in Spirit, and the precious covering thereof may be magnified over all.
And in this Light of Life, and newness of Nature in Christ, runs the Blood
which cleanses, and not elsewhere. It runs not according to men's notions, but in
its own life, virtue and power in the heart: where (where it is livingly felt)
the iniquity is washed away, the sin is gone, the everlasting Righteousness
appears, yea the Water-springs, which washes and keeps clean continually.
Away with your Notions and empty husks, O several sorts of Professors, come to
the thing it self, or rather wait on the Lord to be led to it, that ye may
Seed, the Seed, the pure Seed, the living Seed, the Holy One of God, and may
know its planting and growth in you, and your uncloathing and emptying of all
else, that ye may be clothed upon and filled with it. And in the sense of it,
and unity with it, ye will own and love what comes from it, and rejoice in all
the springings of its Light, either within or without.

Of the Church State under the Gospel.
THe Jews Church State under the Law was precious, who (walking with God,
according to the Covenant of the Law) were an holy People, nigh and dear unto
God above all other People. But they provoked him so continually and
grievously, that (instead of blessings) they drew plagues upon themselves, and
were at last by his righteous Judgments made desolate, and cut off from being
any longer his select Nation and People.

The Church State of the Christians under the Gospel, is much more precious and
glorious, they being gathered into the substance of that, whereof the Jews
State had but the shadow. The Presence of God, the manifestation of his Life
and Power is more inward and bright among them; their union with him more
close, their communion and joy more fell, he tabernacling among them, dwelling
and walking with them, and advancing them into the state of sons and daughters,
whereas the Law-state was but a state of servitude. And their standing also is
more firm; the Covenant wherein they stand, being more able to hold them
together with God than the other was. The standing of the other was by the
works of the Law, which they were to observe and live. The standing of these is
in the Faith, which is from the Power, which works their works in them and
for them.

Yet, as they are gathered in the Faith: so their standing is in the Faith; and
out of it they cannot be preserved. So that (before they are established) there
is a possibility of their fall from the Faith, wherein their standing is, and
from the Power which preserves. And if they so fall, they are liable to be cut
off, as the Jews were, as their Apostle tells them, Romans 11.20, 21, 22. In the
fear, in the humility before the Lord, in keeping to the Faith their safety is:
but if they become high-minded, because of their State and Church Priviledges;
if they think their standing so sure, as that they are out of the danger of
falling: then they are out of the fear, out of the humility, out of the Faith
which preserves; and being out of the Preservation, they must needs fall, and
so continuing must needs be cut off.

Now the same Apostle does not only warn them to take heed of falling from the
Faith, but afterward expressly foretells of a falling away, even that there must
come such a thing among them also; yea, and of such a falling away from the
Truth and Power of Life, as should give Antichrist advantage to get into God's
Temple, and sit there as God, taking upon him the power and authority, as if he
had the true Power and Authority of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 3, 4. And what does
he then? does he not corrupt all? even as God's Power and Presence purifies and
preserves all. And as he shows himself as God: so does he not also show forth
his Church, as God's Church? Yes, it goes so in the World, as God's. All that
drink of his Spouses Cup take it to be so, who are very many and great ones,
even Kings and Inhabiters of the Earth, Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and
Tongues ( Rev. 17.2, 15. and chap. 18.3.) and none are able to discern that it
is not so, but those that are anointed with the true eye salve, which gives to
see through his deceits, 1 John 2.20. For he comes with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness (2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10.) he makes the Church (after he has got
possession of it and made it his, sitting as God in it) appear as like the true
Church as possibly he can, that he may hold up his mystery of deceit in the
World, which if once discerned, would soon fall and come to nothing; 2 Thessalonians.
2.7. Rev. 17.5.

To open these things a little more fully and further from the Scriptures, that
they who yet cannot read otherwise, may read them there, and come in some
measure to the acknowledgment of the Truth, and wait for the Power from on
high, from whence is the true Faith (wherein is the true Church, and its
standing) for want of which the World is become a Wilderness; full indeed of
Profession, but very empty of the nature and life of Christianity.

Christ tells his Disciples, that false Christ's and false Prophets should come
and deceive many; yea that they should prevail so far, as if it were possible,
to deceive the very Elect, Mat. 7.15 and chapter 24.11, 24. The Lord God had sent
forth his truth, and now after it he suffers to go forth a power of Deceit, a
mighty power, even having all manner of Deceivableness of unrighteousness in it,
2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11. And it works according to its power, it gathers all its
own every where. Not one, but he that is of the Elect Seed can stand before it.
Now the reason, why God suffered this to go forth, was in Judgment. Men had
dallied with the Truth, had took up a Form of Godliness, and rejected the
Power: therefore God withdraws from the Form, and suffers the unclean spirit to
enter it, and the uncircumcised nature of man to shelter it self there. It
arose also from the Devil's subtilty, who finding himself dispossessing of his
Kingdom, played this Masterpiece (both to save what he could at present, and to
recover the rest again in process of time) He (in his Apostles and Ministers)
takes upon him the profession of Christianity, sending them forth as the
Ministers of Righteousness, (2 Cor. 11.13, 15.) but for all that, they were
still of the worldly nature, of the worldly root, spirit and principle: And so
by them, he brings forth Christianity, (or the profession and observation of
the Christian Religion) in such a way, as would please the worldly mind and
nature: And bringing it forth so, he gathers to him all, that were not gathered
and preserved by the Power, and so becomes the greater Body and Church in view,
and the rest (as to the outwardness of their Church State) are fain to give
way, and retire into the Power, cut of their former place and station in the
world, Rev. 12.

Now as Christ had said, that false Christ's and false Prophets should come: so
John said they were come, 1 John 2.18. and also showed from whence they come,
They went out from us, ver. 19. They were such as came into the Form among us,
but were not begotten of the Life, nor subject to the Power with us. And there
were many of them, chap. 4.1. and such they were as had a great power of
Deceit, and came therewith to seduce them, 1 John 2.26. Therefore he bids them
(in the Unction which they had received, v. 27. which searches and discerns
all) try the spirits. If their spirit (or the spirit that is in them) confess
Christ (who is the power of the endless life, the sum, substance and end of all
that which shadowed-forth life) they are of God, chap. 4.2. But if their spirit
confess not Christ come in the flesh, though they may seem never so much to
preach him, they are not of God, v. 3. Now whose spirit confesses Christ?
Surely his only that is subject to him. He that preaches Christ in words, and
denies him in works, (whose works are not wrought in Christ, nor brought forth
by Christ) his confession is but outward, but formal; it is no true confession.
It is but the confession of his mouth, not of his spirit: and he is, in the
sight of God, not a confessor, but a denier of him. And who so is enabled by
God to try spirits (and waits in his Light and Anointing to try such) finds
him to be so, notwithstanding all his fair words and speeches of Christ, and
his pretending to be his Minister, Rev. 2.2. For men with fine words and fair
speeches may deceive the hearts of the simple: but they cannot deceive those,
to whom God gives ability to try spirits. Could the Devil deceive Christ, when
he said, Thou art the Son of God? No, Christ knew his spirit to be against him,
notwithstanding those words. And can the ministers of Antichrist deceive the
Elect of God, when they preach up Christ (in words) to be the Savior and
Redeemer, and yet own not that Life and Power which saves, but persecute it
wherever they find it? No, The same Spirit of Christ in them discerns quite
through their words, to their spirit. My Sheep, says Christ, hear my voice,
Joh. 10.27. Man may be deceived and caught in the snare: but the Elect, the
Sheep know the voice of the Shepherd from the voice of the Stranger. If the
Stranger say, Christ is the Son of God: though he believes and owns the thing,
yet they receive it not from his mouth. Well; whence are these false Prophets
and false Christ's? They are of the World. That Is their root. Thence they come.
They are of the worldly spirit, the worldly wisdom, the worldly nature, only
clothed outwardly with a profession and show of the Doctrine and Practices of
Christ and his Apostles. And what do they do? They preach worldly things. They
suit their doctrine to the worldly nature, principle and spirit. And what is
their success? The World hears them, 1 John 4.5. The earthly wisdom in man
falls in with them, judges them to be right, owns them, sets up their way of
Christianity and Worship in the World: and thus the World become Christians.
Those which came in the Name of Christ, the World could not receive. ( He that
knows God, hears us; not the World, 1 John 4.6.) There were but a few (in
comparison) gathered here and there then: a few in one place, a few in another.
The Doctrine that comes forth in the Power, scatters the worldly part. Man's
wisdom, man's nature cannot receive it, in the Love and Life of it. But when
these false Christ's and false Prophets come, the World can turn Christians;
then a whole City, or a whole Nation can presently become a Church. Why so?
These come in that, which the World can receive, which their wisdom can answer,
fall in with, and subject to. These can bring forth a Cross, which the World
can like, fall down and worship; but the Cross of Christ they cannot: for that
crucifies and slayes the worldly nature, wherever it is felt, taken up, and
subjected to. The way of Life is strait and narrow, and few there be that can
walk therein: but a broader way more may walk in. The true Church is not easily
found or entered into; but the false is wider and far larger, yea, desirable to
the flesh. The true Church is circumspect, will admit none but in the way of
God's Wisdom and Power; but the false Church prostitutes and thrusts her self
upon all. She meets men in the streets and forces them into her bed; whereas
the voice of the true Church is, Wait for the preparation, for the being
changed by that which gives entrance into the Truth: for the Builder of the
Church is God, Heb. 3.4. (he builds this House by Christ, ver. 6. as by Moses
he built the House under the Law) and he is the adder to the Building, Act.
2.47.

So Paul also, writing to Timothy, tells him of perilous times in the last
days, 2 Timothy 3.1. For when the last days come, and the Antichrists and false
Prophets appear, then men are in great danger of being deceived, and of making
shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience. Then he that is not in the Truth, but
only in the form and outward appearance, will be swallowed up by the deceit,
and take up his dwelling in the Form with out the Power: for so says the
Apostle concerning them, v. 5. they have a Form of Godliness, but deny the
Power of it. And all manner of Wickedness will shelter it self under this Form.
Self-love, Covetousness, Boastings, Pride, Blasphemy, Disobedience to Parents,
Unthankfulness, Unholiness, etc. ver. 2, 3, 4. and indeed what not? For what is
so evil, which cannot shelter it self under that Form of Religion and
Profession, where there is not the true Power and Life of Religion to resist
and subdue it?

Now mark; When these Antichrists and false Prophets had got up into a body and
strength, gaining Authority and Credit in the World; what did they then do, but
endeavor wholly to crush and suppress the Truth, with those that abode still
in it? Then the Dragon, with his Angels, fights with Michael and his Angels.
They had still been fighting with the Apostles and Ministers of Christ,
endeavoring to disparage them, and eat out their esteem in the Churches (as 2
Cor. 11.) but they could not prevail; Satan, in all his enterprises, fell down
like Lightning, before the Glory and Power of Christ in his Apostles and
Ministers. But when the Apostasy increased, and the Churches provoked their
Preserver, growing cold in Love, and faint in Faith (being lifted up with their
Gifts, thinking highly of themselves, and their standing to be firm) and many
received not the love of the Truth, but only a profession of it for by-ends,
etc. Then the Lord began to threaten some with the removal of their
Candlestick, and did afterward proceed in Judgment, even to let the false
Prophets and Antichrists prevail, and strong Delusions enter, that they who had
dallied with the Truth, might be frustrated of the Salvation they expected by
it, meeting with a Lie (which destroys) in the stead of it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10,
11, 12. And so God, who before built up, in his jealousy and indignation
afterward threw down (men abiding not in the Faith, nor in the Power, but in
the Form and outward Profession, which, separated from the Power, the Lord
abhors.) What he loved, he secured for himself, (his holy Temple, his holy
Altar, his spiritual Worshippers:) and what he regarded not (which was the Form
and outward Ordinances, now polluted) he gave to the heathenishly-professing
spirit; and there they worship, and magnify their own state, prizing it by its
outward glory and appearance, and not by a right sense and knowledge of it in
the Truth. Read these things outwardly, in the letter (or rather wait upon God
that ye may read them, who caused them to be writ to that end, for to be read
and understood) Rev. 12. and chap. 11. 1, 2. where the battle of the Dragon is
related, and God's taking down his Building, and disposing of it according to
his pleasure.

Again, mark. Antichrist gets into the Temple (upon the falling away) sits
there as God, ruling, giving Laws, and exacting Obedience in the Name of God.
But when was this to be? In the last times, 1 Timothy 4.1. (which would be very
perilous, through the power of wickedness and deceit, then getting up.) When
did those times begin? They began in the Apostles days. The Mystery of
Iniquity was then at work, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. Yea, says John, it is the last time;
by the coming of the Antichrists and Deceivers we know it to be so, 1 John
2.18. Christ said, They should come; John said, they are come; Paul saw them
then at work in the mysterious Power of Darkness. But they could not carry
their work through; the Spirit and Power of Christ in his Apostles stood so
much in their way: but after they were removed out of the way, Antichrist got
up his Mystery of Deceit apace. Well, how long does he reign? Even till the
very coming of Christ in his Spirit and Power; yea, there is some remainder of
him, till the very brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. This Mystery of
Iniquity has power and authority over all the wisdom of man: but the
appearance of Christ, in the Spirits of his People, has power over it, and
tormenteth it, by opening its nakedness and causing its darkness to appear; and
the brightness of his coming shall quite dissolve and scatter it: For it is but
a mist of darkness, it has no being in the Truth, nor can it stand before the
Truth. So Babylon is found standing at the very last; just before the breaking
forth and coming down of the new Jerusalem and the Marriage of the Lamb with
his Bride, Rev. 19.6, 7. What is Babylon? A Mystery of Iniquity in a Form of
Godliness. A Profession, a People, a Religion, that seem to set up Christ; but
set up another nature, spirit and power in his stead. A Church that is not of
God, not formed in his Divine Wisdom, not brought forth in his Light and Power,
and in the season of his Will; but of man, and by man, that can go no further
in Religion than the number of a man. Sion, under the Gospel, is not literal,
but mystical: and so is Babylon also, who is the mother of Fornications, who
teaches her daughters to adulterate from the Life and from the Power, who
never knew the Marriage of the Lamb in his Spirit, nor his pure Bed of Life,
but enter into the chambers and bed of a strange spirit.

Qu. But what is the state of the Church all this while, from this hour of
corruption, till the coming of Christ in his Spirit and Power?

Answ. A state of desolation, a state of widowhood, a wilderness-state, where
her living body is not discerned by the vultrous eye; but her children,
whenever they appear witnessing for her, are persecuted, hunted, afflicted, and
sometimes slain. This bloody Church, which comes from the red Dragon, and rules
in his spirit and nature, drinks the blood of the Lambs and Martyrs of JESUS,
who in their several Ages are his faithful Witnesses, and love not their lives
unto the death. And here the Truth, and that which has appeared of the true
Church in the world, for Ages and Generations (ever since this might of the
Dragon's and Antichrists darkness, and his sitting in the Temple under an
appearance of light) has only been to be found, even among the Persecuted
Ones, who have been dear to God, of whom the Professing World has not been
worthy, no not at all, of that heavenly life, spirit and power, which dwelt in
them, and through which they have been able to testify for the Truth, and bear
up their heads against the malice and persecutions of their enemies, Rev.
12.11, 17, etc. and chap. 11.3, 7. chap. 13.15, 16, 17. chap. 14.12. chap. 17.6.

Now, for a close, There are a few Questions in my heart, briefly to propound
and answer, which it may please God to reach forth to his Witness in such, who
in distrust of themselves and their own wisdom, shall wait upon him for
understanding. The Questions are these. First, what a true Church is? 2dly, How
a True Church may be known? 3. How a True Church may continue so? 4. How a
Church may lose its state and being? 5. When a Church has lost its state and
being?

Quest. 1. What a true Church is?

Answ. A true Church is a truly Spiritual Body, gathered out of the World, or
worldly nature and spirit, into God's Spirit and Nature, there to live and walk
with him, and worship him in Spirit and Truth, and for him to tabernacle in and
walk among, and fill with his glorious Presence and powerful Life, Ephesians. 2.21,
22. 1 Pet. 2.5. Joh. 4.23. 2 Cor. 6.16. It is not the Profession of the Truth,
makes a true Believer; nor is it a company of Professors makes a true Church:
but their proceeding from, and union with the Truth it self, and their abiding
in the Life and Power of that which they profess; Ephesians. 4.16.

Quest. 2. How a true Church may be known?

Answ. There must be somewhat in man to know them, and somewhat in them to be
known by. That in man which knows them, must be somewhat of God in him: for
that which is of man cannot measure or judge of the things of God. As the
worldly wisdom and spirit could not know Christ formerly: so neither now can it
know his Church. Many may appear to be Churches of Christ, and yet not be so:
and that which is so, may not appear so. In this case, who shall distinguish?
Not he that judges according to the appearance, but he that judges the
Righteous Judgment. Therefore it is not for every man to take upon him to
judge, which is the true Church: but first to wait upon God to be led into
that, and in some measure born of that, which gives ability to judge. Wisdom
is justified of her Children: but of others she is condemned for foolishness,
and the foolishness justified in her stead.

And there is also somewhat for the Church to be known by, which is that which
distinguishes her from all other Assemblies and Gatherings, which is the
nature, life and presence of the Head with her and in her. This none has, but
the true Church, the gathered Body, the separate Body of the Lamb, which is of
his flesh and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.29, 30. Her Husband is with her, his life is
in her: for she is a living body, or gathering of living stones. So that find
the true life of the Lamb any where, there is somewhat of his Church: find a
gathering in his Life, Name and Power, there is his Church, and he also: for
where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of
them, Mat. 18.20.

Quest. 3. How a true Church may continue so?

Answ. By abiding in the Spirit, Life, and Power, that gathered and built them
up into a Church. This first gave them their being; and this still preserves
them in their being: (if they abide till they be perfected and established) but
falling or being cut off from this, they wither, die, and come to nothing. Even
as a Disciple, departing out of the Vine, making shipwreck of the Faith, loses
that which made him a Disciple or Christian, John 15.6. So a Church, departing
from the Spirit and Life of what they profess, languish by degrees, even till
their life be wholly extinct, and they wholly lose that state and being which
they had by their gathering. Thus the Churches in Asia, beginning to corrupt,
grew formal, lukewarm, dead, etc. were warned to repent and strenthen that
which remained, lest they were spued out, the Candlestick removed, etc. Rev. 2d
and 3d chapters.

Quest. 4. How may a Church lose its state and being?

Answ. Several ways; as first, By departing from the Truth and Simplicity of
the Gospel, letting in Doctrines, Principles, Observations, Customs and
Practices, which are not of the pure Spirit, nor in the unity of it, but from
the corrupt spirit, and which corrupt the minds of them that are entangled in
them. Corrupt doctrines, corrupt principles, corrupt practices, etc. they all
have of the nature and poison of death in them; and as they prevail, they bring
death upon (and engage God against) that Person or Church where they get
dominion. See what danger one corrupt doctrine of the Nicholaitans brought the
Church of Pergamus unto, even of God's coming forth with his sword and fighting
against her, Rev. 2.16. And if God, who is the Defender of his Church, Himself
fight against her, how shall she stand?

2. By negligence and sluggishness in the Truth: by this means also life may
languish and extinguish by degrees, even till death come wholly over and
swallow it up, Rev. 3.1, 2, 3. If the first Love do but abate and wax cold,
Iniquity will be abounding, Mat. 24.12. and the Church will be in danger of
losing its Candlestick, Revel. 2.4, 5.

3. By God's withdrawing his Presence and Power, (for these or such causes
abovesaid) which nourishes and preserves. For the life of a Church (as well
as of a Disciple) is fed and nourished from the Fountain or Vine; and if it
miss of the nourishment, its life cannot long continue. The Jews may keep up
their Sacrifices, and reading of the Law: but yet they are a dead people to
God, after their cutting off from the Olive Tree. And the Gentiles may worship
in the outward Court, and keep up the outward Ordinances, after God's rejecting
and cutting them off also, and be as dead to God therein, as the Jews in
theirs, Rev. 11.1, 2. and Romans 11.21, 22.

4. By their listening and yielding to the power of the Enemy, who quickly
deceives, (with his Lies, instead of the Truth) destroys, and lays waste
such buildings, where God in his just Judgment lets him forth upon them.
For the Gates of Hell will prevail against that building, which the Arm of
Christ is not stretched forth (or cease) to defend. And as the defense of
every particular Building upon the Rock, is in its abiding there, and
subjecting to the Head; so the defense of larger Gatherings, or Churches, is no
otherwise. As their union and gathering is; so is their standing, to wit, in
believing and giving up to their Leader, harkening to his voice, and obeying
him only. But if they hearken to a Stranger, if they hear another voice than
his; if they follow another spirit, letting in his lies and deceit; they cannot
keep their standing in the Truth, but in so doing depart from it, and lose the
promise and protection of it. For, as before, by God's gathering them from the
spirit of darkness, they became His, and met with his Power, Presence and
Blessing: so afterward, being again (by any subtilty of deceit) gathered from
the Truth it self, into some likeness and appearance of it, which the Enemy
has formed, they become the Enemies Synagogue, not God's Church, into which he
enters again, and dwells there, in that likeness and appearance. And this
House, which was once cleansed, swept and garnished by God, being again
recovered and repossessed by the Enemy, becomes worse and more filthy in the
nature of wickedness, than it was before. What is more pure, glorious and
excellent, than a true Church of God, which is sanctified by his Spirit, and
holds forth the virtues and pure nature of his Life in the world? what is more
filthy and abominable, and where does Satan more strongly dwell and act, than
in that which pretends to be a Church and is not? The Promises of God are only
to the Seed absolutely; but not so to any man or society of men, but as (in the
tender mercy of the Lord) they are gathered into, and preserved in the Seed, in
the way that the Lord has chosen and appointed. For the way of Life is
glorious and perfect, and the Lord will honor it; so that those that expect to
reap Salvation from Him, must walk and abide with Him therein: for besides Him
there is no Savior; and besides his Way, there is no way of Salvation, either
for any man or Church.

Quest. 5. When has a Church lost its state and being?

Answ. When its nature is changed, when it is overcome by and gathered into
another power and spirit, than it was first gathered into by the Lord; when its
standing is not in the Spirit, nor after the Spirit, but in the flesh and after
the flesh; when its ways are carnal, its weapons carnal; when its hedge or
wall is broken down, and the spirit of the world not kept out, but entered into
it and become one with it. Then it is no longer of God, and separate from the
world, but one in nature, state and being with the world. Rev. 2.9.

These things are written in the love and good will of God, that men may see
that spirit, which has bewitched and entangled them from him, with the ways
and false appearances wherein it has entangled them, and may wait on the Lord
(in truth of heart) for his Light, Guidance and Power to deliver them; that so
they may come into his Holy Land, and within the limits of his Holy City, out
of all polluted Lands and Buildings (where his Holy Nature dwells not, and
the Pure Dominion of his Holy Life and Power is not felt) that they may sing
Praise to Him among his Redeemed Ones, for his precious Redemption; who is
breaking the bonds of Captivity, and redeeming His out of all Lands and
Countries, wherein they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day, Glory
in the Highest to his Name for evermore.

Some Queries to the Professors of Christianity, to provoke them to jealousy
for their good.
Qu. 1. Have ye eat of the Bread and drank of the Wine in the Father's Kingdom,
which they that have received the Kingdom, and are in the Kingdom, eat and
drink of?

Qu. 2. Have ye known the heavenly Jerusalem, and are ye come to it, as the
Christians were in the Apostles days? Hebr. 12.22.

Qu. 3. Are ye in Him that is true, and your Churches and Gatherings in God,
and in the Name of his Son? Is your being and dwelling in the Eternal Life?

Qu. 4. Have ye received the Promise of the Father, even the excellent Spirit
of the Son?

Qu. 5. Have ye the true Faith? Do the living Waters spring out of your bowels,
according as the Scriptures have said? He that believes on me, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water, Joh. 7.38. and chapter 4.14.

Qu. 6. Does God tabernacle in you? is his dwelling among you? does he walk up
and down in your spirits, and sup with you, and you with him?

Qu. 7. Are ye in the New Covenant; taught of God so, as ye need no man to
teach you? and your sins so blotted out (according to the Covenant) as to
hinder no good things from you?

These things were spoken of in the Law and Prophets, to be fulfilled,
witnessed and enjoyed under the Power and Life of the Gospel; which is not a
state of the names and foretellings of things, as under the Law, but of the
presence and enjoyment of the things themselves: and so far as ye fall short of
them, ye fall short of the state of Christianity.

THE END.
SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE Eternal Judgment, As it is expressed by CHRIST,
Matthew. 25.31. to the end of the Chapter.
Observe 1.

THe condition of Christ here in this world, in many of his Members, in their
several Ages and Generations. He is hungry, thirsty, a stranger, naked, sick
and in prison: yea indeed, what is there of misery, shame and reproach, which
he is not exposed to, or which they are not exposed to, who entertain Him as
their Lord and King, and are faithful in their obedience and subjection to him?
ver. 35, 36, and 43.

Observe. 2.

The notice Christ takes of what is done in this kind, or not done in this
kind, to any of his suffering Members, which extends to all, even the very
least. Insomuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these, ye have done
it unto me, ver. 40. Insomuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye
did it not to me, ver. 45.

Obser. 3.

The honorable esteem Christ has of his poor suffering Members, with what eye
of contempt soever the World looks upon them, yet he looks upon them as his
Brethren, ver. 40.

Observe. 4.

The different carriages of persons toward Christ, in this his low condition
in his Members. Some gave him meat, some gave him drink, some took him in, some
clothed him, some visited and came unto him; ver. 35, 36. Others did none of
these things unto him, ver. 43.

Observe. 5.

The different Judgment Christ passes upon these, according to their different
carriages. The one he pronounces blessed of his Father, judging them to the
inheritance of a Kingdom of Eternal Life, ver. 34, and 46. The other he
pronounces Cursed, and adjudgeth to Everlasting Punishment in the fire of his
Wrath, ver. 41 and 46.

Observe. 6.

The ground or reason why those, who did not minister to him, neglected him,
which was their ignorance of him. They saw indeed, and knew several persons to
be in such kind of conditions, but they did not know that it was Christ which
suffered in them: This is implied in their Answer to him, ver. 44. When saw we
thee an hungry, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and
did not minister unto thee? v. 45.

Obser. 7.

That it will not excuse men from the Judgment, their not knowing of Christ in
his Members: but if they neglect and have not done this thing (though they may
plead never so strongly that they did not know any such) they will in our and
must suffer the Judgment. The Jews cried up Moses and the Prophets, which had
been before, and yet persecuted Christ and his Apostles: And many now cry up
the Prophets, and Christ's appearance in a body of flesh (with his Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, etc.) and also the Apostles, both their words and
practices; and yet persecute him (and the same practices) in his present
Servants and Members. How will these (...)

Object.

But th e that did minister unto him, they knew not that it was he neither, as
ver. 37, 38, 39. Therefore they doing of it ignorantly (as we may say) it
seems to want its due weight, and not to render them so worthy of the reward,
as if they had done it in a clear and distinct understanding.

Answer.

They did not know it so, as to put so great a value upon it, as Christ here
does: but they knew that they had done things of this kind, and that they had
done them on Christ's account. But that Christ was so in those to whom they did
them, as he now speaks; and that he would set so high an esteem of it, that
they were not aware of. Was it thou thy self that wast naked, sick, in prison,
etc.? and did thou take all this as done to thee? This is wonderful to us,
that thou should so set by what we poor worms did to thy suffering Saints, in
thy Name and Fear.

Quest.

But why does Christ make this the ground of the General and Universal
Judgment? Men have committed many other sins (some of which are in appearance
far greater:) why does Christ mention none of them, but fix the Judgment only
upon this?

Answ.

Surely because this is more in his eye, and more hateful to him than them all.
This argues an evil nature and spirit, and the joining of the mind to the
wicked one, more than them all. For it plainly shows, that there is none of the
Love and Nature of Christ in such persons: for if there be of the Love and
Nature of Christ in any person, it will incline his heart toward those which
are Christ's, and especially in their suffering conditions. He therefore that
has no sense of those that belong to Christ, in their suffering conditions,
shows plainly, that he has none of Christ's Nature in him, and so is not at
all found in that which Christ comes to save, but in that which he comes to
judge and destroy for ever.

Now I have three Questions more to propose, which I desire that all men that
read, may judge of it in that, which gives the true sense and judgment of
their weight.

1. If this be the cause and ground of the Eternal Judgment, whether it may
not also be the ground of Temporal Judgments on Person; and Nations, to wit, if
there be such a thing to be found in them, as neglecting to minister to Christ
in his suffering Members?

2. If there be not only this to be found, but also a causing of him in his
Members thus to suffer (a causing of their hunger, thurst, nakedness, sickness,
imprisonment, etc.) whether this is not of very great force to draw down
Plagues, Judgments and Miseries upon a Nation?

3. If there have been such sins committed, God's Anger provoked, and his
Judgments drawn down, whether it be possible to stop them, or there can be any
reasonable hope of the diverting of them, without a deep humbling before God,
confessing the thing in the sight of the World (as it has been done in the
sight of the World) and laying such a foundation for the future, as the Lord
and men may be satisfied and assured, that no such thing shall be done any
more? Was it not a shameful thing, that Jerusalem the outwardly holy City (and
chief, if not only professing ^oop^e of the world) should stone, cast out,
persecute, put to death, etc. the Prophets and Christ of God, and set up
Priests and Prophets of their own? And where and by whom are the Witnesses and
Martyrs hunted and slain? Is is not still in that which is called the Christian
World? do not they strive (each sort) for their Forms, persecuting the Life and
Power, and those which follow the Lamb therein, out of their Forms, from which
his Life and Spirit calls and gathers? O that the World were awaked, O that
this Nation were awakened! Have there not been Judgments enough to awaken it! O
do not dally: ye have God to deal with, who has brought his Truth and People
upon the Stage; who is arisen against the Darkness (which has long possessed
the he^^^s of (...) and held his People in captivity under their corrupt wills
and wisdom) and to bind down sin and iniquity in men. O do not say, Let us
break their bonds in sunder, and cast away their cords from us; but rather let
every one be willing to be bound by the pure Light of God, by that which is
holy of God in him (from the King that sits upon the Throne, even to the very
Beggar on the dunghill) that iniquity may be purged out of the hearts of men,
and they become, not a vainly-professing Nation, but indeed an Holy Nation to
the Lord; that Peace and Righteousness, Love and Mercy, yea sweet and tender
Bowels may dwell within it, and flow up and down in all its borders; to the
glory of God's Truth, which is able to work this (were it but let in, received
and subjected to in the minds of men) and to the delight and joy of the hearts
of all in the Nation.

Writt^^ (...) 29th (...) By Isaac Penington


