Keith against Keith; OR SOME MORE OF George Keith's Contradictions and
Absurdities, Collected out of his own Books (not yet Retracted) upon a Review.

TOGETHER WITH A REPLY TO George Keith's Late Book, Entitled, The Antichrists
and Sadduces detected among a sort of Quakers, etc.

By JOHN PENINGTON.

A Double-minded Man is unstable in all his Ways,

James 1. 8. They that observe lying Vanities, forsake their own Mercy,

Jonah 2. 8. LONDON: Printed, and Sold by T. Soul near the Meeting House in
White-Hart Court in Gracious-Street, 1696.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 7. f. as r. or, p. 14. l. 27. r. Evangeli^^^, p. 21. l. 30. f.
the r. that, p. 22. l. 32. r. those, p. 24. l. 28. r. Propose, p. 28. l. 27. f.
teaches r. treats, p. 29. l. 18. f. the r. that, l. 25. r. never, l. 29. r.
p, 70. p. 31. l. 30. r. and honest, p. 32. l. 17. r. outwardly, p. 33. l. 1. r.
promise, p. 34. l. 1. f. they r. that, p. 40. l. 4. after that del^ which, p.
41. l. 15. f. and r. to, l. 29. f. outward r. outer, p. 59. l. 21. r. hearers
in, in order, p. 61. l. 2. f. as r. or, p. 64. l. 7. r. Penington's l. 17. f,
where r. whence, p. 65. l. 21. f. on r. in, p. 66. l. 24. f. these r. those, p.
77. l. 13. r. Rector's, p. 80. l. 14. r. believed. l. 20. f. on r. in, p. 81.
l. 3. r. who, and goes on, p. 89. l. 3. r. hold, p. 101. l. 4. f. 127. r. 117.
p. 106. l. 1. r. as well as, p. 112. l. 27. f. would r. could p. 120. l. 27. r.
asks if that, p, 123. l. 10. f. the r. ^ at, p. 131. l. 31. r, charge, p.
139. l. 24. r. this which he calls, p. 145. l. 4. f. an r. and, l. 9. r.
Popery, p. 146. l. 22. for ad hucr. adhuc. l. 33. r. vorten,

KEITH against KEITH: OR Some more of George Keith's Contradictions and
Absurdities.
ALthough G. Keith blame us (in his Advertisement, p. 3.) for heaping Book upon
Book against him (to which himself gave the Provocation) alleging want of Time
and Ability of outward Estate (of whose Sincerity therein, the Reader may judge
by his cutting out new Work of late in his twelve Penny Narrative) yet he
continuing to abuse us in Print, it is fit we should there also vindicate our
Holy Profession from his unjust Defamations. And having to do with an unstable
Adversary, I had collected and digested a List of some more of his
Contradictions and Absurdities, upon a review, which I now make introductory to
the Reply; wherein if I exceed my wonted Brevity, know the variety of Subjects
occasioned it: These I shall divide into two Heads, making his own Assertion in
Way to City of God, Printed, Anno 1678. The Title of the First, his Absurdities
and Contradictions, promiscuously Collected out of his Book, called, Truth
Advanced, Printed, Anno 1694. the Second: And then enter upon defending my Self
and Friends from his late false Charges in his late Book, styled, The
Antichrists and Sadduces detected among a sort of Quakers, etc.

1. That through the coming of Jesus Christ in the inward, even before he was
unwardly come as manifest, many were saved, and attained unto perfect Peace and
Reconciliation with God in their Souls. (Way to City of God, p. 125.)
And the Method I shall take here, shall be first to set down what I find in
his later Books, and then confront him out of his former; and that the rather,
for that in his Serious Appeal, (Printed, Anno 1692.) p. 21. he says, Let but
the Reader see my own Words in my Printed Books, and well consider them, and if
he have but a little sound Judgment, he will easily find, I have not
contradicted my self in ANY THING. Upon this Issue, I am willing to leave it
with the Considerate and Judicious (though perhaps G. Keith will allow none to
be such, but who say as he says) and begin with the Christian Faith, etc.
Vindicated, etc. (Printed, Anno 1692.) where he with others thus deliver
themselves.

Though we do affirm, that all conscientious and honest Gentiles, such as
Cornelius was before the Faith of Christ was preached to him, have some measure
of Light from Christ, to enlighten them, and are under some Administration of
the Spirit, yet it is but the first Ministration, until the Knowledge and Faith
of Christ, as he died for our Sins, and rose again, etc. be spiritually
received. And such, who have the true and saving Knowledge and Faith of Christ,
as he dyed and rose again without them -- are ONLY Christians, and Sons of God,
of the free Woman, having receiving the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry
Abba, Father: But who have not this Faith of Christ, crucified and raised again
outwardly, spiritually received and wrought in them, by the Spirit of Christ;
Whether they have, or have not heard Christ outwardly Preached unto them, are
at BEST (however Just and Conscientious to the just Principle of God in them)
not under the second, and more peculiar Ministration of God's Spirit, that
makes Men worthy to be esteemed Christians, but are only under the first; and
such are held under the Custody or Safeguard of the Law, shut up unto the Faith
that is afterward to be revealed, as Paul declared, Gal. 3. 23. And the State,
they are in, under this first Ministration, is to them, as the City of Refuge
was to the Man slayer under the Law, Christian Faith, p. 6, 7. This Notion of
the City of Refuge, etc. I having met with in other Books of his, and touched
upon in mine, Entitled, People called Quakers cleared, etc. as smelling of the
Doctrine of the Revolution of humane Souls (though G. Keith does not care to
hear of it) and contrary to the Scriptures, particularly Eccles. 11. 3. and
Heb. 9. 27. I refer to what has been said there, p. 33. and go on.

In his Book (without date) called, Truth and Innocence Defended, he says,
None are justified by Christ, but through Faith in him, as he dyed for them and
rose again, etc. For he that believes not, is condemned already, and therefore
the Ministration of the Law, whether outwardly writ on Tables of Stone, or
inwardly writ on Stony Hearts, is the Ministration of Condemnation, preparing
for Christ, and leading unto Christ, and such who are under the Law (let them
be ever so obedient, just and conscientious, because they have sinned, and are
not perfect) are held under it, shut up as in a Custody, or Safeguard, as the
Manslayer in the City of Refuge, and are not perfectly justified, but are under
Fear, their Thoughts Accusing and Excusing; for though they are excused or
accused, or to say, justified in some good things done by them, yet that can be
no perfect Justification, because their State is imperfect, p. 19, 20.

By his Obedience unto Death and precious Blood, he has procured and purchased
for us that in ward Principle of Gods Grace, whereby we are sanctified, Further
Discovery, p. 17, 18. Printed, Anno 1694, If that in ward Principle, whereby
Men are sanctified, were purchased by Christ's Death and Blood, what became of
both Jew and Gentile before Christ's Death? Were they without an inward
Principle, and unsanctified? Himself shall resolve the Question anon.

In his Book styled Truth Advanced, Printed, Anno 1694 he thus has it, It is
not said that Cornelius had the Holy Ghost in his Gentile State, although he
had a great measure of Gentile Sincerity and Righteousness. Nor is it any where
to be sound, that ANY received that Holy Ghost, which Christ promised
PARTICULARLY to Believers in him, but such ONLY who believed in him, even
Christ crucified and raised again, p. 70. And in the next Page, That Holiness
that is a Conformity unto Christ the second Adam, and is the proper and
peculiar effect of the new or second Covenant, is far more excellent than any
Righteousness or Obedience, that is but the effect of the first Covenant or
Ministration, and is but a Conformity to the first Adam, his Righteousness, and
makes not Sons but Servants, or if Sons, but Sons of Hagar, or the first
Covenant. And under this first Covenant Ministration, the Spirit is called in
them the Spirit of Fear and Bondage, but the filial Fear, and Love, and other
Gospel Virtues are the far more excellent: And here the Spirit is called, the
Spirit of Adoption or Sonship, that helps us to cry Abba, Father. And as the
Spirit of God is called in Scripture, the Spirit of Faith, etc. So it is called
the Holy Spirit, or Spirit of Holiness, because it works a peculiar Degree
and kind of Holiness, in all true Believers in Christ Crucified, etc. above
what the most upright Gentiles do Witness or Experience in their mere Gentile
State -- The Law made nothing perfect, and that Law was not only the Law
without, but even the Law WITHIN, both in Jews and Gentiles, until the Faith of
Christ, the one Offering, come to be revealed, by which one Offering he has
for ever perfected all that are sanctified, p. 71. Let the Reader bear these
things in Mind, or recur to them upon occasion, for on this hinge hang most of
the Observations in the ensuing Quotations, which belong to this Head.

Now before I bring his former Books in Evidence against him, I think needful
to Premise, that I have not here delivered Mine or my Friends Sentiments pro or
con (for or against) but barely wielded my Adversaries weapon against himself,
for his Writings abound with Contradictions, as I have already observed in my
Apostate Exposed, and that other called, People called Quakers cleared, etc.
who though he could tell others, that, They are not so sincere as to own and
retract in public, their Errors exposed in public, even lest such
Retractation or Correction should lessen and abate their Honor and Esteem
among their too credulous Followers and Admirers. See Preface to Gross Error,
p. 2. yet himself is the Man, that offends in that wherewith he unjustly taxes
others; forgetting (or at least little regarding) what Paul says, Romans 2. 21.
Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy self? etc. For
although he represented his very minute, viz. Not touching any of the great
Doctrines and Principles of the Christian Religion, but relating to some Places
of Scriptures unduly applied, to prove or defend things that were Truths, but
did not really prove these Truths, True Copy, p. 18. and has promised to
correct and retract them, p. 17. yet it remains undone to this Day, which is
above a Year ago. If he be so unwilling to correct small faults, what would he
be to greater? But before I have done with him, I doubt not to evince, he had
no Reason to cast the first Stone, especially against the Innocent, when
himself was so deeply culpable. To that end hear him, Light of Truth Triumphing
(Printed Anno 1670.) thus

That the new Covenant requires doing is Light of Truth Triumphing. 1670.
plain from Deuteronomy. 30. 14. But the Word is very near unto thee, even in thy
Mouth, etc. which Word the Apostle Paul expounds to be the Word of Faith, and
Righteousness of Faith (Romans 10. 8.) which he preached, and that was the NEW
COVENANT, p. 11. Hence I argue, if the Word near, be the Word of Faith, etc. be
the New Covenant, then who hear it and obey it, are not under the first
Covenant only, held under the Custody and Safeguard of the Law, etc. but the
Word of Faith being closed in with, the Faith is revealed. And surely the New
Covenant is Saving and Perfecting.

Page 15. He proposes a few Queries to R. Gordon, to show (as he alleges)
that the Nature and Light by which the Gentiles did the things contained in the
Law, and knew God, was that of Christ. 1. How could they do the things of the
Law, but by the Divine Nature of Christ, seeing without him men can do no good
thing? [And I Query, Whether the Divine Nature of Christ, whereby God is known,
be without the Holy Ghost, or whether the Divine Nature of Christ did not, even
then, make perfect, for in Truth Advanced, p. 70. he denies Cornelius, etc. had
the Holy Ghost, and p. 71. that the Law within made perfect, before the one
Offering came to be Revealed?] 2. How could they be excused but by Christ? --
3. How could they be without excuse, who disobeyed, if they had no Principle
given them sufficient, whereby to perform their Obedience -- 4. How did some of
them PERFECT the Law, and judged the Circumcision, and was Jews inwardly, and
had Praise of God, if not by Christ? [Could they perfect that Law that it self
made nothing perfect? Again, is the Jew inward, who has praise of God by
Christ without the Holy Ghost, but a Son of Hagar* Surely this Man had need
have looked at home, and retracted his own Errors, before he had been so brisk
upon others.] 5. How could they clearly see the invisible things of God, but by
Christ the Son, seeing it is said, None knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son reveals him? And though these invisible things are clearly seen in
or through the things that are made, yet not without that which is to be known
of God manifest in them, which God had showed unto them, which gave them an
Eye, or Understanding to see his Invisible Power and Godhead in these things.
[And now I query, How does the Son reveal these invisible things, but by the
Holy Spirit? 1 Cor. 2. 10. Do Men see the Invisible Power and Godhead without
it? Or is that Administration, that gives to see the Invisible Power and
Godhead, Evangelical or Legal; Imperfect or Perfecting? But fighting against
Truth, blinds Men.]

Again he tells his Adversary, Thou secretly Labors to prove that the Name of
Jesus Christ, Redeemer and Savior, belongs only to the Word, as it was
manifest in that particular Body and Form of Man, born of the Virgin Mary, but
not to him as manifest in the Saints, which (says G. Keith) contradicts the
Scripture Testimony, Ibid. [And G. Keith does the same in Effect, in
representing the Word, or Law within, weak and imperfect, before that
Manifestation.]

My next Citations shall be out of his Postscript to G. Whitehead's Book
styled, Nature of Christianity, etc. in Answer to the same Rob. Gordon, Printed
Anno. 1671.

God was in Christ, reconciling Men to himself Nature of Christianity, 1671.
EVER SINCE the fall in all Ages, both BEFORE and since Christ suffered in the
outward, having given them, or put in them the Word of Reconciliation, by which
they, who became renewed thereby, were reconciled and justified IN ALL AGES.
But according to R. G.'s Doctrine, no Men were justified nor reconciled, until
Christ suffered Death in the outward; because then, and not till then, was
Reconciliation and Justification wrought, etc. p. 65. And according to G. Keith
it is the same, except Men were reconciled and justified, by a Law that made
not perfect?

Page 70. He reckons up R. Gordon his corrupt Doctrines, the fourth whereof is
this, That Obedience to the Light in the Conscience, is but the Work of the
first Covenant, and Righteousness thereof, and that no Man is justified
thereby. Query, Is not the Light in the Conscience, the Law within? Or is that
sound in G. Keith, which is corrupt Doctrine in R. Gordon? But G. Keith is yet
more full, in asserting the Light and Grace given the Gentiles, to be Saving
and Evangelical, even before Christ's coming in the outward, for which hear him
in his Book of Universal Grace, Prted, Anno 1671.

For the better Understanding (says he) Universal Grace, 1671.
of the Matter in Hand, how that the Saving and Evangelical Light of Jesus
Christ has been communicated unto all Men, IN ALL AGES AND GENERATIONS of the
World, we are to consider the Words of the Apostle, to this purpose, There are
Diversities of Operations, says he, but ONE Spirit. [Is that one Spirit, the
Holy Spirit, or another?] and diversity of Administrations, but one Lord, which
diversity of Operations and Administrations are reducible unto these two, the
Law and the Gospel, or the first Covenant, and the second. Which two, as they
were very distinguishable among the Jews, so were they also among the Gentiles.
As concerning the Jews, they had first the Law which came by Moses, and
secondly they had the Grace and Truth which came by Jesus Christ [was that
saving?] The Righteousness of the Law, and the Righteousness of Faith, and
these two, though they were distinguishable, yet as they were administered of
God, they were not separated nor divided, but the Gospel LAY HID within the
Law, as within a Vail: -- And thus Christ Jesus was in the Law, and under it --
The Dispensation of the Law was as Darkness, in respect of the clear
Dispensation of the Gospel, yet even in this Darkness, did Jesus Christ the
true Light shine. And also in or among the Gentiles UNIVERSALLY, there was and
is somewhat, which by way of Proportion does answer unto the Law and Gospel,
first Covenant and second, which was so distinctly held forth among the Jews:
And as among the Jews, there was Moses and the Prophets in the Letter; so
universally in ALL Men, both Jews and Gentiles, there has been Moses and the
Prophets in Spirit, and also CHRIST? p. 8. (Compare this with Truth Advanced,
p. 70, 71. above recited.)

To an Objection, How it is that in the Gospel is revealed the Righteousness of
God from Faith to Faith unto the Just, and also that the Wrath of God is from
Heaven revealed therein against the unrighteous, seeing the Gentiles have not
had the Gospel preached unto them all this TIME BY PAST, in which they have
lived in their Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, G. Keith replies. To this Paul
Answers, That which might be known of God is manifest in them, for God had
showed it unto them, which is as much as to say, though the Gospel came not
unto them outwardly, by the Ministry of Man, yet it came unto them inwardly, by
the Ministry of God himself, because that which may be known of God, is
manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them. So that it is manifest,
that by this Expression, That which may be known of God, and as it is in the
Greek, (...), is understood the Gospel. See p. 20.

By this Manifestation of God in the Gentiles, (adds he) our Adversaries deny
that the Gospel, or any Manifestation, that is of a SAVING Nature, is
understood [to which a little lower, he thus replies] If it were not
Evangelical and the very Gospel it self, in an inward Ministration, it would
quite render the Words of the Apostle impertinent, and contrary to the purpose
he treats of: For Paul is here showing what the Gospel was, and what was
revealed in it, both to the Just and the Unjust; and because the Unjust among
all the Gentiles and Nations, had not the Gospel outwardly administered, he
shows they had it inwardly, God having showed it unto them, p. 21. Does this
agree with his Asserting the Law within made nothing perfect, till the Faith of
Christ, the one Offering, come to be revealed? Or will he say, the very Gospel
it self, in an inward Ministration, was not saving and perfecting, before
Christ was offered up in the outward?

But the foregoing he corroborates by a fourthly thus, This Manifestation is
said to be that which may be known of God, which he had showed unto them,
therefore it is of an Evangelical and Saving Nature. -- 5thly. By this
Manifestation, here mentioned, they did CLEARLY see the Invisible Things of
God, even his ETERNAL POWER and Godhead, p. 22.

There was a Time (says G. Keith) when God dwelt in their [the Gentiles]
Knowledge, whereby they knew him, through what he had made manifest of his
Eternal Power in them, p. 24. Was God known through the Eternal Power made
manifest in them, and the Holy Ghost not received? What Confusion does he run
himself into?

Descanting upon Romans 1. 20. he tells us, By the things that are made -- may be
understood those things which are inwardly made, those MAVELOUS Works of the
Lord, which are wrought in Men's Hearts, both of Judgment and Mercy, through the
Appearance of God, and the Revelation of his Almighty Arm and Power, in that
Heavenly and Divine Principle of his own Seed, by which indeed the Invisible
Things of him are clearly seen. And until a Man come to see the Lord, in the
things that are made of him, in himself, he can never see him, in the things
that are made without him; which gave occasion to many of the Gentile
Philosophers, to bid People, seek God within themselves, p. 26. Now I query,
Are these mavelous Works of Judgment and Mercy wrought in Men's Hearts, and
the Holy Ghost not received? Or is the Divine Principle of his own Seed
separable there from? This is certainly to divide Christ. But a little lower he
tells us what this Seed is -- This Seed and the Birth thereof, by the Springing
up of these Heavenly Powers and Virtues, can and does truly represent the
Divine Power and Godhead; being the express Image of God, Ibid. Will he, upon
second thoughts, divide the Holy Ghost from the Godhead, as he must do, if Men
be allowed to have the one, not the other? That the Seed, which truly
represents the Divine Power and Godhead, should spring up in Men, and they
without the Holy Ghost in the mean while? Again, By Virtue of what Covenant had
the Gentiles this Privilege? Of that which made not the comers thereunto
perfect? Or of that, whereby Grace and Truth came? And what was the Effect of
this Visitation to the Gentiles before Christ's Incarnation, where embraced
would it bring them no further, than the first Covenant, to be Sons of Hagar?
etc. Not to the filial Fear, Love, and other Virtues, suitable to the Child of
the New Covenant, or free Woman? Which he of late Appropriates to Believers in
Christ Crucified, etc. Sarah said of old, The Son of this Bondwoman shall not
be Heir with my Son, with Isaac, Genesis 21. 10. And Abraham is commanded to
hearken to her Voice, ver. 12. but G. Keith seems to think they may in some
Revolution or other, though they dyed Sons of Hagar.

To an Objection, How can the Gentiles be either rewarded or punished, seeing
they have had no Law given them, he says, The Apostle Answers, that they had
the Law inwardly, though not as the Jews had it, in an outward Administration;
and according to this Law, they should be Judged, and Accused or Excused,
according to their evil or well doing -- they had that inwardly made manifest
in them, which God had shemed unto them, whereby they were condemned who did
Evil, and justified who did Well, p. 28. [And a little lower] It is Evident,
that this Inward Principle was the very Principle of the Gospel in them, in
that Paul says, that God will render to every Man according to his Deeds, in
the Day when God shall Judge the secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to
my Gospel, i. e. the Gospel which he Preached. Now if the Gentiles shall be
judged according to the Gospel, then the Gospel behoved in some measure to be
manifest unto them, for no Man shall be judged according to that which is not
made manifest, p. 28, 29. Query, Was this Gospel made manifest with or without
the Holy Ghost? Did it make perfect? Is the Law within another or diffinct
thing from the Gospel? For he is very nice in his Distinctions, yet all will
not do, his Contradictions are so thick and palpable.

Moreover the Apostle proceeds to show how the Gentile, who followed not
after Righteousness, had attained to Righteousness, even that of FAITH, and yet
the Jews missed of it, p. 36. [Is the Righteousness of Faith saving?]

In p. 25. He desires the Reader to observe, that the Grace held forth, both in
this place, and all others aforesaid, is the very Grace that is Evangelical,
being the Word of Faith, and the Light which is to be believed in. [And what is
Evangelical, is perfecting, I hope: For I read not, that the Gospel was weak,
though the Law was.]

My Spirit shall not always strive WITH Man, he renders IN Man, calling it, The
very Salutiferous Spirit of God himself which created Man, and ALONE has Power
to save or destroy him, p. 52. and p. 53. It, may still be understood, says
he, of that inward striving of the Spirit of God, by which God did strive with
them to CONVERT them, that they might not be destroyed, but saved. Now let me
ask him, What Spirit is this Salutiferous Spirit? This Spirit that brings
Salvation? Is it the Holy Ghost, or not? For Christ was not yet offered up in
the outward? Were those Ante-Diluvian Times without the Holy Ghost, who obeyed
that Salutiferous Spirit which strove with them? Or were the Converts of those
Days, under no Law, inward or outward, that made perfect? What converted them
then? Or what were they converted to?

G. Keith having set down the Opinion of the Arminians and Papists, goes on
thus, We in Opposition to these Opinionists do aver this Universal Grace, to be
that very Evangelical, Gospel and Saving Grace, and not another, through which
it being closed with in Faith and Love, Salvation is obtained, p. 94. This he
says of the Grace, but of the Law within, both in Jew and Gentile, he of late
said, it made nothing Perfect, until the Faith of Christ come to be revealed,
etc. Are they two? That predicable of the one, which is not of the other?

In his Looking Glass for Protestants, Printed, Looking-Glass, 1674.
Anno 1674. wherein he Labors to show the Quakers are the truest Protestants,
he compares W. Tindals Faith with ours in several respects. His Fourthly is
thus, His Faith was, that the Heathen once had the Spirit of God, and that
Pharaoh, before his Heart was hardened, had the Spirit of Grace, and this is OUR
FAITH, says G. Keith, p. 28. Query, Whether it be his Faith now? Who must
either distinguish between the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Grace, and the Holy
Spirit, and so make them two, which are but one; or else retract his saying,
the Gentiles had not the Holy Ghost, who believed not in Christ crucified and
raised again.

Now I come to his Book of Immediate Revelation, Immediate Revelation, 1676.
etc. Printed Anno 1668. and Reprinted with an Appendix, Anno 1676. which tells
us, The Light reveals the whole Will of God -- he needs not go forth to seek a
Law without him, the Word is near in his Heart, and in his Mouth; and this is
the Word of Faith, to which Moses pointed the Jews, and Paul the Romans, p. 77.
It seems then it was one and the same Word of Faith, which Moses, who was
before Christ came in the outward, and Paul, who was after his Ascension,
pointed to; and the Work the same, viz. it revealed the WHOLE Will of God: And
surely what reveals the whole Will of God, does it not enable to perform it,
according to Phil. 2. 13. and is not that Saving and Perfecting?

But he Queries, What was this FOUNDATION of the Church of God, before ever the
Scripture was writ, before Moses and the Prophets, etc? Was it not Jesus Christ
the Word, which was in the Beginning? Had it ANY OTHER Foundation? And what
gave them the Knowledge of this Foundation, and builded them upon it, when they
had no Scripture? And whereupon was their Faith founded? By the hearing of what
Word did they come by their Faith, seeing then the Scripture was not writ? It
was even (says G. Keith) the Word which came from God himself, and taught them
immediately, p. 103. I may now Query, Had the Church then a Foundation? Were
they built upon it, even in Moses and the Prophets Days? And was that
Foundation Jesus Christ the Word? And did they by hearing it come by Faith in
Christ, before the Scripture was writ? And yet did they not receive the Holy
Ghost? Could not that Law, that Command, that Word make Perfect? Had Men Faith
in Christ, and could not that Faith save in their Days? Monstrum horrendum!

Page 105. He tells us, that Moses falls a declaring concerning the New
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 30. from ver. 11, to 16. the Probation whereof he gives in the
next Page, both from Jer. 31. 32. and Romans 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And in p. 107.
thus has it, The Jews and People of Israel, who lived in Moses's Time, and
were SAVED, it was through Faith in this Word, in this Prophet, raised up in
them, in their Hearts, not at a distance, but nigh; the Word is nigh in thy
Heart. And this is Christ in them, the Hope of Glory, the Mystery hid from Ages
and Generations, but was EVER made manifest in his Saints, but in the latter
Days more clearly, etc. p. 107, 108. Query, Had Men Faith in Christ, the Word?
Was the Mystery ever made manifest in the Saints; and yet was the Law within in
sufficient to make perfect, till since Christ was offered up in the outward?

Having transcribed many verses in 119 Psalm, concerning the Word, he queries,
p. 109. What Word this is, whether the Letter of the Scripture, o^ that Word of
Faith, Paul (and Moses long before) spoke of, and its effects upon David he
tells us anon, saying, This quickened him, this strengthened him, this comforted
him, this taught him, and made him wiser than his Teachers: This was as Oil
unto him, a Lamp unto his Feet, and a Light to his Paths; in this his Steps
were ordered, verse 133. in this he worshipped, he prayed, he sung Psalms, and
all his Springs were in this, p. 111, 112. But I query, if the Law within made
nothing perfect, until the one Offering was revealed, how came David by his
Quicknings, Strength, Comfort, Instruction, Wisdom, Light, fresh Springs, etc?
For now we are got a step beyond proving, that the Gentiles were savingly
enlightened, and by occasion (administered from G. Keith) driven to evince, out
of his former Writings, that the Patriarchs, before Christ was born and
suffered, had such a Law within them, as did make them perfect. Are these the
Fruits of an imperfect Law, to quicken, strengthen, etc. or will he, who once
contended, that many were saved and attained unto perfect Peace and
Reconciliation with God in their Souls, now deny it to David, a Jew both inward
and outward, as he must do, if the Law could not make perfect? How is he
confounded! how engaged in what is and will be too hard for him!

Solomon comes next. From what he ^^ys of Wisdom's crying at the Gates in every
City, G. Keith queries, Is not her crying, etc. the same with Jesus Christ his
standing at the Door, etc. p. 113. And I query, Whether to them that opened
unto him, even during that Administration, he did not come in and Sup with
them, for G. Keith immediately quotes Rev. 3. 20. to adapt it to Solomon's
saying? 2dly, Whether such had the Holy Ghost? And 3dly, Whether the Law within
such made them perfect, in that Age?

G. Keith goes on thus, The Gospel was Preached unto Abraham -- Abel, Enoch,
Noah, and to ALL BELIEVERS, who lived before Scripture was writ in a Book, and
it was spoken into their Hearts by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and the Saints
who then lived and were inspired of God, preached the Gospel, and the Gospel is
the same in all Generations, for it is the Everlasting Gospel, Rev. 4. 6. But
now the Declarations, Discoveries, and Manifestations of this one Gospel; have
been many and different, under the Law; more darkly in the Time of the
Prophets, more manifestly in the Time of the Apostles. Yet more manifestly and
yet all ONE GOSPEL, and we preach no other, but the same Everlasting Gospel,
which is the Power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1. 16. See p. 213. Now hence I
query, Whether the Gospel Preached unto Abraham, Abel, Enoch, Noah, etc? Were
the Law within Abraham, etc? And whether it made them perfect? 2dly. Whether
these Believers, who lived before Scripture was writ in a Book, who had that
inspeaking into their Hearts by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, partook of the Holy
Spirit, the Spirit of Holiness, of Adoption or Sonship; or of the Spirit of
Fear and Bondage only? Were they Sons of Hagar or Sarah? Of First or Second
Covenant? 3dly, Whether those inspired Men, who preached the Gospel, which he
allows to be the same in all Generations, had ALL OF THEM the Doctrinal
Knowledge and Faith of Christ Crucified, and preached it to others? And this I
the rather urge, for as much as Truth Advanced, p. 42. he denies that Paul
means the Gospel is the Power of God, simply and abstractly considered without
all Doctrine and doctrinal Knowledge and Faith of Christ Crucified.

All Saints have the same Spirit and Word of Prophecy in some measure, more or
less, that the Prophets had, who ever directed People to the same Spirit and
Word in their Hearts, from which they spoke, that they might in themselves hear
the same Word and Spirit, whereby the true Faith comes, p. 221. Is this Spirit
and Word saving? Is it perfecting in all Ages? Can a Man hear it and obey it,
and yet be without the Holy Ghost? But hear him again.

This second Adam is called the quickening Spirit, by whose quickening Virtue,
the Souls of ALL the Holy Men and Women were made and kept alive unto God, as
truly before he came in the Flesh, as after, for they did all eat the same
spiritual Meat, etc. Which was Christ; yea they did eat his Flesh, and drink
his Blood as TRULY and REALLY in measure BEFORE he came in that Body of Flesh,
as the Saints have done since, p. 227. To the same purpose he expresses
himself in p. 258. and in Way cast up, p. 95. and in Rector Corrected, p. 95.
This shows what he once thought of the Holy Men and Women's Condition in those
first Ages of the World, who then only placed the difference in Degree not in
Kind; now will not allow more then Gentile Sincerity and Righteousness, where
Faith in Christ crucified is not revealed, as well as that he concludes all,
before Christ was visibly offered, under such an inward Law, as made not
perfect? How he will reconcile such a State to that of eating his Flesh, and
drinking his Blood, let him look to. In the mean while, as he queries Truth
Advanced, p. 184. in his query, 10. Can any Eat the Flesh of Christ and drink
his Blood, who have not the Faith of him, as he GAVE his Body of Flesh to be
broken, and his Blood to be shed for us? So I query, Could any do thus before
it was given or broken? Or had all those Holy Men and Women (he spoke of even
now) so much as the Faith or Knowledge that it should be broken?

Having offered what Citations I at present proposed out of this Book, the next
that comes Way cast up, 1677.
in course, is, The Way Cast up, Printed Anno, 1677. He there says, Paul takes
notice of some among the Gentiles, in the time of Heathenism, who were a law
unto themselves, and did by Nature (to wit the Divine Nature of the Word
Ingrafted in them, James 1. or by their own Nature, restored and repaired by
the Grace of God, as Augustine Expounded that place) the things contained in the
Law: And such was Socrates among the Grecians, whom Justin Martyr in one of his
Apologies, did expressly call a Christian, and classeth him with Abraham, etc.
p. 44, 45. Several things are Remarkable here, one, that in the time of
Heathenism, some Gentiles partook of the Divine Nature, which has been often
touched upon already. 2dly That their Nature was repaired and restored by the
Grace of God. Qu. Was that Grace insufficient or imperfect? Can Nature be
restored or repaired by that which makes not perfect? By any thing less than
God's Holy Spirit? 3dly That Justin Martyr classed such an one with Abraham,
and calls him a Christian. 4thly That here he boggleth not at the appellation,
in this Book, Printed Anno. 1677. Though he does afterward, Anno. 1694. Saying
in Truth Advanced, p. 46. If they were real Christians, they had some Knowledge
and Faith of Christ the Messiah, as he was to come in the Flesh. But now the
Man being altered, no wonder that his Expressions vary.

If the Saints, before Christ came outwardly in the Flesh, had not Eat of the
Flesh of Christ, and Drank of his Blood, they could not have had Life by him,
but they had Life by him, and therefore, etc. p. 95. [Christ] has Lived in all
Saints, as well before he came in the Flesh, as to his outward Birth, as since,
p. 100. Did he Live in them, and did they Feed on him, even before his outward
Birth, and yet the Law within Jew and Gentile, not make perfect till after it?

Though the outward coming of the Man Christ was deferred, according to his
outward Birth in the Flesh, for many Ages, yet from the BEGINNING this Heavenly
Man, the promised Seed, did inwardly come into
the Hearts of those that believed in him, and Bruised the Head of the Serpent,
and destroyed him that had the Power of Death, that is the Devil, the Stronger
Man entering the House, and dispossessing the strong Man, and Casting him out,
p. 99. When the Head of the Serpent is bruised, the Power of Death (the last
Enemy) destroyed, the Devil Dispossessed and cast out, and the stronger enters,
Has not the perfect Law, the Law which does make perfect, taken place?

Again, Thus the Word was made Flesh, even from the beginning, and dwelt in us,
as in ALL AGES, and they beheld his Glory, etc. p. 103. Is this Indwelling,
where the Glory is beheld, without the Holy Ghost, or unable to perfect the
Work?

Now I come to his Book Styled, Way to the City of God, Printed Anno. 1678.
where he Way to City of God, 1678.
says, Even at Man's Fall, the Seed of the Woman was given, not ONLY to Bruise
the Serpents Head, but also to be a Lamb or Sacrifice, to atone and pacify
the Wrath of God toward Man, p. 125. Is this Bruising the Serpents Head,
atonement, etc. Witnessed, where the Holy Ghost is not received? Is not this
State, a Gospel State beyond Gentile Sincerity and Righteousness? And where
these Effects are wrought, does not the Seed of the Woman make perfect?

He tells us, We are not too nicely to make a difference betwixt the Influence
and effects of his outward and inward Sufferings, but to understand them in a
perfect Conjunction, and that the End of his Sufferings in both was this, viz.
1. Both to quench and allay the Wrath of God. -- 2. to purify and Cure Men,
etc. p. 139. Had G. Keith taken the Counsel he then gave, he would not have so
depretiated the Law within, nor denied the receiving the Holy Ghost to the
Conscientious Heathen, to whom the outward was not revealed, as he has done of
late.

His Book called Rector Corrected, Printed Anno. 1680. Comes next, There he
denies not, Rector Corrected, 1680.
but that some rare and singular Gifts of the Spirit, have been given unto some
of these called Heathen, some whereof have Prophesied of Christ, and others
uttered some Divine Sayings, that could proceed from no other Principle, but
the same Divine Spirit that was in the Christians, p. 50. Qu. Is this Divine
Spirit the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Holiness, which these had, while to
Cornelius he allows only a great Measure of Gentile Sincerity and
Righteousness, had these a Law within them, that made perfect, which of late he
will not admit, to Jew or Gentile, until Christ, the one Offering was
Revealed,: For it seems they had the same Spirit the Christians had. How should
this be, if the Holy Spirit was Peculiar to the latter Days, to them who
believed in Christ Crucified, etc. For that not being done, the benefits
Annexed and Apropriated thereto, could not be received. Again, that these
generally had so much as a belief that the Messiah should come, and suffer, and
rise again, is what will stick hard upon him to prove, if he dare assert it,
especially considering that the Disciples, who conversed with Jesus, were even
after his Resurrection, so far from believing it, either Explicitly or
Implicitly (a late phrase of his) that they disbelieved it, and it seemed to
them as idle Tales, Lu. 24. 11. Yet if that were granted, that all these had
this belief of the Messiah that he should come, etc. Yet if he will believe
himself, (which he has small cause to do, Considering his windings and
twistings of late) they could not have that holy Spirit which the Christians
had, that Holy Spirit being (as he says) peculiar to believers in Christ
Crucified, (not in Christ to be Crucified.)

In the same Page he quotes a saying of Seneca, thus, There is a Holy Spirit in
us, that Teaches us, as we Treat him. So here is a Heathen has outstript G.
Keith, by confessing to more than a great Measure of Gentile Sincerity and
Righteousness, even to the Holy Spirit in the Gentiles: And that G. Keith may
find to his Sorrow one Day.

Again, God gave his Holy Spirit to instruct them; and the Spirit in the Jews
made them to believe in Christ, as well before he was Born in the Flesh, as
since, and therefore he is called the Spirit of Faith, as being the Author of
it, in all them that believe, p. 150. Is this Consonant to his saying, (Truth
Advanced, p. 70.) Nor is it any where to be found, that any received that Holy
Ghost, which Christ promised particularly to the Believers in him, but such
only who believed in him, even Christ Crucified and Raised again? Will he
distinguish between Gods Holy Spirit, and the Holy Ghost, or make two Holy
Ghosts.

He queries, Was not the Spirit of Christ in Moses? And Christ the Lord was
that Spirit, as Paul has taught, p. 187. Now I query, Seeing Christ was not
then offered up, whether that Spirit were the Holy Ghost or no? And also
whether the Spirit made him perfect, yea or nay?

In Truth's Defense, Printed Anno. 1682. He thus has it, When I say the Spirit
is the Truths Defense, 1682.
Rule, there is no absurdness therein; for if we mean by the Spirit, THE HOLY
GHOST Christ and the Holy Ghost are never separated or divided in what they
Speak or witness in the Souls of Men -- Christ himself in Scripture is called
the second Adam, the quickening Spirit, the Lord is that Spirit, p. 170 (And in
p. 107. he tells us, Paul Expounds Deuteronomy. 30. 14. of Christ, and that Clemens
Alexandrinus and others of the Fathers so understood those words of Moses) if
so, the Jews by having Christ for their Rule, had the Holy Ghost for their
Rule, even before he was Crucified and Rose again. This he inforceth in what
follows.

If Enoch, Noah, Abraham, had the Spirit to be a Rule unto them, it is no less
a Rule unto all now, who have the SAME FAITH which they had, seeing the SAME
SPIRIT is given to Believers now, which they had, which Spirit is one, as Paul
has declared: And it is most Rational, that as the Faith is one IN ALL AGES of
the World, and the Spirit ONE, So the Principal Rule of Faith should be one
also, p. 114. If the Spirit be one, the Faith one, the Rule one, in all Ages of
the World, How came Cornelius not to have the Holy Ghost, when his Prayers and
Alms came up for a Memorial before God? Or had he that one Spirit, Rule and
Faith, which Enoch, Noah and Abraham had, and that one Spirit not the Holy
Spirit, not the Spirit of Holiness, not the Spirit of Adoption or Sonship? Is
not this to make two? And to the Levites, P. 121. He allows the Spirit of God
to the right interpreting the Scripture: Now Christ not being yet Crucisied and
Raised again. I query, Whether that Spirit were something besides the Law
within, which of late he has said, made nothing Perfect.

His Commanding them to tarry at Jerusalem, until they received the promise of
the Father, which was the Spirit (to wit in GREATER MEASURE than formerly it
was given unto them) did not oblige, etc. p. 141. Had he kept to this
distinction in his latter Writings, he would not have told of Cornelius and the
Gentiles, not having the Holy Ghost, before they had Faith in Christ Crucified,
etc. A more plentiful Effusion of the Spirit being no part of the Controversy,
but granted: But still it is the same Spirit, same Faith, same Rule, as himself
once acknowledged, and was instanced even now.

In the next place (he having of late asserted, that the Law within did not
make perfect, till, etc.) Let us hear how he here defines perfection, He who
is Faithful in every respect to the measure of Grace which he has received, is
indeed a perfect Man, and does please God, although he be not equal in his
attainment unto others, who have more given them, says G. Keith, p. 212. But
can any one be perfect, by virtue of a Law that does not make perfect? And if
there were this deficiency, even in the Law within, during the first Covenant
Administration, how could any be perfect then? And yet to show that he abounds
with Contradictions, he has allowed it to many, as in above cited Way to the
City of God, p. 125. which I made the Title of this first Part.

And now I come to G. Keith's Book of Divine Immediate Revelation, Printed
Anno. 1684. which I Read not till of late, by means of his Divine Immediate
Revelation, 1684.
citing it, in his answer to me, of which anon. Speaking of Cornelius, he
says, Do not Peter's words plainly imply, that there were many such good honest
Men, who were acceptable to God through Christ, although they had not heard of
Christ as yet outwardly Preached? See, p. 26. 27 Again, Cornelius received the
Spirit Immediately, and yet obtained it FURTHER by means of Peter's Preaching,
p. 63. Qu. Was not then the Spirit he received before and after Peter's
Preaching, the same Spirit.

Again, We no where Read in all the Scripture, that Noah Preached to all
Mankind in the Old World, but we find expressly that God, by his Spirit, did
strive in those Men, which most plainly shows that they had some inward
teaching given them from the SPIRIT OF GOD, for against what did they Sin, but
that Law Published by the Spirit of God in their Hearts, seeing they had no
written Law? -- They had that inward Law, which as Paul affirmed, the other
Gentiles had, Romans 1. See, p. 54. The word of God was rare in respect of its
being outward* preached, yet it was near and within, in the Hearts of both Jews
and Gentiles, as Paul did affirm, Romans 10. compared with Deuteronomy. 30. p. 55.
Whence I Query, What Spirit this is? What Law Published thereby? What word this
that Paul and Moses Speak of? And whether they that received it and obeyed it
received the Holy Spirit, and were thereby made perfect, especially seeing he
further says, p. 79. All the Faithful under the Old Covenant were immediately
taught of God, yet not by virtue of the Old Covenant, but of the New, which New
Covenant in some degree had place in the time of the Old, and was to be further
revealed in Gospel Days, etc. Surely if the New Covenant had place in some
degree, in the time of the Old, the New Testament promised (I will put my
Spirit within you, Ezekiel. 36. 27.) had also a place during the Old Covenant
Administration, even where the word of Faith was closed with: And what Spirit
is this, if not the Holy Spirit?

In p. 55. After having desended R. B's sense, with respect to God, his never
changing his way or manner of Teaching and Enlightening his People by his Spirit
inwardly working in them, and his Continuing the same in all Ages, before the
Law, after the Law, and also after the coming of Christ, he adds, p. 56. that,
The inward Preaching, Speaking and Illumination of God, by his Spirit, did
ALWAYS remain in some degree, more or less, in the true Church, and in ALL its
Members. [Qu. Were the Gentiles, who did by nature the things Contained in the
Law, none of these?] For if at any time the outward Preaching was little or
none -- God did supply that outward defect inwardly by his Spirit, etc.

In the same Book (viz. That part which is ^n answer to Geo. Hicks) he
alleges, p. 154. Clemens Alexandrinus is so for from thinking that only the
Prophets and Apostles ^ri^ by divine Inspiration, that he plainly declares,
that not only Plato, but also many others Preached and Declared the only true
God by his Inspiration, And in p 158. 'That Justin Martyr expressly says, That
the innate Word or Reason, declared of James 1. 21, Was in the Philosophers,
Poets and Historiographers, who by the impulse thereof, spoke some things
excellently. And they who live with, or according to the Word, are Christians,
as among the Grecians, Socrates, Heraclitus, etc. But I query, How could that
be, if the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Christ (without which none are his, Romans
8. 9.) be given to none but Believers in Christ Crucified, etc. Or that the Law
within, both Jews and Gentiles, made nothing perfect till the one offering came
to be revealed? Yet that he may appear, as he is, Contradictory in every
Branch, in the following Page, he bids us, Note, That whereas Justin Martyr
called Socrates and others, who lived in Conformity to the Divine Word in them,
Christians, it is to be understood in part, according to that General
Revelation, although we find not, that Socrates had the knowledge of Christ as
he was to come in the Flesh, and suffer Death, etc. Now compare this with what
himself has said, Truth Advanced, p. 46. up on this very assertion of Jus;tin
Martyr's, viz. If they were real Christians, and were worthy of that Honorable
Name, they had some Faith and Knowledge of Christ the Messiah etc. As he was to
come in the Flesh, etc So one while this wavering Man restricts Christianity to
a belief in Christ come, Crucify and Raised again, and allows the appellation
to Socrates and the rest, only upon Condition that they so knew and believed in
Christ, another while admits them to be Christians part, conform to the Divine
Word, while supposes them not to have had that Kno^ledge. Yet whether Men who
live in Conformity to the Divine Word, can be said to be wholly Strangers to
the Holy Spirit, himself will do well to consider.

In his Plain Short Catechism, Printed Anno. 1690. He says by way of Question
and Answer, Catechism, 1690.
Qu. Is the Seed or Principle of the second or New Covenant, after some manner,
in all Men? A Yea, Qu. And is that Seed or Principle, Christ the Word of Faith?
A Yea, p. 9. Now I Query, Whether Christ the Word of Faith, the Seed or
Principle of the New Covenant, in all Men, were always saving and perfecting IN
ALL MEN, where embraced? Or since Christ's Ascension only?

He queries again, Q. Is that great Mystery greatly (I suppose it should be,
generally) revealed in all? A Nay, Q. Did not God reserve the more full
Revelation of it, in a more general way, to the time after Christ should suffer
Death for Men's Sins, and rise again? A Yea, Q. Was not therefore Christ the
Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, until the fullness of time, and that both
as to his inward and outward coming, for most part? A Yea, ibid. By these words
[more full Revelation, more general way, for most part] he seems to allow the
Mystery was not hid from all. Now I query, Whether they, to whom the Mystery
was revealed before Christ suffered Death for Men's Sins, were under the Law
within that made nothing perfect, according to Truth Advanced, p. 71. Or were
of the Many who were saved, and attained unto perfect Peace and Reconciliation
with God in their Souls, according to Way to City of God, p. 125. Or whether he
will undertake to reconcile those two Passages.

Hitherto I have opposed his former to his latter writings, now let us see,
whether in one and the same Book, he be not as Contradictory to himself, and
that in his Truth Advanced, Printed Anno 1694. as a kind of System Truth
Advanced, 1694.
of G. Keith's Divinity. He asks, Who can say with understanding, that Moses,
Samuel, David and the Prophets, and John that came after, were not in that
Kingdom, as well as any now, for they had the SAME Righteonsness, Peace and Joy
in the HOLY GHOST, as any now have; and therefore, if by the Kingdom, we
understand Christ's Kingdom of Grace in the Hearts of true Believers, surely
John, and all the holy Prophets, and other Holy Men and Women were in it, as
well before Christ came in Flesh, as since, etc. And a little lower, All this
does not in the least infer, that the Prophets were not true Believers in
Christ, as well as any now, and had not by true Faith an entrance into Gods
Kingdom, as well as any now; for it is absurd to suppose with the Papists, that
when they dyed, they went into a Certain Limbus or Prison, where they were
detained, and had not an entrance into God's Kingdom, until Christ rose from
the Dead: And it is as absurd for any to Imagine, that Believers generally,
since Christ came in the Flesh after Death, have a greater or higher place, or
are greater in the Kingdom of Glory, that is to come, than the prophets have,
for it is most clear from Scripture, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the
Prophets are in that Kingdom of God, Luke 13, 28 29. And none can enter into
the Kingdom of God hereafter, who have not known some beginning of entrance in
to it here, in this World, See p. 136, 137. This affords much matter to comment
on, and compare with what he has delivered elsewhere, particularly in this
very Book. 1. Moses, the Prophets and John were in the Kingdom, had
Righteousness, Joy and Peace in the Holy Ghost, as well as any now: They and
other Holy Men and Women were in the Kingdom of Grace, as well before Christ
came in the Flesh, as since. How can that be? If Christ promised the Holy Ghost
PARTICULARLY to Believers in him, to such ONLY who believed in him, ^ven Christ
Crucified and Raised again, as he ^sserts, p. 70. Could these Holy Men and
Wo^en believe in Christ Crucified and Raised a^ain, before he was so? If not,
How came they ^y that Gift, which was annexed to such qua^^fications, as they
could not have? 2. They ^ere not detained in a Limbus or Prison; it an
absurdity in the Papists to suppose so, or at they had not an entrance into
God's ^ingdom, until Christ rose from the Dead, ^ith he here. But in p. 71.
that the Law thin made nothing perfect, until the Faith Christ, the one
offering come to be revealed, by which one offering he has forever perfected,
etc. Is an entrance then administered into the Kingdom of Grace, by a Law that
does not make perfect? Or can Men have that before the one offering, which
perfects, be Revealed, which is only to be had by the Revelation of that one
offering? 3. Whereas he asserts now, that none can enter into the Kingdom of
God hereafter, who have n^^ known some beginning of entrance in this World, I
ask, Can they enter by an imperfect Law? It is hard for Man to come up to the
height of the Ability given, but can any advance higher? If the Law be weak,
are no^ they weaker? Again, if Men must know some beginning of entrance here,
then those Conscientious Gentiles, such as Cornelius was before Peter Preached
to him, either had it her^ (and can that be without the Holy Ghost? or they
must have it there. If they have not, but must have it, when shall that be, i^
a renewed Visitation, in some other Revolution, or in Purgatory? A Medium let
hi^ find, if he can: And so I follow him to t^^ second Head.

2. Absurdities and Contradictions Promiscuo^ Collected.
I now come to make my Observations some Absurduies and Contradictions inter
wor^^ by way of Miscellany, as I find them occu^^ his late large Tract,
entitled, Truth Adv^^ced, in which (as in the foregoing) ^^ keep to the order
of the Pages, for the m^st part.

Some (he says) expound the Herbs and Trees, given to Man for Food before the
Fall, to be paradisical, Genesis 1. 29. And the Earth paradisical, distinct from
this Gross visible Earth, called the Dry Land, [and adds] So it will be to the
raised Saints, at the Resurrection of the Dead, who shall live and dwell in
that Garden, where Adam and Eve at first was placed, called The New Earth, Rev.
20. And though they shall have the Command and Rule of this Visible Earth,
under Christ their Head, yet they shall need nothing in it, p. 24. By this it
should seem, that this Visible Earth is to remain, though the Saints need
nothing in it: Then not to be Burnt up and dissolved, with the Works that are
therein, according to 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11. for what is burnt up and is dissolved,
is no more Visible.

From an unproved assertion that, The Body of Man had not this Grosness and
Impersection before the Fall [he draws this Inference, that] It is manifest,
that the manner of Man's Generation or Propagation had been after a far more
Excellent manner, than now it is, if the Fall had not been, p. 27. 28. But that
is not Manifest, though he, Dictator like, says it is; but needs Proof.

It is certainly a great and hurtful Error for any to hold, that the outward
and Visible Earth was not cursed for Man's sake, says he, p. 32. Then I hope
the Contrary is true, that the Earth was Cursed for Man's sake, But why, I pray?
If Man before the Fall was not made of the common Dust, but much more pure and
Refined, than that which of which Men's Bodies were made since the Fall, as he
tells us, p. 21. and also p. 117. and that Paradise, where God placed Man, was
no part of this Visible Earth, p. 16. Must the Earth suffer for what Man did in
Paradi^^ when neither his Creation was out of he^^ but of a more pure and
Refined Dust, nor his Sin committed in her? How could it affect her then? Is it
equal she should suffer for what was done elsewhere, by one that had not his
^ice out of her? Surely if his Notion were true, the Garden where he
Trespassed, and out of the Dust whereof he was made, were more likely to be
affected with Adams Sin, than this Visible Earth: For Gods way is equal, Ezekiel.
18. 25.

No Illumination (he says) is able to save fully and perfectly with Eternal
Salvation, but that which gives the Knowledge and Faith of Christ Crucified and
Raised again, p. 40. Then those Jews and Gentiles, who dyed without it, either
shall not be saved with eternal Salvation, or it must be revealed hereafter,
according to the Doctrine of the Revolutionists: The latter seems to be his, by
his supposing, A middle state for some time only, until the Faith of Christ be
revealed unto the ^ Souls, p. 44.

In p. 97. he (...) has it, Both Christ's Resurrection Body, and the
Resurrection Bodies of the Saints at their appearance, shall have no heaviness
nor weight to incline them to the Globe of the Earth, as Christ's Body Now in
Heaven has none -- And in p. 98. They shall appear in some certain place above
the Globe of the Earth, over or above the Mount of Olives, where Christ
ascended after he rose from the Dead. And though the Resurrection Body of a
Saint, cannot be in all places at once, yet without doubt they can move from
one place to another, at any distance, upwards or downwards, South, North, East
or West, in the twinkling of an Eye, or according to the swiftness of a
Thought, which is easy to understand, and such who know, that some of the
Moveable Stars and Luminaries move some hundreds of Miles in less than one
Minute of time, some of which are greater Bodies than the Globe of the the
Earth. This Notion he would do well to Evince by plain Evidence of Holy
Scriptures, and in Scripture Words and Terms, seeing he says, it is only safe
to keep thereto, P. 118. As such I leave it with him, and proceed.

When their Resurrection Bodies shall be given unto them, then their inner
white Garments shall be Clothed upon, as with an outward Garment, even as when
a man that is Clothed with a sine Linen Shirt or Wascoat, puts on another
fine Garment above it, to which the words of Paul are to be referred, 2 Cor. 5.
1, 2, 3, 4. See p. 101. And in the next Page, as if he were proud of his
Comparison, he goes on and tells us, I shall not enlarge at present, nor
further launch forth into THESE MYSTERIES, although I may safely say, more of
these things have been in Part opened unto me, than I think fi^ to declare, or
can declare in Words, p. 102 Which, if they be no better than his Wast^ Coat
Mysteries, he may even keep them to himself, and make the best of them: For he
is Strange Man at Similes. Yet he will be ki^^ for rather than Men shall want
clothes at the Resurrection, he has provided them an upper and under Garment,
a Shirt or Wastcoat, and fine Garment above it: So that they shall be doubly
clothed, which is more than his Text allows him.

As in p. 27. he had interpreted the Coats of Skins, wherewith God clothed
Adam and Eve after the Fail, to be a clothing the Soul with the Righteousness
of the Lamb, and the Body with the Skin and Flesh of this frail, mortal and
corruptible Body (on which I made my Observations in my last Book, called,
People called Quakers cleared, etc. p. 45.) now he improveth it thus, Within
this bruial Skin of the gross Body that rotteth in the Grave, there is lodged
the true Body of Man, that corrupts not, and the gross Skin or visible Part
is no essential Part of the true Body, more then Dross is a Part of the Silver
or Gold -- but at the Resurrection of the Dead, nothing of the Drossy Part,
that is brutal, shall arise, but only that which is proper to Man as Man, to
wit, such as Adam had before the fall. So the Flesh that is gross, mortal and
corruptible, is not that Flesh, that shall be raised up immortal and
incorruptible, p. 113. This not only contradicts his own saying (Testimony
against that absurd Opinion, p. 3.) That which rises is the MORTAL, that
puts on immortality, and the corruptible which puts on incorruption, but
even the Apostle Paul, for he says, this mortal shall put on immortality, 1
Cor. 15. 54. Now from what I have quoted above, I demand proof of him. First,
That the frail, mortal and corruptible Body, which Adam had after the Fall, was
not the Body he had before the Fall. Secondly, That the Body he had after the
Fall rises not, but that which he had before the Fall; for we must not take
things upon trust from so unstable an Author.

In p. 115. he tells his Reader, where the Separation is made between the pure
and noble Part, and that drossy Part in Man's Body [viz.] In the Mystical and
Invisible Machpelah, or Sepulcher in Hebron, in the Land of Israel,
figuratively and mystically understood [and who it is to be] bought of, viz. Of
Ephron the Dust-Eater, [and at what price, viz.] 400. pieces of Silver, i. e.
by so many Virtues [and adds in the next Page] that in the mystical Land of
Israel, all the dead Bodies of the Saints shall be raised up, and stand with
the Lamb upon Mount Zion, to wit, not the literal Zion, but the Mystical [But
foreseeing an Objection, viz.] How can these 400. pieces of Silver (signifying
so many Virtues, be paid to Ephron the Dust-Eater, Ephron be the Devil, etc.
[to this he very gravely Answers] Things spoken by way of Allegory, and Parable
are not strictly to be understood in every Circumstance. This is like himself,
Dictator-like, when he pleases they shall; when otherwise they shall not be
understood in every Circumstance: His Word must be a Law, else he will wrangle.
Nay in the very Place he will not bate an Ace of 400. Virtues, they must be
just so many, the number 400. being (as he says) produced of four, Answer to
the four elemental Principles or Qualities of the Body, and the number 10. to
the ten Commandments, and that again multiplied by other ten, because every one
of the ten Commandments may be well understood to be branched forth into other
ten. This is to impose not argue. If this be the Fruit of his being further
enlightened, as he boasts (Advertisement, p. 4.) I may safely say, surely the
old is better, Luke 5. 39. what he learnt, when little and low, beyond these
towering Imaginations. But what Reason, I pray, save that G. Keith says it, is
there for straining the Allegory in one place, not in the other? Or why might
not another multiply them by ten more, and so make 4000. of them?

Again, he says, The Graves that shall be opened at the Resurrection of the
Dead, are not any visible Places on this Globe of the Earth [How will he prove
that? I am sure his Friends he would now creep in with, are of another Mind]
but certain in visible places to our carnal Eyes -- commonly (adds he) Men have
two Graves, the first given them by Men, until the Separation be made betwixt
the Kirnel and the Drossy Part, by Putrefaction (as suppose after a Year, or
more or less) the second given them by God, who probably may use the Ministry
of Angels therein. See Jude 9. says he, p. 116, 117. Query, What becomes of
the Body, after a Year or more, when the Separation is made betwixt the Kirnel
and Drossie Part? And what becomes of the Kirnel? Where is it bestowed till the
Day of Judgment? Or to use his own Words, is only Belly, Guts, and Draught lest
behind?

He goes on, What is said of the Drossy Part belonging to Men's Bodies, called
by Paul, Corruption, is no wise to be understood of the Body of Christ, which
had no such part in it, but was altogether most Pure, and saw no Corruption,
and therefore when the Sepulcher was looked into, nothing was there to be
found, but the Grave-cloaths, p. 117. From hence I observe, that the additional
Clothing which he makes Man to have received after the Fall, that which was
not proper to Man as Man, viz. the Skin and Flesh of this srail, mortal, and
corruptible Body, Christ partook of and ^ scended with (nothing was to be found
in the Sepulcher, but the Grave clothes) yet his Flesh not corrupt: But we
leave that clothing behind us, a Separation being made betwixt the Kirnel and
the Drossy Part: How then shall our vile Bodies be changed, and fashioned like
his glorious Body (according to Phil. 3. 21.) if we rise only with wh^^ is
proper to Man as Man, and which Ada^ had before the Fall, and Christ takes
both Is that (which he in us terms the brutal Part^ so necessary an Appendix to
Christ's Body, a^ not so to ours? Or are our vile Bodies, inste^^ of being
fashioned like his glorious Body, l^^ behind unchanged? This it is to
over-value^ Man's self upon School Philosophy, and neglect^ better Teacher: And
I bring it, not as decla^^tive of my own Faith either way, but as Argumentum ad
hominem, against G. Keith.

That the Body of Man before the Fall (^ which he compares the Resurrection
Bodies) were not made of this visible Earth, but ^ that Dust whereof is Gold,
and the Stones of ^ Sapphires, Job 28. 6. compared with R^^ 21. 21. is another
of his unproved Assertion Ibid. And yet p. 118. summing up his Ma^ter, he
says, But against the Doctrine of t^^ Resurrection, as here delivered and
open^^ by plain Evidence of Holy Scripture, and ^^ Scripture Words and Terms,
to which it ^^ ONLY safe in this and in all other things, ^^ keep close, some
will be ready to Obje^^ Answ. Who these Objecters are, he has not declared,
nor perhaps can. We have been ^^ far from so Objecting, that we have still ke^^
to it our selves, and rejected the contrary particularly in this very
Controversy of the Resurrection. And I am willing to join issue wi^^ him here,
touching these very Notions he ha^ so lately Broacht. Let him then give plain
ev^dence from Scripture, and in Scripture Words a^^ Terms, that God clothed
Man, after the Fall, with the Skin and Flesh of this frail, mortal and
corruptible Body; that there is a twofold Grave, one given by Man, the other
given by God who may therein use the Ministry of Angels; that it is to be
bought of the Dust-Eater, the Devil, and the purchase 400 Virtues, answering to
the four Elemental Principles, and the ten Commandments brancht forth into
other ten; that Man was not made of the common Dust of this visible Earth; and
that the Resurrection -- Bodies were to be made of the same. He that is so tart
upon others, let us see how he will come off himself; for I demand Chapter and
Verse for these Assertions of his. More I could instance in, but these lie next.

As he had said, p. 27. It is not to be questioned, but the true Body of Man
lies within the Shell, Oar or Mine of this gross, heavy and corruptible Body,
and that is it which shall be the Resurrection Body, at the Resurrection of the
Dead. So now he says, Though Man-Eaters may eat the gross Part of Man's Body,
yet that more subtle and invisible Part, they cannot, nor can that which
belongs to one be given to another: hence by way of Allegory and Metaphor, it
is called Bone in Scripture, Isa. 66. 14. See p. 119. Query, What is that gross
part, the Man-Eaters may eat? Is it only the Belly, Guts and Draught, which p.
111. he tells us, Paul distinguishes from the Body, saying, God will destroy
the Belly, but he does not say he will destroy the Body? And what is the more
subtle and ivisible Part? Is it that very Numerical Body that dies (without
Belly, Guts and Draught) which he says elsewhere, Man was clothed with after
the Fall. Or is it that Body, which he pretends is proper to Man as Man, and
received before the Fall? Again, What is that Bone, he speaks of? Is it the
Bone LUZ, he has talked of? Or what is it? If he will needs set up for a new
Sect, between the received Opinion of the same Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones
rising, and our sticking to Scripture Words, that it is sown a natural Body,
raised a spiritual Body, let him explain his terms.

Now let us hear him upon a new Subject, having treated from p. 122. of the new
Heaven^ and new Earth, promised to the Saints, in p. 124. he says, This new
Earth is called Prove. 8. 26. The highest Part (Heb. Head) of the Dusts of the
World. And Isa. 58. The high places of the Earth. All which (he tells us)
cannot be understood of any visible places of the Earth [Why so? Because G.
Keith says it?] And that it is called, Prove. 8. The Head of the Dusts of the
World, does plainly Point at the Excellency of it, for as Man is called in
Scripture the little World, and the whole Creature, so the World may be called,
and is so called by some, a great Man. Now though the lower Parts of this great
Man (i. e. the World) are visible to our carnal Eyes, yet the Head or chief
Part of i^ is invisible to us, and will be until we attain to our Resurrection
Bodies, but with Eyes suitable to our Resurrection Bodies, we shall both see
it, and find our selves in it, etc. See p. 124, 125. [And then tells us] That
in Scripture the Word Land or Earth -- has a Reference to a certain Place or
Region, above the Globe of this visible Earth, whither the Body of Christ is
ascended, and whither the Bodies of the raised Saints, at the Resurrection of
the Dead shall ascend, etc. Answ. That Prove. 8. and Isa. 58. speak of the new
Heavens, and the new Earth, he would enforce, Ibid. from the Terms high and
highest Part of the Earth, alleging the visible Mountains are but like Moles
in a Face, and from the Excellency of it. But what of all that? The Hills are
the highest places in respect of the Valleys, and a Mole in a Man's Face, is a
rising there, and higher than the rest? as well as that one part of the Earth
excells another. Was not Canaan, the Land he had espied for Israel, the Glory
of all Lands, Ezekiel. 20. 6. Or is there no transcendency, no excellency to be
allowed to one part of the visible Creation before another, but we must needs
confound it with the new Earth? Again I observe that, with him, This new Earth
is part of the old Earth, the lower Parts of this great Man (the World) are
visible; the other, the Head or Chief Part, invisible. Whence will he pretend
to deduce his Proof hereof, viz. That the new Earth was part of the old? Will
he do it by plain evidence of Holy Scripture, and in Scripture Words and Terms,
to which he said in p. 118. it is only safe to keep? Or will he dig into the
Ditch of that called Philosophy (a Phrase of his own) to make it out? And
whereas he tells us, that the Word Land or Earth in Scripture has reference to
a certain Place or Region, above the Globe of this visible Earth, whither
Christ is ascended, and the Saints Bodies shall ascend, why does he not give
his Reader Chapter and Verse, where it is so said, that he may see whither
cogent or aptly applied, or no?

From p. 125. to p. 127. he infers the long Life of those within the Millenium,
or thousand Years, from Isa. 65. 20, 21, 22. saying p. 126. The Age of Men
shall be exceedingly prolonged beyond what it is now, even as it was in that
Time before the Flood [Again] Whereas it is promised, As are the Days of ^
Tree, so are the Days of my People, I do well remember, that Justin Martyr, in
his Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew, says, 'That they should be read, As are the
Days of the Tree of Life, so are the Days of my People which do relate to Adams
Paradisical Estate before the Fall (says G. Keith) for if Adam had not sinned,
he had never dyed the Bodily Death, etc. p. 127. What is this but to confound
long Life with Eternity, and that out of the same Text? Especially considering,
tha^ in that very verse it is said, They shall not build and another inhabit:
they shall not eat, and another plant; for as the days of a Tree, are the days
of my People, Isa. 65. 22. Does he think what they built and planted while
here, they should inhabit in, and eat of hereafter?

Looking back upon p. 126. toward the bottom, I find this Passage, viz. The
raised Saints shall need neither Candle nor Light of the Sun, even to their
bodily Eyes, as Adam, before his Fall needed no Light of the Candle, or of the
Sun, etc. Answ. This ^ gratis dictum that Adam, before the Fall, ^eeded not
either Light of the Candle or Sun, ^or have we plain Evidence of Holy Scripture
for ^^, or so much as Scripture Words or Terms, which he, even now, said it is
only safe to keep ^^. That the raised Saints, as to their bodily ^yes, shall
not need it, is ejusdem farinae; for ^ is the Sight, so the Object: And it is
not to ^ questioned, but they shall be in as good a ^ondition, as ever Adam was
before the Fall, ^^d may be inferred that their Optics, if the ^me (which lies
upon him to prove) will be as enetrating, as ever his were, before he fell.

To an Objection, That 'As the Manna was not to be gathered on the Sabbath Day,
etc. ^o in the Time of the 1000 Years, or great Sabbath -- there is no
possibility of Conversion to any, who have not been formerly con^erted [he
Answers] It does well enough prove, that there is no possibility of Conversion
to any, who have formerly lived in the World, and neglected their Time of Grace
and Salvation, which they once had -- it is ^ain for any such to expect to live
again, and ^ave another Time of Grace and Salvation, ^ut it does not in the
least prove that any ^uch, who have not at any Time formerly ^ived in the
World, shall not have a Time of Grace, etc. This I bring as an Instance of his
^ning to the Notion of the Revolutionists, which he cares not publicly to own:
But if he did not believe Men might come into the World again, he might have
said so, in Termnis, and have answered the Objection directly without any
Circumlocution. Nay he betrayeth what he had in reserve, in what follow where
speaking of such as have been prevent from having the outward means of
Salvation offered, he adds, that God does well know to supply what is wanting
to any Part of Mankind in such Ways and Methods, and by so means as Men cannot
comprehend. Now having been positive in p. 44. That Eternal Land Salvation is
ONLY to be had through ^^ Faith and Knowledge of Christ crucified, etc. ^ must
mean by [supply what is wanting] so^ Visitation or Means of imparting that
Fai^^ though the Modus, or Manner of doing it not expressed, which must be here
by a renew^ Visitation, and then it savours the Conceit the Revolutionists; or
hereafter, and then more than borders upon that of Purgatory.

To his Notion, p. 152. of an outward ^^visible Antichrist, yet to come, who
shall call himself the Christ and Messiah, and deceive many f^ Christians and
Jews. I Reply, He had bett^^ look at home, for there Antichrist already ^^ t^th
and reigns, even where Christ h^^ fare; and the House which was once sw^ and
garnished, is the unclean Spirit enter with other worse.

His alleging, that None are truly a^ properly Christians, but who are anoint^
with some measure of that Heavenly An^^ing of the Holy Spirit, that comes from
Christ, which none receive but through the Faith of Christ crucified and raised
again, p. 167. I oppose to his saying, Appendix to Immediate Revelation, p.
243. that true Religon and Christianity may subsist without the History of
Christ in the Letter, having already made my Remarks thereon elsewhere.

The next thing before me, is where he says, We do not find, that God saw the
second Days Work to be good, but it is said of all the rest, God saw that it
was good, which may Mystically signify unto us, the great Degeneration of
Mankind in the second Age, p. 172. Answ. I thought all Gods Works had been
good, the second as well as the seventh. Is he of another Mind? Genesis 1. 31.
tells us, God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good,
and adds, and the Evening and the Morning were the Sixth Day. So that very good
is ascribed to the Six, which were in being and among them the second was one,
not to the seventh for that was not yet in being, nor mentioned in that
Chapter. Is it not enough for him to be self-inconsistent, but he must
endeavor to render the great Creator so too? Which must be, if he saw every
thing that he had made to be very good, and had not seen the second Days Work
to be so?

Well had it been for him, he could have taken the Counsel he is so ready to
give, viz. Let none be hasty to embrace or reject any thing or things, that Men
may bring forth as Openings or Discoveries of Divine Truth, beyond what is at
present commonly made known; for Satan is not wanting to transform himself; as
if he were an Angel of Light and will be apt to intrude his Diabolical
Suggestions and Devilish Doctrines, as if they were Divine Revelations, p. 159.
Of wha^ kind his are, they that walk in the Light, d^ abundantly see and
perceive, not without grie^ on his behalf; which that others also may see and
avoid the snare he warns of, while he miserably plungeth himself into it, are
these exposed.

Thus Reader, have thou presented unto thee as in a mirror or short Extract,
some more o^ G. Keith his Contradictions and Absurdities, a^ promised in the
Title, for thee to conside^ from what Fountain they sprang, seeing the Apostle
James says, Does a Fountain send forth at the same place, sweet and bitter,
Chap. 3. ver 11. And now I shall consider his late Book, in Answer to Mine,
called, The People called Quakers cleared by G. Keith, from the false Doctrines
charged upon them by G. Keith, etc. wherein I had compared some of his
Contradictions together.

3. Reply to G. Keith 's Book, Entitled, Antichrists and Sadducees detected,
etc.
While I was Revising G. Keith's Books, and Antichrists and Sadduces detected.
digesting the Quotations for a further Service that might offer, knowing I had
to do with a restless Adversary, who for all his pretenses to want of Time and
Ability of outward Estate, was uneasy under our Defenses, out comes as
Advertisement (in a news Paper called Pegasus Numb. 14.) subscribed, G. Keith,
wherein he declares himself greatly injured, and badly and unjustly reflected
on, in my Book entitled, People called Quakers cleared, etc. and gives notice
that after our Answer to his late Narrative (which he supposes, and might well
suppose we would Answer) he purposes, God willing, to intimate another Meeting
(with leave of Authority) at Turners-Hall, to Answer the Book, and detect (as
he says) the several gross Perversions and abusive Wrestings therein. But like
a Man, that never knows how to hold long of one Mind, he at length puts it upon
another (though indeed more proper) issue, where I now meet him.

His Book, as by Title Page, is divided into three Parts, 1. An Answer to Caleb
Pusey. 2. To me. 3. Postscript to the Pious and Learned in the Church of
England, and among other Protestant Dissenters. I shall a little invert the
Order, and begin with what affects my self, it being Relative to what precedes
above, where having placed my Quotations according to their Dates and Pages,
and the Title Pages of the Books in the Margin, the Reader may more easily
recurr to them, when referred to in what follows.

He begins with me, p. 21. and entitules that Page 21.
part, Some Remarks upon J. Penington 's late Book, Entitled, The People
called Quakers cleared, etc. And G. Whitehead his Postscript, showing some of
their gross Perversions, falsehoods and groundless Calumnies against G. Keith.

The Charge is high, now let us see how the Proof will answer. To my saying,
that to the Meeting he appointed (at Turners Hall) our Consent was neither
sought nor made necessary, he answers, They got timely notice, a Month before
hand, and were desired to be present. Ans. That proves not, that our Consent
was either sought or made necessary, for upon the Publication of his Summons he
leaves no room for that, but declares his full Intention to be there, and make
good his Charge, whether we come or no (see Advertisement, p. 2.) nor does his
desiring us in former Prints, to consent to Time and Place, as alleged by him,
evince that THIS Meeting was not appointed without our Consent sought or made
necessary. What the Reasons of our refusal to meet him were, has been already
made public, even by my self in my REFLECTIONS upon his Advertisment, whereto
I referr, and proceed.

To my telling him (he says their, in the Plural, as if he scorned to engage
me single) that two Books lie upon him unanswered, to which he gave grounds to
expect an Answer, he says, First, Some of their own Church have sufficiently
answered to show the badness of their Cause, in that censure they gave against
T. Ellwood, etc. If this were true, that some had done so, for they are
nameless, and at most give but their own Censure, and that but to a Passage or
two, have they answered the Book in Print? Or if they had, would that excuse G.
Keith? How willing is he to shift, when pinched, and to lay hold of any Twig,
like a drowning M^n (a Comparison he once used) to evade making good his
Charge! But he has a Secondly, viz. that he has offered to Answer them Viva
voce, at a Meeting, alleging there is no end of answering them in Print, that
few will be at the Pains to compare Book with Book, and that the Charge is too
great for him. But why did he begin then with Printing, and not rather have
exhibited his Charge at first Viva voce, if he esteemed that the best Method of
Debate? But to do it now when he has drawn us into the Press, and to expect we
should do so too, is preposterous. Nay, why does he now answer me in Print,
seeing so few will be at the pains of comparing Book with Book, etc. as he
alleges, and that he so lately proposed a Viva voce, vindicating himself
against me, in his winged ADVERTISEMENT tagg'd to the Tail of Pegasus, but that
he is so hampered with a bad cause, that he knows not which way to turn?

My Quotations, in the Book he now pretends to Answer, were 1. His vindicating
our Principles from our common Adversaries. 2. His Contradictions in several
Doctrinal Parts. To the first, he Answers, Such as I did think were their
Principles, I did formerly vindicate. Nay, this will not shelter him, it was
such as he KNEW to be so, and that from twenty eight Years Converse both
Public and Private, with the most Noted and Esteemed among them, in many
Places of the World in Europe and America, as he told C. Mather (and I cited
him) Serious Appeal, p. 7. And among the rest were some of those very Books of
G. Whitehead and W. Penn, out of which he has since picked Quarrels, brought in
his Book of The Christian Faith, etc. ^s Sound and Orthodox, and to convince
our Opposers, that it is and has been our constant and firm belief to expect
Salvation by the Man Christ Jesus, that was outwardly Crucified at Jerusalem
(as in Title Page, and p. 16.) So that he now freely acknowledging (p. 22. of
this Book) his shortness and mistake, with respect to the Principles of the
Teachers among the Quakers universally, and the Principles of G. Whitehead and
W. Penn, as it is to introduce a slander, so i^ of no weight. The like he had
said, Exact Narrative, p. 61. and would have me to tak^ that for an answer to
my Book, called, An Apostate Exposed, but I shall not so excuse him but put him
upon answering the Book. If tha^ alone might have served, why did he not p^^ me
off so here, and give me no further answer to this Book of mine, I am now
defending against his Remarks? Nor was I most uncharitable to him in alleging
(as I did in my Last p. 10. and he in part Cites here) that he manifested great
hardness, who had so large, so long, so near and intimate Converse among
Friends, now all of a sudden to give the lie t^ all this, and deduce some of
his pretended Probations, out of the Books he had so newly commended and
recommended? For that is a tr^^ State of the Case.

He goes on (in said p. 22.) maiming a Page 22.
Quotation of mine out of him, and then insulting over me. I had it thus,
Seeing this true Faith is wrought in Gods ordinary way by Preaching, therefore
the true Faith of Christ Death and Sufferings ought to be one of the first and
chiefest Things, that every true Minister ought to Preach [there he stops with
an, etc. but had he quoted the rest, his Cavil had been out of Doors, which was
thus] and build up his Hearers in, in order to bring them to Communion with God
and Christ in Spirit, and that they may witness God and Christ to dwell in
them. Upon this he vaunts, saying, It is my Lot to have to do with Men, that
have neither so much true Logic, nor common Sense, as to understand what a
true Contradiction is [then descanting upon the Words ONE OF THE FIRST, he adds
a little lower] It is no Contradiction to say, G. Whitehead was one of the
first Quakers -- G. Fox was the first Quaker. Well, I hope before I have done
with him further to manifest, as little as I pretend to Logic, that he has
really contradicted himself, and that not so much from the Words he so plays
upon, as upon what follow, viz. [and build up his Hearers in Order to bring
them into Communion with God and Christ, and that they may witness God and
Christ to dwell in them] If this be true, that the Faith of Christ's Death and
Sufferings is that which brings into Communion with God, etc. the building up
therein, that whereby they witness God and Christ to dwell in them, then to be
preached before the inward; but if it be true, that the Knowledge of Christ's
inward coming is the more needful and in the first Place, as being that by
which the true and comfortable use of his outward coming is alone sufficiently
understood; as he asserted, Way to the City of God, p. 3. and I cited him in my
p. 12. Then the Inward to be Preached before the Outward. And this is a
Contradiction.

But for the better understanding of the Case, the Distinction betwixt General
Religion and Christian Religion (he says) is to be considered, which
Distinction I have used (adds he) in my Book, called, Divine Immediate
Revelation and Inspiration, etc. Answ. I am beholden to him for this Reference,
out of a Book I had not read before; for it not only helps me to fresh
Passages in General, but even here it makes for me, not for him. For in p. 45.
he says, The Scriptures do witness abundantly concerning such an experimental
and spiritually sensible Knowledge of God, which is perceived in a most inward
Union and Communion of the Soul with God, and in a certain intellectual and
spiritual Contact, or Touch, of which not only Plato and Plotin, and others
among those called Philosophers, but the Apostles among the Christians, have
largely made mention. Hence I query, What Religion theirs was, that of Plato,
Plotin and the Heathen Philosophers? General Religion, or the Christian
Religion? Again, what the most inward Union of their Souls with God, that
spiritual Contact, or Touch, that spiritual, sensible Knowledge of God, he
allows them to have witnessed; was it with or without the Holy Ghost, seeing as
yet Jesus was not so much as born in the Outward?

In p. 23. He says, It most evidently appears from the express Words of my
Book of Universal Page 23.
Grace, p. 120. That I did not then hold, that the Light within was sufficient
to Salvation without any thing else, as without Christ's outward Coming, etc.
Answ. It will sufficiently appear, to them who duly consult the place, that
(even according to G. Keith) the other Nations [viz. the Gentiles] were not
destitute of the main and principal thing, even of the Manifestation of the
Light and Spirit of the Son in their Hearts, and that those that did improve
it, did both know the Lord and his Laws, and were JUSTIFIED through Faith in
him, etc. And it will also appear to such as will cast an Eye upon what he has
said, no longer ago than in the Year, 1691. in his Presb. and Ind. Chur. p 116.
that he then held, that It is no less than real Blasphemy, to say, that the
Light within is not sufficient, to give that Knowledge of God that is necessary
unto Salvation. Now if this does not depretiate the blessed Effects of Christ's
outward Coming, when delivered by G. Keith (which is the Scope of what he
offers in the Page under my Consideration) why must it be rendered so to do,
when delivered (as he suggests) by us, except to gratify his rancour, who will
allow that Exposition to his own Words, he denies to others?

In page 24. He makes my Charge to be, Page 24.
That he did formerly hold that Christ's inward coming saves, where the outward
is unknown, in which he renders me guilty of gross Forgery and Perversion (for
he seldom Charges lower in any thing that affects himself) of Forgery, seeing I
cite no passage out of any of his Books, where he expresses these words, Where
the outward is unknown, etc. But is it Forgery to give his words without a
Citation? If so, it is his own beloved Crime. Yet had he but turned over the
next Leaf in my Book, and minded what he read, he might have found, that I
bring him in saying, The outward Coming, sufferings and Death of Christ, may
have and has a true and real influence, upon them who know it not expressly.
Again, Why may not many receive an advantage by Christ, the second Adam's
Obedience. even in the outward, who never knew it expressly, etc. This might
have shut his Cavil out of Doors, had it not been so Natural to him to Wrangle.

He adds, They (for that is the word he uses, when he brings any thing out of
my Book) are guilty of grossly Perverting my words and sense, as if I did hold,
that Christ's inward coming saves, with Eternal Salvation, without all Knowledge
of Christ's outward coming. What means he by the term, Eternal Salvation (which
yet were none of my words) are not all that are saved here, saved with Eternal
Salvation? Or must they be fitted in Purgatory, or in some other Revolution.?

But he is offended that the words explicit and implicit (which I find not but
in his late Books) are by me called a late Distinction, saying, The place of
his Book, cited by me, says no such thing, yet acknowledges, that in diverse
of his late Books he has distinguished betwixt the express and implicit
Knowledge, etc. But has he made that distinction formerly? if not it is a late
distinction: His alleging that it is employed, that though not expressed, yet was
really understood by him, is idle, for it is not what he understands, but what
he gives us to understand, what he declares, that is properly called his
Distinction. But he Vindicates it, as what all true and Orthodox Christians
hold (though he names none) as well as infers it from Ephesians. 3. 6. Which is wide
from the purpose. The Apostle tells, v. 5. That it was not made known as it is
now. How? Not expressly, but implicitly? That he says not, although G. Keith
does, who in p. 25. from Romans 16. 25, 26. queries, Now what is made manifest,
but Express? And what is kept secret, but Implicit? So then, if the Reader
page, 25.
would know what implicit means, G. Keith resolves him, it is what is kept
secret. I thought it had not deserved to be called Knowledge, while kept
secret, while not manifest, but that the opening, the unvailing, the revealing
a thing gives me to know it; but this Profound Mystic has got a new knack of
expounding words, and interpreting the Scriptures, as if Men were saved by a
knowledge kept secret from them.

He queries, Why will they not allow it (the term implicit) as well with
respect to the knowledge of Christ without us, as of Christ within us? Answer,
I gave him no occasion thus to object, yet reply, because the knowledge of
Christ within, is immediate, by a divine sensation; the other not always so.

Now from my following words, That G. Keith's distinction was to serve a turn
(which he falsely charge upon G. Whitehead, who was not concerned in my Book,
otherwise than i^ his Postscript, as if he thought me too mean to wreak his
Spite at) he falls upon G. Whitehead for excusing a passage of G. Fox's, which
himself had defended, Serious Appeal, p. 60. And also others excusing Is.
Penington saying Can outward Blood Cleanse? The drift whereof is to prove, what
we readily grant him that when our Friends sense has been perverted, we have
Distinguished. My Objection against him, was that his were not cogent will he
Object the same, let him detect them as I have done his. Yet I cannot but take
notice of that passage of my Fathers [Can outward Blood Cleanse?] for it seems
droppe^ by him, as with a design of mischief. When I shall take occasion to
add, That my Father denied not the atonement made by Christ offering up his
Blood in the outward, to such as received him into their Souls, but
acknowledged the remission of his Sins thereby, a^ may be seen in his Book,
styled, Flesh and Blood of Christ, both in the Mystery, and in the outward etc.
Printed in his works, Part. 2. p. 180. And that G. Keith well knew him to be a
true believe in the Lord Jesus, and a sincere Lover of him even the Crucified
Jesus, himself has declared Serious Appeal, p. 25. Alike mischievous is he in
Insinuating G. Whitehead his excusing Solomon Eccles his Blasphemy (as he terms
it) in saying The Blood that came out of Christ's Side, was no more than the
Blood of another Saint. Though G. Whitehead sought to Evince that S. Eccles'^
meaning was better than his words, yet he also declared, that he did not make
S. Eccles's Expressions therein (especially as Construed by our Adversaries) to
be an Article of our Faith (See Light and Life, p. 59.) To this, being formerly
alleged by G. Keith, has T. Ellwood answered in Truth Defended, p. 111. Which
G. Keith takes no notice of, but renews his Slander, as if it had been new, so
unfair an Adversary is he.

From my arguing, That the word Express, ^s a word of Course with him, and of
no force, from his using it, even with respect to Adams Posterity, suffering
disadvantage by his Disobedience, who never knew it expressly, that of them that
knew it not at all, neither ^mplicitely nor explicitly, there have perished,
^e not only puts me upon the Proof, but re^^cts Page 15.
it as False and Fictitious, p 26. The which, ^lthough I account an impertinent
Cavil, and ^emonstrative on its self, to any but a Captious ^erson; yet from
his asserting, Universal Grace, ^ 117. That the knowledge of Christ in the
outward, is not of necessity unto Salvation, save only ^here it is revealed, I
argue, How much less ^ecessary then is the knowledge of the first Adam's coming
in the outward, to man's Dam^ation? Must the Deaf and Dumb, who Die ^n
penitent, needs have a discovery from God ^ther explicitly or implicitly,
that Adam had ^inned, in order to their Condemnation? Or it not sufficient,
that they have Transgres^d the Holy Law in themselves? That they themselves
have Sinned?

To enforce it, he adds, That it is evident from the Heathen Philosophers
writings (who? and where?) and particularly from Plato (where?) that they knew,
at least implicitly, the Fall of Man, etc. Supposing this to be true of SOME,
what follows? That they ALL knew it? Surely not so: Therefore let him, who is
so brisk upon me for a Proof, calling my assertion False and Fictitious, prove
his own, viz. That all knew it, either explicitly or implicitly.

He adds, How can any impartial Reader that Reads my Books, when I so often
restri^ the Words with the Terms, Express, cledistinct Knowledge, Historical,
outward Knowledge (And so he leaves his Sentence imperfect wit^ a fally, to
tell how intimate R. B, and ^^ were, what Discourses they had, etc. A^ which,
as they bespeak his Vanity, and seen introduced to get an esteem to his Cause,
from the Credit of such a Colleague, so they depending upon no better evidence
than his own have no weight with me) To the other I answer, what occasion he
had to use these words I know not, but it might be the Terms of hi^ Opponent,
to which he, as Respondent was tied for I find it was so, with respect to R.
Gord^ who had that word [Express] as well as i^ that of Universal Grace.

From G. Keith his acknowledging, that many of them who knew something of
Christ outward coming, that it was very darkly, a^ under Vails and Figures, and
his having e^cepted others, the many thousands, he says were saved before
Christ's coming in the outward, and my thence inferring, There is no medium
between knowing very darkly in Vails and Figures (implicitly in a very obscure
degree.) And not knowing at all, as in my p. 15 He to confute any Ignorance
(for he calls it both Nonsensical and Ignorant) says, Is there no Medium
between knowing very darkly, and not knowing at all? Is the Particle or little
word [very] Superlative in the highest Degree? Or is it not rather Comparative?
Is there no Medium betwixt a Man's being very Ignorant, and knowing nothing at
all? Answer, I know no difference betwixt being very Ignorant, and knowing not
at all, nothing of that whereof he is very Ignorant: For where is the middle
between knowledge that is very dark, and not knowing at all? The knowing a
thing very darkly and under Vails and Figures, being the lowest degree of
knowledge, as well as the lowest means of knowing, the next step is not knowing
at all. That is implicit knowledge in the remotest sense; what is below this,
is Ignorance: But Envy and Malice is worse than both. For he is not satisfied
with filing it upon my Score only, but he must render it as G. Whitehead's
Logic, who has either writ this Book, that I answer, says G. Keith, or
approved it, and Concludes, Therefore G. Whitehead is as Ignorant in true
Logic, as in true Divinity. Answer, If I had committed a trip (which he has
not proved against me, for all his bluster) what is that to G. Whitehead's
Logic or Divinity? Is he so Hawk-eyed, as no false Logic can escape him, but
he can espy at once hearing a Book Read, for a second G. Whitehead had not till
it came in Print? O^ is he not rather herein like Hamman, wh^ thought scorn to
lay Hands on Mordecai alone, bu^ sought to destroy all the Jews? Esth. 3, ^ And
yet at last, the passage remains sound and unshaken, notwithstanding all his
Cavils.

To prove Forgery and Perversion upon me for making him say, Men have been
saved without the express Knowledge of Christ's outward coming, but not of his
inward coming, he says, Many have felt and enjoyed the Blessed Virtue and
Power of Christ, within them, and so have ha^ an implicit Knowledge of it, etc.
He that reflected upon G. Whitehead's Logic and Divinity, even now, what is
become of his own* Is the Knowledge received by Divine sensation, the knowing
the Virtue and Power o^ Christ to save from Sin, by its Virtuous and Powerful
operation in them, an implicit knowledge? Is knowing a Tree by its Fruits, a^
express or implicit Knowledge, that it is good* But he renders it implicit,
because not know^ by the express Names of Jesus and Christ. Answer, They knew
the thing expressly, the outward name not at all, not so much as implicitly;
They knew that which saved, but it is not the mere outward Name, that saves,
said G. Keith, Universal Grace, p. 115

In the next place let us hear his Appeal to the Schoolboys, it is to be hoped
his own Scholars will give it for him. Let any Shcol-Boy, or Tyro, or Person of
common sense, Judge, says he, p. 27.) if these two Propositions, The express
Knowledge and Faith of Christ is not Page 27.
necessary to all that shall be saved; Some Knowledge and Faith of Christ, is
necessary to all that ^^all be saved, be Contradictory. Answer, He ^aries the
Terms to mislead his Reader; in ^e one he has it, the Express knowledge, in ^e
other some knowledge, and the word express ^^ft out. However his own Scholars
might ^verlook this, perhaps being taught no better, ^t least from their
Masters Example, yet with confiderate Men this will gain him no Cre^^t. For
would he have beeen fair, he should wholly have left out [Express] in the first
^^ inserted them in both. But I shall state ^e Case, de novo, and that more
agreeable to ^s own Positions, whether to say, True Religion and Christianity
may subsist without the knowledge of Christ in the Letter, and to say, Faith
Christ Jesus, as he came without us in the Flesh, ^^d Died, etc. Is necessary
to make a true Christian, be Contradictory. And I the rather put for that he
has Galloped from p. 15. to p. 23. my Book, and left several citations of
mine, ^^d these two just now cited (which were in ^^ p 20. and p. 21.) behind
him. A demonstrati^^ he cared not to cope with them, but had rather catch at a
passage, mistate it, and so go off. To my citations out of two of his former
^^oks (where he allowed, that the true and ^NLY Method to bring People into the
Faith ^^ acknowledgment of the Christian Religion, was first to inform them of
an universal in^^rd Principle, which would, when this Foundation was laid,
bring them to own the Scripture and what Christ did and suffered, etc. And tha^
the contrary was not good order and method) he grants it here p. 27. but with a
reserve and limitation, saying, What is necessary in the first place, to be
Preached to them that have little or no true Knowledge of God, or of an inward
Principle, is one thing; and what is first to ^^ Preached in order to bring Men
to the Christian Faith and Religion more immediately and pro^^mately, is
another. Answer, When he said (^^ I cited him in my p. 23.) This is the tr^^
method and order, which the Lord h^^ taught us to hold forth unto People -- ^^
the first place to point and turn their min^ unto the Light of Jesus Christ,
etc. Again my p. 24. It is for want of this true order in Preaching of the
Gospel, that m^^ have had so little success hitherto, etc. W^^ he writing to
some Preachers, that were ^^ing into the Indies, among the Heathen, or ^^ his
own Countrymen, that lived among ^^ Did we hold it forth, to be Preached in ^^
first place, with a restriction to those pa^^ of the World, where the outward
was ^^ revealed, or indefinitely? Besides, if to ^^ Gentiles it was to be
Preached in the first pla^^ as that which would give them the knowledge of the
outward, why not to the Christian who are attained to a belief of the outward
yet too many undervalue the inward, seei^^ such as have had a belief of the
outward, w^^ be confirmed therein by the inward, as w^^ as others taught it,
who had not known it before even as himself has confessed.

He conculdes, What do my Adversaries bring against me on this Head, to prove
my self Contradiction? Nothing at all (says he) therefore they show themselves
stronger in falsely accusing, than in justly proving, adds he. Answer, Had he
not been stronger in falsely accusing, then became him, he had not thus falsely
accused me: For I proved his self-Contradiction, and told him where, viz. In
Nameless Bull, p. 10. 11. Which I had quoted before, in my p. 11. It is true, I
did not there give the words at length (having done it before) but I gave the
Title and Page of his Book, and referred to my having already given it, in that
very Book. So that he has Slandered me wittingly.

In p. 29. of my Book, I compared his saying, It is not the mere outward name
that saves, but the Life, the Power of Christ that quickens, cleanses and
purifieth, and by this they might be saved, for it is the Life that saves,
Romans 5. 10. With a Friends saying, as himself gives it, that the Blood which
cleanses from all Sin, was the Life, and the Life was the Light, which he then
termed a perverse Exposition, and called the Friend, Bold, Ignorant Soul, and I
deemed as authentic, as G. Keith his saying the same. Under this he is uneasy,
and having skipped many pungent places, from p. 25. to 29. to come at it,
whereto he forgets ever to return, such a Slippery Adversary have I to deal
with, he Labors as to justify his own, so to brand the Friends words. For
himself he pleads, p. 28. He does not in the least Remember, Page 28.
that ever he gave that Exposition on 1 Jo. 1. 7. And perhaps, when Examined,
the Friend may say, He does not in the least remember, he ever did so. But has
G. Keith never unduly applied places of Scripture, to defend things that were
Truths, but did not really prove these Truths, either by express Words or
proper Consequence? Let him Consult what himself has acknowledged, True Copy,
p. 18. If so, why so harsh upon the Friend? Had he then retracted those Errors
(or has he done it yet?) when he fell so roughly upon the other? Or has he
forgot what Christ said to such an one? Thou Hypocrite, First cast out the Beam
out of thy own Eye, etc. Matt. 7. 5. Thus much o the exposition, Now to the
Doctrine it self. Is it true Doctrine that the Life Cleanses? G. Keith has
said it; the Friend has said it. Charity makes the best Construction: But G.
Keith's Charity begins at home, and ends there too, for he reserves none for
his Neighbor. If I had said nothing but the Life within saves or cleanses
from all Sin, they might have justly so argued (says G. Keith on his own
behalf) if the Friend had said nothing, but the Life within saves, etc. G.
Keith might have justly so argued, say I. He goes on, There are several
Concurrent Causes in the great Work of our Salvation, and cleansing from Sin,
which though agreeing in one Harmony, yet one Cause is not the other, therefore
their Argument is Vain and False. Answer, Argument I made none, but comparison
of sentence with sentence, nor do I yet see wherein the Friend could be
unfound, if G. Keith be found, for this explication is as applicable to the one
as to the other.

My quoting him, [Though Prophets and Apostles preached him [Christ] as in the
form of a Man, yet they Preached him also, and that more generally, as a Light
to the Gentiles, yea and to Jews also] he terms a false and perverse sense,
upon the word more generally, as if he did signify by it, more frequently,
which (he says) he did not, but by more generally, that he did and does
understand that his inward appearance was more general than his outward,
therefore what was in it self more general, they Preached to be so: And then
tells us, how much oftener they Preached his outward than inward appearance,
wherein he says not true. Now that this is a false Gloss, and shows he wants
Sincerity, the words and his sense then plainly intimating that more generally
had relation to Preaching not appearance will appear upon consulting the place,
Light of Truth, p. 16, 17. In order whereto, let us recur to the Spring, to the
Objection his Adversary raised, which was not that Christ's inward appearance
was more general than his outward, but that our saying (as the place has it)
That Christ was sometimes Preached as Crucified, to the Jews, but MORE
GENERALLY a Light to the Gentiles, inferred two Christ's, which G. Keith tells
him is a most pitious and abominable wresting of those words, and that though
the Prophets and Apostles preached him, as in the form of a Man, yet they
Preached him also, and that more generally as a Light to the Gentiles, yea and
to the Jews also. Here is never a word (either in Opponent or Respondent) that
his inward appearance was more general than his outward, that what was in it
self more general they Preached to be so (which G. Keith would now foist in)
but as the SOMETIMES related to his being Preached as Crucified, to the Jews,
so the MORE GENERALLY as a Light to the Gentiles, was also restricted to the so
Preaching him, yet with this addition that G. Keith then allowed it, yet
further, that it was more generally Preached to both Jew and Gentile. A
Contradiction had been more excusable, than such a deceitful Cover.

His Secondly cites no Page of mine in particular, but has a general reference
from p. 15. to 33. (which gives him scope, to skip as he pleases) They
perversely infer, says he, from my words, that whereas I formerly made the
knowledge and Faith of the History of Christ's outward coming, not Essential to
Religion, now I did make it Essential. This he accounts Palpable Forgery,
denies any of the citations I bring prove it, and at last recurs to his late
distinction of implicit Knowledge and Faith. But this is a mere begging of the
question, that who were saved by the inward, had ALL of them the implicit Faith
and Knowledge of the outward, not brought till of late, whatever he pretend of
his understanding it so all a long, and is impugned by me, p. 14, 15.
particularly from Luke 24. 10, 11. From whence I again argue, That the
Disciples themselves were so far from having an implicit Faith in Christ, that
he should Dye and rise again, that they disbelieved it, It seemed to them as
idle Tales, and they believed them not, and that even after he had sent them
out two and two, and the Devils had been subject to them, Chap. 10. ver. 1, and
17. If the Reader be disposed to cast an Eye back to my p. 15, to p. 33. he
will yet more evidently see, I have not wronged him, and perhaps be convinced
wherefore G. Keith dropped them.

To his Thirdly, Wherein he repeats his Notion concerning Cornelius, not having
the Holy Ghost in his Gentile-State, etc. as it has been largely treated of,
in this very Tract, under my first Head, I referr thereto: Yet he persisting p.
29. to deny the Holy Ghost is in Wicked Men, or the pious Gentiles, and that
none have Page 29.
it but Believers in Christ crucified, and yet acknowledging the Word near to
be Christ, an Administration of the Gospel to be given in all Ages of the
World, the Spirit the same, the Rule the same, the Faith the same, (see
Universal Grace, p. 8. Immediate Revelation, p. 107, 108. Truths Defense, p.
70. forecited) shows he would divide Christ from his Spirit, and is
contradictory. A further instance whereof take out of his Book of Divine
Immediate Revelation, p. 63. where he says, Cornelius received the Spirit
immediately and yet obtained it FURTHER by means of Peter's Preaching: Whereas
now he denies he had the Holy Ghost in his Gentile-State: But it is become
habitual to him, since he turned from Truth, to contradict himself and his
former Writings.

To my Question, Whether any Prayer is heard by God, but what is put up by his
Spirit? He Answers, Nay, but Servants and Pious Gentiles, such as Cornelius was
in his Gentile-State, may be and are helped to Pray by the Spirit, having the
influence of the first Ministration of the Spirit, which though remotely
Preparatory, yet does not instate the Soul into Union with the Spirit, etc.
Whence had he this? Or how does he prove, that Men's Souls are not in Union with
the Spirit, when helped to pray by the Spirit? Surely, as there are Degrees of
Ministration, so there are Degrees of Union, and Degrees of Acceptance,
Diversities of Gifts, but the SAME Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 4. But he goes on, And
were not my Adversaries extreme blind and ignorant, they might understand how
the Apostle calls one and the same Spirit, the Spirit of Servitude, and the
Spirit of Adoption, Rom 8. 15. Does he bring this for or against himself? If
the Spirit, in the Son and the Servant, be one and the same Spirit, it must be
the Holy Spirit: It is Everlastingly Holy in its self, Holy in every Operation
and Ministration in Man; but in Degree, the Administrations differ, the Law
must be passed under, before the Sonship is known; it is the Spirit of Holiness
in every step, so denominated from its Effects, though the Sonship is not the
first step.

He goes on, These Men's arguing that Men may be Eternally Saved, etc. who have
no Faith or Knowledge of Christ without them, do sufficiently declare what
Heathens they are, and of what little value they make the Faith and Knowledge
of Christ Crucified, and that their Religion is nothing but Deism, etc. Answ.
We do not believe that, that Faith is not necessary to Salvation to us, to whom
the means of knowing it, is offered, but the contrary: But that, where it is
not revealed, it is not of Necessity unto Salvation, G. Keith has granted.
There it is more than Deism, yea Christianity, for believing in the Light, they
do believe in Christ. See Universal Grace, p. 117. and p. 30.

In his Fourthly, he cites a Passage of mine imperfectly, out of Rector
Corrected, p. 150. and then makes his flourish. To a Question of the Rector of
Arrow, whether the Light within sufficiently tells us, that the Messiah is
come, born, had real Flesh, dyed, etc. G. Keith Answers, that it does teach,
That there is a God that created all things, that he is most Holy, Just, and
Wise, a plentiful Rewarder of them that fear him, etc. and that these are AS
NECESSARY Truths as any, etc. (See my p. 22.) Upon this I argued (and G. Keith
has dropped both Quotation and Argument) If the Holy Ghost be given ONLY to the
one Faith, not to the other, surely that one Faith must needs be the most
necessary Faith. Now to the other part [that many, who never had the
Scriptures, yet if faithful to the Light, whether they have not been accepted,
have not believed in the Light, by believing in Christ, who is the Light] he
queries, But where is my Contradiction here? Answ. Even in what I have cited
above, and he has craftily left out. He goes on, Did I ever say, That Men may
believe in the Light, or Christ within, and never at any Time, from first to
last believe in Christ without, either explicitly or implicitly? For this
they bring no Proof, and I believe they cannot, says he. Answ. It was not the
Rectors Question, Whether they that dyed without it, and had it not at first,
should have it at last, in some other Revolution? Perhaps neither of them
dreamt of that Distinction, when the Book was wrote. Nor whether they should
have it explicitly or implicitly, but whether the Light does sufficiently
tell it? He should in his Answer have made that Distinction, if he would have
it allowed him now; but instead of that, to an indefinite Question, he gives an
indefinite Answer, asserting there are Truths as necessary that it does teach,
and that they that believe in the Light [believe these necessary Truths thus
revealed] believe in Christ, and are accepted.

I having in my p. 25, 26. cited G. Keith [That Eternal Life and Salvation is
only to be had through the Knowledge and Faith of Christ Crucified -- that this
Faith is indispensibly necessary to all -- The Work of Sanctification ascribed
in Scripture to Christ's Blood and Sufferings, as well as to his inward
Appearance, and to both indispensibly necessary, and to Faith therein.] I
opposed them, p. 26, to 31. to his former sayings, G. Keith giving the goby to
the rest, touches upon this Passage [The Work of Sanctification, etc.] Thus we
see plainly (says he p. 30.) they place ALL upon Page 30.
Christ within, and NOTHING upon Christ without, and adds, O bold
Antichristianism, etc! But he sees amiss, I did not here give Mine or my
Friends Sentiments either way (that I had done before, p. 11.) but opposed G.
Keith to G. Keith: Yet may now tell him, We do not place all upon Christ
within, nor all upon Christ without; we do not divide Christ, but believe it
was necessary that he should come, as well as that it was afterward expedient,
he should go away, and that the belief of both is a Duty, even in order to
Salvation, where the means of having it, are afforded. And himself has said,
The Knowledge of Christ's coming in the outward, is not of necessity to
Salvation, save only where it is revealed: Which as it was one of the places
among many other I cited (see my p. 30.) in Contradiction to the three Passages
above; so had he no Reason to say here, But wherein I have contradicted that
Assertion, they show not; for I both showed and directed my Reader to fourteen
contradictory Assertions out of his Book of Universal Grace, from my p. 26, to
31. and declared p. 26. (immediately after the Quotation he brings) that I so
brought them.

In his Sixthly, he creeps in at the Tail of a Citation of Mine [Nor is the
outward Name that which saves, but the inward Nature, Virtue, etc.] thus, But
they no where show how I contradict this. Answ. That is false, for it is one of
these fourteen I mentioned even now. He goes on, I say still, it is not the
outward Name either of God or Christ, that saves without the inward Nature,
Virtue and Power, which dwelt and dwells in all fullness in the Man Christ
Jesus, etc. Here he falsifieth his own Quotation, as if there were no
difference between saying, It is not the outward Name that saves, BUT the
inward Nature, etc. and saying, It is not the outward Name that saves WITHOUT
the inward Nature, etc. So little does he regard, what becomes a fair
Adversary. Had he took my Sentence entire his Contradiction had been obvious.
In Order to clear an Objection himself had raised, That there can be no
Justification without Faith in Christ, but these Gentiles had not Faith in
Christ, therefore, etc. he Answers by denying the second Proposition, thus, If
they did cleave unto, and believe in the Light they believe in Christ, for he
is the Light nor is the outward Name that which saves but the inward Nature,
Virtue and Power signified thereby; which was made manifest in them, etc. So
that here he ascribes Salvation in these Gentiles to the inward Work, who,
according as stated on the Objection, were supposed not to have Faith in
Christ, but they believing in the Light, he says, they have, and so
contradicts that other saying, alleged above, that the Faith of both the
inward and outward coming, is indispensibly necessary to all.

He often lays to my Charge, that I bring no place to prove where he
contradicts himself; but that is not true: He leaps over my Proofs, that he may
not see them, picking here and there a Passage, in reading over many Pages, and
perhaps chooses such, as lie most remote from my comparing, wherein the
Contradiction lies. So here (in his Seventhly) upon my quoting him, That these
Gentiles (he leaves out, who did call upon the Name of the Lord, and were
saved, and adds, which was not there, had the Gospel Preached unto them, who
goes on) were not under any outward Administration of the Gospel: And then
alleges, I bring no place to prove where he contradicts this Assertion. I
will tell him, Let him ^ut read two Lines further, and it will direct him,
where, viz. in Truth Advanced, p. 70. But guess, I ken his meaning, why he left
out [did ^all upon the Name of the Lord] and put ^n [had the Gospel preached
unto them] viz. that he might hook in the next Citation of Mine, which more
touched him, without a particular Reply. For this was but a Proem to that,
^here from the Apostles saying, They have not I obeyed, I show he allows the
very Gospel has ^een Preached unto all, otherwise (says he) they ^ould never
have been charged with not having obeyed it: And upon that, I put him to prove,
that the History of Christ's Birth, Crucifixion, etc. was ever preached to all,
either explicite^ or implicitly, seeing he says, the very Go^pel has been;
and secondly, that such recei^ed not the Holy Ghost, as in p. 28. of Mine, ^
this like a Man? Or a Scholar? And that to ^^e he so vndervalues, as having
neither true ^ogick, nor common Sense? And whereas he ^n Answer to the jumbled
Quotation he brings) ^lledgeth that the former Distinction will serve ^re, of
express and implicit, this is to affirm, ^ot prove. If Time or Ability had not
failed ^im, surely it behoved him to have done it.

What he would have to be Noted, as if the ^ain Branch of the Question were, of
the Necessity of our Faith in Christ crucified to our Salvation who are
professed Christians, I do note, as a notable slander, for Proof whereof he
referring n^ to his own Evidence (some where or other in his Exact Narrative,
for he tells us not where) I Answer, I doubt not, but if there, the Reader will
find it replied to, in the Answer to the Narrative.

How the most pious and upright among the Gentiles were saved by Faith in
Christ Crucified, wh^ had not Faith outwardly Preached, he now say may be one
of these Secret things that belong to God and not to us, till he please to
reveal it. Wh^ does he meddle with them then, and prov^ quarrelsom about it?
Why seek to comprehen^ it, and describe it, by the City of Refuge, and ^ where
he tells us, they are shut up as in a Custody or Safeguard, till the Faith come
to be revealed? But this it is to hold Notions, a Madares not defend.

In his Eighthly, he brings me in thus quoting him, He [Christ] left not the
other Nations destitute of the main and principal Thing, eve^ the Manifestation
of the Light, etc. [I adde^ there, which would have given them the Knowledge of
God, and of all his Laws and Statutes ne^^ full to be known by them] Hereupon he
Paraphr^ se^h upon his own Words, main and principal thing, (...) think, he
meant the Light within, compared with Christ without, he tells us, we deceive
our selves. Answ. That it was such a Manifestation as gave the Knowledge of
God, and of all his Laws and Statutes needful to be known by them, are his own
Words. And seeing the^ were destitute of something, what was that they had not,
and now have not, whence they are denominated Gentiles (that which he queried
upon (as I instanced in my p. 31.) seeing it has been so in Times past, why
may it not be so now) but even that which we have, from whence we are
denominated Christians?

From my Book he sallies to G. Whitehead's Postscript, whither I now follow
him. His Notion of the Revolutions I had deduced from what himself had laid
down in his Book, called, Truth Advanced: The same G. Whitehead charges upon
him from Personal Conference; to which in general G. Keith replies by referring
to his Book, called Truth and Innocence Defended (wherein the Reader may find
he is rather Evasive than plain) and to his Appendix to the General History of
the Quakers, without citing any Passage out of them, and then excepts against
G. Whitehead's Evidence, from his Words, If I mistake not, adding in a Scoff,
Is this like Infallible George Whitehead? See p. 31. Page 31.
To which I Answer, The Words having been spoken about twelve Years ago, it
became not G. Whitehead to be over Positive, as to every Circumstance, as
whether it was the first Point in difference betwixt them, whether the
Transmigration was to be of all Souls, or of some of them, and how many
particular Scriptures he argued from, etc. but as to the Main he is Positive, I
am sure, says G. Whitehead, he argued for that Notion (of the Revolution of
Humane Souls) in a Book of his in Manuscript; which he showed me before he went
over into America, that he then dissuaded him fr^^ Printing it, and withal that
G. Keith told him since his return, he had brought it over with him, as in said
Postscript, p. 50, 51. So that G. Keith's flourish is very Empty and Idle, G.
Whitehead's Evidence being in so many respects full and positive.

He goes on, If such a Manuscript were such a Crime in G. Keith, to render me
an Apostate [I find no ground he has so to suggest] and gone from Truth, why
did not G. Whitehead give me Gospel Order, etc? Answ. I do not find but he did
give Private Admonition, and tha^ it had that Effect, as to dissuade him from
Printing it. But that every Error in Judgment should Anathematize a Man, and
render his no Brother, especially while kept Private and not Divulged, he may
see is not our way, by the friendly Correspondence afterward hel^ between G.
Fox, G. Whitehead and him, which although he now make so ill an use of, as if
i^ were Hypocrisy in them, so to do, as to excu^^ his late calling G.
Whitehead, Dear Geo. Whitehead, even when his Heart was not with him and his
Brethren, but he had broke out into Enmity and Prejudice; yet are not the Case
Parallel.

But leaving G. Whitehead a while, let me return a little to the Book, says G.
Keith, which shows, he assigns the Book to another Author notwithstanding his
former laying it to G. Whitehead. That which comes next is this Whereas G.
Keith in an Answer to an Objection, that Adam dyed not that Day that he s^^ned,
etc. had alleged, that Adam not living a ^^^pleat thousand Years, which in
Scriptures signifies sometimes a Day, Psalm 90. It may be said, he lived not a
whole Day, I replied, That this is a Principle of the Revolutionists is plain
to all that know their Principles, and that it is his, is also manifest [there
G. Keith stops, but I go on] in that he gives it as one of the Answers to the
Objection. Upon this he Vaunts, saying, p. 32. Page 32.
What lame Evidence and Argument is this? And then tells us, Justin Martyr, and
many others, Worthy, Ancient and Late Christian Writers held, that a thousand
Years in Scripture sometimes signify a Day (which they might for ought I know,
for he thinks it enough to assert, without directing us, where to find it) and
at length gives us the same from Scripture. But all this will not help him, the
Question is not whether a thousand Years does not in Scripture sometimes
signify a Day; but whether it did so in that Place, where it is said to Adam,
In the Day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye; and whether giving
that Interpretation there to that Objection, did not involve him, in the Notion
of the Revolutionists, who so construe the Place, and therefrom labor to
defend their Notion.

Though he like not to be esteemed a favourer of Revolutionism, (telling us in
the last Line of this Page, his not daring to defend it, did not proceed from
fear of being defamed, but seeing he pretends to no such Assurance in the Case,
etc.) Yet would he fain persuade us, we make Paul and Beza alike guilty in the
Case of the Revolutions, if the Words of Paul, Gal. 3. 22, 23. be but well
considered. Answ. That that Place speaks of a State after Death, does not
appear, ^^ G. Keith does, in saying, So that had they dyed in that State, they
could not have perished, even as the Manslayer was safe in the City of Refuge;
(Thus in my p. 33. I quoted him out of Truth Advanced, p. 43.) On the contrary
the Author to the Hebrews says, As i^ it appointed unto Men once to dye, but
after this the Judgment, so Christ was once offered, Heb. 9. 27, 28. So have I
answered one Scripture by another. And now he need not say (as he here does, p.
33.) Suppose that twelve Years ago I Page 33.
was in an Error, will that prove that I hold them still? For his holding them
still is proved by other Mediums, of which the Instance above i^ one. Nor yet
has he cause to suggest, that it is too probable if G. Whitehead could have
revealed any secret; that would have taken away his Life, he would have done
it: For that is but a malicious Insinuation, what G. Whitehead declared being
now no secret in it self, nor was it probable that what G. Keith communicated
to him, and designed to Print, was imparted as a Secret.

Now we are come to my Fourth Head, of Christ and the Saints glorified Bodies,
wherein I opposed G. Keith's Notion in Truth Advanced, p. 111. saying, Paul
distinguishes between the Belly and the Body, saying, God will destroy the
Belly, but he does not say, he will destroy the Body, for seeing after the
Resurrection of the Dead, Men shall need none of the Meats of this corruptible
World, nor shall they need a Belly to put them in, as Guts and Draught, or any
gross Parts, as Men have ^ow. This I represented as a very carnal Conception of
the Resurrection, and opposed to his former Sentiments, wherein he declared the
glorified Bodies both of Christ and the Saints to be wholly Spiritual. For
indeed what Analoge is there between a spiritual Body, and that Body which is
not to be destroyed, but only the Belly, Guts and Draught of it? Herein he
seems well-deserving the Character of a Carnal Conceiver, which I fastened on
him, and this Answers G. Keith's Query, Do these Words prove that I have Carnal
Conceptions of the Resurrection, like those Sadducees? To the second, Did not
the Sadducees altogether deny the Resurrection? I Answer, Yes: Yet the Idea
they conceived thereof, in such as did believe it, was very carnal, witness
their Instance in the seven Men that married one Woman: But upon a groundless
Presumption, that I had inferred his saying, that Men should have Belly, Guts
and Draught after the Resurrection, which I never intended, he bestows his
vulgar Rhetoric of Perversion and downright Forgery upon me, then refers p.
34. to his Book called Truth Advanced, Page 34.
which I am willing enough the Reader should see, for there he will find more
of the same Leaven, and lastly his Answer to the Bishop of Aberdeen's queries,
which was Extant as he says, thirty Years ago. Answ. His former Sentiments
therein being sound, (if they were so) does not prove his latter were so: But
that he has contradicted himself, in this and other particulars, is too
notorious, I doubt not, to such as have read my former, and (...) read these.

The next thing is concerning Water Baptism and the Supper, wherein I showed,
tha^ one while he pretended to be moderate in his Judgment concerning them,
another while represented the^ as abolished Shadows, and leg^ Rites buried, and
not to be raised up again, as i^ my p. 35, to 42. More Instances I could give
but I reserve them till further Service calls for them, these being shifted by
him; though upon occasion of my opposing some of his Queries (in Truth
Advanced, p. 183, 184.) t^ his declared contradictory Sense formerly ^^
alleges, that they were simply proposed by hi^ as Queries, and plainly
distinguished from Positions, and that at Turners-Hall some made the excuse,
They did but Query. Answ. That Account or Narrative of what passed at
Turners-Hall, being given by himself, who is a Party and none of the fairest
Adversaries, I dare not confide in, and therefore apply my self to himself
thus, That if I did believe he would deny there were affirmative
Interrogatives, Queries in the Nature of Affirmations, I would hunt for a
passage I lately saw in a Book of his, that would give it against him. For that
these were so, coupled with Positions, not distinguished from them, is plain in
that they were proposed, as tending to Love, Peace and Unity among the Sincere
Professors of the Lord Jesus Christ (see Truth Advanced, p. 173.) which if he
will not be bound by, what are they brought for, or what a slippery Chapman
will these Men have of him? But to go on, from his adding of these Sincere
Professors, that they held the Head, and Build on the true Foundation, and yet
differ in some lesser Matters: I observed, that at the same Time no Epithets
were (with him) black enough upon his quondam Friends, whom he sometimes boasts
he has been upwards of thirty Years amongst. G. Keith taking hold of that
Passage [hold the Head, and build on the true Foundation] and giving the other
the slip, renders us so unchristianly uncharitable (as he says, we too
evidently show we are) as to judge none in Christendom differing from us in
Profession, hold the Head, or are Sincere Professors of the Lord Jesus Christ,
but we only. But he runs too fast, and in his Prejudice outruns himself. We do
not so judge, though he, while so unchristianly uncharitable (they are his own
Words) to his quondam Friends, and yet seeking to claw with others, that he
might Nest somewhere, deserved that rebuke.

Now let us hear what a kind of Retractation he makes. The Reader may perhaps
expect some great matter, if he be informed, what large Notice he has given
before hand, above a twelve Month ago, and how he bespoke his own Praise in the
being free to do it. For in his Book, called, True Copy (Dated in the third
Month, 1695.) in Order to introduce what he called, A short List of the Vile
and gross Errors of G. Whitehead, J. Whitehead, W. Penn, etc. he freely
acknowledges, that upon a review of his former Books of Immediate Revelation,
Universal Grace, Rector Corrected, and Truth defended, he has found some
Passages and Words, that not only need some further Explanation, but even in
some Part an Emendation and Correction: And thanks Almighty God, that has not
only given him to see them, but has given him that Humility of Heart, Love to
Truth, and regard to the Salvation of Souls, that he can freely both
acknowledge and correct his former Mistakes, after the example of some worthy
Ancients, True Copy, p. 17. What could be expected from hence, but something
besides flourish, from such as did not know G. Keith, especially considering he
has took Time for it? All he gives is this, I am not ashamed (says he here, p.
34, 35.) to own my general Mistakes, I have been under, concerning diverse
Places of Scriptures, particularly Relative to Water Baptism and the Supper, as
Mat. 28. 19. and 1 Cor. 11. 26. And some other Places of Scripture, relative to
some other Matters, especially in the Misapplication of some Places, to prove
certain Truths, which these Places did not prove -- And I am so far from being
ashamed to Publish this Confession, that I have great Peace and Joy in it.
Answ. This Confession is as Lame, as he pretends in another Place G.
Whitehead's Evidence to be; but two particular Scriptures named, the rest
General, as if he designed a reserve, when more of his Contradictions are laid
open, who notwithstanding the Joy and Peace he pretends to have in his
Publication, is very uneasily drawn to this little, and perhaps, had not I
forced him to it by exposing of him, had stayed yet another twelve Month,
before he had given them, which yet Falls abundantly short of what was proposed
in his True Copy, no Emendation or Correction being yet extant to those four
Books, he there both promised to exhibit, and assigned as needing them. Thus
Parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus mus: All G. Keith's empty crack ends in a
Ridiculous Boast.

I shall follow him upon this subject, though he unseasonably interposeth what
comes not in course. In his p. 36. upon his querying [whether it may not be
said, there is one Baptism, ^s there is one Land called America, though Page,
36.
the Map or Figure of it is also called America, even as there is but one
Spiritual Baptism with the Holy Ghost, though the outward Baptism with Water is
also called Baptism] I opposed thereto his asserting [That the Scriptures are
not that word, more than a Map or Description of Rome or London, is Rome or
London, or the Image of Caesar is Caesar, or Bread and Wine is the Body and
Blood of Christ] to which, after a little ventilation, that the foregoing is
only a Query, he will let it pass for a position, and adds, 1. The Scriptures
are not that Living and Essential Word, etc. But that they may be called the
Word, as a Map of America, is called America, I never denied, says he, The
more unsound man he, the mean while, say I, especially he having confessed they
are no more so, then Bread and Wine are the Body and Blood of Christ: Therefore
what he would turn upon us, viz. That if we deny this to be a Truth, we must
hold with the Papists, rebounds upon himself. 2. That though there is but one
Spiritual Baptism, yet that the outward Baptism with Water is also called
Baptism, is also true, for John's Baptism with Water is called in Scripture the
Baptism of John, says he. Answer, And so there were diverse Washings (o^
Baptisms) and the Doctrine of Baptisms in those Days, see Heb. 9, 10. and 6.
2. Although the Christians had but one, which himself once acknowledged to J.
A. of Leith, when he told him, We do not say, as the Papists, that there were
two Baptisms with Water, one of John another of Christ, Truths Defense, p. 124.
But not it seems, he can both say it with the Papists and defend it, so
uncertain a man is he,

Expostulating with him, I added, Here this Rabbi, who once boasted that he
has the gifts both of sound knowledge and Expressions with manifold other
Mercies bestowed upon him, has foiled himself sorely. At this he excepts,
first against the word Rabbi, alleging, it is in a Scoffing Spirit, and that
it is the known way of the Quakers not to call a Man, Master. Answer, I used it
as the Characteristick of what he covets to be, to wit a Sect Master, and as
such it suits him. His next Cavil p. 37. against Page, 37.
the Word [foiled himself sorely] he leaving to the Intelligent to Judge, I do
so also: Yet is he willing to forestall his Judgment, wherein I shall not
imitate him. Then to vindicate those words [sound knowledge, etc.] From
savouring of Boasting, he alleges, that to make it look like a Boast, I left
out these last words [for which I desire to Praise him for ever] and the
foregoing, viz. [his being Charged by his Opponent with Mavelous Ignorance,
Falsehood and Giddiness] To the first I say, The Pharisee stood and Prayed thus
to himself, God I thank thee, that I am not as other Men, Luk 18. 11. The
Pharisee thanked God: G. Keith desired to Praise him for ever. To the second,
Let another Man Praise thee, and not thy own Mouth; a Stranger, and not thy own
Lips, Prove. 27. 2.

He Objects against my calling his Book of Truth Advanced, a Bulky Book: But
this I did not as representing it a bigger Volumn, than many good Men have
writ, but that it was all Bulk, not to edification, but such gear, as I have
given the Reader a taste of already under my second Head.

I now return to his p. 35. where he alleges, Page, 35.
that I blame him for Opposing it as an Error, That the Garden of Paradise was
some part of this Visible Earth. [He left out, And that Man's Food both for his
Soul and Body was to have been Paradisical] to which he gives no other answer,
than some citations and inferences out of G. W. G. F. and W. S. That G. W. and
W. S have writ against them who have affirmed, that the forbidden Fruit was an
Apple, the Serpent a Creature like our English Snares, from which Dream of
theirs the Picture of a Snake, and an Apple in its Mouth in a Tree, are set up
at the beginning of Bibles, etc. Hence he argues, p. 36. If the Trees of the
Garden were not Visible, and particularly the Tree of the forbidden Fruit, as
Page, 36,
G. W. says it was not, then to be sure the Garden by his Judgment was not
Visible, etc. Answer, ^^ does not follow that man was not in a Visible Garden
any more than it would in the Metaphor, wherein Nathan expressed David's Sin
with B^^^shebah, under the Parable of an Ew-Lamb. For as it would be an undue
inference that David, Uriah, etc. Were not Visible Persons upon this Visible
Earth, because it would be gross ignorance and darkness to think, Nathan spoke
of a material Ew-Lamb; so in this case, it is as absurd to conclude G. Keith's
Notions that the Garden of Paradise was not some part of this Visible Earth,
that man's Food before the Fall was to have been Paradisical, and the Clothing
with the Skin and Flesh of this Frail, Mortal and corruptible Body, received
but since the Fall (as in Truth Advanced, p. 16. 18. and 27.) are backed by
these Friends, not allowing the gross Interpretation and Conception upon, Genesis
3. What he adds out of G. Fox's Journal (which he tauntingly calls that Famous
Book) where it is said, I was come up in Spirit through the Flaming Sword into
the Paradise of God, is very idle. For as there being a Mystical Canaan, does
not imply there never was an outward one: So there being a Mystical Paradise,
does not imply there never was an outward Paradise.

To defend his Exposition of Adam and Eve's hiding themselves among the Trees
of the Garden, to be in a Tree of the Garden, and that that one Tree may be
well understood, to be the divine Mercy or Clemency, whereupon I replied, The
divine Mercy is in Christ Jesus, and if they were got there, methinks when they
heard the Voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden, they should not have
been afraid, for they were already safe. G. Keith p. 37. after a repeating his
having said, that the Hebrew does bear it, in a Tree of the Garden, Page 37.
and a reflecting upon my ignorance in the Hebrew (a Language I never pretended
Skill in, for it is the application that I mind) adds, Are they not carnally
minded, to think that Adam thought he could hide himself, either among the
Trees of an outward Garden, or in any one Tree of it, so as God might not see
him? Answer, Adams thoughts I shall not dive into, but if he thought to hide
himself from the wrath of God (even in a Tree of the Garden, according to G.
Keith's Exposition) he found himself mistaken. But how Natural it is for fear
and guilt, to take undue and precipitant Courses, which in a sedate frame, they
could not propose to be sheltered by, instances in Isai. 2. 19. Hos. 10. 8. and
Rev. 6. 15, 16. declare, where men are said, to go into the Holes of the Rocks,
and Caves of the Earth, for Fear of the Lord; to say to the Mountains, Cover
us, and to the Hills, Fall on us; to hide themselves in the Dens and Rocks of
the Mountains, that they might hide them from the Face of him that sits upon
the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Did these men, thinks he, reckon
God could not see them there? Or were they not in a Terror and Amaze, not
knowing which way to turn? But he queries, Does not the Scripture say, Gods
Mercies are over all his works and does not the Clemency and Mercy of God
extend to them that are not yet in Christ? Answer, But how should man know
that, before the Seed (Christ) was promised? For this hiding was an interval
between the Fall and the promise. He goes on, p. 38. Seeing they will needs
have this place, where Adam hid, some outward Page, 38.
Trees on this Earth, by the same Carnal Mind they must understand, that this
walking of God, was a^ outward and bodily walking, and his Voice, an outward
and bodily Voice; and so they make not only Adam, but Moses, who writ these
words, to be an Anthropomorphite and Muggletonian. Answ. This does not follow,
For the Lord appeared unto Abraham in the Plains of Mamre, and he lift up his
Eyes, and looked, and lo, three Men stood by him [was Moses an Anthropomorphite
or Muggletonian, for describing the Lord appearing as a Man?] and he fetched a
Morsel of Bread, [was not that visible Bread?] See Genesis 18. 1, 2, 5. Again,
when Christ appeared to Joshuah, as a Man, as the Captain of the Lord's Host,
Josh. 5. 13, 14. And among the three Children, as a Man, whose Form,
Nebuchadnezzar said, was like the Son of God, Dan. 3. 24, 25. Were these Holy
Penmen Anthropomorphites or Muggletonians? Or the Plains of Mamre, not visible
Plains? The Jericho mentioned, a Jericho in the Air? The Furnace, not a visible
Furnace? Shedrach, Meshach; and Abednego, not visible Men upon this visible
Earth? For this is the tendency of his Argument against me.

In the next place, whereas G. K. had assigned it as an Error to assert, That
Adam and Eve were Naked before the Fall, and that their not being ashamed of
their Nakedness, did not imply their Innocence but rather their Impudence, I
queried, What sign or token of Impudence is it in People, to endeavor to cover
their Nakedness? To this G. Keith replies, Taking Nakedness Metaphorically, as
I do in that place, Genesis 2. As it is taken Rev. 3. 17. 18. It is a sign of
Impudence to endeavor to cover their Nakedness. And a little lower, Is not Sin
a Nakedness, Metaphorically taken? And when men cover their Sins, with false
and sinful excuses, it is a sign of their Impudence [and then that he might
have an occasion to fling an unproved Slander at us, adds] as is too manifest
in G. W. and J. P. Answer, No wonder if he be so severe upon us, when he is so
uncharitable to our first Parents, as to conclude them impudent Sinners, not
ashamed of their Sin, and yet seeking shelter under the divine Mercy: Yet has
he not hitherto proved, that that Nakedness, mentioned Genesis 2. 25. Which was
before any account of their Fall, was Sin; as well as that he has not assigned
what false excuses they made. He goes on, What Nakedness was that of the
Serpent [for so he renders, Genesis 3. 1. Where the Translation has it subtil]
was it bodily Nakedness? Answer, If it was Nakedness, it was such a Nakedness
as was suitable to him, as a Serpent, as a fallen Angel, even as Adam and Eve's
Nakedness, was suitable to them as Man and Woman, who as yet had not
Transgressed. But he queries again, Can we suppose, that God who Cloatheth
every Lilly of the Field, made Adam without a suitable Clothing, Did he not
Crown him with Glory and Honor? Psalm. 8. 5. And if his Head was not Naked, how
could his Body be Naked? Answer, This is to confound Allegorical with Literal
things. Innocence was his covering, we grant (I suppose) on both hands; but
does this answer the Terms of the proposition, or relate, either to the
Covering or Nakedness, whereof the debate is? The like may be said of the Crown
of Glory and Honor, Psalm. 8. 5.

G. Keith having assigned a twofold Clothing to man after the Fall, viz. A
Clothing them inwardly with the Righteousness of the Lamb, and outwardly with
the Skin and Flesh of this Frail, mortal and Corruptible Body, I queried, Did
he Cloth them with the Righteousness of the Lamb, and yet at the same time
debarr them access to the Tree of Life, See Genesis 3. 21. 22. What strange
Doctrine is this? Said I, to which he replieth, At the same time, is their
addition. Answer, In the Relation there is not a verse between. He goes on, If
by the same time they mean the same instant, or hour, I say Nay. But the time
was not long betwixt their Fall, and their Restoration, so far as they had
access to Christ, signified by the Tree of Life. Answer, Access to the Tree of
Life was not so soon regained; Gods Clothing them is mentioned, v. 21. and
after that, v. 24. That they were driven out, and a Flaming Sword placed at the
East of the Garden of Eden, which turned every Way, to keep the Way of the Tree
of Life: Nor is it probable, that such impudent Sinners, as he has represented
them, could so immediately come at it, that requiring a good Progress, and many
good steps to be made, before attained to. To my saying, with respect to the
outward Clothing which he defines to be the Skin and Flesh of this Frail,
Mortal and Corruptible Body, It is Monstrous that we should have a Body a Top
of a Body, he will not allow it to be his, but my own Invention and Foolish
arguing. Is a Mass, wherein there is a Mixture of Gold and Dross, a Body a top
of a Body, says he? Answer, The Comparison does not hold; Man had a Body
before the Fall, if this be Clothed upon, superinduced, then not a Mixture or
Compound, as in Gold and Dross. The Clothes we put on, are no part of our
Bodies, and that this Clothing which Adam had after the Fall, was not proper
to Man as Man, himself has said, Truth Advanced, p. 113. What is it then less
than a Body a top of a Body?

What I had cited out of him, Truth Advanced, p. 28. (of Man and Woman's being
made Back to Back before the Fall, and afterward split or divided into two
Sides or Halves, the effect of their Fall being such, that they could not
multiply their Species in one Body, without the Separation, as they might have
done, if the Fall had not been, etc.) He wholly waves touching only upon my
quarrelling (as he phraseth it) with his rendering Rib to be Side. Answer, I
should hardly think it worth (...) while to dispute it with him, whether it
(...) best Translated Rib or Side, but that his ^^^mara, of their being made
Back to Back, etc. Depends thereon. Hear then what the Scripture says, The
Lord God took one of his Ribs, Genesis 2. 21. And the Rib, which the Lord God had
taken from Man, made he a Woman, v. 22. And Adam said, This is now Bone of my
Bones, and Flesh of my Flesh, she shall be called Woman, because she was taken
out of Man, v. 23. Qu. How could she be Bone of his Bones, and taken out of
Man, if never in him, but only joined to him? Therefore shall a Man leave his
Father, etc. And they shall be one Flesh, v. 24. Qu. If they had grown
together, and been Created twain, Back to Back, why is it said, they shall be
one Flesh? But that it had respect, not to a Splitting asunder, even to a
distinct formation (in the Margin it is Builded, v. 22.) not a separation,
something taken out of Man, whereon the Lord had bestowed Workmanship, not
barely a healing where the cleaving Instrument had gone? Thus I leave it with
the Reader, whether Moses or G. Keith be soundest in the Expression of this
great Work of the Creator,

What he adds against G. Whitehead his calling G. Keith's proceedings arbitrary
and Extrajudicial, Page, 39.
new Court of Judicatory, etc. (They relating to his Summons to meet him at
Turners-Hall, and yet barely Exhibiting a general charge, without Mentioning
out of what Books and Pages they were deduced) I pass by, as what has been
answered over and over, particularly in my REFLECTIONS and the Paper called
REASONS, etc. For the rest he giving a general reference to his Narrative, I
shall as generally refer to the Answer to it, and for his Notion of the
Resurrection, to what I have already offered, under the Second Head, out of
Truth Advanced, p. 113. 116, 127. Where his Husk or Drossy part exceeds the
more Noble.

To his putting us in mind of 1 Pet. 3. 15. ^ say, The reason of our hope we
have given, and that in the most public manner, even to himself: We need not
go into Corners (as ^ll hearing is in comparison of the Press) to ^o it over
again, especially he being Debtor ^ill to two of T. Ellwood's, and mine called
^n Apostate Exposed: Therefore he may save ^s Labor in making offers to us, to
appoint (...) and place, and he will meet us; for we are before hand with him,
his Books not sticking upon our Hands unanswered, as ours do upon ^s.

And now I come to take notice of the first ^rt of his Book (called Antichrists
and Sadu^ Detected, etc.) levelled against a Book of Caleb Pusey's styled A
Modest Account of the ^rincipal Differences in point of Doctrine between to.
Keith and the People called Quakers, etc.) ^ereto he would entitule me, from my
re^^ding him, that it lay at his Door unan^ered, and the Second Days Meeting
at ^^don, from their approving it. With them ^ begins, p. 3. And I shall
Consider what he ^^h thereof, when I come to answer his ^^script, where it more
Naturally falls in.

What relates to matter of (...), of thin^s ^^sacted beyond Sea, as they who
were (...) thereto, are most Capable of answering, so shall leave it to them to
do, if they see cause, and begin with what he Objects against C. Pusey
concerning the sufficiency of the Light. The words Page 4.
(which the Friend began with, p. 8.) were taken out of G. Keith's Universal
Grace, p. 117, viz. That the Knowledge of him, as in the outward, is of
necessity unto Salvation, w^^ grant not [and it followed in the Book it self,
save only where it is revealed, etc. Here G. Keith seeks to creep out, by the
Terms Express Knowledge and Belief, (which he says is not universally of
absolute necessity unto Salvation, That thus R. B. says (but he tells ^^
where) and himself in the place above. Answer, The Knowledge is spoken of
Indefinitely, in that assertion (and when the words, Express and distinct
Knowledge are afterward a^ded, it is from the Terms of our Adversarie^ whose
Objection he cites) but he uses ^ those Terms in his own position, or as
explanatory thereof. For he is positive that Knowledge of Christ in the outward
(he sa^^ not the Explicit or Implicit Knowledge; ^^ the Knowledge) is not of
absolute necess^ to Salvation, save only where revealed.

In the very same Page, he says, Where he states the difference in point of
Doctrine be^^ some in Pennsilvania and me, as if I said, it w^^ an Error to
affirm, the Light within were suffic^^ without something else, etc. From whence
at ^ close of the Paragraph, he concludes, (...) exclude the Man Christ
without us, and his D^^ etc. From being Concerned in our Salva^ But herein he
wrongs C. Pusey who neither states their belief, nor his undue inference, but
only opposes G. Keith to G. Keith where, upon R. Gordons, saying, that the
declaring the Light and Power and Spirit within to be Christ the only Mediator
and Savior, asserts another Christ, another Savior than Jesus of Nazareth, G.
Keith tells him, If thou were indeed for this Mystery Christ within, as he is
the Seed, the Light, the Power and the Life, thou would not say this asserts
another Christ. This the Friend, in his p. 9. quoted out of G, Keith's Light of
Truth, p. 8. which is cogent: But what is this to a stating a point of
difference in Pennsilvania, or an inferring that they exclude Christ without
^s, his Death, etc. From being concerned in our Salvation? It shows indeed G.
Keith's Contradiction to himself (and as such it was brought) one while to say,
Declaring the Light within to be the only Mediator and Savior, asserts another
Christ than Jesus of Nazareth; another while that it does not so: And that was
^ll C. Pusey deduced therefrom, which G. Keith would pervert to a sense never
given, nor in^ended, in order to mislead his Reader and ex^icate himself.

In the next place comes a Citation out of G. Keith's Book, called Refutation,
etc. (which was Printed, I suppose in Pennsilvania, and I have sought for here,
but cannot get sight of) ^herein G. Keith Charges the Friend with Base Forgery.
When G. Whitehead had in softer ^erms expressed G. Keith's unfairness (he did not
say base Forgery) in leaving cut the word [Blood and Bones] which if inserted
had turned G. Keith's Cavil out of Doors, G. Keith had a Plaster at Hand,
imputing it, p. 39. to an oversight, either in the Print, or Transcript (it
seems he could not tell which, and that he writes by guess) But now he will
allow nothing to either. But observe how he makes good his Charge of Forgery.
See the place, says he, I have no such words, but plain Contrary, and then
refers not to the Page the Friend brought, which was Refutation. p. 38, 39. But
to another, viz. p. 42, 43. And in that other the words given have no affinity
with what the Friend alleged. The passage out of G. Keith in the Friends Book
was thus, [It is a real degree of Blasphemy to say, this Light cannot make
satisfaction for Sins past] in G. Keith's quotaon [neither is the Saints
greatest inward Righteousness or Holiness wrought in them by the Spirit of God,
an atonement for their Sins but Christ alone, who dyed for us, the just for
the unjust] Is it likely that one of these places should be mistaken for the
other? Nay they speak not of one thing; one speaks o^ the Worker, the Light;
the other of the Wor^ wrought, the Saints Righteousness. He might well enough
say both, for they do not Contradict one another: But such pitiful shift is G.
Keith put to, to defend his weak cause against a despised Miller, which a true
Br^^ Scholar would Scorn.

To Caleb Pusey's showing G. K. had said Magistrates may Preach, and opposing
thereto his saying, Preachers may no^ be Magistrates, he replies, This is no
Contradiction, for it is one thing occasionally to Preach, or Teach, or Exhort,
as any Christian can do, and another to Exercise the Office or Function of a
Minister of the Gospel of Peace one day, that says, Resist not evil, and our
Weapons are not Carnal, and another day to Hang Men for Murder. Answ.
Occasionally to Preach is a distinction occasionally made to creep out at. The
Office, Function, and Salary of such a Ministry as distinguishes the Clergy
from the Laity, he may perhaps now Court; but he was of another Mind once, when
he wrote his Book, called, The Woman Preacher of Samaria, Printed Anno 1674.
where in the very Title Page, he asserts she was a better Preacher, and more
sufficiently qualified to Preach, than any of the Manmade Ministry in these
Three Nations, and in his page 1. opposes that Notion, That Women should not
be Preachers, nor meddle with their Holy Function, and throughout the Book
labors to prove her Call, Qualifications, Success, Experimental Preaching,
etc. to be more immediate, more edifying, more free, than such as had the
Ordination from Man: Yet was she but what he now styles an Occasional
Preacher. But to come to the Second Branch of the Objection, May these
Occasional Preachers be Magistrates? May they resist Evil? May their Weapons be
Carnal? (May they Hang Men for Murder? For that he foisteth in to the Premises,
to make a noise) or do the Preachers Preach that Doctrine to be put in practice
by none but themselves? If so, none were to be Christians but themselves, and
then a Man, who is a Christian, cease to be a Magistrate, as well that a
Magistrate cease to be a Christian. I hope by this time the Reader will see
whither Prejudice has driven him, thus to lay down a Position, destructive to
Government, and shaking the Basis of all well-regulated Magistracy among
Christians, as if it were Ordained of God, for the punishment of evil doers,
and the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. 14. only among the Gentiles, and
Christ's Followers must run into Anarchy and Confusion.

He goes on, endeavoring to reconcile his saying, (Way Cast up, p. 131.) It is
no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, but a Pure, Ethereal or Heavenly
Body, to another saying of his, That it remains the same in Substance that it
was on Earth, etc. by distinguishing between the Flesh that is mortal, gross
and corruptible, and the Flesh that is immortal and incorruptible. Answ. How
can it be the same in Substance, when the Substance is not the same? Was the
Substance, when on Earth, no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, but
Ethereal and Heavenly? Or is Ethereal and Heavenly, the same in Substance,
with a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bone? How is this reconcilable?

To his positively denying the express Knowledge of Christ's becoming Man, and
Suffering, etc. to be of Necessity to Salvation, the Friend queried. How is it
now, that he says, that express Knowledge is indispensibly necessary to
Salvation, or perfect Justification, for which they both quote Presbyterian and
Independent Churches, p. 133. and G. Keith replieth, p. 5. Page 5.
His fallacy lies in this, that I say, the express Knowledge is not
universally necessary, but some Knowledge, if not express, yet implicit, is,
and this (he says) is no Contradiction. Answ. That Page has nothing in it of
that tendency, but what is, is in p. 111, 112. So that the Mistake in C.
Pusey's Book, in Print or Transcript, G. Keith has followed in his, without
amending it. This G. Keith did either espy, or he did not espy. If he did espy
it, why not also give warning of it, except he designed to lead his Reader
Hoodwinkt, that he might impose upon him? If he did not espy it, how could he
pretend to detect a fallacy, in what he had not compared? Take it either way,
it makes not for G. Keith's Credit. Now to return to the Quotation, the fallacy
is in G. Keith; for as the Question was concerning Salvation and PERFECT
Justification, so the Assertion whence it was deduced, was thus, It may be very
safely concluded that the express Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified, is
not of absolute and indispensible Necessity, unto the BEGINNING of a Man's
Salvation, although it is really of absolute and indispensible Necessity unto
the finishing and PERFECTING of it, said G. Keith, Presbyterian and Independent
Churches, p. 111. By this the Reader may give a guess, why G. Keith was willing
to shelter himself under a mispaged Quotation; for had the place been examined,
it would have discovered the Friends Inference to have been genuine, restricted
not to some Knowledge indefinitely, but to a saving and perfecting Knowledge.
And if any please to trace him yet further, they will find it was such a
Knowledge, as who had not, WHEN LIVING, might (according to G. Keith) have at
their Death, to wit, in the passing through the Valley of the Shadow of Death,
according to Psalm 23. 4. Even when they are not able to demonstrate unto the
Living, what is then revealed unto them, See Presbyterian and Independent
Churches, p. 112. Which as it is a perverse Exposition of that Scripture,
(David speaking there of a Condition here up on Earth, The Lords preparing a
Table for him in the presence of his Enemies, anointing his Head with Oil, etc.
So that Goodness and Mercy shall follow him all the days of his Life; ver. 5,
and 6. Not of a State after Death, when Men are not able to demonstrate unto
the Living, what is then revealed unto them) so it renders him a Favourer of
the Notion of Purgatory; as well as that it is worse than misapplying
Scriptures to prove certain Truths, which those places did not prove (an Error
he would pretend to have Retracted, p. 35.) this tending to defend untruths,
and unsound Notions, which the Scriptures do disavow.

Upon C. Pusey his querying, Seeing, according to G. Keith, he is not only the
true Christ, who was manifest in the Body of Flesh, but also as manifost in us,
how is it then, that he that is manifest in us, is something else, than he that
was manifest in that Body of Flesh, se^ing, IN BOTH RESPECTS, he is so
confessed to be the only true Christ and Savior. And surely the Word [only] is
alone, and admits of nothing else. Thus far the Friend. Hereupon G. Keith
citing him only, from where he says [the Word only] infers, that he places
all on the Light within, so that the Man Christ Jesus of Nazareth without us is
nothing of Christ, and calls it a blasphemous Assertion and Consequence, which
follows not from his Words. Answ. The Friend gave G. Keith his Words, not his
own, which as I have stated more fairly than himself has done, I leave with
the Reader, whether the Consequence be forced, not natural, or whether it
proves, that the Friend places all on the Light within, nothing on Jesus of
Nazareth without us. Or whether G. Keith had ground from hence to insult, that
his Opponent had neither Learning nor good Exercise of humane Reason, but had
better kept working at his Mill? as well as that I may put G. Keith in Mind
what he once said, that a Docta Ignorantia, or a learned Ignorance is more
safe, and to be preferred to an uncertain Knowledge or Science falsely, so
called. See Truths Defense, p. 77.

G. Keith goes on, Seeing that he would infer from my Words, That Jesus of
Nazareth cannot be something else than the Light, Power and Spirit within, it
is plain, that it is both their Sense and his, that Jesus of Nazareth is
nothing at all of Christ without us, which is a plain Contradiction to
themselves, and to himself in the following Words. Thus far G. Keith. But how
will he prove our Sense and his to be, that Jesus of Nazareth is nothing at all
of Christ without us, if that sense be so immediately Contradicted in the
following words? This shows he wants candor, and would take things by the
worst handle, to fasten an imputation, not only upon the Friend himself, but
his Brethren also, which he confesses is contradicted by him: Who, had he not
sought an occasion to misrepresent us might have entitled us at least, to
what he calls the contradictory Sense. Now C. Pusey his Words were these, upon
G. Keith's saying, The Light is Christ, but the Man Christ is something else,
he queried, Whether the Man Christ be become something else besides Christ? And
adds, but to wave such Comparisons, which shows his were not Assertory, but
argumentative ad hominem, a Comparison G. Keith drew him to. To this I say, The
Man Christ, who was made (or became) Flesh, John 1. 14. who said of himself, I
am come a Light into the World, Chap. 12. ver. 46. is not something else
besides Christ. And seeing himself has said, Way cast up, p. 102. That it is
not the outward Flesh and Blood that is the Man, but the Soul, or inward Man,
that dwells in the outward Flesh or Body, that is the Man most properly, such
as Christ was even from the beginning. I ask, Whether the Man Christ, that was
even from the beginning, be become something else besides Christ? And seeing
God has said, I am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior, Isa. 43. 11.
Whether this infers a denial of what Christ (who is the Light) did and suffered
without us in that prepared Body, etc.

And that the Friend himself did not believe that Jesus of Nazareth is nothing
at all of Christ without us, as unduly aspersed by G. Keith, hear him in his
Modest Account, p. 16, 17. where he thus has it, Though we cannot yield to G.
Keith in these his Terms, That the Light is not able of it self, and
consequently, that God (by G. Keith's own Words, who says the Light is God) is
not able to save, because we believe, Beside him there is no Savior, yet we do
not in the least Question, but dearly own and acknowledge and believe the Way
and Means, that the Lord was pleased, out of his infinite Love and good Will to
Mankind, to take, in order to redeem him from Sin and Death, as sending his
only begotten Son into the World, not only as a Light -- but also as Man, in
the prepared Body to offer up himself a most acceptable Sacrifice for the Sins
of the whole World, which Offering the Lord was pleased to accept of, and by
his Spirit and Power it is made Effectual for the Reconciliation and Salvation
of all those that repent of their Sins, and truly believe in his Name. And that
God does not save any without respect to that great Offering, we all grant and
truly believe, etc. This as it is a full Vindication of the Friend, that he did
not undervalue, but highly prize what Christ has done without us; so it needs
no further Comment, than a Reflection upon his Adversaries Disingenuity, who
kept this back, while he labored to suggest the contrary thereto, as the
Friends sense and ours.

He says further, He [C. Pusey] so mingles my words with his own, that no Man
can distinguish the one from the other, etc. And I think he is unwilling
rightly to distinguish, that he may pervert them. For whereas the Friend had
said, [And that God does not save any without respect to that great Offering,
we all grant and truly believe: For, as G. Keith says, The Lord having
ordained it so to be, how can or dare we say therefore, That he was or is not
Sufficient, by his Light, Power and Spirit, to save without something else?
Surely this seems to me too Presumptuous an Expression; for was not that Body
prepared of God? And what was done in it? Is it not said, God did it by him?]
G. Keith in p. 6. leaving out [And that God, Page 6.
etc.] and beginning with [For as G. Keith saith] lays Forgery to the Friends
Charge, as if [having ordained] related, not to God's saving by that great
Offering, but to the following Query, Concerning the Sufficiency of the Light,
which is a poor insult. From hence he takes occasion to infer the Necessity of
God's Saving by Christ, and that he could not save us without respect to the
Man Christ in the outward, otherwise he could or should contradict his own
Ordination, etc. which is granted him, even by the Friend. But whether
antecedently to Gods purpose, he would have saved us without the Death of his
own Dear Son, a thing (he tells us Exact Narrative, p. 25.) is above Man's
Capacity, and that he wholly waves that Dispute, is what I shall wave insisting
on, yet with this Caution, which the Friend also gave him in his, p. 18. viz.
Let us not undertake to argue, as if there were any thing, that God by his
Light, Spirit and Power, is not sufficient to do, and we need not debate any
longer about it.

What follows, relating to Matter of Fact transacted beyond Sea, whereof I can
pretend to no certain Knowledge, and their Relations do so vary, I must leave
to the Persons concerned to Answer, if they see meet, not being willing to
undertake a Defense of what I am not Privy to, nor to justify them, if in ought
they have exceeded, though I dare not trust his Evidence. Yet his alleging
that he Printed nothing about their retaking a sloop, till a considerable Time
after twenty eight of the Ministers had excommunicated him, to which Sentence,
some that gave the Commission did put their Hands, is a plain Intimation, what
animated him, not a concern for God and his Truth, so much as Revenge and
Malice.

In p. 7. G. Keith acknowledges he said in one Book (this is quoted
Presbyterian and Independent Page, 7.
Churches, p. 133. and should be p. 111.) The express Knowledge of Christ's
Death and Sufferings, as Man in the outward, is not universally necessary to
Salvation, but that he has said, That the express Knowledge of Christ's Death,
is universally necessary, he alleges, C. Pusey ^i^es no Passage in any of his
Books. Answ. Himself has acknowledged in that very Book, Presbyterian and
Independent Churches, p. 111. That the express Knowledge is universally
necessary to the perfecting of Salvation and Justification, and in p. 112. has
allotted them, when it must be, viz. not when living, but afterward, and the
same he says here, thus, I never had any Controversy with any, says he,
whether the express Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Death and Sufferings, be
universally necessary to Man's Salvation, so as necessary to be had by all and
every one before Death. Thus incidit in Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charybdim: To
get off from a Contradiction, he recurs to what will include the Doctrine of
Purgatory, or Revolutionism, for if not before Death, then after Death: And
when then? In their Passage through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, as
instanced above? Or in a renewed Visitation and Re-animation? The former shakes
Hands with the Papists, the latter with the Revolutionists.

But the true State of the Question between them and me, was and is, says G.
Keith, Whether the express Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Death, Sufferings,
etc. be not necessary to Salvation to all professing Christianity, and who have
the opportunity, and help of the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
etc. Answ. What he calls the true State of the Question is denied by them,
particularly by S. J. (State of the Case, p. 11.) to be any Question at all, as
well as that it i^ against our known Principle, to call in Question the
Necessity of the Faith of Christ's Death and Sufferings, where the means of
having it is afforded.

What C. Pusey relates from p. 24, to 28. G. Page 8.
Keith Terms base Insinuations against him, about the twelve Revolutions, and
telling some Stories, most of which are, if we will believe G. Keith,
absolutely false, and that little that is true, not fairly nor duly related,
and for which no Proof is brought but his own forfeited Credit, etc. p. 8.
Answ. This is too general. What are those Stories? Which of them absolutely
false? Which in Part true? And in what Part true, in what unfairly related? If
the Friend have forfeited his Credit, I am sure G. Keith goes not the way to
gain his. However one of the Relations I shall transcribe, which was, 'That G.
Keith told Ebenezer Slocam of Rhoad Island, as he affirms, to this purpose,
That it was Gods great Mercy to the Jebusites, Amorites, and Hittites of Old,
in that he destroyed them so much at once by the Israelites, for that by so
doing, their Souls might be sooner come into the Bodies of the Jews Children,
and so consequently become the sooner to be Members of the Visible Church, etc.
See Modest Account, p. ^7. If this be one of the Stories he has ought material
to object against, it had highly behoved him, instead of passing it over in
silence, to have declared whether false in the whole, or in Part: for if this
be true, his leaning to the Doctrine ^f the twelve Revolutions, is undeniable;
as well as his sliding so lightly over it, gives a ^^rong Presumption, that he
has spoken to ^^at Effect.

His next Essay to clear himself from having indicated us and our Doctrine to
C. Mather a New England, is as unsuccessful. He says, ^ was before that Party
rose up against him in Pennsilvania to oppose the same Doctrine he delive^ed in
his Printed Books -- that he was astonished to ^d how suddenly they turned
against the very same ^octrine, after W. Stockdale had accused him of Preaching
two Christ's -- and finding G. Whitehead and W. Penn to favor and support them,
he found sufficient cause to changs his Judgment concerning these Men, p. 8, 9.
Answ. This will not shelter him, for his complaint against W. Stockdale (which
had had a hearing before Friends, and they for the most Part excused and
defended him, as G. Keith alleges) was by himself again laid before Friends
of the Ministry at their Yearly Meeting in Pennsilvania in the seventh Month,
1691. See Plea, p 2, and 3. whereas the Book in Answer to C. Mather (called
Serious Appeal) was Printed Anno, 1692. This shows as if the Man would boggle
at nothing to excuse himself, who ha^ in that Book defended our Friends in
Americ^ as well as here from being Heretical or Blasphemous. Alike successful
is he in what he alleges against G. Whitehead and W. Penn: For those very
Books out of which he and other (in their Book called Christian Faith) ha^
brought instances to convince our Opposers ^^ the soundness of our Principles,
has G. Keith since offered to prove unsound in those very Principles. This is
not changing his Judgment of Men only, but even of Books.

His next Paragraph p. 9. is about the Doctrine of the Revolutions, in which he
dodget Page, 9
extremely, one while representing it as such which from two Passages out of G.
Fox, in the one he mentions neither Book nor Page, b^^ says it is in some of
his Printed Books; in the other he gives the Book (viz. the Journal and not the
Page, he says has occasioned son to think G. Fox favored the Revolutions,
and adds, but I do not say he did (Query, Did he not know he did not?) Which
shows the Man does not know what he would be at; for if not sufficient, from
his lame Quotations to ^a^ten that Doctrine upon G. Fox, why did he bring them?
Another while he renders it a Question, Whether the Disciples did not hold that
^xtrine, that said Master, who has sinned, this Man or his Servants, [he
should have said Paents] that he was born Blind, and adds, many other Places of
Scripture there are on which he ^ight as much and much more query concerning
the ^evolutions, as any Expressions he has mentioned ^ mine. But all this is
trifling, if he can prove at Doctrine of the Revolutions by Scripture, ^^ him
avow it to be his, and do so. He who ^^th told us, that it is only safe to keep
close Scripture Words and Terms, will he not do himself? But what the Friend
offered, to love that Notion to be his, G. Keith gives ^^ but in a general
Reference to p. 24, 25, ^^. of the Friends Book, till he comes to the ^stance
of an Indian and poor Infant. Now C. Pusey in his p. 25, 26. had argued thus,
'If ^hey could not perish, though they dyed without Faith and Knowledge, and
yet that Faith and Knowledge is absolutely necessary to perfect their
Salvation, where must they have that ^aith and Knowledge, unless they come
again ^o receive it? And if they do, what will become of that Text (Eccles. 11.
13.) brought ^y G. Keith against the New England Profes^ors? Now according to
this Text, brought by G. Keith himself, if an honest Indian o^ poor Infant, dye
or fall without that outward Knowledge, so they must lie. And then if they
cannot be perfectly saved without it, then their lying must be but as Soul
saved in Part, and that to be their State forever, because, as they fall, so
they lie. The far C. Pusey which G. Keith wholly wave^ quoting only from [If an
honest Indian, etc. and goes no further than the Word [outward Knowledge] which
yet it had become him ^ have answered, if he could But what he decite, he is
soon weary of, and catching at t^^ Term outward Knowledge, having left out who
would have explained it, he says, I never affirmed the absolute Necessity of
an outward Knowledge, universally to Salvation, besides that prop^^ly all
Knowledge is inward, and not outward, the subject of it being the Mind and
Understanding that inward. Answ. This is poor shifting, I mig^^ as well say,
all Knowledge properly is expre^ not implicit, what is implicit being hidden
not revealed or made known (kept secret, ^ himself phraseth it) but he plays
upon Word to slide off from the Matter; for the Mill^ has ground him. He knows
the Knowledge they were treating of, was such as G. Keith himself defined to be
necessary to the perfe^^ing Salvation, a Knowledge G. Keith has a lowed they
had not, when living; and th^^ the Reader would have perceived, had not ^ Keith
curtailed the Quotation: And therefore his Cavil is as idle as evasive.

Having thus tossed off the Friends query and argument, he betaketh himself to
retorting I return his own query (says he) upon him to answer, Page, 10.
What becomes of them when they Dye, seeing without being Born again, there is
no entering into the Kingdom of God, and what becomes of many Quakers, and
others, that before they dyed, had no signs that they were arrived at that high
state of Sinles perfection, as attainable by the Grace of God in this Life. And
adds, Let him tell me, or any for him, what becomes of such when they Dye, and
I may give him the like Answer, or some better, what becomes of honest Indians,
when they Dye, p. 9. 10. And then he would make up an Answer for us, which yet
he confesses, we blame when given by others (so ready is he to bespatter us at
any rate) as if they who are in measure Sanctified, etc. Are made perfect in
Holiness at the instant of Death, etc. But we have no need to recurr to this
Notion, that of Purgatory or of Revolutionism to defend our Principles, though
he seem at last willing to allow, it is not altogether improbable, saying, It
has the same Probability in the one Case, as the other, to slide himself off
from the imputation of Revolutionism. And although he has so frequently
stigmatized us, as denyers of the universal benefit accruing to mankind, by
that one offering of our Lord Jesus; yet I shall tell him, that even herein we
ascribe more thereto than he does, who acknowledge that the Penitent, who Dye
not arrived to that Maturity, which a more full improvement of their Talent
might have produced, receive an advantage by Christ's Death and Sufferings,
viz. That a Propitiation is thereby made for their Sins, and not for theirs
only, but also for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2. 2. So that they Dying
in a state of Salvation, and Renovation, their Sins are blotted out, Acts, 3.
19. which none of the finally obdurate and impenitent, partake of: So that
there is no necessity of Pleading for Sin, Term of Life, or for a Purgation at
the instant of Death, in Purgatory, or a Succeeding Revolution, but on him (the
Advocate) is help laid, Psalm. 89. 19. Thus he may see I do not shift and boggle
in my Answers, my cause being such as is not ashamed to show its Head, whatever
his is, that drives such a man as G. Keith (who so overvalues himself upon his
School-Learning, and so undervalues others for want of it) to such mean and
pitiful Subterfuges.

C. Pusey having showed him a Contradiction, in one while saying, That which
rises is the Mortal that puts on Immortality and the Corrutible that puts
on Incorruption, and again, The Flesh that is Mortal and Corruptible, is not
that Flesh, that shall be raised up Immortal and Incorruptible (See Testimony
against that absurd Opinion, p. 3. and 10.) If that which rises be the
Corruptible, how is it that that which rises is Incorruptible, and Corrupts
not again? Thus far the Friend to which G. Keith replies, He quarrels not so
much with me, as with the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 53. and v. 50. Answer, What
Paul speaks of the Bodies sown, G. Keith applies to the Bodies raised, that he
might make the Scriptures as self-Inconsistent, as himself is: It was sown in
Corruption, in Dishonor, in Weakness, a Natural Body; raised in Incorruption,
in Glory, in Power, a Spiritual Body; See, v. 42, 43, 44, But Paul does not
say, That which rises is the Mortal, and then again, The Flesh that is Mortal,
etc. Is not the Flesh that shall be raised Immortal, as G. Keith has done.

To Vindicate his other assertion, viz. That which rises is a pure, Noble part
that Consumes not, he brings in the Similitude of a Grain of Corn, p. 11.
thus, All but Fools and Idiots know, that as there is a Grain of Corn that
Corrupts, Page, 11.
and turns to Earth or Dust, so there is another part in it, that is more
noble, that Corrupts not, but by the Corruption of the other part -- Gets a
new Life. Answer, This Simile will not hold, even among them that are not Fools
and Idiots, for that very noble part may Corrupt, and the Industrious Husband
Man have no Crop, as G. Keith himself, who is neither Fool nor Idiot, allows,
in the very same page. Again, that more noble part in the Seed, is proper to
the Seed, as Seed: And the less noble is a necessary Appendix to the more
noble, which is not so in this Case, G Keith himself being Judge. For Man had a
Body before the Fall, that Body had its radix (else how could it multiply its
Speices, according to G Keith in Truth Advanced, p. 28.) the which Body G.
Keith says, was not Naked before the Fall, ibid, p. 24. On the other hand the
Skin and Flesh of this Frail, Mortal and Corruptible Body, he says, is not
proper to Man as Man, but a Clothing he received since the Fall, See, ibid. p.
113. and 27. But is this predicable of a Grain of Corn? So that all his noise
of Sadduceism, Atheism, etc. Terminates in a dispute whether the Man's Clothes
shall rise or no? viz. That which, according to him, is not proper to Man as
Man, not so much as to his Clothing before the Fall, but was added by means of
transgression? A Resurrection of the Body, of such a Body as God shall please
to give. we own, and that he knows full well; but his uncertain, Wavering,
Notional, Absurd, Incongruous, and Unscriptual Expositions we reject (as
particularly what he said even now, that that which rises is the Mortal, and
yet again, that which rises is a pure noble part, that consumes not) and this
makes him uneasy.

As a further Indication of his instability, let us hear what true Philosophy,
right Reason, and ocular Experience teaches, as himself gives it us, viz. The
Generation of one thing follows the Corruption of another, yet there is
something in the new Generated thing, that was in the old Corrupted thing, etc.
Whence I query, Whether this SOMETHING in the new generated thing, which was in
the Old Corrupted thing, be that which rises Mortal and Corruptible, as he
said even now? For if Mortal and Corruptible, how comes it to be a pure noble
part, which consumes not, nor corrupts, with the old Corrupted thing? Are
these Terms convertible? That predicable of the one, which is of the other? Or
is it not rather a demonstration, that in stead of being taught by true
Philosophy, etc. He is now Plunged into the Ditch of Philosophy, as he called
it, whence this blind Leader of the Blind cannot help himself out? As well as
that these Sentiments, whereby the Flesh, Blood and Bones are Termed the Old
Corrupted thing, that the New Generation has not, but only SOMETHING that was
in it, (The Flesh that is Mortal and Corruptible, being by him denied to be the
Flesh that shall be raised up Immortal and Incorruptible, p. 10.) do no ways
accord with those of those, whom he now appeals to, against us; and would
shelter himself among, for they assert the Resurrection of the same Body of
Flesh, Blood and Bones, that Dyed and was laid in the Grave; he here denies
it. So that after all his quarrelling with us, rendering us Atheists, Sadducees,
etc. And Laboring to Provoke the Government against us, to suppress our Books;
himself is no less Erroneous and Heretical (while abiding by what he here
says) to their received Opinion of the Resurrection, than we are, when our
belief is rightly stated.

Upon G. Keith his distinction of Commutation and Transmutation, with respect
to Body and Soul, the Friend argues, first, with respect to the Body, thus, If
the Corruptible be laid aside, and that which Corrupts not, but is separated
(as G. Keith says) in about a Years time, more or less, and laid by divine
Providence in some certain Invisible place, till the Resurrection; How then
does it receive the change meant by him in the Text, at the Resurrection? viz.
If it be Incorruptible before the Resurrection (for he says, it Corrupts
not) and the Change must be a Transmutation from one thing to another; must it
not then needs be from an Incorruptible Body to an Incorruptible Body, and what
change is that? For if it be a Transmutation, what is it which is Transmuted?
It cannot be the noble and pure part, because the Apostle says, It is our Vile
Body, and according to G. Keith, it cannot be that which Corrupts, because he
says, That which rises, Corrupts not. Thus far C. Pusey p. 32. 33. which G.
Keith gives not his Reader, though he makes his perverse inference therefrom,
saying of his Opponent, He cannot conceive how there can be an Incorruptible
part lodged or placed in the Corruptible Body, and how the Body can have any
Incorruptible part in it before the Resurrection, etc. To which I answer, The
debate is not about an Incorruptible part, being lodged in a Corruptible Body;
but what that is that is changed, whether the vile Body, or that which
Corrupts not; and again, whether seeing a Transmutation must be from one
thing to another, what Change is that, from an Incorruptible Body to an
Incorruptible Body? So that he has, to avoid the force of the argument, not
only not given the Citation, but mis-stated it, and then insults, saying, shall
I send him to his Mill, or own Trade of Grinding, or Sawing Timber, for further
Instruction? And yet this Miller has ground him so, he cannot get fairly off.

And therefore, in the next place let us examine G. Keith his Philosophy, When
a Man cateth Corn with the Husk, and swalloweth down at least a good quantity
of the Husk or Bran, together with the Food that is mixed with it, does the
Husk become any Part of his Body? Or rather, does it not belong to the
excrement, with other gross parts of the Food, says he, p. 12. I answer Page,
12.
by way of retortion, the Swine that feed on Husk only, and the Prodigal Son
who did the like; if all went into excrement, and none into nourishment, what
did they live on? He says again, Is there not in all Food one more noble part
that becomes not excrement, but is Transmuted into real Flesh, in Man? But the
Husk being not allowed by him to be the more noble part, I ask, What is
Transmuted into real Flesh, where the Food is only Husk? Yet he so values
himself upon his Excrementitious and Husky Philosophy, that hence he further
argues, Did not what our Savior Eat, turn into his (...) Flesh, and become
Incorruptible? -- And was not his Body of Flesh yet further changed after his
Resurrection? etc. And then he tells us for whose sake he Traces this Ignorant
Man (as he calls his Opponent) of whom he says, It might seem like casting
Pearls before Swine, that so dares to tread under his dirty Feet, such precious
Truths of Scripture; not for his, and his Sadducean Fraternity's (as he
miscalls Friends) but for others, who he hopes will gather them up, and value
them, for the worth of them. To which I say, They must not be very valuable
themselves; who gather up, and value up such Husky Notions. Again, I query,
Whether that Food (that according to G. Keith, was turned into Christ's real
Flesh, which Flesh was further changed after the Resurrection, and became
Incorruptible, as G. Keith says) be the same in substance, that it was before
the change, and when Corruptible,?

Now I come to what the Friend says, in his p. 33. with respect to the Soul,
As for the Soul (says he) it was a Spiritual substance in its self, before its
Sanctifying, as after (so is not the Body) so that such a change is surely
RATHER a Purification than a Transmutation, even as the washing of a Body
besmeared with Dirt, when cleansed, is a Purification, and not a Transmutation.
Upon which G. Keith, quoting only from where he says [a change is surely] thus
has it, But still this Ignorant Presumptuous Man runs himself rashly upon the
sharp Pricks. Formerly he has Labored in vain to destroy the Felicity of the
Body of a Saint, and now he Labors as much in v^i^ to destroy the Felicity of
his Soul, that he makes the Work of Regeneration in the Soul of Man, to be
nothing else but a Purification from Sin, as when a Body besmeared with Dirt,
is cleansed, that is a Purification, and not a Transmutation. I never heard,
nor read (says he) a more Ignorant and Nonsensical Assertion. Answer, Nor I, a
more bold Forgery: For where does the Friend Labor to destroy the Felicity of
either Soul or Body? Where does he make the work of Regeneration NOTHING ELSE
but a Purification, etc. Though he says, it is RATHER so, than a
Transmutation, which was G. Keith's phrase? He needed not therefore have
queried (as he does p. 13.) What is this but to make the Souls of the Saints,
nothing but so many Page, 13.
Tabulae Rasae, Washed Tables without any beautiful Colors, or lively
Portraicture on them? Is then the Image of God in the Saints no positive thing,
but a freedom from Sin, or a Negation of it? Is Holiness nothing but a Negation
of unholiness, etc? Nor to have added, O wretched Ignorance! And O Lamentable
shame that falls upon the Second Days Weekly Meeting of the People called
Quakers, for approving such Antichristian Doctrine, etc, For as the Friend did
not deny, that man after his Restoration becomes really Holy, and has a
divine Image, the Image of the Heavenly stamped upon him, even so that the Soul
has the Impression thereof, which yet may be, without change of substance: So
G. Keith himself, as little Charity as he uses to have for us or him, seems to
allow C. Pusey will not stand to it, upon better Consideration, which shows G.
Keith has been fighting with his own shadow all this while, who thus goes on.

But if on better Consideration he be ashamed of his rash assertion [is G.
Keith ashamed of his false Charge?] and come to acknowledge, that the Soul by
Regeneration, not only is purified from Sin, but wonderfully Changed and
transformed, from Natural or Animal, to Spiritual, from Earthly [Is the Soul
Earthly?] to Heavenly, and yet the same in substance, let him acknowledge that
the mighty Power of God, through Christ that has thus Changed the Soul,
retaining the same Substance, can and will change the low Body of a Saint, and
fashion it like the Glorious Body of Christ, etc. Answer, As he misapplies what
was said by Paul, of the Natural Body, to the Change or Transformation of the
Soul; so neither do his Parallels hold: For the Soul that is Immortal, is of
nearer affinity to Spiritual, than the Mortal which puts on Immortality, and
the addition it receives of Beauty and Glory, do not Change its Substance: But
what is this to the vile low or Corruptible Body, which is as diametrically
opposite to Glorious and Eternal and Incorruptible, as any thing can be? Can
that be changed into Incorruptible and Spiritual, and yet the substance the
same, as when corruptible, Fleshly and Mortal?

This indeed he would fain have us grant, and in the next Paragraph pretends to
demonstrate, how a natural and Corruptible substance has been Changed into a
Spiritual one, he should have added, and yet the substance not Changed, for
that is the matter in debate, and whereupon C. Pusey has compared his Notion
as equally Contradictory to Reason, with that of Transubstantiation. However he
attempts to prove it thus, The Food which our Savior received into his Body,
was it not before he received it, Corruptible? says he, and answers, Yea,
surely it was, and what part of that Food became part of his Body and Flesh it
was turned or changed into Incorruptible, etc. p. 13. 14. Answer, I did Page,
14,
observe (though I have not noted it before) that in Truth Advanced, p. 119. he
said, The inferior Creatures, by a sort of innate appetite and desire, incline
to be joined unto Man, as their Head, and to be his Food, that so they may
attain to their Per^ection and Restoration in him, which they cannot attain
unto otherwise: But I let that pass then, having store of absurdities besides
to load him with, yet now he having taken a larger step, to embody them with
the Heavenly Man, the Lord from Heaven, shall shall I not say with a cause (as
himself did but lately without a cause) O wretched Ignorance! O Lamentable
shame! He that tells the Friend, that as a Shooemaker goes beyond his Last, so
he beyond his Sphere of knowledge, What becomes of our Master of Arts now? Had
he not better have kept to his employ, of teaching of Schoolboys, than thus to
go beyond his Sphere of knowledge, as to draw such Inferences, which would
fetch in the very Beasts of the Field, Fowls of the Air and Fish of the Sea, to
become part of Christ's Body and Flesh in Heaven?

A second thing I observe in that very Paragraph, p. 14. is, that he cites
Malice of Independent Agent, p. 17. which he assigns to G. Whitehead as the
Author of, to prove that the Body of Christ is at present an Incorruptible
Substance, The words I find in said Page to be thus, Seeing we have always
believed and confessed the Immortality and entire beings of the Souls of all
other men, it must needs be evidently unjust to accuse us with denying the
Manhood of Christ, or Jesus of Nazareth, to have a being both as to his Soul
and Body. And seeing G. Keith has Read this, and thereby perceived that the
Divine existence of Christ's Manhood in Heaven was so fully acknowledged, what a
kind of Man must he be to insinuate the contrary against G. Whitehead.

The Friend having showed that G. Keith had asserted, that the grossy part
(called by Paul Corruption) is not proper to Man as Man, nor no proper part of
Man's Body, and the other part Corrupts not, argues thus, How then is it said
of David that he slept with his Fathers and saw Corruption, and of Job, I have
said of Corruption, Thou art my Father? etc. And how is Man in Scripture,
called Corruptible Man? See his p. 32. This G. Keith calls Wrangling and
Quibling from his own gross Misunderstanding of some places of Scripture [but
he does not enform him better, though he adds] if he will take these Scriptures
strictly and literally, he must as much contend against the Immortality of the
Soul, as the Resurrection of the Body, etc. But why so? Does G. Keith manifest
wherein? Or give any proof that these Scriptures are not to be taken strictly
and literally? Nothing less. They were pat and argumentum ad hominem to him,
the enervating whereof he shifts by huffing. What he adds of the mortal Body of
Man being truly said to be Corruptible, because it consists of two
Heterogeneous parts, the one noble, the other ignoble, to wit the Husk, Dross
or Cortex, and after the Separation of the Noble from the ignoble, is not
Corrupt, etc. Is not ad rem. The question is not about Husk, Dross or Cortex,
but of what was proper to Man as Man, whether that Corrupts, and how David
could be said to see Corruption, or Job, that Corruption was his Father, etc.
If nothing of Man as Man be Corrupt, the which he has rather sought to evade
than answer.

The like the Friend urged from G. Keith's saying, The Man-Eaters may eat the
gross part of Man's Body, yet that more subtle and Invisible tart, they cannot
eat, asking, What is this but to say, the Man-eaters may eat Man's Body, but
they cannot eat the substance of Man's Body? p. 34. 35. This G. Keith never
^ites, yet infers from it, that he would with ^is devouring Throat Eat or
Swallow up the Resurrection of the Body, which shows G. Keith is better Skilled
in the Art of Railing than disputing; he knows who called that a Black Art
once, with something more I may chance to put him ^n mind of, before we part
(see Way Cast up, p. 169.) Besides C. Pusey did not seek to Swallow up the
Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body, but to detect his explication, as
un^ound and unscriptural, as well as Contradictory

But how does it appear that his Opponent ^yneth with Atheists and Sadducees in
arguing against the Resurrection of the Body (being the same ^ substance) from
the Man-Eaters, as G. Keith ^harged him? Do the Atheists and Saducees
acknowledge there is a Resurrection, yet not the ^^me in substance? Or does not
the one deny ^here is a God, Heaven or Hell, and the other that there is a
Resurrection (at all) or Angel, or Spirit, as in Acts 23. 8. Are these Case
Parallel? Or is it not rather manifest that G. Keith's Suggestions are as
false, as they are malicious? Who no longer ago than in the Year 1691. in his
Book, called, Presbyterian and Independent Churches, tells his Reader, It is a
notorious false Charge, that we deny the Manhood ^ the Lord Jesus Christ, and
affirm, that as Man he is not in Heaven, or that we deny the Resurection of the
Dead: But because we deny the^ carnal Conceptions of the Resurrection, and h^^
us to Scripture Words, which is most safe, therefore they have so beli^d us,
says he, p. 22^ 228. And the Case is the same now between us and him.

C. Pusey further says in his p. 35. Is not this ^ contrary to that common
Understanding the God has given Man, as the Popish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. For the Papists s^^ Though as to their Sense, they eat the
ver^ Bread, it having the very color, the smell the taste and show of Bread,
yet the Substance of Bread they eat not: So G. Keith hold That though
Man-Eaters may eat the visible Part of Man's Body, which is seen with the
outward Eyes, yet the Matter and Substanc^ of Man's Body they cannot eat, etc.
This G. Keith, though he gives us not the Friend Words, inveighs loudly
against, saying, From this he most nonsensically inferrs, that I affirm t^
Man-Eaters eat the accidents of Man's Body, and Again, I neither said nor
thought the Man-Eate^ eat only the accidents, etc. This he Ter^ quibbling,
partly from his gross Ignorance, and partly from the ^^rversion and Prejudice
of his (...) shall I say of G. Keith, who gives not the Friends Words at all,
y^^ foist^th in, as said by him, what there is no^ Syllable of in the Book; no
mention of (...), ^he Word not so much as named, for I have ^iven almost the
whole of what was said there ^^ that Subject? Whence came this, but from
^erversion and Prejudice of Spirit, not gross Ignorance, for it was done
wittingly? He goes ^^, I distinguished betwixt the Radix and principal
Substance of Man's Body, and the drossy Part which is frequently separated from
the noble vo^ile Part, by Chemical Operations. Answ. Thus ^^ makes two
Substances to Man's Body, and ^e Man-Eaters to be the Chemists to make this
^eparation. But supposing these Man-Eaters ^t not the Body, till after a Year
more or less, ^ which time he allows (Truth Advanced, p. ^17.) the Separation
may be made betwixt the ^^nel and the drossy Part, do they then our Man's ^ody?
Or do they not? Or what is it they do it, if that be not Man's Body? And whereas
back this Assertion, he queries, p. 15. Whether Page 15.
Robbers that swallowed down Gold, did eat it? Answer, The Instance is very
remote, except ^ could prove they eat the drossy Part, and ^t the more refined
behind them, then it had ^uer suited his Purpose, But what he in^^ances in
Iron, the Demonstration is more ob^ous; Men do not eat Iron, because they do
^^t digest it, but the Ostrich, that digests it, said to eat Iron. Query,
Whether the Substance of Iron, when eaten, the excrementitious Part voided, and
the more noble Part transmuted into real Flesh in the Ostrich (a Notion he has
favored in p. 12. and I have commented upon) be the same, as before it was
eaten? And to his last clause in the Paragraph, viz. As every Body has a
distinct Seed, so the Radix of every Body is a distinct Radix, I say, if every
Body have it is distinct Seed and Radix, the^ Man's Body before the Fall had so,
and must there be a Radix to the Clothes also? To the Coats of Skins (which he
interprets, Truth Advanced, p. 27. to be the Skin and Flesh o^ this frail,
mortal and corruptible Body) t^ that which he says, Ibid. p. 113. is not
proper to Man as Man, and this such a Radix, a^ the Man-Eaters cannot eat with
the dross and husky Part? The Miller, whom he would send to his Mill, and
cautioneth not to go beyond his Sphere of Knowledge, is a better Philosopher
than this comes to.

Now after all his bluster of Sadducees, Sadducean Fraternity, etc. he brings
in his Opponent owning a Resurrection of Just and Unjust though to help himself
off, he brands him with great Hypocrisy, who being a prejudiced Adversary, and
offering no reasonable Demonstration; I submit it to the Candid to make their
Judgment of both of them, and so leave it. Nor shall I now debate with him,
whether the Primitive Christians were come to any result about what their
Bodies should be: It is sufficient, that he has not detected us, whatever he
would have Men believe concerning us, to have deviated from the Faith of the
Resurrection, or from Scripture Terms and Expressions, to which he has said it
is only safe to keep in this and all other things, as has been instanced.

To C. Pusey's query, If it was the common belief of the Primitive Christians,
that the very same Matter and Substance of this corruptible Body, should be the
Body that is raised, why should any, among themselves especially, have asked
such a needless Question, as with what Body do they come? G. Keith Answers,
Such who asked that Question, were such among them, that said there was no
Resurrection of the Dead, 1 Cor. 15. 12. Answ. This is no ways deduceable from
that Scripture, nor any other that I can find: For the Question asked ver. 12.
was answered, and a new one raised ver. 35. to which in ver. 36. Paul replied,
Thou Fool, etc. The one said there is no Resurrection, the other disputed
inquisitively about the Modus, or Manner of it, how? And with what Body? And
were distinctly answered. So that in this G. Keith grossly errs, and needs
Correction, as he once told the Rector of Arrow.

But the Translation [with what Body] does not please him, who seems to think
well of nothing, but what himself has a Hand in. He would have it, with what
quality [why not rather, what kind?] of Body, and adds, this their querying,
was a sort of arguing against the thing it self, p. 16. First he imposes his
own Page 16.
Version, then a Dogmatical Inference without Proof, which as such I reject, as
I do also his slander against us, a little below, that we argue against the
Resurrection of the Body it self, from the Manner of it.

Against C. Pusey's having showed G. Keith his contradictory Assertions to be
as little reconcilable to Reason, as the Popish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, G. Keith alleges, that professing to hold a Resurrection
of the Body, but not of that same Substance, falls in with the Popish
Transubstantiation. Answ. Surely to say, It is no more a Body of Flesh, Blood
and Bones, but a pure ethereal, or heavenly Body, and yet that the Substance
remains the same, that it was on Earth, which G. Keith has confessed to, p.
4. is more like their Doctrine, who say, The Form of Bread remains, yet it is
the real Flesh and Blood of Christ, than our saying with the Scriptures, Thou
sowest not that Body that shall be, but God gives it a Body, as it has
pleased him, and to every Seed its own Body, 1 Cor. 15. 37, 38. For as he has
said in another Place, we have good Company (even the Apostle Paul) on our
side, which he has not for himself.

What follows as a Charge against G. Whitehead and W. Penn, That the Saints get
the Resurrection immediately after Death, and that they both argue against the
Deceased Saints expecting any Resurrection of the Body, etc. He not offering to
prove upon them, out of any of their Po^ks, I lightly pass over, as knowing G.
Keith too well, to trust to his general Accusations, and them better than to
Credit such Evidence against them. Nor shall I engage in what he further
offers, p. 17. relating to their differences in Page 17.
America, whereto I am not Privy: Yet may say, that a free and bold laying open
of our Sufferings, when hardly and illeg^lly dealt with (as in the Case of W.
Penn and W. Mead their Trials) bears no Proportion to giving a Magistrate ill
Language and provoking Terms, for we have not so learned Christ. Neither need
G. Keith ask his Opponent, p. 18. a Proof, that Page 18.
he is a Man of a wrong Spirit! adding, What o^e evil thing has he proved
against me in all his Book, either in Doctrine or Conversation? For any that
compares the Book and Answer together, in a right Spirit, will see there is
sufficient to detect G. Keith to be of a wrong Spirit: And what is wanting
there, himself has made up since, in bitterness, in envy, in reviling and
slandering Gods Heritage, which I pray he may be sensible of, before too late.

In p. 18. G. Keith makes a general Reference to what C. Pusey gave (in several
Pages) out of his Truths Desence, p. 169, 170, 171. And upon the whole says,
he remains in the same Mind still, that he would have nothing urged, nor
pressed as Articles of Faith, but what is delivered to us in plain express
Scripture Words, which (he says) is the Substance of that large Citation.
Answ. The Substance of that Citation was more comprehensive than so, as who so
please to read it in the Original cited above, may find, wherein he declares
that Charity and makes those Proposals of Concord with the otherwise Minded, as
suits not with his late Actions. Yet from what he has here given, as the
Substance of that large Citation, the Friend Objects, p. 53. that this Advice
could not find Place with G. Keith, when so often desired, and queries, What
Uncharitableness is this, when we offer to express our Faith in Scripture
Words, for you to say, we have another Sense than what we speak, see his p. 54.
G. Keith makes Answer, It is false in him to say, that this was so often
desired, but could not find Place -- I said again and again, We shall take your
Confession in Scripture Words, provided ye will condemn your Errors, that are
contrary to express Scripture Words -- But this (says he) they would never do.
And perhaps they held no such Errors, as he charged them with, and so had none
to condemn, say I: However this being true, that such an offer was made by
Friends, and thus replied to by him (which is so far from never refusing, that
it includes a refusal, in tying them to such Terms, as no Innocent Man can
comply with, without an implicit acknowledgment of Guilt) the next thing I
observe is, that whereas his Opponent queried, How know ye that we have a Sense
contrary to Scripture Words, G. Keith Answers, They have sufficiently
discovered it, not only by one or two unsound Expressions, but Multitudes of
them, as their Letters, and Manuscripts there, and the Printed Books here,
sufficiently prove. Answ. This Reference is wide enough: What is in their
Letters and Manuscripts there, we know not, nor are we like, for ought I see,
though he has long threatened us with them? Again, what Printed Books here,
does he mean? What is their Title? In what Page? Who the Author? Surely he
thinks his Credit is great, that the Reader must take all from him, upon trust,
without Examination. But at length he comes to one particular Case, by which we
may give a guess of the rest. It is in haec verba.

We need go no further for a Proof (says he) than the most gross and
Antichristian Expressions and Sayings of Caleb Pusey himself, in this very
Treatise, for whereas he has plainly affirmed p. 15. ad finem, That Jesus of
Nazareth cannot be something else than the Light, Power and Spirit within. Now
can there be any thing more contrary to express Scripture, than this Assertion:
Was not Jesus of Nazareth a real Man, consisting of Soul and Body, in whom the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily? -- And is that Body, and that Soul, and
that fullness nothing else but the Light within us? O abominable Nonsense, and
Perversion, and Contradiction to Scripture, and all true Reason! Ans. By that
Time I have given C. Pusey his Words, I doubt not but to make appear that G.
Keith is a Man nullius fidei, not to be trusted: For this he calls a plain
Affirmation, was but an Inference or Deduction from what G. Keith had laid
down, and no ways designed, as here alleged, to deny Jesus of Nazareth to be
both God and Man. C. Pusey, p. 15, 16. thus has it, Seeing G. Keith's Answer to
R. Gordon, implies, that the Light, Power and Spirit within, is Christ the only
Mediator and Savior, and that so to assert is not to assert another Christ
than Jesus of Nazareth, then surely Jesus of Nazareth cannot be something else
than the Light, Power and Spirit within, because Jesus of Nazareth is the ONLY
Christ, Mediator and Savior, and SO is the Light, Power and Spirit within
acknowledged to be. And if the same, then not any thing else. Thus far C.
Pusey, now where is G. Keith his Inference? Where the Antichristianism? Where
the abominable Nonsense, Perversion and Contradiction to Scripture, etc? Where
does the Friend deny him to be a real Man, consisting of Soul and Body, or that
he is our Mediator and Savior? Nay if applicable to either of them, it must be
to G. Keith himself, whose the Assertion is; not to C. Pusey for citing it, and
arguing from it ad hominem. He that will so palpably abuse a Man to his Face,
as I may so say, when Evidence so near to be produced, what will he do behind
his back? But perhaps he thought every Reader would not scan it, and so it
might have passed.

From G. Keith his having in that Book of Truth's Defense urged, that nothing
should be pressed as Articles of Faith, but what is delivered in plain
Expressions of Scripture Words, the Friend put seven Queries to him, from p.
56, to 59. wherein he demands express Words of Scripture for several of G.
Keith his Assertions, whereof G. Keith takes no notice (except of the third
Query, about the four hundred Pieces of Silver Abraham Purchased the Burying
Place with, which I have remarked under my second Head) but gives him six
Queries, by way of Retortion. To which I say, when he has answered those
Queries, grounded upon his own thesis, whereby he ought to be bound, I may give
an answer to his, which as stated, are not our Principles, but his own unfair
deductions.

He goes on, p 19. Though I remain still in the same mind, that no Article of
Faith should Page, 19.
be urged, on any, but what is Contained in plain express words of Scripture,
or so agreeable to express Scripture, as the common sense of all Mankind, that
hears Scripture words, must acknowledge, etc. -- Yet I see not why I should be
so confined to express Scripture words, in things that I require no man to own
or believe, as Articles of Faith, etc. And toward the bottom, For there are
many things, both in my Book called Truth Advanced, and in many other of my
Books, wherein I may possibly differ from others in Judgment, yet I leave them
to their Liberty to dissent, as I desire to be left to my Liberty, to believe
as I judge God has persuaded me. Answer, Waving the additional Terms [so
agreeable to express Scripture, as common sense, etc.] wherein he is likely
enough to make himself the Judge, what is and what is not so, I tell him, Of
what kind many of his are, even with respect to Articles of Faith, has in part
been manifest, and have been Communicated in several parts of this my treatise;
yet we deny him not a Liberty to dissent, as persuaded in himself, so long as
his Dissent affects himself only, and he is not quarrelsom with us,
stigmatizing us as Atheists, Sadducees, Sadducean Fraternity, etc. As he has
done, upon account of doctrines himself allows to be Articles of the Christian
Faith, yet therein has run so wide from Scripture Terms and Expressions, as
has been showed. But we would, if possible, hold him to his own rule, that if
it be only safe to keep close to Scripture words and expressions, he should do
it, at least in Articles of Faith, of which that of the Resurrection is one.
And in as much as he urges upon us, p. 39. That Scripture (1 Pet. 3. 15.) of
being ready to give an answer of the reason of the hope that is in us, surely
it cannot be amiss in us to demand the like of him, as well as to show the
reason of our dissent from him, where we find him incongruous and absurd, as
well as Unscriptural.

What remains, p. 20. Being but a repetition Page 20.
of his former Slanders, relating to the suffitiency of the Light within, so
excluding our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, his Death, Sufferings, etc. From being
Concerned in our Salvation, and his suggesting our not owning Justification by
Christ's Blood outwardly shed, as he offers no Proof, though he has often
asserted the Contrary on our behalf, I shall barely reject them as false
Charges, not desiring to fatigue my Reader. And now for a close of this part,
G. Keith having so often insulted over his Opponent, as a Miller Philosopher,
one going beyond his Last, his Sphere of knowledge, who had better keep working
at his Mill, to his own Trade of Grinding or Sawing Timber (See p. 5. 11. 15.
etc.) I shall wind up these with some few instances, declaring what himself
once thought and said of that, whereupon he now so values himself, as an
indication, that even herein, the Man is changed from better to worse.

In his Book called, Help in time of need (Printed Anno. 1665.) he thus says,
Away with the education of Youth at Universities and Colleges of Philosophy,
so called. I may say of them, which Luther stuck not to call them in his Day,
that they are the stews of Antichrist, p. 75. 76. Again, p. 76. 'And the
Philosophy, so called, which is taught them, is but mere Deceit and Pedantry,
which even I came to see, when among them -- And toward the bottom, I
certainly know the Human Wisdom or Learning is one of the MAIN Bulwarks of
Antichrist against the Revelation, and setting up the Kingdom of Christ in the
Earth, and because this is arising, and shall rise, down must the other go, and
all who seek to uphold it, shall fall therewith. Surely then G. Keith has no
such great cause to vaunt himself over another, for his Skill in that Learning,
which himself confesses to be a main Bulwark of Antichrist, which must fall
with its upholders; wherein G. Keith may chance to be a truer Prophet against
himself, than he is aware of.

In his Book of Immediate Revelation (Printed Anno. 1676.) he says, Then down
should all the PROUD, LORDING, LOFTY CLERGY, with their many degrees of
DOCTORSHIPS, LORDSHIPS and MASTERSHIPS, pass, who being Strangers to the true
knowledge -- are vainly puffed up in their Fleshly minds, by the form of
knowledge in the Letter, as I was my self, whilst among them, and thought all
Men Idiots and Unlearned, who were not Skilled in that litteral knowledge; but
the Lord, by his Grace, brought me to see the Vanity of all that knowledge,
etc. p. 137. But [now] it is happened unto [him] according to the true Proverb,
The Dog is turned to his own Vomit again, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 22. And what God once
brought him to see the Vanity of, is again become his Glory, so that he again
thinks such to be Idiots and Fools, who are not Skilled in that Pedantry
himself formerly was (and of late is) vainly puffed up by, though if he will
believe himself (Truths Defense, P. 69. Printed Anno. 1684.) he has no such
great cause, for he there says, As to my Learning, that is but very ordinary,
and a thing I neither can nor OUGHT to glory in. His Learning I shall not
endeavor to debase: His Glorying in it, and depretiating others for want of
it, whilst himself has represented that kind of knowledge so pernicious, is
what drew me to offer these, which leaving with the Reader, I thus conclude my
answer to his Cavils against the Book styled Modest Account, and betake my self
to G. Keith's Postscript, who thus introduces himself, p. 40.

It may seem strange, how it comes to pass (says Page, 40.
G. Keith) that while so many pious and Learned Men are Judged to be found in
this Nation, not only of the Church of England, but among the Dissenters and
Non-Conformists, there are found so few among them all, that do imply their
gifts to oppose such Vile Errors, as are holdly and avowedly promoted among a
sort an GANG of the People called Quakers, not only as bad as ANY Popery, but
MUCH WORSE than the WORST of Popery, in diverse respects, etc. Answer, What
those Principles of ours are, which he counts much worse than the worst of
Peopery, he is so far from proving upon us (though he exclaims as virulently,
as the Jews of Old, who said, Men of Israel help, This is the Man that teaches
all men every where, against the People, and the law, and this place, Act. 21.
28.) that he does not so much as name them. The Papists Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, of Purgatory, of Invocation of Saints (which is at least a
tacit rejecting of Christ's Mediatorship) and their deifying the Virgin Mary, as
the Savior of Mankind, with attributes to God and Christ, are so bad in my
Judgment, whatever they are in his, that there need none worse. And if our
Principles had really been much worse than the worst of these, methinks his
Pious and Learned Men (of all Persuasions) should not have been so supine these
40. Years, that they need now to be stirred up, to creep in at the Tail of an
Apostate, to do his Drudgery for him, and that such an one, who not only makes
such poor earnings of it, but (perhaps for 25. Years together) has defended us
and our Principles against them, and particularly in his LookingGlass for
Protestants, Printed Anno. 1674. endeavors to make it appear (as he gives
out, in the Title Page) that the Quakers are the truest Protestants, because
(as he there says) their Testimony agrees with the Testimony of the Ancient
Protestants, in the most weighty things, etc. And whereas he denominateth us a
gang, I would fain know what Gang he is of now? And I was going to put a harder
Question to him, what Gang he intends to be of next, but that I believe he
cannot resolve me, neither knowing his own Mind, nor who will trust him. Yet by
what follows, he bids fair for the Papists, as if he had an Aching Tooth after
them.

I am Confident, says he, if such Antichristian Errors and Heresies were but
the TENTH PART so avowedly broached in the City of Rome, or any where else in
Popish Countries, these esteemed Watchmen among them, would be more alarmed to
oppose them, etc. Then most among Protestants do. There Is a Box on the Ear for
such as will not be at his Beck. Methinks he rates his betters, as if he had
got a Benefice already: But stay, Ad huc tua seges in herba est, he must learn
more Manners to his Benefactors, if he expect Promotion, who, if he be thus
malapert now, what will he be, when he has caught the Fish.

Now to make sure Work of it, he labors yet further to incense the National
Ministers against us (and anon the Civil Powers, yet would fain Men should
think, It is far from him to desire the least Sufferings to come on our
Persons or Estates, as he pretends in the next Page: But as the Dutchman says,
Dit gaet zo verre als hy voeton heeft, it goes as far as it has Legs to stand
on) in Order whereto, he lays before them, That we have provoked such as have
differed from us, to public Disputes Viva voce, and have often gloried over
them, who refused to answer us, that their cause was Bad, etc. He knows who
has said, Deceit lurks in Generals: Wish he assign Time, Place and Person,
perhaps he may be answered, for Circumstances of things much vary the Case.
They may have detracted us behind our backs Viva voce, they may have insulted
over us, when absent, etc. with more that I might insist on. But if he will
accuse, let him descend to particulars; till then wonder not (Reader) that I
reject such Evidence. The Case with him, which Galls him, and makes him wince
so, is that when he had defamed and falsely aspersed us in Print, to which we
answered by Print, we could not be drawn to quit that Defense, by a Viva voce
debate, to which he had summoned us. Now not being gratified here, and we
objecting the inequitableness of such a procedure, the turbulency of the Man
(where of this present Postscript is a sufficient Indication) and the
unsuitableness of the time, with respect to the Public Peace of the Nation, he
bursts out into this Extravagancy, as if he designed that Men of all Ranks
should be let loose upon us.

In Order whereto he applies himself in the next Place to the Civil Authority,
telling them, p. 41. It would be a commendable and praise worthy Page 41.
thing, to enceurage such a Practice throughout the Nation, that Men of true
Piety and Solid Learning might beallowed and countenanced to refute these vile
and abominable Errors, of these chief Leaders and Teachers among the Quakers,
at the end of their Meetings, etc. and to give Order, that all such Books of
them called Quakers, as can readily be found (as great store of such there are,
he says) that contain such vile and abominable Errors, etc. may be suppressed
and witnessed against by public Authority. Answ. I doubt not but this Work
would please him well, especially if he might have an Inquisitors place of it,
whereby he might both gratify his revenge against the Quakers, and also pick
up some little income to help him against that ruin and want, which W. Penn
his calling him Apostate, tended to expose him to, as himself complains,
Advertisement, p. 4. Yet two things I would put him in Mind of, first, that he
even now Proposed, that with what measure we have met to others, with the same
to mete to us again. Would he have been willing to have been thus served, by
the Powers of this Nation, when he termed Prelacy a Limb of Antichrist, and
declared how he had vowed to God against it, which vow we have kept to (says
he to the Presbyterians) ye have shrunk from (see Help in time of need, p. 37,
39. Printed Anno 1665.) or by a Presbyterian Ministry and Magistracy, whose
Form of Church Discipline, Order and Government, he has represented (Ibid. p.
52.) nothing upon the Matter better than the Episcopal, as well as told a
Preacher of that Communion, he was better skilled in the Art of Railing (a
black Art to be sure, says G. Keith, too familiar to the Tribe of Black Coats)
than in the way of Disputing (Way cast up, p. 169.) Does he think these are not
reputed Vile Errors and Slanders by the Men of that way on which he has thus
reflected? And though perhaps he would now turn both Coat and Color, and no
more talk thus sawcily of black Art, and Tribe of black Coats, provided he
might be Dignified with some Ecclesiastical Preferment; yet these are what he
has not yet retracted at least in Public, as well as that I from hence Appeal
to him, whether he would have been so served himself, as he now animates others
to serve us? The second thing I would mind him of, is that this, however
palliated by him, is Persecution, for it excites the Magistrate, not only to
supervise, but also SUPPRESS, what he shall call vile and abominable Errors, of
which it makes him Judge, which how acceptable it would be to the Protestant
Dissenters in general, to have their Books thus come under the Scrutiny, and be
liable to be exposed to the judicial censure of their Antagonists, I leave to
them to consider. Yet I think it is obvious, that the Buddings of Reformation,
in any Age, were never due to such Courses, for it must suppose the Magistrate
to be still in the right, whether the Government be Papistical, Prelatical,
Presbyterian, Indepenpent, Baptist, yea or Quakers, if that were supposeable,
as well that it had been a ready way to have suppreffed the spreading of the
New Testament, by Jew and Gentile, in the first Promulgation of the Gospel, and
of translating the Bible since the Reformation from Popery, it not being to be
doubted, but the Men then in Authority were as likely to brand those Holy
Writings, or the Translations at least, with as opprobrious Names, as G. Keith
now bestows upon us; and if they might have been allowed to be both Judge and
Jury, no Question but they would have made quick dispatch. But that a pretended
Protestant (yea one who has valued himself as a Quaker, for 33 Years together,
and has not as yet renounced the Name) should advise the present Powers (who
have given us a larger and better founded Liberty, than in the foregoing
Reigns) to suppress the Religious Tracts of such, whom he once reputed as
Brethren, and whose Doctrines he defended against them as Orthodox, for so many
Years together, is what I need not aggravate: It speaks for it self.

But the Occasion of this Fury is soon explained, viz. After he had been
litigous in America, he or some of his Agents Labored to Transmit the
difference hither, by sending over several Contentious Books of G. Keith's,
which some Friends here, both desiring G. Keith might be restored into Unity
again, and himself come to see and acknowledge his Evil therein, and also to
prevent that difference dilating it self to the scandal of our Profession, and
the stumbling of the weak, bought up several of those Books, and kept them from
being dispersed. This is what he calls giving LARGE MONEY (whom he compares us
to, by the Expression, is easy to guess) and this heats him to that degree,
that he would fain irritate the National Clergy and Powers to disturb our
Meetings, as well as suppress our Books, who then might Scribble and Scribble
again, and never be pestered with Replies.

Hence it is, that he is so clamorous against the second Days Morning Meeting
at London (to whom himself formerly (at some times) has applied himself, when
he had Books to Print, particularly, those Books called Light of Truth, and
Divine Immediate Revelation, were read and approved there, as he confesses, p.
5, and 22.) for he says in his p. 3. They assume a Power to license and
approve of all Books that are to be Printed by any of their Party, and have
approved this Book falsely called a Modest Account, and all the late scandalous
Books of Tho. Ellwood and John Penington come forth against me [Ay that is their
crime, that they approve of Books, which detect him] and claim Authority over
all other Meetings (the Yearly Meeting perhaps excepted) ending out their
Circular Letters to all other Meetings, in all Parts of the World, etc. Answ.
Shall Men of different persuasions from us be empowered to inspect our Books,
stamp their Cum Privilegio upon the one, and suppress the other; and shall not
we, among our selves, have the Liberty to supervise what we can stand by, what
not, before exposed to the view and censure of Men otherwise Minded? He is
willing we should have the reproach, obloquy and Sufferings due (in his
Judgment to vile and abominable Errors, while he reflects upon our care to
prevent both the one and the other, by first supervising our own Books, our
selves, that as what comes forth he would make to affect the whole Society, so
it may be overlooked by faithful and approved Men of that Society. O
unreasonable Man! Yet would he be ingenious, it is evident, by his own Example
formerly, that it is not so much our Order, and Practice, as our Judgment
relating to him and his late envious Pieces, under which he is so uneasy, that
he goes on.

To whom [viz. the second Days Meeting] the Meetings from all places direct
their Letters upon any Occurrence of difference, etc. Answ. This is false in
Fact, that Meeting claim^ no such Authority, assumes no such Power, neither is
it invested in them. He adds, The which Meeting may be fitly compared to the
Conclave of Cardinals at Rome, but who is the Metropolitan at present, of this
new erected Hierarchy at London is not certainly known, as whether W. Penn or
G. Whitehead. Answ. The Pious and Learned among the Church of England, are
little beholden to G. Keith, to set them upon such a Work, which in us he
upbraids as fitly comparable to the Roman Hierarchy: Surely their Piety and
Learning might be better employed. To the rest, I ask him, when he knew us to
have a Metropolitan among us; and if we had one now, whether it were likely he
could be so ignorant, as not to know which of the two, it was, whether W. Penn
or G. Whitehead: But G. Keith has worded it cautiously, as well as
maliciously; seeing what never was, can never he certainly known. Might he
himself have been a Metropolitan, I doubt not but he would have been willing to
have continued longer among us: For he cavilleth at what he (Diotrephes like)
coveted for himself, and proves quarrelsom because we could not allow him, the
pre-eminence he sought after: For we have none such among us, nor do we own any
Head but Christ.

And now Reader, having traced the Man through his Contradictions, through his
Absurdities, through his Envy and Bitterness here exposed, and having defended
my Self and Friends from the empty Cavils of the Book under Consideration, I
submit the foregoing to thy Impartial Examination, to be weighed by thee in
that Balance, which gives rightly to judge, both as a Man, and as a
Christian, and bid thee farewell.

John Penington.
Beel-house, 28. of 6th. Month 1696.
If they call the Master of the House Beelvebub, how much more them of his
Household? Mat. 10. 25.
THE END.

