The GREAT QUESTION Concerning The LAVVFULNES OR UNLAVVFULNES OF SWEARING Under
The GOSPEL, Stated, and Considered of; For the Satisfaction of such as desire
to scan the Thing in the Weight of God's Spirit, and to see the true and clear
Determination of it in His un-erring Light.

By Isaac Penington the Younger.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the ^^^^k-spread-Eagle and
Windmil, in Martins Le Grand, 1^^^

The great Question, concerning the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of Swearing
under the Gospel, stated and considered of, etc.
Quest.
Whether it be lawful for Christians (who know Christ, the Substance of all
the Shadows under the Law, and are in the New Covenant) to Swear upon weighty
occasions, as it was lawful for the Jews to do under the Old Covenant? or,
Whether Christ allows his Disciples to swear in solemn Cases, as Moses did
allow his Disciples?

Answ. For the clearing of this weighty Controversy to all such, as singly
desire to know the Truth (as it is in Jesus) in this particular, that their
hearts may bow to Him therein, and not be overtaken with the Reasonings and
Subtilties of the Carnal Mind (which never knew nor can know the Power, but
has always been, and still is setting up dead Images, of God's Truths and of
his Worship, out of the Power) these few things following would be considered
of. First, What an Oath is, or, The nature of a right and true Oath under the
Law. Secondly, The ground or occasion of its Institution. Thirdly, The Cases
wherein an Oath was to be used. Fourthly, The proper end and service of an
Oath. Fifthly, The sutableness of its nature to its end and service. Lastly,
The persons to whom the use of an Oath was proper in it self, and intended and
allowed by God; and whether there be any persons to whom it is not proper, and
to whom the Lord does not allow it? This last is the main, and will itself
determine the thing; but yet a brief Consideration of the former may not be
unprofitable, to make way for a clearer leading and insight into it.

First, As touching an Oath, what it is, or the nature of it. A true and lawful
Oath under the Law, was an Engagement or Bond upon the Soul (Numb. 30. 2.) by
the Name of the Lord (Deuteronomy. 10. 20.) to the speaking of Truth in things
affirmed, and to the performance of Truth in things promised. It was as a Seal
to bind fallen man (man fallen from the Truth, from the Uprightness) to Truth
in his Words and Promises, either to God or man. This is the nature and use of
an Oath, to wit, to bind the Soul to Truth, to be such an Engagement upon the
Soul, as, if there be any fear of God there, it cannot but dread to break,
knowing that the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain.

Secondly, The ground or occasion of an Oath, is the Fall of Man from Truth,
from Innocence, from the Uprightness which engaged him to Truth before his
Fall. This made the Jews stand in need of this Bond under the Law, in their
Purposes and Promises toward God; and the same thing likewise made them stand
in need of it one from another, to Ratify and Confirm Truth between them.

Thirdly, The Cases wherein an Oath was to be used, which were chiefly these
four.

1. In case of a Promise or Vow to God, That the Truth, Integrity, and plain
Intention of the Heart might stand, and there might be no departing therefrom,
in the thing promised, either to God or man; an Oath in that state was found
useful to bind the Soul thereto. 2. In case of Promise to man,

3. In case of Pronouncing or Declaring the Truth of a Thing, which was
weighty, that there might be a clear and satisfactory ground of belief.

4. In case of Controversy between Parties, where the Controversy could not
be determined, but by taking the Confession of the one Party for Truth; there
that Party was to seal his Confession with an Oath, and so the other to rest
satisfied therewith, and the Controversy thereupon end.

Fourthly, The end of an Oath, which is, for final Confirmation, and avoiding
of all further Strife and Contention about the Thing sworn to. By binding the
Thing (promised or affirmed) with an Oath, the thing is confirmed; and now
there is no more strife in the heart concerning the thing, if relating to God,
or between man and man in things relating to them, but the striving nature is
bound down by the Oath of God, wherewith the Thing is ratified, and so the
Doubt and Uncertainty removed, and the Contest ended. Thus of right it ought to
be, and is where the Oath is forcible and in its proper service.

Fifthly, The sutableness of its nature to the end aimed at by it. Man out of
the Christian Life, can go no further, than to engage himself by the fear and
dread of that God, whom he professes to worship and serve, and who cannot but
be jealous of his Name and Honor, and ready to vindicate the taking of it in
vain. Man under the Law, could not bind himself to God, in any promise or
service more than thus; nor can there be any greater Bond or Seal of Truth
given by one man to another, in the fallen state, than this. And he that will
venture to break this, what but Deceit and Treachery can be expected from him?
insomuch as no other Engagement from him can be of weight, he hereby
manifesting the want of that in his mind and spirit, whereupon all ties are to
fasten.

Sixthly, The persons to whom the use of an Oath was proper and lawful, and for
whom it was instituted; and whether there be any persons to whom it is not
proper and lawful, and for whose use it was not instituted?

To find out this distinctly and truly, we must consider the several Conditions
of Man since the Creation, and observe to which of those it is useful and
proper in it self, and allowed by God; and to which it is not useful in it
self, nor allowed by God.

There have been four Estates or Conditions of Mankind since the Creation.

1. An Estate of Innocence, an Estate of Integrity, of Purity, of
Righteousness, wherein man could not lie or deceive; but his Promises to God,
and his words to men, must needs be Yea and Amen: for it was impossible to man,
who was made in God's Image (which is Truth) to lie or deceive, until the
Deceit entered him, and drew him out of the Truth.

2. There was (and still is) an Estate of deep Captivity, wherein this Truth
and Innocence was wholly lost, and man wholly corrupted in his spirit and
nature, and wholly degenerated from God. This was the Estate of the Heathen,
who knew not God generally, nor desired after Him, but walked in the vanity of
their minds, and were given up to their own hearts lusts. Yet among some of
these the Eternal Principle of Life was stirring, which did check them, and
offer to guide them out of this Estate, which they that hearkened unto, did not
remain in the Fall with the rest, but felt the Power of that, which reproved
and checked them, circumcising their Hearts, and, in their Obedience thereto,
justifying them in their Consciences before God.

3. There was an Estate of shadowy Redemption, which was not the true Estate of
Redemption it self, or they the true People which were to be redeemed, but a
shadow of it the Redemtion, a shadow of the Redeemed People, a shadow of the
Way and Path of Life, wherein were Figures of the Heavenly Substance, the
Heavenly People, the Heavenly Things, the Heavenly Inheritance, the Heavenly
Food, etc. But all these Figures in and under the Law, were not the true
Heavenly and Invisible Things themselves, but outward and visible Signs and
Representations of them.

4. There was, and, blessed be the Lord, now at length (after the great, long
and dark night of Apostasy) again is brought forth an Estate of True
Redemption, wherein the Soul is brought back from the Death, from the
Captivity, from the Fall, from the Deceit, and from the Shadows into the Truth,
into the pure Life, into the Innocence, into the Uprightness; wherein Christ
(the Power of God) is witnessed, and the Soul new formed in his pure Image, and
become a new Creature, having a new Eye, a new Ear, a new Heart, a new Nature,
a new Life and Spirit (in the newness of which Life, it is to live and walk) a
new Course and Conversation, a new Place to walk and have its Conversation in,
even in that very Heaven, from whence it looks for the Savior; wherein also
all old things, which came in by the Fall, and all the old shadows of the Law
are to pass away, and in this state all things to become new. And this is not
only to be expected in the perfection of this state, but belongs (in its
measure and degree) to the very beginning of it: for even so soon as a man is
engrafted into Christ, and can be said to be in Christ, even then he is a new
Creature, and all things then begin to become new unto him, and he is then to
begin, departing from all the old things, both of the Natural or Heathenish
state, and of the Jewish state, until he has left them all behind. The Apostle
says expressly, If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: Old things are
passed away; all things are become new. Christ, the Lord and Master of all
Believers, who himself was not of the World, calls all His Disciples and
Followers out of the World. How out of the World? does He call them from having
any being or commerce in the Earth, or in the World? Nay, not so, but to come
out of the evil and corrupt state, practices and ways of the World; out of the
Earthly Ways of the Heathens, out of the Earthly Ordinances and Observations
of the Jews; yea, even out of every thing in both, which was not of the
Father, but of the World; and this made them a gazing stock to both, and the
scorn and hatred of both, wherever they came.

These are the four Estates or Conditions of Mankind since the Creation: in one
of which, all men that ever were, have been to be found; and according to the
Estate and Condition wherein Man is found, is the Law of God to him, and His
Requirings of him.

Now let any man, in the Fear of the Lord God, weigh and consider, to which
sort or sorts of these an Oath was useful in it self, and allowed by God, and
to which not. Was it useful in the Innocent state? or, did God appoint it
there, when man could not but speak Truth? or, is it useful in the Redeemed
Estate, where a greater Bond is received, and professedly held forth, than the
Innocence of Man's Nature was? Is not Christ the Truth, the Substance? Is not he
that is in Him, the New Creature? Were not all the Oaths and Shadows of the
Law, to last till Christ the Substance came? Is not this the Bond of the
Gospel? and does not this seal Truth, and keep to Truth more firmly, than the
Oath under the Law could? And the greater Bond being come, does not the lesser
Bond (which signified it) flee away and vanish, and the use of it now become
both needless and unlawful? Men may reason subtly, and persuade strongly
against the Truth, but we know certainly and infallibly in the Light of the
Lord, that the use of an Oath was not for Man in Innocence, nor for Man under
the power and virtue of the Redemption by Christ (which brings Man back into
the Truth, into the Innocence, and into that Life and Strength, which preserves
in the Truth and Innocence) but for fallen Man, for Man erred from the Truth
and Covenant of God: And it is very manifest to us, that for a Disciple of
Christ, who has received the Law from his Lips against Swearing, to be brought
back again to Swearing (the bond of Man in the fallen state, and under the Law)
is no less than a denial of Christ, who is his Life and Redeemer out of the
fallen state, and who also is the Substance, which ends the Oaths: and he that
has ever known the pure Power of His Life, and received the pure Law thereof
in the clear Openings of his Spirit, must not depart from thence, from the
feeling of that, into the fleshly reasonings, into consultations with the
fleshly-wise part, which will be sure to give such Interpretations of
Scriptures, as may avoid the Cross; but keep to that Power which begat him;
and to that Principle wherein he was begotten; and there he shall never be able
to get beyond the Yea and Amen in Christ, beyond the Confessing of the Truth in
the Presence and Life of it, which is the end and substance of Swearing under
the Law: and therefore the Apostle Paul, who several Times, and in several
Cases relates to the Prophecies of the Prophets (who foretold of things under
the Gospel, in Law-phrases) renders the word Confess, instead of Swear, as may
appear by comparing, Romans 14. 11. and Philip. 2. 11. with Isa. 45. 23. That
which the Law called Swearing, the Gospel calls Confessing (each of them
speaking of the same thing, in the proper dialect of each:) which Confessing in
the Life, in the Truth in the renewed Principle, is the weight and substance of
that, whereof the Oath was but a shadow. For what is the substance and intent
of an Oath? is not the intent of it to bind to the speaking or performing of
Truth? And what is it that binds? is it the shadow, or the substance? is it the
words of an Oath, or the sense and weight of the thing upon the spirit? It was
not the form of an Oath, but the weight and substance hid underneath, which
bound the Jew under the Law: and if there be more weight and substance in the
Yea and Nay of a Disciple under the Gospel, it must needs be more binding to
them, and has also more true ground of satisfaction in it (to other Christians
at least) than a Jews or Heathens swearing: yea, and if the Men of the World
would but freely speak their hearts, it would be acknowledged to be of more
weight with them also. Who of those who have observed and known our
Conversation, and upright speaking and behavior for these many years (both
toward the various Rulers and Authorities of the (...) also toward all men of
all sorts) would not prefer our Yea and Nay before the Oaths of others?

Object. But though a Christian may not swear in relation to himself, yet why
may he not swear in relation to the satisfaction of others, seeing God himself
swear in that respect, who was as much in the Power and Virtue of that Life
which binds from Swearing, as a Christian can be?

Answ. 1. God (being not bound Himself by the Laws, wherewith He binds the
Creature) may either Himself, or by an Instrument (in his immediate Life and
Power) do that, which the Creature has not liberty from Him to do: but that is
no warrant in general, but the Disciple is particularly to eye the Rule from
his Master CHRIST JESUS (who is Lord over the Household of Faith, and who was as
faithful in all His House as a Lord, as Moses the servant was in his House) by
whom the same God, who once allowed Oaths to the Jems, has now wholly
forbidden Swearing. And let the Disciple diligently and faithfully eye the Laws
of the New Covenant (which are written by, and received from the ingrafted Word
of Faith in the heart) he shall find Oaths excluded there as a part of the Old
Covenant, even as a literal and shadowy Confirmation of Truth among the Jews,
under Moses his Dispensation, for the time of the Law; but the Grace and Truth
it self is the substance, and the Faith received is the seal of Truth under the
Gospel, both toward God and man.

Answ. 2. A Christian may not swear in relation to the satisfaction of others,
Because he is to hold forth his Light, his Life, his Principle in the eye of
the world; He is to testify to the Worth and Excellency of it, that it is a
greater and firmer Bond to him (both toward God and man) than any Oaths either
of the Heathen, or of the Jews can be. Now his entering into their way of
Confirmation of things, which is short of his own, is an undervaluing and
disparagement of the worth and weight of that Principle of Truth, which God
has given him and raised up in him: It is indeed a denying of it: for, entering
into the Law-bond, is a laying of the Gospel-bond by, and an offering of that
as a Bond, which indeed once was so, but is now excluded by the Law of Faith
from being a Bond any longer, and has lost its virtue. And if men would but
open their eyes, they might easily see how little Oaths bind, and how
unprofitable they are to the end and use for which they are intended: but the
Yea and Amen in Christ (the Principle of Life) cannot be broken, but he that
abides in Him, must perform the Yea and Amen, which is firm in Him.

Answ. 3. A Christian or Disciple may not swear under the Gospel, Because
Christ has brought in Confession or Affirmation of the Truth, from the
Principle of his Life, instead of Oaths: which is made good, not only by the
Apostle Paul's rendering of Swearing in the Law-time, Confessing, in the
fulfilling of it under the Gospel; but also by Christ's bringing in the Yea,
Yea, and Nay, Nay, instead of the Law's Swearing. In the Jew the Oath was the
Seal or Confirmation under the Law: in the Disciple, who is in the Life, and
has learned the Truth of Christ the Life, the Yea, Yea, the Nay, Nay, is
appointed him by Christ instead of the Oath. And though the subtilty and
fleshly widom strive hard, to wrest that place out of the hands of the
Simplicity, yet they shall never be able to do it; but he that looks on it with
a single eye in the Light of that Spirit wherein it was wrote, shall plainly
see Christ's drift to be to take away the shadow, even to abolish that use of
Swearing which was proper and allowed to the Jews under the Law, and to bring
the Confession or Denial of the Thing, the Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, (from the
Gospel Spirit and Principle in the Disciple) in the stead of it: Which, to make
more manifest to the honest, simple, and naked heart, which is willing to take
up the Will and Truth of God in every thing, with all the crosses that attend
it, let these few Lines following be uprightly considered of.

First, That slight, trivial and frequent Oaths were not allowed under the Law,
but forbidden by the Law, as a taking of Gods Holy and Dreadful Name in vain.

Secondly, That though vain Oaths were then forbidden, yet solemn Oaths,
weighty Oaths (such as were needful and useful to the thing intended) were
allowed under the Law. So in all those cases before expressed, Oaths were
allowed and justifiable, so that they were but careful to perform them, and did
not forswear themselves.

Thirdly, Christ brings in an Exception against the use of this lawful Swearing
under the Law, as the word But does plainly signify, and forbids Swearing
wholly, altogether, or at all. The Law says, Thou shall not forswear thy self
(that is the substance of what the Law forbids: it allows Swearing, but forbids
Forswearing) But I say unto you, Ye shall not only avoid Forswearing, but
Swearing also, and that wholly or altogether: But I say unto you, Swear not at
all.

Fourthly, Christ brings in another thing instead of Swearing (a thing far more
suitable to the truth, plainness and simplicity of the Gospel) which is
Confessing the thing, or speaking the thing in truth, just as it is either by
way of Affirmation or Denial; But let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay.

And there is liberty enough left to a Disciple, to satisfy any man concerning
the truth of a thing by a Confession, as much as by an Oath: For is it not full
as weighty, under the Gospel to confess the Presence of God, or that He is
Witness, or that we speak the thing in his Fear, and in the feeling of his Life
and Power, as it was under the Law to swear by his Life, by his Fear, by his
Power, or the like? Is not the Confessing of God by a Christian, of more
weight, than the Swearing by Him from a Jew or Heathen? O Nations and Powers of
the Earth, seek Truth, seek Righteousness, and do not set up a Form or Image of
things in your own wills (and according to your own wisdom and inventions)
above the Power of God.

And let it be duly considered, whether the Powers of this Nation deal kindly
with the Lord, in exacting an Oath from his People, who not in the least
disaffection to them, but only in fidelity of Conscience to Christ their Lord
and Master, cannot but refuse it.

The Question is, concerning their Fidelity and Obedience to the King, that is
the thing which an Oath is required to ratify and confirm. Now the Swearing it
self (or formal taking of an Oath) is of little value; but to be obedient, to
be faithful, is the thing of value. The case then stands thus: The Lord has so
formed them, that they cannot but be faithful and obedient. The Lord has
raised up that Principle in them, which cannot hurt the King or any man, nor
cannot stand by and see him or any man hurt, without endeavoring to prevent
it. Here is their strength of performing good and avoiding evil; and their Yea
and Nay from this Principle, is the best Security which they can possibly give
to any man (and he who has thus formed them in the pure Principle of his Life,
has likewise forbidden them to swear) But this cannot be accepted for want of
the other Confirmation, to wit, of Swearing, which came in by the Fall, and was
allowed among the shadows of the Law, but is forbidden by the Gospel.

Now, O King, shall not God's People be faithful and obedient to the Lord as
well as to thee? shall they not be true to the Principle of Life, wherein they
are begotten and brought forth, in the Love and Good Will to all, and out of
Enmity to any? Has God raised up in them a Principle which cannot deceive, and
will not the Yea and Nay of that serve (after so much experience, through so
many changes) but they must either break Christ's Command, and hazard their
Souls, or else lose their Liberties and Estates?

O that men would wait on the Lord, for his pure Fear to be written on their
hearts by the finger of His Spirit, that they might come out of the fleshly
wisdom into the womb of the Eternal Wisdom, from whence our Principle came;
that they might be able to see and justify the Purity, Righteousness, Nobility
and Worth of it, and that they might feel its security from all that is out of
the Good Will, out of the Love, out of the Life, and out of the Peace, that so
there might be an end of all Strife, Rebellion, Heart-burnings, Plots, and all
manner of Wickedness and Ungodliness, which have no place in it, but daily
waste and wither where it is sown and grows, even till they come to an end, and
till Righteousness and pure Innocence fill the room and place which they had,
both in the heart and mind within, and in the life and conversation outwardly.

And let every one that names the Name of the Lord, depart from Iniquity, and
look well to his goings: for the darkness of the thick night of Apostasy is
already past, and the True Light now again shines. Blessed is the Eye which
sees it, and the Heart which is established in it, in the midst of those
terrible and dreadful shakings and confusions, which must not end here, but go
over all Nations. O that this Nation could once bow to it, that it might be
happy, and its Rents and Breaches healed for ever.

THE END.

