CONCERNING PERSECUTION: Which is, The Afflicting or Punishing that which is
GOOD, under the Pretense of its being EVIL.

Which Practice is contrary to the very Nature of Mankind (so far as it is
drawn out of the Corruption and Depravation) which would be Good and do Good,
and have Good Cherished, and Evil Suppressed, both in it self and others.

It is contrary also to all Equal and Righteous Government, which is for the
suppressing of Evil, and cherishing of Good, and not for the afflicting and
crushing of that which is Good, upon pretense of its being Evil.

Yet this unhappy Error will always be committed in Nations and Governments,
until the proper Right and just Liberty of Men's Consciences be discerned,
acknowledged and allowed.

LIKEWISE, There are some Answers given to that common Objection, against
affording CONSIENCE its due Liberty, because Evil Persons may pretend
Conscience to escape the just Punishment of their Evil Deeds.

With a brief Account of that supposed STUBBORNES, which by many is objected
against the People called QUAKERS.

Given forth in love to this Nation, that at length the true bottom and
foundation of a lasting Peace and Settlement may be espied, the Spirits of the
Governors and People fixed thereon, and that dangerous Rock of Persecution
(whereon both the Powers and People of this Nation have so often split)
carefully avoided by all.

By Isaac Penington the younger.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

The PREFACE.
THere has been an Enmity in the Seed of the Serpent against the Seed of the
Woman, from the time of the Promise even until now. God in mercy to Mankind,
has given unto him since the Fall, a Seed or Principle of Life, in the Light
and Strength whereof he is to war against and subdue the Corrupt Principle, and
so be freed from the Curse, and become Heir of the Blessing. Against this
Principle all the Powers of Darkness fight (even in every particular man and
woman) until they be overcome and subjected there: And against those in whom
this pure Principle reigns, all the Powers of Darkness in the world fight also,
striving to make it miserable, and to bring it into death and captivity, that
they might keep up the content and happiness of the Corrupt State. All the
Nations of the Earth have always warred against the Principle of God and the
People of his choice. In the time of the Law, the Jews were the object of the
Envy and Hatred of all the world: in the times of the Gospel, the Jews in
Spirit were hated and hunted, in that day and hour, not only by Heathens, but
also by such as were Jews according to the Letter; and ever since the Apostasy
by Christians also, according to the Letter, who are as great enemies to the
Spirit and Power as ever the Jews were.

Now all the Misery of the World, as it at first came by departing from the
Principle of Life; so it has been ever since continued by men's joining with
the Principle of Death and Corruption, to oppose and withstand the workings of
the Principle of Life, both in themselves and others. What man is there that
has not in him a Witness against that which is Evil? But where is that man,
who joins with this Witness in him against the Evil, and not with the Evil
against this Witness? Oh how does God's Witness reprove for Sin, making the
heart (which is not sensual and brutish, but seriously considers its latter
end) sad because of it! This is God's way of making the creature weary thereof,
of weaning him from it, delivering him out of it, and so rescuing him from the
Wrath and Everlasting Burnings, which are the portion and inheritance of the
Wicked. But who is it that does not strive to stop, silence and suppress this
Witness in himself, that he might enjoy his lusts, ease and content in the
flesh, by keeping the sight and remembrance of the Evil-day far from him? And
if he can do so, then he rejoices and makes merry over the Testimony of the
Witness in himself; and when he has so far prevailed, then he is in a good
capacity to persecute others, who hear and obey the Voice and Testimony thereof
in themselves.

That which is to redeem the World out of Misery, is the Power of the Gospel:
and precious is the Peace which comes thereby, after the work of the Spiritual
Sword (with the trouble thereof) is finished. O how blessed would the Principle
and Power of Life make the World, might it but have its free course therein! O
how happy is that man, who bears the Condemnation because of Sin, follows the
guidance of the living God, and waits for the day of his Salvation! O the sweet
inward Peace of Spirit which is enjoyed after the storm, and after the Judgment
of that which is to be judged and destroyed! And that which makes one person
happy, the same must make Nations happy. There is no true settlement nor
abiding security, but in the settled and abiding Principle. God is arisen to
shake the Earth, and it can settle no more upon the old foundations: yea, the
same God has shriveled up the old Heavens, and they can no more be stretched
forth again. Behold, I make all things new, says the Lord in the days of the
Gospel, when he stretches forth the Arm of his Power: And who is he which
shall venture to establish the old Heavens and the old Earth, which the Lord
God is removing and causing to pass away, and abolish the new Heavens and the
new Earth, which the Lord God has created and formed and is establishing? O
that men knew the place of Wisdom, that they might be wise and not fight
against their Creator, from whom their strength comes, and against whom their
strength cannot prevail. O that men could see how industrious they are to keep
up Misery, and to keep out Happiness. The eye of man (in the fallen and corrupt
estate) cannot see aright: and mis-seeing, how can he choose but mis-aim and
mis-act? and mis-aiming and mis-acting, how can he attain his end? But the
Lord's Counsel shall stand, and he will fulfill all his pleasure in every heart
and throughout the Earth. Happy is he who is weaned from himself, and begotten
in the Light of Life which is incorruptible, he shall stand and be blessed,
when all flesh falls before the Breath of the Lord and becomes miserable: and
the fall of all the fleshly will, wisdom and strength hastens apace; happy is
he who is delivered from them before the day of their ruin, which is nearer
than man is aware of, or can believe.

I. P.

Concerning PERSECUTION, etc.
BEcause men, generally, in Persecuting know not what they do (neither whom it
is they Persecute, nor how they sin against God therein, nor what danger they
are exposing themselves to, and what misery they are drawing upon themselves
thereby, both in this World and for ever) even as Christ said concerning the
Jews, who were Persecuting Him even to Death, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do: and afterward to Saul; Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou
me? Therefore, in love to those, who are at unawares running into this great
Error, that they may find the good Hand of God stopping them therein for their
own good, are these things following concerning Persecution Written, wherein
are manifested,

First, What it is that is Persecuted.

2. Who it is that Persecutes, or is the Persecutor.

3. The Nature of Persecution.

4. The Grounds or Causes of Persecution.

5. The Ways and Means of Persecution.

6. The Ends of Persecuting, what men aim at therein, or rather what that
Spirit in men, which puts them upon Persecuting of others, aims at thereby.

7. The Color or false Pretense of the Persecuting Spirit.

8. The Blessedness of the Persecuted.

9. The Misery of the Persecutors.

10. The Way and Means whereby men may come to avoid this great evil of
Persecuting others.

Whereunto (in the Last Place) are added, Some sad Effects of Persecution, to
kindle in men a Desire of avoiding so great an Evil in its self, and so
Pernicious an Enemy, (to all that is good in General, and Particularly to the
Peace and Welfare of Mankind) as the Persecuting Spirit is.

1. What or Who it is that is Persecuted.
The Persecuted in all Ages, is that which is born after God's Spirit, Gal. 4.
29. He that is new-created in Christ Jesus, who is formed in the Image and by
the Spirit of God (which is contrary to the Image and Spirit of the World) and
who follows Christ in the leadings and teachings of his Spirit (which is out
of and contrary to the course, fashions, ways and customs of the world) This is
the man that is Persecuted in all ages. He that is of another Spirit and
Principle than the World, and so cannot be as the World is (being made
otherwise by God) nor walk as the World walks, nor worship as the World
worships, being taught and required of God to do otherwise, This is the man who
is afflicted, reproached, hated, hunted, persecuted. And so the Apostle lays
it down, not only as a thing to be in his Age, but in after Ages also, 2 Timothy
3. 12. Yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
Persecution. Men may talk of Christ, profess Christ, worship Christ according
to the way that is set up in Nations, and avoid Persecution; but come under the
new Principle, come into his life, live Godly in Him, become really subject
unto the Power and direction of his Spirit: then there is no longer avoiding of
Persecution. That which comes into the Life of Christ, comes presently into a
proportion of Suffering from that which is contrary to His Life.

2. What or Who it is that persecuteth, or is the Persecutor.
The Persecutor, in all Ages, is that which is after the flesh. That Spirit and
Principle in man which is from beneath, puts the men in whom it is upon
Persecuting the other Principle, and the persons in whom it appears: Or more
plainly thus; That which is of the world, that which Loves the world and
present state thereof; that which lies in the darkness, is in unity with it,
loves it, and the corrupt ways thereof; that hates the Light, and Persecuteth
the children of the Light, who are witnesses against and reprovers of the
darkness, John 3. 20. He that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was
after the Spirit. So it was formerly, so it is also now, says the Apostle,
Gal. 4. 29. Now there are several sorts and ranks of these, as some in the way
of open profaneness and wickedness, some more civilized, and of a more gentle,
noble and considerate spirit and temper, some more religions and devout in
worships (though not rightly principled and guided, but turned aside to some
inventions or other of the earthly spirit, all which are pleasing to the
earthly spirit.) But all these, though they are different one from another, and
agree not well among themselves, but are full of dislikes one toward another,
yet they all agree in this, to wit, in a willingness to have that persecuted
and subjected, which is of a contrary spirit and nature to them all. They are
all against this more or less, though not all against it in the same degree of
heat and vehemence.

3. The Nature of Persecution, or What it is to Persecute.
Persecution is the opposition of the flesh against the spirit. The fretting or
dashing of the earthly spirit, or spirit of man corrupted, against that which
is born of God. The fighting of the unregenerate and unrenewed spirit in man,
against the spirit of man renewed by the regenerating power of the Spirit of
God. The fighting, the opposing of this spirit against the other, is
Persecution. What ever any man does in his own will, according to his own
wisdom, and after the inclination of his own heart, against another who desires
to fear the Lord, (who waits on Him for the counsel and guidance of His Spirit,
that he might Obey and Worship Him aright) is Persecution. The Principle of God
teaches to fear the Lord not according to the fear which is taught by the
precepts of men, but according to the fear which God puts into the heart; it
teaches likewise to worship the Lord, not according as man invents and thinks
good to prescribe, but as the Lord instructs and requires; it teaches likewise
not to conform to the world, but to deny it, and come out of it: Now the
hating, opposing, and punishing of that which is thus taught, because of these
teachings and its obedience thereto, this is Persecution. The rising of the
heart against such, is Persecution in the heart. The reproaching, scoffing at
or speaking evil of such, is Persecution with the tongue. (So Ishmael's mocking
of Isaac, Genesis 21. 9, 10. is called Persecuting of him, Gal. 4. 29. 30.) The
smiting, fining, imprisoning, of such, etc. in relation to any thing that they
do from this Principle, is Persecution with the hand, or lifting up of the
power either of a particular Person, or of a Magistrate against such.

4. The Grounds of Persecution, or what are the things that cause the one
Spirit and Principle to Persecute, and the other to be Persecuted.
The Grounds and Causes which expose the one to Persecution, and kindle the
heat of Persecuting in the other, are chiefly these three ensuing.

1. The enmity of the birth of the Flesh against the birth of the Spirit. There
is enmity in the Serpent against the Woman, and in the seed of the Serpent
against the seed of the Woman. That which is born of the corrupt Principle
cannot endure that which is born of the pure Principle. That which walks and
worships in the will and according to the inventions of man's wisdom, and in
shadows and fleshly Forms pleasing to the flesh, cannot endure that which
worships in Spirit and Truth.

2. The contrariety of that which is born of God and drawn out of the world, to
that which is of the flesh (or of corrupt man) and left in the World, this is
that which incenseth, and draws forth the enmity in the corrupt Principle.
They are not of the world, even as I am not of the World, John 17. 16.
Therefore the World hates them, v. 14. They are of another Spirit, of another
Image, of another Make, of another Heart, of another Desire, of another manner
of Carriage and Demeanor, of another Principle, and have other Ends in all they
do, then the World: And their whole course and conversation (being in the Light
and in the Love, and in true Purity of Mind) reproves the world, which lies in
the darkness and in the enmity, and walks in the wickedness. And how can the
world bear this, in the midst of all their height glory and greatness, to be
continually reproved by a poor and contemptible Generation, as Gods choice in
the world have for the generality of them always been, even looked upon by the
world as the offscouring thereof, as not fit to be suffered to have a being in
it, but rather as deserving to be scowred off from it?

The Light, whereof the Children of Light are born, and which they hold forth
(or rather, which God holds forth by them) condemns the World. The evenness,
sweetness, and straitness of their conversation and practices condemns the
unevenness, crookednes and perversenes of the spirit of the World. The
integrity, seriousness and spirituality of their worship (with the living power
and presence of God, appearing among them) condemns the deadness, formality and
hypocrisy of the worships of the world, who draw nigh to God with their lips,
when it is manifest, that their hearts are far from Him, being ensnared, and
captivated with Vanities and Self-interests, and love of the World and earthly
things. Indeed the whole course, and manifestation of the Light and Power of
God in them, is a continual upbraiding of the principle and ways of darkness in
the men of the world. And how can the men of the world forbear making an
unrighteous war, even a war of Persecution against that which invades their
territories and makes war with them in Righteousness? Can darkness choose but
fight to save its own dominions? It must put out the Light or it cannot save
its own, but will be losing ground daily.

3. Because of the Children of Light leaving and coming out of the world. They
were once of the world, as well as others; Of the same nature, of the same
spirit, of the same corrupt will, of the same corrupt wisdom, walking in their
way, worshipping according to their worships, approving and observing their
customs, fashions and vanities. But when the Spirit of Christ called them out
of the world, and created in them that which could hear his voice and was
willing to follow him, then they left all these and stood Witnesses (in God's
Spirit which called, and in that life which was begotten in them, and in the
fear, love and power of that God who quickened them) against all these. And this
mads the world, in that they were once of them, but left them. Had they staid
in the world, and been still of the world, the world would have loved them, as
it does the rest of its own: but departing from the world, traveling toward
another country, subjecting themselves to another Spirit, and testifying
against that Spirit which formerly led them and still leads the world, and
against those ways and practices wherein formerly they walked, and wherein the
world still walks; this fills the worldly spirit with rage against them.

5. The Ways and Means of Persecution.
The Ways and Means of Persecution, are very many. Who can want Instruments to
afflict the innocent and helpless, who can neither resist the evil which is
offered them, nor harm that which offers it? I shall only here mention three
general heads, to which many particulars may be referred.

1. One great way of Persecution is, by making use of Laws already made, either
according to their proper tendency to that end and purpose, or by bending them
aside, from their proper intent, to reach those whom they have a mind to
afflict and persecute. Thus the Jews, when they had a mind to have Christ put
to death, told Pilate, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die, John 19.
7.

2. Another way is, by making new Laws fit for their purpose, whereby they may
catch, ensnare and suppress that which is contrary to their spirit and
principle, and which will not bow thereto. This is a certain way to take that
which is born of God, and which cannot but be true to Him, and so cannot bow to
the corrupt will of man, nor to any Law made in the corrupt will to strengthen
the corruption, and against the holy pure Will and Mind of God. Thus Daniel and
the Three Children were caught in the snare by Laws, Daniel for praying to his
God against the Royal Statute and firm Decree of the King, signed in writing,
according to the desire and advice of all the Presidents of the Kingdom, the
Governors, Princes, Counselors, and Captains, Dan. 6. 7, 8. and the Three
Children for not worshipping the Image Nebuchadnezzar had set up, according to
the Decree of the King. (observe this by the way and consider it well. What
has been set up all this night of the Apostasy, but Images of the true
Worship? and what compelling has there been thereto?) Thus have Articles been
framed, and Statures made here in England, (as in King Henry, 8. and in Queen
Mary's days) which have been great Engines of Persecution: And thus have there
been some late Laws made in New -England to the same Effect, though better
might have justly been expected from them. And this is not only a certain way,
but a very plausible way likewise, whereby the Persecutor hides himself from
the Imputation of Persecution, and appears as a just Executer of the Law; and
so represents him, who is upright before God and innocent in the sight of God,
as an Offender and Breaker of the Law, and so justly punishable. But this will
not always cover the unjust spirits Persecution of the Just. He that shall
persecute the Lord of Glory (as he that persecuteth the least Member of His,
how contemptible soever he appears to his eye, does no less, Act. 9. 4. Matthew.
25. 40, 45.) when Christ shall call him to account; therefore it will be a vain
plea for him to say, there was a Law for it, and he acted according to Law. It
is fit for all Men and Laws to bow before the Lord, and not to disturb any in
their Obedience to the Lord, or hurt the Principle of his Life in any, but
cherish and nurse it up (as much as in them lies) in that tenderness which
Christ begets in it, and in that spiritual Liberty which Christ allows it.

3. A third way of Persecution is by the hand of Violence, without either Law,
or so much as pretense to Law. Thus the persecuting spirit, when it has power
in its hand, and is out of fear, smites (with the open fist of wickedness)
that which is an Enemy to, and stands a Witness against its wickedness.

6. The Ends of Persecution, or what the Persecuting spirit aims at in its
Persecuting, and would fain attain thereby.
1. The main end of Persecution, is, to bring the Children of Light, (who have
left the Evil, Darkness and Corruption of the World) back to the World again.
That which they persecute them for, is, for leaving the World both in its
principle and practices, and for professing obedience and subjection to another
Spirit: That which they drive at in persecuting them is, to force them back
from under subjection to that Spirit which has led them out of the World, into
subjection to the spirit of the World again. There is a great fight between the
Spirit of God and the spirit of the World, in the two Seeds; the Spirit of God
striving to bring the spirit of the World under, and the spirit of the World
striving to bring the Spirit of God under. This is well known in the heart,
where the new Birth is witnessed. O what striving there is by the powers of
Darkness, with all manner of secret Temptations and forcible Oppositions (so
far as the Lord permits) to bring the Heart (which the Lord has begun to
redeem, and in some measure set free from them) under their power again! And
the same that stirs up the Darkness in the Heart against the Seed and Birth of
Light there, the same stirs up the Darkness in other men against it also. The
Lord knows what bitter fights we have had with the Enemy in our own Hearts,
before we could leave our principles, paths and practices of Darkness, how hard
it has been to us to deny the World and come out of it: and yet when the Lord
has conquered and subjected the Darkness in our own hearts in any measure,
then we meet with a new fight abroad in the World, the same Principle and Power
in them fighting against us, as did at first in our selves. And as this was the
aim and work of the Power of Darkness in our selves (and still is, so far as
any of it is left in any of us) to bring us back under the Darkness again, even
from the Light and Leadings of the Spirit, and from single obedience thereto:
so it is the aim and endeavor of the same spirit in others. And if they could
but bring us back from our God into the World again, they would be at peace
with us as well as with other men, and love and cherish us as they do the rest
of the World.

2. A second End of Persecution in the spirit that persecuteth, is, to keep the
Children of Light from gaining further ground. The Kingdom of God and his Truth
is of a growing spreading nature. It is like Leaven, like Salt, like the Light
of the Morning; it is nature is to leaven, to season, to overspread and gather
Mankind from the Evil, from the Darkness, from the Corruption, from the Death
and Destruction. Now the spirit of the World, and that spirit which rules the
World, is loath to lose ground; and therefore hunts and seeks to destroy the
Vessels wherein the Light appears, and from whom it shines sorth, and to
make them appear as odious as they may, that they may keep all their own
Territories and Dominions in a perfect detestation of them, and distance from
them. Thus though the People of God have still been an innocent People, and
simple as to the subtilty and deceit of the Serpent, and weak and foolish in
compare with the wise and strong ones in the worldly nature and spirit: yet
they are still represented as most dangerous, most subtle and pernicious, as
shrewd Deceivers, Witches, Jesuits, etc. yea, any thing that is hateful and
hated.

3. A third End of Persecution, is, to afflict, grieve, vex, disturb and
torment those, whose Principles and Practices are displeasing to them. There is
enmity in the nature and spirit of the World, against the holy pure Spirit and
Seed of God: and if it cannot overcome and get its will one way in bringing
back, yet it will strive to have its will another way, even in vexing and
afflicting. It is the pleasure of hatred or enmity to do any thing which may
hurt that, against which its hatred is. Thus the evil spirit rejoices in
iniquity, in grieving and afflicting that which is good. As the Spirit of Love
delights in Love, and in doing good even to those which persecute: so the
spirit of enmity delights in hatred and doing evil, even in vexing and
oppressing those which seek their good, because they are not, nor cannot be one
with them in their dark principles and evil practices.

7. The color, or pretense which men put upon their Persecutions of that which
is good.
Persecution is so hateful (and has such a blackness of spirit in it) that it
cannot endure to appear in its own color. Where is the man that would appear
to persecure that which is good in men, or men because of their goodness?
Therefore all Persecutors, though they still persecute that which is good, and
those which are good; yet they still represent and charge them as evil, that
they might thereby hide the badness and unjustness of their Persecutions from
their own eyes, and from the eyes of others. Thus the true Prophets of the Lord
were always misrepresented by their Persecutors, even as false Prophets, as
Troublers of Israel, as mad men, as men not fit to be tolerated in the Kingdom
or Commonwealth of Israel: see Jer. 29. 26, 27. And those which condemned their
forefathers, for persecuting the true Prophets in former days, yet could also
persecute the true Prophets in their own days. Christ himself, when he asked
the Jews, for which of his good works they stoned him? They said, Not for a
good work, or as a good man; but for his doing evil, for his blasphemy, in that
he being a man, would make himself God, Joh. 10, 32, 33. And the Pharisees did
not represent him as a good man, as an holy Teacher from God (as indeed He was,
though his Doctrine and Conversation differed very much from theirs) but as a
Deceiver, a Seducer of the People, a mean man, the son of Joseph the Carpenter,
one whom none of the wise Scribes owned, but only such silly people as knew not
the Law (Joh. 7. 49.) yea, as a very bad man, as one that was against the
Worship and Ordinances of Moses, against God's Temple and Priests in his
Doctrine and Principles, and a prophaner of God's holy Sabbath in his
Practices: yea, more than this, they represented Him as a man that had a Devil;
and when the mighty Power of God appeared in Him, they said it was the power of
the Devil, and that He was able to do such great things beyond them, through
the help of Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. Could the Jews think they did
otherwise than well in desiring such a man as this to be put to death? might
they not well prefer Barrabas before a man thus represented by their chief
Priests and Teachers, who knew and could expound the Law, and were best able to
judge (as they might well think) both what was the Truth, and who were
Deceivers?

8. The Blessedness of the Persecuted.
The Disciple of Christ, who is persecuted for Conscience sake, who suffers
from men and their Laws for the uprightness of his heart toward, and for his
obedience unto Christ, that man is precious in the eye of Christ and has his
blessing with Him: yea, the more men disesteem and hate him upon this account,
the greater is his blessedness. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against you falsely for my sake.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, Matthew. 5. 11, 12. He is blessed in several
respects.

1. That man is in that Spirit and in that way which God has chosen, and so he
is in a happy state and condition at present. He is in the path of Life, in the
way of Peace, under the Leadings of God's Spirit. The World loves and
cherishes that which is its own, that which is of it and walks with it; but
is at enmity and war with that which is of God. Therefore the World's Dislike,
Enmity and Persecution is an evidence of God's choice, and of a Removal from it
toward God. It is an happy thing in the eye of man, to be at unity with the
World, to have the love and friendship thereof, to have all men speak well of
one, to be found doing that which is pleasing in the eye of the World, and to
be enjoying the pleasures and profits thereof: but in the eye of God it is
happy to be in unity with that which is contrary to the World, and procures
its ill will. Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World. If
any man love the World, the love of the Father (which begets out of the
World) is not in him. But he that loses the love of the World (for the
Principle of God and his subjection thereto) is in that which the Father
loves, and feels the Love of the Father opened in him, and revealed to him:
and this is truly an happy state.

2. The Recompense, which God will give to them in the World to come, who
cleave to Him and his Truth, for all the Persecutions which they endure in this
World for his Truth's sake, is exceeding great. Great is your Reward in Heaven,
Mat. 5. 14. Our light Affliction, which is but for a moment (but at most, for
the time of this world) works for us a far more exceeding eternal weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

3. The Reward is great in this world also. There is an hundred fold Recompense
to be reaped in this life. The Peace of God in the Conscience, the Presence of
God, the Life of God, the Virtue of God, the Glory of the Spirit of God (which
accompanies, rests with, and abides on the heart which is faithful, and
waits upon God for Patience, Meekness, Innocence and Strength to carry
through the Sufferings) may well be valued at above an hundred fold Income and
Recompense, for all the Hardships and Tribusations which are undergone for his
Namesake. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the
Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

9. The grievous misery of the Persecutors.
It is a miserable thing to be deceived about that which is good, to put Good
for evil, Light for darkness, Sweet for bitter, and so (under a mistake at
least) become a Persecutor of the good. All good is of God, and he that is
against good is against God; and it is a dreadful thing for the creature to set
himself in battle against his Creator, and to engage the Power and Wrath of the
Omnipotent One against him, though while the eye is shut, it does not appear to
men, either that they are against God, or that their danger is so great
thereby, as indeed it is. The Children of God are as the Apple of his Eye: Who
can touch them, and He not be deeply sensible? yea, and they are most dear to
God in that, for which the World most persecutes them. And therefore their
danger and misery must needs be great, which may further appear in these three
respects.

1. In respect of the weight of Wrath, which their Persecutions of others here
will bring upon themselves in the world to come. Then every hard word, with
every thing they have done against any Lamb of Christ's, shall come upon them.
There is a time of Judgment for all that is sowed in this world: and then every
one shall reap what he has sowed. And if he that has not visited the sick and
imprisoned for Christ's sake, shall hear that sentence, Go ye our sed, etc.
what will his portion be, who has imprisoned them and caused their sickness?
Now is our time of trouble; but the Lord has prepared a day of rest for that
Spirit which is troubled in this world by the spirit of this world, and then
shall the troublesome spirit, which troubled the peaceable Spirit (and would
give it no rest in its following and obeying the Lord) be troubled by the
Spirit of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. And what shall the misery of that spirit
be, whom the Spirit of the Lord troubles and fills with anguish, and
torments in his Fire and with his Brimstone! Oh that men would awaken and
consider in time, and not fell away their everlasting Inheritance for a mess of
Vanity and transitory Lusts and Pleasures.

2. The hand of God does often overtake them in this world, and the Lord does
many times curse their very Blessings to them, insomuch as they cannot enjoy
this world with that sweetness and content they might, were it not for the rage
and bitterness of their spirits against God's People, and their provoking of
God against them thereby. How many of his own People did Pharaoh lose, and how
did he break the strength and glory of his Kingdom, by persecuting God's Israel
of old? How did Amalek cause his name to be rooted out from under Heaven? How
did the Nations and mighty Powers of the Earth fall upon this account, one
after another? And in this Nation how many Powers have already fallen thereby!
Jerusalem is a burdensome stone (it was so in the type, it is much more so in
the substance) which lies in the way of every earthly spirit and power, which
they know not how to build with, neither can they rear up their own building
because of it, and therefore every Power strives to remove it out of their way:
but they know not the weight of it, nor who it is that has squared it, nor how
firm it is fixed upon the Rock. The earthly spirit is never to enjoy any true
or lasting Peace and Settlement (which is the Gift of God) until it leave off
persecuting God's Israel (which are the People whom God calls out of the
world) and leave them free for God to enjoy, command and dispose of: and
whatever holds Israel in bondage, either within or without, must either subject
to the Lord, or be broken by that Arm of Power, which the Lord puts forth to
redeem Israel with.

3. By all their Persecutions and Afflictions they shall but increase and cause
to grow, that which they strive to suppress. This is Misery indeed, for a man
to hazard his soul eternally, and his Peace and Prosperity in this world, to
crush and suppress a People, and yet not be able to effect that neither, but
even thereby occasion their growth and increase: and yet so it is in the day
that God puts forth his hand to redeem Israel. The ways that man takes to
bring them back into captivity shall be the means of perfecting their
Redemption. Come, said Pharaoh, this People multiply too fast, they grow more
and mightier than we; let us deal wisely with them, and keep them down by hard
labor, lest they grow over-numerous and join with our Enemies against us, when
they see their advantage: But they grew and spread the more, upon his wise
plotting and contriving to diminish them. And what did he get by striving to
keep them from going forth of his Land and Idolatrous Worships, to worship the
Lord aright, but Plagues and Judgments upon himself and his People from the
Lord? Can the Powers of the Earth withstand God any more now, than they could
formerly? shall not He redeem and bring forth his People from the Land of
Babylon? His spiritual Israel from the spiritual Egypt? Shall He not break the
Antichristian Yoke from their Consciences, that they may be free in spirit to
serve the Lord? Can any hinder God from breathing his Spirit upon People, and
from begetting them in the image and likeness of his Spirit unto Himself? And
shall not these be the Lord's? shall not the same Spirit teach them to worship
the Lord? shall God call them to worship Him openly, and shall they not obey
him, but worship Him according to man's Inventions and Commandments, or not at
all publicly? Oh ye sons of men be wise, do not contend with the Lord; be not
bewitched by the Cup of Fornications, from the pure spiritual Worship of the
living God, into Man's Inventions, which the Lord's Soul loathes; nor do not
strive to hold any back from the Lord, whom the Lord draws after Him: but
consider his Power, wait to know his Work in the world, and do not entrench
upon his Dominions, but be thankful for and content with your own; and do not
provoke Him against you, who can more easily take yours from you, than ye can
His from Him. And consider this Watchword, in that which can open and show the
truth of it; The Lord has put forth his Arm to recover his Possessions from
out of the hands of Antichrist: and who shall be able to force it back again,
to make it return into His bosom without effecting what He stretched it forth
for?

Therefore, O Magistrates of this Nation, do not make use of the Sword to
suppress the Plants of God, but to cut down that which manifestly is not of
God. Look abroad throughout this Nation, behold how much evil there is to
grieve and provoke the Lord, and to divert good from the Nation; and to bring
wrath upon it and the Government thereof; strike at that in righteous and true
Judgment, and with mercy to creatures souls and bodies: but that which
certainly is of God, meddle not with; and that which may be of God, for ought
ye know, be circumspect in meddling with, lest ye engage God against you. It
were better to let many Tares grow, than pluck up one Ear of Corn. Christ has
absolutely expressed it to be his Mind, that he would not have that done, which
may so much as hazard the plucking up of an Ear of Corn, (Mat. 13. 29.) But oh
how are the Laws and Governments of this world to be lamented over (and oh what
need there is of their Reformation) whose common work it is to pluck up the
Ears of Corn, and leave the Tares standing! The chief cause of this misery
(from whence it principally arises) is men's meddling with those things which
God has reserved for Himself, and assaying to do that carnally, which God once
did spiritually, and will do spiritually again in his due time, when He has
sufficiently shown how untoward and improper man's hand is to effect it. The
Christians in the Apostles days, were of one heart and one mind, which
proceeded from the Power and Work of God upon them, and then they soon came
into one Way and Worship: but men will have Unity and Uniformity in a way of
Religion and Worship, before there is one heart and one mind. Now this is
contrary to the Spirit of God and to the very nature of Religion, and the cause
of much Cruelty upon men's Consciences: and this has been and will be the
constant effect of it, even the crushing (as much as lies in man) of that which
is tender, and of and for God, and the increasing of that which is formal, dead
and earthly. Now if ever Christ appointed or intended such a Church Government,
which naturally produces this effect, let all that fear God, and are of sober
spirits, judge.

10. The way and means to avoid Persecution.
Where is the man (in whom there is any good, who has any love to Goodness and
Righteousness, who hates Cruelty and Oppression over men's outward Liberties
and Estates, and much more over the Consciences of People) that could not with
his heart desire to have this grand Enemy removed, both from particular
persons, and also from Governors and Governments, that Peace and Settlement
might be known, Righteousness reaped, all Cruelty and Hardness in one man
toward another removed, and there be no more complaining in our streets,
either because of Oppressions from men, or fear of Wrath from God upon those
Governments which oppress? And who would not earnestly pray to God for the
discovery of that way and those means, and be very industrious in the use of
them, whereby this persecuting spirit and temper might be wasted and dried up
in him? Now the way and means whereby the persecuting spirit may be subdued,
are diverse, as,

1. By a true Awe and Fear of God in the heart. The Fear of God teaches to
depart from Iniquity, and to seek the crucifying and bringing under of the
worldly spirit in a man's self, and to wait daily to have God's Will revealed,
and likewise to be made obedient thereunto. Now he that is in this temper of
spirit, will hardly be drawn to persecute another, but rather rejoice to see a
tenderness of spirit in him, and true subjection of heart to what he believes
to be the Mind and Will of God; and dares not so much as judge him for
differing, either in Apprehensions or Practices about Worship, much less
persecute him therefore. But that man who is of a profane spirit, or comes
easily by his Religion (even by the wisdom, industry and parts of man, and not
by the gift of God) and is exercised in that Fear of God which is taught by the
Precepts of men, but knows not that Fear which God puts in the heart (from
whence the true Religion and Worship springs) either of these may be drawn to
persecute, yea indeed, it will be hard for either of them to abstain therefrom.

2. By meckness of spirit. The Gospel makes meek, tender, gentle, peaceable,
fills with love and sweetness of spirit, teaches to love, to forgive, to pray
for and bless enemies: and how shall this man persecute? Can a Lamb persecute?
Can a Dove persecute? Indeed a Wolf in Sheeps clothing may raven and devour,
but a true sheep cannot. As the power of the Gospel is known, the devouring and
persecuting nature is destroyed: and that being taken away, Persecution soon
comes to an end.

3. By a sober and patient consideration of their cause whom they persecute,
and what it is in themselves which moves them to persecute them. The strength
of Persecution lies in the darkness, in the dark thoughts, mis-judgings and
misapprehensions about him, whom one persecutes or is inclined to persecute, in
prejudices, and false judgments of Persons and things received: which by a
sober hearing and considering of things in God's fear and in meekness, might be
removed; and then the eager Persecuting heat of spirit would soon abate and
fall, the fuel (which kindled it) being taken away. The Jews stopped their
ears and ran upon Stephen, Acts. 7. 57. This is the way of persecuting spirits;
They take in prejudices against persons, their Principles and Practices, stop
their ears against what may be said to manifest either the equity of the thing
in its self, or their mistake about it, and then run headlong in their fury of
persecuting and devouring. But he that is sober and considerate and weighs the
cause before he engages against it, and observes what it is in him which moves
so hotly against another, and which is so ready to believe ill aforehand: he
shall soon see that, which is always hid from the eye of the Persecutor, and
find water to cast on this devouring fire of spirit in him.

4. By a righteous frame of spirit, which is willing to do by another, as he
would be done to in the like case. Persecution arises from unrighteousness and
selfishness; righteousness and true equity would soon end it. If no man would
make another man's Conscience bow by force who would not have his own so bowed,
Persecution would soon cease. But this is the great evil and unrighteousness of
man; whoever is uppermost, thinks he has, right to bow all the rest under him,
and looks upon them as guilty and offenders, if their Consciences do not yield
and bow under him. And he that newly complained of the load laid on his
Conscience by others, yet if he can get ease and power into his hand, is
presently laying a load upon others. Here is a wrong frame of spirit within,
and how can it choose but bring forth injury and Persecution outwardly.

5. By taking heed and watching against the corrupt and carnal, Principle, with
the reasonings, self ends and interests thereof, and hearkening to the
Principle of God, which teaches and speaks right Reason. Man, as he came
from God and was by especial favor formed in His Image: So it pleased God to
place in him a Principle of His own Life to govern him. This Image was defaced
by the fall, and this Principle forfeited, yet for Christ's sake (who is the
Savior of all men, but especially of them that believe) the Lord stirs up
and visits all mankind more or less, by the pure eternal Principle of His own
Light and Life in Christ. In hearkening to this, man's reason is rectified,
purified and preserved pure; and his steps here are safe: But consulting and
contriving out of this, he meets with that which corrupts him (captivating and
mis-byassing his reason) and then all his intents, designs and contrivances
become corrupt, and tend not only toward the prejudice of others at present,
but also to his own loss and detriment in the issue. He therefore that would be
safe in the enjoyment of any blessing which he has received from God, and
faithful in doing him service in his generation, must know what of himself is
ready to betray him, that he may watch against it and turn from it, and what in
himself is given him of God to enlighten, guide, instruct and preserve him,
that he may hearken thereto and be made happy thereby.

11. And Lastly, To set it yet more home upon all that are ingenuous, and would
be worthy and noble, and do that which is worthy and noble, abhorting cruelty,
afflicting and oppressing of others, let them consider the fruits and effects
of Persecution, which are very many, and of the worst kind, even suitable to the
nature of the root. At present I shall only mention these four.

1. In a great degree it hinders the growth of the present good in every age
and generation, so far as the earthly power or sword of the Magistrate can well
hinder. Persecution of that which is good by the earthly Powers, in its proper
tendency is an hinderance to the growth thereof in their age and day, though
the Lord can overbear the malignity of it and further the growth of his Seed
thereby.

2. It wholly tends toward hindering the shooting up of any further seeds of
good, which God has to saw in the earth: For all the seeds of good which God
has to sow in the earth, at first they are looked upon as evil, until by God's
blessing upon them, and opening of men's eyes through the much suffering of
those vessels, in whom God causes the most excellent seeds of his virtue and
goodness first to appear, their innocence and beauty begins at length to shine
in men's eyes and be discerned.

3. It occasioneth the growth of evil. For good withstandeth, opposes and
chaseth away evil, even as light does darkness: and therefore the preventing of
the springing up of the good, is a cherishing and strengthening of the evil.
Besides, the same Spirit, Government or Power, which persecuteth and keeps
down the good under a pretense of its being evil, cannot choose but also cherish
and nurse up the evil, under a pretense of its being good. For the same eye,
tongue and heart, that sees, calls and acknowledges that which is indeed
good to be evil, cannot choose but also mistake the evil and think it good.

4. It draws down the wrath of God upon People, Powers and Governments, where
such persecution is; where the evil is cherished under a pretense of its being
good, and the good endeavored to be suppressed under a pretense of its being
evil. If men from their hearts do acknowledge the being of God, and His
disposal of things: then surely what is truly good in Persons or Nations is of
Him; and what is of Him, His eye is upon. He beholds the plants which He has
planted in the earth, and the plants which the envious one has planted; and He
cannot bless that Place, that People, those Powers, that Government, where His
plants are crushed, under a pretense of their not being His, and where the evil
hature and plants are cherished as if they were the good.

Therefore he that would not be an enemy to God, an enemy to goodness, an enemy
to himself, an enemy to mankind, and a friend and promoter of evil, let him
wait on the Lord, for the fear of his Name and Power to be written on his
Heart, and for a meek righteous frame of spirit, etc. that he may consider his
steps and the reasonings of his mind, and not mistake evil for good, and good
for evil, and so persecute men for being and doing that, which (might it have
its course and progress) would make the world happy.

Object. But will not this undermine Magistracy, and interrupt its punishing of
evildoers, if they should be thus tender and considerate? For what man cannot
pretend Conscience for what he does? and if the Magistrate should hearken to
every pretense of Conscience, the Laws would soon be silent, Government at a
stand, and every one do what they list, bringing in all manner of
licentiousness and disobedience to Authority, under a pretense of Conscience.

Answ. 1. Conscience is of God; and tenderness and conscienciousness toward
Him is necessary to the receiving of His pure fear, and toward the springing
up and growth of all good in the heart. The Seed of good is tender: and if it
be not received into tender and well-prepared earth (but into thorny, stony or
highway ground) it cannot grow. And it cannot reasonably be supposed, to be
the intent of God in appointing Governments, that ever their Laws or Authority
should hurt that tenderness of Conscience, wherein his seeds of good are sown.

2. It is true, The corrupt nature of man, which is selfish and seeks covers
for evil, may also seek this cover to hide iniquity under, and may pretend
Conscience when there is no matter of Conscience at all, but self-will and
self ends at bottom.

3. Notwithstanding this, God would not have the true conscienciousness and
tenderness in any of His crushed; nor can it be done by any Person, Authority
or Law, without provokeing God on the one hand, or without injury to such who
are so dealt with: Viz. Who are punished by man for the exercise of that
conscientiousness which is of God, and which he requires and is pleasing to
Him.

4. It were far better in it self, safer for Governors, more agreeable to
equity and righteous Government, and more pleasing to God and good men, rather
to suffer some (by their craft and false covers) to escape due punishment, then
to punish those who by the goodness, innocence and righteousness which God has
planted in them) are exempted from punishment. Yea, it were better and much
safer to spare many evil men, then to punish one good man: For mercy and
sparing (even of offenders) is natural to that which is good, but severity and
punishments are unnatural, and but for necessities sake. And as for that man,
who by his subtilty and deceit thus escapes man's hand, he will be no great
gainer: For God, who is above all, will be sure to meet with him. Yea that
Magistrate (who spares some evil and evildoers merely upon this account, lest
he should hurt that which is good) the Lord will help and bless; whereas that
Power and Government which wilfully errs herein, the Lord may soon cut down:
And that which errs thus through mistake (it being a grievous mistake to cut
down the good in stead of the evil) the Lord, who loves the good and hates
the evil, may easily be provoked against.

5. As Government came from God: so the righteous execution of it depends upon
God. Every man needs God's help daily, else he may easily err in his course:
and Governments and Governors need God's help much more, in the many
intricacies and perplexities which they often meet with. And God is nigh to
them in their difficult cases, who wait upon him for counsel and direction. If
the case be knotty, yet if God give wisdom, has the Magistrate cause to
complain? And will not the Lord assist that Magistrate, who in his fear waits
on him, and is not willing to spare the evil, and afraid to hurt the good? If
there were not so much consulting with man's wisdom and policy, (nor such
laying of designs and intents at first, as spring from man and not from God)
but a naked upright waiting on him for instruction, who can only guide the
spirit of man aright, Governments would not prove so difficult, nor the success
therein so dangerous.

A brief Account of that stiffness, resolvedness and supposed stubborness,
which by many is Objected against the People called Quakers.

Object. That the People called Quakers, are an innocent and industrious
People, that they aim at good and might be serviceable and profitable to the
Nation in many respects; this many believe concerning them, and in their hearts
wish that the Powers would let them alone and make a trial of them: the which
they might be the more inclined to do, were it not for a certain stiffness
which appears in them, they being so gined to their Principles and Practices
that they will not bend in the least, nor so much as meet the Magistrate one
jot in any favor he would show unto them. This is such a temper as no
Magistrate or Governor can beat, and therefore there is a necessity either of
banishing or suppressing them out way or other.

Answ. I freely confess, that (looking upon them with man's eye) it may easily
appear so to man, who cannot see either whence that is, or what that is, which
is wrought in their hearts by God. And how can I blame others for judging thus
of them, when I my self should be liable so to judge, if I did so look upon
them? But yet, if I had patience to hear them, and to consider the thing in the
fear of God, (watching against that wisdom, from which the knowledge of the
things of God and the state of his People is hid) I see also, that there is
some ground may appear unto man, to let him see that this is not such a
stiffness and stubborness of spirit as he judges, but arises from, and
necessarily accompanies a true tenderness and conscientiousness toward God;
which to make the more manifest to such as are willing fairly to consider the
thing and know the truth thereof, I shall thus demonstrate.

1. Stubbornness, or such a kind of stiffness and resolvedness, arises from
the strength and corruption of the natural will and earthly wisdom. The wisdom
which is from above is gentle, easy to be entreated: and the will which is
created by God is mild and flexible, and easy to be led (by the least child)
in the line of goodness. And I can truly say this, that I never in my whole
course and conversation (who have long been a Spectator and un-interested
person both as relating to the civil state and the various professions of
Religion, till the power of Truth and presence of God appearing in this People
drew my heart after them) yea I cannot but say in the singleness of my heart, I
never met with a more mild, gentle, flexible-spirited People. And he that can
reach the ground of the thing, cannot but see it to be thus: For he that is
daily exercised in denying his will and wisdom, he on whose back the Lord lays
the cross and crucifies him every day, his self-will and self-wisdom (with all
the conceitedness and stiffness which arises therefrom) must needs be much
broken in him.

2. In the tenderness and pliableness to good, which God begets, there is and
cannot but be an unbendedness to evil. Consider this, O ye that are wise: In
the birth which God begets in the heart, in the immortal Seed of life, which
God has sown and causes to spring up in his heritage, there is a bowing to
God at every appearance of good, accompanied with a tenderness, gentleness and
good will to man: But it cannot bow to that which is evil in any man upon the
face of the earth. Read then this Riddle, with a true understanding: The tender
one cannot yield, the flexible one cannot bow, but naturally stands upright
and strait toward God, even in every thing it has learned of him, and which
he requires of it. Thus in the Apostles days, the Christians (though meek,
though sweet, though pliable to the Spirit of God and to all good, yet) could
not bow to so much as an appearance of evil any where, but shun and avoid it
every where. And if it were not for this kind of stiffness and unbendedness,
the Children of God could never be preserved in their departure out of the
Worlds Spirit, Ways, Worships and Practices: but would soon be ensnared and
drawn back again, by the enticements and subtilties of the worldly nature
either in themselves or others.

3. A stiffness then I grant, an unbendedness I grant; but not of the earthly,
not of the self-wil, nor according to the earthly: but such as arises from
Truth in the heart, and from tenderness of Spirit toward God; such as is begot
in His fear, preserved by his power, and is necessary toward their
preservation who are born of Him, and called by Him out of the World. And if
those who are apt and liable to mis-judge of them, did but see the sincere
desire of their hearts not to offend man, but to be subject to the utmost
according to the will of God, and knew what breathings there are in their
hearts to God (in relation to the Magistrate, and when they appear before Him)
that they may be preserved in the pure fear, and in righteousness and
inoffensiveness, and how they cannot but refuse to break any of God's commands,
because He is their Supreme Lord, and they dare not disobey Him to please man,
or avoid their own sufferings from man: I say, if men did see this, surely they
would not call it stubbornness and self-willedness, but a pure subjection and
denial of the self-will in God's fear, joined with an holy and humble boldness
in His power.

4. Let it be equally considered, and it will soon be acknowledged, That the
least thing which God requires (the Command being from so great a King, upon
whom the soul has so great dependence, from whom it has so great hopes, and
to whom universal obedience is so due in it self and so profitable to the
creature) is exceeding weighty: and it is impossible for the fear of Him and
due tenderness toward His Commands, to be preserved, without a strict and
close giving up the Will to Him, and standing in His strength, strong and
unbended against all temptations, provocations, allurements and affrightments
to the contrary. (and how easily may men call this stubborness and stiffness.)
But this they receive from God, as well as the law of obedience and power to
obey; and this (which men call stubborness) flows in upon them from him, when
they are in the sweetest and meekest frame of spirit, most ready to deny
themselves and to yield up their own wills, to whatsoever is good and
righteous, and so of God.

5. The same thing, which is offended at this unbendedness and resolvedness,
which is wrought and preserved in them by the fear of God (calling it by way of
reproach, stiffness and stubborness) I say, the very same thing will commend
that resolution and stiffness, which is taken up in man's wisdom, and held in
man's will. Is it not good to weigh and consider things reasonably, and then to
choose and hold fast to those Principles which appear most reasonable? what man,
but will say it is? And is it not good to obey and keep to that Light which is
higher than Reason, which comprehends Reason, rectifying and preserving it,
making it profitable and serviceable to God which made it, to the Vessel in
which it is, and to the rest of the Creation? But Wisdom is justified of her
Children. He that knows not the Principle of the Eternal Light, who is not born
of it (much less by unfeigned obedience and subjection formed into it) he
cannot justify it in his Paths: but he justifies the earthly wisdom and reason
of man, by it setting up appearances of Good, instead of Good, and would make
all acknowledge and bow to them as Good: whereas that which is indeed
acquainted with the Good, living in the Principle thereof, cannot bow to the
false Appearance, but only to the Truth it self. When man's spirit and wisdom
is wearied out of all its paths, and he broken with the misery which will
certainly overtake him therein, at last the Path of God will be welcome to him,
and that Principle which (through the operation of God) is able to rectify him
and make him happy.

There has long been a Peace and Prosperity throughout the world in
Unrighteousness: but the season is at length come for the breaking thereof, and
now there is not to be such a settled false Peace in Unrighteousness any longer;
but Tribulation, Anguish and Destruction is coming upon the selfish and unjust
spirit: and he that refuses the Path of Righteousness, must not know Peace,
but be overtaken with the overflowing scourge, and swept into and shut up in
the pit, which has long been digging for the wicked (Psalm. 94. 13.) and mark
this thing following, ye that would not find your selves deceived of your souls
hereafter, nor of your outward Peace and Prosperity here: for it deeply
concerns both.

The Spirit of the Lord once raised up a spiritual building, which the spirit
of the Dragon overturned (as to its outward state: though the gates of Hell
could not prevail against the being and inward state of the true Church) and
instead thereof set up an earthly Image, agreeable to the earthly spirit in
Nations, but burthensom to that which is innocent, pure and spiritual. The Lord
God suffered this to stand all its allotted time, and to have power to keep
down the Visibility of His Truth and People: but the Lord has appointed a
season to raise up his own Building again, and to throw down this Image. Now
this I say to all men, in the Fear and Dread of the Almighty, Stand still and
mark, if all the power of man be able to keep down God's spiritual Building
which he is raising up, or to keep up any part of the earthly Image which He is
throwing down. The spirit of man (in various ways) has showed, what it
judges best to have down and to have up, and has put forth its strength to
accomplish its will and counsel: Stand still a while and ye shall see, that the
Spirit of the Lord will also show what He would have down, and what He would
have up, and He will also put forth His strength to accomplish His Will and
Counsel. It is the Glory and Honor of the Lord to carry on His Work in the
midst of all the Oppositions of man, and against the full current of his
strength and will. This will make it to appear to be of God, and cause the
Glory of his Name to shine. O that men could fear the Lord and bow before Him,
that He might be honored in them, and see good to honor them in the carrying
on of His Work, and so might not be forced (through their hearkening to the
dark spirit, and because of their ignorance of, and disobedience to the Light
of his Spirit) to get Himself a Name by overturning their strength and
Councils, and causing his Glory to shine over them.

We have been a poor oppressed People, from the day that the Power of the Lord
brake forth upon us, and his Light sprang in us, even until now. And now we are
brought lower than ever, and are in greater danger (to the eye of man) than
ever. Yet our confidence is still in our God: and this we are certain of, that
our Principle (and Practices therefrom) shall stand, and man shall not be able
to prevail against it: for God will preserve his People in his Life and Power,
and the heads of all that wait upon Him in his Fear, shall be lift up above all
the swellings of the Waters; yea, a song of Praise is already prepared in the
hearts of God's Chosen, against the day of his Deliverance. We look not out,
but give up our backs to the smiter, as if their strokes were never to have an
end: and yet we wait on our God and hope in Him, as if Deliverance were
springing up every moment. And, Oh that God would smite the spirit of Enmity
and Darkness in Men and Powers, and then there would be Love, Peace, pursuing
after God and Righteousness, and no more persecuting and smiting of God's
People for the Uprightness of their hearts, and for their Obedience and
Faithfulness to Him. But be it known throughout all the Earth, We are the
Lord's, and we must worship and serve Him. He has redeemed us (even all of us
in some measure, who have known Unity with His living Truth) in soul, in body
and spirit: and they must all be His in the first place, and cannot bow to man
(in the least) against His Will, or contrary to the Law of his pure Life, and
Leadings of his Spirit in the heart. Here is our standing, in the strength of
our God, whatever become of us. And here we stand in love and good will to
mankind, yea to these present Powers, however they judge of us; and have been
praying for them, and mourning over them, while they have been smiting of us.
And when they have drawn the Hand of the Lord upon themselves; if the Lord
shall please to open their eyes to see what we have been toward them (and how
fain we would have had them set footing there, where they might have stood firm
and have been preserved) they will bewail as much their dealings with us, as
what will befall themselves. The Lord will manifest all things in his Time, and
give his Truth a passage in the Earth, and his People a quiet habitation
therein, how black soever the face of things now appear, as relating to them.

O how happy will the Day be when the Lord shall have wrought down the selfish
spirit in man, and shall have raised up His own Noble and Equal Principle. Then
shall Righteousness spring up and spread abroad throughout the Nations: and the
work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness Quietness
and Assurance for ever.

THE END.

