SOME QUESTIO^^ AND ANSWERS* For the opening of the Eyes the JEWS NATURAL,
that they may see the Hope of Israel, which has so long been hid from them.

WITH Some QUESTIONS and ANSWER^ for the Direction, Comfort, Help and
^^^therance of God's Spiritual Israel, in (...) Travels in Spirit from
Spiritual (...) through the Spiritual Wilderness to Spi^^^^al Canaan, which is
the Land where (...) Redeemed Soul flourishes in the Life (...) with God and
worshipping him (...) and Truth.

By Isaac Penington, the you^^^^

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, (...) Le Grand, 1661.

The Preface.
SEveral things has the Life, begotten by the Eternal virtue, breathed in me
toward my Father for, in relation both to my self and others, from my
Childhood. As touching my self, First, that I might be a Vessel for Him, that I
might be freed from the bondage of Corruption and brought forth in the Image of
his Life. Secondly, that I might be filled with his Life, that I might be
satisfied in the presence and with the fullness of the Spring of my Life: even
that I might have enough of my God in my heart continually. Thirdly, that he
would of his own mere goodness both preserve the Vessel and dwell in it for
ever: that so my Tenure and Possession of him, and fitness for him might be of
his Grace, of his Love, of his good Will, of his own Nature, depending wholly
and altogether on him, and not at all on any thing that can be expected from
the Creature-hood in its purest State. And likewise, that if he pleased to use
me in any service, it might be of him, and for him, and to him: that he would
bring me so low in my self, that I might not be able to detain any of his Glory
and virtue from him, but the meanness of the Vessel might still so appear to
me, and also be so sensibly discerned and acknowledged by all other eyes also,
that the Excellency of the Power and of the Glory might run back entirely into
his pure Bosom.

Besides these, there have been Vehement desires in me concerning others also.
First, toward Mankind in general, that they might have an exceeding merciful
and powerful day of Visitation, even that the whole Earth might be touched with
the Power of Life and drawn out of the Darkness. O how has my Soul breathed
for poor lost mankind, and how has my Spirit traveled (with unutterable pangs
and earnestness) for unheard of, unthought of, and altogether unexpected mercy
and good will toward the Sons of Men in general! Secondly, toward my Brethren
in Spirit, that they might know the day of Redemption and Power in Spirit, and
not always lie grovelling on the Earth, and groaning and mourning because of
the Lusts and Corruptions, but might know Deliverance in Power, and might sing
the Song of Moses and the Song of the Lamb (because of their feeling Victory
over Pharaoh and the Dragon) and might serve and worship the living God in
Spirit and Truth, without fear of interruption, and Captivity from the Enemy
any more. Thirdly, toward the Jews after the Flesh, that their Iniquity might
be blotted out, their wound healed, the pure Eye opened in them, and the pure
Glory revealed to them: that they might know the Shepherd of Israel in Spirit,
the Spiritual Tents of Jacob, the Beauty of the Footsteps of the Spiritual
Flock, and might Travel out of their Darkness, Earthliness and litteral
Knowledge into the Land of pure Life, Rest* Peace and fresh Joy in the living
God (whereof their Land of Canaan, with all the good things thereof, was but a
shadow) and might be Anointed with the fresh oil of the Salvation of the
Messiah, and might become indeed an holy Nation, yea, a Kingdom of Priests to
offer up Spiritual Sacrifices on God's spiritual Altar.

My Soul still breaths to the Lord, and waits on him, for all these things:
and as he draws my Spirit forth, so am I ready in Spirit to be serviceable
unto him therein. These present drawings and openings of my Life, in the
Questions and Answers following, are both toward the Jews in Flesh, and also
the Jews in Spirit; that they may meet in one, even in the One Path and Pasture
of life, where there is one Shepherd, one Seed, one Flock, one Spirit, one
Beginning, one Progress, one End in one and the same Circle of Life. The Lord
my God take it into his own Hand, dispose of it for good, Manage and Bless it
according to his Pleasure.

J. P.

Some QUESTIONS and ANSWERS for the opening of the eyes of the Jews natural,
that they may see the Hope of ISRAEL, which has so long been hid from them.
Question. WHat was the Rise of that People the Jews?

Ans. They came of Abraham after the Flesh, who was God's Friend, whom God took
from his Father's House and from his Native Country (where he was worshipping
and serving Idols) to be the Stock and Pattern of the Faithful, both of the
Jews according to the Flesh, and of the Jews in Spirit. Of this Root, of this
Stock came this People according to the Flesh, who were an Holy Nation, a
Circumcised People, a Sanctified People outwardly: and (as long as their day
lasted) were the Beloved of God, the Pitied, the Pardoned, the Redeemed Ones,
even until the Shadows were finished, and the Season came, for the Substance to
appear and be set up in the World; whereof they had the first offer also, and
out of whom was the first gathering for the Spiritual building. But they
generally hardening their hearts, and cleaving to the Wisdom and Knowledge
which their wise Ones had taught them (from their misunderstanding the Letter
of the Scriptures) missed of the Spirit, Rebelled against the Redeeming Power,
and so lost their share in the Inward Glory, and by God's Righteous hand were
cut off from their outward also, their day being spent, and the Blood not only
of the Prophets, but of the Son and Heir himself also required at their hands.

Quest. How came this People to be the chosen People at first, and so long to
continue such?

Answ. It was not for their Righteousness, not for their Loveliness, or
plyableness to God above other People: but because it pleased the Lord freely
to love them, and to pitch upon them for the People of his Choice after the
Flesh, in the free Covenant which he made with Abraham. The Earth is the Lord's
with the fullness thereof, and he may choose whom he will to fill with his Inward
and Spiritual Glory (even with the manifestations of his pure Love, Life and
Presence) and he may also choose whom he will to make outwardly or typically
Beloved, Great and Glorious. He chose Abraham freely, he gave to Abraham an
Heart to follow him, he gave him the Faith and Obedience which made him
accepted with him: and he chose his Seed after the Spirit to be his Eternal
Heir, and his Seed after the Flesh to be his Temporary Heir. Thus of Isaac in
Spirit came the Children of the Promise in Spirit, and of Isaac after the Flesh
came the Seed of Promise after the Flesh. Sarah after the Flesh bare one of
these, the Sarah represented by her (or the Free Woman which is from above)
bare the other. And of Isaac comes Jacob, Worm Jacob, who serves for his Wife,
who flies from the face of Esau, yet afterward finds favor in his Eyes: from
this Worm do the Twelve Patriarks branch forth, who were the Heads of the
Tribes of Israel. Thus has it been with that Nation according to the letter;
and thus it has also been and is still inwardly in Spirit, as the Israel of
God, the Jews in Spirit (who are Learned in the Law of the Spirit of Life) can
very well read. Thus outwardly Israel was God's Child, Ephraim his Dear, his
Beloved, his pleasant Son; Judah his Praise, whom his heart was toward, and to
whom he stretched forth his Arm of Salvation all the day long. In all their
Affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them: and he
said, Surely they are my People, Children that will not lie, so he became their
Savior. Thus it was with them till the day of Israel after the Flesh expired,
and the day of Israel in Spirit was to succeed in the sight of the World.

Quest. What was the end for which God chose that People?

Answ. It was to be a Vessel for him to form, to try and experiment what his
Love could bring them to, and bring forth in them in that way of Manifestation
and Operation. This God opens to Jeremiah concerning them, bidding him go down
to the house of the Potter, where, in a Parable, they might read their own
State, and what they were to expect from God, even to be formed by God unto the
utmost, until he had made a perfect trial of them, and then to be broken and
laid aside, as a Vessel that could never be fitted for the Master's use in this
way of Dispensation, Jer. 18.4. On the Lord's part there was no defect toward
his Child, his Spouse, his Vineyard, his Garden of pleasant Plants (as this
People was in that Dispensation:) for he was still a Father to them, Faithful
in Covenant, Tender in Bowels, abundant in Loving Kindness and Mercies: Yea
what could be expected from the Lord toward a People, according to that
Dispensation, which the Lord failed in? But they were still faithless,
continually breaking Covenant, Erring from his Dear and tender Love, and
drawing down the strokes of his Wrath upon them, forsaking the guide of their
youth, forgetting the Love of their Espo^sals, continually starting aside from
the right State, wherein God pleased at first to set them, or at any time
afterward in any measure to reduce them.

Q. How did God exercise and try them to the utmost, even till at length it was
plainly manifest, that there was no firm keeping a People to him by Virtue of
that Dispensation, but he must necessarily cut them off, choose another People,
and take another course, if he would have a People for his Heart to love and
delight in, and for them to enjoy and possess him?

Answ. He tried them several ways, and in several States and Conditions: as
First, in a State of Captivity in the Land of Egypt. Secondly, in a State of
Straits and continual Dependence upon God, even for Necessaries, in the
Wilderness. Thirdly, in a state of Enlargedness in the Land of Canaan, which
flowed with plentiful provisions for the outward man (which were also shadows
and instructions concerning the inward Blessedness.) Fourthly, in often
Captivities. Fifthly, in Returns to their Land again, with Settlement and Peace
and many Blessings therein.

Quest. How did God try them in Egypt?

Answ. First, with sore Bondage and Oppression from Pharaoh and the Egyptians.
Secondly, with giving them the feeling of their state, the sense of their
bondage, and causing them to cry unto the Lord for Deliverance. Thirdly, in
raising up a Deliverer, and giving them a Sign of the Deliverance by the hand
of the Deliverer, in his smiting of an Egyptian and saving an Hebrew. Fourthly,
in sending the Deliverer to them with Promises of Deliverance, and with Signs
and Symptoms of the Delivering Power. Fifthly, in Pardoning their Unbelief and
Rebellions against him in Egypt, and showing many Signs and Wonders for them in
that Land, till at length he had brought them forth by his Mighty outstretched
Arm, even against the will and mind of Pharaoh and their Taskmasters.

Quest. How did God find them in Egypt upon this Trial?

Ans. Very unbelieving, very stubborn, mis-interpreting his Sign of
Deliverance, reasoning against his Promise, because it came not so soon and
after the manner they expected. When he lift up his hand to them to redeem them
from under Pharaoh, to bring them forth of the Land of Bondage, to the good
Land he had espied for them, and bid them forsake the Idolatrous worships of
Egypt, and not defile themselves any longer therewith; because he was now to
become the Lord their God, and to appear in his Power for them; yet they would
not, Ezekiel. 20.5. etc. When Moses would have reconciled and Hebrew to his
Brother, he would not hear him, but upbraided him for slaying the Egyptian, not
waiting on God to understand the Figure, but mis-interpreting and abusing it in
the Fleshly Mind. When the Deliverance succeeded not according to their
expectations, they Murmured against Moses and Aaron: and when God sent them
again with a fresh Promise, they would not mind it. Yet God bare with all this
in them, and did not cast them off, but assuaged his Wrath, and stirred up his
Love to make a further Trial of them.

Quest. How did God Try them in the Wilderness?

Ans. By many Temptations, Signs and Wonders; by Powerful Appearances for them
against their Enemies; by bringing them into many straits; by unexpected and
impossible supplies (I mean impossible to the sight or expectation of the
outward Eye) as with Bread from Heaven, Multitudes of Quails, Water from the
Rock, keeping their Clothes and Shoes from wearing out and decaying. Likewise
he gave them an Holy and Righteous Law to Inform their Minds in Equity and
Righteousness, directing them in an holy way, walking with God, and one toward
another, and chalking out unto them an acceptable path of Worship: and this Law
was delivered in great Majesty, dread and terror, to cause a deep impression
thereof upon their minds.

Quest. How did God find them in the Wilderness?

Answ. Full of discontent, full of murmuring, full of self-will, full of doubts
and questionings concerning God's Power. They did not wait on him, who had
delivered them out of the hand of Pharaoh, and from under the Egyptian
Taskmasters, but they murmured against him. They did not wait for food, or
water when they wanted, but distrusted and complained, repining at Moses and
Aaron, and sometimes talking of making a Captain to lead them backward. Neither
were they content with the Provision which God allotted them (that was mean in
their eyes) but they would have flesh: Though the Manna, the light Bread (as
they esteemed it) of God's choice and with God's Blessing, had been far better
for them, then the flesh with his curse, upon that lust which asked it, and
would not be content without it. Again, They would not go on toward Canaan or
Fight when God would have them, and when his strength would have gone along
with them: but when he forbad them, of their own will, and trusting to their
own strength, they would go on and Fight. It is a sad record which Moses their
tender Shepherd (who with the Eye of true Light had faithfully observed them)
left concerning them, Deuteronomy. 9.24. You have been Rebellious against the Lord,
from the day that I knew you.

Quest. How did God deal with them in reference to the Land of Canaan?

Answ. First, he prepared them for it. Secondly, he dispossessed their Enemies,
and placed them in it, giving them an Inheritance according to his will.
Thirdly, he poured down Blessings upon them therein.

Quest. How did God prepare them for the good Land?

Answ. Eirst, By many Afflictions and Exercises in the Wilderness, wherein he
judged and wore out the Rebellious Generation (who were consumed with dying)
and raised up their Children in the awe and dread of his Mighty Power.
Secondly, by giving them a Righteous Law to walk by in every respect, that they
might not be to seek how to please God, or how to walk one toward another, or
toward the Heathen among them, or round about them, but in every thing might
be rightly instructed. Thirdly, by warning them of their own proneness to err
from God, and of the Danger thereof, both in Relation to the loss of Mercies
and drawing down of Judgments, that they might watch against the Erring Nature
and Transgressing Spirit in their hearts. Fourthly, by appointing a way of
Sacrifice and Mediation, whereby God might be atoned either for Particular
Persons, or for the Land in General. Fifthly, by directing them to a Principle
as near to them, and more strong than the unrighteous Principle; whereby they
might be preserved in the Obedience of the Law, and from out of the reach of
the Curse.

Quest. How did God find them in their own Land?

Ans. That Generation which was thus Prepared, thus Taught, thus Directed,
walked sweetly with the Lord, and was a precious savor in his Nostrils: but
soon after the evil thing sprang up again in the Generations following, and
they did quickly corrupt themselves, departing from the Lord, and running a
whoreing after their own hearts lusts, Judge. 2.7, etc.

Quest. How did God deal with them then?

Answ. He brought Judgment upon Judgment, still Weightier and Weightier upon
them, according as their need required, exercising loving kindness and Mercy
toward them, as much as possibly their Estate could bear. He sent his Prophets
to forewarn them of the Wrath, that they might be spared, if possible: and when
his Judgments and Severity came, he mingled Mercy therewith, that by both he
might try to the utmost, what they might be wrought to. He tried them a long
while under the Judges, and a long while under the Kings, often recovering them
and setting them to rights, expecting the Fruit of his Rod and of his Love
toward them.

Quest. What was the result of God's trying them under the Judges and Kings?

Answ. They wearied out God's Prophets, yea, they wearied out the Lord also in
that way of his Dispensation. They chose the false Prophets before the true,
lying Divinations before the openings of Life, and dead Idols before the living
God. The Kindnesses and Mercies of God were wasted upon them, for with his Love
they were not drawn: the Bellows also were burnt, the Lead consumed, the heat
of the Furnace spent upon them, and yet their Tin and Dross not purged away.
Under the Judges they tired out the Lord's Patient Expectation of Good from his
Delivering hand, insomuch as he resolved to deliver them no more, Judge. 10.13.
Under the Kings they were as unruly (whether good Kings or bad Kings, given in
love or wrath) insomuch as the Lord said, Why should ye be stricken any more?
ye will revolt more and more, Isai. 1.5. There was indeed no bending of Israel
after the Flesh and keeping him Strait to God, in that way of Dispensation:
therefore must he be cast off, even becoming Reprobate Silver in the sight of
the whole Earth, because the Lord would reject him.

Quest. How came Israel after the Flesh to be rejected?

Answ. His day of Flesh was out, and the day of Spirit was come, wherein the
Spiritual Glory (which was to succeed the Shadows of the Fleshly) was to be set
up: and so he not seeing that, nor entering into that, his own Sun set, and he
has abode in the Darkness unto this day.

Quest. How came he not to see the Spiritual Glory?

Ans. Because the Eye of the Flesh was open in him, which Eye cannot see it. He
Read the Law in a gathered Light, in the Light of the earthly Wisdom, and not
in the Light of the Spring from whence it came: and then how could he possibly
understand the Law aright? Could he then choose but set up the Shadows of the
Law, in the stead of the Substance which was veiled therein? He read Moses with
the Eye which can see but to the vail, and not to the Glory which was revealed
to Moses, and which Moses hid under the Vail. And thus likewise he beheld the
Prophets, in the days of their Appearance; not in the Light in which they
appeared, but in the Light of his own Reason and Imaginations: and upon this
ground the Jews still chose and cried up the false Prophets, but Persecuted the
True. Now not seeing Moses in Spirit, nor the Prophets in Spirit, how could
they see Him who was greater then the Prophets, he looking so Contemptibly to
the Sight of that Eye, wherewith they expected to see him? It is the Jew in
Spirit, who alone can see and own the Messiah in Spirit: yea, no fleshly Jew
could possibly discern him then, whose Eternal Life (Light and Power) was hid
under so mean a Vail. He must be more than a Jew after the flesh, who can own
so much as the Law, or any of the Prophets in Spirit: and then surely it can
require no less than Inward Jewship, to discern the Messiah himself. They knew
by the Letter, that then he was to come and to appear; but they could not know
by their Observations from the Letter, which was he, but alone by the pointing
of the Finger of the Spirit, which they were unacquainted with.

Quest. What did they do to him, not seeing his Glory?

An. They dealt with him as they had dealt with the Prophets before him,
disdained him that he should Claim to be the Son of God, Slighted him, Reviled
him, Reproached him, preferred Moses and the Prophets above him (who all did
but declare of him) yea at last they preferred a Thief and Murderer before him,
and put him to Death after that manner that the Prophets had foretold they
would do.

Quest. Did the Prophets foretell that the Jews would put the Messiah to Death?

Answ. Yea, very manifestly, with the manner and Circumstances thereof. Daniel
said plainly that the Messiah should be cut off; though not for himself, Chap.
9.26. Isaiah shows the Cause why he was cut off, to wit, for the Transgression
of my People was the Stroke upon him, Chap. 53.8. He was the Lamb without Spot,
there was no Iniquity found in his Heart, nor guile in his mouth, but he
offered up his spotless Soul (through the Eternal Spirit) as a Ransom for the
Souls of Transgressors, and with his Bruise are they healed. David shows yet
more particularly how he should be cut off, They Pierced my Hands and my Feet,
Psalm, 22.16. and Zachary says, that afterward in the Day of their Visitation,
they shall look upon him whom they have Pierced, Chapter 12.10. Was he not Betrayed
by one of his own Table? (Psalm. 41.9.) Did they not cast Lots for his Garments?
(Psalm. 22.18.) Was not Gall also given him, and Vinegar to Drink? (Psalm. 69.21)
Were not his Bones kept from being broken, according to the Paschal Lamb the
Type? (Exodus 12.46.) O that the Jews could read the words of their own Prophets
in the Light of the Prophets, and not in the Light of man's Imagination, and
then they could not but Bow before the Spring and Fountain of that Light, as it
was Revealed in Flesh according to the Scriptures, and see how that Body was
prepared for the Light to shine in, and for it to do the Will in, and to offer
up the Sacrifice which God would have, that so an end might be put to all the
Sacrifices and Offerings which God would not have, Psalm. 40.6. Dan. 9.27.

Quest. What was to befall the Jews for refusing the Day of their Visitation by
the Messiah, and for the putting of him to Death?

Answ. They were to be cast off, to become no People, their Covenant to be
broken, their Glory turned into shame, their Light set in obscurity, their
House made Desolate, and the hand of God pursuing this desolate People, making
them a Scorn and Reproach throughout all Nations (Dan. 9.27. And is not this
come to pass upon them? for what Person has been more hateful and hated than a
Jew, who was once the Glory and Envy of all Nations? yea, hardness and
blindness has so happened to them, that they cannot see the plainest things
written in the Prophets, concerning the Expiration of the Day of Moses with all
his Shadows, and the succeeding of the Spiritual Glory in the days of the
Messiah, but their Eyes and Hearts are still blinded and held Captive in the
Figures of things.

Quest. Is there any Scripture of the Prophets, which declares that they
should be thus blind and hard?

Answ. The Spirit of the Lord in the Prophet David (the Beloved King and Figure
of the Messiah) prayed for this Righteous Recompense to them. Let their Table
become a Snare before them, and for Welfare a Trap. Let their Eyes be Darkened
that they see not, etc. Let their Habitation be Desolate, etc. Psalm. 69.22,
etc. What is their Table? where and on what do they Feed? Is it not on the
Writings of Moses and the Prophets? Now all the Meanings, Observations and
Hopes which they gather from these (being under the Curse, and out of the
Spirit of the Prophets) cannot but be their Snare and Trap: and that which
entangleth them deeply to this day is, their misunderstanding and
mis-interpreting of Moses and the Prophets. O Lord my God, in the abundant
Riches of thy Goodness at length Pity them, and let the fierceness of thine
Indignation abate toward them, and in thy Love open their Eyes to see their
state, and what they have refused, and against whom they have lift up their
heel in their conceited Wisdom and Knowledge, which they have gathered from
Moses and the Prophets Writings, that they may mourn after thee, and wait for
thee in the way of thy Redemption.

Quest. How long is this Desolation and Hardness to abide upon them?

Ans. Until God visit them with his Spirit, and open their eyes to see his
Spiritual Glory, and turn their hearts toward it. Then their outward
expectations, and desires after an outward Glorious Kingdom, will soon come to
an end; and the Messiah will be known, owned and received by them in Spirit:
yet any outward Glory that the Lord God sees good for them, they shall not want
neither. This the Prophet Isaiah plainly Relates to the Ear that is Spiritual,
Chap. 32.15. ( Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on High, and the
Wilderness be a Fruitful Field, and the Fruitful Field be counted for a
Forest.) They must lie wast, until the Lord God please to let forth his Spirit
upon them, to gather them into his Spiritual Glory: for the Day of their
outward Glory did end, and a Spiritual succeeded, which they are to be gathered
into, when the days of their Distress and Tribulation are accomplished.

The Spirit was once poured down from on High on the Disciples of the Messiah,
upon his Ascending into his Glory, and the Wilderness then became a Fruitful
Field, and the Fruitful Field was accounted for a Forest: but over that Glory
the Defense was not so stretched forth, but that a night overtook that day, and
the Wild Beasts made a Prey of that Vineyard and Fruitful Field also, as well
as of the former. But there is to be a more general pouring out of the Spirit,
even upon all Flesh, and the Wilderness is more generally to be visited and
become a fruitful Field, and the fruitful Field is more generally to be blasted
and made a forest: insomuch as all Flesh every where shall appear Grass, and
the Glory thereof as the Flower of the Field, which shall fade and wither
before the breath of God's Spirit. Then Judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness
which is then visited, and Righteousness shall remain in the Field which is
then made fruitful: and Righteousness shall be Powerfully-operative, working
out the lasting Peace, and the effect of it shall be Quietness and Assurance
for ever* No more War, no more Fighting with Creatures, no more burthening and
oppressing of the Creation, no more sinning and offending against the Creator,
no more being dispossessed of his Life and Glory, but the Dwellings, which God
reareth up in the last days for Israel his People, shall be Peaceable
Habitations, sure Dwellings and quiet Resting-places for evermore. O let Israel
feel that which is able to awaken him, and wait for this.

Quest. How shall they be visited and gathered?

Answ. By the new Covenant, by by the new Law of the Messiah, which is to go
forth out of the new Sion, and by the Word of the Lord, which is to issue out
of the new Jerusalem. Not by the Covenant of Moses (their Eyes may fail in
hoping and looking out that way) but by the Covenant of the Messiah, where the
Law of Life is Written, not in Tables of stone or outward writings of the
Letter, but in the heart by the Spirit. There they shall be cleansed by inward
Water, receive the inward Circumcision and Mark of the inward Jew, be sprinkled
with the everlasting Blood of the Lamb, and taught to offer up the spiritual
Sacrifice, and shall hear the Voice which will tell them of the Way, and which
will lead them in Paths they have not known. There the spiritual Seed, the
spiritual Israel shall find the Shepherd of Israel, who leads into the Land of
Life, puts forth his Sheep into the Pastures of Life, gives them of the living
Streams to drink, begetting them as Heirs of, and bringing them up in the
everlasting Power and Dominion of the Life.

Quest. How may old Israel enter into this Path, and so become new Israel?

Answ. By waiting on the Lord for the closing of that Eye, which is wise
according to the Flesh; and for the opening of that Eye which is at first weak
in Spirit. There must be a low beginning. Israel must know and not despise the
Day of small things, if ever he will grow up into the Riches and Inheritance of
this Glory. There is a Light in every heart, which gives a sound in the natural
Vessel, which is very hardly at first distinguishable from the natural, till
(by obedience and subjection thereto) its living Touch, Virtue and Power comes
to be felt and distinguished: but in the Meek, Humble, Believing and Obidient,
it daily appears more and more, and makes it self more clearly manifest to
them, who are walking on unto the Kingdom and Inheritance in it, while others
are disputing about it.

Quest. How may Israel believe, and become subject to the Light?

Answ. When there is a drawing felt in the heart, either to good, or against
evil, he must not dispute concerning it on the one hand, nor run on in the
forwardness on the other, (for both these ways, the breathings of the Spirit
on him, and springings up of the good Seed in him are easily quenched) but in
the Fear he is to trust himself with what his heart certainly feels in the
drawing Virtue, and in the Humility to give up the Members to the Good and to
withhold them from the Evil, waiting for strength from the Fountain of strength
toward both. By this means there is a Travel and removal, out of the
corruption and filth of the heart, into the pure holy Law, Nature, Image and
Will of God.

Quest. Where does God find the heart, when he first visits it with his Light?

Answ. In Egypt, in the Darkness, in the Bonds and Captivity of Death.

Quest. What does the Lord do with it there?

Answ. He Exercises it a while there, till he has made it fit for a
Wilderness-state.

Quest. What does he do with it then?

Ans. He brings it into the Wilderness, which he has fitted it for.

Quest. What does he do with it in the Wilderness?

Answ. He prepares it for, and leads it toward the Land of Life.

Quest. What does he do with it then?

Ans. He gives it an entrance into the everlasting Kingdom (which is the Land
of Life) according as he has prepared and fitted it. That which is
new-begotten, new-created and formed, newborn in the Messiah's Eternal Light,
finds an Entrance into and an Habitation in the Light, and is not turned back
into the Land of Darkness, it abiding in the Virtue and Principle of its Life,
although sometimes it may be exercised with the Darkness for its further
advantage. Thou art our Habitation from everlasting to everlasting, says the
Child of Light unto the Father of Spirits, in all Ages and Generations.

Now that Israel after the Flesh may the better understand the Path of the
spiritual Israel in the way of Redemption, by the powerful visitations of the
Light of the Messiah in their hearts and Consciences; and may know the Gospel
of his Salvation, which is able to effect that, which the Law of Moses could
not, because of the weakness of the Flesh on their parts; let them in fear and
silence of the natural wisdom, and in waiting on the Lord in Spirit, consider
these Questions and Answers following, relating to spiritual Israel.

Some Questions and Answers, for the Direction, Comfort, Help and Furtherance
of God 's Spiritual Israel, in their Travels in Spirit from Spiritual Egypt,
through the Spiritual Wilderness to Spiritual Canaan, which is the Land where
the Redeemed Soul flourishes in the Life, walking with God and Worshipping Him
in Spirit and Truth.
Quest. WHat is the Gospel?

Answ. A good Message or glad Tidings to man in the fallen estate, concerning a
Promise of Redemption out of it.

Quest. Is man then in a fallen Estate?

Answ. His present Temper, Constitution, Disposition and whole Course, upon the
least touch of God upon his Spirit, do in some measure discover his fall unto
him; though the insensibleness, which is come upon him by his grievous wound
and death through the fall, makes him very unapt to take notice thereof.

Quest. What was his Estate before his fall?

Answ. A State of Glory and Blessedness, wherein he came pure out of the hands
of his Creator, was fitted for his use, service, enjoyment and delight, even
for him to appear or disappear in, and exercise according to his pleasure.

Quest. Wherein did his Glory and Blessedness consist?

Ans. Chiefly in these four things, to wit, In the Light; in the Life; in the
Liberty in which the Vessel was formed; and in the Indwelling and appearing of
the Creator there, according to his pleasure.

Quest. Open this a little further.

Answ. Man was made a Vessel of Light, a Vessel of Life, a Vessel of pure
Freedom. He was formed in the Eternal Image, and had a pure being in that
Image. He was Light in the Lord, living in the Lord, free unto all Good, and
from all Evil in the Lord. This was the state of his being at first, and thus
was he made in the Image a pure resemblance of the Eternal Purity and
Blessedness: but besides this he had the Eternal Life, the Eternal Substance,
the Eternal Purity it self dwelling in the Vessel, shining in it, and
manifesting it self from it according to its pleasure.

Quest. How came man to fall from this Estate?

Answ. Not willingly, not of an inclination of his own, but he was deceived,
through the subtilty of Temptation, to entertain a desire of enlarging his
blessedness, out of the limits of the will of his Creator.

Quest. How could such a Temptation enter man, he being Pure and Holy, inclined
to Good and against Evil, after the Image of his Creator?

Answ. Man was not made to enjoy a Perfection in himself separate from his
Creator, or to live of himself, but by dependence. Now though he had no
inclination in him not to depend, or to seek a Life in himself out of the
Fountain, yet there was a Capacity of so doing: before which Capacity the
Tempter laid his bait of advancing him to a greater Wisdom, Glory and
Excellency, than his Creator had placed him in; with which he consulting out of
the dependence upon his Creator, fell from that which alone was able to uphold
him in the pure state, wherein he was made. Thus was he taken in the snare of
misery and brought to that loss, which all the Sons of Adam lie grovelling under
to this day, when the Lord at any time awakens the sense thereof in them.

Quest. What was the State of man in and since the fall?

Answ. A state of Darkness, a state of Death, a state of deep Captivity,
wherein his Soul, Body and Spirit are become dark as to the Light of God, dead
as to the Life of Righteousness, and Captive unto that spirit which has entered
them by their harkening thereto, who dwells and rules in them in the
Darkness, as God did before in the Light.

Quest. How is man dark? how is man dead? is his Soul or body dead as to their
being? or how else is it?

Answ. Man is not dead as to his being either in Soul or Body, but as to the
right, pure and sanctified state of each. The Vessels still remain the same in
being, but they are emptied of their proper Liquor, and filled with other Wine.
The Understanding is the same, the Reason the same, the Will the same, the
Memory the same, the bodily Members the same as to their being or matter: but
they are all otherwise leavened, and another King now dwells in them and Reigns
over them.

Quest. Then there needs not any dissolution of man's Reason, or bringing it to
nothing, in relation to man's Recovery, but only a changing of the Leaven.

Answ. Man is become another thing by degeneration from the Life. He is so
poisoned by Sin and Corruption, that he is to be wholly broken down and brought
to nothing, even in the very Naturals, that he may be new made and built up in
the newness of the Spirit. Thus he is to become as a Fool, as a little Child,
or rather as a Seed to be cast into the womb of Life, there to be formed and
born of the Spirit. And as he springs up in the Life, he is to forget his own
Country, living in the Spirit and walking in the Spirit: where watching to the
Spirit, and against his own Reason in the pure Childishess, in the simple
instinct and naturalness of the Life, he shall at length find a Reason new
formed and springing up in him, which waiting on the Lord in Obedience and
subjection, shall be taken into Unity with the Life: but if the Eye of Reason
open too fast, and be not kept down to the Light of Life, the Betrayer will
enter again at that door, and bring the Soul into Death, after it has had
sweet and Precious Tastes of the Redeeming Virtue and Power.

Quest, Can Man in the fall see his fallen Estate, and so seek after a recovery
out of it?

Answ. It is not possible for him so to do, without some Light shining upon him
from the Redeemer. How can Darkness discover Darkness? That which makes
mamanifest the Darkness is Light. When the Vessel is dark, and the Prince of
Darkness fills it and dwells in it, what can that Eye see but according to
the Darkness, judging Evil Good and Good Evil, bitter sweet and sweet bitter?

Quest. But there is no man but has some Light, no man but at some time or
other sees Good or Evil in some measure.

Answ. That arises not from the light of Man's Nature, as it now stands in the
fall (which being wholly in the Enemie's hands, and being it self become
darkness, cannot at all give man notice of or light him out of the darkness)
but from a fresh Visitation of the Life, which gives all men a day of
Visitation by the shining of its Light, wherein is some manifestation to man,
and some certain sight by him both of the Good and of the Evil: and not only
so, but there is also the living Spirit striving with him, and attracting him
from the one to the other, according to the Lord's good pleasure, whose is both
the Light, and also the determination of the proportion of every man's
Visitation by it.

Quest. But has not man naturally a Light in the fallen Estate, which
discovers unto him Good and Evil?

Answ. Not a true Light, not a true Discovery, but only somewhat which the
Enemy sets up in man as such, to keep him in the entanglements of the
Deceit, and out of the suspicion of it. For the Enemy entering into him, by his
subtilty blinds and deceives his Eye (that he may the better hold him
Captive in the deceit) insomuch as he discerns not the false Image which the
Enemy has stamped upon him: for though the Enemy brings man into a state of
real Darkness, Death and Captivity; yet these do not at present appear to man
what they are, but are miscoloured or Painted to appear what they are not, the
better to deceive, bewitch and entangle man therein. The Enemy did not
represent Darkness in its Black hue, Death and Captivity in its dreadful
Appearance to Adam; but as Wisdom, as Light, as a better Life, as a greater
Freedom. And thus he still enters man, and after this manner he still dwells in
man, until the true Light pursue him, opening and discovering his Deceit, and
drawing man back from this false Paradise of pleasure in wisdom and liberty out
of the Life, into a sense of his want of, and breathings after the true Garden
of the living God.

Q. Is man then mistaken in his Judgment of Good and Evil since the fall?

Answ. Yes, altogether: and by this means does he so pleasingly situate
himself, and take up his Habitation in the Kingdom of Darkness, wherein are
strong holds and wise reasonings against the true God, and for the false
Appearances of good, which the Enemy of the Soul strongly makes men believe to
be such as he represents them for, in the darkness. Thus in particular persons,
and also in Societies evil is pursued after, and advanced for good, and the
true good suppressed as evil, through the working of the Mystery of Darkness in
men's hearts.

Quest. What then is the proper Estate and Condition of man in the fall?

Answ. A State of false light, of false life, of false liberty. He seems to
himself advanced in Wisdom above the low, empty, naked Estate of Innocence,
which is nothing and has nothing, but by a continual dependence on the
Goodness of the Creator. He seems also advanced in Life, advanced in Liberty.
He can speak his own words, think his own thoughts, do his own will, seek
himself, please himself, satisfy himself. The life of Righteousness is a yoke,
a bond in his Eye: He is free from the restraint of it. He has Life in
himself, and is exceeding wise in the compass of his own dominions. Thus does
the Enemy transform the Kingdom of Darkness and Death, giving fallen Man a
share with him in it, while he remains his willing Subject. And here the Goods
of the Enemy, the Heart estranged from God, yea, not only the devout and
zealous Worshipper in invented Forms, but also the gross Sinner, the envious,
lustful and wicked Mind, the perverse Tongue, the bloody Hands and Feet are at
peace, and have joy and pleasure in their course and circuit in the Earth. But
all this is but the Deceit of the Enemy, wherewith he has cheated Man, with
false appearances and representations instead of the true, as man himself will
see, when ever the Eye of his Soul comes to be thoroughly awakened by the
Eternal Light, whether here or hereafter.

Quest. What is the Work of Redemption?

Answ. To purge this old Leaven out of the Vessel, to purify the Vessel from
all the false Appearances of Light, to batter down all the strong holds of the
Enemy in the Mind, all the Reasonings, Thoughts, Imaginations and
Consultations, which are not of the pure nor in the pure; and so to New-create
and New-form the Vessel in the Image of the Wisdom and Purity, wherein it was
at first formed.

Quest. Who does this Work, or who is Man's Redeemer out of the Fall?

Answ. The Eternal Word or Son of the Father, even the Wisdom and Power which
went forth from the Fountain in the Creation, the same goes forth from the
Bosom of the Father to purify the Creature, and so brings the Creature back
(being purified and cleansed) into his bosom again.

Quest. With what does this Word or Redeemer redeem?

Answ. With his own life, with his own blood, with his own Eternal virtue and
purity. He descends into the lower parts of the Earth, becomes Flesh there,
sows his own Seed in his prepared Earth, begets of his flesh and of his bone in
his own likeness, and nourishes up his Birth with his flesh and blood unto
Life Everlasting.

Quest. What is this Life, or how does it first manifest it self in the
darkness?

Answ. It is the Light of Men. It is that which gave light to Adam at first,
and again to him after the Fall, and to all men since the Fall. It enlightens
in Nature, it enlightened under the Law: it did enlighten under the Gospel
before the Apostasy, and again since the Apostasy.

Quest. How does the Light enlighten?

Ans. By its shining. The Eternal Word moves, the Life opens, the Light shines.
This in the least degree is a beginning of Redemption; in its fullness it is
Redemption perfected.

Quest. How does the Light work Redemption in its shining?

Ans. Two ways. First, by turning the heart from the darkness toward it self.
Secondly, by exercising the heart being turned.

Quest. How does it turn the heart from the darkness?

Answ. The Light by its shining and enlightening finds out its own, opens
it, touches it with a secret Virtue, which persuades out of, and draws the
heart, from the principle and power of Death and Darkness, toward its own
native spring.

Quest. May not these drawings be quenched, and the Work of God stopped?

Answ. The Plant of the Lord is exceeding tender, his pure Spirit jealous, the
Enemy very strong and subtle; insomuch as the Plant it self may easily be
crushed, the Spirit grieved and quenched, and the Captivity redoubled.

Quest. If Adam was betrayed in his full strength, how shall this poor weak
Plant spring up and grow, without being supplanted by the violence and
treachery of the Enemy? Or how shall the grieving of the Spirit be avoided, by
an heart so full of corruption and provocations, us man in the alienated state
is, when the Light first visits him?

Answ. The Lord God is nigh to help, nigh to pity, nigh to pardon, nigh to
watch over and support Worm Jacob, yea nigh to revive life and spirit in him
freely, and to heal his backslidings and multiply pardons, or it could never
be. Yea, the Creature can never be brought so low or so far lost, but there is
still help in the nature of God concerning him, though there may not be help in
any revealed Promise.

Quest. How does God exercise the heart that is turned?

Ans. In Faith and Obedience through very great varieties and changes of
conditions. He exercises it in believing his voice, and in obeying his voice
and following him, in what ever and into whatsoever he draws and requires.

Quest. How is the Voice of God known? Does not the Enemy speak inwardly also,
and resemble his voice? how then is the voice of the Redeemer distinguished
from him, who counterfeiteth the Shepherd and his voice?

Ans. By these two means.

First, The Soul lying low, out of the Wisdom in which the Enemy appears and
forms his likenesses, in the Simplicity which the Lord has begotten, the Life
opens to it, and the true Light appears, which manifests the false light and
false appearances of the Deceiver.

Secondly, In that which is begotten of God there is not an hastiness or
suddenness to determine, but a silent waiting on the Lord in Subjection, till
the Life speak and make things manifest. Thus the knowledge and light of the
Child is held in the will of the Father, and received from his hand and
according to his pleasure. Thus what he will he hides, and what he will he
makes manifest, and the Child which is born of his will is content with his
will; and lying down there, it keeps out of the Enemie's Territories, and out
of the reach of his Temptations.

Quest. What are the several Estates or Conditions, wherein God exercises the
Spirit of man in Faith and Obedience?

Answ. The particular Estates and Conditions are innumerable, but they may be
referred to these three general heads. First, An Estate of breaking down the
former Building. Secondly, An Estate of Devastation or Preparation to be
New-built. Thirdly, An Estate of Rebuilding. God does not forget, but exercise
his People in Egypt, even while they are in Bondage, before they come to
receive his Law: he is visiting them in the dark Land, opening the Eye that can
see the Captivity, causing groans and sighs in their oppressed Spirits; and
then holding forth to them the Promise, and preparing them for a departure from
that Land. Secondly, He has a time of stripping them, of Nurturing and
bringing them up under his Discipline and close exercises, wherein they are
Desolate and ready to Sin and perish every moment, but as they are wonderfully
provided for and abundantly helped and Pardoned. Thirdly, There is a state of
rebuilding the Stones, when they are prepared therefore, into a New-building
for the Life to dwell in, and for their entrance into the Land of Life.

Quest. Declare these Estates and the exercises therein more plainly, and first
show what is the Estate of the Soul in Egypt Spiritually, when the Lord
visits it there with his Light?

Ans. An Estate of deep Bondage and groaning under the Powers of Darkness,
whose bitter Oppressions thereof increase, even as the sensibleness and
tyredness of the Soul increases. The Soul then sees its Captivity from the
Life, and finds a building of Death and Corruption raised up in it, in which
the Prince of Darkness dwells and bears rule: and then O how it groans and
longs after departure from that Land, and waits for the Promise of Redemption
out of it! but yet it is still left in the hand of the Enemy, and daily feels
the bitter Bondage, from the Powerful Law of Sin and Death springing up in the
heart, and issuing out through the Members.

Quest. How is Faith and Obedience here exercised?

Answ. In believing the Promise, in waiting for the Promise, in feeling some
remote drawings of the Life and Uniting therewith, so far as is possible in
this Dark and Captived Estate. There is an acknowledgement of the true Prince,
and a bowing to him even in this Estate of Captivity, until he please to break
the Bands thereof and receive under his guidance.

Quest. What is the Estate of the Wilderness Spiritually?

Answ. It is an Estate of waiting for the guidance of the leader, of receiving
direction and Laws from the leader, of following the leader as he pleases to
lead, through the Entanglements, Temptations, Straits and Necessities, which he
sees fit to exercise the Spirit with, for the wearing out of that which is not
to inherit, and for preparing the Heir for the Inheritance.

Quest. How is Faith and Obedience here exercised?

Answ. In waiting on the Light for the leadings in the Law of Life, and then in
subjecting to the leader, being content with all his Dispensations therein:
with the time he chooses for standing still, and with the time he chooses for
Traveling on, with the Proportion of Light and leading that he judges fit,
with the food and clothing which he prepares and preserves, with the Enemies
which he sees fit to have avoided or encountered with. Hereby the own Wisdom,
the own will, the own Strength, the own Desires, the own Delights, with all the
murmurings, weariness and discontents, which arise from the earthly part, are
by degrees worn out, and a pure Vessel prepared for the pure Birth to spring up
and appear in.

Quest. What is Spiritual Canaan, or the Heavenly-built State or State of the
Gospel?

Answ. A State of Regenerating or renewing in the Life and pure Image, where
the building is reared up which is made without hands, where there is a sweet
and peaceable growth in the Life, and a fresh and satisfactory enjoyment of the
Life.

Quest. How is Faith and Obedience here exercised?

Answ. In abiding in the Vine, in drawing from the Vine, in returning the Sap
and Virtue back into the Vine, and living according to the Will and in the free
Dispensation thereof. Thus Works are excluded with Self from whom they proceed,
and the Vine becomes all in all.

Quest, Are Egypt with the Wilderness and Canaan Spiritually as distinct
Estates, as they were Literally?

Answ. There are such distinct several Estates Spiritually, wherein a man may
be Spiritually in Egypt, and neither in the Wilderness nor Canaan. So there is
an Estate in the Wilderness, which is out of Egypt and not in Canaan: and an
Estate in Canaan, which is beyond both Egypt and the Wilderness. Yet these
Estates in Spirit are oftentimes inter-woven, with the exercises thereof:
insomuch as the Soul may in part, or in some respect (to his own understanding)
be in Egypt, in part in the Wilderness, and in part in the rest, Life and
Peace. But these things are not to be curiously sought into, lest a wrong
Wisdom and Knowledge get up; but abiding low and little in the little Seed, the
Kingdom and everlasting Inheritance grows daily in the Soul, and the Soul daily
shoots up into it and is enlarged in it.

Quest. Is there any return back into Egypt or into the Wilderness, after the
State of the Soul is advanced higher, the entrance into the everlasting
Inheritance being administered, and the Soul partly taken into and having found
a place of rest in the Life?

Answ. The Enemy lies near to deceive: and while he has Power to tempt, if
there be an hearkening to his Temptations, there is a departure from the pure
Life, and a return of the Captivity or bewildering in some measure. In the
Faith and in the Obedience to the Light of Life is the preservation, out of it
is Death and Destruction Eternally.

Quest. Is not the pure being untouched by Death and Destruction? and shall not
the Creature, when it is Redeemed into him, be as he is?

Answ. The pure being cannot be impure, evil cannot enter upon him, it has no
place in him, his nature excluding it: nor can it enter into the Principle of
Life that comes from him, and is always preserved by him: nor can it enter upon
that man, who is begotten of that Principle, abides with it and is preserved
in it. But so to be in him, as to abide and not go forth is a great State, even
higher then the first Adam knew.

Quest. But is not Light and Darkness, Good and Evil all alike to God? and
shall they not be so also to him, who is in perfect Unity and Fellowship with
God?

Answ. All the Light and Darkness, Good and Evil which can issue from the
Creature, cannot reach God's being as it is in it self, but only so far as he
has pleased to expose his Life (in the various manifestations thereof) to be
reached thereby. Yet his Eye sees the Evil and the Good, the Perfection and
the Imperfection, and his Nature is perfectly excluded from all Evil and
Imperfection; insomuch as he cannot possibly lie or deceive, or be unrighteous
or unmerciful in any of his Dispensations: and that which is gathered into him,
is thus one with him. But that which can do any thing which is sinful and evil
in it self, is not in the true Unity with the Eternal Being, but in the deceit
of that Spirit which Erreth from him, and centereth the creature in the
imagined likeness of his Life and Happiness.

Quest. How far may Persons go, and yet be liable to the Enemies snare?

Answ. Very far. They may come out of Egypt, they may pass through the
Wilderness, they may receive an Inheritance or Portion in the Holy Land, they
may have Houses and Vineyards which they Builded not nor Planted, they may have
had deep Draughts of the Life, deep Incomes of the Love, large Riches of the
Grace, and precious Tastes of the Fullness: They may have been in the Paradise of
God, may have been Anointed by God, may have stood upon his Holy Mountain, and
walked up and down in the midst of the stones of Fire, etc. and yet the Enemy
may have leave to tempt, and may find entrance for his Temptation, advancing
above this Estate in the Deceiveableness, and increasing the Glory in the Eye
of the wisdom which he steals in, and so hold the Spirit Captive in his Golden
Chains, and lead it back again to the Chambers of Death.

Quest. How does or can the Enemy prevail over Persons in so Glorious an Estate?

Answ. By opening a larger Eye in them, than is given them in the Life to see
with. The Eye of Life is limited in man, and man is to be held within the
limits and openings of Life, and his Heart and Mind to be bounded within the
Desires and Delights, which arise from the Life: he is to wait on the Life for
its living, moving and being all in his Being: and here he shall be large
enough, and full enough, and wise enough, and happy enough. But there is
somewhat which presents to him a Kingdom, a Riches, a Dominion, a Vastness of
Perfection in himself and at his own command; the which he beginning to listen
unto, the same opens an Eye in him to see the Beauty and Glory thereof, and
then Immediately his heart is taken, and he cannot avoid the snare: nor can he
henceforth know where he is, until that which he has forsaken, again please to
visit him, and to discover to him his Iniquity and Error from the true Root.

Quest. What is the way of safety, when God enlarges the Territories of Life
in the Soul, and causes his Love and Grace to abound?

Answ. To Drink the Draughts of Joy and Sweetness in the pure Fear and
Trembling, not departing therefrom in what ever it does for God or receives
from him, till the Salvation be wholly wrought out and perfected, the
Habitation of unspotted Love prepared, and the Soul led into, and seated in its
complete Mansion therein. And then the Name of Fear is no more heard of in the
Land of Life, though the Principle from whence the Fear sprang, and the Birth
and building (which was begotten, raised up, formed and perfected in the Fear)
abides for ever. So that the pure Love does not cast out the pure Fear
(wherein is no Bondage of the Life, but the preservation of the Life from the
Bondage) but swallows it up and comprehends it: for the pure Fear is but Love
descended, and the pure Love is but Fear ascended, the Eternal Principle or
Substance being one and the same in both.

Quest. Is there then such a State of Safety, upon which the Enemy cannot
Entrench?

Answ. There is a State of such Union with the Life, as the Enemy cannot come
between, where there is lying down and rising up in the Power of the Life, and
no Beast of prey can make afraid any more; nor can any Root of bitterness
spring up from within, to trouble or make any disturbance between the Life and
the Soul any more.

Some Questions and Answers conducing toward the further manifestation, and
opening the Path of Redemption and Eternal Life to the Eye of Spiritual Israel.
Quest. HOw does the Son of God, or Eternal Word, in whom is the Light of Life,
Redeem man out of the fallen Estate, out of the Kingdom of Darkness and Death,
into the Kingdom of everlasting Righteousness and Peace in the Life?

Answ. Three ways. First, by wounding him in the Natural and corrupt Estate,
and so breaking his Peace and Pleasure in the Kingdom of Darkness and making
him weary thereof. Secondly, By weakening him under the Teachings and
Chastizements of the Law. Thirdly, By healing and binding him up with the Oil
of Salvation in the Power of the endless Life, which is the Gospel.

Quest. How does God wound him in the natural and corrupt State?

Answ. By pursuing him with his Light, which lets him see what it is,
discovering the Evil and Danger of it, and so weaning his heart from it, and
making him look out after, and long for a Redeemer. O how Burdensome is the
Captivity to the awakened Soul, when he has a glimpse of what man was before
his fall (when he had a place and being in the Life, with a Spirit suitable to
the Life) and what he is now in his Estate of estrangedness and alienation from
the Life, and whither he is going in his Paths of unrighteousness,
estrangedness and alienation! And while his heart is thus turning from the Land
of Death and Captivity, and longing after the Redeeming Power and Virtue of the
Life, the Enemy (the Power of Darkness) lays load upon him, drawing him more
and more under the Chains and Bonds of Iniquity to the utmost of its strength.
So that now Lusts abound, Evils increase, Temptations and Snares multiply; and
in the Land of Captivity their strength is great, the Soul weak and faint, and
the Redeeming Power and Virtue seems very far off. Now this is the Estate of
Conversion; when the Lord, in the midst of the Powers of Death and Darkness,
turns the heart from them toward himself, causing it to wait (under the
Captivity) for the Appearance of the Arm of his strength, to break the yoke of
the Oppressor from off the Necks of the oppressed, and so to bring out of the
Land of Death and Darkness, into the Travels toward the Land of Promise, where
the Peace, the Life, the Liberty in the Lord, the Rest, the Joy, the full
Content and Happiness is reaped by the Soul, which follows the Lamb thither.

Quest. How does God weaken the Creature under the Teachings and Chastisements
of the Law?

Answ. By exercising him toward Good and Evil, and correcting him for his
unbelief and disobedience, as he finds good, just and necessary for him.

Quest. How does God exercise him toward Good and Evil, and correct him?

Ans. When he has brought him from under the Power of Darkness in some
measure, and in some measure set the Spirit free therefrom, by the Virtue of
his Life springing up in the heart, then he exercises the Heart and
Conversation toward the Good and from the Evil: then he gives out Laws for,
or against things, according as he finds most Proper to the Estate of every
Particular Soul. Now upon the giving forth of the Law (the Life being in some
measure raised) there is that which loves its Teachings and pure Path, and
there is that also which draws back from it; and that being yet strong, there
come many strokes and Chastisements from the Lord upon his own Dear Child. And
these are bitter; and to be forced into the Sin which it loathes and in Heart is
turned from, and to be kept from the Good which it longs after, and in heart is
United to, (partly by the strength of the Enemy, and partly by reason of its
own weakness and negligence) this is bitter also: insomuch as it cries out Day
after Day, and finds this Administration of the Law almost as heavy a yoke,
as the Land of Captivity it self was, because of the weakness of it through the
Flesh, and the strength and advantages which the corruption of the Heart and
Prince of Darkness gather thereby.

Quest. What is the benefit of these Exercises upon the Soul?

Answ. They melt, they break, they make the Heart Tender and fit to be molded
by the Eternal Virtue and Power, into a Vessel for the Power.

Quest. What frames of Spirit do they work the Heart or Mind into?

Answ. Into very many precious Ones. As for Instance,

First, They make the Spirit poor. The daily inroads of Sin and Corruption
dashing against the Holy and Righteous Law of Life, the overbearing the strong
Desires after Purity and forcing into the Defilement, hindering the Soul from
doing what it loves, and making it to do what it hates and would not; this
makes it become poorer and poorer, and more Afflicted Day by Day. Upon some
Visitations of the pure Life and some fresh Virtue received, Oh how strong does
the Soul seem! but when it suddenly Forfeits its Mercies, loses its freshness,
and is Plunged deeper in the Pit than before, how poor and weak does it then
feel it self, Trembling at the next openings of the Life and Springings up of
the Virtue thereof in it, not knowing what Weakness, Captivity, Entanglements
and Misery from the Snares of Death remain to follow!

Secondly, They bring into a mourning Estate. They fill the Eyes with Tears and
the Heart with Sorrow, yea they cause an entrance into the House of mourning.
To be accustomed to Wounds, Bruises, Snares, grieving of the Spirit, provoking
of the Deliverer, furthering and giving Advantages to the Enemy, etc. the sense
of this overwhelms the Heart with grief, and causes continual Sorrow and
Lamentation to that which is upright toward God.

Thirdly, They bring into a meek, merciful and Tenderhearted frame toward
others. He that is tempted, he that often falls, and is so often wounded and
made miserable, he pitties those that err, he mourns over the miserable. His
heart is broken with the Sins and Afflictions of others, and he knows not how
to be hard toward them, feeling such continual need of abundant mercy himself.
It is the rich man, the sound man in Religion, that is rough and hard: but he
that is once thoroughly melted in the Furnace and made up again, is made up
Tender, and retains the impression of the Meekness, Love and Mercy for ever.
Now a broken Estate in Religion, or a state of waiting for the Life is much
more precious, than that which is rich and full by what it had formerly
received and still holds, out of the Immediate feeling and fresh Virtue of
the Life.

Fourthly, They bring into an hungry and thirsty state after Holiness and
Righteousness. O how the Soul, that is sensible of its filth, longs to be
washed! how it pants after the Pastures of Life, the food of Life, the living
Waters: to appear before and enjoy God in the Land of the living! O how does
the heart, that is daily afflicted with its Unbelief, and Disobedience, long
for the Faith that stands in the Power, and the Obedience that flows from the
Power! O Teach me thy Statutes, show me the pure Path of Obedience in the way
of Life, guide my feet in the way everlasting: O write thy Fear in my Heart,
that I may not depart from thee: Create a clean heart in me, and put thy Spirit
within me to be my strength. O continue thy Loving Kindness to them that know
thee, and thy Righteousness to the upright in Heart. O what unutterable
Breathings daily issue out from the broken Spirit, toward the Spring of its
Life!

Fifthly, They bring into a pure frame, into a cleanness of inside. Cleanse
first the inside of the Cup and Platter, said Christ to the Pharisees, and he
does so in his Disciples. With the mind I serve the Law of God, said Paul when
he cried out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver! It is not
conceiveable what purity of heart is Formed by God in his Israel, by the fire
which he kindles in his Sion, and by the Furnace which he sets up in his
Jerusalem: for though in the Furnace the Dross still appears, the sight whereof
is apt to grieve and afflict the precious Heart, yet the melting and purifying
sweetly goes on, and the Soul (which abides the heat) is effectually cleansed
thereby, as is very manifest afterward, when Righteousness springs up with the
quiet Fruit thereof; but this cannot be discerned, while the flames are
discovering and taking hold of the Unrighteousness.

Sixthly, They bring into a Patient Frame; fit to bear Reproaches and
Persecutions from the World, who in the midst of all this weakness (misery and
distress) lay load upon the Poor Soul, Persecuting him whom God has smitten,
and speaking to the grief of him whom God has wounded. God smites for want of
Obedience, for too much propensity to please the World, for not coming soon
enough out of their Customs, Vanities, Earthly ways and Worships: and so soon
as the Heart and Conversation is given up in Obedience to the Lord, the World
is discontent, and they smite and Persecute because of the Obedience. Now the
more the Spirit is broken by the hand of the Lord, and taught thereby to fear
him; and the less strength it has in it self, to grapple with the Persecuting
Spirit of the World, the fitter it is to stand in God's Counsel, to wait for
his strength and preservation, which is able to bear up its head, above all the
rage and swelling of the waters of the worldly Spirit in the men of this World.

Much more might be said, but this may suffice. What is behind will be felt
inwardly, as the Soul waits on God in the leadings of his Spirit, through the
Teachings, Chastisements and Distresses of the Law.

Quest. With what kind of things does the Lord exercise the Spirits of his
Israel, to bring their hearts into these and such other like precious frames?

Ans. With several sorts and kinds of things both outward and inward. As,

First, With oppositions, reproaches and interruptions from the earthly part,
both in the men of this World and in themselves. There is abundance within and
abundance without to resist, disdain and interrupt the Work of God in the heart
to oppose and withstand that which he has begotten there, his leadings of it
and its Obedience to him.

Secondly, with Temptations from the Enemy, even of many Kinds, Natures and
Degrees, according to the present temper and Condition of the Soul: as either
to doubt and so despair, or be Confident in the Flesh from Knowledge received,
out of the pure Fear and fresh feeling of the Life: so again either to halt and
draw back, or to be overhasty and forward: so likewise either not to obey and
Act for God, or to Act in that Will and Wisdom which is against God. Now these,
with such like, are very Numerous, Frequent, and sometimes very violent (...)
^^petuous.

Thirdly, By withdrawings o^ (...) Life and sweet presence of God (...) the
Soul. These are very frequ^^^ from the Lord toward his peop^^, insomuch as he
is called by this Title; "the God that hides his face from the house of
Jacob," Isai. 8.17. chap. 45.15.

Fourthly, By Buffettings and prevailings of the Enemy. When the Spirit is
grieved, the Life wounded and withdraws inward, the Enemy often gets ground,
giving wounds and causing Bruises to the Soul; not only tempting, but finding
entrance and taking in the snare the Bird, which once escaped and was delivered.

Fifthly, By doubts, Fears and confused reasonings concerning the voice of God
and the voice of the Enemy. In the hour of Darkness (when the Lord sees good
to let forth the Power thereof, and to withdraw the Beams of his Light) how
(...) ^^at be clearly distinguished, (...) alone is known and seen in the
(...)? how can the motions, draw^^^^ and pure low-workings of the (...) be
discerned, from the false Images and Transformings of the Enemy? O the misery
and anguish of the Poor Soul in this Condition! how is the Poor upright-heart
pained between Faith and Unbelief, Obedience and Disobedience, etc, not knowing
when it is drawn forward or Backward, or by whom!

Quest. When do these exercises begin, and how long do they continue?

Answ. The Lord does begin to exercise the Soul even in Egypt: for after the
Promise (of Deliverance from Spiritual Pharaoh) the bonds increase, the yoke
grows more heavy, Pharaoh grows more Violent and Furious, the Captivity
increases much; but there is no sight of Redemption at all, save to that Eye
which is weak and easily overborn in Israel. But the exercises are much more
full (...) sharp in the wilderness, where Is^^^^ is led about, tried,
afflicted, c^^sumed Day by Day, as if he sho^^^ never come to the Holy Land,
(...) any of Israel be left to enter therei^* Yea in Canaan, in the rich
possession, in the plenteous overflowings of the Life, there is still somewhat
left to try Israel and bring him low with, if at any time he be exalted with
the Glory and fullness of his own Estate, and begin to forget his God.

Quest. Why does God thus exercise his Israel? why does he lead them in such a
knotty, and not in a more easy and ready way to the everlasting possession,
and to the fullness thereof?

Answ. Because their Estate and Condition requires it. They could not be so
purified and fitted for the Life, their Vessels would not be so enlarged to
receive it in, nor they so safely enjoy it, were it not for this course of
Wisdom, wherein God ^^^^^ises and tries every cranny of (...) Spirits, until
he has perfected (...) and stopped up the entrance of ^^^th every where.

Quest. How do these exercises puri^^ and enlarge them?

Ans. First, They try the strength and virtue of the Life in them, and discover
to them their further want thereof. In the time of the Soul's prosperity there
seems to be enough: but the Day of distress makes manifest the Estate and
Condition as it is. Then the Faith, the Love, the Patience, the Meekness, the
Constancy and Chastness to the Spouse (loving him, and cleaving to him above
all, and in all) many times is found to be less, then it was judged to be.

Secondly, It brings to a waiting on God for support, and for receiving of more
from him. Then the Life breaths vigourously, and the Soul hankers after,
cleaves to, and sees its need both of the presence and increase of the Virtue
of the Life. Then he that was rich becomes poor, and he that was full becomes
empty and nothing: yea he that had enough to live on and to spare, is now
pressed with hunger, want and penury.

Thirdly, It prepares for a clear^^ entrance into and safer enjoyment of the
fullness. As the Soul is more emptied of the strength and Riches it received
from God: so it is more prepared to enter into and live in the pure Being it
self. For nothing can live there, which Vails. In the Life God was, and is, and
is to be all in all for ever. That therefore which enters there, and lives and
abides there, must be poor, empty, naked, nothing, and remain nothing for ever.
As it gathers any thing from the fullness and becomes any thing in it self
thereby, it is shut out.

Quest. How does God heal and bind up that, which he has wounded and broken to
pieces with his various and frequent exercises?

Answ. By opening the Power of the endless Life, in the Vessel which he has
thoroughly purified and prepared, and filling it with the Power. The free Power
of Life, that is the Gospel. To the meek, to the brokenhearted, to the cleansed
it is Promised: and when the work of cleansing is finished, the wound made wide
enough and kept open long enough, and the Death to the first Husband fully
accomplished, then the perfect oil is perfectly poured in, and everlasting
health and Salvation obtained. This is the end, which God Aims at in the
Visitations and leadings of his Seed: happy are they that pass through the Vail
of Misery, and drink off the dregs of the Cup of Trembling, not fainting nor
sitting down by the way, but following the faithful Shepherd and leader of
Israel, till they Arive here.

Quest. What is the great danger in the Path of Life?

Answ. The great danger is of Ascending a step higher, then the present Estate
and Condition will bear: for by this means the aspiring Mind gets up, and is
exalted and holds somewhat received from the Life, out of the pure fear which
preserves the heart clean, and out of the sencible feeling which keeps fresh
and living to God; and then the simplicity is betrayed, and a wrong Spirit
lives, and a wrong Eye is opened: so that there is nothing now but Whoredom
from the Life, and the heart exalted and conceited in the way of its Whoredoms,
as if it were the pure Bed and most excellent way of enjoyment of the Life.

Quest. What way is there of preservation here-from?

Ans. Watching to the Life, keeping low in the fear and close to the feeling.
Here the aspirer is shut out, or soon espied at his beginning to enter, and
then the living Cross received, which Crucifieth and drives him back. And
indeed there is no way of safety in the Travels toward the enjoyment of Life,
or under any enjoyment before the state of perfect Death, but under the Cross
to that Spirit and Nature which would dwell there, and please it self
therewith, and be somewhat therein, and so forget the pure everlasting Spring.
Adulterating with the streamings forth of it.

Man was made for God, to be a Vessel of his pleasure, and to receive his
content, Enjoyment and Happiness by reflection. So that man's proper work was
to watch to the spring from whence he came; to be disposed of, ordered, and to
be according to his pleasure. This was Natural to man before his fall, till a
corrupt spirit by deceit entered him and corrupted him. And while any thing of
that corrupt spirit or fallen nature remains, he is apt to aspire in the
Selfhood, and to seek the enjoyment of what comes from the Fountain (yea and of
the Fountain it self also) in and according to the will and Wisdom of the
selfhood. And here let man receive what Gifts soever from God, be advanced to
never so high an Habitation in the Land of Life, yea have the very Fountain it
self given him, yet by this means he will corrupt, lose the Gift or Spring, be
separated from it, and Adulterate with what he can still retain or gather in
his own Principle. And here do deep Travelers lose their way, falling from
their Portion in the Land of Life and from their enjoyments in the Paradise of
the Pleasure of the Life, into the earthly and sensual Spirit, holding things
wisely and richly there in the earthly Principle, not knowing the remove of
their Habitation thither, nor thinking that they are there.

He that reads these things, let him not strive to comprehend them, but be
content with what he feels thereof suitable to his own present Estate: and as
the Life grows in him and he in the Life, and he comes to meet with the things
and exercises spoken of, the words and experiences concerning them will of
themselves open to him, and be useful and serviceable to him so far as the Lord
pleases, he keeping to the leadings, savor and Principle of Life in in
himself, wherein alone his knowledge, sight, growth and experiences are safe.

Now he that would travel safely in Spirit unto the Land of Life, let him wait
to have these things following, written by the Finger of God in his heart, and
the sense and Impression thereof preserved fresh in him.

First, It is the Free Grace of God which begins the Work of Redemption, which
causes the Light to shine, which works the Repentance or turning from the
dead State, and also the belief in and turning toward the living God.

Secondly, It is the same grace alone, that can preserve and cause the Plant of
Grace to grow. If there be a withdrawing of the Light, a withholding of the
free influence, that which depends thereupon cannot retain its freshness: which
the Lord may do as often as he pleases, for the chastisement of the Rebellious
part, or for the Trial of his Pure Life and Virtue in his Plants.

Thirdly, The grace of God visiting the Soul in the Death, in the Darkness in
the fallen Estate, begets Life anew in it, makes it in some measure Light
in the Lord, opens an Eye in it to see the things of God, an Ear to hear and
distinguish between the sound of Life and of Death, an heart to turn from and
refuse the vanity, and to turn toward and abide in the living Substance.

Fourthly, The Spirit of God carries on the Work of Redemption by drawing,
leading and acting the quickened Soul, by exercising that which he has
begotten in the Life, under the Law of the Life. Thus the Life draws the Soul
daily nearer and nearer toward the everlasting spring, and from the fading
emptiness of Sin, Vanity and the Creature-hood; and the Soul, by the enlivened
Virtue, daily follows on after the Life, in the leadings, Spirit and Power
thereof. There is a living Soul begotten by the Virtue of the Grace, and the
living Soul daily lives in the Grace, and travels in the Virtue thereof from
the Unbelief to the Faith, from the Enmity to the Love, from the perverseness to
the Straitness, from the Iniquity to this Righteousness, even from all the
territories of the Darkness, and also from the weak Measures and Degrees of the
Grace and Life toward the Fullness it self, even until it perfectly Center in,
and be fully filled therewith.

Fifthly, Where there is a stopping of the Virtue received from the Grace, and
not an Answer of it in the heart, there the Work of Redemption is stopped. If
the Soul follow not in the drawing, the drawing is lost, as to it. If the Ear
open not to hear the voice of the Word, or if it be not mixed with Faith in the
heart hearing, it proves ineffectual. If strength issue forth from the Lord,
yet if the Soul receive not the strength which issues forth and Bubleth up in
it, or answer it not in giving up to it and Traveling on, the Soul abides
where it was at least, if it also retire not backward from that Estate and
Condition, whereto the Life had advanced it: for if the Virtue of the Life and
Grace be refused, there is an advantage given to Death to re-enter, and gain
ground by its contrary Virtue and Power.

Sixthly, Mark therefore diligently, how the Lord does carry on the
Dispensation of his Love and Free Grace, even as if there were much done by the
strength and Diligence of the Creature. What wounding of it self by Repentance!
what striving to believe! what wrestling against Enemies and for the Influences
of the Grace, and to keep the hope up and the distrust out! what strict
watching and waiting, even as if the Creature did work out its whole Salvation!

Seventhly, Though the Creature seems to do much it self (having received
Life from the Grace, and acting abundantly toward God in the Grace) yet it is
the Grace and Virtue which comes from the Creator (who is also the Redeemer)
which indeed does all: for though the creature repent really, and turn from the
Darkness with its whole heart, yet the Repentance is of the Virtue which flows
from the Grace, and not of the creature which receives the Grace: and so
likewise is the Faith, the Love, the Obedience, the Meekness, the Patience, the
Watching, the Waiting, the Hoping, etc. Yea the very receiving the Grace, is
not of the creature, but of the Grace: for the creature is dead, until it be
visited by the Grace; and by the Visitation of the Grace alone is made alive,
and able to receive it.

Behold then the mystery of Redemption. God is all in Redemption. God does all
therein as fully as in Creation (it is a new Creation) even the whole Work
thereof; yet the creature quickened and renewed is in Unity with him in his
Operations, Phil. 2.12, 13. He whose Eyes are opened can read the Mystery, and
in true understanding say (if he has been led and has proceeded so far) I am
able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me; yet not I, but the
Grace of God in me. Now to bring the creature to this, the Lord exercises it
daily in Obedience unto him, in the Life and Virtue which flows forth from
him, causing it to feel its weakness as it forgets the Virtue, or aspires to
live of it self on the Virtue received, out of the sensible feeling of its
Dependence upon the Spring. And indeed, the Virtue that comes from God can
alone Answer God, and the creature is only accepted with the Spring and Father
of Life, as it is found therein.

Quest. But if the Work of Redemption be wrought by God's creating Power, how
comes it to meet with so many rubs and interruptions, and sometimes
overturnings? can any thing stop God's Creating Power?

Answ. So far as God absolutely pleases to Create, nothing can stop or hinder:
but the entrance of that, which he begins to Create, into the creature and
its getting a being there, as also the growth and preservation of it there, may
be hindered by the force of Spiritual Enemies, if the Lord please to permit, or
by the grieving and provoking of that Free Power, which alone begets and
preserves Life in the Heart.

Object. Then the Work of Redemption is not carried on by an absolute
free-creating Power.

Answ. The Creating Power and preserving Power is the same, but the work is
somewhat different, both in the outward visible Creation, and in the inward
New Creation. The preservation of that which is Created and Planted (unto its
growth and Perfection) is by the same Power which Created and Planted: but
rather in a way of Care, Industry, Art and Skill, than of such Immediate Force
and Power, though by the exercise and putting forth of the same Virtue and
Power.

There are Three things in Redemption.

First, There is the issuing out of the Free Grace, Love, Virtue and Divine
Power toward the Creature.

Secondly, There is the opening of the Estate of the Creature thereby,
convincing and drawing it out of the Alienation from the Life, toward Unity
with the Life.

Thirdly, There is the following of the creature after the Life, in the
quickening Virtue of the drawings, through all the Snares, Temptations,
Diversions and Oppositions of the Enemy.

Now there is no hindering of the issuing forth of the Free Grace toward the
creature, or of those convictions and inclinations of the creature to follow,
which necessarily ensue thereupon. But the Pursuit and Progress of the creature
(or its abiding with the quickening Virtue and Power) may many ways be
interrupted and diverted, and so the creature drawn from under the influence of
the free Covenant: for though the Covenant be free, yet the creature only
partakes of it, as it is drawn into it and preserved in it.

Therefore let those Fear, who feel the Power and Redeeming Virtue, and know,
that notwithstanding the free and certain Promise to the Seed, yet the creature
is as Clay in the hands of the Potter, which may be made a Vessel of Honor or
Dishonor, as he pleases to favor it or take occasion against it. And who
ever would pass through the Work of Salvation and Redemption, unto the
Salvation and Redemption it self; in the living Virtue received from the Life,
let him keep fast hold on the good Pleasure, and in it give all diligence to
make his Calling and Election sure, working out his Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, because God works in him both to will and to do of his good Will.
And walking diligently and industriously in this Path, he may attain the Seal
of the Redemption, even that Mark which can never be worn out, and to full
Assurance of Faith in the Redeeming Power: though it is also possible for him
afterward, through much negligence and grieving the Spirit whereby he was
sealed, to lose the sight of the Mark and the comfort of the Assurance, which
was once fresh and clear in his Spirit.

For a close at this time, I shall add a few words concerning the Unity of
God's Grace (or free Light of his Spirit) notwithstanding the various Estates
and Conditions of man whom it visits, and the variety of its Operations.

There is a threefold state of Man, wherein the Grace of God visits him.

First, The Gentile-state, or state of Nature.

Secondly, The Jew-state or Administration of the Law, wherein God takes him
under his own Tuition, making known his will to him, and requiring Obedience of
him: and not only so, but also directs him to the inward Teacher, and to the
Principle of the pure Fear, which is the place of Wisdom's teaching and
instructions.

Thirdly, The Gospel-state, or state of Faith, where the Principle is raised,
the Seed lives, and that is felt springing up, known and enjoyed, which does
the Will and receives the Promise.

Now in all these the Law, the Light, the Life, the Wisdom, the Power is one
and the same; but the Administrations are different.

In the Gentile-state or state of Nature, the ^ight which man receives there
(to discover Evil and work him into Good) is of the Spirit and by virtue of the
Promise. For he had been everlastingly shut up in the Darkness, had it not been
for the Promise: and it is for the Promise sake and from the free Grace, that
he has any Visitation in the state of Nature, and any desires after or
leadings toward the good and from the evil; which spring not nor can spring
from corrupted Nature, but from the free Fountain of the new Life.

In the Law-state the Light grows more clear, the Teacher is there discerned
and acknowledged, his drawings, warnings, instructions and reproofs felt more
distinctly, and the Soul (that is watchful) continually exercised therein.

In the Gospel-state the Principle of Life is raised, the promised Seed come,
the Power which does the Will received, and the Light of Life entering into and
possessing the Vessel.

Now this is the whole of Man, to wait on the Ministration of the Life to him
in his present-estate, whether he be yet in the estate of Nature, or under the
Law or under Grace. To know whence his Redemption springs, and to wait on the
Redeeming Arm for the beginnings, progress and perfecting of it: And if he be
in the feeling of that Virtue, it is enough: or if he be but kept longing and
panting after it, it is well: yea, if there be but a desire in him after a
thirst, there is hope: nay, if there be but the least feeling of his dead,
barren and senseless Estate, there is some Life in him, which the Lord loves and
will find a time to express his bowels toward: yea, that which is wholly in
the Darkness and shut up in the Pit, the Lord has bowels in him toward, and
after many days may please to visit. Oh the height, the depth, the length, the
breadth of the Riches of the Mercy and Love of God! who knows his yearning
toward Souls, and his ways of visiting and redeeming! O my Soul, hope thou in
the Lord for evermore, and leave not breathing toward him, till thou and his
whole Creation be filled and satisfied with him; and then fetch the full breath
of Life in him for ever.

THE END.
A Postscript.
I Have been Treating of the Inward Work, as it is wrought in the heart by the
Power, and brought to the sensible Experimental Knowledge of the Creature; yet
would not be so understood, as if I made void what was done without by Christ
in his own Person, or any of those ends and purposes for which it was wrought,
and appointed so to be done by the Father: though this I know, that the
knowledge of those things with the belief therein, or any Practices and
observations therefrom without the Life, can no more profit now, than the Jews
literal knowledge of the Law could profit them, when they were rejected
therewith. And since the Apostasy, of this latter Age especially, I have
clearly seen in the Spirit of the Lord, that the Professors Knowledge of the
Letter of the Gospel, and cleaving to their apprehensions which they gather
therefrom, is become a Snare and Trap to them, to keep them from feeling the
Power, and living in the sensibility of the Virtue of the Grace, even as the
Jews Table (or gathered knowledge from Moses and the Prophets) became their
Snare and Trap. The Lord open their Eyes in his due time to discern it, that
they may not withstand that Ministration and Revelation of his everlasting
Gospel, which God sees good to visit the Apostatised world with, after this
long dark night of the Apostasy; whereof those that stick in Forms, or
knowledge of things from the Letter without the Power, cannot but prove the
greatest Enemies, Opposers and Persecutors.

Now to help them a little, if the Lord please, in the rouling of my bowels
toward them I find my heart opened, to lay a few things before them.

First, With my heart, in the sight of the Lord do I own that Principle, which
formerly wrought in some of them, which I my self was wrought upon by, and knew
not only the outward knowledge which they were acquainted with, but also the
inward work: and I also knew what I called the Light of Nature, and what I
called the Light of the Spirit, the one whereof was not the other, but differed
as far as Spirit and Flesh.

Second^^ I also own all the Openings and Refreshments which they received from
the Lord in reading of the Scriptures, in their Public or Private Exercises,
and the Experiences which they had from God in their own hearts: and I know
that these things in themselves were true, in their Proportion; however their
present sense, and holding of them out of that wherein they received them, may
justly be judged by the Spirit of the Lord in his Servants.

Thirdly, Though those things were true in their day, and in their Proportion
and Measure, yet in them they might lose their virtue and die; and so they not
retain the thing in its Life, in its own Principle, in the newness of the
Spirit, in that Birth to which God gave it, but only an Image of it in the
Natural understanding, in the earthly part, in the dead Principle: and then
their knowledge of God and their Experiences cannot but be corrupted, and now
become the possession of Death, and the Engines of Death in their hearts.
Again, God had somewhat further to manifest, even to bring forth that, which
they so earnestly prayed for in that Day; which they, having abided in that
Virtue wherein they prayed, might easily have discerned and embraced: but being
out of that, and pleasing themselves with the litteral knowledge of the things
they then received, holding them in the wise earthly part, that part cannot but
stumble at the low and contemptible Appearances of God, which are still
offensive to that part. The great Glory of God is hid in a little Seed, and how
can the great Eye of the fleshly-wise see it? We have Moses and the Prophets,
said the Jews after the Flesh; But as for this man, we know not whence he is.
Even so it is now: We know the Relation which the Scriptures have given of
Christ by the Apostles, we are sure this is of God, say the Professors; but as
for this little Seed of the Kingdom, or Light of God in the heart, we cannot
believe that all we want is to spring up in it.

Now Fourthly, there is a necessity both of the knowledge of Persons to pass
away, and also of their Experiences to be given up and let fall, in these two
cases following.

First, When the Virtue is withdrawn from them, when Death has caught them,
when they become Death's goods. For that which is received from the Life, is
only profitable to the Soul in the virtue of the Life. When the earthly part
has caught them and seated it self there, they then become the strong holds of
the Enemy, and the Engines of Death to the heart; so that then Life and true
Relief is not to be had in them, but where the Eternal Virtue pleases next to
appear.

Secondly, When God has somewhat to bring forth further in the world or in any
particular heart, to make way for it, he brings Death upon that which was
before living. Thus when God is pleased to bring forth a greater Measure of
Faith and Power of his Spirit, he distresseth the heart, making the foregoing
Faith and Power appear weak and pass away, and many times for a season shuts
up the Soul in the unbelief, until the Fresh Faith and Fresh Power spring up
and arise. And this causes the necessity of the further Dispensations of his
Eternal Virtue to appear, and the Beauty of them to shine, which they would not
have done so abundantly, had it not been for the foregoing distress of the
hea^*

The^^^^^e yet some things further weighty upon my heart to lay before them,
needful for them to consider of, which may be serviceable and helpful to them
in their present Condition, if the Lord please to open their hearts and impress
them thereon. They are four Propositions, relating to the right Knowledge of
the things of God, which are these following.

First, That the Knowledge of the things of God comes from the Spirit. As the
Scriptures themselves came from the Spirit: so the true Knowledge of them is
alone given, to any man which receives it, by the same Spirit. And no man
living can know the mind of the words which the Spirit spoke, but as the same
Spirit which spoke them, gives the meaning of them.

Secondly, That the Knowledge of God (the living Knowledge the serviceable
Knowledge) is (...) held in the Spirit and in the Birth which is of the Spirit.
Man's natural part is not the true Treasury, nor is man's Reason to be Master
of any of the things of God's Spirit; but that which holds the Knowledge of the
Kingdom, the Grace of the Kingdom, the living Experiences, is that which is
born of the Seed of the Kingdom; and man's Reason is for ever to be shut out of
the things of God, further than it bows, is limited and subjected.

Thirdly, That the Knowledge received from the Spirit, is still to be tried by
the Spirit. The Spirit alone can keep it living, and the Spirit alone can tell
whether the Life and Virtue be still in it, or whether Death has caught it:
whether it be Manna fit for the Soul's Food; or Manna once given, but now
corrupted. O my Dear Friends, wait to understand my Experience concerning this
thing, which is this. That which I had certainly received from God, and which
the true Birth at first had fed on, the earthly Birth would be catching at,
laying hold of, and treasuring up to feed on at another time. Likewise in my
reading of the Scriptures, I lay open to this great snare of reading in my own
will, and of gathering from thence in mine own understanding, and so growing
wise concerning the things of God after the Flesh: for though, at that time, I
was not without living Knowledge and Experiences of God, yet I knew not how to
turn from the Death, nor to keep to the Life; and so the bad, the lean, the
earthly, the ill-favored overgrew the good and wel-pleasing to God, and
brought it into bitter misery and Death. O that ye knew being begotten of the
Will of the Father, and keeping the Will of the Father, and receiving the Bread
daily from his hand. That which man conceives concerning the Scriptures, is
not the pure Milk of the Word, but that which the Breasts gives out: that is it
which has the Immediate Life, Virtue and true Nourishment in it. And this must
be returned back into the Treasury, and not held in the earthly part, in the
earthly will and understanding, but received from the Life again when it is
again needed: yea, this have I often known, that when I have been in great
distress, I have received fresh comfort from the Lord: but running to that
afterward, it never was able to comfort me, but more deeply wounded me. And
thus has the Lord been Teaching me to live upon himself, and not upon any
thing received from him, but upon the Life it self, the Mercy, the good
Pleasure, which Proportions out the living Bread daily to the living Birth.

Fourthly, It is easy receiving of Knowledge in the earthly part, in the
earthly Wisdom, out of the Spirit and living Virtue. When one reads a
Scripture, it is easy conceiving and apprehending a meaning ones self, or
taking in another man's meaning; but it is hard abstaining from all conceivings
and reasonings of the mind, and waiting for the pure Will and Opening of the
Spirit therein. Also it is easy retaining of Knowledge, and making use of it
in the will and wisdom of the earthly mind (for both these are natural) but it
is hard denying the reason, the thoughts and imaginations, and watching to the
Spirit.

O Professors! wait for the living Appearance of God, even for the freshness of
his Spirit in your spirits, that in that which comes from the Spirit ye may
know the Spirit, and may also know how to turn to him and abide with him,
having the watch set against that wisdom in your selves, which in all Ages and
Generations is eternally shut out of the things of the Kingdom, although it may
gather, get and hold a vast Knowledge of the things of the Kingdom in the
earthly Treasury. Thus Fleshly- Israel has the Wisdom of the Letter, but
Spiritual- Israel the Wisdom, Virtue and Life of the Spirit in all Ages and
Generations. And though he that is born after the Flesh, despises him who is
born after the Spirit, yet this is God's Heir: and the bondwoman, the earthly
wisdom, with all her Children (even the greatest Giants in Knowledge,
Profe^^^^n of Religion and Scripture o^ (...)) must be cast out, and (...)
Inherit the Land of Life. This is written that that might be raised in you by
the Power, which is to Inherit the Life Eternal: and ye not find your Souls
deceived when the Light of that Day fully opens, which has already dawned.

I was in a poor low Condition, when the Lord formerly visited me; as lost, as
undone, as miserable as any. What Knowledge, what Life, what precious Virtue I
then received, was from God's Grace; which was still his own, and he might call
for it at his pleasure. And surely, he which has received from the Fountain,
ought to trust and to give back again to the Fountain, when he calls for it;
and then to remain Empty* Naked and Desolate, until he be (...) freely visited.
This is an hard ^^ss^n, who can learn it? Who can trust his Life with the
Fountain, and lie open to what follows? Yet this did the Lord require of me:
and my heart being not willing to part with my Life, but striving to retain it,
and grow in the first way of the Dispensation of the Grace unto Perfection, he
brake it after an unutterable manner, and brought such a Misery and Desolation
upon me as I could not possibly have suspected, having been sealed by him. And
now he is Teaching me to live more fully upon his Grace, or rather upon the
Spring, where I am nothing, where I can be nothing for ever: but he is and will
be what he will be, and when he will be; and nothing in me can be satisfied
with him, but what is of him and lives in him. And here all that I have known,
or formerly tasted of him, springs up again at his pleasure; and I drink of the
old Wine and also of the new, but have nothing at my own dispose. And when I
catch at any thing or would be any thing, I lose the Spring and am Corrected
for my Backsliding and Adultery of spirit, but am still again visited with
fresh Love, and the springings up of the fresh Power and Life, and fresh
Visitations of the rich Mercy and Grace, which the everlasting Fountain
naturally opens in its own. The Pearl is exceeding Rich, the Treasure of Life
unutterable; and he that will possess it must sell all for it, even all his
Lusts and Corruptions, yea all the Riches of his Nature (the best of his Will,
the best of his Wisdom most refined) nay not only so, but all the Riches of
his Spirit, all that he has held or can hold out of the Life. Then, when he is
poor in Spirit, and has nothing in himself but emptiness, nothing so much as
to receive or retain the Life, but what is formed, grows up in, and is
preserved in the Life according to its own mere will and good pleasure; then
alone is h^ fit to be comprehended and brought forth in the Eternal Spring.
Perfectly happy is he, who is perfectly possessed thereof: yet he is not
without a Proportion of blessedness also, who is mourning after it and
Traveling toward it; which can never be attained by the Natural Part's
retaining the Letter of any Spiritual Revelation or Knowledge, but only by
beginning in the Eternal Virtue, abiding in it and Traveling from Death to
Death, and from Life to Life, till all be slain which is to die and perish in
the way, and all be raised and perfected which is to receive, and live in the
Kingdom and Crown of Life for ever; which the Lord lays before all to run
after, but none but the Spiritual Seed (begotten of and abiding in the Spirit)
can obtain. Mind then this brief Sum.

The lost Creature, the undone Creature, is graciously sought after and visited
by the Fountain of its Life and being.

Being visited with the Mercy and Grace, and impressed, it receives somewhat
of the Grace and Living Virtue from the Fountain.

Having received somewhat, the Creature is apt to retain it in the Creaturely
Vessel (even in the own will, and to enlarge the own Wisdom thereby, and so to
become somewhat again in it self) forgetting the Spring.

As the Creature retains any thing in the Natural part out of the Immediate
feeling of the Living Virtue, it corrupts, it Adulterates (...) the living
Spring.

And that, which any one has thus Adulterated with, must be taken from him,
and he be made dead to it, and it to him, before he can be recovered into a
Living State, fit to enjoy what he formerly received, or further to receive of
and grow up in the fresh Living Virtue.

THE END.

