Many deep CONSIDERATIONS have been upon my heart concerning the STATE of
ISRAEL, both past, present and to come, some of which I find drawings to
communicate; together with some QUESTIONS and ANSWERS concerning UNITY.
The Considerations concerning Israel, are these which follow.

1. THe precious living State, which my soul remembers to have been, about the
beginning of the late troubles of this Nation, when Israel was bent to seek
after the Lord, and applied their hearts to wait upon him in fastings and
earnest supplications, wherein my heart has often had the testimony, that they
were accepted of him, and had many times the seal of his presence and power
among them: yea my heart did truly unite with and enjoy the Lord in what was
then given forth, and I can never be drawn to deny the truth and worth of that
dispensation, though I know it was swallowed up by a greater desolation, soon
following after, and since by the breaking forth of a more lively dispensation.

2. The overrunning of that state by the subtilty of the enemy, drawing the
minds of the simple and upright-hearted from the living feeling, and from the
inward power of Religion, into Disputations and Contentions about Forms of
Worship and Church Government, which drew out the reasoning part, and withdrew
the spirit of the mind from feeding on its proper nourishment; and so Life
decayed in the Spirit, while Wisdom and Knowledge and Subtilty increased in the
Understanding. And so the upright-hearted missing of Life, where before they
had found it, were scattered up and down to seek after it: and those, who abode
where they were, grew dry, barren and contentious, losing the savor,
sweetness, meekness, love, and indeed whatever was living and precious, and
remained fixing their minds on that, which the Lord had departed from. Oh the
darkness and misery of this state! O the pain of the hearts where Life was
stirring, for want of the living God! O the death and formality of those, that
were dead and formal! Surely had not the Lord pitied his People in this state,
and appeared to them in his Life and Power (which this great desolation made
way for) it had been determined concerning Israel for ever: for Death had
overgrown the generality, and Life was even gasping and expiring in the
single-hearted.

3. The precious breaking forth of the Lord (at this dismal time, in this hour
of distress and desperate condition of Israel) in some hidden Vessels, whom he
had kept waiting upon him, and whom he had preserved fresh in the sense of him:
to whom his appearance was very glorious, to whom he opened the state of the
Earth and the state of his People, giving them the Everlasting Gospel to preach
to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and promising them that his Spirit and Power
should go along with them, bidding them go forth to till and dress the Earth,
and to gather his People into his Fold. And who can utter what the glory of
this Light was, in its shining and breaking forth in their hearts! how welcome
to their weary souls, how pleasant to the eye of their spirits, how
demonstrative and satisfactory to their hearts! O the joy of that day (surely
it can never be forgotten by them) wherein they sensibly felt the pouring down
of the Spirit of Life upon them, and their hearts gathered into the bosom of
Eternal Rest, and their souls and bodies sanctified and set apart for the Lord
and his Service.

4. The contemptible means God put into their hands, to work his work by; which
was not by preaching any new thing, but by directing to a Principle, which God
had already hid in the earth of every man's heart, and which was to be known by
its divine Nature and Light, turning against and repoving sin, testifying that
this was the way the Lord of Heaven and Earth had chosen, to bring his Sons and
Daughters into the Power and Glory of his Life. O what heart can receive this,
what eye can see any beauty in this, but that which the Lord touches and
opens! I testify (in the sense of Life) that the wisdom of man, yea the
wisdom of Israel corrupted, cannot but despise and turn from this. Is not this
the lowest of all dispensations? Is not this common to all mankind? Does not
this fall short (in its self as I may say, and as it has formerly been
dispensed) of the dispensation of the Law of Moses to the Jews, much more of
the dispensation by Christ and his Apostles? Who would have looked for the Lord
here! And yet this has the Lord chosen to gather his People by, and to appear
to the world in, and has gathered the Life, Virtue and Substance of all former
Dispensations into it, as those who are gathered thereby and have waited upon
him therein, and felt the Nature and Power of his Life (and seen things past,
present and to come) are living Witnesses of, against all the gain-sayings,
thoughts and reasonings of flesh and blood.

5. The contemptibleness of the Vessels, which the Lord chose to fill with this
Treasure, and to let forth this dispensation of his Life through. They were for
the most part mean, as to the outward, young country lads, of no deep
understanding or ready expression, but very fit to be despised every where by
the wisdom of man, and only to be owned in the Power of that Life, wherein
they came forth. How ridiculous was their manner of coming forth and
appearance, to the eye of man! about what poor, trivial circumstances, habits,
gestures and things did they seem to lay great weight, and make great matters
of moment! How far did they seem from being acquainted with the Mysteries and
Depths of Religion! But their chief preaching was Repentance, and about a Light
within, and of turning to that, and proclaiming the great and terrible Day of
the Lord to be at hand: wherein I confess my heart exceedingly despised them,
and cannot wonder that any wise man, or sort of Professors did, or do yet
despise them. Yea they themselves were very sensible of their own weakness, and
unfitness for that great work and service wherewith the Lord had honored them,
and of their inability to reason with man; and so (in the fear and in the watch
of their spirits) kept close to their tetsimony, and to the movings of his
power, not mattering to answer or satisfy the reasoning part of man, but singly
minding the reaching to and raising of that, to which their Testimony was.

6. The blessing that God gave to this his dispensation of Life in their hands.
O how did the Lord prosper them in gathering his scattered wandering sheep into
his fold of Rest! How did their words drop down like dew, and refresh the
hungry thirsty souls! How did they reach to the Life in those to whom they
ministered, raising up that which lay dead in the grave, to give a living
testimony to the living voice of God in them! How did they batter the wisdom
and reasonings of man, making the loftiness thereof stoop and bow to the weak
and foolish babe of the begettings of Life! Eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what the power of
Life has wrought through them in the hearts and consciences of those, who have
longed after and waited for the Lord. O the breathings and meltings of soul,
the sense of the living presence of God, the subjecting of the heart unto the
Lord, the awakening of and giving strength unto his Witness, the falling down
and weakening of the powers of darkness, the clear shining of the Light of Life
in the heart, and the sweet running of the pure streams thereof into the
enlivened souls, which has often been known and sealed to from the powerful
appearance of God in their ministry! Indeed when I have considered these and
such like things in my heart, and narrowly marked them in my converse with
them, I have been often forced to cry out concerning them, Truly here is man
very weak and contemptible, but God very glorious and powerful. And indeed,
when at any time I looked on the man, I was hardly able to forbear disdaining
them: but on the other hand, when the eye of my spirit beheld the power and
glory of the Lord in them, I could hardly forbear over-esteeming and exalting
them.

7. The glory which the Lord advanced these Vessels to, since his beginning to
make use of them. How has he enriched them with gifts and abilities, and every
way fitted them for the service and employment, he has had for them! How has
he enlarged their ministry, that they who had very little to say, either by way
of declaration or disputation at first, now abound with strength, and
abundantly surpass the knowledge and wisdom both of the World, and of other
Professors of Religion! The Lord indeed has adorned them, putting his beauty
upon them, and causing them to grow up in his strength, and in his wisdom. This
mine eye has seen and often took notice of, blessing the Name of the Lord, and
praying to him for their preservation. And surely whoever he be, that has
either known himself or heard the relation of the poverty of these young
striplings, when they first came forth in the Power of the Lord, how empty in
themselves they then were, how sensible they went up and down of their own
weakness, how little they had to say to people, that came to observe them and
enquire of them, how afraid they were to be drawn from their watch, at what a
distance they stood from entering into reasoning about things, I say, he that
did know and does consider this, and shall also behold how the Lord has
advanced them since, making them mighty and honorable with his gifts and
abilities (with the beauty whereof the very man flourishes, to the sight of
every eye that is in any measure truly open) cannot but acknowledge the change
to be wonderful.

8. I have had the sense and consideration of this also in my heart, That their
danger is now greater, then when they were poorer, weaker, and not so enriched
and gifted by the Lord. The enemy is very subtle and watchful, and there is
danger to Israel all along, both in the poverty and in the riches; but the
greater danger is in the riches: because then man is apt to forget God, and to
lose somewhat of the sense of his dependence (which keeps the soul low and safe
in the Life) and also to suffer somewhat of exaltation to creep upon him, which
presently in a degree corrupts and betrays him. The heart that is in any
measure lifted up in its self; so far it is not upright to the Lord. Let every
one feel this, waiting to be preserved, and praying for those who are most
beautified, and advanced by gifts and abilities from the Life, because in this
respect (and at this time) their danger is greatest. When Israel is poor, low,
weak, trembling, seeing no loveliness nor worthiness in himself, but depending
upon the mere mercy, and tender bowels of the Lord in the free Covenant of his
love etc, then is Israel safe. But when he has a being given him in the Life,
and is richly adorned with the ornaments of Life, and come to have the power it
self in his hand to make use of; then is he in more danger of becoming somewhat
of himself, and of forgetting him that formed him (being apt to make use of his
gifts without such an immediate sense of the giver, as he had in his trembling
and weak estate) and so of departing out of that humble, tender, abased,
contrite state and temper of spirit, wherein he was still preserved.

9. This also has been manifest to me, and deeply impressed on my spirit all
along, That the Lord may, if he see good, suffer some great and eminent ones to
fall in Israel. Man may forget himself, and the Lord may let out temptation
upon him, and suffer it to enter, that he may bring him to the sense and
feeling of his weakness again. Yea, those who have felt the power of the Lord
in and through an instrument, may give more to the instrument than belongs unto
it, and so put the Lord upon recovering the honor due to him, which is
misplaced and misapplied to that, which is but his instrument. This is the
Lord's day (the Light thereof is his, the Life his, the Power his) and the
glory thereof will he not give to another. If therefore any man, in this day,
shall take to himself what belongs to the Lord, or any other shall give it him,
the Lord will not so lose it, but will find out a way to recover his own: And
happy is the man, who lies continually perfectly-abased before the Lord,
assuming nothing of the Lord's to himself, nor attributing any thing of the
Lords to another, that the Lord alone may be exalted every where. And let all
gifts serve the Seed, and its rising over all gifts be waited for, that the
Life every where may have its due, being lifted up over all.

10. I have had a deep sense of this also, That if the Lord should suffer such
a thing to fall out among us, it may cause a great shaking and shattering in
Israel. Surely I may say, it would come very unexpectedly and unsuspectedly to
many; and so such persons would be surprised with it, and not at all prepared
for it. Alas, who could suspect (feeling persons so eminent in the power, and
so exercised and skilful in the way and paths of righteousness, and so able to
instruct others therein) that they could possibly fall in any degree, from the
Truth and Power of Life! And yet they are not free from temptation: and if they
be confident of their own strength, and forget the tender hand of the Lord, he
may suffer a temptation to enter them, which presently begets a ground for evil
weeds to spring up in, and for blindness, and hardness, and error from the pure
Power to creep in at.

O dear Friends, who know the pretiousness of Life, and desire the preservation
of the Lord in your several conditions, Let us fear the Lord and his goodness
to us, remembering what a low ebb we were at, when the Lord visited us, and how
freely he visited, and how freely he daily preserves, that we may not be
hardened or lifted up against the World, or against any sort of Professors, but
may magnify the grace which has made and keeps up the difference between us
and them, praying to the Lord for them, and watching for the hour of his mercy
to them, exercising all manner of sweetness and meekness and longsuffering
toward them in the mean time, also pitying and bearing with all the tempted
ones among our selves, as such who are sensible that we also may be tempted,
and that understand the ground why we fall not by the temptation.

What shall I say more? There are three Queries appearing in my view, in
relation to this thing, which the hearts of some may desire satisfaction about,
to which I find somewhat in way of answer springing up in me.

Querie 1.
How may a man, whom the Lord has exalted by gifts and services to him, be
preserved from falling?

Answ.
1. There is that which waits to preserve and is still stretching forth its
hand to keep to its self that which it has gathered, which being hearkened and
yielded unto in its discoveries and warnings, will not fail to deliver the soul
from the danger and snares of every condition.

2. There is the free mercy and love of the Covenant, wherein the soul may find
help and pity, although it should be somewhat tainted and entangled with the
snares of the enemy.

3. There is a proper frame or state of spirit, to wit of humility and
brokenness, which is fit for Israel in every condition, but more especially
when he is exalted in the dominion and power of Life, and honored with great
gifts and services for the Lord. In this Israel is safe: and happy is he, who
is not suffered to abide in any degree of exaltation of spirit, but is brought
down again (through the tender mercy and love of the Lord) into this, though by
the buffetings of Satan.

Querie 2.
How may the little ones, if the Lord should suffer one or more (of such as
have been very eminent in his service) to decline and fall, how may they be
preserved from falling with him or them?

Answer.
Keeping to the measure of Life in the particular, and not valuing others, by
an apprehension concerning them, but only knowing and honoring them as they
are felt and discerned in the Life, this will preserve every particular (that
is thus ordered) from being tainted with any of their snares or deviations. O
Israel, O little Babes, Know no man after the flesh, but the Lord alone in his
living Spirit. For man is but a vessel, wherein the Life may appear or
disappear at pleasure; and the Lord is not engaged to make use of man in his
service, further then he sees good. The Lord may appear where he has never
appeared before, and he may not appear where he has hitherto appeared very
frequently and powerfully. O know the Life in thine own heart, that is to be
the Judge in thee concerning the appearances of Life in others. If that judge
not, be still and silent in thy heart, waiting for its judgment: when that
judges, let all thy thoughts and reasonings be bowed down under it. Let man
have no more than his due, while the Lord pleases to make use of him; and to
such there will accrue no great shaking or damage, when the Lord lays aside
any of his own instruments. But if any thing but the Life judge, it will still
either be setting up or throwing down man, whereby there will come loss on
either hand in the issue, to all such who thus act.

Querie 3.
How may any such, as have fallen from an high and glorious state in the power
and dominion of Life, be again recovered?

Answ.
Indeed this is a very difficult thing: not because the Mercy and Power of the
Lord is at a loss to or concerning man in this state, but because this
condition sets a man's spirit at so great a distance from the use of that
remedy, which the Lord has appointed for man's recovery. It is very hard to
bring such an one to the sense of his loss (whereby the depth of his fall might
be prevented) until he be gone very far: and the farther he goes in his
declining from the Life, the harder will his recovory be. Again, It is hard for
such an one to become so poor, and lie so low and so long at the foot of God's
grace, as also to be contented to be so laid aside and not made use of, as the
Spirit of the Lord may judge necessary for him, to bring him into a perfect
abasement of spirit, and to work that perfectly out of him, whereby the enemy
now entered to betray him: yea the judgment of the Lord (the righteous and
severe judgment of the Lord) is hard to be born in this state; and it is much,
if such a Vessel do not break here, in its new forming on the wheel. Yet that
which boweth before the Lord, being willing to be smitten and abased by him,
and to lie under his correction and judgment his season, even until he say it
is enough, the Lord will without doubt restore into his favor, if not also
into the honor of his service again.

Object.
But some tender heart may say (which feels many weaknesses, much unbelief
and the danger of falling daily) if this be true, O what will become of me! If
such as these be liable to fall, and to fall so dangerously, how shall I stand!
I was wounded enough before with the sense of mine own condition, but this
affrighteth me much more.

Answ.
O tender heart, the enemy may make use of this to trouble and afflict thee,
but it was not so intended by the Lord, who is very full of unutterable bowels,
and who has a day of bowels for thy state: yea his day, which has already
dawned, is so dawning, as to reach thee. The Lord has not yet done gathering
his scattered sheep, nor yet shown the utmost skill he has, either to gather
or to preserve: and the state of the weakest, under the preserving power of the
Lord is safe. Creat are the diseases of Israel, great is yet the loss of
scattered souls, which as yet know not the call of the shepherd; and if at any
time they do feel a touch thereof, are easily reasoned again out of it, and
driven back by the thoughts of their own hearts. O great, great also is the
skill of the shepherd, and his hand very tender, which the Lord is putting
forth for the help of th^se, blessed be his Name. And as the condition of these
needs and requires that from the nature and soul of the Lord, which the
conditions of others do not require: So the nature of the Lord has mercy and
love in it to answer their states, and will give it out in his day and season;
O let none be offended thereat. Let no eye throughout all Israel be evil,
because the Lord is exceeding good. If he please to kill the fatted Calf, and
set it before his Prodigal Son; let none that have walked faithfully with him
in any dispensation, be offended thereat: but rather let all (in whom is Life)
stand ready to shout at the issuings forth of love and mercy, in the varieties
of the dispensations thereof, according to the need and capacity of every sort
of Vessels, prepared by the Lord to receive it. Therefore, O thou afflicted,
tossed with tempest and not comforted, thou shall know and feel this from the
Lord, that he knows how to bring home his consolations to thy soul, and to
cast thee into the mold of his Life, and bring thee forth in the power of his
righteousness; and that he needs not to find any worthyness or righteousness
in thee: for he can create and make room for it in thy heart, yea he can begin,
carry on, and perfect his work in thee for his own Names sake. And to thee, O
broken soul, I cannot (so much) say, Do this or believe this; but rather, The
Lord will work in thee, yea the Lord will quicken Faith in thee, and raise up
his own Nature from the Seed of his own Life, which he himself has sown in thy
inward parts, and will not fail to preserve.

Besides, this broken state of thine (wherein the vileness and weakness of self
is daily felt, with the exceeding great need of the Lords preserving power and
mercy) is a safe state, toward which, that which (alone) preserves is
continually issuing forth in the bowels of its tenderness. And though thou do
not see the love of the Lord and his tender care over thee (and so want the
comfort of thine own condition;) yet it is never a whit the less in the heart
and spirit of the Lord toward thee: and in diverse respects, I may say, it is
better for thee at present to want the sight of it. I am satisfied in my heart
concerning the nature and ways of the Lord, and I know there is that Mercy in
him, which my soul cries for; and that it is not only treasured up, but about
to be issued forth toward those for whose sakes the cry is unto him for it.
The Lord will arise and have mercy upon Sion, even upon the mourners and
distressed ones in Sion; he will say to them who are of a fearful heart, and
mourn bitterly because of their unbelief (finding themselves as unable to
Believe now for Righteousness, as ever the Jews were to Work for it) be strong,
stand still, wait on me your God, behold my righteousness is ready to be
revealed, and I am bringing that faith with me which ye want, to give your
souls the entrance into my Promises, and into my Divine Nature promised. Ye
are my Lambs, and my bosom is for you, and thither will I gather you; yea, ye
have already conceived and are with young, though ye know it not, and I will
lead you on gently in a way that ye cannot nor never shall know, as ye would
know it, but shall not want or miss of that knowledge thereof, that I see good
for you. I will beget a deeper Life in you, and bring it forth after a deeper
way of dispensation, than ye have yet been acquainted with, or than your
understandings can comprehend: but in the death which I am bringing upon you,
and in the traveling pangs which ye shall feel in your hearts, shall it spring
up in you and be brought forth. O dear Lambs, mind the quickenings of Life, and
the savor and sense which the Lord begets in the heart, and let the outward
knowledge (even of what ye have had experience) go, but as the Lord quickens
it: and mind not the noises of thoughts and reasonings about things, which the
soul's enemy will be striving to fill you with and batter you by; but sink down
from these, and wait to feel that which lies beneath them, in the free nature,
life, virtue, power and motions whereof alone is your soul's salvation: and if
ye cannot receive the sense of this direction at present, wait on the Lord
either for it, or for what other manifestation or tender help he shall please
to give forth unto you.

Some Questions and Answers concerning Spiritual Unity.
Quest. 1.
What is Spiritual Unity?

Answ.
The meeting of the same spiritual nature in diverse, in one and the same
spiritual center or streams of Life. When the spirits or souls of creatures are
begotten by one Power into one Life, and meet in heart there: so far as they
thus meet, there is true Unity among them.

Quest. 2.
Wherein does this Unity consist?

Answ.
In the Life, in the Nature, in the Spirit wherein they are all begotten, and
of which they are formed, and where their meeting is. It consists not in any
outward or inward thing of an inferior nature, but only keeps within the
limits and bounds of the same Nature. The doing the same thing, the thinking
the same thing, the speaking the same thing, this does not unite here in this
state, in this nature, but only the doing or thinking or speaking of it in the
same Life. Yea though the doings or thoughts or words be diverse, yet if they
proceed from the same Principle and Nature, there is a true Unity felt therein,
where the Life alone is judge.

Quest. 3.
How is this Unity preserved?

Answ.
Only by abiding in the Life, only by keeping to the Power and in the
Principle, from whence the Unity sprang, and in which it stands. Here is a
knitting of Natures, and a fellowship in the same spiritual center. Here the
diverse and different motions of several members in the body (thus coming from
the Life and Spirit of the Body) are known to and owned by the same Life, where
it is fresh and sensible. It is not keeping up an outward knowledge (or belief
concerning things) that unites, nor keeping up an outward conformity in
actions, etc. for these may be held and done by another part in man, and in
another nature; but it is by keeping and acting in that, which did at first
unite. In this there is neither matter nor room for division: and he that is
within these limits, cannot but be found in the oneness.

Quest. 4.
How is this Unity interrupted?

Answ.
By the interposition of any thing of a different nature or spirit from the
Life. When any thing of the earthly or sensual part comes between the Soul and
the Life, this interrupts the Soul's unity with the Life it self, and it also
interrupts its unity with the Life in others, and the unity of the Life in
others with it. Any thing of the man's spirit, of the man's wisdom, of the
man's will, not bowed down and brought into subjection, and so not coming forth
in and under the authority and guidance of Life, in this is somewhat of the
nature of division: yea the very knowledge of truth and holding of it forth, by
the man's wisdom and in his will, out of the movings and power of the Life,
brings a damp upon the Life and interrupts the Unity; for the Life in others
cannot unite with this in spirit, though it may own the words to be true.

Quest. 5.
How may this Unity be recovered, if at any time decaying?

Answ.
In the Lord alone is the recovery of Israel, from any degree of loss in any
kind, at any time, who alone can teach to retire into and to be found in that,
wherein the Unity is and stands, and into which division cannot enter. This is
the way of restoring unity to Israel, upon the sense of any want thereof, even
every one through the Lord's help retiring (in his own particular) and
furthering the retirings of others to the Principle of Life, that every one
there may feel the washing from what has in any measure corrupted, and the new
begetting into the power of Life. From this the true and lasting unity will
spring amain, to the gladding of all hearts that know the sweetness of it, and
who cannot but naturally and most earnestly desire it. O mark therefore, The
way is not by striving to beget into one and the same apprehension concerning
things, nor by endeavoring to bring into one and the same practices; but by
alluring and driving into that, wherein the Unity consists, and which brings it
forth in the Vessels, which are seasoned therewith and ordered thereby. And
from this let all wait for the daily-new and living knowledge, and for the
ordering of their conversations and practices in that Light (and drawings
thereof) and in that simplicity and integrity of heart, which the Spirit of
Life at present holds forth and works in them; and the Life will be felt,
and the Name of the Lord praised in all the tents of Jacob, and through all the
habitations of his Israel: and there will be but one heart, and one soul, and
one spirit, and one mind, and one way and power of Life: and what is already
wrought in every heart, the Lord will be acknowledged in and his Name praised,
and the Lord's season contentedly waited, for his filling up of what is wanting
any where. So the living God (the God of Israel, the God of everlasting tender
bowels and compassions to Israel) fill the vessels of his heritage with his
Life, and cause the peace and love of his holy Nature and Spirit to descend
upon their dwellings, and to spring up powerfully in them toward his living
Truth, and toward one another.

And let all strive to excel in tenderness, and in long-suffering, and to be
kept out of hard and evil thoughts one of another, and from harsh
interpretations concerning any thing relating to one another. Oh this is
unworthy to be sound in an Israelite toward an Egyptian, but exceeding
shameful and inexcusable to be found in one brother toward another. How many
weaknesses does the Lord pass by in us! how ready is he to interpret every
thing well concerning his Disciples, that may bear a good interpretation! The
Spirit, says he, is willing: but the Flesh is weak. When they had been all
scattered from him upon his death, he did not afterward upbraid them, but
sweetly gathered them again. O dear Friends, have we received the same Life of
sweetness! Let us bring forth the same sweet fruits, being ready to excuse, and
to receive what may tend toward the excuse of another in any doubtful case;
and where there is any evil manifest, Wait, O wait to overcome it with good. O
let us not spend the strength of our Spirits, in crying out of one another
because of evil, but watch and wait where the mercy and the healing virtue will
please to arise. O Lord my God, when thou have shown the wants of Israel in
any kind sufficiently (whether in the particular or in the general) bring forth
the supply thereof from thy fullness, so ordering it in thine eternal wisdom,
that all may be ashamed and abased before thee, and thy Name praised in and
over all.

ISAAC PENINGTON.

THE END.

