A LETTER FROM A SOLDIER IN THE Royal Camp near Dublin TO HIS FRIEND in LONDON.
From the Royal Camp before Greenock, Nine Miles from Dublin, July the 4th.
1690. Dear Cousin,
I Desire all my Friends to join with me, in returnning Thanks to God, for his
Preservation of me in the greatest Danger. I thank God, I am come off without a
Wound, only a little Bruise, which will be well immediately. Droghedah is
surrendered upon Conditions of marching out without Baggage, only to have Life.
King James is run away; Dublin is in our hands; We pursued them eight miles,
they making a very handsome Retreat, till night kept us from killing them, and
gave them leave to retreat. Next day we rested: To day we marched to Greenock,
where came to us Hundreds from Dublin, ^essing the King, telling him the Irish
came by Sixes and Sevens to Dublin; some without Hats, Boots Clocks, Horses,
Legs, and Arms: It was a sore Conflict, and our Men spared none they could
kill; the Artillery playing hard upon them. Upon which, the Irish leaving
Dublin, the Protestants seized the Castle for us; which, in comparison, a Mouse
might have done, God having so possessed them with fear, that the late King
James and all fled by Five next morning. Having run from the place, we pursued
them all night, which was Twelve Miles from Dublin. We have now Six of King
James's Trumpeters come in: He is quite run away, and designs for France: He
told them, He was unfortunate; desires them to make the best Conditions they
can for themselves, etc.

I am just going for Dublin, and the Army will march after. A Body of our Men
marched for Munster. I question not being in France by the latter-end of
August. Our Men are fine Fellows now they are blooded, and will out do
Alexander's Men: I never saw Men more boldly come on; and stand more stoutly to
it than they did: They came on like Lions, and stood like Rocks. The French
were very brisk at first.

We lost D. Schombergh, and some few Underofficers, and about Fifty Men: We
killed 2500 Men, and took 200 Prisoners, among whom was Lieutenant General
Hamilton, Lord Carlingford; Lord Dungan, dead; Lord Slaney, dead; Tyrconnel
lost his Arm; with several other Officers mortally wounded, and lying in the
Field, whose Names we cannot yet know.

I hope within this fortnight to send You and Cousin Norris good Encouragement.
Munster will, I hope, not much trouble us; however we must see it.

Yours, T. P.

LONDON: Printed for W. Jones 1690.


