SOME THINGS of GREAT WEIGHT and Concernment to All; Briefly opened, and held
forth from a true sense and understanding, for the healing of the Ruins and
Breaches, which the Enemy of Mankind has made in Men's souls, AS, 1. Some
Assertions concerning the Principle and Way of Life. 2. Some further Directions
to CHRIST, the Principle and Fountain of Life. 3. The End of Christ's
Manifestation, his Salvation, and whom he saves. 4. Three Questions answered
concerning Justification. 5. Of the pure, constant, eternal, unchangeable
Nature of God's Truth.

Written in the time of my Confinement in Alisbury, when Love was working in
me, and the Life of God in me traveling and wrestling with the Lord for the
Salvation of others, ISAAC PENINGTON.

London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

Some Assertions concerning the Principle and Way of Life.
THat it is a great and hard matter to come into a capacity of knowing and
receiving the Truth. It is no hard matter to take up any Religion that a man
finds in the World. To read Scriptures, to believe what a man finds related
there, according to his understanding of them; yea, to believe that he has the
Light and help of the Spirit in his reading and understanding, to apply himself
also to practice and observe what he finds therein required, and to aim at
Holiness, etc. This is no hard matter, every man that is serious, and seeks
religion of any kind but in the weight of a man's spirit, may go thus far. But
all this administers not the true capacity, but he that meets with it, must go
further then thus.

2. That which gives the true capacity is a Principle of Life from God, and
there alone and no where else can man meet with it and receive it. This
principle is the Seed of the Kingdom or Heavenly Leaven, with which the mind
must be in some measure leavened, ere it can come into a true capacity of
understanding and receiveing the truth. And in this Leaven must it abide and
grow up, if it abide and grow in the true knowledge, etc.

3. That from this principle and in this principle, not only the true Light and
Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ and all Spiritual things is given and
received, but also the true Faith, the true Love, the true Sanctification, the
true Justification, the true Peace, the true Joy, etc. And what of these is not
received and held here, is not of the Truth, but a garment of men's own forming
and not the covering of the Spirit.

4. That the Spirit himself sows this principle, and is received in this
principle. And he that receives this principle and is born of this principle,
receives and is born of the Spirit; and he that receives it not, nor is born of
it, neither has received nor is born of the Spirit, but is but in the
imagination and self-conceit about the things of God, but is not in the truth,
as it is in Jesus.

5. That in this Principle the new Covenant is made with the soul and entered
into; and he that receives this principle from the hand of God, receives Life
and enters into the Covenant of Life, and feels the pure fear, wherein God
cleanses the heart, and whereby he keeps the heart clean, and feels the Laws
of God daily writing there by the finger of Gods Spirit, and feels the power
and sense of the Spirit to teach and cause obedience; so that the yoke, which
is hard to the transgressing nature (alienated from the Life and Power) is easy
(and as I may say natural) to him that is born of this nature. For being dead
with Christ, and risen with Christ, and changed into the nature of Christ, by
the principle which is of him, through the Power and Spirit of Christ which
works therein, he can say as Christ did, when the Lord calls him to any thing,
Lo I come, it is my meat and drink, yea my great delight to do thy will O God,
yea thy Law is written in the midst of my bowels.

6. Among those who are gathered into this Principle, and abide in the Sense,
Light and Life of this Principle, there is great love and unity. They are of
one mind, of one heart, of one soul, of one spirit, of one life, gathered into
one demonstration of truth, and there is no jarriug, no doubting, no
dissenting, etc. All this is out, in the world, in the earthly wisdom, in the
earthly professions and walkings, but it is excluded the Principle of Truth,
and them that are gathered into and abide therein.

7. That all that are not gathered into, nor walk nor live in this Principle,
they are yet in the darkness and error from the pure power of God, and stand
and walk in slippery places: and though their way may seem very right, and
their estate and condition sure (as to God-wards) in their own eyes and
judgment, yet is not really so; but they are but in a dream concerning the
Truth, not in the Truth it self, which (how strange soever it may seem to them
at present to be affirmed concerning them) yet they shall certainly feel to be
so, when the Lord by his powerful voice and bright appearance of his Spirit
awaketh them. For many things go for truth now with men in the dark, which will
vanish like smoke before the light of the day, and then that only which is
Truth indeed shall have the glory and praise of being accounted so; and then
what will become of those who have mistook about Truth, and are not clothed
with the pure Wedding Garment (the spotless life and righteousness of the Son)
but only with that which they have accounted so.

8. That to those that see in the light of this Principle, the Mountain of the
Lords house is discovered, and those that abide and grow up therein, they know
and experience it established above all Mountains and exalted abve all Hills;
all earthly Knowledge, earthly Religions, earthly Ways, earthly Worships,
earthly Spirits and Minds, etc. in their greatest exaltations and glory, being
far beneath it. And here the feast of fat things, and Wines on the lees well
refined, even the fruit of the Vine which gladdeth and refreshes the very
heart of God, is fed and partaked of by those that dwell here. For the Father
and the Son and the Spirit is here revealed, in the holy House and Tabernacles
which are built here: and here they make their feast, bringing forth the riches
of their Nature, Spirit and precious Life, on which they feed with the soul,
and give unto the soul favor and ability to feed with them; in which food
there is the life, strength, righteousness and joy of the Kingdom given forth
and received.

9. That in the heart which discovers iniquity, reproves it, witnesses
against it, and striveth with the mind to turn it from it, and to wait for life
and power from on high, that is this very principle. In that is the Divine
Nature, even the nature of Gods Spirit, which was always against sin and ever
will so be, and in all its appearances testifies against it, and in love to
the creature striveth with the creature to convince it of that in it which is
contrary to God, and to draw it to that strength and divine virtue which
stops it, beats it back, and works it out of the mind and nature of the
creature, as it can get entrance, and is harkned and subjected to. For there is
no Salvation, but by the Cross and Yoke of our Lord Jesus Christ: for in that
is the power to crucify the affections and lusts, which lead into sin and
death, and will not cease to tempt and lead aside, till the soul be gathered
into unity with that, and become subject to that which is contrary to them. So
that this is the main thing in Religion, even to know Christ revealed in the
soul as a Standard against corruption, and to be gathered under his Banner,
which is the Cross, or that living Principle in the heart, which resists the
corrupt principle: and he that is gathered hither, and continues faithfully
fighting here, shall receive mercy help and strength from on high, in every
time of need.

10. That the true and certain way of knowledge of the things of God, is in the
faith and obedience of this Principle. It is not by reasoning and considering
things in the mind (after the manner of men) that a man comes to know spiritual
things: but they are spiritually revealed by God, after a spiritual manner, to
the Believer, to the Obeyer; and they are revealed to him in his believing, in
his obeying, in his waiting, in his holy fearing, in his distrusting of
himself, and feeling his own insufficiency, either to attain them or retain
them, but as the Lord God makes them manifest in him, and preserves him in the
sense of them. He that does my Will, shall know of my Doctrine, says Christ.
This is the way. Would thou know what God requires of thee, what this or that
is which appears in this or that sort as Truth, whether it be so or no? Mind
this Principle in thee, mind the pure, the holy Light, inward touches and
leadings of this pure Divine Principle: that will make manifest to thee
whatever is fit for thee in thy present state to know; and thou art not to
desire more, but as a child to rest contented with that proportion of knowledge
and strength, which the wise and tender Father judges fit for thee: and as thy
state grows capable of more, he will not fail to administer to thee. And what
he gives thee is good, seasonable and proper for thee, which thou may
safely feed upon and enjoy in the sense and fear of him. But if thou press
after what he would not as yet have thee know, thou entrest into the will and
wisdom of the flesh, and there are the disputes, discontents, murmurings and
ill tempers and dispositions of the mind, which there will increase and grow
upon thee to thy hurt.

11. That the mind that is gathered here, will find great opposition, both
within and without, insomuch as he shall not easily pass from out of the
kingdom of darkness, into the Kingdom of the dear Son, but through many trials,
temptations, oppositions and dangers many ways, for turning the back on the
kingdom of darkness, by joining to the Principle of Life, in harkening and
subjecting to the light thereof; hereupon the powers of darkness both within
and without bestir themselves to hinder the souls progress, and to bring it
back again into subjection under the will and wisdom of the flesh.

O how does the will and wisdom strive within in a man's own bosom! What
risings of the Impure are felt against the Pure! What secret and subtle
reasonings to ensnare and entangle the mind! and if they cannot draw the soul
back from the Lord and the Living-Path, then they strive to vex, afflict and
torment it! There is none knows what is felt inwardly by the followers of the
Lamb but those that travel with him in the Living-Path; they are often sensible
of what they meet with in their travels, and how hard it is to abide in the
path of Salvation, insomuch as they understand the truth of that saying, If the
Righteous scarcely be saved. It is scarcely indeed, so subtle, so strong, such
a many holds, so many stratagems has the subtle, twining, crooked, piercing
Leviathan, to ensnare, perplex, overrun and entangle them with. And then
outwardly, the same flesh, the same earthly spirit and wisdom, the same
crooked, hellish will is striving in men without also, to bear down and subject
the pure Principle in them who are born of God, to their devices and
institutions, decrees, ways, customs, etc. which are of the will and wisdom of
the flesh. So that, as the Apostle said, through much tribulation is the
entrance of the soul into the heavenly Kingdom; and there is no avoiding the
many tribulations, but by turning aside out of the way (which though thereby
the flesh get ease for a time, it will be to the greater loss and sorrow in the
end:) For the spirit of the world, the wisdom of the world, the nature,
religion, worship and whole course of the world, is contrary to the way of the
pure Wisdom and Spirit of God, and uses it as its enemy, where ever it finds
it: and they that will not bow to the spirit, wisdom and way of the world, must
feel the force of its beastly claws. For is it not a beastly thing (even far
beneath the nature of a man) to persecute that which is good, to hurt,
reproach, and pursue the innocent life of the Lamb? and yet this is that which
the spirit of the world (which is not of God, but wise and seemingly just and
righteous in another wisdom, nature and principle) always has done, still does
and will do to the end.

12. That there is a glorious Crown prepared for all those, who are gathered to
the Lamb in this Principle, and abide with him faithful therein to the end,
hearing his Voice, believing the demonstration of his Spirit, obeying him in
all his motions and requirings, undergoing every yoke (which is appointed by
him to yoke down the fleshly nature and mind) and taking up every Cross of
every kind in meekness, patience and fear. And there is not only a Crown laid
up for them at last, but the Power of the Lord God is nigh unto them to work
all in them, to bear them up through and over all, and to keep them to and in
that Principle, whereby and whereinto his tender Mercy and powerful Arm
gathered them. For, as the Power of the Lord began the work: for there could
never any heart be gathered from under the power of darkness to the Light which
leads out of it, but by the Power of the Lord: for the powers of darkness stand
between, and would hold and keep their own, did not a greater Power appear and
put forth it self for the soul against them. I say, as the Power of the Lord
began the work, so the same Power alone is able to go on with it and perfect
it; and it will go with it and perfect it upon the same terms it began, and no
other. How were the terms at first but on a giving up of the soul in the faith
to the Lord, in the sense of his love and goodness and mercy, touching and
drawing and making willing? And how is the standing, but in the same giving up
still, in abiding with the Lord, in harkening to the voice of the Lord, in
waiting for the wisdom and counsel of the Lord? But if any man draw back from
this, if he despise the Spirit and his motions and counsels, and hearken to the
voice of a contrary spirit, believing and following it, like the Angels that
fell, he departs from his place and habitation, which he had in the drawings,
life and power of God, and is not to God what he was before, nor is God to him
what he was before: but the Lord who loved him before, and delighted in him to
do him good, has now no pleasure in him, he being turned from that which the
Lord loves, and in which he has determined and appointed to choose, love, and
own the children of men: who as they are gathered thither, are his children; as
they are gathered from thence, into a contrary principle, are the children of
the wicked one.

And now what is of man in all this? where is the man that can boast before the
Lord, who is thus saved? He has all from a Principle, yea he is gathered into,
preserved in, and abides in this Principle by the Power, goodness and mercy of
the Lord. The Power begins the work in him, the Power accompanies him; the
Power carries him through, or he falls and miscarries. There is no man can
stand any longer here, than he submits to and is upheld by the Power, nor act
nor suffer, but as the Power acts in him and helps him to suffer. Let the man
that boasts, bring forth somewhat of his own, if he can, here. Is the will at
any time his own? Does not he that is spiritual and in the true sense, always
find God to work in him to will, when ever he wills rightly and holily? and
if he cannot will of himself, can he do any thing of himself? can he believe of
himself, pray of himself, wait of himself, resist enemies and temptations of
himself, nay, so much as give a look to the Lord at any time of himself? Indeed
in the grace of the Lord, and principle of his Life there is sufficiency, and
therein he that is joined to the Lord and become one Spirit with him, what can
he not do here? but that is, as he is new-made in Christ, and as Christ
arises, lives and acts in him, which he that is in the true sense and feeling
will still acknowledge, not only in his words to men, but in his heart and
spirit before the Lord.

Some further directions to Christ, the Principle and Fountain of Life, by way
of Question and Answer.
Quest. 1. What is CHRIST?

Answ. He is the Word of Eternal Life, who is appointed of the Father to give
life, and who gives life to them that receive him and obey his Gospel. He is
the Son of God, the Wisdom of God, the Power of God, the Righteousness of God,
the Savior and Salvation of God. The peace, the rest, the joy, the life of the
soul. The King, the Priest, the Prophet, the Shepherd of the sheep. The Way,
the Truth, the Door, the Vine, the Olivetree, into which the living are
gathered and engrafted. And he is also an Hammer, an Ax, a Sword, a Fire to the
corrupt tree and fruit.

Quest. 2. How is Christ known, received and obeyed?

Ans. As a seed: as the seed of Life, as the seed of the Kingdom, as a Leaven,
as Salt: as a little small thing, rising up in the heart against all that is
great and mighty. As a branch out of a dry ground, as a little child to lead,
which all the wisdom of man and flesh cannot but despise: and therefore that
must first be brought down in some measure in the heart, before Christ can be
owned in the heart and subjected to.

Quest. 3. How is this Seed received?

Answ. By feeling its virtues, manifestations and operations in the heart, and
subjecting thereto.

Quest. 4. What are its virtues, manifestations and operations?

Answ. They are all living, and have all living and powerful effects upon the
heart, as they are let in. They are all against darkness, sin and death,
tending to discover it, to turn the mind from it, to lead out of the captivity,
power and reach of it: and they are also all for God, tending to prepare the
heart for him, and to bring it into union and covenant with him.

Quest. 5. What is the first operation of the seed to the soul, wherein it is
to be waited for and closed with, that the soul may come into the farther sense
and feeling of it?

Answ. It is according to the state of the soul, which being in darkness, sin
and death, it appears as a light to discover the darkness, sin and death, and
to lead out of it to the redeeming power. And then, to them that thus receive
it, and wait upon it in the fear and humility which it gives and begets, it
appears as life, quickening the soul, and as power enabling it in some measure
to live to God, and to walk with him in the way to the Kingdom.

Quest. 6. How comes this way to be hid from some that desire after the Lord,
and to know his Truth as it is in Jesus?

Answ. From the subtilty of the enemy, who blinds the eye which alone can see,
and stops the ear which alone can hear, and hardens the heart which alone can
understand; and has devices, snares, and baits, and fall reasonings from
Scriptures, and from Experiences, which any one that hearkens unto, and is
entangled and ensnared in, is his captive, and cannot be at liberty to see or
know, or embrace the Truth as it is, but his heart is deceived about it, and
filled with prejudices against it. (Therefore such should wait for the true
Circumcision, that they might hearken to the Lord, come out of the enemies
snares and subtle devices, and live, (...) Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3.)

Quest. 7. But may not these be saved notwithstanding?

Ans. There is no Salvation but in and by Christ Jesus; and the Salvation is
not to them that received a bite notion of him under the Law, or another empty
notion under the Profession of the Gospel, but only to them that receive him as
he was promised, as the Holy Seed: for in that alone is the Redemption, freedom
from sin, and power of life felt, and no where else. So that he that has not
this knowledge of him, has not the true knowledge; nor he that does not so
believe in him, does not rightly believe; nor he that does not so hope in him,
does not rightly hope: and without the true Knowledge, the right Faith and Hope,
how can any man be saved?

Therefore awake, awake, O weary, thirsty souls, Come to the spring of Life,
come to the living Waters. Become little, that ye may learn of Christ; wait to
have your eyes anointed, that ye may see him, and your hearts opened; that ye
may know and receive him. O wait for the manifestation of this Seed in you, be
abased before him, join to him, receive his checks, receive mourning and
repentance from him; wait for the Light and Faith that he gives, and the Power
that issues from his Throne, and ye shall find him the bruiser of the Serpent
head (which none else is able to do) and the breaker of the bond of Iniquity,
which keeps down the Just and lets the Unjust at liberty, till he dissolve it.
And this is sufficient to manifest against all the disputes of the mind, that
this is He and no other, by his doing that which none else can do. This
demonstration he gave to the Jews in flesh, in his appearance in flesh: and
this demonstration he gives now to the Jews in Spirit, in his appearance in
Spirit, whereby he satisfies their hearts, and puts them out of doubt that
it is he. And we must profess to the world (as our hearts are drawn and guided
by the Lord, to give forth the testimony we have received of him) that we look
not, yea we cannot look for another. Whom should we look for, besides the Lamb,
besides the Word which was in the beginning, besides him who is one with the
Father, and has the Eternal Life, Wisdom, Righteousness and Power of the
Father, and manifests it in us? We look for indeed more of the same, and the
more universal and powerful breaking of it forth, but another thing, another
Christ, another Life, Spirit, Power, etc. we cannot look for. And this we
further testify, that whoever receives this Testimony in the truth and
uprightness of his heart, waiting on that which discovers sin to him, and in
simplicity joining and giving up thereto, and walking with him in forsaking the
evil and cleaving to the good, in the faith of him and of his power, he shall
witness the same thing with us, and all the reasonings, imaginations and strong
holds of his mind shall be battered down and come to nothing, before the
virtue, power and life of him who thus is pleased to appear and manifest
himself after the Apostasy, even as he did before, even in an inward Principle,
an inward Seed, an inward Light, an inward Life, an inward Word, an inward
Power. And Friends and People, mark (in your minds, and learn to put a right
difference between) that which stumbles you, and that which draws and convinces
you. What makes any of you own Truth at any time? is it not an inward, lively,
powerful touch and demonstration of Gods Spirit? what makes you afterward
doubt and question? is it not another thing, of a different nature from this?
is it not a subtle reasoning, whereby the enemy twines into your spirits, and
begets first a doubt concerning, then a prejudice, and at last a great strength
against that, which before ye had some sense of and some unity with, in the
teachings and quickenings of the Spirit of the Lord. And what spirit is it in
you, that thus works in your minds? and whither does he lead you by these
workings and subtle reasonings? Oh that ye might see! Oh that ye might feel
the snare, and know with us the Preserver therefrom: for we have met with much
of this; and had we not been helped by the Lord, and given up to him, we had
been entangled to this very day, as ye are. And he that has helped us, waits
to be gracious to you: and O that you would not reject his help, that he might
deliver you also, that ye also might bless his Name, in feeling the benefit and
joy of his preservation. And this is written in true bowels and tender yearning
love, that ye might be a little stirred up to wait to know the Fathers house,
and might feed on the bread which abounds therein, and drink of the waters
which makes fresh and living to God, and be clothed with the raiment which the
Master of the family gives to his Spouse, Children and Servants.

The end of Christ's Manifestation, his Salvation, and whom he saves.
CHRIST came (and is manifested in the hearts of those that receive him) to
destroy the works of the Devil, and to set the soul free from sin: and whom he
makes free, are free indeed. Is the Liberty which the Son gives, inferior in
this Life, in its kind, to the captivity and bondage of the Enemy, in its kind?
Which of them is stronger? the Enemy to enthrall, or the Lord Jesus Christ, to
set free from his Thraldom? Yes; the Lord Jesus Christ, the Captain of our
Salvation, the mighty Savior (who is more able to save, than the Enemy to
destroy) delivers his Israel out of the hands of their Enemies, and so
mightily and powerfully delivers them, that they are able (in the power of
his Might) to serve him, without fear of them any more, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of their life.

It is true, there is a state of darkness, sin and death, wherein Satan reigns:
and there is a state of weakness, wherein Satan much prevails, if the watch be
not strictly kept to him, who is the everlasting strength; and there is a state
of fighting and groaning under the body of sin and death, and crying out who
shall deliver from it! But there is also a state of growth in the Life, and of
Victory (through the Life) over that which captived and caused to cry out.
There is a treading down of Satan under the feet by the God of Peace, insomuch
as not only the Elders, but the very youngmen in Christ overcome and triumph
over him, feeling the entrance ministered to them abundantly into the
everlasting Kingdom, into which no unclean thing can enter. Oh! wonderful is
the travel to the holy Rest of the pure Life! Happy are they that meet with the
true Leader, and faithfully follow him, till they have traveled through and
overcome all that stands in their way! for to them, and to them alone, is the
promise of the possession of the everlasting Inheritance; and such find and
feel the Lord to be their God indeed, and themselves to be his Children
(brought forth in his holy Life and Nature) which to feel in truth and certain
knowledge, is more than tongue can utter.

Christ saves only those that come unto him, and believe in him, and so are
born of his Spirit, and by the faith and through the strength and virtue of his
Spirit overcome the wicked one, his works, snares and temptations in their
hearts. And these feel in themselves the Root of his Life, the holy Seed of his
Kingdom springing up in them, into which they are ingrafted and become one with
him, and so bringing forth the holy Fruit, the living Grapes, the new and
righteous Conversation, wherein the Life of God shines and is glorified. Now it
is not knowing, or believing, or receiving any thing into the old
understanding, that avails with God, or the Reformation which is there wrought,
but the New Creature alone, created of God in Christ Jesus. This is born of
God, this lives in him, this is clothed with him. This puts off the old man
with his deeds, and puts on the newness of the Nature and Spirit of the Lord
Jesus Christ; so that this man is as really in Christ, in the Spirit, in the
new Adam, found in him, formed in him, covered with him, as the first man or
nature is in the old Adam. Therefore this is the main thing in Religion, to
mind the Seed of the Kingdom, the Leaven of the Kingdom, its growth in the
mind, foul and spirit, and the minds, souls and spirits gathering into and
growth in it. And here is Faith, the true Faith, the true Love, the true Hope,
the true Meekness and Patience; the true Justification and Sanctification felt,
and not elsewhere: but those that are out of this, out of Christ the Seed, out
of Christ the Word, out of Christ the Wisdom, Righteousness and Power of the
Father, are only in a dream concerning these things, but know not the truth and
real nature of them, as they are felt in Jesus, by those who are truly
ingrafted into Him, and livingly grow up in him.

Three Questions answered concerning JUSTIFICATION.
Quest. 1. What is justifying or Justification with God?

Answ. It is God's owning the state, works or actions of a creature, either
inwardly in his own mind, or manifestly to them. This is God's justifying of
them, or his Justification: his disowning or disallowing them, is his
condemnation. As for instance, God's owning Adam in the upright estate of his
Innocence, wherein God created him; and any thing he did in that state and
spirit, was his justifying of him and his works. Gods disowning and disallowing
his harkening to his Wife and the Serpent, and his eating the forbidden fruit,
upon their temptation, was his condemnation thereof.

Quest. 2. What is it God justifies, and what is it he condemns?

Ans. That which God justifies is the Spirit of his Son, the Life of his Son,
the Nature of his Son brought forth in any creature; the Faith which is in him,
and so the creature as it is in the Obedience which is of him, and the works
that are wrought in him: but the fallen estate of Man from him, and all that is
done by Man out of him, God condemns.

Quest. 3. How is Justification received, kept and grown up in; and what is the
Preservation out of Condemnation?

Answ. Justification is only received by receiving him, who is the
righteousness and justification, and only kept by abiding in him, and only
increased by growing up in him. For as every one that is found in him, is
justified: so he that has more of him, more of his Life, more of his Faith,
more of his Nature, more of his Spirit, more of the pure Obedience, more of the
Garment of Righteousness and Salvation drawn over him, he is more justified.
For there are degrees of Justification, as the soul that is really in the
thing, and is acquainted with the true nature and dispensation of it from God,
feels and knows. A father is more or less pleased with his children, yea with
the same child sometimes, which is a true figure to man who is come under Gods
Teachings. And the preservation out of condemnation, is, by being preserved out
of that, which God condemns: for no man upon the earth, that has the true
sense and feeling, shall ever find the Holy and Just One justifying him in his
sins, but as the heart is turned from them, and by the power of Life kept out
of them. He that will be kept in the Justification, must be kept out of that
which the Justification is not to: for there he is not Justified; but in his
being drawn again out of it, and turning again from it, his Justification in
the tender Mercy of the Lord is renewed. Justification under the Law, was
according to that Covenant: and Justification under the Gospel, is according to
that Covenant. He that walks with God in that Covenant, he that walks in and
after the Spirit of Christ, he is therein justified: but he that walks after
the flesh, and does any thing that is fleshly; that is not justified with God,
nor he in that: but in the Faith which cleanses and gives victory over it, in
that is the Justification from it, and the pure Heavenly peace with the Lord
God of Life witnessed.

He that is in Christ, and receives his knowledge from Christ, and is kept in
the pure fear and sense of him, he understands the truth of these things: but
he that is erred in spirit, and holds but up a literal knowledge (though from,
or at least accompanied with some remembrance of former feeling and
experiences) he errs about these things also, and deceit and a lie has
prevailed over him, as he will find, when the Lord confounds his wisdom and
present apprehensions of things, by awakening his Witness in him. For Religion,
the true Religion is a Mystery, Life a Mystery; Christ is a Mystery, the Spirit
is a Mystery, Faith is a Mystery, Obedience (the pure Obedience) is a Mystery,
Worship (the Spiritual Worship in and according to the New Covenant) is a
Mystery, hid from the eyes of all the wise searchers of the World, but revealed
to the least Babe that is of God, and abides in the quickened Life of his Son.
But many that are out of the Mystery of Truth, are in the Mystery of Deceit,
and have a knowledge or profession concerning Christ, his Spirit, Faith,
Obedience, the Spiritual Worship, etc, in that Mystery of Deceit, which they
for the present account the true, and by it venture to judge, disallow and
condemn the Truth it self: but that is not at all to the hurt of the Truth, or
such as are in it, but rather to their own hurt and great danger. For the
sparks which man kindles, will never light him to God; the garments of man's
righteousness (either according to his apprehensions or the letter of the Law,
or letter of the Gospel) will never cloth him; but for all that, he must lie
down in shame and sorrow, when the Truth of God appears in his conscience, and
all his shadows and deceits flee away.

Therefore hearken to the Testimony from these, whom the Lord has awakened,
whom the Lord has quickened, whom the Lord has led out of the darkness of the
night, into the light and brightness of the day; who have seen Jesus, and
testify what they have seen, heard, felt and handled of that eternal Word,
which was from the beginning, which appeared in flesh, and afterward in Spirit
before the Apostasy, and has again appeared (since the Apostasy) as a
Shepherd, as a Gatherer, as a Seeker-out and Preserver of his wandering Sheep,
who were driven from Him in the cloudy and dark day. And if ye would hearken
aright, breath to the Lord, in that which desires and longs after him, that he
would circumcise the heart, and open the right ear in you, that the ear may
hear his witness in you, that so ye may indeed know the voice of the Shepherd,
and in true understanding, sense and constant experience bear witness to that
true Testimony, which Christ spoke in the days of his flesh; My Sheep hear my
Voice, and follow me; but a stranger they will not follow: for they know not
the voice of strangers.

Of the pure, constant, eternal, unchangeable Nature of Gods Truth.
TRuth is of God, and was with God and in God, before any thing else had a
being. Truth was before Error or Deceit: for it was from the Truth that the
Error was, and it was about Truth that the Deceit was. There was somewhat which
erred from Truth, and brought in Deceit into the World, and has propagated
Deceit in the World: but Truth remains the same that it was, keeping its pure,
eternal, unchangeable nature; and is not, nor ever was, nor ever can be defiled
or tainted with any Error or Deceit; but testifies against it, reproves it,
and condemns for it, draws out of it, and delivers from its bands and
captivity, all those that hearken and cleave to it, in the Faith which is of
its nature and begetting.

The Father, the Fountain of Truth, is the same. The Son, his express Image
(whom he fills with himself, and in whom he appears) is the same. The Spirit,
the Anointing (who is Truth, and no Lie) is still the same. The Principle, or
Seed of Truth, is still the same. The Doctrine and Way of Truth is still the
same: for it was the same Truth which was preached in shadows under the Law,
the substance whereof appears and is witnessed in the Gospel: and it was the
same before the great Apostasy, in the latter days from it, and all the times
of the Apostasy, and again after the Apostasy. It has the same nature still,
the same properties, the same operations and effects, and gives forth the same
Testimony in the ears and hearts of all that are open to it. Indeed the minds
of men, and the states of men may often change in relation to Truth: but Truth
it self changes not, but is equal, fair and just to all men upon the Earth, in
all Ages and Generations, always condemning that which is unjust, erroneous
and deceitful, and always justifying what is pure, holy and righteous.

Now is not this a Pearl? nay is not this the Pearl indeed, the precious Pearl
of price? Who would not buy it? who would not sell all for it? who would not
dig in the Field where this Treasure is hid, until he find it? The Field is
near thee, O man, which thou are to purchase and dig in, and must feel torn up
by the Plough of God in some measure, before this Pearl or Treasure appear to
thee: and thou must take up and bear the Yoke and Cross of Christ, until all be
bowed down and crucified in thee which is contrary to its nature before it be
polished in thee, and thou come to behold and enjoy, its riches and ever
lasting fullness. O happy are they, that are begotten and born of it! happy are
they that know its voice and give up to it, to be gathered and redeemed by it,
out of all deceits, out of all errors, out of all that entangles and on snares
the soul in sin, misery and utter perdition: for destruction and misery
everlasting is out of it, and Life and Salvation is alone to be found in it.

There is a Witness in every heart, which knows these things and will testify
it to their faces, when the Light of God is opened in them and its tongue
speaks therein to them. O happy they, that wait for, know, hear and subject to
the heavenly Voice while he day of their Visitation and reclaiming lasts,
wherein they may travel from Sin to Holiness, from Death to Life by its help
and guidance. O why should Man perish ^ why should Man hearken to that which
hates him, and seeks his destruction, and stop his ear against that which loves
him, and warns him of his danger in the dearness of love, and in tenderness of
bowels toward him?

THE END.

