(...) (...)
MY Soul has still in remembrance the grievous shakings and rendings that have
been in this Nation, which entered deep into the bowels of it, and made every
heart ache, and every mind astonished. This Nation was settled in religion and
outward peace, in such a way as was pleasing to most: but yet there was a
spirit within, which had been long groaning under oppression, whose sighs and
cries entered into the ears of the Lord; and he arose up in his fury and
jealousy, and rent the heavens, and rent the earth, so breaking the very
foundations of both, that men generally were amazed, and wondered what would
become of all. The former Religion was almost buried in confusion, and in
danger of being utterly lost: a long-spun corroding war were we entangled in,
which administered no hopes nor likelihood of peace. The hand of the Lord
reaches through all these dominions; Mastracy, Ministry, the common people,
the people of God (both such as were accounted so, and such as were indeed so)
the line of confusion was stretched over them all; they did all reel and totter
like a drunken man, as if they had been so to fall, as to rise up no more:

But behold how suddenly and unexpectedly was there a settlement of al again!
The Nation settled in peace, Magistracy settled, Ministry settled, the common
people settled; and those which were shaken in their Spirits, got into their
several ways in religion and settled again. Thus there was a general healing of
all again save only of a few, whose Spirits God had so reached, that their
wound was incurable: and unless somewhat of God had been brought forth, which
the world cannot know (nay the religions spirit of man which is below, can no
more reach it, then the common spirit of the world) they had remained
miserable, lost, scattered, and confounded to this day. But the Lord has in
infinitemercy visited them, in the season of distress; and there has a little
foolish thing broke forth (at which all the wise, and religious in the Spirit
of this world cannot but stumble) which has administered relief, and discovered
the foundation whereupon they also can settle. So that now there is as it were
an universal settlement, as every creature is gathered into that center, which
is proper and suitable to its Spirit to bottom on.

Now this I have to say to all; Let every one look to his foundation, for the
Lord can arise again, yea and will arise again and shake once more; and then
the heavens and the earth which have not a true foundation, cannot but fall. If
the earth be not founded upon and settled in righteousness, its present
establishment will not stand: if the heavens be not founded upon and settled in
truth, they will melt and pass away before the fire of the Lord. There is a
spirit that mourns deeply to the Lord, groaning inwardly, and his ears are
open to it, and he will plead the cause of his seed: and the Churches and
religions, wherein the seed of the Serpent can live and flourish, shall wither
and come to an end. Dust is already become the Serpents food; the Spirt of man
in all his exercises of religion, knows not the bread of life: but the dead
feed upon the dead, and the dead spirit of man loves to have it so. But this
cannot continue, for the Lord has been at work all this while, and when he
brings forth the people which he has been forming, and their religion, the
religion of man will appear what it is; and shame and sorrow will be the
portion of all who have pleased themselves therein, and trifled away the day of
their visitation.

Be wise now therefore, O ye wise ones; be religious, O religious ones! Open
the eye and ear that has been shut, shut the eye and ear that has been open:
Stumble no longer, least ye fall and rise no more. I know ye cannot see, for
the wrong eye is open, and the Lord has designed to hide his wisdom from that
eye. If it be possible for you, become poor in spirit, least ye at last prove
to be the rich, whom the Lord will send empty away. Sell all apace, that ye may
have wherewith to buy the Pearl. Ye have not known the appearance of the Lord,
but in your wisdom have disdained it, and he has disdained to make use of you
in this great work; but it has been pleasant to him to lay stumbling blocks
before you, that ye might fall and be broken. The children, the fools, the
blind can see the way, and enter into life: but ye that are men, that are wise,
that have both your eyes, that can judge in religion, and determine what is
Orthodox and what erroneous, yet cannot.

O hear, that your souls may live! Ye know not how short your time is, the day
of your visitation passes away faster then ye are aware. The cry has long
gone forth, Behold the Bridegroom comes, and his Spouse has been preparing
for his bed. Ye must off with your old Garments, and have the new Garment on,
ye must have the true oil in your Lamps, or the door of the Kingdom will be
shut upon you, and there will be no entrance for you. In plain terms, ye must
part with all your Religion which ye have gathered in your own wisdom, which
has grown up in the Apostasy, and which only can make a fair show in the
dark, but cannot endure the searching light of the day of the Lord; and ye must
purchase the true religion, the true righteousness, the true innocence and
purity of Christ: the old must be done away, truly done away, and the new come
in the place; so that flesh and self may be quite destroyed, and nothing but
Christ found in you, and you found no where but in Christ, if you enter into
his Kingdom: for no unclean thing can enter. Therefore put away pride, and
passion, and enmity, and fleshly reasonings; and seek out that which is pure,
and enter into it, and take up the cross against all that is contrary, that so
you may be wrought into it, and found in it. And turn from all imaginings, and
conceivings about the meanings of Scripture, in the uncertain and erring mind,
and come to that which is infallible. And know the silencing of the fleshly
part, that the spiritual part may grow in the wisdom, that so ye may learn in
the spirit, and know the word of God, and be able to speak it.

My bowels are toward you, and in bowels has this been writ(...): not to anger
or shame you, but to provoke you to jealousy against that dark and evil
spirit, which leads you to destruction, under the guise and appearance of a
light and good spirit. Nor is it to glory over you, for my soul lies down in
shame and sorrow before the Lord, and the reproach of my own Apostasy and
seeking relief from the world (turning from th(...) Lord, who had wounded me,
to earthly vanities for ease) will not easily be covered. The Lord had been
kind to me in breaking of me in my religion, and in visiting me with sweet and
precious light from his own spirit, but I knew it not. I felt, and could not
but acknowledge a power upon me, and might have known what it was, by its
purifying of my heart, and begetting me into the image of God: but I confind it
to appear (...) a way of demonstration to my reason and earthly wisdom, and
for want of satisfaction therein, denied it and rebelled against it; and so,
after all my former misery, lost my entrance, and sowed seeds of new misery and
sorrow to my own soul, which since I have reaped. So that I have no cause to
boast over others, but to lie low in abasement of spirit. And what I write, is
not in any dominion or authority of my own, but to bring others unto that
dominion and authority, which it is good for me, and for every one else to be
subject to. The Lord strip us of our own understanding, and of that
righteousness which is but ours (though we have called it his) that so we may
be gathered into, and receive his understanding, and be clothed with his
righeousness, and feel his rest and peace. And happy is he that loses all to
gain this; but he that keeps what he has too long, shall in the end lose
all, and yet not gain this neither. Therefore be no longer wise in the eye of
flesh, or according to what man calls wisdom, but be truly wise.

If the Reader (before he peruse this Book) would be persuaded to amend with
his Pen these Errors and mistakes of the Press (some whereof make the sense
difficult, some wholly pervert it) it may prove for his own ease and benefit.
Smaller errors, as of adding or substracting letters, or mistaking the stops,
the sense may somewhat help him in.

PAge 13, l. 7. r. And, l. 31. r. It: p. 16. l. 2. r. when. l. 11. r. man. p.
17. l. 3^. r. light. p 18 l 15. r. is profitable. p. 19. l 33. r. moving. p.
21. l. 13. r. known. p. 24. l. 11. r. enjoyed. l. 36. r. cherished. p. 27. l.
31. r. found. p. 28. l. 19. for this, r. the. p. 24. l. 15. r. of help. p. 36.
l. 8. r. to light, p. 38. l. 27. r. pant. p. 39. l. 1. 2. r. in simplicity. l.
38. r. And then. p. 40. l. 28. is, dele. p. 41. l. 2. got. p. 44. l. 29. if ye.
p. 45. l. 1. thou that. l. 23. were formed. p. 51. l. 38. 39. would reach. p.
53. l. 4. knew. l. 20. he. p. 54. slighted. p. 60. l. 1. and witnesses. p. 61.
l. last, Answ. p. 66. l. 2. one of. p. 67. 68. for the, r. thee, where the
sense requires. p. 68. l. 17. these, l. 24. the, delc. p. 70. l. 7. as he does.
p. 73. l. 14. as. l. 24. betrayers of the life. And so p. 75. l. 9. bringing
forth. p. 76. l. 16. world. p. 77. l. last, r. this. p. 81. l. 6. seat. p. 96.
l. 19. this day. l. 20. that Scripture. l. 27. then they.

Some POSITIONS concerning the Apostasy from the Christian Spirit and Life.
Position I.
THat there has been a great Apostasy from the spirit of Christ, and from the
true light and life of Christianity; which Apostasy began in the Apostles
days, and ripened apace afterward.

That the Apostles, and Christians in their days, had the true Spirit, the true
Light, the true Life, I think will not be denied. We know that we are of God,
and that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding that we may
know him that is true: and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ.
This is the true God and eternal life, 1 John 5. 19. 20. They were truly born
of God, and knew the Son of God come, receiving from him a true understanding,
and the true light and knowledge in that understanding, and both the
understanding and knowledge was rooted and seated in him that is true, where
their situation and abiding was (we are in him that is true) where they met
with the true Spirit, the true God, the true Life, even life eternal. That they
had the true spirit from God, (because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the
spirit of his Son into your hearts, Gal. 4. 6.) that they had the true light
from God (God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 6.) that they had the true life from and in the
spirit (if we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit, Gal. 5. 25.)
is generally acknowledged concerning them.

Now of an Apostasy from this, beginning even in their days, and to be
completed not long after, the Scriptures also make mention. The Apostle Paul
speaks expressly of the thing, that there must come a falling away, and a
revealing of the man of sin, the son of perdition, 2 These. 2. 3. Christ the
man of salvation had showed and declared the path of life, had discovered the
true Church, which was the pillar and ground of truth, against which the gates
of he I could not prevail; had sent the true spirit, which could lead into all
truth, and preserve in the truth: but there must spring up a man of sin, a son
of perdition, who in a mystery should work against this, and cause a falling
from this to another thing. And this the Apostle did not only give a touch of
here in writing, but he had likewise told them of these things by word of
mouth, to which he refers them, verse. 5. This were enough to an ey opened; but
for further illustration to the thick understanding of man, which is surrounded
with fogs and mists of darkness, some more evidences from Scriptures may be
given.

Christ foretold of false Prophets, Mat. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets, which
come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. The Lord
sent true Prophets under the Law, and gave them true visions to declare: Christ
sent true Apostles and Ministers under the Gospel, and gave them the truth
which they should preach and propagate. But then there were false Prophets, false
Apostles and Ministers to come after, who never were sent by Christ, nor never
received the truth from his spirit. Now these do not come to gather into the
life and truth of Christ, but to scatter from it; and so either to begin, or
uphold an Apostasy. And, says Christ, beware of them, for they come very
subtly, they come in the sheeps clothing: They get the garment of the sheep
upon their backs, even that very garment which the sheep did wear; but they
have not the nature of the sheep, but the nature of the wolf, which is
ravenous after the life of the sheep. Mark where there is the Garment without,
but not the nature within; where there is the form of Godliness, but not the
power; where there are Scripture-words and practices, but not the spirit of life
from which they came, there is the false Prophet, there is the Wolf, there is the
Apostate, there is the Seducer from Christ.

Aagin, Christ fore-tells of many false Prophets, Mat. 24. 11. And many false
Prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many: and verse. 24. For there shall arise
false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders:
insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect.

And as Christ himself, so his Apostles also after him, by the same spirit,
foretell of the same thing.

The Apostle Paul speaks of seducing spirits in the latter times, and of
Doctrines of Devils, which should prevail to cause a departure in some from the
faith, 1 Timothy 4. 2. And if in those days the power of Seducers was so great, as
to draw from the truth, which was then so manifest and living, how easy would
it be to keep from the truth afterward, when it had been long lost and out of
remembrance, and thereby deceit got into the place and name of it.

The Apostle Peter also foretold of false Teachers, who should privily bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them: and that they should
so prevail, that their pernicious ways should be followed by many, and the way
of truth evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2.

Again, Paul in his 2d Epist. to Tim. speaks of the last days, that the times
therein should be perilous, Chap, 3. Christ had said, The love of many should
wax cold, and iniquity abound, Mat. 24. 12. And Paul shows how the times would
prove very perilous by the abounding of iniquity. In the last days perilous
times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankeful, unholy,
without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce
despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasure more then lovers of God, 2. Tim. 2. verse. 1. 2, 3, 4. Behold what kind
of fruit sprung up from the false doctrine of the false Teachers in the
Apostasy from the truth. And yet all this under a form of godliness, Having a
form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, verse. 5. Christ sent the
power of Godliness into the world, to subdue the root from whence all this
springs, to kill the evil nature inwardly: but in the Agostacy the evil nature
is not killed, but the power denied which should kill it, and the form kept up
to cover the evil nature with. The inwardly ravening nature, which devours and
destroys the stirrings and shootings forth of the just one in the heart, that
gets the sheeps clothing, the form of Godliness to cover it self with. Look
any where among the Apostates from the Apostles spirit and doctrine, and see; Is
self-love killed? is covetousness killed? is boasting and pride killed? is
the love of pleasures killed? are Persecutors and oppressors killed? and is
your honor and glory laid in the dust? Nay they are but covered with the form,
there life is still in them; the power wherewith they should be killed was at
first denied, and now is lost and not known, where there is the life, there is
the power; and where there is the power, the evil nature is killed: but where the
evil nature is not killed, there is only a form of godliness, a covering, a
painted Sepulcher, but rottenness within.

Now those last days and last times were not far off, but begun then: For the
Apostle exhorts Timothy to turn away from such, verse. 5. From such turn away;
intimating that even then there were such to be turnedaway from. And he says,
verse. 8. that they did then resist the truth like Jannes and Jambres, who with
a likeness of what Moses wrought, but without life, did strive to resist the
life and power that was in Moses. (And this is the work of all deceivers, to
get their own spirit into the likeness, and then to make use of the likeness
to oppose and suppress the true life and power.) So that they were come even
then, when the Apostle wrote this Epistle to Timothy.

And Jude says, that ungodly men, turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
were crept in already, verse. 4. of his Epistle.

And the Apostle John speaks very expressly, 1. Joh. 2. 18, 19. Little Children,
it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now
are there many Antichists, whereby we know that it is the last time., They went
out from us, etc. Christ instructing his Disciples concerning the last times,
tells them there shall arise false Christ's, with great power of deceit, Mat. 24.
v. 24. Now says John here, there are come many Antichrists, whereby we know it
is the last time, Mark, There were many Antichrists to begin and lay the
foundation of the apostasy, and make way for the great Antichrist (who was to
be their successor in the apostasy., and not the successor of the Apostles in
the truth:) And these did not. abide in the doctrine of the Apostles, who
preached the everlasting Gospel, nor in the spirit and principle which they
were in; but went out from them, from theit spirit (from the anointing to which
they kept, and by which they were kept) into another spirit, and preached
another Gospel; a Gospel which was not the power of God to kill the earthly, but
consisted in such a dead literal knowledge of things, as the earthly might be
fed and kept alive by. And as the great Antichrist was to come, so there
Antichrists who were to make way for him, were already come, and were already
laying the foundation of, and beginning the apostasy. So that the Spirit of
Antichrist (that very spirit wherein Antichrist succeeded, and in which he grew
up, and perfected the apostasy) was then in the world, as this Apostle says
yet more manifestly, 1 John 4. 3. This is that spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye
have heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the world.

Nor was it idle, but it was at work, working it self into the form of
godliness, that it might eat out the power, drive out the true spirit, and
make a prey of the life. The mystery of iniquity, says the Apostle Paul, does
already work, 2 These. 2. 7. This spirit did work in a mystery of iniquity to
eat out the mystery of godliness, and to set up this mystery of iniquity in
the world instead of the mystery of godliness. And it did prevail to wind it
self into the form, and get possession of the form, and also to trample upon
and keep under the life. It gained the outward Court, (for when that spirit had
corrupted it, the Lord did not regard it, but gave it up to it) and it trod
down the holy City, Rev. 11. 2. And this mystery of iniquity did not begin to
work many ages after the Apostles, but even then, in their days, already: The
mystery of iniquity does already work.

And look now into the estate of the Churches then, according to what the
Scripture records of them, and the symptoms of its working will plainly appear.
The Church of Ephesus (among whom some of the grievous wolves had encred, Act.
20. 29.) had left their first love, Rev. 2. 4. The Churches of Galatia were
bewitched from the Gospel, Gal, 3. 1. The Church at Coloss was entangled and
made subject to the rudiments of the world, and ordinances (which perish with
the using) after the commandments and doctrines of men, Col 2. v. 20, 22.
(Mark. When once one comes to be subject to the commandments and doctrines of
men, to perishing ordinances and worldly rudiments which men teach and command,
the true state is lost, and the apostasy is entered into. Here the wrong Teacher
is teaching, and he teaches the wrong thing, the wrong doctrines, the wrong
Commandments; and the wrong ear is hearing, which hears the wrong voice, and
knows not the true: and so the more it hears and practices, and the hotter
its zeal grows, the deeper it still runs into the apostasy.) The Church at
Corinth also was haunted with false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. v. 12, 13. insomuch as
the Apostle was afraid lest that Church should be corrupted by them, verse. 3.
The Church in Pergamus had them that held the doctrine of Balaam, Rev. 2. 14.
The Church in Thyatira suffered the woman Jezebel, which called her self a
Prophetess, to seduce and bring forth children in the apostasy, Rev. 2. v. 20.
and 23. The Church in Sardis had a name to live, but was dead, Rev. 3. 1.
having defiled her Garments, verse. 4. The Church in Laodicea, looked upon her
self as rich, and increased with goods, and as having need of nothing: but was
wretched, miserable, poor, blind, (so then the ey was put out) and naked,
wanting the gold, wanting the raiment, wanting the eye salve, Rev. 3. 17. 18.
And lastly all the Gentiles were warned by Paul, in his Epistle to the Church
at Rome, (whereby that Church might look upon her self as more particularly
concerned therein) to look to their standing, lest they falling from the faith,
from the truth, from the life into the apostasy (as the Jews had done) might
also feel the severity of God, as the Jews had, Chap. 11. ver. 20, 21, 22.

Thus it is evident that the apostasy had got footing, and began to spread in
the Apostles days: and the Apostle John in the spirit beholding the future
state of things, sees it overspread and overrun al, al Nations drunk with the
cup of fornication, Rev. 18. 3. The way of truth had been evil spoken of long
before, 2 Pet. 2. 2, and the rock of ages, which alone can establish in the
truth, had been forsaken, and al became as a Sea, and up gets the beast (which
could not rise while the power of truth stood) and the woman upon the beast,
with the cup of deceit, and of error from the life, in her hand; and this she
gives all the Nations to drink, and they drink and are drunk with it, so that
al Nations have been intoxicated with the doctrines and practices of apostasy.
They have took that for truth, which the Whore told them was truth, and they
have observed those things as the commands of God, which the Whore told them
were the commands of God. And by this means they have never come to be married
to Christ, to be in union with him, to receive the law of life from his spirit,
and to know the liberty from the bondage of corruption, but have been in the
bed of fornication with the Whore, and have pleased, glutted, and satisfied the
whorish principle in themselves with this fornication. And thus corruption did
overspread all the earth: for taking in a corrupt thing in stead of the truth,
it cannot purify the heart, but corrupt it more. A corrupt profession, corrupt
doctrines may paint, and make a man to himself seem changed, but the
corruption still lodges within, which a spiritual ey can easily discern, though
he that is in the corruption cannot. The Pharisees did seem glorious to
themselves, but Christ saw through them. And every sort of people now, in their
several strains and forms of apostasy, seem glorious to themselves, but the
spirit of Christ sees through them al, to that which lies underneath (in whom
it raigns) and there it finds corruption increased and strengthened in its nature
by the form; though outwardly painted with it. Does not fornication defile,
corrupt? so does the fornication of the Whorish spirit: the earth was corrupted
with it, Rev. 19. 2. So that this has been the universal state of Christendom
since the apostasy, the error, the deceit, the fornication of the Whore has
corrupted them, and withheld their eyes from the sight of that life and truth
which has power in it to purify them. Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, Tongues,
have been al waters; weak, unstable, without any foundation in religion, but
fit to be swayed and tossed up and down with every wind or breath of the Whore,
of whose cup they had al drunk, and by whose spirit they were all guided: for
the whore sat upon them, Rev. 17. 15. The whore, which had whored from God,
and so was not the true Church, sat upon Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and
Tongues. She sat upon them, she had them under her, she ruled and guided them
by her cup of fornication, and with her spirit of fornication, as a man would
guide the beast whereupon he rides. So that all that the Nations do from
henceforth, in religion is under the Whore, according to her guidance, by
virtue of the wine that they have drunk out of her cup.

And though God reserved to himself a remnant to worship him, and give so ne
testimony to his truth all this time, yet the beast (which was managed by the
Whore) had power over them: power to make war with them, power to overcome
them, Rev. 13. 7. The beast had power over all kindreds, tongues and nations,
every where to overcome the Saints, and suppress the truth they at any time
were moved to give testimony to, and to set up the worship of the beast, and
make all the earth fall down before that, Rev. 13. 7. 8. And the second beast had
and exercised all the power of the first beast, and set up his image, and gave
it life, and caused men generally to worship it, Rev. 13. 12. And he caused al
both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond to receive his mark, some way
or other, either in their right hand or in their forehead, verse. 16. And such
as would not receive his mark, nor worship him, he had power to persecute and
kill, and he did kill them, verse. 15. and the Whore drunk their blood, Chap. 17.
6. and God required it at her hand, Chap. 19. 2. though she made the hand of
the beast execute it, and would seem to wash her own hands of it.

So that now since the days of the Apostles, even all this time of the
Apostasy, since the man child has been caught up to God, and was not to be
found in the earth (which makes it seem such a strange thing for people to say
Christ is in them) and the woman has been in the wilderness, and not in the
habitable part of the world, Rev. 12. 5. 6. if all this time, any one will look
for the true religon, for the true Church, for the true knowledge and worship of
God, he must not look on any Nation, or any People, or among the Tongues, which
are cried up in Nations and people, for the original, and as the chief
interpreters of the original; for they are al drunk with the whores cup; they
are under the power, dominion, authority and service of the whore, who rides
upon the beast, to whom power was given over al kindreds, tongues and nations.
But look among the Nations who was persecuted, whose blood was drunk, whom the
powers of the Nations made war against, there alone the testimony of Jesus is to
be found, Rev. 12. 17. there alone are the witnesses against the present
idolatry and corruption, and to some truths or other of Christ's which God
enlightened them with, and whereto he, stirred them up to give their testimony,
though with the loss of their estates, liberties or lives.

Now by what has been expressed, is it not manifest to every ey, that has
room but to let in the letter of the Scripture, in simplicity and plainness,
that there has been a great apostasy from the true knowledge of Christ, and an
universal corruption and power of death sprung up, instead of the power of his
life and grace? The grace of God which brings salvation, has disappeared;
and the abomination of desolation has took up its place, and filled it with
deadly venom against the truth and against the life, so that enmity against
God, under a pretense of love and zeal to him, has reigned generally in the
hearts of men, from the times of the Apostles to this present day. And as the
light breaks forth, and their eyes come to be opened, they will see that they
have been and are haters of God, and of his life and spirit, but lovers of the
world, and of such a religion as suits the worldly Spirit.

Position II.
THat in this great Apostasy, the true state of Christianity has been lost.
This must needs be: for if there was an Apostasy from the thing, there could not
be a retaining of the thing, about which the Apostasy was. If they apostatised
from the spirit, from the light, from the life; then they were gone from it,
they lost it.

Now it may be instanced in every particular, how the state of Christianity was
lost, but that would be too vast and tedious: it may suffice therefore to
instance in some considerables ones, which may lead into the discovery of the
rest.

1. The true rule of Christianity, or the rule of a Christian, which is to
direct, guide and order him in his whole course, was apostatized from and lost.

What is a Christians rule, whereby he is to steer and order his course?

A Christian is to be a follower of Christ, and consequently must have the same
rule to walk by, as Christ had. A Christian proceeds from Christ, has the same
life in him, and needs the same rule. Christ had the fullness of life, and of
his fullness we al receive a measure of the same life. We are members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5. 30. yea we came out of the same
spring of life, from whence he came: for both he that sanctifies, and they who
are sanctified, are al of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren, Ebr. 2. 11. Now what was his rule? was it not the fullness of life
which he received? And what is their rule? is it not the measure of life which
they receive? Was not Christ's rule the law of the spirit, the law which the
spirit wrote in his heart? And is not their rule the law of the spirit, the law
which the spirit writes in their hearts? How was Christ made a King and a
Priest? was it by the law of a carnal commandment? or by the power of an endless
life? And how are they made Kings and Priests to God? Rev. 1. 6. Is it by the
law of a carnal commandment? or is it by the power of the same endless life? Lo
I come to do thy will, O God, says Christ, when he comes into the world, Ebr.
10. ver. 5. and 7. but by what rule? by what law? thy law is within my heart,
Psalm. 40. 8. And the same spirit who wrote it there, is also to write the new
Covenant with all the laws of it, in the heart of every Christian from the least
to the greatest, Ebr. 8. 9. 10. yea the same spirit that dwelt in Christ's
heart, is to dwell in their hearts, according to the promise of the Covenant,
Ezekiel. 36. 27. This was Paul's rule, after which he walked, the law of the spirit
of life in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1, 2. This made him free from the law of sin
and death. Where is the law of sin writ? where is the law of death writ? is it
not writ in the heart? And must not the law of righteousness and life be writ
there also, if it be able to deal with sin and death? The spirit forms the heart
anew, forms Christ in the heart, begets a new creature there, which cannot sin
(He that is born of God sins not) and this is the rule unto righteousness, the
new creature, or the spirit of life in the new creature, Gal 6. 15. 16. In
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them.
Mark, there is the rule, the new creature which is begotten in every one that is
born of God. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; and this new
creature is to be his rule. And as any man walks according to this rule,
according to the new creature, according to the law of light and life that the
spirit continually breathes into the new creature, he has peace: but as he
transgresses that, and walks not after the spirit, but after the flesh, he
walks out of the light, out of the life, out of the peace, into the sea, into
the death, into the trouble, into the condemnation. Here then is the law of the
converted man, the new creature; and the law of the new creature is the spirit
of life which begat him, which lives and breathes and gives forth his law
continually in him. Here Is a Christian, here is his rule: He that has not the
new creature formed in him, is no Christian: and he that has the new creature,
has the rule in himself. Ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know al
things, 1 John 2. 20. How came they to know al things? does not John say, it
was by the unction? the anointing was in them, a foundation or wel-spring of
light and life, issuing forth continually such Rivers and streams of life
within, as they needed no other Teacher in the truth and way of life, ver. 27.
The Comforter did refresh their hearts sufficiently, and lead them into all
truth. Search the Apostles Epistles, and ye shall find them testifying of the
Lords sending his spirit into the hearts of Christians, and exhortations to
them not to grieve or quench the spirit, but to follow as they were lead. They
were to live in the spirit, and to walk in the spirit, Gal. 5. 25. and the
spirit was to walk, and live, and bring forth his own life and power in them, 2
Cor. 6. 16. And what can be the proper and full rule of Gods Sons and
Daughters, but the light of the spirit of life, which they receive from their
father? Thus God did advance the state of a believer, above the state of the
Jews under the law: for they had the law, though written with the singer of
God, yet but in tables of stone; but these have the law, writ by the finger of
God in the tables of their hearts. Their's was a law without, at a distance
from them, and the Priests lips were to preserve the knowledge of it, and to
instruct them in it: but here is a law within, nigh at hand, the immediate
light of the spirit of life shining so immediately in the heart, that they need
no man to teach them, but have the spirit of prophesy in themselves, and quick
living teachings from him continually, and are made such Kings and Priests to
God, as the state of the law did but represent. The Gospel is the substance of
all the shadows contained in the law; A Christian is he that comes into this
substance, and lives in this substance, and in whom this substance lives, and
his rule is the substance it self, in which he lives, and which lives in him.
Christ is the substance who lives in the Christian, and he in Crhist: Christ
lives in him by his spirit, and he in Christ by the same spirit: there he lives,
and has fellowship with the Father and the Son, in the light wherein they live,
and not by any outward rule, 1 John 1. 6. 7.

But what is the rule now in the Apostasy?

Among the Papists the rule is the Scripture, interpreted by the Church (as
they call themselves) with a mixture of their own precepts and traditions.

Among the Protestants the rule is the Scriptures, according as they can
understand them by their own study, or according as they can receive the
understanding of them from such men as they account Orthodox. And hence arise
continual differences, and heaps, and sects, one following this interpretation,
another that.

An this is a grievous apostasy, and the root, spring and foundation of all the
rest: for he that misseth in his beginning, he that begins his Religion without
the true rule, how can he proceed aright in any thing afterward?

Object. But are not the Scriptures the word of God? and is not the word of God
to be a Christians rule? If every one should be left to his own spirit, what
confusion and uncertainty would this produce?

Answ. The Scriptures are not that living word, which is appointed by God to be
the rule of a Christian; but they contain words, spoken by the spirit of God,
testifying of that word, and pointing to that word which is to be the rule.
Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me: and ye will not come to me that ye might have life,
Joh. 5. 39. 40. The Scriptures are to be searched, for the testimony which they
give of Christ; and when that testimony is received, Christ is to be come to,
and life received from him. But the Pharisees formerly, and Christians since (I
mean Christians in name) search the Scriptures, but do not come to Christ for
the life; but stick in the letter of the Scriptures, and oppose the life with
the letter, keeping themselves from the life by their wisdom and knowledge in
the letter. Thus they put the Scriptures into the place of Christ, and so honor
neither Christ nor the Scriptures. I had been no honor to John to have been
taken for the light, his honor was to point to it: nor is it any honor to the
Scriptures to be called the word of God, but their honor is to discover and
testify of the word. Now hear what the Scriptures call the word: In the
beginning was the Word, and the word was with God, and the word was God, Jho.
1. 1. and the word was made flesh, verse. 14. This was the name of Christ, when
he came into the world in the flesh, to sow his life in the world. And when he
comes again into the world, out of a far Country, to fight with the beast and
false Prophets, and to cleanse the earth of the Whores fornication and idols,
wherewith she had corrupted it, he shall have the same name again his name is
called, The word of God, Rev. 19. 13. So Peter calls that the word of God,
which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. And this word that lives and
abides for ever, was the word that they preached, ver. 25. And they that
believed, did not cry up the words that the Apostles spoke, for the word; but
received the thing they spoke of, the ingrafted word, which being received with
a meek, quiet, and submissive spirit, is able to save the soul, Jam. 1. 21.
This is the word of faith that is nigh,, in the heart and in the mouth, Romans
10. 8. This is the word that stands at the door of the heart, and speaks to be
let in (Behold I stand at the door and knock:) and when it is let in, it speaks
in the heart, what is to be heard and done. It is nigh, it is in the heart and
in the mouth, to what end? that thou might hear it, and do it. The living
word, which is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword,
divides in the mouth, and divides in the heart the vile from the precious, yea
it reaches to the very inmost of the heart, and cuts between the roots, Ebr.
4. 11. and this thou art to hear and do. Thou art to part with all the vile
words, the vile conversation, the vile course and worship of the world
outwardly, and the vile thoughts and course of sin inwardly, as fast as the
word discovers them to thee, and to exercise thy self in that which is folly
and madness to the ey of the world, and a grievous cross to thine own worldly
nature; yea when the word reaches to the very nature, life, and spirit within,
from whence all that comes; that strong wise root of the fleshly life in the
heart, must not he spared, nor that foolish weak thing (to man's wise ey) which
is brought in stead thereof, be rejected: which when it it received, is but
like a little seed, even the least of all seeds; and when it grows up, it is a
long while but like a child: and yet keeping in that childishness, out of the
wisdom, it enters into that Kingdom, which the greatest wisdom of man (in all
his zealous ways and forms of religion) fels short, and is shut out of. This
is the word of life, this is the true living rule, and way to eternal life; and
this is the obedience, this is the hearing and doing of the word. He that has
an ear, let him hear. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove
your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5. Are ye in the faith? then Christ is in
you. Is not Christ in you? then ye are in the reprobate state, out of the
faith. Is Christ in you, and shall he not hold the reins, and rule? shall the
living word be in the heart, and not the rule of the heart? shall he speak in
the heart, and the man or woman in whom he speaks, run to words of Scripture
formerly spoken, to know whether these be his words or no? Nay, nay, his sheep
know his voice better then so. Did the Apostle John, who had seen, and tasted,
and handled, and preached the word of life, send Christians to his Epistles, or
any other part of Scriptures, to be their rule? Nay, he directed them to the
anointing, as a sufficient Teacher, 1 John 2. 17. He that believes on me, as
the scriptuce has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water,
Joh. 7. 38. He that has the fountain of life in him, issuing up rivers of
living water continually, has he need to go forth to fetch in water? The
Kingdom of heaven is within you, says Christ, and he bids seek the kingdom.
Light the candle, sweep thine own house, seek diligently for the kingdom; there
it is, if thou can find it. Now he that has found the kingdom within, shall
he look without, into words spoken concerning the kingdom, to find the laws of
the kingdom? Are not the laws of the kingdom to be found within the kingdom.
Shall the kingdom be in the heart, and the laws of the kingdom written without,
in a book? Is not the Gospel the ministration of the spirit? and shall he who
has received the spirit, run back to the letter to be his guide? shall the
living spirit, that gave forth Scriptures, be present, and not have
pre-eminence above his own words? What is the proper intent of the letter? is
it not to testify of the spirit, and to end in the spirit; The Law, the
Prophets, John led to Christ in the flesh, and he was to be the increasing
light, when they should decrease. Christ words in the flesh, the Apostles words
afterward, and al words since are but to lead to Christ in the spirit, to the
eternal living substance; and then the words of Christ, of the Apostles, or any
words spoken from the same spirit in these days, have brought to the spirit,
to the feeling and settling of the soul in the living foundation, and to the
building and perfecting of the man of God therein, they have attained their end
and glory. But to cry up these, not understanding their voice, but keeping at a
distance from the thing that they invite to; the words hereby are put out
oftheir place, out of their proper use and service, and so attain neither their
end nor their glory. And though men put that upon them which seems to be a
greater glory, namely to make them his rule and guide, yet it being not a true
glory, it is no glory, but a dishonor both to them, and to the spirit who gave
them to another end.

Now for the other part of the Objection, that if men should be lest to their
own spirits, and should follow the guidance of their own spirits, it would
produce confusion and uncertainty: I do acknowledge it, it would do so. But
here is no leaving of a man to his own spirit, spoken of or intended, but the
directing and guiding of a man to the word and spirit of life; to know and hear
the voice of Christ which gathers and translates man out of his own spirit into
his spirit: and here is no confusion or uncertainty, but order, certainty and
stability.

The light of Gods spirit is a certain and infallible rule, (and the ey that
sees that, is a certain ey) whereas man's understanding of the Scriptures is
uncertain and fallible; he having not the true ear, receives such a literal
uncertain knowledge of things, into his uncertain understanding, as deceives his
soul. And here man in the midst of his wisdom and knowledge of the Scriptures,
is lost in his own erring and uncertain mind, and his soul deceived, for want
of a true root and foundation of certainty in himself. But he that is come to
the true shepherd, and knows his voice, he cannot be deceived. Yea he can read
the Scriptures safely, and taste the true sweetness of them: for he being in
the life, can taste the sweetness of the words that came from the life; but
man who is out of the life, feeds on the husks, and can receive no more. He
has gathered a dead, dry, literal, husky knowledge out of the Scripture, and
that he can relish: but should the life of the words, and things there spoken
of be opened to him, he could not receive them, he himself being out of that
wherewith they were wrote, and wherein alone they can be understood. But poor
man having lost the life, what should he do? he can do no other, but cry up the
letter, and make as good shift with it as he can, though his soul the mean
while is starved, and lies in famine and death for want of the bread of life,
and a wrong thing is fed.

The Scribes and Pharisees made a great noise about the law and ordinances of
Moses, exclaiming against Christ and his disciples as breakers and profaners of
them; yet they themselves did not truly honor the law and ordinances of Moses,
but their own doctrines, commandments and traditions. So these now who make a
great noise about the Scriptures, and about the institutions of the Apostles,
do not honor the Scriptures, or the institutions of the Apostles; but their own
meanings, their own conceivings, their own inventions and imaginations
thereupon. They run to the Scriptures with that understanding which is out of
the truth, and which never shall be let into the truth; and so being not able
to reach and comprehend the truth as it is, they study, they invent, they
imagine a meaning; they form a likeness, a similitude of the truth as near as
they can, and this must go for the truth: and this they honor, and bow before
as the will of God; which being not the will of God, but a likeness of their
own inventing and forming, they worship not God, they honor not the Scriptures,
but they honor and worship the work of their own brain. And every Scripture
which man has thus formed a meaning out of, and has not read in the true and
living lights of Gods eternal spirit, he has made an image by, he has made an
idol of: and the respect and honor he gives this meaning, is not a respect and
honor given to God but to his own image, to his own idol. Oh how many are your
idols, ye Christians of England (as ye think your selves to be!) how many are
your idols, ye gathered Churches! how full of images and idols are ye, ye
spiritual Notionists, who have run from one thing to another, with the same
mind and spirit wherewith ye began at first! But the founder of images has
never been discovered and destroyed in you, and so he is still at work among
you all: and great will your sorrow and distress be, when the Lords quick eye
searches him out, and reveals his just wrath against him.

In my heart and soul I honor the Scriptures, and long to read them throughout
with the pure eye, and in the pure light of the living spirit of God: but the
Lord preserve me from reading one line of them in my own-will, or interpreting
any part of them according to my own understanding but only as I am guided, led
and enlightened by him, in the will and understanding which comes from him. And
here all Scripture, every writing of Gods spirit, which is from the breath of
his life, profitable to build up and perfect the man of God: but the
instructions, the reproofs, the observations, the rules, the grounds of hope
and comfort, (or whatever else) which man gathers out of the Scriptures, (he
himself being out of the life) have not the true profit, nor build not up the
true thing; but both the gatherings and the gatherer are for destruction. And
the Lord will ease the Scripture of the burden of man's formings and inventions
from it, and recover its honor again, by the living presence and power of that
spirit that wrote it: And then it shall be no longer abused and wrested by man's
earthly and unlearned mind, but in the hand of the spirit, come to its true use
and service to the seed, and to the world.

2. The true worship was lost.

The true worship of God in the Gospel, is in the spirit. The hour comes, and
now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit, and in
truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him, Joh. 4. 23. The true worship
is in the spirit, and in the truth, and the true worshippers worship there, and
such worshippers the Father seeks, and such worship he accepts: but all other
worship is false worship, and all other worshippers are false worshippers, such
worshippers as God seeks not, nor can accept their worship. Did God refuse
Cains sacrifice formerly, and can he accept any sacrifice, or worship now
that is offered in that nature? why, he that worships out of the spirit, he
worships in that nature. But he that worships aright, must have his nature
changed, and must worship in that thing wherein he is changed in that faith, in
that life, in that nature, in that spirit whereby and whereto he is changed.
For without being in this, and keeping in this, it is impossible to please God
in any thing. He that is the true worshipper is a believer, and in his worship
he must keep to his rule, the law of faith, the law of the spirit of life in
him, the law which he receives by faith fresh from the spirit of life
continually. He must heat and observe the voice of the living word in all his
worship, and worship in the presence and power and guidance of that, as that
moves and as that carries on, or it is not worship in the spirit. I shall
instance only in prayer. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in
the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18. Mark, all prayer and supplication must be in the
spirit, yea it must be always in the spirit, which speaks in the heart to God,
and makes the intercession, or is is no prayer. If a man speak never so much
from his own spirit, with never so much earnestness and affection, yet it is no
prayer, no true prayer, but only so far as the spirit moves to it, and so far
as the spirit leads and guids in it. If a man begin without the spirit, or go
on without the spirit, this is out of the worship; this is in his own will (and
so will worship) and according to his own understanding (and so fleshly
worship) both which are to be crucified, and not to be followed in any thing
under the Gospel. We are the Circumcision, which worship God in the spirit,
(here are the true worshippers, the circumcision; and here is the true worship,
in the spirit; and they have no bounds and limits in the flesh, wherein their
strength and confidence is broke) and have no confidence in the flesh. If a man
address himself to any worship of God without his spirit, has he not
confidence in the flesh? If he begin without the ving of his spirit, does he
not begin in the flesh? if he go on, without the spirits carrying on, does he
not proceed in the strength and confidence of the flesh? But the worship of the
spirit, is in its will, and in its time, and is carried on by its light and
power, and keeps down the understanding and affectionate part of man, wherein
all the world worship, and offer up the unaccepted sacrifices, even the lame
and the blind, which Gods soul hates.

Now this worship, as it is out of man's will and time, and in that which
continues, so it is continual. There is a continual praying unto God. There is
a continual blessing and praising of his name, in eating, or drinking, or what
ever else is done. There is a continual bowing to the majesty of the Lord in
every thought, in every word, in every action, though it be in worldly things
and occasions, yet the spirit of the Lord is seen there, and the tongue
confesses him there, and the knee boweth to him there: this is the true
worship. And this is the rest or sabbath wherein the true worshippers worship.
When the creation of God is finished, when the child is formed in the light;
and the life breathed into him, then God brings him forth into his holy Land,
where he keeps his Sabbath. They that are in the faith, which is the substance
of the things hoped for under the Law, are come from all the shadows and types
of the Law, and from all heathenish observation of days and times in the
spirit of this world, where the spirit of man is hard at work, into the true
Sabbath, into the true rest, where they have no more to work, but God works all
in them in his owntime, and according to his own pleasure. We which have
believed, do enter into rest, Ebr. 4. 3. and he that is entered into his rest,
has ceased from his works, as God from his, verse. 10. He that has the least
taste of faith, knows a measure of rest finding the life working in him, and
his soul daily led further and further into life by the working of the life,
and the heavy yoke of his own laboring after life taken of from his shoulders.
Now here is the truth, here is the life, here is the sabbath, here is the worship
of the soul that's led into the truth, and preserved in the truth.

But what is the worship now in the Apostasy?

Among the Papists a very gross worship, a worship more carnal then ever the
worship of the Law was: for that though in its nature it was outward and
carnal, yet it was taught and prescribed by the wisdom of God, and was
profitable in its place, and to its end: but this was invented by the corrupt
wisdom, and set up in the corrupt will of man, and has no true profit, but
keeps from the life, from the power, from the spirit in fleshly observations,
which feed and please the fleshly nature. Look upon their days consecrated to
Saints, and their canonical hours of Prayer, and their praying in an unknown
tongue, with their fastings, feastings, saying of Ave-Maries, Pater-nosters,
Creeds, etc. are not all these from the life, out of the spirit, and after the
invention, and in the will of the flesh? Ah their stink is greater then the
fleshpots of Egypt.

And the worship of the Protestants comes too near them: for their worship is
also from a fleshly principle, and in their own times, and wills, and according
to their own understanding and apprehension of things, and not from the rising
up and guidance of the infallible life of the spirit in them (for that they
will quench.) They also observe days, and times, and perishing ordinances, and
are not come out of the flesh into that spirit, where the worship is to be know
and to be in.

3. The Faith, the true faith was lost. The faith which gives victory over the
world; the faith which feeds the life of the just, and slayes the unjust; the
faith which is pure, the mystery whereof is held in a pure conscience; the
faith which gives entrance into the rest of God; the faith which is the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; this has
been lost, and is not yet to be found among those who go for Christians.

For those who challenge the name of Christians, and say they believe in
Christ, and have faith in him, cannot with their faith overcome the world, but
are daily overcome by the world. Where is there a Christian, but he is either
in the honors, or in the fashion, or in the customs, or in the worships of
the world, if not in them all? He is so far from overcoming these, that he is
overcome with them: yea so overcome, so drunk therewith, that he has even lost
his senses, and thinks he may be a Christian, and in a good state, while he is
there.

And the life of the just is not fed by their faith, but the unjust nature is
fed, and the righteous witness (which is raised up and lives by the true
faith) is kept down, and cannot bring forth his life in them, because of their
unbelife: for that is the proper name of their faith; for being not true faith,
it is not faith, but unbelief.

And the faith of Christians (so called) is not a mystery, (they know not the
mystery of it, which is held in a pure conscience) but consists in believing an
Historical relation, and in a fleshly improving of that, and can be held in an
impure conscience.

Neither are they entered into rest by their faith: for they know not the
Sabbath in the Lord, but are still in a shadowy Sabbarh.

Neither is it the substance of what they hope for, but the substance of what
they hope for is strange to them. They are not come to Mount Sion, to the City
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to the innumerable company of
Augels, to the general assembly and Church of the first born, to God the Judge,
Christ the Mediator, and the blood of sprinkling, and so to unity and certainty
in the life: but are in opinions, ways and practices suitable to the earthly
spirit which may easily be shaken, and must be shaken down to the ground, if
ever they know the building of God, and the true faith.

4. The love, the true love; the innocent love, which think no il, nor wishes
no ill, much less can do any il to any; but suffers long, and is kind, meek,
humble, not seeking its own, but the good of others, this love is lost. The
love unfeigned is banished, and a fained love, such a love as enmity and
violence proceeds from, is got in the place of it. The true love loves the
enemy, and cannot return enmity for enmity, but seeks the good of them who hate
it: but this love can persecute and hate that which it calls the friend, nay
the brother, because of some difference in opinion or practice. The love that
was in Christ, taught him to lay down his life for his sheep: and he that has
the same love, can lay down his life for his brother. But the love that is now
among Christians, tends rather to the taking away of life.

What is the love among the Papists? See their Inquisitions, their wraths,
their fire and faggot, etc.

What is their love in New England? is it not a love that can imprison or
banish their brother, if he differ but a little from them in judgment or
practice about their worship? yea they can whip, burn in the hand, cut off
ears, just like the Bishops of old England. If one had told them, when they
fled from the persecution of the Bishops here, that they themselves should have
done such things, they would have been apt to reply with Hazael, what, are we
dogs? But they fled from the Cross, which would have crucified that persecuting
spirit, and so carried it alive with them; and being alive, it grew by degrees
to as great an head there, as it did in the Bishops here.

And what is the love here in old England? is it not a love that whips, stocks,
imprisons, stones, jeeres? yea the very Teachers (which should be patterns of
love to others) they will cast into prison, and distrein the goods of their
brother, even almost to his undoing for maintenance, according to a Law of the
Land made in the Apostasy. See the Record of Sufferings for Tithes in England,
which may make any tender heart bleed to read it, and is like to lie as a brand
of infamy on the Magistracy and Ministry of England to succeeding generations.
Is this the love of the righteous seed? or is it Cains love which is in
profession, in word, in show; but not in deed and in truth? And how can these
love God? nay if the true love of God were in them, this enmity could not
stand, nor such fruits of it shoot forth. But they have not seen the father or
the Son, and that life of them which appears in the earth, the evil spirit in
man seeks to destroy, that he may keep up his own image and shadow of life,
which the nature of the true life (in its appearance) fights against. By this
shall all men know that ye are my Disciple, if ye love one another. And by this
may all men know, that those that now go for Christians are not Christ's
Disciples, in that they do not love one another. They are not in unity in the
light, and so cannot love one another there; but are only in unity in forms,
in opinions, in professions, in practices; so any difference there stirs up the
enmity, causing risings in the heart against them at least, if it proceed not
further. The true love grows from true union and fellowship in the light, where
that is not known, there cannot be true love in the spirit, but a fained love
in the flesh.

5. The true hope, joy, and peace is lost.

The true ground of hope, is Christ in the heart, and the true hope is that
hope which arises from this ground, from the feeling of Christ there, Christ
in you the hope of Glory, Col. 1. 27. What is the true Christians hope? it is
Christ in him, he has eternal life abiding in him, and he knows that cannot
but lead to glory. But what is the common Christians hope? He fastens his hope
upon the relation and his belief of an History. He that believes shall be
saved: I believe, therefore I shall be saved. And thus as he has got up a
wrong faith, and a wrong love, so he gets up a wrong hope. And this hope will
perish: for this is the hope of the Hypocrite, or an hope in the hypocritical
nature, which complies with Scripture-words, but is not in union with God, nor
with the life of the Scriptures; and so being without the anchor is tossed in
the waves of the Sea.

And the true joy is in he spirit, from what is felt, and enjoined, and hoped
for there. But the common Christians joy is from things which he gathers into,
and comprehends in his understanding, or from flashes which he feels in his
affectionate part, from a fire and sparks of his own kindling, from whence he
fetches his warmth and comfort.

And the true peace stands in the reconciliation with God, by having that
broken down which causes the wrath, and to which the wrath is, where ever it
is found. The Lamb of God breaks down the wall of separation in the heart, the
blood of Jesus (wherein is the life) cleanses away the sin there, makes the
heart pure, uniteth the pure heart to the pure God: here is union, here is
fellowship, here is peace. But the common Christians peace is from a
misunderstanding of Scriptures, while the wall of separation is standing,
while wickedness lodges in the heart. They reason themselves (from Scripture
words) into an apprehension that God is at peace with them, and that they are
in union with him, while that of God which is in them witnesses against them,
and checks them, and wars with them: and they are not one with it, nor cannot
be in that nature and understanding wherein their life lies, to which belongs
no peace.

6. The true repentance, conversion, and regeneration has been lost.

The true Repentance is from dead works, and from the dead principle whence all
the dead works proceed: but these have not been repented of; but perished in
the apostasy. The praying, the striving, the worshipping, the fighting has
been from the dead principle. The building up, and whole exercise of Religion
in the Apostasy, has been in that understanding which is to be destroyed: and
the will, which should have been crucified, has been pleased and fed with its
religion.

The true Conversion is from the power of Satan to God, from the darkness to
the light. But in the Apostasy men have not known God or Satan, the light or
the darkness, but have mistook, taking the one for the other, worshipping the
Devil in stead of God, Rev. 13. 4. and following the dark conceivings of their
own and other men's minds concerning scripture, and calling them light.

Regeneration is a changing of man, whereby the birth is born of the Spirit:
the stripping of the creature of its own nature, of its own understanding, of
its own will, and forming it anew in the womb of the Spirit: so that the old
creature is passed away, and there comes forth a new thing, which grows up
daily in the new life toward the fullness of Christ. But men have been so far
from being born of the spirit, that they have not so much as known the gift of
the spirit in them; but to this day are enemies, and at a distance from that of
God in them which is pure. And if they could but open their eyes, they would
see that their birth is fleshly, and consists (at best) but in such a
conformity to the letter, as the old nature may imitate and attain: but the
immortal seed is not sprung up in them, nor they dead to the mortal, or alive
to the immortal.

7. The true wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption is lost.

The true wisdom stands in the fear of God and departing from evil: This, those
that are taught of God learn, and thereby are made wise unto salvation. But
most that are called Christians, are not come to the fear of God, and many are
got above it, looking upon it as legal, and not appertaining to the Gospel;
but the Gospel state is love, which casts out fear. Does the love of God
refuse, or cast out the fear of God? Nay it casts out the fear that, brings
bondage, the fear that came in by transgression, which fear is stirred up and
discovered by the Law. And this is a fear of sin, or a fear arising from sin,
through the Law's manifestation of it, and the wrath against it, which causes
both the fear, and much bondage from the fear: And this the Gospel (which
discovers the love, the mercy, the grace, the power, and unites to them) frees
from and casts out. But then there is a fear of God, a fear wrought in the
heart by his spirit, a fear which is part of the new Covenant, (I will put my
fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me) a fear which is part
of the everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14. 6, 7. and endures for ever, Psalm. 19. 9.
And this fear is not bondage, but liberty; it is indeed bondage to the unjust,
but liberty to the just: for where this fear is, sin is departed from; it sets
free, it delivers the feet out of the snare of iniquity: there is true liberty.
Can sin prevail in that heart, where the pure clean fear of God is placed by
God to keep it down? The love of God does not cast out this fear, but keeps in
this fear: and this fear keeps the heart clean from the evil which defiles, and
preserves the love from the enmity, which springs up where this fear is not.
Now this fear in the Apostasy was lost, or else what needed there an especial
ministry to be raised up to preach it again, Rev. 14. 6. 7? And the estate of
Christians every where does manifest this loss, for their hearts are not kept
clean, which shows that the fear, (which does keep clean, where it is) is
wanting in them. There Is pollution, there is filth, there is deceit, there is
high-mindedness, self-conceitedness, and love of the world and worldly
vanities, and many other evils to be found in the hearts of those that go for
Christians; and the purity of heart (which comes from the fear, and stands in
the wisdom) is not known They are wise to do evil, but want the knowledge to
avoid the evil, and do the good: They are wise to get and enjoy the world, but
know not the true riches: They are wise to gather together many Scripture-words
against sin, and yet still keep the nature and life of it in the heart, and it
as a sweet morsel under the tongue: They are wise to apply promises to comfort
themselves with (when sometimes they receive a just wound in their hearts from
the righteous one) but know not that nature, or that estate and condition to
which all the promises are made, but are yet in that nature, and in that estate
and condition to which the curse appertains.

The true righeousnesse stands in the faith, in hearing and obeying the word of
faith. How comes the righteousness of the law, but by hearing and obeying the
voice of the Law? And how comes the righteousness of the Gospel, but by
hearing and obeying the word of faith, who is preached, and the Preacher of
righteousness in the heart? The Apostle Paul makes this comparison, Romans 10.
The righteousness of the Law speaks on this wise, The man that does those
things, shall live in them: But how speaks the word of faith? The word is
nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, he that does that, he that hears
that, shall live in that. The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. Disobedience
to the Law is unrighteousness, and brings death; and disobedience to the
living word is unrighteousness, and cannot be justified, but condemned: and
obedience to it cannot be condemned, but justified: So that when the soul
hears, believes, and obeyes, then it is justified: then its former sins are
forgotten, and this is imputed to it unto righteousness. But when the soul
will not hear, will not believe, will not obey; this unbelief is judged in him,
and his sins retained, and not remitted. Now is not this a just and equal way
of justification, O ye sons of men? is not your way unequal? shall a man
continue in the unbelief and rebellion against Christ, against the light,
against the faith; and yet be justified by Christ, by the light, by the faith?
This cannot be, Gods way of imputation will stand; but man's invented way of
imputation, which sprung up in the Apostasy, will not stand. If we walk in the
light, as he is in the light; the blood cleanses, but not otherwise. If we walk
after the spirit, and not after the flesh, there is no condemnation, and not
otherwise. The true Baptism is the plunging down of the old thing, with all its
filth; and the raising up of a new thing: and it is the new thing, the
circumcision, the baptism which is justified. God justifies his Son, and man
only so far as he is bound in his Son.

The true sanctification consists in the growth of the seed, and its spreading
(like a leaven) over the heart, and over the whole man. By faith Christ is
formed in the heart, the hidden man in the mystery is formed there: and as this
seed, this leaven, this man grows; so he makes the man holy in whom he grows.
The seed of life, the Kingdom of heaven is an holy thing; and as it grows and
spreads, it purges out the old leaven, and makes the lump new. But now, in
Christians that have grown up in the Apostasy, this seed is not known, this
leaven is not so much as discerned; but their holiness consists in a
conformity to rules of Scripture, received into the old heart and
understanding. And what a noise has this made in the world, all this night of
the Apostasy, as if this were the heir, and should inherit the Kingdom: Nay,
nay, The heir has appeared (by whose presence it is seen, that this is not the
heir) and ye shall not be able to kill him, but he shall live to enjoy his
inheritance, and the inheritance shall not be yours.

Redemption consists in being bought, by the price of the life, out of sin, out
of death, out of the earth, out of the power of the devil. It is a casting off
the strong man out of the heart (with all that he brought in) and a delivering
from his power. It is a dissolving of the work of sin, which the Devil has
wrought in the heart, and a setting the soul (which is immortal) at liberty;
free from sin, and free unto righteousness: this is the true Redemption. But
this redemption in the Apostasy is a fained redemption; wherein salvation from
sin, and the Devil, and his power, is not felt: but the strong man is still in
the heart, and keeps the soul in death, and brings forth fruits of death daily.

The Christians formerly (in the first day of the breaking forth of Gods power)
had Christ in them, the living word; opened their hearts to him, received him
in, felt him there, sound him made of God to them their wisdom, their
righteousness, their sanctification, their redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. They had
the thing that these words signify, and speak of, and knew the meaning of the
words by feeling of the thing. But Christians now, in the Apostasy, have got
several apprehensions from the words, without feeling the thing the words speak
of, and there lies their Religion. And now the true heir being come, holding
forth the thing they have been all talking of, all Sects upon the earth are mad
against him, and would fain kill him. They would not have the living substance
(which is the heir) live, and nothing be esteemed life but that; but they would
have their dead apprehensions from the words live, and their dead forms and
practices owned: and the heir of life must come in their way, in the way that
they have hoped and waited for him, or they will not own him. Awake, awake, O
ye Sons of the Apostasy, and of the night, rise up out of the fleshly wisdom,
out of the dead fleshly interpretations of Scriptures, out of the dead invented
forms of worship, and bow to the Heir, kiss the Son, lest ye feel the force of
that dreadful sentence, Those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. For of a truth the great
Prophet is arisen, and speaks in the heart, and his sheep hear his voice (there
are many faithful witnesses thereof) and he that will not hear his voice, must
be cut off; there is no avoiding of it: for the two-edged sword is in his hand,
and he will cut down the transgressor.

8. The Church, the true Church was lost.

The true Church was a company gathered out of the world into God, begotten of
and gathered into his life, by the living word, and so had a true place and
habitation in God. The Apostle Paul writing to the Thessalonians, styles them a
Church in God. A Church under the Gospel is made up of true Israelites,
gathered out of their own spirits and natures, into the measure of the spirit
of God in them, as Christ was into the fullness. They are such as are begotten
of God, born of his spirit, led by him out of Egypt, through the wilderness to
Sion the holy mount, there they meet with the elect precious corner stone which
is laid in Sion, and they being living stones are built upon it into Jerusalem
the holy City, 1 Pet 2. 5, 6. Ebr. 12. 22. This is the true Church. Every one
that believes in Christ, is a living stone, and being a living stone, he is
laid upon the living foundation, and so is a part of the building in the Temple
of the living God. Yea his body and and spirit being cleansed, he himself is a
Temple wherein God dwells, appears, and is worshipped. And the gathering of any
of these together at any time in the life, in the name of Christ, is a larger
Temple, and such a Temple as Christ never fails to be in the midst of. But the
great Temple, the full Church is the general assembly of the firstborn. This is
the unerring pillar and ground of truth. This always bare up truth, truth
never failed here; but when it was at any time lost in the world, it might from
hence be recovered again when God pleased, and as far as he pleased. Indeed the
Law of the Lord has always gone forth from this Sion, and the living word
from this Jerusalem:

But what has the Church been in the Apostasy? a building of stone, say some:
and that not only among Papists, but here in England also, many have called
the old Mass-house a Church, a Temple, the house of God, pleading for it to be
a holy place; and have showed it by their practices, keeping off their hats
while they were in it.

Others say, not the stone building, but the people that meet there, is the
Church: whereof many are openly profane, yea so far from being gathered into
the spirit, and so ignorant of his motions, that they are ready to scoff, if
they hear a man speak of being moved by the spirit. What are these? are these
living stones, whereupon the true Church alone can be built? are these children
of the day? Nay these are children of the night, children brought up in the
Apostasy from the true light, the true life, the true rule of Christianity, the
true worship, the true faith, the true love, etc. and so are dead stones in
that building, but not true living stones in Gods building.

Other sorts separate from these, and gather Congregations out of these; but
still in the same spirit, in the same nature, being not themselves gathered out
of the Apostasy from the spirit, into the spirit again; and so they build but
with the same stones as were in the old building, and not with the new and
living stones, and so are but a more refined appearance of a Church, but not a
true Church. Not a Church in God, and by the gathering of his spirit; but of
their own gathering, after a form, according as they have imagined from their
reading and studying of the Scriptures,

9. (Which may be the last instance) The Ministry, the true Ministry has been
lost.

The true Ministry was a ministry made and appointed by the spirit, by the gift
of the Spirit bestowed on them, and by the spirit sending of them, and
appointing them to their work. Christ bid his Apostles and Disciples wait at
Jerusalem for the promise of the spirit; and when he had given them the spirit,
he gave them to the Church for the work of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. Act.
20. 28. And if none can be a member of the true Church, but by being begotten
out of death into life by the spirit, surely none can be able to minister to
him who is so begotten, but by the same spirit. So these receiving their
Ministry of the Lord Jesus, Act. 20. 24. and the gift of the spirit from him,
they were made able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter, but of
the spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. They were able in God, to minister from his spirit to
the spirits of his people. And they did not minister a literal knowledge of
things to the understanding of man: but they led men to the spirit of God, and
ministered spiritual things to that spiritual understanding which was given them
of God. Neither did they make use of their own wisdom and art, to tickle the
natural ear; but spoke to the conscience, with the demonstration of the spirit,
in the sight of God, as it pleased the spirit to give them utterance.

But how have Ministers been made in the Apostasy; By orders from men, set up
in their own wills, after their own inventions. And how have they been
qualified, but by humane arts and languages, which have been of high esteem in
that which men call the Church, since the language and skill of the spirit of
God has been lost; God (who chose in his own Church) does not choose here, who
shall be his Ministers; but any man can appoint his Son to be a Minister, if he
will but educate him in learning, and send him to the University, and so bring
him into that way of order wherein men make Ministers: and then he is able to
minister unto man, the things of man, according to human skill. And this in the
dark night of apostasy, must go for a true call to the ministry of God. Indeed
they are as true Ministers, as the Church is to which they minister: but they
never were, nor never can be thus made Ministers of the Church of God: but as
God alone can form and build his Church, so he alone can fit and appoint the
Ministers thereof. And though others, having seen the grossenes of this, make
their ministers by a call in their Church, yet neither is that out of the
apostasy, but only a striving of man to get out of it, which man cannot
possibly do, till he meet with the spirit of God to lead out of it. So that
that Ministry also is but an invention of man made by man, and comes not from
the spirit, nor is able to minister spirit to the spirit.

Object. But has there been no true Religion since the days of the Apostes?
no true rule, no true worship, no true faith, no true love, no true hope joy or
peace, no true repentance, conversion and regeneration, no true wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, no true Church, no true Ministry?
What has become of all our forefathers? did they all perish? And has not
this ministry converted many to God? were not ye your selves converted by it?
Nay have not many of them been Martyrs, and witnessed to the truth of God? And
though some of them are bad, yet are not many of them zealous and conscientious
Preachers of the Word at this day? By such reasonings as these, the wisdom of
man much strengthens and hardens it self against the truth.

Answ. The rule in Nations, the worship in Nations, the faith, love, hope, joy,
peace, repentance, conversion, regeneration, etc. which have been cried up in
Nations for the truth, the Churches in Nations, the Ministry in Nations; all
these have been corrupted, and never recovered their true state to this day.
There have been changes from one thing to another, but the restoration has
not been known. The whorish spirit has been hunted and puriued, and so run out
of one form into another, traversing her way, and changing her ground and
garments, but has not been taken and judged to the death: and the true spirit
has not been able to find the bed of her husband, but has wandered from
mountain to hill, all the time of this cloudy and dark day, forgetting her
resting place.

Yet, though the whole earth was corrupted, and false doctrine and worship set
up every where among the Nations, which continued the fornication and whoredom
from the spirit of life in the public ways and national worships;
notwithstanding this, even all this while God reserved a seed to himself,
which he caused to spring up in a remnant, and which he moved and carried on to
witness against somewhat of these corruptions, in their several ages and
generations. And as fast as the beast killed and knocked down these, God raised
up more: yea though the whorish spirit, in some Nations, painted her self
curioussy, leaving some of the gross Doctrines and Worships of Popery, and got
into a more refined way: yet God raised up witnesses against her there also,
and still does into what form soever she gets: for though of late she has
decked her self very pleasingly, as she think, and covered her self round with
scripture-words and professions, and practices as like as ever she can form
them to the practices of former Saints, yet quick and lively is the spirit of
God that searches after her, who has found her out, and raised up witnesses
against her there also.

Now this seed, this remnant, though they were not able to recover the
possession of the life and power that was lost, yet they had a true taste of
it, and their testimony which they gave out from that taste, was true: and so
far as they kept to this testimony, in the faith and in the patience which they
had learned and received from God, (though but in a low measure) they were
accepted of him. So that all were not lost in this night of darkness, but such
as feared God, and knew and hearkened to his voice, had the testimony of his
presence with them, and tasted of his life and power in measure: God was not an
hard master to them, but tender and gentle, and contented to reap what he
sowed. But the appearance of God, in this dark time was weak, and low, and
easy to be made a prey of. And this is very observable, that so long as the
simplicity ran pure it was preserved, but so soon as ever the spirit of man was
tempted either into any old, or into any new invented form, the wisdom of the
flesh got in with it, grew up more than it, and when it had gathered strength,
corrupted the vessel, betrayed the simplicity, and lost the life. Thus many
precious beginnings and buddings forth of life, have been betrayed in these
late days. There was a precious thing stirring in Queen Mary's days, the life
whereof was more hurt, and suppressed, by that dead form of Episcopacy,
succeeding afterward, then by the foregoing persecution. The persecution did
clear and brighten it, but the fleshly form of Episcopacy brought death over
it. And the forms of Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptism, have been little
less then graves to bury and keep down the life. How many spirits, that had a
precious savor in them at their entrance into those forms, did soon become
fleshly, earthly, and very unsavory, loosing the quickness and freshness that
was in them before, and falling into the deadness of the form, withering with
it.

And as touching the Ministry, though in it self it was evil, being in the
degeneration from the true Ministry, all this time of the Apostasy; and the
persons therein for the most very corrupt, being brought up to it as to a
trade, and making use of it as a trade: yet I do believe that there was a
simplicity of heart in some persons among them, which did cause them in some
degree of faithfulness, to seek the Lord, his service, and the good of souls.
And in the time of ignorance and darkness, it pleased God to wink at, and
overlook the evil; and to cause good to pass from the good in them to the
good in others, through the evil that hung about both. And this was the great
tenderness of the Lord, in pity to his poor creatures (who were very destitute
to help in the thick night of darkness) and should not now be made use of to
justify and keep up the evil. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people
and unkind? Because his mercy and goodness extended to you notwithstanding the
evil (which might have hindered) will ye make that an argument to keep up the
evil, and to oppose the light which discovers it? Because God causes light to
shine through the darkness, and visits man in the dark, will ye therefore set
up the darkness as his proper way of ministration? The corrupt way, call, and
exercise of the corrupt ministry, could not keep out the tender love of God,
but he had respect to the simplicity of some who were found in it, and to the
simplicity of others who waited on him for instruction there, and did please to
give some answer to both. And will ye make this uningenious use of it, to
interpret it as his approbation of that ministry, which sprung up in the
Apostasy from him, among those that were apostatised, and is a great dishonor
to him, and the abhorring of his soul? A ministry of Christ, a ministry set up
by his spirit is precious; but a ministry made by man, according to his will,
and ministering in his wisdom, the soul of the Lord bears as a burden, and is
pressed with it; and as he raises up his own life, will ease himself of it. And
what do they minister from, but the literal part of the Scriptures, which
kills and cannot give life? and what do they minister with, but their own
understanding part? what meanings they can invent, what deductions the wisdom
can draw from the Scriptures, but do not see the true meaning in the infallible
and unerring light: and what do they minister to, but the understanding part in
you? whereas there is somewhat else to be ministered to by the true Minister;
and what do they minister to you, but food for the understanding, food for the
serpentine wisdom, which always fed upon knowledge, but never upon the true
bread? and hereby another thing is fed in you, and not your souls, but they are
kept in leanness and barrenness, under death and the bondage of corruption
(which Paul cried out upon as a wretched state, and could find no ease, rest,
or freedom from condemnation there) and without the true life and redemption. I
do do not deny but ye may there meet with some kind of warmth in the
affectionate part, which may be heated by a fire and sparks of man's kindling
and blowing up, and this may go for life with you now: but in the presence of
the truth, where the eye is opened, it vanishes: yea the spirit of the Lord
has so blown upon it, that it is even withered in the sight of a more
inferior eye in many people.

Position III.
THat there is to be a recovery, a true recovery out of this state of Apostasy,
into the true state of Christianity again.

God will not let the desolations of Sion remain for ever, but he will again
build up Sion, and appear in his glory. He will set his King upon his holy hill
of Sion. The new Jerusalem shall again come down from heaven. The Man-child
which was taken up, shall come down again conquering and to conquer, and the
Lamb shall get the victory over the Whore, and over all her apostatized Nations
and Churches, that have a name and not the life; and he shall rule them with a
rod of iron, and make them a desolation which have made his holy city desolate,
and trample them down which have trampled upon it. The lofty City he will lay
low, he will lay it low, even to the ground, he will bring it even to the dust:
The foot shall tread it down, the feet of the poor, the steps of the needy. The
whore shall be judged, with the beast whereupon she rode: the life, which they
trod upon, shall rise up in the mighty power of the Lord, and over-turn them.
The everlasting Gospel shall be again preached to them that dwell on the earth,
and to every Nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, Rev. 14. 6. Mark, the
Gospel that was preached to the Nations, all the time of the Apostasy, was not
the everlasting Gospel, that Gospel did not bring life and immortality to life,
but they were hid from men's eyes, and men had only a sound of words in stead of
the thing: And thus poor Nations, kindreds, people, tongues, were every where
bewitched with a form of things, with an outward knowledge, a perishing knowledge
in the perishing part, a vain traditional invented worship, which stands in the
wisdom and will of man, but had no union and fellowship with that which is
everlasting. And thus all the Nations in the smoke of the bottomless pit, run
into the pit from whence the smoke came. But the Lord has a time to pity the
poor Nations, and to send forth his true everlasting Gospel again, to deliver
the Nations from that witchery, and sorcery, and spiritual enchantment which
got up in the dark. And as this everlasting light springs up, then down goes
Babylon, down go all invented doctrines, all invented forms, all invented
worships, and that wisdom and evil spirit that raised them up. Babylon is
fallen, is fallen, that great City, because she made all Nations drunk of the
wine of the cup of her fornication, Rev. 14. 1, And now the new wine of the
kingdom, which is tasted of in the everlasting Gospel, purges out the old wine;
and the drunkenness, which thereby came upon the Nations, wastes. And they that
have tasted of this life, and know this life, can never be bewitched back
again, by the whorish spirit, to dead forms and likenesses without life: Nay,
when Babylon falls, she can rise no more. Though the life fall often, it can
rise again; but when the witchery from the life is discovered and cast into the
pit, it can get out no more. Indeed the beast has had all the strength of the
Nations, and the whore has had all the wisdom, all the esteem, all the honor:
who can make war with the beast? who can show miracles and wonders like the
false Prophets? who can teach but the wise, learned, orthodox men, that have
the arts, and know the original? yea there is another that can make war, and a
Prophet, that can preach better then them, one that can preach life, one that
can preach the everlasting Gospel, and knows the original of it, one that is
wiser and stronger then the whore, and by his wisdom and strength is able to
judge her, and cast her out of the Nations, though she has got very strong
possession, Rev. 18. 8. Now learn wisdom, know the parable of the fig tree,
come to the life that is arisen, and abide not in the death, that is passed,
and passing away. Ye have heard the voice of the Whore, ye have drunk of her
cup, ye have been bewitched, ye have set up her inventions, but have wanted the
thing which cannot be invented, and which the inventing understanding cannot
comprehend. But if the force of the wine still remain upon you, so that ye
cannot hearken after, or let in that which is everlasting, assure your selves,
as the life rises, ye will meet with plagues and wrath from it, in stead of the
refreshments it brins to others, and know what it is to sit down under a dead
talk of, without feeling the living power of redemption. Therefore be wise, and
know the times and seasons. That will not be born with now, which was born with
formerly: but as the love and power of God to salvation has more appeared, so
the severity against those who now resist, will appear more also: And death
shall have its sting, which they that will love darkness and hate the light,
shall feel,

Position IV.
THat they that are in those things which have been set up in the times of the
Apostasy, are not yet come to the recovery from the Apostasy.

They that are in the Doctrines, and bodies of Divinity, which have been formed
since, are not in the true Doctrine.

They that are in the rules of life which wise Churchmen, or Synods, or
Councils have given, or which they themselves have gathered by their industry
out of the Scriptures, are not in the true, living and everlasting rule. They
that are in the worship, or under the Ministry, or of any Church which has
been set up since by the power of man, or from the inventing wisdom (though
this wisdom has founded its inventions upon the Scriptures) are not in the
true worship, in the true Church, or under the true Ministry. They that are in
the faith, which has since been gathered into the understanding, and did not
spring up from the mystery of life, in the heart, are not in the true faith.
The same may be said of love, hope, joy, peace, and all the rest mentioned
before, yea and all other things in religion, for all has been corrupted, even
the inward part. And while here has been a great contention about forms of
worship, and Church Government, the power of godliness, and the Government of
Christ in the heart has been lost.

Observe diligently what I have now to say. When the Apostles, who had the true
Ministry, preached the Gospel, they stirred and raised up the power of God in
the heart, and the power of sin, corruption and deceit sunk down, and was under
foot, and trampled upon by the power. But when Antichrist and the false
Prophets arose, they raised up the corruption again, and fed it with doctrines
of deceit, but the power sunk down, and was not felt, but buried all that time
of the prevailing of the corruption and deceit. Now the power was not lost all
this while in it self, but only lost to man, so that he knew not where to find
it. Yet this power in this time of loss did stir and move, and make men in some
degree sensible of the loss, causing them to part and seek after the living
truth. And this was good, this was of God. But then there was an evil spirit,
which was near to the good, and lay lurking in the serpentine wisdom of the
heart, and that drew the mind (which was bent toward the seeking of a right
thing) a wrong way, that cried lo here, lo there; look into the Scriptures,
the Church was so and so; go get into such a thing: the Christians there did so
and so, go do such a thing: there is the way, there thou shall meet with the
life and the power. And thus it drew from that which stirred within, into an
imitation of a form without, and there they came to a loss. I dare appeal to
all honest hearts, Was there not a good thing stirring in you, when ye went
into your Church forms? were ye not led into simplicity, hoping to meet with
life and power there? did ye find it so? did ye meet with the life and power
there? nay did ye not lose it there, and become deader? I know, if ye have not
forgotten the taste of life, ye will confess to me, that that which now ye
have is not life, but far short of that which ye had, when ye entered into your
form. Ah poor hearts, the whore betwitched you, the harlot in your bosoms, and
the false Prophets without, helped to increase the witchery, crying lo here and
lo there, but ye knew no that the kingdom of heaven was within, from whence
that stirring of life was in you, where ye should have kept, and not have gone
forth. But now ye are dead and buried in your graves, lying there without sense
and are now got into the spirit of the world, and into the enmity against that
life in others, which was then your own life. And do ye know where ye are, and
what ye are doing? Can ye bear to hear it?

Of a truth ye are in the snare of the enemy, in the enchantment from the life,
in the whores bed, in the strumpets bosom, and not in the bosom of your
beloved. And your practices are branches of the sornication, parcels of the
whoredom, inventions which have been gathered in by that understanding, and set
up by that will which whored from God. They are the effects and products of the
whores cup, which gets new dresses, new habits, new forms, new ways to cosen
and deceive the simple with; but still she remains the whore, and those who are
seduced by her, are led into her whoredom. For when God discovers and hunts her
out of one form, then she decks her self with another, perhaps more seemingly
spiritual, more Scripture like, and so more likely to take with the simple
heart: and then she lies in wait for the young man to entrap him again, saying,
Come in hither, This is the true way of God without doubt; did not the Saints
meet with life here formerly? Come thou hither also, here is the bed of thy
beloved, take thy fill of life, thy fill of love. And thus the poor honest
simple heart follows her, going like a fool to the correction of the stocks
not knowing that it is for his life, until he come to feel the loss of life.
And there if she find she cannot keep him there, but fresh stirrings of life
spring up in him again, and withdraw him from that which had deceived him, then
she paints again, and lies in wait for him again, to catch him in some more
refined appearance, or in some elevated notion, or at least in the shadow of
that which was true: for the whore has not only art and power to invent forms
and likenesses of that which is true, and make Idols and Images of them: but it
has power also given it over the outward Court, so that that which is found
there, it can make idols and images of. That which is corruptible, it can get
into and corrupt, and make an enemy to that life, which lived in it before it
was corrupted: and when it is corrupted, then there is no more truth or life to
be found there, but the Idol, and the idolatry.

The Apostle John who forewarned of Antichrist, and gave a mark whereby he
might be known, namely by his not confessing Christ come in the flesh, 1 John
4. 3. (which he that sets up any thing of the old Covenant, or any invention
or imitation of any thing therein, does not) he bids also beware of Idols.
Little Children, keep your selves from Idols, 1 John 5. 21. Now what is an
Idol? The Apostle Paul says, An Idol is nothing in the world. An Idol is no
true thing in its place, but a false thing set up in stead of the true. A false
conception of God in the mind, is an Idol. A false Church or Temple, is an
Idol: a false Minister, who is not made according to the appointment of God,
and by the gift of his Spirit, but came in another way, by the appointment of
men, is an Idol-shepherd: and the worship in this Church, and by this ministry,
is public Idolatry; and all the worship in families, which has been erected
after the same manner, is without the guidance of the spirit of God, is private
Idolatry. Were the heathens Temples, Altars, Priests, Sacrifices, and other
inventions of theirs (in imitation of the Jews) Idolatrous? and are not the
inventions of the heathenish spirit, or Antichristian nature in man, are not
they also Idolatrous?

Object. But is praying Idolatry, preaching Idolatry, singing Idolatry,
Baptising of Infants Idolatry, breaking of bread Idolatry?

Answ. The praying which God appointed is not Idolatry. Praying in the Spirit
of God, when he moves, and according to the will of God, which is only known
in the Spitit, is not Idolatry; but thy praying in thine own spirit, and at
thine own times, and according to thine own will (perhaps in way of imitation of
the Jewish morning and evening Sacrifices) this is Idolatry. This is that which
thou have set up, in stead of that which God set up, and so it is not the true
thing which God set up, but an Idol of thine own making: and so thou
worshippest not God therein, but that spirit which helped thee to invent and
set up the Idol. The same might be said concerning preaching, singing, washing
with water, breaking of bread, and what ever else is practiced in Religion upon
these terms.

Object. But does not the Scripture mention these things? and did not the
Saints practice these things? surely they were not Idolaters. Can I be an
Idolater in practicing that which they practiced?

Answ. Nay, thou art mistaken; they are not the things which they practiced.
The stress of their Religion lay in the life of it, in the presence of the
spirit of God in it: it was his breath made it the truth. Now if thou could
have the same things that they had, yet without the same living breath, they
would be but dead things, but Idols. But thou have not the true form of things
neither, thou have not the true Church, the true Ministry, the true Ordinances
according to the form, but things set up in their stead, by the invention of
man, in the time of the Apostasy from the true things, and what can these be,
but Idols;

The world wondered after the beast, and they worshipped the Dragon which gave
power unto the beast, and they worshipped the beast, Rev. 13. 3, 4. Behold what
was worshipped at the time of the Apostasy! That which arose from the beastly
invention of man, and not from the true spirit of life. And the inventing and
setting up of these, and worshipping according to these inventions, is
worshipping the Dragon, (for he gets in and lodges in man's inventions) and
not the living God. And therefore God, at the end of this Apostasy, raises up a
new ministry to recall the Nations from worshipping the Dragon, to the worship
of God again, ver. 6. 7. of that Chapter, What the Gentiles sacrificed of old,
they sacrificed to Devils, and not to God, 1 Cor. 10. 20. And what the late
Gentiles sacrifice, (I mean Christians in the heathenish nature, Christians to
whom the outward court was given, Rev. 11. 2. and who have not a profession of
the Saints words and practices, but without life) they sacrifice not to God
neither, but to that spirit that helped them to invent, and form a likeness or
image of the truth. Transgressing the principle of God within, they go from
God, and from his worship; and the Devil (who went out from the truth) gets in,
and they go into his power, and whatever they perform, in worship there, is to
him: for when they go from the principle of God in them, the Devil gets into
their hearts, and God goes out, and his true life, power and worship is not
known, but an image or likeness which the Devil sets up in stead of the true
thing. So then, in that state, let men consider what they worship: for there
they cry up ordinancies and duties, and kill one another about them, thinking
that they worship and honor God thereby; but know not, nor are come to that
wherein God alone can be worshipped and honored.

I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, says the
spirit, Rev. 2. 9. is this blasphemy? For a man to call himself a Christian,
who is not, what is that? to call that a Church which is not, what is that? to
call him a Minister of Christ, who is not, what is that? to call those the
Ordinances of Christ which are not, what is that? to call that faith which is
not, that justification which is not, etc. what is that? Can ye spy out the
blasphemer? ye have made a great outcry against him long, are ye willing now
he should be put to death? The Lord has lighted his candle, he is searching
for him, and he will find him out: and as he have desired, so it shall be; the
Lord will not spare him. O be awakened, be awakened, ye heathenish Christians;
Open the eye that can see, and behold where ye are, and what ye are doing, and
how fast ye are running into the pit. Ye have forgotten God, ye have lost the
true line of judgment, ye have lost the key of knowledge, and the light that is
in you is darkness, and leads to darkness, though ye cannot possibly believe
it. Oh come back to the remembrance of God, and and to true holiness (without
which no man shall see him: for the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all
the Nations that forget God, and ye have forgotten him days without number.

Position V.
THat the only way of recovery out of the Apostasy, is by returning to, and
keeping in that spirit, from which the Apostasy was.

The Apostasy came by leaving the spirit of God, and running after another
spirit: and the recovery must be by leaving that other Spirit, and returning to
the spirit of God again. How did Christians formerly begin their Religion? They
began in the Spirit, Gal, 3. 3. and so they were to go on to perfection, and
not intermix any thing of the flesh. And had the anointing been kept to,
Antichrist and the mystery of iniquity had been kept out; and where that is
returned to, the Antichristian spirit is purged out by degrees, and the ways
thereof discovered and forsaken. Therefore know the whorish Spirit in thy self,
which is busy to form likenesses in thy mind to seduce thee, and to make thee
fall in love with the likenesses which she has formed in other men's minds: and
let her not deceive thee with her paint and gaudy appearances: but know
likewise the little seed of life, from which truth springs up in thee, and in
which the spirit of truth dwells, and is to be found; and take heed least the
serpentine wisdom teach thee to despise and turn from it. From this spring it
was that truth sprung up in the witnesses, all the time of the Apostasy: for
they had their testimony from the spirit of Prophecy, Rev. 19. 10. So far as
they kept to that, they gave a true testimony: so far as their own spirits
mixed with it, they corrupted it. But to abide in that was very hard, and there
was need of much affliction and persecution to keep the flesh down, and to
preserve the life pure. But as the life springs up more strongly, and overcomes
that spirit inwardly, (I mean the wise, fleshly spirit) there will be less need
of outward afflictions or persecutions, yea or inward either; but there will be
a safe entrance into, and abiding in the joy, the rest, the peace, where the
whore within (which seduced from the life, where the power is, into some form,
where the power is not) is burnt. Learn then, and know in thy self that spirit
of prophesy, which spoke in all the Martyrs. Hear that, come to that, keep to
that: feel the union, the fellowship, the spreading of that in thee. When that
bids thee go, go* when that bids thee come, come: when that bids thee do this,
do it. But the flesh is grown strong, and strongly resists this spirit, both
inwardly and outwardly; and will not suffer him to rise up in the heart, or to
rise up in the Nation: but at any time when he stirs, and offers to speak,
or lead to God; there is a reason rises up in the fleshly wisdom, that knocks
him down, and denies his voice, and hearkens to another voice in stead of his.
Thus they first give way to the fleshly wisdom, and suppress the truth in
themselves, and then they would go forth and suppress it in others: and they
think them mad, and their rage rises against them, where the truth is suffered
to grow, and man's reason or fleshly wisdom denied. And thus is the Lord of
Glory evil entreated, and slain at this day by this generation of Christians,
as he was by the Jews slain formerly in the Prophets, in that his appearance
in a fleshly form, and in his Apostles: and his blood will be required; for the
earth shall not always drink it up and cover it, nor the adulterous woman be
always able to wipe her mouth, and say she has done no wickedness. Ye have
saved alive the unjust, and killed the just. The murdering nature is alive in
you, O ye Christians, but the holy one is slain, and lies buried in your
graves: and ye have painted your graves, and speak good words of him, but still
keep him down, and let another rise up and live in you. Ye cry up that
appearance of Christ in the flesh, and the words he then spoke, and the words
of his Apostles, and think that if he had lived in those days, ye would not
have killed either him or his Apostles, and yet ye resist and oppose the same
life in your selves and in others, with such a kind of wisdom in the letter, as
the Pharisees had. O what will ye do! the uncircumcised ear is got up in you,
and ye cannot hear; and the uncumcised heart, and ye cannot understand; but
when this is told you, ye despise, and wonder, and go on in the perishing
state. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my bowels! O England, England, thou
that killedst the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, thou that persecutedst the
nonconformists afterward, that thou would not suffer the people of God to
meet together, to seek him with an honest heart, but would confine them, to
thy gross formal ways of worship? Though the Lord has appeared and broken the
horns of the Oppressors, yet the persecuting spirit is not broken in thee, but
thou still huntest after the precious life of the seed, and would not let it
spring up in the Nation. The spirit of enmity is still up in thee, which knows
not the Lord of life, but by a natural instinct opposes him, and would fain
keep up some grave or other, it cares not what, so it might but thereby keep
down the life: for thou can now bear with any form, and cherish it: and thy
only enmity is against those, who are sent by the Lord, to gather out of all
forms into the life. How often would the Lord have gathered thee, but thou
would not! and yet seeks to gather thee, but still thou will not; but as if
the former laws, made in Queen Mary's days, were not sufficient, desire new
laws to ensnare and entangle the innocent! What will become of thee! or what will
thou say to the Lord, when he arises to plead the cause of the innocent? for
that Spirit, which he raised up to witness against the whorish spirit, (which
lies hid in thy forms of worship and religion, and appears in all thy Laws,
Councils and ways of Government, so far as they formed, and so far as they are
guided by the wisdom of the flesh) is innocent: even as that spirit, which
witnessed formerly against Popety and Episopacy, was innocent before the Lord,
though accused by them as guilty of error in it self, and of disturbance to the
public peace, as this is now by thee.

Some Principles guiding out of the Apostasy to the Christian Spirit, and Life
again.
1. THat there is no salvation but by the true knowledge of Christ. The Jews had
received the ordinances of God, and knew of the Messiah to come, and believed
it, and were very zealous in their worship, in observation of Circumcision, the
Passover, New moons and Sabbaths, etc. (Wherewith shall I come before the
Lord, and bow my self before the high God?) and yet God complains of them by
his Prophet, My people perish for lack of knowledge. And the state is the same
under the Antichristian Apostasy, wherein the whore has made all nations,
kindreds, tongues and languages drunk with the cup of her fornication, the true
knowledge and worship has been lost, though the eyes of them that have been in
the apostasy, and drunk with the cup could not see it, no more then the Jews
could in their day. But to come close to the thing.

The knowledge of Christ is not litteral, traditional, or fleshly; nor can it
be received by the natural understanding: but it is spiritual, and the
understanding must be given by God which receives it. He has given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true, 1 John 5. 20. A man may read
Scriptures, hear Sermons, etc. and thereby gather a knowledge into the old
understanding: but neither this understanding into which the knowledge is
gathered, nor the knowledge it self which is gathered is spiritual, but
fleshly, and so cannot save. He that comes once to receive an understanding
from Christ, and to have the knowledge of Christ powered forth from Christ into
his heart, knows the difference between that, and the understanding into which
he gathers things. The knowledge of Christ after the letter (and a faith in him
answerable to such knowledge) will not save: but a man must know him in that
spirit, life and power wherein he lived, if he groundedly hope to be saved by
him, 2 Cor. 5. 16. 17.

2. That Christ saves by the new covenant: Not by any thing got into the mind
by the oldness of the letter, but by a life begotten which is new. There are
two covenants made mention of in Scripture, one whereof is called the old, the
other the new. The old belonged to the Jews, which is done away with their
ceremonies, state and polity: the new, which is better then the former Christ
is the mediator of, Heb. 8. 6. By mediating between God and the creature, or by
bringing them together in and according to this covenant, he saves. Man by his
disunion and distance from God, he perishes: by being brought again to God, he
lives again; which thing Christ effects by the new covenant. So then, he that
is not lead by Christ into that covenant, is not in the state of salvation.

3. That the new covenant is written in the heart, or there is no other way of
coming into the new covenant, whereof Christ is the High Priest and Mediator,
but by having the Laws of God written in the heart. This is the covenant, etc.
I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts, etc. they
shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying,
know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest. Heb. 8.
10. 11. He is speaking of the covenant whereof Christ is mediator, ver. 6.
which he calls a new covenant, ver. 8. and says it is not like the old ver. 9.
instancing in two main particulars, wherein it is very unlike. 1. The old was
writ outwardly in letters, to be read by the outward ey: but this is writ
inwardly in the heart and mind, and so can only be read by a spiritual ey. 2.
Under the old they needed teaching from men, the priests lips were to preserve
knowledge, and they were to seek the law at his mouth; but now they should have
the law so near them, so clearly written in them, that they should need none to
teach them. From the law is the knowledge of God; the law is in the heart; and
from the law in the heart springs up the knowledge of God in the least, and in
the greatest that are within this covenant, that they need not say know the
Lord. This is the state of the new covenant, which the Christians came to in
those days. 1 John 2. ver. 27. but it has been a strange thing in this dark
night of Apostasy, and is yet a strange thing to many. But let such consider,
can a man be a Christian, and be out of that covenant, whereof Christ is the
mediator? Can a man be brought back again to God by Christ, and yet be out
of*that covenant whereby Christ brings men back to God? O how has Satan
deluded poor souls in this thick night of darkness, to make men believe they
have faith in Christ, and shall be saved thereby; while they are quite ignorant
of, and strangers to that covenant, whereby Christ the mediat or saves. They
shall all know me, from the least to the greatest. Mark, there is not the
least in this covenant, but has the law so written in his heart, that he need
not seek out for knowledge.

4. That the spirit of God alone can write the covenant in the heart, or that
Christ writes the covenant by his spirit. Man by all his wisdom cannot attain
it. Man is driven out from God, and cannot find the way back again to him,
without the teachings and leadings of Gods own spirit. It is not the being
educated in any way of Religion from ones childhood, or the leaving of that,
and running into any sect afterward, that will avail any thing hereto; but the
alone hearkening to the true voice of the true spirit. It is written in the
Prophets concerning the children of this covenant, that they shall be all
taught of God, And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord. It is the Lord
alone, who by his spirit teaches them to come to Christ, and to receive the
new covenant into their hearts from Christ: For man is in an incapacity to know
or receive Christ or his covenant, until the spirit has fitted and taught him:
John 14. 17. but when he has prepared and fitted his heart, then with his own
finger he writes the pure law of the nature and life of Christ therein, by the
receipt where of he comes out of his old dark spirit and nature into the true
knowledge of God, and union with him. I will put my spirit within you, Ezekiel.
36. 27. This is part of the covenant, and indeed that part whereby all the rest
is wrought.

5. Therefore the first proper step in Religion, is to know how to meet with
Gods spirit. There is no progress (no true progress) to be made in the true
Religion, till a man comes into the covenant: and there is no coming into the
covenant, but by the spirit: therefore the first thing that is absolutely
necessary to be known in Religion is the spirit, his writing, or at least his
motions and stirrings in the heart. It may further be evidenced thus, all
things in Religion, acceptable to God, flow from the spirit: All knowledge is
to come from him; for he alone has revealed and can reveal truth, and is
appointed by Christ to lead into all truth: All worship is to be offered up in
him they that worship the father, must worship him in the spirit, and in the
truth, for the father seeks such to worship him, but rejects all other
worshippers and worship, how glorious soever their worship may seem to them:
Particularly praying is always to be in the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18. Jude 20. so
singing, etc. yea the whole life and conversation is to be in the spirit,
Galath. 5. 25. The mortifying of all corruption is to be done by the spirit, If
ye through the spirit mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 13.
Indeed a Christian is nothing, and can do nothing without the power and
presence of the spirit of God in him. So then, if nothing in Religion can be
done (with acceptance to God) without the spirit, then the spirit is the first
thing to be looked after, by him who would be truly and well-groundedly
religious.

6. The first way of meeting with the spirit of God, is as a Convincer of sin.
(Here is the true entrance, This is the Key that opens into life eternal; He
that can receive it, let him. It is not by soring alost into high imaginations
and forms of worship, but by coming down to this low thing.) This is the first
and most proper work of the spirit of God toward fallen man (whereby he makes
way toward the writing of Gods Law in the heart) namely to convince of sin. And
where should man look first to meet with him, but in his first work upon him?
When Christ promised the comforter, the spirit of truth, he said this
concerning him, that he should convince the world of sin, John 16. 8. They who
are created a new in Christ, and become his Disciples, receive comfort from the
spirit: but what is he to the world? or how may they feel any operation of him?
why he is to them a convincer of sin, and they may find him checking them for,
and convincing them of their sins. So that the great work for man, while he
lies in the darkness (for when he is translated into the light, it will be
easy) is to know how to distinguish the movings and stirrings of the spirit of
God: And this is the best way for man in this state to know them by: That which
discovers that which is evil, that is good: that which discovers that which is
spiritually evil, that must needs be spiritually good: for evll is darkness
and cannot make it self manifest. That which discovers that which is
undoubtedly pure, and inclines to it, that must needs be of God. Now to know
this, and be joined unto it, is a joining of the creature unto God, by some
what of him that comes from his spirit, and so is a true beginning of life
eternal.

7. That whereby the spirit of God convinces of sin, is his light shining in
the conscience. Fallen man is darkness; The light shines in the darkness, and
shows man the evil which otherwise would ly covered in him. Man fell from God,
lost the image of God, and became wholly darkness: but the spirit of God is
light, and shines in the darkness, and strives with man to reduce him back
again to that light from which he fell. God who commanded the light to shine out
of darkness, has shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God, etc. 2. Cor. 4. 6. Where did the Apostles, and Christians in
those days, meet with the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
Christ? God shined it in their hearts. He that made the light to shine out of
the dark deep, Genes. 1. 2. by his spirit, he by the same spirit made the light
of the knowledge of life shine in their dark hearts: and there it is also that
the work of conviction is wrought by the same spirit. He that perfects the good
work in the heart, the same is he that begins it there; and his beginning is by
reproving and convincing of sin, and so turning the heart from it unto God, and
unto the obedience of that righteousness which he makes manifest. And he that
meets not with the spirit in the beginning of his work, or slinketh back and
goes not on with him, but smothereth his reproves, not forbearing that, or
parting with that, for which he is reproved, is never like to meet with him in
the end. And then it will be too late for him to blame that Religion wherein
there was only a dead form, but not the living power of God. He that will come
to life eternal, must be translated out of his dead understanding, and all his
dead ways and worships (which please that understanding) into a living
principle and keep in that principle and then he shall know life indeed, and
the true food of that life, and the true worship and service from that life,
and the reward belonging to all.

8. That this light convincing of sin, shines in every conscience. He has
showed thee, O man, what is good, Micah. 6. 8. The life, which was in Christ,
was the light of men, Joh. 1. 4. Christ is the light of the World, Joh. 8. 12.
God as he loved the World, so he manifested his love to the World, by sending
his light into it to enlighten every man that comes into the World, that with
the light they might see his Son, and as many as receive him, to them he gives
power to become the Sons of God. As God would have all men to be saved, and
come to the knowledge of the truth: So he has given that light to all, which
may bring to the knowledge of the truth which saves. He is the true light,
which enlighteneth every man that comes into the World, Joh. 1. 9. The grace
of God, which brings salvation, has appeared to all men, etc. As the enemy
got possession of every man's heart, by filling it with darkness: so Christ
pursues, and seeks to dispossess the enemy, by the light which he sends
after him into every man. And this is the condemnation of man, not that he
wants a light to witness against, and draw him from the enemy: but that he
loves the enemy, and chooses to be one with the enemy; but hates the light and
turns from it, Joh. 3. 10. 20. He hearkens to the reasonings of his mind
against the light, and so smothers and choaks it; but does not turn to the
light, to have all the reasonings and strength of his mind subdued by it, and
subjected to it.

9. The true way to life eternal, is by believing in the light of the spirit,
which shines in the conscience. Man is in darkness, which keeps him in death:
and there is no way to come out of the death, but by coming out of the
darkness: and there is no way to come out of the darkness, but by following
that light which discovers it, and calls forth from it: And he that does follow
that, cannot remain in the darkness, but must needs come out. There is an evil
principle in man, calling for evil; and there is a good principle, calling from
the evil to the good: Now he that follows the good, cannot follow the evil, but
departs from it. I am the light of the World (says Christ) he that follows
me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, Joh. 8. 12.
But this is that which undoes man, he loves the darkness, he loves the world,
the course of the world the worships of the world; He loves his own
understanding, and his own will, and so hates that light which crosses these,
and which teach would him (by the denial of them) to crucify that nature from
whence they spring, and to which they are suitable* And from hence it comes to
pass (the love to sin within being strong; and Satan, the strong man, keeping
the house) that the motions of Gods spirit are easily overborn, either by
reasonings of the understanding, or by perverseness of the will: But if man durst
trust himself to them he would quickly find of what nature they were, by the
strong opposition of the strong man against them. It is indeed a strait and
narrow way, into which no flesh can enter and walk. And yet it is the only way:
for there is no life in God, no peace with God while the enemy lives in the
heart. But when the light is received and turned to, then the power begins to
work which slayes the enemy in the heart; and that being done, there is no more
war, but peace. Then the true peace, which passes understanding, fills and
refreshes the heart; where as the peace which was in the soul before, was but
the peace of the enemy, and will abide no longer then the enemy is suffered to
keep possession quietly.

10. That believing in the light of the Spirit, which shines in the conscience,
unites the soul to God, and opens the springs of life to it. Belief in darkness
(which is unbelief toward God) disunited the soul, and closed up the springs
of life from it; belief in the light, which is sent to lead from the darkness,
unites again, and opens the springs again. God is light he dwells in the light,
and there enjoyes the fullness of life; and he gives a measure of his own light
to draw from the darkness; and he who believes and follows this, is led by it
unto God from whom it came: and being come out of the darkness unto him, he
begins again to feel the springs of life (the fresh springs of life) which are
in him. He that believes, is come to the well of salvation, and draws living
water out of it, and drinks of the living water continually, so that he can
thirst no more; yea out of his belly flow rivers of living water. This is the
fruit of the true faith, but this is not the fruit of the faith of the
Apostasy, but there the soul remains still disunited to God, and united to the
darkness, and drinks not of the living streams, but drinks dead water: the
fountain of pure life is not open to it, but the fountain of iniquity: and that
blood which cleanses, and takes away the sin, is not known. There is only a
dream of these things in the dark night of apostasy, by which dream the
conscience is a little quieted for the present; but when the witness awakes, and
the light of the day shines, the soul (which is lean) will find it self in the
hands of the enemy, in the bonds of sin, and feel that it never new that power
that could redeem it, but the subtle Serpent deceived it with a name in stead
of the thing.

This is the true way, the narrow way (I can, in the presence of the living
God, set my seal to the truth of it) which it has pleased God to discover and
make manifest again, after the long dark night of Apostasy. And we come not to
it, by hearing or receiving of any new notions or apprehensions of things, but
by feeling that which puts an end to all creaturely notions and apprehensions:
and we grow in it, by the increase of that thing in us. The seed to which the
promise was made, the seed which was before Abraham was is felt, and his day is
seen and rejoiced in, and by the light thereof the darkness is discovered and
the kingdom of darkness is assaulted. And as it daily falls, in many
particulars, so it shall at length fall in the general, and the Kingdoms of this
world shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, and ye shall reign
upon the earth, where sin and Antichrist have long reigned and kept him down.
And though there be a great rage and outcry among the people and heathenish
professors, yet the decree is gone forth, and Sions King shall reign upon the
holy hill of Sion, and the hills and mountains shall melt before him, and the
earth shall shake round about him.

Therefore gather your selves together, muster up your strong forces, O ye
several sorts of carnal professors. Let all your differences one against
another fall, and join together against him, who is against you all: improve the
Serpents wisdom, and form arguments out of the Scripture thereby, with the
utmost of the skill and understanding of flesh; get the Kings, Rulers, and
Magistrates of the earth on your side too, handle all the weapons of the flesh,
skilfully; Dispute; reproach, revile, whip, stock, imprison, starve, nay put to
death. See if you can uphold your kingdom: for there is a mighty one come forth
against you, who will take the vineyard, the kingdom, the inheritance from you,
and give it to another; and on you shall come that death and darkness, that
misery and destruction which ye have put far from you, and preached as the
portion of others. Therefore consider your condition in the fear of the Lord:
and if ye feel not your selves able to fight it out, make your peace betimes,
and let your greatest crowns (your choicest wisdom and strength in the flesh)
be laid down at the feet of Christ, at the lowest appearance of his light in
the conscience. Let not the least check of his spirit be spighted there, but
esteemed above the highest notions of light that ye have gathered in, or can
gather with your fleshly understandings. And indeed it is no less then its due:
for this which runs fresh from the Spirit, is more living in it self, and more
proper to that man's present estate to whom it comes, then whatever he himself
by his understanding can gather from the letter.

There has been a precious seed of God long stirring in this Nation, but it
has been oppressed, and kept in bondage by the spirit of Pharaoh and his wise
Egyptians, who would subject it to their laws and worships, and not let Israel
go out of Egypt at Gods call, to worship him in spirit and truth, but would keep
him in forms and ways of man's invention. The Lord has poured out his plagues
upon this spirit, and more and more wrought out the liberty of his people: but
as the plagues cease, this spirit hardens it self, and assaies the reducing of
Israel into bondage again. And as Pharaoh renews the bondage of Israel, so God
renews the plagues on Pharaoh and his Egyptians. Pharaoh has a stubborn will,
and a great wisdom and power, and is loath to let Israel go: but the Lord also
is wise and strong, and has a will more righteous then Pharoahs, and by his
wisdom and strength will he effect his will, and Pharoahs shall not stand.

Who is such a stranger in Israel, that has not observed, that as God began to
raise up the seed in this Nation, and call it into liberty, so the spirit of the
wise Egyptians rose up against it, exclaiming of error, heresy, blasphemy, new
ways, new lights, etc? And doubtless many tares have sprung up, but the aim
of the enemy was not so much to pluck up these tares, as to destroy the one
good seed of wheat. Herod did not aim at killing all the Infants in Bethlehem,
but he would rather kill them all, then have Christ live. What preaching on the
one hand? what running to the Magistrate on the other hand? and all to destroy
this young babe. When any different way of worship did appear, as of
Independency, Anabaptism, or of seeking and waiting for the truth; how did they
make an head against them, and cry out against them, for fear the young child
should be born and appear there? And now they see their own image brought forth
there, they are at peace with them: and having discovered that, where no part
of the image or mark can be received, but there is another nature in life and
truth brought forth, and no form without life will down? now they know where to
shoot all their darts, now they know against whom to invent, and speak all
manner of evil, and against whom to direct all their envy, rage and outcries,
and to prepossess all sorts of persons every where, with all manner of
prejudices, that the truth may not spread any where, but be opposed every,
where And all persons minds there, are so filled before hand with the venom of
the Serpent, that truth cannot come any where, but it finds the enmity already
stirred up, and prepared to withstand it.

This is a new way, a new light, says one: we know a Religion before this came
up, and we will keep to that, let who will run after these new sects and ways. A
natural light, the old light of nature, says another, or the corrupted light
of Adam which has run along through all his posterity. Another outcry is, that
it makes the Scriptures void and useless. Others cry out that it teaches
things contrary to the Scriptures, that it sets up free will, that it leads to a
covenant of works, that it breaks down Relations, Laws, Governments, takes away
due respect from Magistracy and Superiors, and turns the world upside down.
Thus the worldly spirit is every where up in arms, and a zeal kindled every
where, to keep it out of every heart, and out of every place and country.

Now these are not real things, but such kind of slanders and reproaches, as
always have attended truth. The Prophets of God, Christ, and his Apostles,
though they have been spoken well of afterward, yet they have ever been hated,
spoken il of, and persecuted by the generation of professors of their age. The
Scribes and Pharisees could not with so great advantage have persecuted Christ
and his Apostles, without a seeming zeal for the Law and Prophets: and yet it
was the same spirit that so vehemently cried up the Law, the Prophets, the
Ordinances of Moses, that persecuted the spirit and life in Christ and his
Apostles, from whence the Law, the Prophets, and Ordinances came. And thus it
is at this day, though that Spirit is as blind now as it was then, and cannot
see through its own cover, though it be as weak and narrow as theirs was. The
guilty charge the innocent, that it might hide its own guilt, and keep its
covering. The guilty Jews, and the guilty Scribes and Pharisees, charged the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, that they might not be found guilty by them,
and their formal covering rent from them. And thus it is at this day, Truth is
risen to make manifest men's false coverings, and the guilt and hypocrisy that
lies hid underneath: now to save themselves, they are prepared before hand to
lay that charge against truth, which truth has against them.

Search thine heart, resist not the light, thou that haste charged the truth
with any of these things, and thou will find it thine own condition, The truth
is no new light, or new way; and they that hold it forth, do not hold forth any
new way, or new light: but it is thou that have left the good old light, the
good old way which was before the apostasy, and have fallen in with some new
light, some new way invented and set up since the Apostasy. It is thou again
that set up the natural light, the fallen wisdom, the wisdom which is out
of the life, and in enmity with the life; with this thou feedest that
understanding which is to be brought to naught: and when thou have done this
thy self, then thou call the spiritual light, wherewith God has pursued it
in all ages, a natural light. It is thou, that with this wisdom searching into
the Scriptures, and gathering the oldness of the letter into the old
understanding, make the Scriptures void and useless to thy soul, and can
not meet with that life and power which they speak of, but still art alive in
thy sins, and dead unto God: and then thou cryest out against that which comes
to discover this to thee, and to bring thee out of this dead knowledge into the
life of the Scriptures, thou cryest out against this, as if this made the
Scriptures useless. And when thou have set up an whole body of knowledge,
religion, and worship quite contrary to the Scriptures, which the truth comes
to make manifest, then Cains nature rises up in thee, and thou take up Cains
weapons, and fain would thou kill thy brother, because his sacrifice in the
faith testifies against thine, which is out of the faith, and contrary to the
true testimony of the Scriptures. Again, for free will and a Covenant of works,
Thou have set up a religion in the old will, and works, not according to the
new Covenant of life, but according to the old Covenant of death: and by this
thou preachest that will to be free, which is in bonds, and set up the works
of man's righteousness and conformity to the letter, for the works of the new
Covenant. And for Governments and Laws, That which is according to God, which
is a terror to the evil, and a praise to them that do well, that which is
liberty to the just, and a curb to the unjust; this thou art against, and
cryest out daily for the turning of the Magistrates Sword against the innocent,
because they are a light to discover thy deeds of darkness (which be out of the
light) and disturb thy peace and thy settlement in that which is fleshly, and
of man, and not of God. So for relations, and honor to Magistrates, The
transgressing nature has brought up a wrong thing, a fleshly thing, an honor,
a duty which is of the flesh, and pleases the flesh, and is not according to
God. And this is not honor indeed, not an honor that will stand, not an honor
that will be justified in the sight of God, but is a shame to them that give
it, and a shame to them that receive it, discovering that they are servants to
the flesh, giving to and receiving from the fleshly part, that which the
fleshly part (which crucifies the life) calls for, and is pleased with.

All that the light does to these things, is to discover and condemn them: and
the end of its discovery is that they might be removed, and truth and
righteousness brought in the stead of them. But man's evil heart, which is the
cause of them, cries out against the light, as if the light brought them;
whereas if man could but be quiet and still, and suffer the work of the light
upon him, he would find that the same light which discovers them, would also
purge them away, and leave neither root nor branch of iniquity either in men's
hearts, or in relations, or families, or towns, or cities, or laws, or
governments; and there would be no want of honor. Now though the Serpents
wisdom is irreconcilable, and that understanding which stands there cannot be
satisfied, but must be confounded and brought to naught, 1 Cor. 1. 19. yet
because underneath all this, there is a simplicity in some which is betrayed;
for the relief of that, somewhat further may be spoken in answer to these
things.

Object. 1. To the first Objection that this is a new way, or new light, I
answer.

Answ. It is new indeed to them who have lain long in the Apostasy, and set up
another light, but it is not new in it self, but the same that was in the
beginning, yea and before the beginning also. Christ was the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever* and the light that comes from him is like him, that also is
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. It was the same under the law, the
same before the law, the same since the law. As the darkness all along has
been the same: so the light all along has been the same also. It was the same
in the Jews, and the same in the Gentiles. It was this God expected obedience
to from the Jews, and the Prophet (in the name of the Lord) disdains their
sacrifices, and brings them to this, Micah 6. 8. He has showed thee, O man,
what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Their eye was upon sacrifices and
oil; the prophet points them to that which would bring them to the right
sacrifice, and to the true oil. And the Gentiles, so far as they were obedient
to this, were accepted, and excused in their own consciences, the faithful
vvitness whereof is of God, and vvil stand in the day of Christ, To. 2. 15.
16. That which was from the beginning, says the Apostle John, declare we unto
you, 1 John 1. 1. And this is the message which we have heard of him, and
declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at al, ver. 5.
And the end of preaching this message, is to dravv out of the darkness into the
light: to bring men to the feeling of the light of God in them, and so to union
with it; which being turned to, draws out of the darkness. God who is
light, is nigh to every man, who is darkness, though man's sense is very thick,
and can hardly see or feel him: and a light from him shines in man's darkness,
but man's darkness comprehends it not. So that this light is not new in it
self, but only new to the old Spirit, which has long lain hid in the region
of darkness and death, and has not known the light of life.

Object. 2. That this is a natural light, or the light of old Adams nature.

Answ. It is in one sense a natural light, it is of the nature of him from whom
it comes, of the nature of God and of his Christ, whom it appears for: but it
is not of the nature of corrupt Adam, whom it always reproved, and against whom
it still stands a witness, and condemns all corruption. Man is darkness, and
when Christ comes to redeem him, he finds him darkness: and Christ finds no
light in him to help him to discover sin to him, but all the disoveries of sin
that are made in the heart, are by the light of Christ, and not by any light of
man's nature. The Lord is the searcher of the heart, and he searches it with
his own candle, and not with any left in man's nature. Man fell into darkness,
and knew not where he was, but the Lord comes after him with his candle, and
discovers his state to him. It is the light from which man fell, and against
which he sins, that is alone able to make his disobedience manifest to him. We
know, says the Apostle, that the law is spiritual, but I an carnal, Romans 7.
14. The law is the lowest part of the light, and yet that is spiritual, and of
Christ's nature, and not of Adams nature; we know it, says the Apostle. Such as
know the nature of that which manifests sin, know it to be spiritual. It is the
fallen man from the light, the man in the darkness, that calls the light
darkness: but that which discovers the darkness, and reproves the darkness, and
wars against the darkness, is not darkness, but the light of life. And those
who are spiritual, and feel the nature and power of it in their spirits, know
it to be so. But man has set up a light of his own, has raised up a light by
his study and invention, in the strength of the fallen wisdom: and now setting
up this for light, he must needs call the true light darkness, as the Pharisees
did Christ.

Object. 3. That it makes the Scriptures void and useless.

Answ. It came from the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, it is of the
same nature with the light that shone in them that gave forth Scriptures, it
speaks the same thing with Scriptures, it leads to the same thing, and it opens
witnesses to the words which the Scriptures speak; and so it brings the
Scriptures, which have been long abused, into their true use. Indeed it puts an
end to the corrupt use of Scriptures, to man's inventing and forming things out
of them, but brings them into their true use and service. It takes the
Scriptures out of man's hand, who has slain the life by them, and puts them
into the hands of the spirit, who makes the words again pure, and quick, and
living, purging away man's defiled and dead conceivings and interpretations of
them.

A man must know the Spirit, come to the spirit, be joined to and be in union
with the Spirit, before he can have the true understanding of the Scriptures.
The Scriptures of truth are the words of God, or various expressions of his
mind, which he that searches into, before he has his spirit, cannot know: and
so man in this state can only guess and imagine at things, but cannot see the
truth. And from hence it is, that so many sects and heaps are sprung up in the
world, according to the variety of their imaginations. One sort of men cry this
is the way, this is the truth, this is the Church, this is the worship: Another
sort cry that is not it, that is superstition and error, but this is it: and so
a third, and fourth etc. So about Scriptures, one says this is the meaning;
another says it is not so, but this is the meaning. The Papists say the Church
must judge of the meaning of Scriptures; and the Protestants who take more
scope, how do they doubt, and differ, and oppose one another about the
interpretation of Scriptures? which plainly shows, that they do not plow with
the right heifer, for then there would be unity and certainty. They let their
own reasonings and imaginations loose, and there is no foundation of certainty:
but had they waited for the Spirit to begin with, and gone on no farther then
he opened to them, all these doubts and dissentions would have been choked in
the birth, or womb, or not have come so far as either birth or womb. Yet do I
not altogether deny the reading of Scriptures, even in this state, if men read
with fear and trembling, not setting up his own understanding, or the
understanding of any man else, but waiting for the spirit, which can alone give
him an understanding to receive the true knowledge. But this I dare boldly
affirm, that men's reading of the Scriptures in their own wisdom and
selfconfidence (or confidence of what interpretation others have given) does
them no good at all, but much harm, tending to the building up of that which
God will again destroy. But he that begins with the spirit of God, giving
himself up to that light which comes from him, comes to true union with God,
and to the feeling of his life, and so to a true growth, and knowledge of the
spirit of God, whereby he comes to know and understand the Scriptures which
came from the same spirit; and hereby also he comes to be able to measure the
deceit of his own Spirit, which formerly led him aside, and also to see and
measure the spirits of deceivers. But he that is in the deceit, in the
imagination, out of the true knowledge; he cannot know the deceit of his own
spirit, or the spirits of deceivers, but calls the truth deceit, and the deceit
truth.

Object. 4. That this light teaches things contrary to the Scriptures.

Answ. That light, which comes from the same spirit which the Scriptures came
from, cannot teach things contrary to the Scriptures. But man, who has took
the tools of his understanding, and formed images and likenesses out of the
Scriptures, (I mean invented meanings and senses) and judged these agreeable to
the Scriptures: he must needs judge that which is contrary to these, as
contrary to the Scriptures: whereas the truth is one in it self, and agrees
with whatsoever is true in this age, or in former ages; and differs only from
that which is not true. And we know that there is that true unity with that
spirit from which the Scriptures came, and with the Scriptures, and with one
another in that light which the wisdom of man cannot but despise, as has not
been in any age since the Apostasy til now.

Object. 5. That this sets up free will. When persons are exhorted to embrace
the light, to let in the light, and told that condemnation comes for not
believing or receiving the light: then they cry out, can man believe? can man
receive the light? has man free will?

The will of man is bound; but there is liberty, power, and freedom in the light
which visits man, and comes to unbind and save him. And man feels this power,
tastes of this liberty, feels somewhat disengaging him from the evil, and
drawing him from it: but he, being in love with the evil, draws back from the
drawing, shutting his ears against the wisdom of the light, and opening his
ears to the reasonings of the Serpent; and then the liberty and power, which
was in the light, withdraws with the light, and the bonds are strengthened upon
him; And this is the condemnation, not that there was a want of power from God,
but that he chose the power of the enemy, not loving the light, wherein the
power of life lay. God knows the state of man in the fall, and knows the
strength of the enemy; and the Savior that he sends has sufficient power
against him, and the light that the Savior sends is stronger then the
darkness, and can overcome the darkness, and cannot be overcome by the
darkness; And if thou join with the darkness, and wilt not yield to the
drawings of the father, but yield up thy self to the drawings and reasonings of
the darkness; yet the strength of the light remains in it self: and though for
the present, thou have struck it down and slain it, yet it will rise up a
strong and living witness against thee, and the darkness to which thou have
joined. When a man goes from the light, he goes into the will, voluntarily; then
take and choose in the flesh. When a man follows the light, the will of the
flesh dies in him, another will rises up and chooses for him, there is the
true liberty.

But as for your speaking of free will, ye do not know what ye speak of: for the
will, (with the freedom of it) either stands in the image and power of him that
made it, or in a contrary image and power. While it is in the image and power
of him that made it, it is free unto good, and not to evil: while it is in the
image and power of him who corrupted it, it is free unto evil, and not to good.
The will is not of it self, but stands in another, and is servant to that in
whom it stands, and there its freedom is bounded and comprehended. For there is
no middle state between both, wherein the will stands of it self, and is free to
both equally; but it is a servant, and under the command of one of these
powers. If it be under the command of sin, of the power of darkness, it is free
from righteousness; and if it be under the command and power of righteousness,
it is free from sin: but such a free will, as men commonly speak of, is a mere
imagination, and has no foundation in the true state of things.

And this may answer another objection, which lies as a great block in the way
of many, who feel a conviction, but are withheld from obedience, under a
pretense of wanting power: whereas the power lies in that light which
convinces, and is received in the obedience, and in the cross. As the power of
the enemy crept in, in harkening to him: So the power of truth is received in
harkening to, and receiving the reproofs of truth. That which checks the evil,
that which stands against the mind, smiting it in its course of vanity and
pleasure in the fallen state; in that is the power. That comes from the power,
goes forth in the power, and the power is in it, and cannot be severed from it.
So he that lets that in, lets in the power; and he that shuts that out, shuts
out the power. And in this state, a man may complain all his days for want of
power, and not meet with it: for how can he, when he refuses it in the way
wherein the power seeks him, and waits for it in a way wherein it is not to be
found? The appearance of the power at first is small, and contemptible to the
eye of the fleshly wisdom; and it is not received in any such great overpowring
way (though that also is known afterward) as man is apt to expect; but all lies
in one little seed, where the day of small things is known: The light, the life,
the power, the purity, the wisdom, etc. lies hid there: and in receiving that
little thing, all is received: and in the grows of that, all grows up. But by
being tempted by the enemy to neglect this, and wait for some great power and
appearance of God, the soul is held in the bonds of iniquity, and kept from the
life as strongly, as by the grossest form.

Object. 6. That this sets up a covenant of works: for a man is bid to do, bid
to obey the light: and when he does, when he obeys, he has peace; and when he
obeys not, he has not peace.

Answ. This sets not up the works of the Law, but it leads through the works of
the Law, to the righteousness of faith. When the commandment came, sin
revived, and I dyed, Romans 7. The Apostle was alive in his worship and Jewish
state, till the Law came: but when the Law came, it flew that life that he had
there, and he became dead, both to that life by which he lived before, and to
the Law that flew him, and then there arose up a life in him which answered the
Law, and could fulfill it, and lead to a righteousness beyond it and then his
life and his righteousness were not any works of the Law, but of faith, and in
the faith, Gal. 2. 19, 20. But yet there is no passing to this; but through the
administration of the Law in the heart, in the hand of the Mediator. And when
the life is risen and received, yet even then there is no peace but in
obedience to the life. The peace lies in that which brings the peace; and if
there be a departing from that, there is a departing from the peace. Any
fleshly thought, any fleshly motion, as it is out of the life, so it is out of
the peace; and the mind joining to it, feels the death and trouble of it. Thus
says the Apostle, Gal. 6. 15, 16. Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails, but a new creature: and as many as walk according to this rule, peace
be on them. The peace comes to the new creature, and to man walking according
to the rule of the new creature: and the condemnation is not to them, that walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8. 1. but if there be an
harkening to the flesh, and a fulfilling the unrighteousness thereof in any
thing, God is righteous, and he cannot speak peace to the wicked, or to him
that joins with the wicked. Therefore where there is true peace, there must be
a coming from the wicked nature, and a living out of the wicked nature in him
who is the life, the righteousness, the peace. I know there have been curious
fabrics in men's minds about the covenant of grace, but they have not known the
nature of it, and of the works that flow from it, and so are apt to call the
works of the new life, springing from the covenant of life, the works of the
old covenant. But wisdom is justified of her Children, and they know her birth;
and in the true light the true nature of things is seen, and the true name and
description given, which he that is out of the light cannot receive, but
stumbles at: and the wiser he is, in his own devised way and knowledge of
things, the more stumbling blocks he has, and the more he stumbles.

Object. 7. and last. That it breaks down relations, Laws, Government, takes
away due respect from Magistracy and superiors, and turns the World upside
down.

Answ. Iniquity has reigned, unrighteousness has winded it self into, and
twisted about every thing. And now the truth comes to discover and purg out the
iniquity, the strong man, who hither to has kept possession of the house,
cries out as if the destruction of the thing were aimed at. Nay, it is only
the evil that is aimed at, but the thing it self is not to be destroyed, but to
be set free from the evil, and preserved. Relations are good, Laws are good,
Governments are good, of God; but the unrighteousness of flesh, the pleasing of
the flesh by the pretense of these, the giving liberty to the unjust, this is
not good. And is it not in relations, in Governments, in the execution of Laws?
If a man will be fleshly, and walk in them according to the flesh, the Law
takes not hold of him, his relations are not offended at him: but if he come
once to feel the power of God, and withdraw from the evil, and stand a witness
for God against it; then relations, and powers of the earth, and Laws, all
strike at him: and the reason is, because they are in union with the evil, and
so cannot bear the rending of the evil from the thing. And from hence it is,
that wherever the Gospel comes in power, it kindles a flame round about,
setting father against son and son against father, husband against wife and
wife against husband, etc. yea it goes closer then so, it sets one part in man
against another: and the fight is very bitter and sharp, till one of these be
subdued, and then there is peace: fleshly peace, if the wise fleshly part
prevail, spiritual peace, if the weak foolish thing (to the World) in the
heart, which is of God, prevail.

And for honor to Magistrates and Superiors, it is not denied: but fleshly
honor, corrupt honor, honor from the fleshly part, and to the fleshly part,
this cannot but be denied by them which are of God. That which is born of God
is not of this World, nor can it give honor to that which is of this World:
but it honors all men in the Lord. What ever is of God in Magistracy it
honors, what ever is in superiority according to God (as a father, an husband,
a master is) it honors with true honor. Christ, the only begotten of God,
could not receive honor of man, nor could he give honor to man: and he says
to the Jews how can ye believe which receive honor one another, and seek not
the honor that comes from God only? The receiving of honor from man, cannot
stand with the true faith (when ye know the faith, ye will know it.) He that
repecteth persons, commits sin; and is a transgressor against the Law of
faith, which leads to the life which stands in God, out of the Worlds honors,
worships, customs, and whatever else which is not of faith, but of the World.
Mordecai did not bow to Haman, nay he sat in the Kings gate, where Haman was
to pass, and yet did not stand up, move, or bow to him: what an affront was
this to that high, proud, lofty spirit? and yet it was of the Lord. This was a
type (as the Jewish state in general was typical) of what God would do in the
World, and is now doing. The Lord has raised up Mordecais nature, and he has
discovered Hamans nature, and has given the command to Mordecai, that he shall
not bow to Haman. And if ye could search your hearts, ye would find, that it
is not that of God in you, which is offended for want of that which ye call
honor, but the Hamanish spirit, the fleshly pride and loftines, which the Lord
will lay low, and he alone will be exalted in this day of his mighty power, and
man shall only be honored as he comes from him, and as he is found in him: but
the honor which the fleshly part has sought, and gained in the transgression,
shall fall with the transgressor, whom the Lord has furbished his sword to
smite.

And for turning the World upside down, it is acknowledged: the power of the
Lord is come forth to do it. That which is high, that which is wise, that which
is strong, that which is rich, that which is full; that which is fat; the Lord
will lay low, make foolish, weak, poor, empty, Lean; for it lies in wickedness.
He will feed the fat and strong cattle with that judgment, which shall make
them lean and weak. And the humble, the foolish, the weak, the poor, the empty,
the lean he will raise up, and make wise, and strong, and rich, and full, and
fat with the true honor, the true wisdom, the true strength, the true riches,
the sure and living mercies of David, who sets his feet on top of the high
places of the earth, of whom Christ came according to the flesh.

Thus I have in plainnes of heart, and with plainnes of speech, set the truth
and the error before you, and lent my hand toward the removing of some blocks
which lay in your way, in love and pity to your souls. Now if any, in the
reading of this, feel a secret touch upon their hearts, startling them, and
giving some testimony to the truth, though very small, and through a thick dark
covering: there is that to which I speak, there is my witness within the vail,
and there is the testimony rising up which leads to life, if given heed to.
Keep to this, and this will prick and wound, judge and condemn the contrary
nature, though never so strong. And when it does prick and wound, keep the
wound fresh and open, as thou love thy life, till thou meet with the true
healer. For the false prophet will rise up in thee, and fill thee with
reasonings, and perhaps multitudes of promises and comforts from Scripture,
skinning over the wound, and crying peace, peace, when there is no peace. And
when thou have thus got over the trouble, then the false prophet, which brought
thee this peace, will stir thee up against the witness, exalting the wisdom and
reasonings of the flesh, and making merry with thee over the witness, which
witnessed against thee and him, and over the trouble which came thereby: and
this will bring thee to that hardness of heart, which is for destruction. And
then, when thou have slain the witness in thy self, and exalted thy fleshly
reason and understanding over it, then the false prophet which seduced thee,
will kindle a zeal in thee against the witness in others, and thou will prove a
persecutor of the life under the name of deceit, error, heresy and blasphemy,
whereas thou thy self art fallen into the deceit, into the error from the life,
and into the blasphemy against it, and art in Cains nature, and would fain be
handling of Cains weapons to destroy it.

Therefore take heed of the fleshly wisdom, take heed of thine own
understanding, take heed of thy reasoning or disputing, for these are the
weapons where with the witness is slain. That wisdom must be destroyed, and
that understanding brought to naught, and thou become a child, and learn as a
child, if ever thou know the things of God. Where is the wise? where is the
Scribe? where is the Disputer of this World? did they ever from the beginning
of the World to this day, attain the knowledge of the things of God? where are
the Councils? where are the great Convocations? where are the Synods? where are
the assemblies of divines? what is become of them all? what have they done?
have they been ever able to lead out of the Apostasy from the truth, into the
truth again? Nay, that wisdom is cursed; it is of the earth, and fixes in the
earth, and is the grand enemy to the wisdom that is from above. And where that
wisdom stands, there is no entrance for the other. This made it so hard for
this sort of persons, in all ages, to own truth. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge,
it has perverted the. This made the whorish spirit so able to use sorceries,
and enchantments from the life in all ages. And it is easier for publicans,
harlots, drunkards, swearers, all sorts of sinners to own truth, and enter into
life, then for these. For it is easier to empty them of their profanenes, then
it is to empty these of their settled conceited Religion and devotion: and yet
this with their Religion and devotion cannot enter, no more then the other with
their profanenes. Ye have a knowledge, a righteousness, an hope, a faith, etc.
founded by your pretense to Scriptures, who can shake down these, say you? and
yet these must fall, before ye can build upon, and grow up in the life that the
Scriptures came from. For the Scriptures were not given for men to gather the
meanings out of, and lay a foundation of faith there, by their own wills: but to
discover and testify of the foundation. And he that comes thither, and is
built there, knows the truth, not because the Scriptures say so, but because he
feels the thing, is founded upon the thing, grows up in the thing, and the
thing in him whereof the Scripture speaks. And this knowledge shall abide, and
this faith, and this righteousness, and this holiness, and this redemption;
whereas the other is but a name, put upon that which is not the thing.

These are precious and faithful words (though through a Vessel weakened, and
weak beyond measure) and happy is he that has an ear to hear them: but woe
from the Lord to that eye that is closed, to that ear that is shut, to that
heart that is hardened, in the inventions and imaginations of man's fleshly mind,
against the truth of God. Let the witness of God in thee stir and speak, it
shall answer me now: but if thou, through the strength of the flesh, and the
vain imaginations which thou huggest in thy heart, stifle the voice of it now,
yet I know it shall answer me one day: but then it will be too late for thee to
hear it.

The Lord is now gentle and tender, pursuing thee with his love, and following
thee up and down with his light; and though thou run from him into sin and
transgression, and hearken to the wisdom of the flesh, yet his voice comes
after thee to reclaim thee: and if thou will hear, and but yield thy self to
him, he vvil not put thee to do any thing* but subdue all thy enemies for thee;
yea he vvil slay the serpentine wisdom in thee, with all its inventions, and
dash all she children of Babylon against the stones, without pity to them,
though with great pity to thee. But if thou refuse, and choose the pleasure
of the flesh, and the gross fleshpots of Egypt, and turn thine ear from his
voice, giving way to the reasonings of the flesh, and keeping down the
vvitness; that day of wrath and severity, which all the Scriptures have spoke
of vvil come, and thou vvilt have thy portion with hypocrites, who in all
ages have covered themselves with a form of religion, pleasing to the flesh
and the world, but have vvith-held their hearts from the power of life,
therefore prize the love of God to thee in giving thee this warning, and be not
uncircumcised in heart and ears, as this generation of professors have alvvaies
been: but let Christ reign in the heart, and let him trample all man's invented
forms of knowledge and worship under his feet; and give up thy self to be led
by him, into the true knowledge and worship, in the spirit and in the truth.

And now you, who find your hearts touched and convinced of the truth, and find
any desire kindled in you after the living God, and an hungring and thirsting
after his righteousness: Take notice of these three things, which I have upon
my heart to say to you, by way of advice.

1. Know and take up thy cross, the Cross of Christ, the daily Cross of Christ.
The Cross of Christ is that which crosses the natural, and this is the power
of God to deliver from the natural. How should the earthly understanding, the
earthly will, the earthly affections, with the elementary nature (which have had
their swinge in the earth) be crucified and slain, but by the cross of Christ?
he therefore that will have a Religion to please himself in any thing, must not
come hither: and he who after he is come hither, admits of any thing
pleasing to the earthly, and starteth from the cross, which would deny and turn
from it; so far as it does so, he goes backward and not forward. It is no
wonder that there is such an enmity in all sorts against the truth, for it
strikes at their life, yea at the very root of their life. If there were any
new way or form of Religion held forth, men's understandings and affections
might by degrees be wrought of to it, and find pleasure in it: but this is
direct death to that nature and spirit that has lived in any form of Religion,
and to the whole course of that nature and spirit: yet through this death the
true life springs up, in those who receive the strokes of it. Therefore be
willing and learn to die daily, and bring every thing which is contrary to
Christ, to the Cross. Deny self in every thing, take up the Cross in every
thing, follow Christ in every thing, This is the way which Christ himself
prescribes to become his disciples by. If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, take up his Cross daily, and follow me, seek not ease in the
flesh, no not in the least, but take up the Cross every day, in every thing,
till the earthly be slain, til the wisdom and strength of the flesh be wholly
subdued, and then the wisdom and power of God will become natural.

2. Keep to the sense, keep to the feeling: beware of the understanding, beware
of the imagining, conceiving mind: These cannot be for God, not bring forth any
thing for God, until they be new cast and new molded. The one seed of life
lies in the invisible, in the hidden man of the heart, among multitudes of
seeds of death, all which have their growth up into, and strength in the
corrupted natural. So that this seed cannot shoot up into any part of the
natural, but the other seeds shoot up with it, and endeavor to choke it. Now
the other seeds spring up two ways? either in a way of opposition against the
the true seed, or in a way of similitude. There cannot a good thought, or
desire, or beam of light enter into the understanding or will, but multitudes
of evil thoughts, evil desire, or fleshly reasonings against it will spring up
with it, and strives to over bear it. And if the enemy be at length overcome,
by the power of God fighting with him and vanquishing him, then he has his
garments of light, then he brings in thoughts, and desires, and motions like
Gods, which easily pass for good, if the soul keep not close upon the watch.
The forward understanding is apt presently to own them, and the forward will to
embrace, and the forward affections to let themselves forth into them, until
the soul come to feel a loss in life, and miss the power and presence of God,
and find the enemy strong again. Yea the enemy has yet a more subtle way,
namely, to raise motions like the motions of Gods spirit, and suddenly, before
the light has given the discerning of them to raise opposition and reasonings
against them; that so by the opposition, which is manifestly evil, the motion
it self, which is also evil, (though good in appearance) might be the less
suspected and swallowed. Now the only way of safety is to keep out of the
natural, whereof the enemy has possession, and where his strength lies, and to
keep in the sense and feeling of the invisible seed? and only to come forth
with him into the natural, in that sense and feeling. And when he comes, he will
come with strength, above the strength that the enemy has in the natural, and
by degrees conquer him. But by no means rest or abide in the natural, but
retire with the Lord (who will not dwell there, until it be cleansed) into the
resting place. These words may be hard to you at present, but hereafter (as you
come into the exercise) you will feel them. And this is the reason, why the
formal and outward part of Religion does so commonly eat out the life, because
things there are suitable to, and exercise that part wherein the strength of the
enemy lies: and there can never be perfect freedom and safety, until that part
be subdued, and all that belongs to that part removed. The Lord is risen to
shake what may be shaken, that the kingdom which cannot be shaken may appear:
and happy are they, who are shaken by his hand in all that is outward, and
established in the inward life, power, and rest, which remains for ever and
cannot be shaken.

3. Wait patiently the Lords leisure. Be not hasty after life and salvation in
the will of the flesh, but leave the Lord to choose his own season, for the
showring down of his mercy and blessing. The Lord will not presently entertain
that spirit, which has adulterated from him (prostituting it self to
strangers, and defiling it self) into his bosom: but there must be a time of
sorrow, a time of purifying and clensing. The soul must know and feel, that it
has been an evil thing and bitter, that it has forsaken the Lord, the living
fountain of living mercies, and has sought life from vanities, and among dead
Idols. And all the Idols must be thrown away, and the heart washed from that
nature that ran after them, and become a pure virgin, to bear and bring forth
the living seed; and by faithfulness to that seed, and waiting in that seed, in
the Lords season it shall receive the mercy, and the blessing, and the
inheritance which belongs to that seed. The Husbandman does not presently reap,
but waits long, even till the seed be grown up to maturity. Jacob, the type of
the seed, said, O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation. It is the election
that obtains: it is to the seed, and for the seeds sake that the mercy is
bestowed: and there must be a waiting, till the seed be gown up to age, and
able to defend his portion from his elder Brother, who otherwise would be ready
to seize on it, and waste it upon harlots again. Therefore lie still, and bear
the indignation of the Lord against that which has transgressed, til he judge
it, and deliver from it, and lead into the innocence and righteousness: and
then he will find a time to arise, and plead the cause of the innocent, and give
the crown of immortal life to that which he has prepared for it. Therefore
think not the race long, nor the battle hard, nor be weary of the afflictions
and chastisements in the way: but follow the Captain, the guide, the leader,
whose light, strength, courage, and wisdom will overcome all, and bring the
soul, which abides in it, into his own throne.

Now as you thus wait, taking up the Cross, and keeping in the feeling; so the
corrupt natural, the mortal, wherein Satan's throne and power has been, will
wither, decay, and grow weak daily; and the tender plant of God, the immortal
seed will shoot up, and gather strength daily: and you will come to a will in
God, and an understanding in God, and that which is of God will manifest it
self, and you will come to know, and desire, and take delight in the things of
God: Then the soul, which is immortal, will come to hear, and receive, and feed
on the immortal word, which is the bread of life, and which alone is able to
preserve and nourish up to eternal life. Then ye will know what it is to tremble
at this word, and to have all the powers of nature melt and fail before it.
Then ye will know the faith which gives the victory, and the knowledge which
lets into life, and the fear which keeps the hearts clean, and the hope which
anchors the soul immortal in the immortal God, and the patience which wins the
Crown. And so ye will come to witness the several conditions of the Saints in
Scripture, at ye grow up into them, and will not need men to give you meanings
of Scriptures, from their brain-studies and acquired arts and understandings,
but will know the meaning from the thing felt in your own hearts, and hear the
words from the living voice of that spirit that first spoke them, who alone is
able to interpret his own mind, and open the words which he himself spoke. And
then ye will know and love life, and need, no more exhortations to depart from
all dead, corrupted, and corrupting forms, which ever were, and ever will be
enemies to, and be traitors of the life. And to the peace of God, the rest of
God, the true Sabbath of God, the everlasting light and life of God will come to
be your own, and enjoyed by you, past all gainsaying or dispute in you, while
the natural understanding in others is reasoning, contending, and disputing
about them, but can never know (while they are from the thing within?) for that
mind is not the heir, nor must not inherit the kingdom of God.

A Postscript.
TO those who have had a seriousness and depth in their Religion, who could not
sit down in empty forms and shadows of things, but have been pressing after the
living substance, and missing of that, through error of judgment, the true eye
being not fixed in the head, have come to a loss; and so are returned to,
overgrown with, and hardened in the old nature, and have taken up a pitiful
rest and center in the earth, having let fall the pursuit of their spirits after
the true center of rest in the life: a word to such from the love in the life.

There was a spirit, soul, or image of God brought forth, and standing in his
life before the fall.

This soul was brought into death, under the burden and bondage of corruption,
out of its proper center and resting place, by the fall.

Now as there is in this state a true loss, so there is in this spirit a
sensibleness, a groaning under the burden, a feeling the bitterness of the
captivity, and a panting after redemption and restoration to its former state.

Now though the whorish part, which seduced from the life, make a great noise
in the flesh about Saints words, and tempt to pleasures of the outward part,
and pleasures in the mind, and draw into forms and religious worships, and
frame deep centres of satisfaction in the understanding (perhaps from true
openings of the life, quenching it) and so seek to quiet the soul, and still the
cry: yet the lost state remaining, the soul being not truly redeemed, but a
false rest taken up by the way, in the false part; this will fail, and the sense
be again renewed in the day of trial and sore trouble. For the soul by any
imagination, or notion, or feeling of a center in the corrupt mind, cannot be
healed or restored; but only by having the true life raised up again in it,
and it brought into its proper place and mansion in the fountain of life.

There have been in the shakings of this Nation great stirrings, the seed
springing up, and great openings to the seed; the spirit of prophesy has been
enlarged in us, above what many of our forefathers felt: but the way into the
spring of life has not been known, where the preservation is: so the whorish
part, the corrupt part, the understanding which was not purified and brought
into subjection unto the truth, this harlot caught the openings and prophestes
of the true spirit, conceived with them, and brought forth children to the
flesh; bringing for a more inward apprehension of things, a more spiritual kind
of knowledge, as of God to be all, all to be good, and in God, and all sin and
evil done away there, etc. and so such a center for the fleshly mind (as it
were) in him, as was not known before. And now the redemption is forgotten, the
pantings after life slain, and the flesh can lie down quiet in the un-redeemed
estate, and say it is his will, it is good, and it can rest satisfied there in
that will of his which is good. Thus the great abomination from the subtle flesh
sprung up, which made many hearts desolate of very precious springings up, and
buddings forth of the true life and power of God.

But after this great loss and betraying of the life in them, it has pleased
God to raise it up in others, and to discover the hammer, the sword, the fire,
which can knock down, cut down, burn up this whorish part: and thither the
whore is brought, when she comes to betray again; and the springings up of life
shrink back, and lie safe in the center, while the whore is burning. And as the
whore is burnt, the heir comes up, and the Spirit (which is the portion of his
inheritance) descends and rests upon him: and by this he is known: and that
which is in union with him knows him. Therefore if you will live, come to that
hammer, that sword, that fire which flesh dreads; and let the flesh be
delivered up to it: and do not despise the day of small things, waiting for some
great appearance, but know it in its lowest knock; for its power of redemption
is as truly there, as in its greatest appearance. He that has an ear, let him
hear, and his soul shall live.

Let those therefore whom this concerns, consider their ways (as the grace
that appeared to me, has taught me to do) and try their foundation, upon what
they stand: and that they do not kill what is opened, and live in the slain
openings and so in the end become dark, airy, dry, withered, wheeling about and
turning into the earth, it becoming their rest and foundation again, and so
loosing the joys which formerly the opener did open. This, with me, many of
you may witness: for whom my desire is, that they may also witness the return
to that which then opened, and live in the opener, and be preserved by him from
abusing his precious openings any more.

For though I had a true taste of life and power from God, yet not knowing the
foundation, there could be no true building with it: and so the spirit was
quenched, the life wasted, the portion spent upon harlots, the true bread lost,
and chaff and husks fed upon, without the least satisfaction to the soul; the
sense whereof, when the spirit of the Lord awakened me, did almost over-whelm
me. Yea the bands of death were so strengthened upon me, and the spirit of the
word had taken such hold of me, that I found my return very difficult: yea when
living words of hope were mentioned to me; to draw me back to that principle of
life from which I had gone out, I could receive nothing, but cry out
impossible, impossible, impossible. I felt my self like a tree twice dead,
plucked up by the roots, without the capacity of life, sense, or motion in the
eternal being any more. But at length it pleased life to move in a low way, in
the midst of the powers of darkness in my heart: and by sinking low out of the
wisdom, out of the reason, out of all high imaginations, and trusting my self
to it, though dreadful strokes and oppositions were felt from the powers of
darkness, yet at length there was some appearance of the deliverer, in such a
poor, low, weak, despicable way, as could never have been welcomed, had not the
soul been first brought to distress, and the loftiness of the imaginary part
brought down. And then coming out of that into the feeling, in another part;
there was a seed sprung up into a child: and as that child grows, and feeds on
the milk of the immortal word, I live, and am strengthened in him, and daily
weakened in that part which lived before. These are true words, from an honest
heart, for the relief of those who may have been entangled in the same snare.

Here follows the Testimony Concerning the Estate of the True Church; what she
has been, and what she is; and it was given forth, as being the motion of the
Spirit of the Father, and left with me; and is Judged suitable and servicable to
be here inserted; and it may be for the edification of many.
COncerning the True State of the Church, what she has been, and what she is
at this day; and concerning her increase and decrease thorough ages and
generations past, and her present State is this; returning again out of the
Wilderness, where she has long been fed, having a place prepared of God. Now
the Apostle saw her a woman clothed with the Sun, covered with the light of
Heaven, and with the glory of God, having the Moon under her feet, the light
which was ordained to rule the night. Thus she was, and this was her state in
the days of the Apostles, when many were converted out of darkness, and
renewed to be members of this Church, for her glory shone through the World,
and she flourished through Nations, and this was her Estate in the Apostles
days; and she traveled to bring forth the man-child Christ Jesus, which is
the child and husband of this woman, which was clothed with the brightness of
the glory of God, the elected spouse of Christ, the Lambs wife, and his body,
of his flesh and of his bones, having power and dominion and treading under all
contrary. And thus was it with her in generations past, whose seed spring forth
as branches fruitful and glorious. But in process of time it came to pass, that
this woman the spouse of Christ, his body, the wife and mother of thi^
man-child, she was bereaved of her beauty, and her garments were taken away,
her seed was made war against, and was smitten and overcome and she fled into
the wilderness, and there has sat desolate as a widow, lamenting the loss of
her children, and being deprived of her husband, and the man child, which
should have ruled the Nations: for she has been fled into the Wilderness, and
her former beauty has not appeared to be, and her former glory has seemed to
be gone, and she has been driven away from her head, from her husband, and
from her seed. Behold all people the Estate of such a woman, and read this
parable who can, a woman most glorious and fair, having her husband ruler of
the whole earth, and having an heir born to rule over heaven and earth, being
covered with the light of heaven, and of the everlasting day, and having the
light of the night under her feet: yet has this woman been deprived of her
glory, and sat desolate in the Wilderness a mournful place, separated from
her husband, and made childless and without seed: and what ey that sees this a
right, but must mourn; and what heart that truly perceives it, but must lament:
a woman so great and so glorious, and so fruitful as to bring forth the heir of
heaven and earth yet has she been left as a mourner, as without husband, and
without issue for many generations; This has been her estate and condition for
ages, since the days of the Apostle, which John saw (in a vision) would
shortly come to pass after him, and we see it has been come to pass within
this sixteen hundred years; and this has been the estate of the true Church
for many ages, a woman childless, whose heir has been taken from her, and
whose seed has been made war against and killed for many generations. But her
time was decreed, and she should but be thus for so many days: and now are the
days expired, and she again shall receive her heir that has been caught up
from her, and her seed shall spring forth, and her slain shall live, and her
beauty shall be given her, and her first glory shall be increased, and she
shall feed no longer in the mourning. Wilderness, but she shall be fed upon the
Mountain of Gods house, which is to be established upon the top of all
mountains; and her seed shall spring forth numberless, and her heir shall rule
with an iron rod, and her marriage day is come, and the approach thereof nigh,
and life shall be revealed. Thus she has been and thus she shall be, the Lord
has said it.

Now as for all those multitudes of sects, and peoples that have professed
Religion, and as for all those Churches so called, that has gone under that
name, which has professed Christ to be their head, and made a show of him in
appearance, the Papists Church, the Protestants Church, and all the sects that
has risen out of both of them, they have not been the true spouse, the lambs
wife, but children of fornication, and not of the seed of that woman that was
once clothed with the Sun, and they are come up; and their original begun,
while this true woman, this spouse of Christ has been childless: none of these
are clothed with the sun, nor none of them have brought forth the heir of
salvation. Come let us reason with you: who was your mother? who brought you
forth? and in what womb was you bred? you that have appeared in the World, and
for many ages, for the true spouse? The mother of the heir has been childless,
and as a widow banished from her husband, and her heirs separated from her, and
her seed killed and made war against. She has not born you nor brought you
forth; then of what womb did you spring, all ye of the Papists and Protestants
Church, and all the sects that came out of you, answer me this? None of you
has been fled into the Wilderness, for you have appeared in the World. None of
you have been as a widow mourning; for you have been practicing ordinances, and
rejoicing in the World. None of you have been without issue, nor your seed made
war against: for you have been fruitful in the World, and one sect brought
forth another, and one Church brought forth another, therefore none of you has
been that woman which John saw: for never none of you, from the least to the
greatest of you, was ever clothed with the sun, nor had the moon under your
feet, nor ruled the Nations with the rod of iron: therefore none of you are the
true spouse, the lambs wife; he is not husband to any of you, nor is he your,
child, nor heir. And this is the word of the Lord God to you all; you Churches
and sects, your beginning and springing forth was from another womb, while this
woman lodged in the Wilderness, and while she was childless and without seed;
and the mother of harlots brought you forth, the great whore whose
superscription is Mystery of Babylon, and her character is Mother of all
abominations. For while this other woman has been fled into the Wilderness,
which John saw was fled thither, this woman the mother of harlots, which
brought you fotth, has been fruitful and flourishing, and has had an husband
and many children; for John speaks of two women, of a whore, and of a virgin:
of one, the blood of whose seed was drunk, and the other drunk the blood: yea,
one that was made war with and against, for the Saints were killed and their
blood drunk, and that other killed the Saints, and was made drunk with their
blood: the one was fled into the Wilderness he saw, of which I have spoken, and
the other making all Nations drunk with her fornication, and ruling over all
the Nations of the earth as a Queen; and while the one of those, the virgin,
the Lambs wife, has been fled into the Wilderness, and left childless without
seed; the other, the whore has been fruitful, and brought forth many children,
taken great pleasure in the World, and committed fornication with the Kings of
the earth: and these things John saw was to come to pass, and we see (that have
John's spirit) is come to pass already. And come all ye Sects upon the earth,
and Churches so called, that have been in the World for many ages, which of
those two women are you of? and the seed of whether of them are ye? who of
these two was it that brought you forth? answer me, and make it appear. But I
have said already the virgin brought you not forth, the Lambs wife did not bear
you, nor you are not of her: for you were brought forth while she was banished,
and deprived of her heir, and without her husband; and you are of the seed of
that whore, the product of her fornications, generated by the seed of
adulterers: and though you have been warring, and fighting and striving one
against another, yet you were bred in one womb, and are of one seed: And though
some of you in one appearance of the whores beauty brought forth have made war
against them, brought forth in another appearance of her, and burned her flesh;
yet have ye given your power to the beast, and John saw that also, which we see
is fulfilled, some that should hate the whore, and make war against her, yet
should they also give their power to the beast. This have we seen fulfild
amongst you sects and false Churches, and your beginning we know, and the first
beginning of whordom, and when the whore began with her fornications, since
which time all Nations have drunk her cup, and her sent hass been upon Nations,
and multitudes, and peoples. Her first whoredom John speaks of in his Epistle,
and her beginning, they went out from the body, from the spouse, and from the
virgin; they went out from the true Church being false members, not as ever
being of the body of Christ, nor of the true Church, but such as had been
amongst the members of the true Church and were once convinced which had got
the form, and put on sheeps clothing upon the Wolvish nature, and here was the
beginning of her whordom she went from the spouse, and went into the World, and
the World heard her and received her, and they drunk of her cup, and committed
fornication with her, and she played the whore in the unbelieving World, after
she departed from the Saints. She went out from them, and they denied her, and
it was manifest she was not of them: and this was the beginning of whoredoms:
and she was but young yet in her whordoms, and little in the World, and had not
yet deceived many: but in process of time it came to pass, she increased so
mightily, that she made all Nations drunk, and overcame them, Kings and Rulers,
Bondmen and Freemen, they all drunk of her cup, and she became so great, that
Nations, kindreds, multitudes and peoples was her seat, her place of government,
where she sat Ruler and Queen having dominion over all, and all was bewitched
by her, and made drunk with her cup: and of this woman came ye, all ye sects
upon earth, and you are the multitudes, kindreds, and peoples upon, which her
seat has been, and over whom she hass had government. And this is she that
hass drunk the blood of the Saints, and overcome them, and the heir and seed of
the other woman, the virgin, has long been made war against, and killed and
slain by this woman and her seed, and this has been the state of the Church
for many ages, since the days of the Apostles she hass been fled, and her seed
made war against and killed, and her heir caught up to God, and the Nations
which should have been ruled by her heir, the whore hass set upon them, and the
peoples, and the multitudes which he should have governed, has been the seat
of the Harlot, the mother of all abominations: and was it not like to be so,
and how should it be otherwise, when the manchild, the woman's heir, hass been
caught up to God, and he hass been as prevailed against, and the remnant of the
woman's seed made war against and killed, and this has been since the days of
the Apostles? and so all you Churches and sects, by what name soever you are
known in the World, you are the seed of the great whore, and she has brought
you forth, while the other woman hass lodged in the Wilderness, and remains
childless, if any man have an ear to hear, let him hear.

Now it may be objected to me, and thus may it be said, by this account the
Church, the Lambs wife, hass been prevailed against by the whore, because it is
said she has killed the Saints, the members of Jesus and of the Church; this
seems to show, as if the Church of Christ had been prevailed against, but
Christ says the gates of hell shall not prevail against them, but she should
remain for ever, and the gates of hell should not prevail against her, and how
does these two things agree? it seems doubtful to us, may some say.

Answ. To all this I do answer, the true Church, the spouse of Christ in her
self was never prevailed against, so as not to be in being, or that she was
not, but in her self hass remained in being, and not prevailed against, so, as
not to have a place or being, and Christ's words are true, she hass had a place
and being, to wit in the desert Wilderness, which place was prepared her of
God, there to be fed for, such a time. So she hass a place and has a being,
though in the Wilderness, a place desolate and of mourning. So she hass not
been prevailed against, as that she hass not had a being; but the Lambs wife,
the mother of the heir, that which is perfectly so; which was and is to be
joined to Christ, which is of his flesh and bones taken out of him that cannot
be prevailed against, never was, nor never shall be, for the devil nor Satan
has nothing in him, of whose flesh and bones she is; which is taken out of
him, and it is as possible for to prevail against him, as to prevail against
her, for she is of him, as Eve was of Adam, if any have an ear to hear they may
hear. But her offspring hass been overcome her seed made war against, and her
heir taken away, and caught up from her: so she not prevailed against nor
overcome, though banished into the Wilderness, fled thither, and there hass she
fed and had a place, and hass been left childless, as I have said. So the
mother and the Lambs wife, has had a being, and in her self never prevailed
against nor overcome, and Christ's words are true: yet has her seed been
killed, and made war against, and overcome, as John said; and both these are
true, and this is my answer, and if any have an ear to hear they may hear,
though a parable to the world, yet plain to the seed, which now God has raised
and is raising: for the woman again is returning, and her seed again is
springing, and she is becoming as fruitful as ever, and her glory shall be as
great, the light of heaven shall cloth her, and the light of the night shall be
under her feet as perfectly, when she is restored, as it was before the
apostasy, though people cannot believe this in the apostasy. No revevelation,
nor immediate teaching, nor miracles now to be expected, cry the professors,
and these false sects and Churches: it was extraordinary times, and
extraordinary manifestations were amongst the Apostles and Churches of old, say
they, but the same now is not to be expected, nor never to be looked for, but
thus they are in blindness and ignorance, and unbelief. But we believe the
glory of this woman, that has been long fled into the wilderness, and has
been long without issue while she has been fled, shall have the same fruit and
issue, and the same clothing that she had before she fled. When the whore and
her seed is removed from the face of the earth, the glory of the Lambs wife
shall be as great, her beauty as fair, her fruit as plenteous as before the
whore was: and they that believe it not, believes not the Scriptures: for that
testifies of the glory of the Church to be the greatest in the last days, as
we are sure and certainly know it shall come to pass, when the waters are dried
up, which has been the seat of the great whore.

Now though all those Churches and sects of people are said to be, and known to
be the seed of the whore, and not of the Virgin, as I have declared: and though
Nations, and Peoples, and multitudes have been all running to sornication, and
been deceived, and made drunk, yet this I have to say, in all sorts of people,
and amongst all those sects, amongst Papists and Protestants, and all sects
risen out of them, in thousands of people, notwithstanding the darkness and all
the Apostasy that has ruled in the general; yet in some of all sorts and sects
there has been a sincerity, and simplicity, and a desire and zeal for God, and
of God in them and amongst them: yet the sincerity, simplicity, and desire
which has stirred in some of all sects, it has no soonet appeared, but it
has been smitten, and betrayed by the wicked without, and so by the error of
judgment within: for even amongst the worst of sects, we know there is some in
whom there is simplicity, and sincerity and zeal; and yet err in judgment, for
this is possible: and we know it is so with thousands, and ten thousands at
this day, there may be a simplicity, and zeal, and sincerity of heart, and yet
err in judgment, and the judgment not truly guided, by the Spirit of the Lord;
but a false spirit, and a false thing, even the spirit of whoredom it self
ruling the judgment, and be chief there: and this destroys, and murders, and
betrays the zeal and simplicity; and this is, and has been ever since the
days of the Apostles, great error in judgment, and the judgment of all those
sects have been mis-guided and misted, and a false thing, and not the spirit of
the Lord has guided the judgment, and thereby the true sincerity, zeal and
simplicity has been enslaved and held under, by reason of the erring in
judgment: and the state of such are truly to be lamented, where simplicity is
devoured, and sincerity betrayed, and held captive by the whorish spirit that
sits ruler in judgment. I do not speak of all people of all sects, that they
have zeal and simplicity; but of some people in all sects, and through all
these false Churches, and so the spirit which has guided the judgment, that has
abased the zeal, and abused the sincerity, and betrayed it; so people have been
a running, running after the form, and blind in judgment, and lost sincerity,
and simplicity that has been betrayed in them, though sometime appearing and
stirring, and so the wrong part in people has fed upon the form and appearance,
and the seed starved, and the sincerity eaten out, and so one sect has made
this the rule of their judgment, and another sect another thing, the rule of
their judgment, one cries tradition, another Scriptures another cries the
practice of Saints before us, and none of all have been guided in judgment by
the spirit of the Lord; and where the spirit of the Lord is not the only rule
of judgment, guiding the judgment in all things, that people and that man, are
in error, and the sincerity in them has not its free course, but bound under
with a spirit which is bondage, and leads into bondage; and when people comes
to be turned to the light of Christ in them, and receive a measure of the
Spirit of the Lord to guide the judgment, then the sincerity and simplicity and
zeal will grow, and thrive, and be increased: but til then the good is eaten
out, that lies under and is oppressed, and ever and always, the desire
quenched the sincerity lost, the simplicity betrayed by the spirit of whoredom
which rules the judgment; and these things are manifest in our age, therefore
all people come out of your sects and false Churches, for the woman is
returned, and returning out of the wilderness, and the seed shall spring forth
as in the days of old.

E. B.

A Testimony of great concernment to all that call themselves Christians, but
have not known the true Church, of which alone the true Christian can be born.
THere has been a great War between the woman and her seed, and the harlot and
her seed, from the beginning to this day; and they have each had their
prevailings in the war. The woman and her seed have been made strong in God, to
conquer some of the territories of death, and to set up their life in the
world. Thus in the Jewish state, God prepared an heaven and an earth for the
woman and her seed: and when that heaven and earth was shaken, he prepared a
more glorious heaven and earth in the Christian state. Now no sooner was the
Church and her seed seated in either of these, but the Dragon made made war
against her, and in the war had power given him, to recover her seat from her.
Thus the Devil gat possession of the Jewish state, so that there was no room
for the true Church there, but all was in idolatry and corruption; and the Lord
was not served by their ceremonies, by their sacrifices, by their Sabbaths, by
their new moons, by their Temple-worship, etc. but the Devil. And the Devil
also got possession of the heaven and earth in the Christian state, so that in
their Ordinances, in their worships, in their duties, in that which they call
their Churches, God has not been worshipped in truth, but the Devil for this
many ages. For mark, who was it that got into the Temple of God? was it not
Antichrist? was it not the Spirit of Satan? 2 These. 2. 4. And who was it that
was worshipped in all the world, that had power given him over all kindreds,
and tongues and nations? and whom all that dwell upon the earth, worship? was it
not the Dragon? Rev. 13. 7, 8. Did not all the world wonder after the beast,
and worship the Dragon which gave power unto the beast, ver. 3. 4. of that
Chap. The woman was assaulted here, her strong holds taken from her, so that
she could not stay safe in that heaven and earth, which God had made for her:
therefore there was another place prepared for her by God in the wilderness,
and she had wings of an Eagle given her to fly thither, but the Dragon got
into, and held possession of that heaven where she was before, Rev. 12. So that
none has known the Church all this time, but he that has been born of her in
the wilderness, which was a place the world never dreamed of, but looked for
her in the heaven and the earth which the Devil had got possession of. And here
they cry up the Ordidinances, the Ordinances, duties, the Church, the Ministry,
etc. (as the Jews did the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord) not
knowing in whose hands these were, and whom they worshipped hereby. Now
consider this O ye Christians, I speak what I assuredly know, that God could
not be truly worshipped in any of these, while they were in the Devils hands;
but the whorish Spirit, and her seed worship here; and the worship of the
Church and her seed: was a wildernessworship, or a worship which she learned of
God in the wilderness. Mark now and consider my testimony, O ye Christians. I
deny all the worship, all the Ordinances which were taught the Christians of
old, now practiced by the whorish spirit: for the Devil had gained it, and
corrupted it, and having corrupted it, God could not be any more worshipped in
it; but the Antichristian spirit sat there, giving forth those things as his
Laws; He sat in the Temple of God, and there made use of the Vessels and
Ordinances, which he had carried captive into his Babylon; and I deny it to be
possible to have any true use of these, til the time of the recovery. And now
the time of the recovery is come, and the restitution begun, people know it
not; but cry up the old heaven and the old earth, which Satan had corrupted,
setting it up in opposition against the new, which God has new formed, and is
bringing forth in true beauty and glory.

Now in this war, though the Devil, though the harlot and her seed gat the
woman's seat from her, and banished her seed as it were out of the earth; yet
they were not able to touch the woman, nor to overcome the life of God in her
seed, but only to kill their bodies; but the life was still conqueror over them,
and not subjected to them. They could raise up Churches, and Ordinances, and
Ministers and duties, and cause all that dwell on the earth to worship, in some
part or other of this Babylon: but they could never make the seed bow to any of
their images, nor could they hurt the woman hereby who was in the wilderness,
out of the reach of all these: And there she did eat the bread of life with
tears, mourning over her desolate estate, and her loss of children: And here
alone was the true bread of life, which was not to be known or tasted of, in
any of the Ordinances of the Apostasy: ye will all one day acknowledge this to
be a true testimony, held forth to you in true love: it were good for you that
ye could see it now.

J. P.

A brief account of what we are, and what our work is in the World.
WE are a people whom God has converted to himself, a people in whom God has
raised up the seed of his own life, and caused it to reign over the earthly
part in our selves, a people whom God has divorced from the spirit of whordom,
and joined to his own spirit. We, many of us, sought truly and only after God
from our child hood (our consciences bear us witness in the sight of God) but
the honesty of our hearts was still betrayed, and we led aside by the whorish
spirit, and knew not how to turn to that of God in us, which inclined us
toward God. By this means we came to great distress and misery, beyond all
men. Not but that all men were in as great a want of God (his life, power, and
presence) as we; but the sense thereof was not so quickened in others, as in us.
Now it pleased the Lord at length to pity us, and to inform our minds toward
himself, to show us where life lay, and where death lay, and how to turn from
the one, and to the other, and he gave us his helping hand to turn us. And by
being turned to him, we have tasted of the truth, of the true wisdom, of the
true power, of the true life, of the true righteousness, of the true
redemption: and by receiving of this from God, and tasting and handling of it,
we come to know that that which the World has set up in the stead of it, is
not the thing it self. Now mark, we are not persons that have shot up out of
the old root into another appearance, as one Sect has done out of another till
many are come up one after another, the ground still remaining the same out of
which they all grew: but that ground has been shaken and shaking, destroyed
and destroying, removed and removing in us, and the old root of Jesse has been
made manifest in us, and we have been transplanted by the everlasting power of
life, and a real change brought forth in us out of that spirit, wherein the
World lives and worships, into another spirit, into which nothing which is of
the World can enter. And here we have met with the call of God, the conversion
to God, the regeneration in God, the justification, the sanctification, the
wisdom, the redemption, the true life and power of God, which the World cannot
so much as bear the name of. And what we are made of God in Christ, we know to
be truth, and no lie: and when we testify of this to the World, in the measure
of the life of God in us, we speak truth and no lie; though the World, which
knows not the truth, cannot hear our voice.

Now our work in the World, is to hold forth the virtues of him that has
called us, to live like God; not to own any thing in the World which God does
not own: to forget our country, our kindred, our Fathers house; and to live
like persons of another country, of another kindred, of another family: not to
do any thing of our selves, and which is pleasing to the old nature, but all
our words, all our conversation, yea every thought in us is to be come new.
Whatever comes from us, is to come from the new principle of life in us, and to
answer that in others, but we must not please the old nature at all in our
selves, nor in any else. And walking faithfully thus with God, we have a reward
at present, and a crown in the end, which does and will countervaile all the
reproaches and hardships, we do or can meet with in the World.

We are also to be witnesses for God, and to propagate his life in the World;
to be instruments in his hand, to bring others out of death and captivity unto
true life and liberty: we are to fight against the powers of darkness every
where, as the Lord calls us forth. And this we are to do in his wisdom,
according to his will, in his power, and in his love, sweetness, and meekness.
We are not to take ways according to our own wisdom (but there must be a
strict watch, set in the life, least that get up again:) nor must we speak such
words, as man's wisdom would call wise: nor may we go in our own will to seek
any, but the Lord must go before: nor may we make use of our own strength, but
feel his arm in our weakness: nor may we go forth in that love, sweetness, or
meekness which is pleasing to the fleshly mind: but we must be true to God,
handling the svvord skilfully and faithfully, judging and cutting down the
transgressor in the power and authority of God, and when the meek, the lowly,
the humble thing is reached and raised, then the true love, the sweetness the
tenderness, the meekness must go forth to that. The Lord God is tough with the
transgressor, and all a long the Scripture heweth and judges him: and if we
come forth in the same spirit, we shall find the same leadings, where we meet
with the same thing: for the Lord God will never be tender there; nor can that
which comes from him, lives in him, is lead by him, be tender there where he is
not.

Now the very root of this severity is good, and of God, and has love and
sweetness at the bottom of it: yea in pity, love, and bowels do we use the
sword. It is in pity to the poor captived creature, that that might be cut
down, which keeps it in bonds and captivity. And though we seem enemies to all
sorts of men, for the Lords sake: yet we are not enemies, nor could do the
least hurt to them any way, but are true friends to their souls, and bodies
also: and our only controversy is with that which captives and makes them
miserable: for we fight not at all with flesh and blood, but with the
principality and power which led from God, and rules in it against God, to the
poor creatures ruin and destruction. Yea if we had all the powers of the earth
in our hands, we could not set up our own way, (if, after the manner of men, I
may so call it) or so much as disturb others in their way thereby, but should
wait in patience, till God gave us an entrance by his power.

Now let not men run on in heats against us, but let them seriously consider,
whether we be of God or no: and let them consider, not with the reason and
understanding which is alienated from God, but with the witness which lies hid
in the heart. There is one great palpable argument that we are of God, which is
this, all the World is against us, the Wordly part every where fights with us,
the Wordly part in every sort and Sect of men opposes us, the rage of man
every where rises up against us; But those that are so hot against us, if at
any time they become but meek and calm, patiently considering our cause, and
consulting there upon with the testimony that they find in their own hearts
concerning us, they soon become pacisied, and see that we are no man's enemies,
against no righteous Law, not against relations, not against Governments, not
against any thing in the World that is good, but only against that which is
evil and corrupt. And of a truth, the corruption of things God has showed unto
us, and daily calls us forth after an immediate manner, to witness against.

Therefore let men be sober, and take heed what they do, least they be found
fighters against God: for the reproaches, the scoffs, with other presecutions,
which seem to be cast at us, light on him. It is not as we are men, but as we
are obedient to him, as we stand witnesses for him, that we meet with these
things. Now, as it is not we our selves that do these things, but the life
and power of God in us; so it is not we that are struck at, but that life and
power: If it were not for that, we might be as acceptable as other men. It
is because we are not of the World, but God has called us out of the World,
that we are so hated of the World. This is the true cause, though the World
will no more now acknovvledge it, than it would in former ages. Yet I do not
speak this for my own sake, to avoid my share in the cross: for the reproach
of Christ is our riches, yea far greater treasure, then is to be found in the
Palace of Egypt. Yea the presence of God, the svveet power of life makes up
all our losses, so that we have no cause to complain. It is very svveet,
pleasant, and profitable for us to be found sufferers for God; but we know it
will not be profitable for you to be found persecutors: and this is told you
in true love and good will, by one who vvishes no evil to you, for all the
evil that ye have exercised tovvard the dear and precious people of God for
these many years. O that God would open your eyes, that ye might see whom ye
have opposed, and against whom ye have hardened and strengthened your selves,
that ye might bovv to him, and receive life from him, and not perish in your
gainsaying and opposition.

I. P.

The cause of all error from the truth, and the Universal call out of it, into
the low voice and beginnings, of the true Eternal light, which is the only
leader to Eternal life and to followship in it.
NOw is the calling in of the Jews, of the Papists, of the Christians of all
Sects upon the earth, to the Lord, into the fould, into the covenant of God,
into the end of the Prophets, the end of Moses, the end of Abraham's words, the
end of the Apostles preaching, into the substance Christ, who is come to gather
together in one, and reconcile in one, things in heaven and things in earth
into covenant with God: and this is the age; the call is gone out, the voice is
gone out, and the trumpet sounding for all to come in, and the spirit bids
come, and he that hears may come, and the bride and the Lamb says come, who
raigns, and the great war is begun, and the slaughter shall be till the tenth
of the spoil shall be offered up; and the gathering of all Nations is come,
and the war among all Nations shall be, and all shall be on heaps, before the
light of the Son of God be risen in the hearts of all people, with which he
must be seen, and receive his government upon his shoulders. Now is he come to
raigh, who does enlighten every man that comes into the World, Jews, Gentiles,
Papists, Christians, Independents, Baptists, Heathens, and all the Sects upon
the earth whatsoever, and all in the light are to be gathered into one mind,
and heart, and soul, and spirit concerning God and the Scriptures, concerning
the Prophets, concerning Christ and the Apostles, and concerning the types and
parables and the figures, with the light they shall see all, and have unity
with all; who being out of the light, they see not one another, nor the
Prophets, nor Christ, nor parables, nor types, nor figures, and so have not
unity with their words, and so out of covenant with God and one another, in the
earthly nature, in lusts, strife, and pride which causes the wars, which must
be all burnt up; and the cause of all peoples upon the earth setting up Images
and Idols, is, because they are gone from the light which Christ has
enlightened them with all, and so bows down to them, but to the light should
every one bow, to Christ, and to confess him to the glory of God; the cause of
all them that are called Christians in Christendom, setting up and making
Images, crosses and Idols, likenesses and pictures, names and worshipping
Names, (...) has enlightened them withal, and so they set up likenesses,
Images and Idols, and falls down to them, to put them in mind of Christ, which
coming to the light which Christ has enlightened them withal, every knee shall
bow to him who is Immanuel, and confess him to the glory of God, and receive
his mind, and they need not have any outward thing to put him in their mind,
and the cause of all high notions of God, Christ and Scriptures, that are
making Images and likenesses of things in heaven and setting up their
imaginations of the Prophets, Christ's and the Saints words and falling out
about them is, because they be from the light which Christ has enlightened them
withal; and it is the cause why the Jews rest in the types in the outward
letter, priest, tithes, temples, shadows, is, because they be from the light
which Christ has enlightened them withal, in which all people should have
unity one with another, with God, and with Scriptures, Jews and Gentiles to be
gathered together in one with God, with one another, with Scriptures; in which
light people should have peace with God, and one with another, which is the
covenant of God with man; in which covenant, people being in covenant one with
another, shall shake all Nations says the Lord, that that may appear that
cannot be shaken, and such an earthquake shall be upon the World; and the
cause of all heresy, and Sects, and opinions, Judgments, and errors, and false
Prophets, and deceiving men is going from the light which Christ has
enlightened them withal, and the devil going out of truth, which truth
destroys him and his works, and death (who being the power of it) who has
blinded the minds of all the transgressors upon the earth, who went out of the
truth. So this is the true light, who has enlightened every one that comes
into the World, that all through the light might believe: and he that believes,
has the witness in himself; and he that believes, sets to his seal that God
is true, who has sent his Son to inlighten him, him by whom the World was
made, in whom was life, and his life was the light of men; and this is it which
shines in darkness, and the darkness cannot comprehend it; And there is the
state of all confusion, and Sects, and opinions upon the earth, the darkness
professing Christ's, the Prophets, the Apostles, David's, Abraham's, and the
Saints words, and yet the darkness cannot comprehend the light which Christ
has enlightened them withal; so the darkness is not in unity with Abraham's,
David's, Christ's and the Apostles words, but be all on heaps about them.
Therefore as light shines out of darkness, shining in the heart, giving the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ the end of the
Prophets, Abraham's; Moses, David's, and the Apostles words, Christ Jesus is
known, in whom is the unity and reconciliation, and no darkness at all, but
unity with God, and with his Prophets words, and his Apostles and servants
before Abraham was; and in this unity all come into life and light, to the
spirits of just men made perfect. And to you this is the word of the Lord God,
and to your age and generation, the cause of all deceit and strife upon the
earth, is, because men have been in transgression, Heathens, Jews, and Gentiles
from Christ the light, under the devils power, out of truth; the cause of all
Christians being on heaps one with another, and their bad conversation, that
the heathen cries shame of them, has been because they have been out of the
light which they have professed, in which they should have served God, and had
unity with Scriptures, and one with another, and with God, and with that answer
the principle of God in all upon the the earth, and not by serving Jdols,
because of the vanities of their minds and unconverted state; so all upon the
earth that sets up likenesses and Jmages, are under vanities, because of the
corruption of their own minds, and the vanity of them: But the day of
restoration is come into Christ the light and covenant of God, and all upon
the earth that sets up Jmages and Jdols, liknesses, and serves dead works, and
has a dead faith, and not the faith of Abraham, the faith of the elect, that
gives every one to see Christ, and have access to God, and such need not to
have any dead thing to put them in mind of him, so all that set up such
things, whatsoever likenesses and Jmages, does the light which Christ has
enlightened them withal, bring them off from into light and covenant with God
(loving it) unto salvation, and to see it and to covenant with God, there is
every ones teacher, loving it; there is every ones condemnation, hating it; and
they there with the light, that every one is enlightened withal, shall come to
see the Prophet raised up, and there none shall be cut of that do hear this
Prophet, and there every one shall have his reward according to his works, from
the Son who has enlightened them, who is come to judge the World in
righteousness, who is now set down upon his Throne. So all Nations are called,
are commanded to come in and to hear the Son of God, and learn of the Son of
God, hear the beloved Son of God, and cease from all them that are made of men,
and by men, that they may come to hear the Son of God themselves, and receive
the Son of God; and receiving him, they receive life by whom the World was
made, coming into the light that he is enlightened withal, then every one may
freely declare what he sees, and hears, and handels, and every one sees him by
whom, the World was made, who is the light, and life, and resurrection; and
wisdom, and sanctification, and justification from all things in which light
the covenant of God, you have peace with God, that you may see him to the
beginning.

G. F.

An addition concerning the doctrine of Justification.
BEcause the doctrine of Justification is of great concernment, and the enemy
of mankind has exceedingly endeavored to corrupt it, and in the Apostasy has
greatly prevailed, and the darkness which springs up in the fleshly wisdom, is
exceeding thick at the day concerning this thing; therefore in true love to
souls it is laid upon me, to search into the Scriptures, which chiefly speaks
thereof, and from thence to clear it up to such, who are not yet come to the
life that gave forth the Scriptures.

The Apostle Paul does largely and fully treat of it, in his Epistle to the
Romans, and lays down several things concerning it, which if well heeded, may
dash men's present apprehensions about it, and bring them to wait for the
opening of those Scriptures to them, in another light then you have yet known.

1. He affirms that Justification is not by the deeds of the Law, To. 3. 20. If
a man could say with the young man, All these things have I done from my youth;
or as Paul, that he was as touching the Law blameless, yet could he not be
justified thereby:

And the Apostle gives a mighty reason; for by the law is the knowledge of sin.
Now Justification is not by the making of sin known, but by that which saves
and delivers from it. The knowledge of sin may put a man upon seeking out for
justification, but it cannot justify him, but rather condemn him; but that
which delivers him from the sin, which the law makes known, that justifies him.

2. He affirms that the righteousness of God (which is the justification) is
manifested without the law, v. 21. The Law makes sin known, and shows the
sinner the need of justification, but the justification it self is not thereby,
but is manifested without it. The Law commands the nature to act that pertains
to similitudes, figures, and types, and shadows, to the obedience of them, but
the seed takes away the nature that pertains to similitudes, and shadows, and
the works of the law: so to the obedience of those things the law commands
there is justification by the law, in the obedience to the works it commands:
but the justification, Christ, removes the nature, that pertains to those
things the law commands: so that justification, the law, ends in Christ.

3. That this righteousness or justification is witnessed by the law and the
Prophets, v. 21. The law, though it is not the justification, nor can the
justification be by obedience to it, or by the deeds of it, yet it gives
testimony to the justification: for the substance of what the law and all the
Prophets witness, is, that nothing can justify but the righteousness of God.

4. That this righteousness or justification is by the faith of Christ, v. 22.
by believing or entering into that which justifies. As condemnation was by
unbelier, by joining unto and entering into the spirit of enmity: so
justification, is by joining unto and entering into the spirit of love, by true
union with Christ in the spirit, which union is by the faith which comes from
Christ.

5. That this justification or righteousness is upon all that believe, v. 22.
He that receives the faith, believes; and he that believes has the
righteousness: and he that believes not, cannot have the righteousness, but
the condemnation and wrath abides on him.

6. That this justification is freely by the grace, v. 24. There is no way to
come to this righteousness but by the gift of grace, which gift is given
freely. Therefore if ever man will be justified, he must know the grace, and the
gift which comes from the grace, and receive it: and receiving it, he cannot
miss of justification, and not receiving it, (but either being ignorant of it,
or resisting of it) he cannot possibly be justified.

7. That this justification is by the redemption in Christ, v. 24. Christ is
redeemer, the redemption (wherein is the justification) is in him, and there is
no way of meeting with the justification, or redemption, but by receiving of
him in whom it is; and he who has him, has the justification, and is made
partaker of the redemption; and he who has not him, has it not.

Mark then, the justification or redemption, is not by believing of a thing
done without man (though that also is to be believed) but by receiving of him
into the heart. For the virtue of all Christ did without, is within him: and I
cannot be made partaker by believing that he did such a thing without, or that
he did it for me, but by receiving the virtue of it into me, and feeling the
virtue of it in me. This is that which saves me, and makes that which was done
without, to be mine.

8. That Christ is the propitiation, v. 25. or that which pacifies and makes
way for sinners to God, so that he that truly receives Christ, has the
atonement; but he that has not received him, only dreameth of peace with God,
but still remains in the enmity, and is liable to the wrath, having the bond
of iniquity over him, and is in the night.

9. That this Propitiation is by faith in the blood, v. 25. There is nothing
pacifies God, but the blood of his Son; and three is nothing feels the blood,
but the faith, and that which is in the faith. A man may read Scriptures, and
gather notions about justification, and think he believes, a right, and shall be
justified; but he never comes to feel the blood, nor the life which is in the
blood, till he receive the faith, and then he knows the true propitiation,
and the true peace, which before he did but talk of.

10. That this faith is the righteousness; Faith is the gift of God, and this
gift justifies; this gift is the justification, this is that which God imputes
for righteousness, chapter 4 v. 3. and 5. The faith is in the blood, and the blood
is in the Son, and in the true receiving of the Son, both the faith and the
blood are known, and felt. These are true words, though hard to the fleshly
ear; do not stumble in the wisdom, but calmly wait for the revelation of the
spirit, and then thou will say, the price of this knowledge is not to be valued;
and if once thou come to taste truth here, all thy knowledge in the letter will be
but dross with thee. Ye are come to the blood of sprinkling* O do not rest in
an outward way of believing an outward thing, but seek out the way of coming to
the blood of sprinkling.

11. That the justification is of the ungodly, v. 5. He whom God makes
righteous, was ungodly before he made him righteous. There was nothing but
unrighteousness could be imputed to him in transgression before he gave him his
Son, and made him righteous in his Son; for nothing is righteous with God but
Christ, and man only as he taken into his righteousness; which is done, not by a
believing from the bare leter, but by a receiving of faith in the life.

12. That the justification of the ungodly, is by believing in him that
justifies, v. 5. The gift of faith goes forth from him, is received into the
heart: now both by the gift it self, and by the exercise of it, is the
justification: by receiving of the gift is the person justified, by the
exercise of the gift are all his actions justified. Christ being let in to the
heart, justifies the heart into which he is received; and Christ being in the
heart, justifies every motion and action that comes from his life; and any
other motion or action is not justified, for it is out of that which is
justified, and is in and from that which is condemned.

Abraham believed God, and it was counted anto him for righteousness, v. ^. God
promised him a seed, he believed God, God bid him sacrifice this type, he
believed. This was it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now if he had not
believed, if he had not received the gift, or not exercised the gift, could he
have been righteous? so that Abraham was not justified by any work he did or
could do, but by receiving and exercising the faith in the seed: by going out
of his country kindred and fathers house, not of himself but by faith, and by
living to God, and obeying his voice in that land to which he was led, not in
his own will or power, but in the faith. And by hearing the call of God, and
receiving the faith, and living out of self out of a man's own understanding,
will and power, in the faith and living power and wisdom of God is the
justification now: and they that do thus are the children of Abraham, born of
the free woman, when as they that take up practices from the letter, without
being ingraffed into the life, are but children of the bond woman, but such
children of Abraham as the Jews were, (if so much) and can not inherit that
promise which belongs to the spiritual seed, while they live in that state.

13. That where the faith which is imputed unto righteousness is found, there
sin is not imputed, but covered, which is a blessed state, v. 6, 7, 8. Sin cuts
off from God, who is life and blessedness; sin lays open to the wrath of the
creator, which is too great for the creator to bear: woe and misery will be his
portion, to whom God imputes sin. But happy is he who has his sin covered: this
is an happy condition, life and immortality will soon be opened to him. Now
this blessedness comes not by the works of the law, for they cannot remove the
sin, but by the righteousness of faith, which is able to cover the sin even
from the pure ey of God. O Christians, christians, do not imagine your selves
covered from sin, but know it, feel it; never rest till ye are so made
partakers of the true righteousness, that by its virtue in you, ye may be past
all doubt that it is it. Believing from the letter without you, that ye are
justified, may easily deceive you; but if once ye come truly to feel in your
selves, the thing which justifies, and so find the power and life of it in you,
above the power of all that which condemns, casting out the condemned thing,
and the condemner with all his works out of your hearts, this cannot deceive.
The virtue of life was lost in the Apostasy, and that which was living did not
so much enjoy life, as mourn after it: and the power and safety of life did
then appear most in mourning: but now the Apostasy draws toward an end, and
the virtue begins to shoot up again: and he that will be a Christian now, must
be so, not by retaining his old notions, but by feeling this new virtue, and by
growing up in this new-sprung life and power of the Lord, whose appearance is
new to us, who have not been acquainted with it, but have been brought up in
the darkness of the apostasy, and lived in the waters, where great Leviathan
ruled, and who was able to make war with him there? But he that seeks, is
joined with, and keeps to that power which dries up the waters, and puts
an hook into the nostrils of the Leviathan, shall find the world with the whole
course of it, ending in himself, and the beginning and growth of an endless
life: and in whom that life lives, they shall live also; but where death keeps
the power of life down, such shall not live, or know the blessing, but abide
under the curse of misery and death, and under the powers of darkness.
Therefore look about you, and make a wise choice; for his servants ye are whom
ye obey, whether the Prince of darkness in his invented forms of godliness, or
the Prince of light it the living power: and your reward shall be, according to
your choice and work, either death in the death, if ye choose and join to that,
or life in the life, if ye join to that. He that has an ear to hear, let him
hear.

J. P.

A Table of the Contents.
AN Apostasy from the truth foretold of, Page 1 That this Apostasy began in
the days of the Apostles, p. 4 The poison of it infecting the Churches then,
p. 5 The general overspreading of the Apostasy over the whole earth, p. 7
Witnesses raised up against the Apostates, but still persecuted and slain by
the Apostates in all ages since the Apostasy, p. 8 Where the true Religion and
Church has been to be sought for all the time of the Apostasy, 9 The general
corrupting of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and of the whole state of
Christianity by the Apostasy, 10 The rule of Christianity lost in the Apostasy,
10 An objection concerning the rule answered, 13 The true rule (which was
before the Apostasy) infallible, 16 A dishonor put upon the Scriptures under
pretense of honor, 17 The Scriptures honor to be again recovered, 18 The true
worship lost in the Apostasy, 18 The true faith lost in the Apostasy, 21 The
true unfeigned love lost in the Apostasy, and a feigned love got up since among
professors of all sorts, 22 The true hope lost in the Apostasy, 23 The true joy
lost in the Apostasy, 24 The true peace lost in the Apostasy, 24 The true
repentance lost in the Apostasy, 24 The true conversion lost in the Apostasy.
25 The true regeneration, lost in the apostasy 25 The true wisdom lost in the
Apostasy, 25 The true righeousness or justification lost in the Apostasy, 26
The true sanctification lost in the Apostasy, 27 The true redemption lost in
the Apostasy, 27 The difference between Christians before the apostasy, and
Christians since, in the very substance of Christianity, 28 The true Church
lost in the Apostasy, 29 The true Ministry lost in the Apostasy, 30 Witnesses
raised up in all Nations to testify against the Apostasy, and some sparks of
truth (such as God saw fit for them to testify to the present age) revived in
them, 32 As the whorish spirit changed her dresses to keep up her deceit, and
to withold the honest hearted from the truth, so witnesses still raised up
against her, to discover her, and witness against her in all her new forms and
shapes, 33 Affliction and persecution good for the witnesses, to keep down the
flesh, and keep the life pure, in its weak appearance in them, in the time of
the Apostasy, 33 The tender kindness of God to the simple and honest hearted in
the time of the Apostasy, 34 The ill use that the carnal mind now makes of it,
34 The Ministry of the apostasy wrong in its nature, and whole course, feeding
the fleshly part, but not able to raise up and feed the soul, 34 Of a recovery
from the Apostasy, the Lamb and the Saints again ruling, 35 The preaching of
the Gospel again in the world 36 The fall of inventions, traditions, and false
worship, with that whorish spirit which invented them, and bewitched all
Nations with them, 36 Plagues to come upon them that abide in any part of
Babylon, 37 Who are still in some part or other of the apostasy, and not
recovered from it, 37 What the spirit that rules in the apostasy raises up in
men, and what it suppresseth, 38 How this Spirit entangled the simple hearted,
and held them in her snares, even when there were pure stirrings of life to get
loose from her, 39 What the worship of men is in the apostasy, and whom they
worship, 40 The only way of recovery out of the apostasy, 43 The enmity of
this Nation against that Spirit which would recover it out of the apostasy, 44
The danger of this enmity to the Nation, 45 Salvation only by the true
knowledge of Christ, 46 By the new covenant, 46 The Laws whereof are to be
written in the heart, 47 Which can be done by none but the Spirit, 48 Therefore
the first thing to be known in Religion is the Spirit, 48 The Spirit is first
known as a convincer of sin, 49 He convinces by his light in the conscience,
50 The light of conviction shines in every conscience 50 Believing in this
light is the true way to life, 51 Believing in this light unites to God, and
opens the springs of life, 52 How we came to the knowledge of the way to life,
53 The true Heirs comfidence in God against all the powers of flesh, 53 The
springing up of the seed of God in this Nation, with the great opposition
against it, 54 The spirit of error charge truth, with those things which
belong to it self, 55 Truth would take away the error, with that from whence it
springs, and wherein it lodges, but that it is opposed and withstood at the
very first, even when it does but begin to discover, 57 Object. That this is a
new way, answered, 58 Obj. That this light is natural, answered, 59 Obj. That
it makes the Scriptures void, answered, 59 Obj. That it teaches things contrary
to the Scripture, answered. 61 Obj. That it sets up free will, answered, 61
Obj. About wanting power, answered. 63 Obj. That this sets up a covenant of
works, answered, 63 Obj. That it breaks down relations, laws, governments,
takes away due respect from Magistrates, etc. answered. 65 A false healing of a
true wound, is the cause of error from the Spirit of life in ones self, and of
persecuting it in others. 67 The wisdom, which has been gathering knowledge
from the Scriptures in the apostasy, must fall, and all that knowledge come to
naught, before the truth can be received, 68 Gods love in discovering the
Apostasy, and calling from it, and
(...)
