THE JEVV OUTWARD: BEING A GLASS FOR THE Professors of this Age: Wherein, if
they read with meekness, and in the true light, such of them as have not
overslipt the day of their visitation, may see their own spirits, to their own
everlasting advantage and comfort, by learning subjection to that, which has
power in it to destroy this evil spirit in them. CONTAINING Some EXCEPTIONS and
ARGUMENTS of the Jews, against Christ's Appearance in that fleshly form of his
in their days, which the present Professors may view, and compare with their
Exceptions and Arguments against his Appearance in Spirit in this Age, that
they may see and consider which of them are the more, and the more weighty. By
Isaac Penington, the Younger.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Castle in Cornhill, 1659.

The PREFACE.
THE Lord God of infinite goodness, who has ever dearly loved Mankind, yet
could never so appear to them since the transgression, as to be owned by them,
till the vail was taken from before their hearts. Israel in Egypt hearkened not
to Moses, because of their anguish and bondage. When they were led out, they
were ever and anon murmuring, and picking quarrels against him. Samuel they
rejected (as the Lord lays to their charge) though they might excuse
themselves, and say they had just exceptions against his sons. Elijah, that
mighty man of God, the great restorer of Israel, and pleader against Baal by
fire, his life was sought for. And though there be not a particular record of
their usage of the Prophets about those days, yet in general he complains that
they were all slain but himself, 1 King. 19.10. Micaiah was smote on the cheek
and jeered bp the false Prophet which smote him, and said, which way went the
Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee? And he was commanded to be put
in prison, and fed with bread of affliction, and water of affliction. Jeremiah
was put in the dungeon, even to the danger of his life: and by those few that
were left, that seemed singly to enquire by him concerning the will of the
Lord, ( Jer. 42.2, 3.) disdainfully rejected, chap. 43.2. What should I spend
time in particular instances? What Prophet can I except? for though all their
bad dealings with them, are not related in Scripture, yet Christ testifies that
they did deal badly with them all, some of them they stoned, some of them they
scourged in their Synagogues, some of them they killed and crucified, and
others they persecuted from City to City. Yea, says Stephen, which of the
Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have stain them which
showed before of the coming of the Just one. Ye make it such a strange thing,
that if Christ had been a Prophet, ye should not own him: why which of the
Prophets was owned? ye have still some exception or other against us, that we
are not the Prophets of God; and against our message, that it is not the mind
of God. Ye take arguments from one Prophets words, to oppose another Prophet
with; and from one Prophets manner of coming, to oppose another Prophets manner
of coming. If John come neither eating nor drinking, ye reject him for his
austereness: if Christ come both eating and drinking, ye reject him for his
liberty and freedom in the life. Now what is the reason of this? Christ
himself gives the reason, Mat. 11.19. Wisdom is justified of her children. Ye
are not the children of wisdom, ye are not begotten of the life, of the spirit
of the Prophets, and so cannot justify that spirit. Ye have got the Letter of
the Prophets, ^e are born of that; but ye are not born of the life, ye are not
born of the wisdom. And so, whoever comes forth in the same birth from the
Letter with you, him ye can own: but if any Prophet come forth with that same
spirit, him ye cannot own. He that is born after the flesh, cannot but
persecute him that is born after the spirit: Jerusalem was all along the
persecuter of the Prophets, from the beginning to the end.

And is this nothing to you, O ye Professors of this age? Search and see who
have been the persecuters among you, but they who have had the name of the
Church and her Prophets? Who has slain the Witnesses? The Church of Rome has
slain the Witnesses against her, and the Protestants have slain the Witnesses
against them. About the beginning of these troubles, if a man were never so
truly zealous, yet if he could not conform to the Common Prayer Book and
Ceremonies, how was he persecuted? A Nonconformist, a Separatist, a Brownist,
an Anabaptist (though owning the same Christ in his very heart and soul) yet
because his practice was a testimony against the false Church-worship of the
common Protestant, must be hunted up and down to Courts, imprisoned, fixed,
banished. And to this day, the Lord can bring forth no birth of his Spirit, but
the zealous Professor hates, reviles, and seeks to destroy. If the Lord lay any
Law upon the Conscience, if it be not suitable to their apprehensions from the
Letter, how do they reproach, disdain, revile, and endeavor to render such
odious to the Magistrates, and to the People!

But why should we wonder at these things? There is no new thing under the Sun.
The state of the world is just as it always was. The power of Truth in every
age, has been still opposed by those who cried up the Form. It were a wonder
if it should be otherwise. I should much more, wonder, if the Teachers and
Professors of this age should own. Truth, than that they fight against it and
persecute it. Well friends and brethren, be strong in the Lord, and faithful to
his Truth in the power of his might; bear the reproach, the afflictions of this
age, the persecutions of this your day: Verily your eyes shall see that there
is a reward for the righteous, and your hearts shall be satisfied with it, when
the children of the Kingdom (of this age, as well as of Christ's, and all
former ages) shall be shut out in utter darkness, where shall be weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Some Exceptions and Arguments of the Jews, against Christ's Appearance, etc.
THE Jews were once the only outward visible People of God, who were chosen by
God for a peculiar People, who had the Promise of, and expected the Messiah,
whose faith and hope of Salvation was in him, yea, and at that very time they
were looking for him; yet when he came, he was a stone of stumbling, and a rock
of offense to them, and they could by no means receive him. They were full of
reasonings, and doubts, and contendings about it, but could never with all
their wisdom from the Letter, determine that that was he. Though he lived as
never man lived, though he spoke as never man spoke, though he did what never
man did; yet still some exception or other they had from the Letter of the
Scriptures, to which his manner of appearance, his conversation, and his
Doctrine did not suit in their judgment; and so after many Disputes and
Debates, they at length deliver him up to death, as a Blasphemer, a deceiver, a
seducer of the People.

Many Exceptions and Arguments they had against him, against his Descent, his
Doctrine, his Practices, his Miracles, his Followers, etc. which I shall refer
to Heads, to make them more obvious.

1. They excepted at his descent and kindred. Is not this the Carpenters Son?
Is not his Mother called Mary? and his Brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon,
and Judas? And his Sisters are they not all with us? Matt. 13.55, 56. (What
this the glorious Messiah, the great King of Glory, of whom all the Prophets
have prophesied and spoke such great things! surely it cannot be.) And they
were offended in him, verse. 57. It was this made them they could not receive
that heavenly Doctrine of his, which otherwise might have been life to them,
when he taught them that he was the bread of Life that came down from heaven:
but they murmured because of it, and said, Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph,
whose Father and Mother we know (...) How is it then that he says, I came down
from heaven, John 6, ^1, 42. So again, John 7.27. We know this man whence he
is; but when Christ comes, no man knows whence he is. This was a close
Argument, and was raised up to eat out a deep impression of his being the
Christ, as may appear from the foregoing verse. He speaks indeed boldly, and
deep things, etc. as if he were the Christ; but how can he be he, seeing it is
known from whence he comes?

2. At his Country, or place of his Education and residence, which was Nazareth
of Galilee. Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? John 1.46. Shall
Christ come out of Galilee? John 7.41. Search and look; for out of Galilee
arises no Prophet, verse 52.

3. At the time and season of his Coming. He came (as to their sense) before
Elias. With this Argument they pinched the Disciples, as is signified in that
Query of theirs to Christ, Why then say the Scribes that Elias must first come?
Matt. 17.10 This could not but be a sore Argument in the mouth of the Scribes,
who might reason with the Disciples on this wise: What poor, ignorant, sottish,
deluded People are you, to own this man for your Master, and take him for the
Messiah? Elias must first come, and restore all things. If this man preached
never so heavenly Doctrine, and did never so many Miracles, yet if he pretend
to be the Messiah, he can be but a Deceiver; for the true Messiah comes not
before Elias; and every one knows that Elias is not yet come, nor his work of
restoring all things, so much as begun.

4. His Doctrine administered abundance of offense to them, and they were
continually stumbling at it. That heavenly doctrine mentioned a little before,
that he was the bread of life, they murmured at it, John 6.41. When he did but
say, God was his father, they presently flew out upon him, and said he made
himself equal with God, John 5.18. When he said, Destroy this Temple, and in
three days I will raise it up; they misunderstood him, and brought it forth as
an argument against him at the time of his suffering, Mat. 26.61. And cast it
as a jear in his teeth, Mat. 27.40. When he did but say to the man sick of the
palsy, Son thy sins are forgiven thee; the Scribes and Pharisees presently
exclaimed against him, who is this which speaks blasphemies? who can forgive
sins, but God alone? Luke 5.21. and chap. 7.49. When he preached very
powerfully against covetousness, the Pharisees derided him, Luke 16.14. Yea,
when he did but preach a Parable or two about the Widow of Sarepta, and Naaman
the Syrian (it coming a little close to their State) all they in the Synagogue
were so filled with wrath, that they rose up and thrust him out of the City,
and led him unto the brow of the hill to cast him down headlong, Luke 4.28, 29.
At his saying that Abraham rejoiced to see his day, and he saw it, and was
glad; the Jews replied, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen
Abraham? John 8.57. How absurd and impossible was this to them, that a man of
not fifty years, should say that Abraham (who lived so many ages before) saw
his day; And instead of giving them an argument to demonstrate it to them, he
only returns them a more confident affirmation, Verily, Verily, I say unto you,
before Abraham was I am; verse. 58. which so enraged them, that they took up
stones to cast at him, verse. 59. Now mark, the life speaks what it sees and
knows, and so it gives forth its Testimony: the wise professor not being in the
life, he cannot know or receive the testimony, but calls for arguments and
damonstrations to his wise eye, the life refuses to answer him, but instead
thereof, only affirms the thing more strongly and confidently; this (being so
far from that which he looks for and requires to satisfy him) kindles disdain
and rage in him: and he looks upon the life, for this way of proceeding, as
worthy to be stoned. What, when they should lay before Christ a fair argument,
whereby they might plainly convince him by evident reason, that he could not
see Abraham's day; and he instead of answering it, should only bring forth a
more confident affirmation. Would not men's wisdom in this age, even hiss at
such a thing? yet this was the way of the life then, in that day; and the life
may at his pleasure, take the same way again now, to offend the wise and
knowing.

When he spoke of his being the good Shepherd, and of his laying down his life
for the Sheep (and of the Hirelings fleeing in time of danger to save himself)
John 10, verse. 11.12. etc. many of the Jews said, he has a Devil, and is mad,
why hear ye him? verse. 20. Many of them that were then the people of God (the
separated people: for the Jews were a people separated from the World, and
studied the Law, and observed the Ordinances of Moses) looked upon Christ, as a
man not fit to be heard speak, but as a mad man, as one that had a Devil, as
one that might have great power of deceit from the Devil, to bewitch men from
truth; why hear ye him? what good can ye expect from him? He has a Devil, and
is mad. O how desperately will bold flesh venture to judge of the life and
power of God, when it has got a little knowledge from the Scriptures, and a
way of worship, duties, and ordinances!

When he said, I and my Father are one, John 10.30. they took up stones again
to stone him, verse. 31. and made no question but they did well in doing of it,
as appears by their answer to his demand; for which of his good works they
stoned him? They reply very confidently, for a good work we stone thee not, but
for Blasphemy, and because thou being a man, make thy self God, verse. 32, 33.
And when he said, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death, John 8.51.
Then said the Jews unto him, now we know that thou have a Devil. Abraham is
dead, and the Prophets are dead, who make thou thy self? verse. 53. Were not
Abraham and the Prophets holy men? had not they the sayings of God? and did not
they keep the sayings of God? yet they are dead. Such a kind of speech as this
must needs be from the Devil. Now thou make manifest from what Spirit thou
speak, Now know we that thou have a Devil. And indeed how could the
professors of that age digest such things, being so contrary to what appeared
to them, to be certain truth in the Scriptures.

And there were many other things as hard to them, though the exceptions which
might or did arise in their minds, are not particularly mentioned: as when he
says, I am the door of the Sheep. All that came before me are thieves and
robbers, but the Sheep did not hear them, John 10.7, 8. How offensive must this
Doctrine needs have been to them, going carnally to understand and reason about
it? What were all the Prophets and holy men before thee, thieves and robbers?
did the truth never come, till thou broughtst it? What became of our
Forefathers in former ages? were they none of them Gods Sheep? did none of
them find the door? for thou say thou art the door, and thou have been but of
late. And whereas thou say, the Sheep did not hear them, that is utterly
false: for they did hear Moses, and they did hear the Prophets: and we have
their writings, and will keep to them for all thee, let who will be thy Sheep.
When he said, that he came not to send peace but division, Mat. 10.25. How
readily might they reply, that his own mouth discovered him, not to be the
Messiah, the Savior, the peacemaker, but the worker of divisions, the causer
of breaches in families; setting three against two, and two against three, Luke
21.51. When he said, whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin, John 8.34.
Might not they well except against this, as condemning the whole generation of
the righteous, and making null the way of sacrifices which God had appointed
for sins committed at any time by his people, which could not but presuppose
their commission of sin? did not Abraham, Isaac, David, Moses, and the rest of
the Prophets all commit sin, and were they servants of sin? He taught also,
that the children of the Kingdom should be cast into utter darkness, Mat. 8.12.
Oh how harsh would this sound in the ears of the zealous professing Jew, who
was waiting and hoping for the Kingdom! So in his Doctrine there seemed many
contradictions to the fleshly understanding, for one while he said, I Judge no
man, for I came not to condemn the World: and yet was he not continually
judging and condemning the Scribes, the Pharisees, the Priests, the Lawyers,
and that whole generation of professors? So again he came to seek and save that
which was lost, to preach the Gospel of peace: and yet another while he says,
he came not to send peace but a sword, and to kindle a fire, and to set men at
variance, etc. Again, one while he said, I and my Father are one, another time,
my Father is greater than I; one while he bid men do as the Scribes and
Pharisees, taught; another while he bid men beware of the Leaven, or Doctrine
of the Prarisees and Saduces, Mat. 16.12.

But to what purpose should I heap up any more instances? O thou that read
this, wait to know in thy self the ear that cannot hear Christ's Doctrine, and
while thou condemnest the Jews, do not run into the same error of unbelief and
gainsaying, but wait to know the voice of Christ in this day, and to receive
the ear that can hear it, for though thou should be willing to hear, yet
thou can not, till thy ear be opened. Nicodemus who could acknowledge Christ
a teacher come from God, yet could not receive the doctrine of the new birth
from him, John 3.4. and there were many things the disciples themselves were
not able to bear, for when, at a certain time, he spoke of giving his flesh to
eat, not only the Jews, John 6.52. but they also stumbled, ver. 61. and who is
there among professors, that can now bear it, or receive Christ's own
interpretation of it? who says, that the flesh (which they understood)
profits nothing, but the flesh which he meant was spirit and life, ver. 63.

5. At his practices, and conversation, How is it that he eats and drinks,
with Publicans and sinners, Mark 2.16. Behold a gluttenous man, and a wine
bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners, Luke 7.14. This man if he were a
Prophet, would have known who, and what manner of woman this is that touches
him; for she is a sinner, Luke 7.39. At the Publicans and sinners drawing nigh
to hear him, the Pharisees and Scribes were offended, and murmured saying, This
man receives sinners, and eats with them, Luke 15.1, 2. and when he went to
Zacheus house, they all murmured, saying, that he was gone to be Guest with a
man that is a sinner, Luke 19.7.

Again, because he healed on the Sabbath, and justified his disciples in
plucking of ears of corn on the Sabbath, they were filled with madness, and
communed what they might do to him, Luke 6. ver. 3. and ver. 10, 11. and took
counsel how they might destroy him, Mark 3.5, 6. Another time, the Ruler of
the Synagogue spoke with indignation about it, Luke 13.14. Yea, the Jews did
persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him because he had healed a man, and bid
him take up his bed and walkon the Sabbath day, John 5. ver. 8, 16. and some of
them made it a strong argument against him, this man is not of God, because he
keeps not the Sabbath day, John 9.16. What come from God, and be a breaker of
his Ordinances? Can these two stand together? Read and consider, what more
strict Ordinance of God under the Law, than the Sabbath? What one Ordinance
more conducing to the honor and worship of God? Did not their whole religion
and worship much depend upon it? How could this possibly but be a great offense
to them in that Spirit, and Litteral Wisdom from the Scriptures, wherein they
stood? Yet Christ, in his fleshly appearance, was Lord of the Sabbath; and in
his spiritual appearance he does not lose his dominion.

Again they excepted against him, that he did not teach his disciples to fast
and pray as John did, Luke 5.33. but could suffer them to transgress the
traditions of the Elders, Mat. 15.2. he was not strict after the Jewish way of
devotion, not strict after John's way neither; but against the traditions of the
godly Elders of the Jewish Church, against sanctifying of the Lords Sabbath
(justifying his disciples in plucking ears of corn thereon, whereas their
forefathers the Jews, were not so much as to gather Manna on that day) against
fasting and prayer, for he justified his disciples in that they did not fast
and pray as John did, saying, how could they while the bridegroom was with
them? Mat. 9.15. and consider which way the Jews (in the state they stood)
could understand such an answer as this, to rest sastified therewith?

6. They excepted against his Miracles, partly because he did them on the
Sabbath day, John 9.16. whereupon they concluded he could not be of God (for if
he had been of God, he would have observed the day which God commanded) and if
he wrought them not by the power of God, by whose power then must he work them?
So they concluded, He casts out Devils, through the Prince of Devils, Mat.
9.34. he has Beelzebub, and by the Prince of Devils casts he out Devils,
Mark. 3.32. and having thus concluded in themselves, there was no ear open in
them, to hear any thing that might be said to the contrary. And again partly,
because he did not answer their wills, in giving them such a sign as they
required: for this was still their tone, Master, we would see a sign from thee,
Mat. 12.38. what sign show thou unto us, seeing that thou do these things?
John 2.18. and they more particularly express what sign they would have, they
would have a sign from heaven, Luke 11.18. What sign show thou, that we may
see and believe thee? John 6.30. We are ready to be convinced, we are ready to
believe, If thou would give us sufficient ground of beleiving in thee. As for
all thy healing people, and casting out Devils, Beelzebub (the Prince of Devils)
may furnish thee with power) therewith, to deceive and bewitch us from the Law
and Ordinances of Moses (which we are sure are of God) but show us a sign from
heaven, or else blame us not for not leaving Moses to run after thee.

7. They excepted at the Testimony, which the Spirit of God in him, gave
concerning him. When he spoke the inward Testimony, which the spirit of God
gave from within, saying, I am the light of the world, he that follows me,
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, John 8.13. they
presently cried out thou bear record of thy self, thy record is not true,
verse 14. mark his answer, It is written in your law, that the Testimony of two
men is true, I am one that bear witness of my self, and the Father that sent me
bears witness of me, verse 17.18. How would such an answer pass now in these
days, though the same life should speak it? would not the wise professors of
this age even hoot at it? yet the thing is known at this day, even the life
which the Father begets, and the Fathers testifying of it, and with it: and
thou that read this, might know it, could thou wait in the loss of
thine own life, (wisdom, and knowledge) for it.

8. They excepted against his disciples and followers, which were women,
Publicans and sinners, the common people, yea the meanest, the poorest, and
most Ignorant (in their account) who were fittest to be deluded and led away.
Are ye also deceived? Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on
him? but this people who knows not the law, are cursed, John 7.47, 48, 49.
the common people, the ignorant people, the unsettled people, such as know not
the law, such as understand not the Scriptures, they run after him, and cry him
up: but which of the Settled ones, which of the truly Zealous ones, which of the
Wise men in the knowledge of the Law and Prophets, which of the orthodox
Scribes and Pharisees, who keep close to Moses, which of these believe in him?
whom of them can he deceive? As for the heady people, who (for want of
knowledge of the Scriptures) are ready to run after every new fangle, they are
not worth the minding, they are accursed, and therefore no marvel though God
give them up to follow this deceiver, and to cry up his new Light, and forsake
the good old Light of Moses and the Prophets.

9. They excepted against him, that he did not rebuke his disciples, and the
multitude (spreading their garments, cutting down branches from the trees and
strowing them in the way) with the children that cried Hosanna to him, as he
rode on the Ass Colt to Jerusalem: but he rather justified them, Luke 19.31.
and Mat 21.15, 16. what a ridiculous, and vainglorious piece of pageantry would
this seem to the fleshly wise eye?

10. That he did not show sufficient authority for what he did. By what
authority do thou these things? and who gave thee this authority, etc. Mark
11.28. Thou take upon thee great authority over the people of God, over their
Teachers, yea over Gods Temple, Sabbath, and Ordinances; but where is thy
authority so to do? Show us that, etc.

11. They excepted when he spoke of his sufferings and death, We have heard in
our Law, that Christ abides for ever; and how say thou, the Son of Man must
be lift up? Who is the son of man? John 12.34. Sure he that is to be lift up,
cannot be the Christ which is to abide for ever, and not to die: So that here
(in one breath) thou have overthrown all that thou have been setting up by thy
Preaching and Miracles. Now which way could they understand this thing? Nay the
very Disciples themselves could not swallow it, but were startled at it, and
Christ was fain to hide it a long time from them. And yet if there be any thing
held forth now in these days by the same spirit, (as concerning light and
perfection, or other truths which are seen in the spirit) because men cannot
apprehend them with their carnal understanding, and make them agree with their
carnal knowledge of the Scriptures, what liberty do they take to themselves to
speak both against the truth it self, and also against them who have seen these
things in the spirit, and speak them from the spirit? Now whosoever becomes a
Disciple, must wait in the obedience to know the doctrine, and not think to
enter with that wisdom, and carnal reasoning from Scriptures, which the
Scribes and Pharisees, and Professors of that age were shut out with.

There were many other things which they could not but except against, as at
his answers to their questions, to which sometimes he was silent and gave no
answer at all. At other times, he answered not directly, but in Parables (and
how offensive is this to man's wisdom, who requires a positive and direct
answer?) And sometimes his answers might seem quite from the thing, as John
12.34, 35.

His not giving respect to persons (for it was a known thing of him, that he
regarded not men's persons, Mat. 22.16.) could not be very pleasing to them, who
loved greetings, and sought honor one of another. He showed not respect to
Herod the King, (but spoke contemptuously of him, as men would account it) Go
says he, and tell that Fox. He did not show respect to the reverend and grave
Doctors of the Law, nay nor to the High Priest himself. Nay he did not show
respect to his own Disciples, but said to Peter, (when he mildly and
affectionately desired his death might be avoided) Get thee behind me Satan.
How harsh and rough a reply might this seem? If Peter had erred, through his
affection and tenderness to his Master, a meek spirit would gently have
informed him; but to call him Devil, and say, get thee behind me; what kind of
spirit does this favor of, would that professing Jew say, who knows not the
true meekness, but seeks after a fleshly meekness, which is a servant to the
fleshly wisdom and prudence, but not true born? Nay he did not speak
respectively to his own Mother, (as man's spirit, by its rule of respect would
judge and condemn him) but said, Woman, what have I to do with thee? John 2.4.
and in a manner denied all his relations, Mat. 12.48.

Lastly, (to instance no more) at his harsh censures of all the Professors of
that age, (which observed the Law of Moses, and Isreal's Statutes) with all
their laborious and godly Teachers, justifying none but himself, and what he
taught, and a few of his followers. He told them that they had not the love of
God in them, John 5.42. Did not this (think ye) seem to them a very harsh
charge? And why not the love of God? because they did not follow him, and his
new Doctrine? yea, would they be ready to say, they did love God, and kept his
Commandments, Sabbaths, and Ordinances, which he transgressed.

He laid this also to their charge, that they did not believe Moses, John 5.46.
What an unjust charge might this seem, when they were so zealous for Moses, and
their very dislike of him, and controversy against him, was for the sake of
the Law and Ordinances of Moses?

Another charge he laid to them was, that they were not the children of
Abraham, or of God, but of the Devil, John 8. ver. 39, 42, 44. What a rash
censorious man might they account him thus to speak of them, who were the human
seed of Abraham, who were such strict observers of Gods Laws and Ordinances,
(which is the property of his children) and such enemies to the Devil, that
they would not be drawn from the truths, and way of worship taught by Moses and
the Prophets, no not by all the Miracles he could work?

He called them a faithless and perverse Generation, Ma 1 t. 17.17.

He told them that they did not know God, though they said with confidence that
he was their God, John 12.54, 55. How could they bear this? They had been
studying the law and Prophets, and had a great stock of knowledge from thence,
and were strict and exact in worship (some of them, as well as Paul, might be
according to the Law blameless) and now to be told they did not know God? Nay,
he that abounds in knowledge, devotion, and worship, yet being not in the
life and pure Power of the Spirit, has not one dram of the true knowledge.

He told them that they should dye in their sins, John 8.21. (O hard word, and
severe judgment!) And yet he had told them a little before that he judged no
man, ver. 15. yea they did think themselves exceedingly wronged by him, and
thought that no man that had any thing of God in him could speak such things,
but only one that was an enemy to the people of God, and led by the spirit of
Satan. To this effect they express themselves, verse 48. of that Chap. Say we
not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and has a Devil!

Yea when Christ charged them with going about to kill him, they seemed to
themselves so clear in their own consciences, that they answered, thou have a
Devil, who goes about to kill thee? John 7.29. how easily might they closeup
the controversy, and by this very thing conclude him to be a false Prophet? He
says we went about to till him, when (God knows) there was not such a thing in
our hearts. Can this man be a true Prophet? yet Christ knew the prefessing Jews
to be the Murderer, and in and for his Religion sake still seeking to slay
him. And there is no such murderer of Christ (the life) upon the earth, as the
zealous Professor and worshipper out of the life. He that is in the life cannot
persecute any man; he that is out of the life, cannot but persecute him that is
in the life. Hereby the true and false christian may be discrened, by the
weakest simple and single eye.

And then for their teachers and expounders of the law, how exceeding bitter
did be seem against them? and how heavy things was he continually laying to
their charge? He called them blind Guids, Hypocrites, painted Sepulchers,
Graves which appears not, and pronounced woe upon woe against them. Read that
one place, Mat. 23.33, Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape
the damnation of Hell? What speak thus of our zealous Teachers, who study the
Law, are strict in practicing of the Ordinances, and take such pains to
ininstruct us in the mind of God, from Moses and the Prophets? was such a man
as this fit to live? Nay and he does not show a Gospel spirit, mark how sharp
and bitter his words came from him (for indeed a sharper speech, with greater
vehemence and indignation of spirit, can hardly be spoken) and they might seem
to aggravate this sharp condemnation of his, from his own confession: he
himself had confessed that they sat in Moses chair (now he might have shown
some honor to Moses chair, and to their office, which was of God, and
doubtless good) and not have gone about to make them thus odious in the eyes of
the people. Nay he himself had bid men do as they said, but in ver. 3. of that
Chap. Now was it likely that ever men should mind what they said, or observe
their doctrine, when he had thus represented them, as oppressors of the
conscience, ver. 4. as devourers of widows houses, and making long prayers in
Hypocrisy, ver. 15. as making their proselytes more the children of hell then
themselves, ver. 15. as neglecters of the weightier matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy and Faith, ver. 2.3. as appearing righteous to men, but full
of Hypocrisy and iniquity, ver. 28. as of the same generation that killed the
Prophets, ver. 31.32. as d^ceivers, as such as led into the ditch, (and bid men
beware of their leaven) were not these good kind of encouragements for People
to hear them? Yea he charged them with shutting up the Kingdom of heaven
against men, and not going in themselves, nor suffering men to enter that were
going in, ver. 13. How could they observe what they taught without hearing
them? and would Christ wish any to hear such men as these? Yet for all this,
without doubt they were not without their justifications against Christ in
these respects, and also had their charges (on the other hand) ready against
him. Now how did they shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men? Did not they
teach the Law, and direct men to the Ordinances of God, and open the Prophets
words to them? was this shutting up the Kindome of heaven? And would not they
suffer men to enter? Why, their work was to win people to their profession,
they would compass Sea and Land to make a proselyte. How stiffly might the Jews
have pleaded against Christ, that he did slander their godly Ministers, who
were very painful and zealous in opening the Scriptures, and teaching the way
of God? nay he himself could not deny but they taught well: for he himself
says, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, Mat. 23.3. But
mark now, that ye may understand the thing, it is thus. Any teaching, or
expounding of Scriptures out of the life, shuts up the Kingdom: for the Life
is the Kingdom: and words from the life yield the savor of the Kingdom: but
words out of it (though never so good and true) reach not to the life in
another, but only build up a knowledge in the contrary wisdom, and teach to
hold the truth in the unrighteousness, where Satan's Kingdom stands, and where
he has the dominion over all that is brought thither. And so this kind of
teaching and knowledge shuts up the door and way of life; and must be lost,
before the Kingdom can be found.

They shut up the true Kingdom, but they opened another Kingdom, they opened
the Kingdom another way, (which was in truth shutting of it,) and they had
Disciples and Children of the Kingdom* whom they tickled with the hope of
life, and fed with promises and comforts: but these the Lord would shut out.
Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven: but the Children of the Kingdom,
shall be cast out into utter darkness, Mat. 8.11, 12. This is as true at this
day, in this present dispensation, as it was then in that dispensation, though
men make it a great accusation against us, charging us that we say none are the
people of God but our selves, and as if all were damned but we. These are men's
harsh and unsavory expressions; we use not to speak after this manner, but
soberly open the state of the thing, as it stands in the truth (and as it has
been revealed unto us, by him who is true, and cannot lie,) which is thus:

That through which men are saved, is the dispensation of truth in their age.
The measure of light, which God gives forth in every age; that is the means and
proper way of Salvation in that age: and what ever men get, or profess of the
knowledge of truth, declared in former ages, yet making use of that to withstand
the present dispensation of truth in their age, they cannot thereby be saved,
but may thereby be hardened against that which should save them. And this we
are assured of from the Lord, that as the Jews could not be saved by the Law of
Moses (making use of it in opposition to the shining of the light of God in the
Prophets in their present ages) nor afterward could be saved by magnifiing and
observing both the words of Moses and the Prophets, and their belief from
thence of a Messiah to come, (making use of these things to oppose that
appearance of Christ in the flesh, which was the dispensation of their day
then.) No more can any Professors be saved now, by belief of a Christ come, or
any thing which they can learn or practice from the Scriptures, making use
thereof to oppose the dispensation of this day; which dispensation is the
immediate and powerful breaking forth of the light of the Spitit, in the hearts
of Gods people (who have earnestly sought, and in much sorrow and perplexity of
Spirit, longed and waited for him) after this long dark night of the
Antichristian apostasy.

There remain yet some other exceptions against him, about the time of his
suffering death, with his hard usage, which would not wholly be passed over.

As first, his disrespective or irreverend answering of the high Priest, (as it
seemed to them) when he asked him of his Doctrine, John 18. verse. 19. His
answer was, that he spoke openly in the World, not in secret, why ask thou
me? ask them that heard me; whereupon one of the Officers struck him, saying;
Answerest thou the high Priest so? verse. 22. The plainness and simplicity of
the life (which bows to God, and cannot regard man in the transgression) seems
rude and unmannerly to the lofty Spirit of the world.

2. His silence at the Testimonies brought against him, and to the high Priest
when he questioned him, Mark 14.60, 61. Indeed either the speaking or silence
in the life, is offensive to the carnal professor, who knows not the Law of
the life in this particular, but can either speak or be silent according to his
own will. This is the difference between the true and the false Christian; The
false Christian, his knowledge and Religion stands in his own will, in his own
understanding, (he speaks in his own time) both which are crucified in him that
is born of the Spirit.

3. When he did speak the truth of himself, the high Priest rent his clothes,
and charged him with blasphemy, Mat. 26.64. And those that were by, fell in
with the high Priest, and said he was guilty of death, verse. 66. Then they spet
on his face and buffetted him, and smote him, and mocked him, and blindfolded
him, and struck him on the face, bidding him prophecy, who smote him, Mat.
26.67, 68. and Luke 22.63, 64.

When they brought him to Pilate, they would have Pilate take it for granted
that he was an evil doer, and worthy of death, for when Pilate asked for their
accusation against him, they answer, if he were not a Malefactor, we would not
have delivered him up unto thee, John 18.29, 30. Pilate refusing so to proceed
in judgment, ( verse. 31.) they begin to bring in their charges, we found this
fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying,
that he himself is Christ a King, Luke 23.2. Pilate examines him herein, but
professes he can find no fault in him at all, John 18.38. Then the chief
Priests accused him of many other things, ( Mark 15.3. and were more fierce,
saying, he stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Jury, beginning from
Galilee to this place. (This indeed was his great offense, he taught with the
authority of the Spirit, and not as the Scribes.) Then Pilate sent him to Herod
(where the chief Priests and Scribes stood vehemently accusing him) who
questioned him much, but he answered him nothing. And Herod, with his men of
War, set him at naught, and mocked him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and
sent him back to Pilate, Luke 23.9, 10, 11. Pilate professed that he could not
find him guilty of this second charge neither of perverting the people, verse.
14. therefore chastising him, he would release him, verse. 16. But the people
(by the persuasion of the chief Priests and Elders) cried all at once, Away
with this man, and release unto us Barbas, verse. 18. but let him be crucified,
crucify him, crucify him, verse. 21. etc. Now when Pilate had scourged him,
and the Soldiers had stripped him, and put on him a Scarlet Robe, and had put
a Crown of platted Thorns on his head, and a Reed in his right hand, and had
bowed the knee to him in Mockery, and spit on him, and smote him with a Reed,
he brings him forth to them again, hoping this might appease there malice, and
they might be content to spare his being crucified. They tell him they have a
Law, and by their Law he ought to dye, because he made himself the Son of God,
John 19. verse. 4. to 8. (see how they turn and wind every way to make the
innocent an offender, and to make some Law, of one kind or other, take hold of
him!) But when all their accusations would not prevail with Pilate, but still
(from the sense of his innocence) he had a mind to release him, they use
another subtle artifice, telling him, if he let this man go, he was not
Caesar's friend, John 19.12. This carries it with Pilate, now he disputes no
further, but delivers him up to their will, Luke 23.5.

Now thou, who read this, take heed of judging the Jews for all this
wickedness, while the same nature is alive in thee, which did all this in them:
for assuredly thou (in whom that nature, which did it in them, is not subdued)
would have done the same thing, had thou lived in those days. Thou that
disdainest and persecutest the appearance of Christ in this age, whuldst have
disdained, and have persecuted his appearance in that age, do not deceive thy
Soul.

The Jews did as little think, that ever they should have put a Prophet, or any
good man to death (much less the Messiah) as thou can: yea, they could blame
their Fathers for killing the Prophets, and say; if they had lived in those
days, they would not have done it: and yet do thou not read what they did?
The persecuting Spirit was ever blind, and could in no age read its evil and
bitter nature, and its enmity against the life and power. Be not thou blind in
thy day (as they were in theirs) and an enemy under pretense of being a friend.

4. Another exception or argument against him about the time of his suffering
death, was, that he did not put forth his power to save himself from the cross,
he saved others, let him save himself, if he be Christ the chosen of God, Luke
23.35. Is it likely that this is the Son of God, and that he did so many
miracles by the power of God, and cannot now save himself from the cross? This
his suffering death on the Cross did a little stumble some of the Disciples (as
may appear, Luke 24.20, 21.) and was enough to have overturned the faith (of
any) which stood not in the Spirit, and in the power. The Soldiers also could
mock and manage this argument against him, saying, If thou be the King of the
Jews, save thy self, Luke 23.37. And they that passed by, reviled him, wagging
their heads and saying, Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in
three days, save thy self; If thou be the Son of God, come down from the
Cross, Mat. 27.39, 40. Likewise the chief Priests with the Scribes and Elders,
mocked among themselves, saying, he saved others, himself he cannot save. Let
Christ the King of Israel descend now from the Cross, that we may see and
believe, Mark. 15.31, 32. One of the Thieves also railed on him saying, If thou
be the Christ save thy self and us, Luke 23.39. And when he cried out to his
God, Eli, Eli, etc. they derided him, This man calls for Elias, let us see
whether Elias will come to save him, Mat. 27.47, 49. And after he was dead, the
chief Priests and Pharisees spoke of him, as of a known deceiver, verse. 63. And
seem in a pious zeal for the Church, to take care that there be no further
occasion after his death, for the reviving and spreading of his deceit and
errors, verse. 64. Thus the holy one, the pure one, the just and true one, (in
whose heart and mouth was no guile found) was numbered among transgressors,
accounted a deceiver, and put to death as a blasphemer by the zealous priests
and professors of that age, who were so confident of the righteousness of their
cause (on the behalf of the Law of Moses, and their Sabbaths, Temple, etc.)
against him, that when Pilate washed his hands as clear of his blood, all the
people answered and said, his blood be on us, and on our children, Mat. 27.25.

Now let men consider what the great exceptions are, which they have against
the living appearance of Christ in his Spirit (now toward the close of the
apostasy) and against us his witnesses, whom the Lord has called forth to
testify to his name. Many exceptions men have against our Persons, our
Doctrine, our Practices, for want of miracles, etc. Is this generation more
wise, or just in their exceptions then the former was? Consider the main ones a
little.

Their great exceptions against our Doctrine are.

1. That we preach up a light within, and that he that receives that light
receives a perfect gift; and growing up in it, grows up to perfection, which
in this life (through faith and obedience to this light or perfect gift) may be
attained, and the body of sin put off, and the new man Christ put on.

Answ. Indeed we cannot but preach up the light within, and declare unto men
how great things it has done for us, even that which we could never by any
means meet with, from any light without. And this is perfect, and tends to make
perfect, carrying on its work daily. Now he that feels its virtue, cannot doubt
of its power. He that sees the body of sin daily going off, cannot doubt but
he may be stripped. Indeed if a man strive against sin in his own will, (and by
his own gathered knowledge) he cannot get much ground, and so it is hard for him
to believe perfection. But he that feels unity with that which is perfect,
cannot but acknowledge that it is able to perfect him, and in faith and patience
is encouraged to hope and wait for it.

2. That we deny that Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, and his imputed
righteousness, and set up an inherent righteousness.

Answ. We know no other Christ then that which dyed at Jerusalem, only we
confess our chief knowledge of him is in Spirit. And as Christ said in the days
of his flesh, that the way to know his Father, was to know him; and that he
that knew him, knew the father also. So we now witness, that the way to know
Christ is to know the Spirit; and that he that knows the Spirit, knows
Christ also, with whom Christ is one, and from whom he cannot be separated. And
as for imputed righteousness, it is too precious a thing to us for to be denied
by us. That which we deny is men's putting of it out of its place, applying it
to them who are not in the true faith, and walk not in the true light: for in
the true light (where the fellowship is with the Father and the Son) there
alone the blood cleanses, 1 John 1.7. and there alone the righteousness is
imputed to him, who is cleansed by the blood in the light, and not to him who
knows it not. And as for inherent righteousness, we meddle not with that word,
but this we say; That our life exceedingly lies in feeling the righteousness of
Christ wrought, and revealed in us; and we wish men could come out of the
reasoning about it, into the feeling of the same thing with us: for then we are
sure they would not so sharply, nor so long contend.

3. That we deny the Ordinances and means of Salvation.

Answ. We deny nothing that the Apostles or Christians formerly practiced, nor
do we deny any thing that any now practice in the light, and in the faith: but
the setting up of such things in the will, that we deny; or the imitating these
without the command of the Spirit, that we deny also. And this we testify,
that Antichrist crept in here, and that they are his great cover to keep men
from the life, and therefore warn men to mind the life, and to take heed they
be not kept from the substance by the shadows, where Antichrist lies lurcking
to bewitch from the substance. And we are sure that these in Antichrists hands,
are not the means of Salvation; but keep from the sight of the holy City, where
the life and Salvation is. And we read that the outward Court was given to the
Gentiles; who trod under foot the holy City, Revel. 11.2. And we have found by
experience, that while we our selves were crying up the outward Court, we did
trample under foot the holy City, though we then knew it not.

Their exceptions against our Persons are, that we are ignorant, illiterate,
and also unsettled Persons (who have still been seeking up and down, etc.)

Answ. What Persons are fittest for God to make use of, toward the recovery of
his People out of the Apostasy? Does not God choose that which is weak, and
mean, and contemptible, that his glory might the more appear? Is not this a
more likely way for him to steal upon the World, then if he appeared in the
wise and learned ones? And among whom is his appearing to be expected? among
those who are settled upon their lees in the Apostasy; or among those who have
mourned, panted, and sought to come out of it, and could not be settled without
his appearing to them, and fixing of their feet upon the Rock. But have we been
unsettled, since God has fastened us on the living Foundation? Nay, here is no
more going out, but he that abides faithful, remains a pillar in the house of
God.

Men except likewise against our practices, as that we show not respect to
persons, and that we are not strict (after their manner) in duties, etc.

Answ. We have heard that voice, Fear God, and give Glory to him, Revel. 14.7.
(not only as it is written there, but in Spirit:) and where the Lord is
exalted, the glory of the creature falls: read Isa. 2. how all falls in that
day, that God alone might be exalted. And we cannot, in this mighty day of the
Lord, any longer give to man that honor which he has gathered in the fall,
and which pleases the fallen nature, and not that which is borne of God. And
for duties, we have bewailed (in the sight of the Lord) our former running into
duties without his Spirit: and we must confess we can only pray in the Spirit,
sing in the Spirit, wait in the Spirit, speak in the Spirit (as that gives
utterance) and not of our selves, or when we will, but as we feel life
(strength and power from on high) leading and assisting us. And our religion
consists neither in willing nor running, but in waiting on the Spirit and power
of the Lord, to work all in us and for us. All these things we look upon to be
our duty, and practice them.

It is likewise excepted against us, that we do not work Miracles.

Answ. We point to that which wrought all the outward Miracles formerly, and
which now works great inward Miracles in spirit: and we are sure the same
power (which we have received the Gospel in) is of the same healing virtue. But
that power works according to the purpose of its own will, and not according
to the will of man (yea though Paul had the gift of healing, yet he left
Trophimus at Miletum sick, 2 Timothy 4.20.) neither was the will or wisdom of man
satisfied in all those Miracles which Christ and the Apostles wrought. It is
enough for us to feel and live in the moving of the power, in which we rejoice
and are more satisfied (that by it our names are written in the Book of Life)
then we could by any such outward and visible appearance and manifestation of
it. But if we did work outward Miracles, yet if thou had not an inward eye to
see them with, thou would not be able to distinguish by what power they were
wrought.

To what purpose should I mention any more particulars? Is it not enough? O
fear before the Lord, and do not lose the present dispensation of life through
mistake (or because ye cannot have things suited to your corrupt wills) but
know the Gospel, which is an inward dispensation, and does not consist in
outward shadows, but in inward virtue, life and power: for the Kingdom of God
is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Spirit. Come to wait for that,
to feel that, to unite there; and then we shall not differ about that which is
outward. But it is Antichrists way (by the Magistrates power) to force an
agreement about the outward, which destroys that tenderness of conscience
which prefer us the inward.

And now let me put one Question to you; Where is the deceit of the ages after
Christ to be expected? Did the Jews deny Moses and the Prophets Writings, or
Ordinances? nay were they not very zealous for these? and were not these their
cover, under which they persecuted Christ, and vented all their malice against
him? So can it be expected now, that the Deceivers of this age should deny the
Apostles writings, or the practices therein mentioned? Or is it not rather to
be expected, that under their crying up of these, they should hide their enmity
against the life? Search and see, has not every after-age of Professors took
up the words and practices of them who were persecuted in the foregoing age,
and under the profession of those words and practices, have hid their spirit of
persecution? There is a remnant only among Professors to be saved, the
generallity of them have still been persecuters, creeping into the form,
getting that for a cover upon their backs, and then fighting against the life
and power. O wait on the Lord in his fear, that ye may be found worthy to know
the persecuted truth on the one hand, and the persecuting spirit on the other
hand in this day of large profession, and also of bitter persecution!

Now what might be the cause, or how could it come to pass, that the zealous
Worshippers of that age should thus err in their zeal, and be thus heady and
rash against him, whom they looked for to be their Savior? How came they thus
to err in vision, and stumble in judgment in so weighty a matter? Show unto us
the cause, that we may see whether the same cause be not in us? for undoubtedly
if it be, it will produce the same effect, and so we may ignorantly draw upon
our heads the same heavy wrath in our day, that they did in their day.

Answ. The causes were very many, I may mention some few of the principal ones,
which if they be seen into and removed, (by that power which is able to do it)
such as are of a more inferior influence, will not be able to stand.

1. One cause of their blind zeal, and bitterness against Christ, was, Their
ignorance of the Scriptures, and of the power of God. If they had known the
Scriptures in the true light, they could not but have known Christ, from whom
the Scriptures were given forth; And if they had known the power of God, they
could not but have known him who came in the power, yea who was the power. They
had knowledge enough of both these one way, that is in the Letter; They knew
the words of Scripture (they could make large expositions of them) they knew
what was said in Scripture concerning the power of God, but they knew not the
thing it self; and so turned against it, and made use of the words (which came
from it, and testified of it) against it.

2. A second cause of this their sad miscarriage in their zeal, was, Their
putting the Law and Ordinancee, and Writings of the Prophets out of their
proper place. They exceedingly magnified, and cried them up, in that carnal way
wherein they apprehended and practiced them, but understood not the right end
and use of them. And by these means, practicing the shadows in the carnal mind,
they lost the substance, which the proper use of the shadows was to have
pointed them unto.

3. Their high conceits of the goodness of their state in relation to God, and
of the certainty of their knowledge of the truths of God from Moses and the
Prophets. They were confident that they knew God aright, and that he was their
father, and that they were his children and people. And so Christ appearing in
a seeming contrariety to these (notwithstanding all his powerful preaching and
miracles) they made no question but they might boldly conclude him, not to be
of God.

4. Christ's coming in a way that they looked not for him. They had concluded
from the Scriptures, how Christ must appear, and he coming in a far different
manner, they could not own him, but looked upon him as a Deceiver, one that
pretended to be Christ, but was not like to what the Scripture said of Christ.
So what the Scripture says of Christ's second coming, is hid as much from the
carnal eye of professors in this age, as what was said concerning his first
coming, was hid from them in their age; and he will steal upon them as a Thief,
at a time, and in a way, and after a manner that they expect not.

5. (Which is the main one, and the cause of all the former) Because they were
from the light within, from the true light in their own hearts and consciences.
The light within is the great Ordinance of God, and the proper means to give
the knowledge of him, (2. Cor. 4.6.) without which it was never received under
any dispensation: for the light that shines abroad (or from without) can alone
be known and received by the light that shines within. Christ himself opens
this in a Parable; The light of the body (says he) is the eye; if therefore
thine eye be single, (clear, without beams or moats) thy whole body shall be
full of light, Mat. 6.22. But if that be evil, if that be dark, if that be
closed by the God of the world, all Moses words, all the Prophets words, yea
all Christ's and his Apostles words, cannot give thee light. Can I see the light
of the Sun, Moon, or Stars, (or of any fire or candle) if I have not a natural
eye, and if that natural eye be not open? So neither can I see the light of any
dispensation of life, if I have not an eye within me open, wherewith to see it.
So that that which gives me the sight of the things of God, is the eye which
God has given me. By that may be read the eternal power and Godhead in the
creatures, in the Books of Moses and the Prophets, in the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, as the spirit leads and opens. Yea the same spirit
that opened to these without Books, may again open to any of us without Books
at his pleasure, (and will not be limited to Books) and we then may read also
as they did, even within in the spirit, and in the immediate life; but without
this, can none of the things of God be read aright. Now the God of this world
had blinded this eye in the Jews, yea they themselves had stopped their ears,
and closed their eyes, etc. they would not see this way, they would not be
converted and healed this way. They would keep up the knowledge, which they had
gathered from Moses and the Prophets without this eye; and with that they would
see, or not at all.

Thus being from the light within, they could not see the place of life within,
where life is to be received: they could not see the womb of wisdom, which is
within, and so could not enter into it, and be born again. And being not born
of the wisdom, how could they justify the wisdom? being not born of the
light, how could they know or own Christ, whose coming and appearance was in
the light? For that appearance of Christ the life, in that body of flesh, could
not be discerned by all men's wisdom in the letter, (the Disciples themselves
came not so to know it) but my Father which is in Heaven has revealed it to
you. And mark it, the Disciples, who were illiterate and not so knowing of the
Scriptures that were written of Christ, yet they knew Christ: and the Scribes
and Pharisees, which were very skilful in the letter, could not know him. What
was the reason? The reason lay in the difference of the eye, or light wherewith
they looked: the one looked with an outward eye, the other with an inward eye.
And a little inward light will do that, which a great deal of outward light will
not do. And this I can certainly affirm, that all the light that men can gather
from the Scriptures, cannot give them the knowledge of Christ as he has
appeared in this age, nay nor as he has appeared in any age since the days of
the Apostles: but a little true inward light will give the knowledge of this
thing, and open those Scriptures infallibly (in its season) which all the
Generations of wise and learned men have been controverting and disputing
about, in that wisdom and searching spirit which is never to understand them.
This then is the main and full reason of this deep error of the Jews, and their
desperate splitting upon the rock, which would have saved them, They were
begotten of the Letter which was given forth in former ages, but not of the
life which was raised up in their age: and so they knew not how to turn to the
light within, which alone was able to give them the true and certain knowledge
of the things of God.

Now consider these things well. O ye Professors of this age, and take heed
that ye do not fall after the same example of unbeleif. Be not high minded, but
fear. Be not so confident of what you have gathered by your wisdom for truth
from the Scriptures, (after the manner that they were, of what they had
gathered by their wisdom) but fear lest ye should be mistaken, as they were:
and wait for the opening of that eye in you, which was shut in them, even the
true eye, in the true Light, by the holy anointing, where there never was, nor
can be any mistake. The Jews fell by unbeleif; unbeleif of what? They believed
the Scriptures, they believed according to that knowledge they had gathered from
the Scriptures: but they did not believe in the living word. They had a
knowledge abiding in them, which they had gathered from the Scriptures, but
they had not the living word abiding in them; and so their faith was but
unbeleif: (for the living faith, stands in belief of the living word in the
heart, which the Scriptures direct to; without the knowledge of which, all
knowledge of words is vain; and without faith in which, all faith is vain also)
Now says the Apostle to the Gentile-Christians, Thou stand by faith, Romans
11.20. by what Faith? By Faith in that word in the heart, which they neglected
and turned from, Romans 10.8. for Moses had taught them, after the Laws and
Ordinances, about worship and sacrifices, that the word that they were to obey
and do (the word that could give them life, and make them obedient to all the
commandments without) was in their heart and mouth, Deuteronomy. 30.14. and so the
Prophet Micah, when they proposed sacrifices, and Oil, to please God with, he
brings them to this which was given to them in common with mankind, Mich. 6.8.
for all Ordinances and Laws, and observations, and practices without, are but
to bring to the life within, which is to be found again there, where it was
lost, and still lies slain and hid (even in the field, or house where it was
lost.) And he that seeks abroad, never finds it; but when the candle is lighted
in his own house, and he searches narrowly in the field in his own heart, and
the eternal eye begins to open in him, then he cries out, God was in this
place, and I was not aware of it Ah how the enemy bewiched me, to run from
mountain to mountain, and from hill to hill, and has hereby covered my eye
from beholding the mountain of the Lords house, and from feeling the spring of
my life, which I further and further ran from, all the while I was seeking
abroad. Therefore O ye Professors, be not so conceited like the Jews, and
running after them into their desolation and misery, but learn wisdom by their
fall! Do not you set up your Ordinances and Scriptures, after the manner that
they set up theirs: for this is your Danger: for this I clearly, in the Light
of the Lord, testify to you: that if ye gather a knowledge and wisdom from the
letter of the Scriptures, after the manner that they did, without knowledge of
the word within, and without a light within from that word, ye lose the living
faith, ye are but dead branches, and all your knowledge of Scriptures, and
practices, and Faith, and Duties, etc. that ye here hold and observe, are but
for the fire; and the flames of eternal wrath, shall kindle more fiercely upon
you because of them, then upon the Jews: for ye stumble at the same stumbling
stone, at which they stumbled and fell, and it will fall upon you also. And as
you have more Scriptures, then they had, and the experience of their fall to
warn you: so your destruction will be exceeding dreadful if ye neglect so great
salvation, where of at this day there are so many living and powerful
witnesses, as they are known and owned to be in the light of the Lord, though
despised in your exalted and conceited wisdom.

Now to help any honest and single hearts among you, over this great stumbling
block of a light within, consider these few things.

1. That all the knowledge (all the true knowledge) that ever ye had of God was
from a light within. I do not deny that ye might receive your knowledge through
the Scriptures (and some warmth formerly in those things which ye call
Ordinances, and duties) but that whereby ye received the knowledge, was the
light within, the eye that God secretly opened in your spirits. This was the
way ye then came by it, though ye perhaps might feel the thing, but not know
how ye came by it: even as a Babe may see truly, but does not understand its
own eye, or knows how it sees.

2. While this eye was kept open in you, your knowledge was true in its
measure, and serviceable to you, and did draw you nearer to God, making ye
truly tender, meek, sweet, humble, patient, loving, gentle, and full of
precious breathings toward God, and after righteousness. O how lovely were you
to God in this state! when Israel was a child, I loved him. God remembers at
this day the kindness of your youth, and is seeking after you, O why do ye so
harden your hearts against him!

3. That wherever this eye is shut, the virtue of the true knowledge is lost,
and the sweet fruits thereof wither. The outward part of the knowledge may be
retained, yea, perhaps much increased, but the life is gone, and the pure sweet
Savouriness (to God) vanished. And if this eye were but a little opened again
in you, your death and unsavouriness might be soon seen and felt by you in all
your knowledge, duties, ordinances, yea in your very graces and experiences.
You have a faith still, yea, but it wants the savor of your former faith: ye
have some kind of love, gentleness, and meekness; yea, but it is but a thing
formed by the fleshly wisdom and reasoning, but not natural from the living
spring, not such as ye once felt, etc. for the true and living eye being shut,
that which is then best (or afterward attained) is held but in the dead part,
and serves but to feed death.

4. The great work and design of the enemy of your Souls, is not to steal away
the bulk of your knowledge, or to draw you from ordinances, or duties, but to
steal the life out of your Spirits. This I have experimented from my
childhood, I might still have knowledge enough of any kind, but that which I
wanted was life, and I was still sick under all the sorts of knowledge that
ever I met with, and under all ordinances and duties, for want of life. The
Lord had given my soul a taste of true life, whereby I became unsatisfied
without it, and no manner of knowledge or enjoyment could take me up by the
way: yea, when through extremity, I seemed willing to be content with any
thing, yet still my heart was sick after that one thing, which alone could
truly ease and satisfy it. Now if the enemy can but prevail herein, to blind
the inward eye, and steal away the life within, he has enough. Then abound, as
much as thou will, in knowledge, in zeal, in duties, in ordinances, in reading
Scriptures, praying, meditating, etc. thou art the surer his hereby, and so
much the better servant to him: for how much the richer thou art in knowledge,
experiences, hopes and assurance (without the life and power) so much the more
acceptable, and honorable, and useful art thou in his kingdom.

Therefore see where ye are; Is the inward eye open in you? do ye know the
light within? (surely he that sees by a light within, can hardly speak evil of
it!) or has the enemy, by some of his artifices, drawn a vail over that eye,
wherewith ye once saw in some measure? O be not slight in a matter of so great
weight! O please not your selves with the eye of the perishing wisdom, with
deaths eye, and with deaths knowledge of Scriptures, and of the Son of God,
which speaks great words of the fame of true wisdom, but is a stranger and
enemy to the thing! O, life is precious, eternal life is precious. To have the
word of God abiding in the heart, and to feel the true light giving the true
life, who can set a value on this! Ah do not loose your Souls for a trifle, for
a little such knowledge of Scriptures as the earthly part can gather! (This I
cannot but exceedingly despise, although the Scriptures I truly honor, for
their testimony of that whereby I live) if ye see not the way of life by the
inward light (which alone can show it) ye loose your Souls. If the God of the
World has blinded that eye in you, what are all your treasures of wisdom and
knowledge? What are all your hopes? and what will become of you? All these
sparks of your own kindling from Scripture, will not secure you from the bed of
sorrow. O several sorts of professors why will ye dye with the uncircumcised?
why will ye go down into the pit, among them that know not the Lord?

But what shall I say to this generation? The spiritually-wise foreseeth the
storm, and hides himself; but the spiritually-foollish run on headily, and are
punished. The clouds have long been gathering, but the sick eye cannot discern
the signs and seasons of the times, and so because judgment comes not as men
expected, they grow hard, and wear off the the sense, wherewith they were
somewhat affected at the first threatening of it. But assuredly both judgment
and mercy hasten, and they will come, and will not tarry.

For the same Lord God Almighty, which confounded the heathens Babel (when
their sins and vain confidence was ripe) which they built to prevent any future
flood. For though they once had the true knowledge of God from an inward light,
Romans 1.21. yet they soon left that, not liking to retain God in their
knowledge, verse. 28. but running out into imaginations, and so building a
Babel, whereby their foolish hearts became darkened to the light, which God had
made to shine in them, which showed what might be known of God unto them, verse.
19.

Yea the Lord God which overthrew the Jews Babel, which they had built from
their knowledge of the Laws and ordinances of Moses, and the Scriptures written
to them (they running out into imaginations also) whereby they likewise thought
to prevent the overflowing scourge from coming near them, Isa. 28.15.

The same God will overthrow the Christians Babel, which they have built from
the Prophets and Apostles words, (by their own imaginations, and conceivings,
in the high mindedness, out of the fear) whereby they think to escape the
deluge of eternal wrath: (for their City also shall be thrown down with
violence, and shall be found no more at all, Revel. 18.21.) And the great work
o^ this day is to discover the rottenness of their wall, and the untemperedness
of the mortar wherewith they have dawbed it. He that reads let him
understand: but the uncircumcised in heart and ears, cannot.

THE END

