A LETTER FROM A Citizen of Oxford, TO A Citizen of London, Concerning the
DISSOLUTION OF THE PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
YOurs I received of the 18th. Instant, with an account of the Common-Councels
Proceedings, as likewise the Proclamation for the Dissolution of the
Parliament, and the Calling of another to meet on the 21. of March next; and in
compliance to your desire, I shall endeavor to acquaint you with our Surprise,
and the sense we have of those Transactions here, with as much brevity,
clearness and impartiality as the little experience I have in Affairs will
permit.

As for the calling a Common Counsel, it is every one's wish here that the
worthy Citizens of London had not been so Spirited with Zeal, or rather hurried
on with Jealousies, that would not give them leave to see the time expired,
that was appointed by His Majesty for the meeting again of the Parliament, but
by a too forward Petition, would seem to impose upon, and distrust his Royal
Conduct and Care; and by that, and other courses, have more Exasperated, then
Composed matters, and rather procured their being Dissolved, then their Meeting
again. Shall I deal plainly with you, and tell you my Opinion? I think it would
become us Citizens much better to mind our Trades, and our Shops, then to
meddle with State Affairs: For no doubt those at the Helm know better what to
do, then we can tell them, as being the most Experienced, having the best
Prospect, and are the most concerned in an even and steady managing of Affairs.
You daily acquaint me with the Fears you are in of Arbitrary Government, and
yet I cannot see what Reasons and Grounds you have for them: Does not the King
let the law have its full scope? has he deprived any of his Subjects of their
Privileges? has he put the least Curb upon, or failed to do Justice to any
one? has he raised Money without the consent Af his Parliament? I do not hear
of the least of this has been done, and therefore I cannot imagine upon what
bottom you build your Jealousies and Suspicions of Arbitrary Power. Certainly
never any Nation had so Good, so Gracious, so Merciful a Prince; he ought to be
the Joy and Delight of his People, as he is the Admiration and Wonder of the
rest of the World. Has not his Mercy extended to the very worst of his Enemies?
and have not his greatest Persecutors obtained their Pardons, and enjoyed his
Protection and Care, as if they had ever been his greatest Friends? All this
has been done, and can we distrust such a Prince? I must tell you, I fear these
courses will provoke and draw upon us Gods Anger and Judgment.

As for Occurrences here, our Preparations are very great, as well as
Expectations, for the me^ting of the King and his Parliament, which we hope
will compose all our Differences, and heal our Divisions; at least we shall not
be found guilty of meddling with things out of our Province, nor by any too
hasty Motions, give occasion for further Mischiefs and Breaches, though perhaps
we might brag and value our selves as high for our Zeal, and good intentions
for the Public Cause, as any others of our Fellow Subjects: yet as in Religion
one of the greatest Virtues is a perfect Resignation and Submission to all that
Divine Providence shall be pleased to order, so we are apt to think the same of
our Governors in this World: Therefore it is only our parts to choose for our
Representatives such Persons as are best acquainted with the true Interest of
the King and his People; such as are apter to Compose, then raise Disputes, and
are true Members of the Church of England; and then leave all the rest to His
Majesty, and Them, and think of nothing but of putting in Execution what they
shall think fit to Ordain and Order; which we hope and look upon as the best
means for the maintaining the Protestant Religion, and the Honor and Interest
of the King and the Nation, and which will most contribute toward the
Reconciling of all Differences, and the Uniting us amongst our selves: which
shall be the daily prayer of,

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, T. P.


