THE Penitent Murderer: OR, An Exact and True RELATION taken from the Mouth of
Mr. William Jvy (lately Executed) concerning the Murder by him committed upon
the Body of William Pew, Servant to Sir Robert Long in Westminster, upon Monday
the 28th of April 1673: With the Reasons inducing him to that horrid Crime; His
Resolution likewise to have killed the Maid; his taking away seven
hundred-pound Bags, and his manner of disposing them.

AS ALSO, His Trial, Conviction, and Condemnation; With his Confession of the
whole Fact, and his Contrition for the same; as it was delivered from his own
mouth to a particular Friend, and by him Published, to prevent all False
Reports.

Licensed May 21. 1673.

LONDON, Printed for Roger Vaughan, in Bishops-Court in Little Old Bailey, 1673.

The Penitent Murderer, etc.
MR William Ivy (the unhappy Subject of this following Discourse) was a
Gentleman, descended from the Ancient Family of the Ivies in Wiltshire, his
Grandfather Sir George Ivy, his Uncle Sir Thomas Ivy of Masbury in the County
of Wilts; and his Father though a younger Brother, yet endowed with a Fortune
plentiful enough to afford him liberal Education; But his own promptness and
readiness to learn, and his industry to improve that Learning, made him so
little chargeable to his Friends, that after having been but a while at School
at Weymouth, he grew capable of himself, and attained to an Employment for his
own Maintenance, after which he became Clerk to Mr. Blake (one of the late
Surveyor-Generals of his Majesty's Customs) with whom he remained till the
death of the said Mr. Blake; always behaving himself so, as to deserve the
reputation of Diligent and Virtuous.

This had been encouragement enough to any indulgent Parent to take a
particular care of, and have a peculiar delight in a Child; and his Father made
as fair a show of it as any man could do, and seemed industriously to labor
for his settlement, who had taken hitherto so good a care of himself; he
therefore considering him now come to the 25th year of his age, determined to
marry him, and in that his choice agreed with his Son's, pitching upon and
encouraging him to the hopes of gaining Mrs. Elizabeth Rowland, late of the
Three-Cups-Inn in Breadstreet, against either whose Person, Virtue, or Fortune
no exceptions were to be made.

It Is therefore no wonder if the young Gentleman had easily directed to her his
whole thoughts and inclinations; and it is natural to Youth, when once they
love, to affect the pursuing their Amors with all the Vigor and Gallantry
they can, and any cross that lights in their way easily discontents them, and
their eagerness turns into a kind of Frenzy; and the brain, thus distracted, is
ready to admit any impression to arrive at its end; and so Natures, that were
before perfectly pure and good, become the easier vitiated, and are hurried on
to strange and prodigious Violencies.

Thus this unfortunate young Gentleman, finding some Friends falling off from
their promises made to him in relation to his Marriage with the forenamed
Mris. Elizabeth Rowland, began to think himself obliged in Honor to find some
ways to prosecute it, and the studying upon it drove him into Malancholly, and
Malancholly increased his discontent, and then is the Devils time of working,
who never omitts the playing upon such Engines.

In this height of discontent he comes to Sir Robert Longs (where he had long
been acquainted) and, unhappily for him, finds all the Family out of Town, but
only one Young Man called William Pew, and a Maidservant.

This Young Man and Maid having before received their instructions from a
Gentlewoman, Housekeeper to Sir Robert, and Countrywoman to Mr. Ivy, treated
him with all manner of Civility and Respect, and they drank a bottle of Wine
together, after which the youngman and Mr. Ivy spent some time in surveying the
Furniture of the House, and viewing the Pictures, till happening into a Room
where some Guns lay, he took down one and shot at a Mark, and then putting the
Gun in its place returned to his former divertisement of seeing the House, when
coming into Sir Robert Long's Bedchamber he pulled a Pistol out of his pocket
and shot the young man through the Back; who thereupon turning about, cried
out, Mr. Ivy, how could you have so much cruelty to serve me thus? upon which
Mr. Ivy having a Cane in his hand struck him over the Head; on which he fell
down and never spoke more.

But here may be observed with what cunning the Devil works, who could put into
the invention of man the taking down a Gun and shuting at a Mark, that the
noise of his Pistol might not afterward be suspected.

The Youngman thus made sure of, he thought himself not secure whilst the Maid
who was gone to dress him some Eggs might possibly come too soon to call him,
and therefore dragging the Youngman into the Celler, and there covering him
with what he could find, he makes haste to the Kitchen, with a full resolution
to have murdered the Maid likewise, at which he made many proffers, but was
still prevented by that good Angel which protected her; so that in a little
time came in another Maid, and then his evil Angel draws him off from that to
Sir Robert Longs Money-Chest, whence he took seven hundred-pound baggs, two of
which he never carried out of the house, the other five he carried into the
Garden, four of which he laid within the house of office door, the other he
carried away with him into London, and there changed it into Gold; the same
night he came for two more which he likewise carried away with him, and the
other two he buried under the stairs of the Watergate, which could not be
found. The next day he changed the rest of his money into Gold, and took a
resolution to take his leave of England.

But though he had so resolved in his mind, yet it was not in his power to act
it; and all the while he was in Southwark, whither he went with intent to take
Post for the Seaside, he felt the load of Blood and the villainy of his Crime
giving him a check, and infusing into him (as himself expressed it) these kind
of thoughts; If I do get beyond Sea, and there live some time more in sins, in
the midst of them all I may be served my self, as I my self have served the
young man; and these considerations drew him again back to his Lodging, at one
Mr. Nash a Strongwater-man's in Little-Eastcheap, where the Officers of Justice
found and seized him, and brought him to (as himself with all desirable
penitence confesses) his just and deserved punishment. His free confession of
the whole matter of Fact, and his admirable Contrition for it before the Bench,
immediately pleading guilty, and yielding up himself with a reverent submission
to that punishment he confessed he had so justly deserved, leaves no room for
any more to be said concerning his Trial.

But here it is to be noted, that he had behaved himself always with so much
Civility and Regularity, that his Landlord thinking it impossible he should
ever be guilty of so heinous a crime as that wherewith he was charged, was
ready to offer himself to be his Bail.

From all which it may be observed, that neither Birth, Wit, Education,
Industry, nor a habit of well living, can, without the especial Grace of God,
free us from the snares of Satan; and therefore a much better use may be made
of these fatal Accidents, then the common one of reviling and railing at the
lapses of our Brethren, by a due consideration had of the necessity and
Excellency of those two short Petitions of that Prayer taught us by our blessed
Savior, Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.

FINIS.

