To Friends in England, Ireland, Scotland, Holland, New England, Barbado's, or
any where else where the Lord God shall order this to come in the tender Spirit
of Life and Love, greeting.
O Friends,
IN the pure love of God, and fresh Breath of his living Spirit, is it now on
my heart to write unto you, in fear, in tenderness, in meltings and true sense
of Spirit; and the Lord God so guide my heart and words, as that they may reach
the witness in the hearts of all that shall read, and may be felt by that to be
purely of God, and not at all of the birth, will, or wisdom of the flesh.

I remember, I remember, O Friends, and it is in my heart to put you in
remembrance of the cloudy, dismal and dark day, wherein the Shepherd of Israel
(...) our Souls, and what condition we were in, when he caused the Light of
Life to shine upon our Tabernacles, and to spring up in us. O the desolation,
the desolation that our Souls were in, in that day! O the wanderings up and
down, the seekings, huntings, mournings, bitter complaints, and deep distresses
for want of our God, and for want of the guidance of his good Spirit! Who can
utter now what was then felt of the thickness of darkness, of the misery, the
loss, the dreadful captivity that poor Souls were entangled and wraped up in? O
how acceptable was the Visitation of God then! how deep was the sense of his
tender Mercy in visiting! how glad was the Soul then of the living Path
revealed! how unfainedly did it cleave unto the Lord, and embrace the measure
of his Life revealed inwardly to the mind! how did it fear! how did it wait!
how did it watch against the Enemy, and cry to the Father for his help! how
beautiful were the Feet, and how pleasant the visitations of them, who brought
the tidings of this Life and Peace! What love, what unity, what embracing one
another in this life, was then witnessed in the hearts of one another! and
where this lives and grows to this day, O how precious is that Vessel! but
where the Life in any is departed from, where another thing (of another nature)
has entered and been entertained by any, there it is not so; but there the
love is grown cold, the mind changed, the goodness of the Lord forgotten, and
the poor Soul again entangled in that which formerly it felt some release and
deliverance from.

Now, that the Enemy would endeavor to entangle the minds of the Redeemed, and
to draw them back from the Lord, and his pure measure of Life in the heart,
toward Perdition again, that is not to be questioned, it being his Nature and
Property so to do; and that he would use, not only his strength, but also all
his subtilty and deceiveableness to affect this (his aim being at the Church
and Redeemed of God, more then at the World) appearing as an Angel of Light, in
motions like Light, in ways like Life, this is not to be doubted neither; for
how else could he gain upon that, whose eye is toward, and whose aim is after
the Lord? But this is the great thing for my heart, and the hearts of Friends,
to be exercised in, to wait on the Lord, in his true Light, clearly to discern
how far we have been assaulted by this Enemy; and how far the Lord has
preserved us from his assaults, or suffered him to prevail upon us; for he has
prevailed in former Ages, under the ministration of the Law in the Prophets
days, and under the ministration of the Gospel in the Apostles days; yea, and
I must needs say, he has also prevailed in our days, on all that have not
watched in the pure Fear, and been preserved by the pure Power of the Lord. Now
does it not concern every one to look up to the Lord, to guide his heart in
searching, that he may truly understand his state? that, if he can witness the
preservation of the Power, he may sing praise to the Power; but if he has been
betrayed and come to a loss, he may seek after the Power of Life again, and
wait for deliverance and restoring by it. For with the Lord God is Mercy and
Bowels, and he seeks after and saves the Lost, not once only, but again and
again; only here is the great danger of Souls, when they are ignorant of their
Captivity, and judge in themselves, and are guided by that, which should be
judged down and destroyed in them; When Darkness is the light and leader in the
Mind, O whither does that Soul travel! how does it judge, think, act! how sure
does the Enemy hold it in his Bonds and Chains! how easily does he prejudice it
against that, which is of God and for its good; and incline it to think
favorably of that, which only appears to be of God, but is not, and is to
its hurt.

Now Friends, there were three things on my heart this morning, which sprang up
in true sense and demonstration of God's Spirit, as subtle engines, which the
Enemy has endeavored to make use of to hurt our Souls; which any that have
been entangled in, have received hurt by, and those that have escaped, have
cause to bless the Name of the Preserver of ISRAEL.

The first is this, By getting in Persons prejudices against those whom the
Lord has chosen, and pleases to make use of in Ministering to his People.
Precious is the Ministry that is in the Spirit, for the building up in Life, as
well as for begetting. How does the Enemy strive to prejudice the World against
them, that there may be no begetting to God from amongst them? And how does he
also endeavor to raise prejudices among the Begotten, that he may interrupt,
and (if possibly) stop their building up?

The second is this, To draw men from eying and subjecting to the present
dispensation, by an earnest looking after and waiting for another, or further.
The security and blessing of the Soul lies in the present dispensation, in
bowing to God there, in being diligent under the exercises of his Spirit
therein. Now that which draws the mind another way, from the present exercise,
from belief in the present gift, under a specious pretense of waiting for
somewhat more glorious to appear, betrays and deceives, in thus turning the
mind out of the Path which God holds forth and guides into, toward expectation
of a Path as yet to be revealed.

The third is this, Under a pretense of sticking to the enlightening and
guidance of ones own measure, to set up a sense and judgment in the mind, both
concerning persons, practices, and things, which is not truly of the measure,
but secretly instilled into and raised up in the mind, contrary to the pure
measure of Life. All these have I not only seen in Spirit, but been forely
assaulted with; and that they have not prevailed upon me, even to destruction,
is the tender mercy and kindness of the Lord unto me; and in that tenderness
and love, for the preservation of others do I write these things: And indeed, I
have somewhat in my heart to say singly and nakedly concerning each of these,
which the Lord guide and bless to the conditions of those who stand in need
thereof.

First, Concerning those prejudices which the Enemy is apt to lay before the
minds of Friends concerning those whom the Lord has chosen to minister to them
in the Power of his Truth, I shall say this: Look over the former dispensations
of God; There were false Prophets under the Law, and false Apostles and
Ministers in the time of that dispensation of the Gospel, who did strive and
labor hard to disturb, undermine and overturn the Building and Work of God in
the Spirits of his People then; but did God suffer the True Prophets under the
Law, or his True Apostles to fall and lose their Ministry? And is not this
present dispensation pure and living, and able to preserve both the Instructers
and Instructed in the Lord? It is natural to the Enemy to suggest such a thing;
but let all that fear the Lord and love his Truth, take heed how they entertain
such a suggestion. Besides, he that has felt the pure Power in his heart, and
waited to be carried through the work of it, and has been carried through and
brought into the dominion, and set as a Pillar in the Temple of the Lord; it is
not easy (if possible) for him to fall, the Lord having undertaken for him,
that he shall go no more forth, as Rev. 3. 12. But let me say this to thee, O
Soul, who ever have entertained this prejudice, Thou, through prejudices and
suggestions judge them fallen; but do not they, in the true Eternal Light of
the Spirit of Life, see thee fallen? Nay, if thou could but retire to the
pure measure that at first quickened thee, might not thou feel thy own fall?

To the second, Of drawing out the mind to look after another or further
dispensation, I have this to say: Consider what this dispensation is; Is it not
of the Seed it self? Is it not of the Light, Life and Power of the Father,
manifested in the Seed, and in the Soul through the Seed? Is not the sense
quick, and the love pure, where this is felt? What would thou have, poor
Soul? O that thou feltest the virtue and power of this, surely thou would
then find, that thou might sit down here in the Peace, Purity, Power,
Dominion and Perfection of Life; for it is all in the Seed, and to be revealed
to thee, and become thine, as thou art gathered into the Seed, and the Seed
opened in thee. Besides, are there not many that have witnessed, and that can
witness from God, that this is the dispensation which is to go through the
whole earth? and shall it be laid aside in the beginning of its work? If there
had been a Law given, which could have given Life, (said the Apostle)
Righteousness should have been by the Law. God does not change. When he has
brought forth that which will do the thing, why should he change it? Now of the
ability of this, there are many witnesses; Yea it has brought forth Life and
Righteousness in those that have been subject to it, and was once owned as the
desire of our Souls, and became a covering to our eyes that we could look no
further; our hearts in the sense and life of Truth, being satisfied that this
was the very thing we had long mourned after, and waited for. O that which
begets another sense in any of us, (under what pretense or appearance soever)
let it be the abomination of our Souls, that we hearken not, nor give the least
entertainment to it, lest by it we be betrayed of our portion in the blessed
Treasure and Inheritance.

To the third I say; It is a standing Truth, the Standard we were invited to,
and to which we are to keep for ever, even the measure of Life in our own
Vessels: This will justify us in our subjection to whatever it reveals; and
its justification will stand, whatsoever any man else shall say to the
contrary. But this is at unity in it self, and never opposes the motion or
appearance of Life in another. Now this is certain, the Enemy will appear as
near life and its motion, as he can; and if I receive his appearance, I am not
subject to the measure of life in me, but to him under his deceitful
appearance. Therefore if that, which appears like Life in thee, contradict a
practice or appearance of Life in others, (who were in the Truth before thee,
and are in the growth thereof far beyond thee) ought thou not to be sober in
Spirit, and to wait in fear, lest thou should be deceived, lest thou
should exalt Self and the Enemy in thee, and not the Truth; yea lest thy
heart should grow hard, and thy neck stiff against those who are over thee in
the Lord, and so thou lose the benefit of their watching over thee and counsel
to thee, and of Gods preservation? For out of the Truth, in the deceitful
appearance, there is no preservation, nor true Light, nor justification of
Life, but self conceit fleshly confidence, and the justification of a man's own
spirit; and his wisdom then gets up, and exalts it self, as if it were the
right thing. The Lord gave the measure of Life to thee, and the Lord also has
given Fathers, Guides, Instructers, Watchmen, in his Israel. These have a
service from the Lord toward thee, who knows that thy Soul has need of that
service; now if the Enemy can prejudice thee against, and withdraw thee from
the use of what thou need, art thou not in danger of falling and
miscarriage? Do not thou set up the measure of Life in thee (if not another
thing) beyond its place, state and growth? And can any thing grow and thrive
out of the Order and Wisdom of God? Nay, nay, the very measure of life it self
will this way come to wither and die in thee, and another thing live in its
place, and the Sword of the Lord will be drawn against thee, and thou will be
cut off from the Body, and also from him who is the quickner and preserver of
the Body. Therefore my Friends, as the Enemy watches to deceive and destroy,
so the Lord keep our Souls in the true Watch and looking up to him, who (to
those that fear him) discovers the deceit, and preserves from the snare.

And this is witnessed concerning the measure of Life in the heart, and the way
of its acting and operation, that it always acts in its place, even in due
subjection to the Father of Spirits, and to his Life in others according to its
growth: for there is no rent nor division in the living Body, no setting up one
measure of Life against another measure, or one motion of Life against another
motion, or one practice against another, but all there is in the unity, in the
love, in the tenderness, in the sense, in the peace, in the dominion, in the
subjection; and that which differs or dissenteth from the Life, interrupting
the Union and Uniformity in the Life, is not of the Life; which when it is
everywhere cast out, Life to Life will answer everywhere; which day my Soul
breaths and waits for, even the day wherein Life alone shall live and reign
in every Vessel, and all the devices and snares of the Enemy not be able to
enter upon, or catch any of God's little simple-hearted ones; but still by the
power of Life rising in clearness against them, be thrown back upon the Enemy,
to his torment and disadvantage.

And O dear Lambs, consider how easy it is for you to mistake, err, and wander
from the Truth; and do not refuse the care, watchfulness and tender counsel of
those who were instrumental to beget you to, and are yet over you in the Lord.
Alas, how easy is it for the Enemy to deceive your simplicity, and get between
you and your Life; and then ye are liable to miss-see and miss-act in all ye
do, and to follow the Enemy, as if he were your right guide; and to fight
against, and resist him who is your true Leader, as if he were your Enemy. The
Life in you is to be your Guide and Leader, as it grows up and receives
ability, strength and dominion from the Lord; but the Heir is to be under
Tutors and Governor, till the time appointed of the Father. And the Seed is
meek, humble, tender, lowly, sensible of its own state and weakness, and
subject to the exaltation, dominion and pure authority of Life in others where
the Lord has so exalted it. That which is otherwise in you (which is high,
exalted, conceited of it self, and not subject to every degree of Life in
others, according to its state) is another thing, which is not of the true
kind, but only under a guize appears to you as the true; and as it gets
entrance, corrupts your hearts from the true, and destils its poison into your
Spirits, which ye believing, entertaining and feeding upon, as if it were the
true, grow up in his poysonful nature (losing the pure nature and fellowship of
the Body) and are traveling whither ye are not aware, being gone from that
which at first gathered, into that which through subtilty has deceived,
appearing to you as if it was still the same, and that ye still keep to it, but
others are departed; whereas the thing is clean contrary in the sight of the
Lord, and in the sight of those who keep to the Anointing, and see with his
eye. Therefore, O dear Lambs and Babes, what need have we to wait, in tender
sense, for the Lord's preservation of us in that Nature, Spirit and Life,
whereof we were begotten, and wherein we were taught, that there we may still
learn and keep to the true teaching, in the innocence and simplicity of love,
and not hearken to the wisdom and reasonings of another spirit, who lies at
watch to catch the mind with his wiles, and draw from the true thing. Mark how
we learned at first; Was it not in a Nature, by a secret instinct and
inclination of our minds toward the Life, and the Path, Ways and Practices
thereof, whereinto the Body (which before had been gathered) was led and walked
before us? The same Life, when it makes us part of the flock, brings us into
the same footsteps; and there we walk with them, in the unity of the same Life,
and sense of the same Leader; but if the Enemy can at any time draw us from
this sense, and from the belief and practices or practice, which we received in
this sense, (even out of the limits of this nature and its naturalness) how
easy is it for him to persuade us to question right things in our minds and
understandings, as if they were wrong, (darkening our eye, and causing us to
overlook and forget the leading and motion, which we had in the true sense and
nature, from the Annoiting it self) and so confidently to think and conclude,
that we took up such or such a practice by imitation, and have held it up in
form? whereas the Lord (who forgets not what and how he has wrought in us)
knows that we took it up in the sense and leading of his Truth, and are now
tempted from that in the reasoning subtilty, which we formerly practiced in the
true innocent simplicity. And thus getting into us a belief and entertainment
of his snare, he draws us from that which at first led us, and from the
practices we were at first led into, to hearken to him and follow him, who
instructs us in a way we were not instructed in before while the Lord
instructed us; and so destroys his Nature, and the Work of his Spirit in us,
dividing us both from the Head and living Body; and so our standing, growth,
sense and judgment is altered, and we are neither to the Lord what we were
before, nor is he to us what he was before; for he hates that Spirit in all its
appearances, and cannot have unity with the Souls that are entangled by it.
Therefore, dear Friends, as we prize our gathering to and abiding with the
Lord, and the enjoyment of his Love, Peace, Joy and Presence at present, and
the Crown and Inheritance of Life with him for ever; so let us fear, so let us
watch, so let us cry unto him, to be preserved by him, which gathered us, in
that into which he gathered, and not by any means betrayed (through subtilty of
the Enemy) into another thing, where the life of the Body (and union with the
Body) cannot possibly be witnessed, nor the true justification of the Lord, but
only an appearing justification of a man's own spirit, which must afterward
come under condemnation. Ye, who are in the living and true sense, will feel my
love, tenderness and faithfulness in what I write; and ye who are not, the Lord
God of Bowels pity, and recover out of the snare and wrong judgment, that ye
may feel it; and feeling that which is true, may be joined to it, drinking of
its virtue and preservation, and live; which is the earnest desire of my Soul
to the Lord, who am

From Alisb. Prison, the 14th. of the 5th. month, 1666. Your Brother and
Companion, in the tribulations and mercies which attend the Living. Isaac
Penington.

POSTSCRIPT.
DEar Friends, Brethren, Lambs and Plants of the most High, it is in my heart
to add one thing, which I have been deeply exercised about, and have received
help from the Lord in, wherein I am truly willing (in faithfulness and
tenderness) to be helpful to any of you that stand in need thereof, as the Lord
shall give me ability and opportunity; It is this, Among other things,
wherewith the Enemy endeavors to reproach those whom the Lord has sent
forth amongst us, he makes use of this, as if they wanted Bowels and
Tenderness. Now Friends, I beseech you consider it, that the Enemy may not thus
enter you; Did not the Lord consider of his work, and whom he sent forth in
this his service and labor of Love? Does he not know the need of bowels and
tenderness in them, and would be not especially furnish them therewith? Yea,
have they not bowels from, and in the Lord? and does not the eye that is open
see, and acknowledge their bowels, and bless the Lord for them? I have lately
been often warmed in the true sense of it, and have felt, that therein I have
not blessed his Name in vain; but the thing is so in the sense of Truth, and so
acknowledged before the Lord, in that which erreth not: Only as true judgment
and severity has its proper place in the Lord as well as his Mercy; (...) made
use of by him toward his people, as all by experience know, so must it be in
them also who bear his Image, who must know, in his Wisdom and Authority, whom
to smite with his Rod and sharp Reproofs, and when, and whom to cherish in the
tenderness and meltings of Love. And this is also love and tenderness (and has
sweet and precious virtue and usefulness in it, both for the recovery and
restoring of those whose condition calls for the sharp stroke, and for the
preservation of the rest) though it does not so appear to that, which by no
means can endure the judgment, but would have the tenderness and mercy which
belongs not to it; for the mercy is to the broken, to the humble, to the meek,
to the afflicted and bo^^^down ones under the sense of judgment; not to the
stiff and stubborn against the righteous judgments and testimonies of the
Lord. And my Friends consider, Could the Lord carry on his glorious Work, in
the hearts of his Children, without his judgments? Or can they, who are sent
by him, possibly carry on his work among his people, without making use of
(...) pruining-knife, to cut off that which sprouted out unnaturally and
unseasonably, which (if it be let alone) will draw away the sap from that which
should be fed and nourished with it. Dear Friends, the Lord give you a true
sense, that in his Light, Life, Wisdom and Presence ye may justify what is of
him, discerning between things that differ, and not call any thing that is evil
(as the tenderness which is out of him is) good, nor any thing that is good (as
the judgment and severity which is of him is) evil, but may rightly distinguish
between the nature of things, knowing every thing that is of God, and owning it
in its place.

Alisb. Prison the 29th. of the 6th. month, 1666.
THE END.

