THE New Covenant OF THE GOSPEL Distinguished from the Old Covenant OF THE LAW.

AND The Rest or Sabbath of Believers, from the Rest or Sabbath of the Jews;
which differ as much from each other, as the Sign and Shadow does from the
thing signified and shadowed out.

In Answer to some Queries of W. Salters, tending to enforce upon Christians
the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, which was given under the Law to the
Jews for a sign.

As also to some other Queries sent in Writing upon an occasion of an Epistle
directed to all such as observe the seventh day of the week for a Sabbath now
under the Gospel. As likewise to some Letters to the same purpose.

With a brief Explication of the Mystery of the six days Labor, and seventh
days Sabbath.

Whereto are added some Considerations propounded to the Jews, tending toward
their co^^ersion to that which is the Life and Spirit of the Law.

By ISAAC PENINGTON the younger.

We which have believed, do enter into rest,

Heb. 4.3. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of
an holy day, or of the new Moon, or Sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to
come; but the body is Christ,

Col. 2.16, 17. London, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his
shop at the black spredd-Eagle and VVindmill in Martins l' grand^ 1660*

The Preface.
THE Apostle Paul says, That God had made them able Ministers of the
New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor 3.6.

After the dispensation of the Law, which was a shadow of good things to come;
and after the dispensation of the Prophets, who foretold of better days, and of
a better state to come, then the days and state under the Law was; it pleased
God first to send the forerunner John the Baptist, in the spirit and power of
Elias, to prepare the way for the King and his Kingdom; and then to send the
King himself in the fullness of his spirit, to gather Disciples to him, and to
furnish them with a competent measure of the same spirit, to raise up a
Spiritual Seed to him, in whom he would set up his Kingdom, dwelling, walking,
and reigning there, causing his Light to shine from thence round about the
Earth, as from his holy City, founded upon his holy Hill of Sion.

Now those Disciples or Ministers whom he chose to raise up this holy Seed unto
him, he made fit and able to minister his New Covenant, by which it was to be
raised: yea he furnished them with such a power of his Spirit, that they were
able through him to minister, not in the Letter (as the old Covenant was
ministered, which left the people still dead: nay, because of the transgressing
nature, made the offense abound, and so increased death upon them) but in the
quickening spirit, which raises from death, and brings into the light of the
living, to walk with the living God toward the land of Eternal rest and peace.
So that that which they ministered was spirit, and that which they ministered to,
was spiritual. By the power of the spirit, in preaching the living Word of
Faith, they reached through the vail to that which lay in death, they stirred
up a living Principle, and ministered life to it through the spirit, Gal. 3.5.
and such as were born of this living Principle, they taught to live in the
spirit, to walk in the spirit, to be made perfect by the spirit, and not to run
back to the Ministration of the Letter (as was proper for the Jews in their
day) after the manner of the former dispensation, but to keep in the living
Principle, to grow up in the Seed, into the eternal life and immortality of the
Gospel.

Mark well, (O ye Christians, who desire eternal life) the different way of
Ministration between the Law and Gospel. The Law was a Ministration of the
Letter, in which they were to wait for assistance from the Spirit, by which
they might be kept in the faith of, and be made obedient to the Law, Nehem.
9.20. The Gospel is a Ministration of the Spirit, wherein they are to begin
with the spirit, and to go on with the spirit; not to gather outward Rules out
of the Letter, from what is written or spoken, but to keep to the living
Principle, and feel refreshment to that, in reading or hearing what is written
or spoken by the Spirit. And thus the Scriptures being read, or any one
speaking from God being heard, it is mingled with faith, and becomes
profitable, feeding and refreshing the young tender plant, the living
Principle, and causing it to grow up into God: whereas whatever is understood,
or received, or held out of this, feeds but the earthly, and does but thicken
the vail over the living Seed, to which the Kingdom belongs, and to which the
Gospel is sent to be preached to raise it, that it might live, and thrive, and
grow up into its stature, that so it might inherit.

The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, said John the Baptist; Mat. 3.2. It is come
unto you, said Christ, Mat. 12.28. that Power of Life which was made manifest
in him, was it: and this Kingdom is also within you, says Christ to the
Pharisees, Luke 17.21. The Pharisees demanded of him when the Kingdom of God
should come? It comes not, says he, with outward show or observation, it
comes not that way you look for it, to wit, by the manifestation of an outward
glorious King, to reign outwardly in the Commonwealth of the outward Israel:
but the Kingdom is within you. How was it within them? Christ explains to them
in another place, it was in them like a Grain of Mustard Seed; it was the least
of all the Seeds in their hearts. There were many great seeds of darkness
there, but yet there was also one little Seed of Light. It was there, as well
as the rest (though less then them all) and did sometimes cast some glimmerings
of light, and of its shining in the darkness, though the darkness could not
comprehend it. This Seed was also likened to leaven, which being received by
faith into the lump, would leaven the whole lump, and bring it into the savor
and Dominion of the Kingdom. Now the Ministry of the Apostles was to turn men
from Satan's Kingdom to this Kingdom, from his large compass of Dominion in the
heart, to this narrow Seed; from his great Territories of darkness, to this
little Principle of Light; from his great Power of Death, to this little weak
Thing of God, wherein the Eternal Power and Godhead is made manifest, as this
comes to be opened and increased by the Spirit. Here light is sown for the
righteous, and joy for the upright in heart; where it is to grow up, and from
whence it is to be reaped after its growth to perfection.

Oh how long have Christians (so called) wanted the Spirit! How have they
wearyed themselves, in running to and fro about the Letter, to find out the
mind of God, and are still unsatisfied concerning it, and even drowned in
fleshly imaginations and contentions about it! They seek to have that
satisfied, which is not to be satisfied: They seek to have that know, which is
not to know: they offer to God the service, faith, and obedience of that, which
he will not accept; and keep that from him which he calls for. They seek for
the Spirit in the Letter, according to the manner of the Law; but wait not to
feel it in the Seed, quickening the Seed, raising up the Seed, and dwelling in
the Seed, whither Christ and his Apostles directed to wait for it. They look
for that knowledge, that faith, that life, that spirit from words written,
which the Apostle preached was to be waited for from the word in the heart. And
by this means they raise up several buildings, and get various kinds of
knowledge, each according to his understanding and apprehensions of the Letter,
every sort being very confident concerning their own apprehensions that they
are the right: And thus they wander from the City of the living God, and from
the living knowledge, building up Images, some outwardly, some in their minds;
some more gross, some more refined; but all more or less who are not acquainted
with the living knowledge and truths of God, but have gathered apprehensions
with the wrong tool from the Letter, have set up somewhat else instead of the
true Life and Power. (The knowledge of the true God, which is life eternal) the
knowledge of the true Christ (whom no man can indeed call Lord, but by the
spirit) the knowledge of the everlasting Gospel (which alone is read in the
spirit) the knowledge of the spirit (which alone is read in the Seed) these are
strange things to the several generations of the Christians of this age, who
commonly know no more of them, then according to the apprehensions they have
taken in concerning them, even from that wisdom and understanding which has
not a capacity in it to receive them, but must be destroyed before these things
can be understood aright, 1 Cor. 1.19. O that ye could read in the eternal
light of life! O Christians, Christians, O that ye could see how your
understandings, and knowledge from the Letter stand as much in your way, as
ever the Jews did in theirs, and must be broken down as flat as ever theirs
was, before the foundation of the Kingdom can be laid, and the building of
eternal life reared up in your hearts. Be not offended at my zeal for the Lord
my God, and for your souls. It has cost me very dear, what I testify to you
in the simplicity and integrity of my heart; and this I know to be most
certainly true, that that spirit of man which without the leadings of the
eternal Light, has nestled it self in the letter* got a seat of wisdom and
knowledge there, raised up a building from thence, either of inward or outward
Worship, will be dissetled and driven thence, even by that very spirit which
gave forth the Letter. And when this is done, and God's spirit again opens
the Letter, O how sweet, how profitable, how clear, how refreshing will it be,
being read in the light of the spirit, and in the faith which is in Christ
Jesus, which is begotten in the heart by the word of Faith, which is nigh
there* From that light, from that spring (as the Lord pleased to open, enlarge
and fill the Vessel) all the words of the holy men of God came; and in that
alone they have their sweetness, freshness, virtue and fullness: but how to read
the words outwardly written, keeping to that, and understanding them in that
(and how to keep out the natural man with his natural understanding, which
knows not the things of the Spirit, nor can know or receive them, 1 Cor.
2.14.) is a mystery to them who have not been turned inwards to this word, nor
have known or heard his voice. The Lord is recovering the Mystery of Life: and
as that appears, the Mystery of Death under all its paint (under all its
painted Faith, painted Love, painted Knowledge, painted Obedience, painted
Duties, Ordinances, and Worship) will be made manifest. Happy is he, whose
inward Building will stand, whose Gold will abide the fire and everlasting
Burnings of the jealous God, whose Eye Salve was bought of the true spirit,
whose raiment is right spun: but exceeding hard will it go with that man, whom
the Lord (when he comes to search him) shall not find a right inward Jew, as
he took himself to be, nor truly circumcised by the Lords eternal Spirit with
the light thereof; but only by such a circumcising knife as he himself had
formed out of the letter of the Scriptures. This is the great misery of
Christians, the vail lies over their hearts, even the same vail which covered
the Letter of Moses from the Jews; and they are groping after the mind of God
in the Letter, but the life is hid from them, even as it was from the Jews: and
because they also say they see, and that they have the life and the spirit,
therefore the vail remains, and the caul of iniquity surrounds them, so that
they cannot see into that which makes free from it, but remain yet in captivity
and bondage to the Enemy.

Some Queries of W, Salters, tending to enforce upon Christians the observation
of the Jewish Sabbath, ANSWERED.
Query 1. WHether the Fourth Commandment, expressed, Exodus 20. be not moral and
perpetual, as well as the other nine be, yea or no?

Answer. That Covenant, which God made with the Jews at mount Horeb, when they
came out of the Land of Egypt, was not to be perpetual, but to make way for
that Covenant, Priesthood, Lawgiver and Law which was to be perpetual. That
Law, so given forth, made nothing perfect, but was a continual handwriting of
Ordinances against the Jews, and the very Salvation of the Jews was by another
Covenant and by the Laws thereof, Deuteronomy. 30 11. By which Covenant and by which
Law they might be made perfect, and come to the better hope. Which other
Covenant is the Covenant of Grace, or the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, or the Word which is nigh in the mouth and in the heart, and speaks Life
to them that can hear and believe the joyful sound of it.

Now that this former Covenant was not to abide, but to give place to the
other, see Heb. 8. Which treats of the New Covenant. For God's speaking of a
New Covenant, imports that he himself has made the first Old, ver. 13. It
had had a long continuance among that people of the Jews; but now against the
coming of Christ, who was to be Mediator of a better Covenant, v. 6. even of a
New Covenant, v. 8. as it had been long decaying and waxing Old, So now it was
ready to vanish away, as v. 13.

And indeed it was necessary it should pass away, for it was not faultless. How
not faultless? was there any sin in the Holy Law and Ministration of God by
Moses? can there any just blame be found in any thing that proceeded from the
Lord? Nay surely, the ministration of Moses was holy and without blame: but it
was weak through the flesh, ( Romans 8.3.) and therefore God would lay that
aside, so far as it was weak, and suited to the weakness of a fleshly people,
and bring instead thereof a ministration of the Law in the Spirit, which should
be lively, and powerful, and effectual in the Spirits of his people.

That which God aimed at in a Covenant, was to keep him and his people
together: Now this Covenant was weak on the peoples part, they continued not in
it, and so, according to that Covenant, God dis-regarded them, v. 9. Now God
finding this Covenant not able to effect his purpose of Love toward his
people, he finds fault with it, bringing forth another or second, which this
gives place to, v. 7. And this other Covenant, or New Covenant is not according
to that. How not according to that? Why thus: It was not written outwardly, as
that was: Not according to that which I made with their Fathers, when I took
them by the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt, ver. 9. For I will put
my Laws in their mind, and write them in their hearts, ver. 10. And here they
shall learn the knowledge of God every one from the least to the greatest, v.
11. So that all the Children of this Covenant shall be taught of the Lord, and
learn the Law from his mouth; not as it was given at mount Sinai (which
ministration was to the children of the Old Covenant) but as it goes forth out
of Sion, and from the Jerusalem which is above, which is the mother of all the
children of this Covenant, and nourishes them not with the Law of Moses, but
with the milk of her own breasts.

Now if any think to restrain this to the types and shadows of the Law, they
therein err: for the main Covenant was the Law of Commandments, which they
still broke, worshipping other Gods, making Images and likenesses, taking his
Name in vain, profaning his Sabbaths, and so of the rest. It is true, The
first Covenant had a worldly Sanctuary, a Tabernacle wherein was the
Candlestick, etc. But the chief matter of the Covenant was the ten words,
therefore the Tables wherein it was written were called the Tables of the
Covenant, or the Tables wherein the Covenant was contained, Heb. 9.4. Yea the
ten words are expressly called the Covenant it self, Deuteronomy. 4.13. Observe
therefore diligently these few things following in the fear of the Lord.

First, the ten Commandments, given by Moses from mount Horeb, was the
Covenant which God made with the Jews, when he took them by the hand to lead
them out of the Land of Egypt.

Secondly, That Covenant God found fault with, because it was not able
(through the weakness of the flesh in their parts) to keep them to God.

Thirdly, Against Christ's coming God provideth a New Covenant, a better
Covenant for him to be Mediator of, which Covenant was not outvvard like the
former, but inward, put in the mind, writ in the heart. As the people was
inward, the Sanctury inward, the Ark inward, The Tables of the Covenant
inward, so the Covenant it self and the Writing of it was inward also. And
this Covenant, as it is only written in the Spirit, and in that which is
Spiritual; So it cannot be read in the Letter.

Fourthly, That wherever this New Covenant comes, the other waxes old,
whether to a Person or People. Where ever the Law of the Spirit of Life is
made manifest, the Law of the Letter is svvallovved up in it, and is known no
more, but as it is comprehended, appears and is brought forth in it. And he
that is in the Spirit, and has received the Law of Life from the Spirit,
knovveth not Christ after the flesh, how much less Moses? but taking the
whole ministration of Moses in the Spirit, not only the ten Commandments,
but all the Sacrifices and other types also, here they are owned and received,
even in Christ the substance: but the ten Commandments, so far as they were a
shadovv, pass away before the Son of Righteousness, as well as the other
types and shadovvs of the Law.

Obj. But was there any thing of the ten words a shadow? Do they not all
command abiding things?

Ans. Moses his whole Ministration (as it stood in the letter without) was but
a shadow of the fullness and perfection of that Ministry of the Spirit, which
was to come, and to be set up by the Son in his house, Hebr. 3.5, 6. Moses his
people but a shadow of the spiritual people, Moses his Priests and Sacrifices,
but a shadow of the spiritual Priests and Sacrifices. Moses his Law in the
letter ministered from Mount Sinai, but a shadow of Christ's law in the spirit to
be ministered from Mount Sion, (2 Cor. 3.10, 11.) The Law it self which was
given by him, but a shadow of the grace and truth which came by Jesus Christ,
Joh. 1.17. of whose fullness every believer receives a portion of the same
Grace, even Grace for Grace, v. 16. which Grace is to be his Teacher, both of
what he should deny and turn from, and how he should live and carry himself
both toward God and man, Tit. 2.11, 12. Look particularly on the Commandments,
and see if there will not appear something of a shadow in them.

The first commandment to that people, That they should have none other Gods
(like the heathen) but him only whose powerful Arm had brought them out of
Egypt, This is a shadow of the subjection of the spiritual Israel singly in
spirit, to the Lord of spirits, who by his mighty arm redeemeth them out of
spiritual Egypt. Now must they bow to other lords no more, ( Isa. 26.13.) as
they did bow in the land of Egypt, (oh, who can read this!) but bow alone at
the Name of Jesus, and be subject to the arm of his power in their spirits
alone for ever.

The second Commandment, That they should not make any Images or likenesses of
things in Heaven or Earth, or bow down to them, is a shadow of what God
requires of spiritual Israel in the inward, where all likenesses, inventions,
imitations, resemblances of what they have seen in the spirit above, or beneath
in the earthly nature, they must not make themselves, nor bow to such as any
others make.

And they must not take the Name (of the Lord their Redeemer) in vain,
pretending to the living Power, when it manifests not it self in them,
pretending to meet in the living Name, and to worship in the spirit, when they
are gone a whoring from it, and become strangers to it. What should I mention
any more? It is easy to observe, how the other commandments were shadows of
the inward innocence and purity, which the believer receives inwardly into his
heart, from the powerful operation of the law of the Spirit of life in him.

Obj. But may any of these Laws be broken? if they may not be broken, then they
are perpetual.

Ans. The reason why they may not be broken, is not because that the
dispensation of them is still in force, but because the dispensation of the law
of the spirit, comprehends all the righteousness of Moses his law: and the end
of Christ's dissolving that Covenant, was not that any man might have liberty to
do any thing which is there manifested to be unrighteous; but that the
righteousness of it might be fulfilled in them who receive his law in the
spirit, which never could be fulfilled by receiving of Moses his law in the
letter, Rom 8.4. And mark this diligently, ye that have been exercised in
spirit toward God, The law of sin is nearer to us, then any law of the letter
can come; the covenant of Death and Hell (with the laws thereof) are written
within by the finger of Satan; and that which blots them out must be as near,
even an inward covenant, an inward writing from the Eternal Word in the heart,
by the law of his Eternal Spirit of life.

This then is my Answer; Moses his law in substance remains, as it is taken in
by Christ and administered by him in spirit; but not as it was given in the
letter to the Jews; for so it was a shadow, making nothing perfect, but making
way for the better hope, for the Covenant established upon better promises, for
the inward law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus; which effects that in the
spirits of his people, which Moses his law could by no means do.

Quest. But what is the substance of the law which abides?

Ans. The substance of the law is Love: To love God above all (above all
without, above all within) and to love one's Neighbor as ones self. To receive
this love from God, and to bring it forth in his spirit; this is the substance
of the law, this is the thing which the law drove at in a shadow. The law is
fulfilled in this one word Love: but that love must be received from God which
fulfils the law. A man may strive to love abundantly, and strive to obey in
love, and yet fall short of the covenant; but the Lord must circumcise the
heart before that love can spring up, which fulfils the law, Deuter. 30 6.

Obj. But does not the Apostle Paul say, That by the law is the knowledge of
sin, and that he had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not
covet; plainly referring to the tenth Commandment, which says, Thou shall not
covet?

Ans. By the law outwardly was the knowledge of sin outwardly to the people of
the Jews; by the law inwardly is the knowledge of sin inwardly to the spirits
of Disciples. Now a little consider and wait on the Lord to know, what
administration of the law it was that Paul knew sin by: whether it was by Moses
his administration of the law in the letter, or by Christ's Ministration of his
law to him in the spirit? It is rendered in our last Translation, Thou shall not
covet: but it might more properly be rendered, Thou shall not lust: For if (...)
be properly rendered Lust, then (...) may as properly be rendered, Thou shall
not lust. And he that has received the administration of the law in the
Spirit, knows it thus to issue forth from the Word of life, into his Spirit.
It discovers the lusts and affections of the flesh, which draw from the yoke
and subjection to the spirit; and then by a command from the living spirit, it
hedgeth up the way after the other lovers, saying, Thou shall not lust. And as
the law of the flesh arises, kindling desires after vanity, and after fleshly
ease and delight: so the law of the spirit arises in the inner man, forbidding,
pricking, stopping, and limiting that which would be at liberty out of the life
and purity of the holy law. And here begin the bitter fights, and terrible
battles and conflicts between the two Seeds, wherein all the powers of heaven,
earth and hell are engaged.

Now because this interpretation of Paul's words may seem strange and uncouth,
to persons who have drunk in another apprehension, and have taken it for
granted that Paul there refers to the tenth commandment; consider the place yet
further, and perhaps the Lord may please to open it to you from the very
Letter, even as he has opened it to others immediately by his Spirit, by
causing them to feel the thing which Paul felt, and to receive the Law as he
received it.

Paul in that seventh of the Romans speaks of three states which he had known.

First, a state of life before the law; I was alive without the law once, v. 9.

Secondly, a state of death after the commandment came; Then sin revived and he
dyed. When the Word of Life came with its living commandment, to set upon sin
indeed, then sin would dally no longer, it would no longer lie as dead, and
let Paul live in his Zeal and Worship as he had done before; but it slew him,
it showed its power in him, sometimes deceiving him, and sometimes forcing him
from that which was holy, spiritual, just and good, and to that which was
unholy, insomuch as he did do what he hated, and could not do what he loved;
and found himself a wretched man, and in miserable captivity, because of the
body of death, and the law of sin in his members, v. 23, 24.

3 dly. A state of life, after the commandment had done its Work in thoroughly
slaying of him. When that was removed which the law came against then, then he
was married to another husband, then he could bring forth fruit unto God, Romans
7.4. then he could walk freely with God, not after the flesh, but after the
spirit, chapter 8.4. and rejoice in the life, and the peace, instead of roaring out
because of the death, which came from the carnal mind, v. 5.

Now when was the time when Paul was alive without the Law? Was it not when he
was righteous, when he was whole? then he had no need of the Phisician, then he
had not received the Wound, even the terrible Wound which Christ then gives the
soul when he calls to it by his spirit, and gives forth the commandment,
Thou shall not lust. When he had confidence in the flesh, being circumcised the
eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the
Hebrews, as touching the Law a Pharisee, concerning Zeal persecuting the
Church; touching the righteousness which is in the Law blameless, Phil. 3.4, 5,
6. Here was a living man: and his exact receiving the Ministration of the Law
in the letter, was part of his life: yea but he had not received the
commandment yet that slew him. Paul was alive yet, and could flourish in the
freshness of his life, zeal, and abundant knowledge under this administration
of the Law. But when God, who caused the light to shine out of darkness, shined
in his heart, when God begun the Work of the new Creation in him by his living
light, when the commandment came fresh from the Spirit (the commandment which
was ordained to life, Romans 7.10. which the Ministration of the Law in the
letter was not, no not to the Jews, but another, Deuteronomy. 30.14, 15.) then Paul
began to feel the sting of death, and the Power of sin, which now arose up in
its strength to retain one of its subjects, and to keep the stronger man then
he, from dispossessing him, if he could. And now, how was poor Paul rent and
torn, and harrased by the Enemy, and made to see and feel his miserable
captivity, until he had passed through the death, and was redeemed from under
sin, and consequently from under this bitter Ministration of the Spirit, by his
holy, pure, and severe Law against sin! for the man being dead, the law has no
force against the Seed, nor against that which is one with, and lives in the
Seed: And this is it he speaks to the Romans concerning, who also were
acquainted with this Ministration of the law, as v. 1. of this seventh chap.
Now is it not very manifest, that Paul knew not sin spiritually by the
Ministration of the law in the letter, but was alive without it, until he felt
the Ministry of it from Christ in the Spirit? and that soon struck at his life,
and by degrees slew it, killing the body of sin in him, with its members, and
so preparing him for the marriage to another Husband.

Object. But by this then, a man is not only freed from the Law of the letter,
but also from the law of the spirit: for if this law be ministered to him til
death pass upon him, and til he be married to Christ; then after death is
passed upon him, and he is baptized into death and risen with Christ, and
married to him, then this Law passes away likewise.

Answ. There is a double ministration of the Law of the Spirit: a sharp
ministration against sin, and a sweet ministration in the renewed spirit. The
ministration against sin passes away, as the sin is wrought out: but then the
sweet Spiritual current and law of its holy and pure life in the renewed
Spirit, is more vigorous and full. So that the law of the Spirit remains for
ever, but its convictions, its reproofs, its chastisements toward the worldly
part, diminish and pass away, as the worldly part is wasted: and its sweet
comforting presence, pure peace, fresh joy and life increase, as the new man
grows and flourishes.

Quer. 2 Whether the scope and drif^ of that fourth precept, be not to persuade
us to lay by the works of our calling one day in seven, that we may on that day
wholly give up our selves to wait on the Lord, in the performance of duties of
piety and mercy, for our attaining of, and growing in sanctificaion and
holiness?

Answ. The scope and drift of the fourth Commandment was to injoin the Jews to
keep the Sabbath strictly as a sign, by forbearing all works, and sanctifying
it as a day of rest to the Lord, according to the law, Ezekiel. 20.12. But the
substance being come (Christ, who is the body, Col. 2.17.) the day and rest of
the Spirit being known, the sign is at an end, and the thing signified takes
place. So that the rest is now in Christ, through the Faith, by his Spirit,
where the worship is. And this in the Gospel comprehends the time of worship,
the place of worship, and the worship it self (which are Spiritual) where in
substance all is known, enjoyed and solemnized, which was figured out in
shadows under the law. The sanctification being come, the rest being come, the
Lord of the Sabbath being come, shall not the sign of the sanctification, the
sign of the rest, (which rest the Lord of the Sabbath was to give, and lead the
Spirits of his people into) pass away? Ex 31.13

Quer. 3. Whether the fourth precept, do not as strictly bind us to keep holy
the seventh day, of or from the creation, as it binds us to the observation
of a seventh Day?

Answ, The fourth Commandment did not require the observation of a seventh Day
in general, but of the seventh day in particular, of those of whom it required
it: for what the law required, it required of those who were under the law, and
not of others, Romans 3.19.

Quer. 4. If the seventh days Sabbath, be not moral and perpetual, then how
comes it to pass that it was instituted, or appointed from the first Creation,
when man by guilt stood in no need of a Savior, nor yet of such a ceremony,
Genesis 2.3.

Answ. That it was instituted or appointed from the first Creation, or that God
intended to require of man the observation of it had he abided in innocence, is
not manifest in the Scriptures: but that God did then bless and sanctify it
(in relation to the service he had for it) that is expressed in Scripture; Genesis
2.2, 3. And that this was one end for which he did sanctify it, namely that it
might be for a sign unto that people of the Jews (which was the people he chose
to set up his signs and figures of the invisible things among) the Scripture
also testifies, Exodus 20 11. But what further meaning there is in it, and what
relation it has to all the redeemed of the Lord, in whom, God brings about the
New Creation, with the rest thereof, (as he did the old) it is better to wait
to know and feel in the Spirit, then to be prying into with the curious,
searching, fleshly understanding.

Quer. 5. If the seventh days Sabbath be not moral, and belonging both to Jews
and Gentiles: then how comes it to pass that it was given to all men in Adam,
when there was no difference between Jew and Gentile? and was observed by
command from the beginning, as appears by comparing together, Genesis 2.3. and
Exodus 16.18. to 31.

Answ. That it was given to Adam in innocence, or to all men in Adam, I do not
find, nor do these places quoted make it manifest. But its being practiced
before the giving of the law, does not prove its perpetuity, or that it was not
given for a sign: for circumcision was instituted and observed long before the
giving of the law, ( Genesis 17.) and sacrificing long before that, ( Genesis 4.)
both which were signs of the inward, and not perpetual, as to the outward
observation of them.

Quer. 6. If when our Lord Jesus says, Mat. 5.18. that till heaven and earth
pass, one jot or tittle should in no wise pass from the law. If he there meant
not the law of the ten Commandments, expressed in Exodus 20. then what law did
he mean?

Answ. By the law is meant the whole ministration of Moses, as by the Prophets,
ver. 17. the whole ministration of the Prophets: and that it is not to be
restrained to the ten Commandments, is manifest by the instances which Christ
gives, more of which relate to other parts of the law, then to the
Commandments: for there are but two instances out of the ten Commandments,
but there are four instances out of other parts of the law, as may be seen,
ver. 31, 33, 38. and 43. of that Chapter. So that Christ does not only take in
the ten Commandments, but he takes in the rest of Moses his Ministry in the
Spirit, not one jot or tittle whereof is to pass, till it be all fulfilled; but
was to stand in the letter to the Jews its full season, and then in the Spirit
till all be finished there also.

The Law and the Prophets were until John, from that time the Kingdom of God
began to be preached, Luke 16.16. and both the law, Prophets, and John himself
were to decrease and Christ and his Kingdom to increase. Christ in this 5 of
Matthew. had been preaching the Kingdom, declaring to whom it apperteined, and
the blessedness of such: Now this his manner of preaching might seem to
derogate from the law of Moses, and from the Prophets, whose doctrine and
dispensation hereby he might seem to destroy. But Christ takes away the
occasion of such a mis-apprehension, bidding them not think he came to destroy
the Law or the Prophets; for he was not come for that end, but to fulfill.
Wherein he does these two things,

First, he establishes that ministration of the law and Prophets for its
season, till it should be fulfilled by him the substance, who was to fulfill
all the righteousness of it. It should last out its whole day, and should not
fail in the least tittle of it (as he himself explaineth it, Luke 16.17.) til
the heaven and earth of the Jews passed away, Heb. 12.27.28.

Secondly, He takes in the substance of it into his own ministration, and
lays it more inwardly, and closely, and largely upon the Spirits of his
Disciples, then Moses had done in the letter upon his Disciples. But he does
not give it out in full, but only gives a taste to his Disciples how straightly
he would minister it to them by his Spirit, as they came under his yoke, Matthew.
11.29. which yoke is his Spirit or the law thereof, as Moses his yoke was the
law of the Letter.

Now mark yet further, Christ does not give out the letter for his law, as it
was delivered by Moses: but requires somewhat of his Disciples, which
comprehends the letter. As now when he administers the law against revenge,
from whence murder proceeds, he does not say, Thou shall not kill, as Moses had
said to them of old time, but says, thou shall not be angry without a cause,
nor give thy brother any provoking language, ver. 22. Nor does he say, Thou
shall not commit adultery; but thou shall not let out a lustful look, nor let
in a lustful thought, v, 28. And had he spoken here about the Sabbath, would
he have administered it in the letter, or would he have commanded the
observation of the true Sabbath, where no work is done, no fire kindled (nor so
much as any sticks gathered to make a fire with) nor no burden born; but the
Manservant, the Maidservant, the Ox, the Ass, and every creature rests in
the seed. The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath. It is true he subjected
himself under the law, but yet he was still Lord: and he makes all his, Kings
and Priests to God, who being once baptized into his death, know also his
resurrection and reign.

Ob^ect. But all the other Commandments are to be kept according to the
letter; for although it should prove so, that believers are not bound to
observe them by virtue of Moses's ministration in the letter, but by virtue of
the ministration of the Spirit, yet the Commandments themselves are kept: but
take away the outward observation of the Sabbath, and this Commandment has no
fulfilling at all according to the letter.

Answ. This arises from the different nature of the thing: for the other
Commandments require or forbid that which is either good or evil in its own
nature; but this is but good or evil by institution or command. To keep a Day,
or not to keep a Day, is not good or evil in it self, but as it is commanded,
or forbidden, or left at liberty in the Lord, and according as it is done or
forborne by him, who receives the command or prohibition, or is let into the
liberty of the Gospel, Romans 14.6 So that if the Nature of the thing required in
this Commandment, had been alike with the nature of the things required or
forbidden in the other Commandments, it would have been as durable after the
dissolution of that Covenant, as the other things therein contained were, which
vanish not in themselves upon the dissolution of that Covenant, but only pass
into an higher way of dispensation, where they retain their full virtue and
strength, even according to the letter, though not by virtue of the
administration of the letter, another higher and fuller administration of a
better Covenant challenging and taking its own place.

Qu. 7. If the seventh Days Sabbath be not moral, but an abrogated ceremony
now since the death of Christ; then wherefore should our Savior instruct his
beloved Apostles, that must instruct Christian Churches to pray, Mat. 24.20.
that they might not fly on the Sabbath, knowing that their flight would fall
out more then thirty years after his death?

Answ. Great was the hardship the Jews under went in the siege of Jerusalem, by
that apprehension of theirs that they ought not to do any work (not so much as
of defending themselves) on the Sabbath, which hardship such Disciples of
Christ's among the Jews, as could not easily be drawn of from the law and Jewish
observations, but still were for circumcision and keeping of an outward
Sabbath, might be liable to: now Christ and the Apostles after him, were not
hasty to draw them from such things, but for a time bore with them therein,
insomuch that Paul circumcised Timothy, and became to the Jews as a Jew and to
them that were under the law as under the law himself also. But the strength of
the Query seems to lie in this, that it should bear the name of Sabbath from
Christ's own mouth, in relation to somewhat which should happen on it more then
thirty years after it should cease to be a Sabbath. To which my Answer is
plain, that that may as well bear the name of Sabbath, as Jerusalem or the
Temple bear the name of the holy place, ver. 15. of the same chap. for
Jerusalem and the Temple did as much cease to be the holy place above thirty
years after those words were spoken, as the Jewish Sabbath could cease to be
the Sabbath.

Now for the sakes of such as have been truly exercised in their spirits by the
spirit of the Lord (and have felt the powerful work of his grace, and a
building raised up by him) and may yet be further exercised, I shall add this.
Jerusalem was a type of an inward building in the Spirits of Gods people, both
in its rearing up, in its situation, in its standing, in Gods dealing with it
all the time of its standing, and lastly in its downfall and utter desolation.
There is an appearance and building of God in the Spirits of his People, which
is to give way to, and be swallowed up in a fuller and higher appearance. But
the fleshly spirit, getting into this building, will not give way to the
further and more inward and spiritual appearance of the Spirit, but will have
the first building stand as the building, and will entertain no further
appearance of God, then as it can comprehend it, subject it, and afford it a
place in the first building: Hereupon God distresseth Ariel, even the City
which David built (saying within his heart, surely that which I have built will
I break down, and that which I have planted will I pluck up, even this whole
land: So he causes the overflowing scourge to pass, even over Thy whole land,
O Immanuel) Now when the enemy enters within the holy City and within the holy
Temple, it is time to fly, and exceeding great distress will befall that
Disciple, whose flight is either on the Winter or on the Sabbath day. Do not
imagine at this, but if the Lord open it not at present, wait his season: for
the thing is true and sealed, both by the openings of the Light eternal, and
by sensible exercises and experiences from that Light.

Thus I have answered such of the Queries as concern the seventh days Sabbath.
Such as seem to argue the unwarrantableness of observing the first day of the
week for a Sabbath, I leave to those to whom they are tendered (and of whom an
Answer seems so conscienciously and zealously desired, as I do not see how it
can be reasonably neglected or denied) that by weighty evidence of Scripture he
may be reduced, if he has erred: but if not, but it be truth which he has
therein held forth, the Lord may be honored in men's bowing and subjecting to
every truth of his, by what instruments soever it pleases him to make it
manifest.

Some Queries sent in writing (upon occasion of an Epistle directed to all such
as observe the Seventh Day of the week for a Sabbath) Answered.
Query 1. IF the whole Law of Moses, the Law of the ten Commandments, as well
as the Law of Sacrifices, were both added upon one and the same account for
transgressions; Then why does the holy Spirit in the Scriptures lay forth such
an antiphitical use of them (I suppose he means anti-tipical) the one that sin
might abound, Romans 5.20. the other sacrificing for sin? Heb. 9.7, 8, 9.

Ans. That the Law of Moses was added because of transgression, is manifest
from that Scripture quoted by me in my Epistle, as well as from other
Scriptures: and one end, why it was added in relation to transgression was,
that the offense might abound, which would make the Sacrifice or propitiation
for sin appear more necessary and more acceptable. And the sacrifices also
relate to the sinner, some referring to the sin committed, others to the
thankfulness and acknowledgement due for the peace, mercy and blessings of God
toward his poor, sinful, erring creatures; both which were to last till the
time of reformation from the sin, Heb. 9.10. and Gal. 3.19. (But that they
were both added upon one and the same account, that I did not affirm, that is
wrongfully put upon me.)

Now though both these were added because of transgression, yet they had not
both the same use and service in relation to transgression, but the one was
added to discover sin, and to make it appear exceeding sinful, Romans 5.20. the
other to blot it out, to take it away, to make atonement for it, which the
sacrifices did, making the sinner upright and perfect as relating to that
outward state and capacity, though they could not as pertaining to the
conscience, Heb. 9.9.

Qu. 2. If the whole Law, the ten Commandments as well as the Sacrifices, were
representations, figures, or shadows of somewhat relating to Christ the Seed:
Then what did they in general, or either of them in particular represent,
figure, or shadow forth, before they were written in Tables of stone, or since
they were written in Tables of stone, more of Christ then, then now.

Answ. That the ten Words were some of the Precepts of Moses, and appertaining
to the first Testament or Covenant, all which Precepts were sprinkled with
blood, cannot be denied: And the Apostle distinguishes the Precepts of Moses
under the Law, which were sprinkled with the blood of the Sacrifices under the
Law, Heb. 7.19. from the Precepts of Christ which he writes in other Tables,
chapter 10.16. which also are sprinkled with blood, but not with the blood of Bulls
and Goats, but with his own blood: and he that receives any of these Precepts
out of the blood of Christ, cannot truly and spiritually obey them, though he
may strive much to form his spirit into the obedience thereof. Now the time and
season of their signification, was the time which God allotted them under the
Law, wherein was the use of signs: but the Gospel is a state of substance, of
bringing the life and immortality into the heart, and into the possession of
believers, which the state of the Law shadowed. So that they are not signs
since the Gospel, since Christ put an end to the Law-signs, shadows and
figures, not yet before the Law to Believers, so far as they were in the New
Covenant: (For as the thing signified comes* so that which signifies it
passes away) though that was a mixed state, wherein God gave a taste of both
Covenants, before his perfect dispensing or bringing forth of either.

Qu. 3. If the whole dispensation of the Law was given to the Jews, and not to
the Gentiles, and so the Gentiles not bound to that Law, but another way for
them to know the mind of God Then whether that Law cited Rom 2 15. which the
Gentiles showed (the work of in their hearts) be another Law contrary to that
Law that was given to the Jews, even the ten Commandments.

Ans. The Law which is the substance, is not contrary to the Law which is the
shadow, but is the comprehending and fulfilling of it. The Law in the Spirit
(written by God's power and presence in the heart and mind) is not contrary to
the Law in the letter, but is an higher and more glorious Ministration of it.
The one commandment which God gave by Moses to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 30.11. which was
the commandment of life and death, as relating to their inward and eternal
state, ver. 15. was not contrary to the ten commandments, which God had
commanded them before by another covenant, which he had made with them as an
outward people, and which was to be their Rule as to their outward state: for
they were chosen by God to be an holy people outwardly, and so an outward Rule
of holiness and obedience was prescribed them: but by all their obedience
thereto, they could not be justified, but only by hearing, believing and
obeying Christ the Word nigh in the heart, and by feeling in the spirit the
blood of that one offering.

Qu. 4. If the Gentiles were not bound (under that Law that the Jews were)
which carried the curse with it: then which way have the Gentiles redemption by
Jesus Christ: seeing all that are redeemed, are redeemed from the Law and the
Curse thereof, Gal. 4.5. and 3.13:

Ans. As they were under the curse outwardly by transgressing that outward Law
or Covenant, and so m^ssed of the outward happiness of the holy Land, and still
met with Wrath and Judgments, and at last utter cutting off, as to their
outward state, and as to all their hope from that Covenant: so he that comes to
receive the Ministration of the Law of the Spirit* will find the curse as
abundantly inwardly, even till that be cut down by the sword of the Spirit,
which the curse is to, and that brought into dominion, to which is the promise
and blessing. So that the Gentiles find as great need to be redeemed from the
curse inwardly, which the inward Law brings upon the transgressor, as the Jews
did outwardly; yea and find a more heavy burden and load then ever the Jews
did outwardly. Paul when he was alive in the outward Administration of the Law,
not being acquainted with the inward, he knew little of the curse, he was
according to it blameless, Phil. 3.6. but when he came to receive the living
light of the spiritual Administration of it into his spirit, then he felt the
burden, and weight, and misery of sin and the curse indeed, and cried out, O
wretched man, who shall deliver!

Qu. 5. If the duration of the dispensation of Moses Law in the Letter was till
Christ the Seed should come and fulfill it, and the dispensation of Moses Law
(so stated without distinction) between that that was perpetual, and that that
was ceremonially vanishing, and so in the fulfilling of it besides: Then what
law or commandments that or they were, which while Moses dispensation was in
full force, is said to be perpetually sure to stand fast for ever and for ever,
as Psalm. 10.11.7, 8. and when Christ the Seed was come, and had fulfilled all
that the Father had appointed him to do, was established, Romans 3.31. and not
one jot or tittle of it to pass so long as heaven and earth remain? Mat. 5.18.
and Luke 16 17.

Ans. That distinction between something in Moses Law being perpetual, and
something ceremonial, is not sound and proper in this place: For all that was
under Moses law was but a shadow, as in that dispensation, and that Testament
was dedicated with blood (with the blood which was a shadow) which related to
every precept, Heb. 9.18, 19. and it was all substantial and perpetual in
what it signified and related to. The sacrifices were substantial in that
Sacrifice which they signified, as well as the law and precepts were
substantial, in the law and precepts which they signified. And as the first
Covenant pointed at a second Covenant, so the laws of the first Covenant
pointed at the law of the second Covenant, the ministration whereof is from the
Mediator of that Covenant, and they come into the heart sprinkled with his
blood. Now the law or Commandment, which even under that dispensation was to
be perpetual and last for ever, was the word in the heart, and the laws
thereof, Deuteronomy. 30.14. which Moses by especial order from God, and according to
the tenor of an other Covenant directed the Jews to v. 4. For the law, as
administered by Moses in the letter is not perpetual or eternal; but as it
comes from the Spirit, and is administered in the Spirit, so it is Spiritual
and eternal. That administration was fitted to that people: and (we know) the
Lord, if he had pleased, could have given a fuller administration of his law in
the letter then that was, as Christ plainly intimates diverse times, Mat. 5. But
if it had been never so full, yet the administration of it in the letter, is to
give place to the administration of it in the Spirit: So that the
administration of it in the letter is not perpetual, but for the time which
God allotted it: but the administration of it in the Spirit is eternal and
perpetual, and there it remains an eternal Light, witness, and sword against
sin and the transgressor. And thus it is established in the hands of the
Spirit, after the season of that ministration of it in the letter was ended;
and thus not one jot or tittle of it was to pass away, after the other
ministration with every jot and tittle of it was ended.

Qu. 6. If the coming of Christ in the flesh: and his fulfilling all the
righteousness of the law: and being foretold by Moses to be that Prophet, that
was to be heard in all things which is not denied by us: but if by these he put
an end to the law of the ten Commandments and gave forth an other law to his
house or family: Then what law that is. And whether it be contrary to that law
that he with the Father gave forth as Deuteronomy. 33.2. with Psalm. 80.17. which now
is in Gospel ministration holy just good as Romans 7.12. and Spiritual ver. 14.

Answ. It is the law of the Spirit, or the Light of the Spirit in the heart,
which discovers sin (not only in the outward acts, but in its principle, rise,
first motions and inward nature) giving forth his living commands against it.
This is the law now, in which the believer is to begin, Gal. 3.3. and according
to which he is to go on to perfection. For as the believer is begotten of the
Spirit, and born of the Spirit, so he is to receive the ministration of his law
from the Spirit, and in the Spirit, He receives a gift of Faith, a measure of
Faith from the eternal Spring of Life, and that is his Law. His law is the law
of Faith. The Light of Life, which receives in the Faith, opens the mind and
will of Christ to him in the Spirit, showing him both sin and also the things
of God more fully, then the Law of Moses could, though opened by the Spirit:
for it is a fuller, a deeper kind of ministration; and so opens the things
which it ministers, more fully then a ministration of an inferior nature can.
Yet it is not contrary to Moses law, but comprehends all the substance, all the
righteousness and equity of it, (as I said before) which it, as a shadow,
represented and commanded to that outward or shadowie people, the Jews. But the
law which Paul spoke of, Romans 7. was the law of the Spirit, or such a
ministration of the law as Paul knew not, all the while he was under the
ministration of Moses's Law blameless: but this law found out sufficient blame
in him, ver. 14. etc.

Qu. 7. If Jesus Christ as he is the Son gave forth another law to his house or
family: and that law contrary to that that the Father gave forth: then whether
there is not two lawgivers, when the Scriptures say there is but one, Jam.
4.12.

Answ. The substance, when it is shadowed out, or when it is nakedly dispensed,
is one and the same thing; so that when ever it comes, it cannot be an other
thing, then what the shadow represented it to be. Moses his dispensation and
Christ's are one in Spirit: and when he comes in Spirit, he does not destroy
either Moses or the Prophets, but comprehends them. So that the law is but one,
although the dispensations of it have been various: but the proper dispensation
of the law now to Christians is Christ's dispensation, not Moses his
dispensation; and Christians are now to look for the Light and Knowledge of it,
in the Tables where Christ writes it, according to his Covenant. So that there
have not been two Laws given out, but the one Law of God has been variously
dispensed: in and according to the letter by Moses to the Jews, in and
according to the Spirit by Christ to his Discipes.

Quer^ 8. If the Tables of Stone: the writing of the law of the ten
Commandments in the Tables: and the Law of the ten Commandments it self which
was written (were figures or representations) Then whether the finger of Gods
Spirit does write the law of God (two ways in the inward Tables) So called
namely in the heart of Christ's family: in one way whilst Moses dispensation was
on foot, Psalm. 37.31. For the Psalmist speaks in the present tense (which was
under that dispensation): Now is it another way in this latter dispensation
expressed, 2 Cor. 3.3.

Qu. 9. If two ways then how does the finger of Gods Spirit write them those
ways.

Answ. The eternal Covenant was the same under the Law, as under the Gospel;
and its Tables were the heart then, as well as now, and its way of writing the
same then as now, even by the finger of God's power or eternal Spirit: and
thither the Jews were even then referred for the inward writing of the Law,
Deuteronomy. 30.14. So that they that truly hearkened, even to Moses, were to wait on
this word, which was nigh in the heart, for the vvriting of his Laws there.
And they that hearkened to this Law which endures for ever, knevv the
writings thereof in their hearts; whereas the Jews, who were very diligent to
get the Law into their hearts from the letter, could never thereby attain the
writing of it there, but were still found breakers of it, and under that curse
which belonged to the breach. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, David and the
Prophets knevv the inward Jew, who becomes so by the inward Covenant, and by
the inward dispensation of the Law in that Covenant and the Law which was
after the promise, could not disannul the promise which was before it, but it
stood good and firm to the children, even to all the Spiritual seed, the
whole time of that outvvard dispensation of the Law.

Qu, 10. If not. Then how does the writing of the Law in Tables of Stone:
represent the writing of the Law in the Tables of the heart: seeing the Tables
of the heart were writ upon by the finger of Gods Spirit whilst the Tables of
stone were in full force and the dispensation had not ceased.

Answ. Though the Tables of Stone, or Law thereof was in force to that outvvard
people of God the Jews, yet this did not destroy his inward people, nor his
inward Tables in their hearts nor hinder him from vvriting his inward Law
there; but the inward and eternal Covenant ran underneath to them inwardly
(even all the time of that outvvard dispensation) whereby they were made
inwardly righteous and obedient to God. And as God had perticularly directed
by Moses, to the Word and Commandment of that Covenant: So he would not fail
to write it thereby in the hearts of such, as turned to that word and
Commandment. So that this was the Law which God vvrote in the heart, even
then, and was always the inward substance, while as Moses his dispensation
was but an outward sign thereof.

Qu. 11. If the Law of the ten Commandments it self: which enjoined love and
duty to God: and love and duty to man as Matthew. 22.37, 38, 39, 40. was, or is a
figure of an other: then what Law that is, that is the antitipe of this Law
which in succeeding of it enjoins not love and duty to God: and not love and
duty to man.

Ans. This Query arises from a great mistake, as if the Law in the letter and
the law in the Spirit could not require the same thing, whereas they do
require the very same thing in substance, but several vvays, according to the
difference of each administration, to wit, the one literally of a litterall
or outvvard people, the other Spiritually of a Spiritual or inward people. The
one requires love according to the tenor of the letter, the other according to
the Spirit.

Qu. 12 If the owning of the ten Commandments as they are plainly laid down in
the letter, be a breaking of them in the Spirit and especially those contained
in the first Table: Then how does the truth of God written which is life and
truth, Act. 7.38. and Eccl. 12.10. and the Spirit which is given forth meet
together, seeing the Spirit leads and guides into all truth.

Ans. I do not know any, who has said, that the owning of the ten
Commandments at they are plainly laid down in the letter, is a breaking of
them in the Spirit, but he that has the Spirit, owneth the dispensation of the
letter in its place and season: but the Spirit does not teach him to run from
his own dispensation (where it is livingly administered to such, as wait on the
eternal Word in his Covenant of Life for it) to that dispensation which was
appointed for, and given forth to others. But that the truth, as it is written
(outwardly) is Life, I do not read, but otherwise 2* Cor. 3.6. where Paul
says, the letter kills (speaking of the letter of the New Testament.) The
Spirit indeed guides into all truth, but it is the living Soul whom he so
guides, and it is the living truth into which he guides in the New Covenant,
though it was he also who gave forth, required, and was able to lead into the
letter of the Old Covenant.

Qu. 13. Whether when Jehovah gave forth the ten Commandments plainly as a Law
in the letter he did intend by the observation according to the letter: the
breach of them by the Spirit.

Ans. The Spirit does not teach to break the commands in the letter, but such
as are under the ministration of the letter, to observe them according to the
letter; and such as are under the ministration of the Spirit, to fulfill the
righteosness of them in the Spirit. (Yet the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath:
and if he bid a man Take up his bed and walk, which was bearing a burden and
doing of work on the Sabbath day, it is no breach of the Sabbath.) Now this is
most righteous, that as the Son's rest should be entered into under the Gospel,
so his day of rest should be kept by his Disciples and family.

Qu. 14 Whether to say: The keeping the Law of God according to the letter is a
breaking of it in the Spirit: be not a charging of God that gave it forth to be
kept: and the holy Spirit that incites (us so to do now in this administration
Jam. 2.8. and says they do well that do so) and yet thou say they break it in
Spirit: but tell us by any one Scripture, how a man assisted by the Spirit to
own Jehovah alone to be his God according to the letter of the first
Commandment does break that Command in the Spirit. Or so the like of any other
of them.

Ans. This Query is altogether from a mistake; for it was not said by me, That
the keeping the Law of God acccording to the Letter, is a breaking of it in the
spirit; but that he that runs back to the Law in the letter, to take up any
command as hold forth in it, will be found a breaker thereof in spirit. And for
this, the Jews in general, and Paul in particular may be my instances, who was
exceeding strict according to the Letter of the Law, but yet was a grievous
breaker of it in spirit, and did not love his neighbor as himself, but in a
blind zeal was a bitter persecutor: And if the Jews had taken that direction of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.14. the observation of the law in the letter might have been
more easy to them. So that the turning toward, and receiving the Word in the
heart, from whence the letter came, is the only way to fulfll the letter; and
the Law is not so much as to be known, much less fulfilled, by running to the
letter of it in the first place. And this I certainly know, that there is no
coming to the Lord of life, nor no keeping chaste to him, but in the
New Covenant, and in the light of the Lord, as it is there dispensed: and till
then, the mind cannot forbear making of images and false representations of him
to it self, though being from the light of this Covenant, it cannot discern
that it does so, no more then Paul by the Letter of the Law could discern how
he was a breaker thereof in his violent persecutions.

Qu. 15. Whether the Prophets, Jesus Christ or the Apostles, their keeping the
Law according to the letter: that they did do so, is evident, did break the law
in the spirit?

Ans. The Prophets were under the Law as to their outward state, though
inwardly not without feeling the virtue of the New Covenant. Christ also was
made under the Law, and took upon him the fulfilling of that dispensation of
Moses, that he might bring the believing Jews from under it, into the liberty
of the Spirit, that they might receive the adoption of Sons, and the free
Ministration which was appointed for the Sons, and might not be held under that
Ministration of bondage, which was appointed for the servants. And the Apostle
bids Believers to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ had made them
free, not making themselves debtors to the Law, Gal. 5.1. for they were
children of the promise, children of new Jerusalem, the free Woman, children of
the New Covenant, and not children of Mount Sinai, the old Covenant the Law in
the Letter, c. 4.15, 16.

Qu. 16. If there be but one day of rest holy to the Lord and all the Sabbaths
of the law were but signs of it. that is said to be the day of redemption: that
the Lord has made: Then whether that day be a day natural, one of the seven
days of the week which either respect the Day on which our Redeemer suffered,
or that on which he rose again from the dead, or any other?

Ans. As the Gospel is not natural, but spiritual: so its day of rest is not
natural, but spiritual likewise. Yea I may add this also, the six days Work in
the new Creation are not natural neither.

Qu. 17. If not so, but that it should he intended applicable to the day or
time of the Gospel Administration from the time that Christ suffered in the
flesh, unto the end of the world. Then whether this day that is intended as a
Sabbath, is one with that day that the Scriptures intend and call a Sabbath,
which Christ himself gave his Disciples charge to have respect unto in their
flight, Matt. 24.20.

Answ. The supposition here put, demonstrateth that those that put it, have no
acquaintance with the Gospel-Sabbath, but propose another outward time for it,
even the time from Christ's suffering in the flesh to the end of the World. Now
if any should so affirm, it were as justly to be excepted against, as pressing
the observation of the Jews Sabbath is* That which signifies is outward or
natural, and signifies to that part which is without: that which is signified,
is inward and spiritual, and is known, entered into, kept and enjoyed in the
spirit. It is a spiritual Sabbath, not a natural, which God has instituted for
his spiritual people, after he has led them out of spiritual Aegyt, into the
spiritual Wilderness, where he administreth to them the Law in the spirit, and
teaches them to worship him in spirit and truth.

Qu. 18. If they intend one and the same Sabbath day, then how impossible was
it for the Disciples of Christ to escape flying on that Sabbath day, though
never so fervent in prayer, in regard that this Sabbath spoken of begun when
Christ had suffered and put an end to the dispensation of Moses Law: and the
flight spoken of by Christ, which respect the Lords Sabbath, was not until many
years after his sufferings. Supposed-Sabbath being before denied, the
foundation of this Query fails.

An. Christ's Sabbath is not an outward time or day in the flesh, but a day in
the Spirit, even a day of rest from all the labors of the fleshly part* But
this was spoken to before in the Answer to the last of W. Salters Queries,
whereto I may add this* Christ spoke to his Disciples of things, as they were
able to bear them. Now as they understood not his death: so then they
understood not the abolishing of those things, which were to pass away after
his death: so that Christ might very well call Jerusalem the holy place, and
the seventh day the Sabbath, speaking to them in that state.

Qu. 19. If they intend not one and the same Sabbath day, then which are the
Disciples of Christ to have respect unto, whether that that Jesus Christ
injoined his Disciples to have respect unto, or that that Isaac Penington would
enjoin the Disciples of Christ to have respect unto.

Ans. This Querie has very little in it, save to show the unsavouriness of the
Spirits of them that put it, and their want of acquaintance with the
ministration of the Spirit. They that know the Gospel Sabbath (which is the
substance of the Law Sabbath) can tell who enjoined it them, and can also tell,
that he has not required of them the observation of the Jews Sabbath. But they
that are born after the letter, have been always subject to revile and reproach
the truths of the Spirit, and those that testify thereto.

Qu 20. If the Lords holy Sabbath be that day which we may suppose is intended
by this paper sent unto us: to be the day that contains the time of
Gospell-administration: then whether that Sabbath does prohibit outward labor
as well as abstaining from sin, if not then which way must this Sabbath be
kept. Seeing, that they that did and does observe the weekly Sabbath did and
does it in the Spirit. And rest by faith in Christ worshipping the Father in
Spirit and in truth.

Answ. The Gospell-Sabbath begins not in the observation of outward time: but
as it is Spiritual, so it has a Spiritual beginning, increase, and
persecting, wherein there is a rest to the Spirit from sin and from the
creaturely works, and a worshipping in the Spirit, even as on the outward
Sabbath there was a bodily ceasing from labors, and an outward worshipping.
And he that hears the joyful sound of deliverance from sin and self-working,
and enters into the faith (beginning to cease from his own works and working,
and to wait in the Spirit on the power for its working in him) has a taste of
the Gospel-Sabbath, and begins to see that day, which the type pointed to
and ends in.

Qu. 21. If that that was ministered to Paul, Romans 7. thou shall keep the
Sabbath or believe in the Light, follow the Light and the observing of either
of these in the Spirit to be a keeping the whole Law. Then how are the
Scriptures observed if the keeping of one Commandment be a keeping the whole
Law when the holy Spirit in Scriptures says that he that offends in one point
is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10.

Ans. I did not say, that the keeping of one Commandment is the keeping of the
whole Law; but that the observing in Spirit of any one of those there mentioned
by me, is the keeping of the Law: which was not barely said, but demonstrated,
because no part of the Law can be broken, but every one of these must be
broken. He that commits any sin, breaks the Gospel-Sabbath, which is a resting
from all sin and self-works; errs from the law of love received in the Spirit,
which shuts out all enmity and transgression both against God and man; departs
from the fear, which keeps from departing from God by any iniquity; and enters
into the lust, which is the womb of sin, out of the compass of which womb sin
cannot be conceived, much less committed. So that Paul, in that Law received
from the Spirit, Thou shall not Lust, saw the whole body of sin struck at,
whereas before, under the ministration of Moses in the letter (according to
which he said he was blameless) there was not so much as the life of one sin
struck at, but for all his exact answering of the Law according to that
ministration, he was alive still. To decide this controversy, let it be put to
trial, let any one singly wait on the Lord for the administration of his Law
in the Spirit, and if the Lord give forth that Command to him, Thou shall not
lust, in the clearness of the Light of his eternal Spirit, let him try, if
continuing in obedience and subjection thereto, he can commit any one sin
whatsoever. I do not say, that a man's proposing to himself that he will not
lust, or his striving of himself to love and fear the Lord or his applying
himself to keep the Sabbath or rest from sin to the Lord will do this. (Nay
this is but an administration in the letter, and will prove weak against the
inward strength of the enemy) but receiving the Law in its pure living
administration in the Spirit, and from the Spirit, here comes strength against
the enemy, which is too hard for him, while it is abode in. And this the
Apostle Paul taught the Galatians, who were running backward toward the Law,
and not forwards in the Spirit: He bids them Walk in the Spirit, Gal, 5.25. and
so doing as they should not be under the Law, ver. 18. So neither should they
be breakers of the Law: for within those bounds sin enters not, but is kept
out, not so much as a lust against the Law being there known, much less any
open transgression against it: and against such as thus keep within the bounds
of the Spirit there is no Law, ver. 22.23. But against all that make themselves
debtors to the Law of the letter, there stands in force both the law of the
letter and of the Spirit also; and they cannot in that state be free from the
condemnation and curse thereof, whatsoever they may imagine concerning
themselves, and their own state, from a misunderstanding and mis-application
of the Scriptures.

The first Letter Answered.
There is a double ministration of the Law: a ministration in the Letter, and a
ministration in the Spirit. The ministration of the Letter was by Moses, from
mount Sinai, in Tables of stone, to that outward people the Jews: the
ministration of the Spirit is by Christ, from mount Sion, in Tables of flesh,
to believers or his Disciples. Now this is it which the Lord has made manifest
to me, that the Disciples of Christ, or believers, are to have recourse to
their administration for the receiving of the law from the Spirit, and not to
run back to that ministration which was litterall and outward, and fitted to a
litterall and outward people. This was more fully set down in my Epistle in
several particulars. Now in opposition to this, it is said

F^rst That all written in that Epistle, makes no more at all against a Gospel
Spiritual observing in love the seventh day Sabbath to the Lord, then they make
against a Gospel Spiritual observing of the other nine Comandements.

Ans. My Epistle strikes not at a Gospel Spiritual observation of any thing:
but he that will obey Spiritually, must receive his command from the Spirit in
that way which the Spirit has chosen to dispense it to him in. Now the same
Spirit, which wrote his law in the letter under the old Covenant, writes his
law in the hearts of believers under the new Covenant, Heb. 8.10. which is a
better Covenant, and of which Covenant Christ is the Mediator, ver. 6. and
Christ is as faithful to give forth the Laws of his Spirit in the hearts of
his people, as their condition requires them, as Moses was to give the Law
written in the Tables of stone to his house, Heb. 3.5.6. And as Moses pointed
his Disciples to Christ coming in the flesh, so Christ pointed believers or his
Disciples to the Comforter, the Spirit of truth, first to wait for him, and
then to receive light or his law of Life from him: And this is Gospel or New
Covenant, even that which the Spirit speaks or writes in the heart; and this
has power in it and saves, whereas the letter kills. Now consider
seriously, whither should a believer go for this laws? to which Covenant? to
Moses his Covenant, or to Christ's Covenant.

Secondly, That all these Commands being holy and good, are to be loved, and in
love to be observed, etc.

Ans. All the Statutes, and Judgments, and Ordinances, and Precepts of the
Lord are holy and good, and are to be loved: but each is to be obedient to that
which God requires of him, and to have recourse to that ministration for the
law of God to him, under which God has set him. He that believes, he that has
received the Spirit, is to have recourse to the law of Faith, and to the Spirit
for his light or law: he who was under the law of Moses, was to have recourse
to the law of Moses: for the law of Moses spoke to them who were under it in
his family, giving forth the precepts or commandments of that dispensation, to
them who were under his Testament, Heb. 9.20. And Christ speaks to his family
by his Spirit, whom his Disciples are to hearken unto, and not to grieve him,
or quench his motions, or despise his prophesyings, but give diligent heed
thereto, until the day dawn and the Day Star arise in their hearts.

Now to obey in love, does not make the distinction of the ministrations: for
love belongs to each ministration. The Jews in their day were to obey the law
in love, and to have it in their hearts, Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6. But this makes the
difference, the Jews were to seek to the letter for it, the Disciple is to
receive it from the Spirit: for he is to begin in the Spirit, Gal. 3.3. Whereas
the Jews beginning was in the letter. And this is obedience in the newness of
the Spirit, when the law is received fresh from the Spirit, who both writes new
things and brings to remembrance old things livingly and powerfully: but to go
to Moses ministration and learn it there, and get it into the heart from
thence, that is according to the old ministration or Covenant, which was given
in the letter to the Jews; as may appear in that place last cited, Deuteronomy. 6.5.6.

Thirdly That in the same spirit and love, that we have the Lord for our God,
etc. in the same we are to remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.

Ans. The Lord teaches believers to know him to be the only true God, etc. by
the Law of the Covenant of life in Christ Jesus, which he ministers to their
Spirits in the Spirit; whereby he teaches them so clearly and effectually,
that they need not run back to the Tables of Moses his Covenant, from thence to
teach one another to know the Lord, but they shall all know him from this
teaching from the least to the greatest: yea, and I may add this, This Covenant
by its ministration teaches more clearly, then the ministration of Moses his
Law in the letter could teach, Heb. 8.10, 11. They that have been with Moses,
and have learned the Law of him, under the ministration of his Covenant, have
yet need of coming to Christ: but they that have been with Christ, and have
learned the law of his Spirit, by the teachings of the new Covenant in their
hearts, have not need of being sent back to Moses. Moses points forward to
Christ, but Christ (even in the flesh) sends not his Disciples from his own
dispensation back to Moses (though he also established the dispensation of
Moses for its season) but points them forward to the Comforter, or to his
appearance in the Spirit. And this is the mark of a Christian, which it is the
intent of the letter to direct him to, and not for him to fix in the letter, as
men have done since the Apostasy from the Spirit.

This Argument is further enforced thus, because he that said the other, said
this, in the same Law and Spirit.

Ans. It is true, he that said the other by Moses to the Jews, said this also
to them, and they were strictly bound thereto: but that which binds the
Disciple is the ministration of the new Covenant, where Christ writes this Law
in the minds and spirits of his people, by which they are bound, and such as as
are out of that the Lord when he comes to examine them concerning their faith
and obedience, will say to them, Who has required this at your hands? Were ye
children of the New Covenant? Did ye receive the Spirit? had ye a measure of
faith given you? were ye new creatures? Why did ye not keep to your rule? Why
did ye not wait on the Spirit, and receive the Law from the New Jerusalem, from
whence it issues forth to the family of believers? The Jews were to be taught
by precepts and Judgments from Moses, but all thy children shall be taught of
the Lord.

It is said yet further, So that if thou keep the other, and not this, thou
art a transgressor of the ROYAL LAW OF LIBERTY.

Ans. What is the Royal Law? what is the Law of Liberty? Was the law as it was
administered by Moses, the Royal Law? or is it the Royal Law as it is
administered by the Son, who is the King of Saints, and writes his law in their
hearts as their King? Again, was the law, which Moses administered to the Jews,
a law of Liberty, or a law of bondage? did not the ministration on mount Sinai
gender to bondage, Gal. 4.24? but in the ministration of the law by the Spirit
is life and liberty, ver. 26. and 2 Cor. 3.17. And this very law, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self is Royal, and a law of pure liberty, and there
is no bondage in it thus administered: but let any man now read it in the
letter, and strive to obey it to the utmost he can, he shall find it weak
through the flesh, accusing and in bondaging him. And this is the reason that
Christians so mourn in their prayers, even as persons in bonds, because they
know not the Royal law of liberty, because they feel not the love which the
Spirit begets, but strive to get the letter into their hearts, and to answer
the Commands in the letter with what love and obedience they can come at; and
this (through not seeing into the true Covenant and ministry of Christ) they
call obeying in the Spirit. The testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12.17. is the Spirit
of prophecy, chap. 19.10. and his Commandments come fresh from that Spirit of
prophecy, which are to be taken heed to, till the day dawn and the day star
arise, and then a fuller ministration is witnessed then that of prophecy, even
the shining and appearing of that which was prophesied of, which every believer
is to wait for in the prophesies of the Spirit, and in obedience to those
Commands, which come livingly into his heart from the Spirit of prophecy.

Fourthly. That the fourth Command is to be in love kept by all believers.

Ans. All the Commands of Christ's Covenant are to be kept by believers,
according as he pleases to dispense them, under his administration in the New
Covenant: but the laws of the Old Covenant are not the laws of the New
Covenant, as so dispensed, but only as they are comprehended in the
righteousness, which is taught and required by the spirit, which is fuller,
stricter, and exacter, then that which the law of Moses required.

Nor do I hereby go about to teach any to break the least of Christ's Commands,
but the way to fulfill them, which is, by keeping to the certain knowledge and
obedience of them, in that ministration, where Christ has promised to dispense
and make them known to believers, which is, under the ministry of his own
Covenant, writing them in their hearts and minds by his Spirit. And here the
keeping of all Christ's Commands is possible, yea this is the only way to have
the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in us: for he that keeps the eye which
the spirit has opened in him, close to the Spirit, shall not be able to break
any law of righteousness, but the righteousness even of Moses his law shall be
fulfilled in him.

Christ is the rest of the Gospel (as he is also the holy land) believing is
the entering into this rest: here is his Sabbath, and the keeping of it. Keep in
the faith, the Gospel rest is kept. Parting with every lust that he makes
manifest, observing every thing that this King calls for by his Spirit, and
waiting for the further manifestation or shining of the Light of his Spirit in
the heart, here is the obedience of the faith, and the holy and spiritual life
and subjection of the living soul to its living King. Here Is the beginning of a
true Christian, his growth, his perfection. But as for times, places, persons,
etc. these are of another nature, to another part, even to that part in man
which is to be done away, as he comes into the faith, and into the rest. Let
that which is invisible, whose habitation is out of the reasoning part, feel
and read me in that which is invisible: for I do not make void the law by
faith, or through publishing the ministry of the Spirit, but establish it in
its ministration in the Spirit to the Disciples of Christ; who, keeping to the
Spirit, cannot transgress the righteousness of it, though they may there learn
not to esteem one day above another, but to esteem every day no days having
ever had any real holiness in them one above another, but only a figurative or
representative, which the substance, Christ and his Gospel swallow up: for as
his day dawns, those things which were the shadows of it fly away.

The second Letter Answered.
Object. 1. It is said to be dangerous, so to hold forth the Spiritual
Sabbatism, as to deny the weekly Sabbath, wherein our Lord Jesus Christ rested,
etc. and which he blessed and sanctified to Adam and his posterity, etc.

Ans. The Gospel is a state of substance, of fulfilling the types and shadows
of the Law, by bringing believers into the possession of that which they
signified of. Canaan was a type of Christ, who is the land of the living, in
whom every believer has an habitation at present, according to the proportion
of his faith: and the Sabbath is the day of rest, which every believer is to
celebrate to Christ in this holy land, which he does by believing and obeying
his Spirit in the faith, which keeps him out of the sin, the unbelief, the
unrest. But that the Sabbath of the law the rest thereof, which pointed to the
faith, is still to be held up in the times of the Gospel, I know no Scripture
which so teaches, and I know somewhat which teaches me otherwise. The day is
dawned, blessed be the Lord God Almighty, the everlasting day is dawned, and
the shadows of the Law are flown away.

Object. 2. It is said, that Heb. 4. Speaks of three rests, The seventh day or
Sabbath rest, Isreal's rest in Canaan, and a remaining rest whereof David
speaks, Psalm. 95.

Ans. I grant it, There were two rests under the law, which were signs of the
one rest under the Gospel. The two under the Law were outward and natural, the
one under the Gospel inward and Spiritual, answerable to the state of the
Gospel^ David was not only acquainted with the Law-state, but with the free
spirit, ( Psalm, 51.) and the eternal law thereof. He knew the new Creation,
the creating of a new Spirit, (with its travel through the law) and also the
new rest. He knew the circumcision of the heart, the spiritual sacrifices of a
broken heart and of praise, he could take the cup of salvation, and sing the
song of praise to the Lord, which none can do in the strange land, nor on any
other day but the day of rest. And he incites Israel to this rest, that they
might not harden their hearts against it, but in the day of their visitation
enter into it, by harkening to the Word which was nigh them, which gives the
entrance through the faith. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, etc. There is a rest ye are now called to enter into, as your fathers
were called to enter into the land of Canaan: harden not your hearts as they
did, but hear the voice, hear the word which calls to this rest, believe and
enter. This rest remains, says the Apostle, the others were types of it under
the law-state, which was to pass away.

Object. 3. It is said, Ceremonial signs are done away, but the ten Commands
under the mercy-seat are of an other nature: and that there are signs which are
not yet abolished (as the Rainbow, Sun, Moon, and Stars) but still remain for
us to make good use of.

Answ. The mercy-seat under the Law is done away, and the substance thereof is
come, and will ye not give him leave to write his law in the Tables which he
shall choose, where his Disciples may read it with the eye which he gives? Is
his law now to be read in the shadow, or with the outward eye, or to be looked
for under the old mercy-seat of the outward tabernacle? or is it to be read
with the eye of the new creature, with the eye of faith, with the eye of the
Spirit, in the everlasting Gospel, where the life it self is read, and in other
books or writings without, but tidings or relations of the life? Here Christ,
here the Spirit, here the eternal life, here the love, the joy, the peace, the
rest, the purity, which is eternal, is seen, is felt, is handled, is enjoyed:
for the true faith is indeed the substance of the things hoped for, giving
victory over the enemies which disturb, and a quiet habitation in him who is
the rest.

And as touching signs, I do not say that signs are so done away, as that there
is now no good use to be made of them; but in reading the law and shadows
thereof, the Lord may please by his Spirit to enlighten the Spirit of him, who
reads in his fear, to see through them: but this I do not find, that so much as
any one sign or shadow under the law, was to be continued in that way of
service under the Gospel (for indeed to what end should it? When that is come,
which it signified, is not its work at an end?) and that that Sabbath was given
for a sign (as well as any other Sabbaths of the Law) I find expressly, Exodus
31.13. to 18.

Object. 4. It is said, That though Christ's law be a new law, yet it is also
old, given of old to the Jews.

Answ. Yea, it is older then so: for it was written in Abels and the other holy
men's hearts, long before this Covenant of the Law in writing was made with the
Jews. And consider well which is now to stand in the times of the Gospel, the
writing of the law by the Spirit in the hearts of believers, as it was written
by virtue of the promise before the law was given, or the outward and visible
writing under the Law, which was done for the sake of, and as a suitable
dispensation for that outward people. It was not thus from the beginning, but
after a long time: for when God chose an outward people, he chose also this way
of writing to signify somewhat by, which signification is concerning another
state; in which state, that which was signified is to be set up and advanced,
and not the shadows which were significant of it.

It is further said, that the Lord writes these things new in his peoples
hearts, to know the Lord, as their God, and as the God and Father of Jesus
Christ, and as their Father in him: and to love their brethren as Christ loved
them. And he writes this law also in their hearts, Thou shall have no other
Gods but me, make no Image, exalt my name, keep holy the Sabbath, etc.

Ans. If God write these things in the heart, are they not to be read there? If
God write them in the new Covenant, and in the new Tables, shall not I read them
there? And if I can read there in this living book, what God writes in it by
his Spirit, is not this nearer to me and clearer, and read by a more certain
eye, then what I can read with my outward eye in Tables of stone? Oh, do not
turn the believer out of his way: do not hinder him from reading in the book,
which is clear and infallible, the clear and infallible things of God. Will God
write in my heart, and will he not give me an eye to read? Shall he give me an
eye to read, and shall I not read therewith? Thou have here confessed this to
be the new writing, and the new writing belongs to the new Covenant, both which
are proper to the Gospel-state and to Christ's meditation, who is Mediator of
the new Covenant, Heb. 8.6. And in that he says, a new, he has made the first
old. Now that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away, ver. 13.

Object. 5. It is said, that Love being the sum and substance of the law of the
Spirit, makes no more against the fourth Commandment, then against the rest.

Ans. Love is the substance of them all, and they are all fulfilled in it: but
they are not after this manner fulfilled, to wit, that a man should strive
perticularly to keep them in his eye, and so labor to fulfill them in love;
but rather thus, in waiting on the Lord to receive love from him, and to be
kept by him in the love, in this love received they are all fulfilled and
cannot be broken, and this is an easy yoke. This is the new birth, and the
path thereof, the other is but the old creature, with its striving after the
path and inheritance of life. And as this love is the fulfilling of the law, so
the heart are the Tables of this love, wherein God writes both the whole and
all the parts of his Law. Now I am not against any man, who in singleness of
heart applies himself to the letter; but it is but the old way, and a
conversing with Christ after the manner of Moses's his dispensation: but I must
confess that I am for the new Covenant and for the ministry of the Spirit,
which is far beyond the letter, and though I have known Christ, and the Laws
of his life after the flesh, yet henceforth my desire is not after knowing him
so any more, but to know him in the eternal life of his Spirit, and to drink
of the fruit of the Vine, new with him in his Fathers Kingdom.

A brief explication of the mystery of the Six Days labor and Seventh Days
Sabbath, for such to behold, the eye of whose Spirit is opened by the pure
anointing, and who are not so drowned in their conceivings and reasonings about
the sense of the letter, as most of the professors of this age are.
Mat. 11.28, 29, 30. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy,
and my burden is light.
He that hears the joyful sound of the everliving power, calling him by the
voice of his eternal light out of the darkness, out of the death, out of the
misery, out of the Dominions, Territories and deep slavery of Satan unto
himself, and comes unto him in the virtue and power of that life which
calls, he has a taste given him of the eternal rest, and a promise of
entering into it.

But the entrance into the fullness thereof is not presently, but he has a long
journey to take from Egypt the dark land, from Sodom the filthy land, from
Babylon, where all the vessels and holy things of God have been defiled,
through the wilderness, unto Canaan; and many battles are to be fought with
enemies by the way, and also with the enemies which possess the holy land, and
many hardships to be undergone in following the Captain, who also leads his
Israel by a pillar of cloud by day, and by a pillar of fire by night; and there
must be a circumcision and a baptism in the cloud and in the Sea, and the
falling of all those carcasses in the wilderness which are not to enter, nor so
much as see the good land, before the entrance be ministered to the seed, and to
that which passes through the water and through the fire with the seed. In
plain terms, there must be a taking up of the yoke, and a learning of Christ
under the yoke, till the proud, the stiff, the stubborn, the wise, the wilful,
the selfish Spirit, the hard stony heart be wasted and worn out by the cross,
and nothing left but what becomes one with the seed, and so is fit to be
married to it, and to enter with it into the everlasting Kingdom.

Now this bearing the yoke, this taking up of the cross, this following of
Christ in the wilderness, through the corrections of the Father, through the
buffettings and temptations of the enemy, in the midst of all the weaknesses
and frailties of the flesh, going when he bids go, standing still where he
stops, fighting when he prepares to the warfare, bearing the repulse, when he
suffers the enemy to prevail, and hoping even beyond hope for his relief and
victory in due season; here is the labor, here is the travel, here is the
working under the life, with the measure of grace and power received from the
life. So that first the dayspring from on high visits: from that visitation
there is light entered into the heart: by closing with that light there is grace
received: with this grace received there is work to be done for God, his
talent is to be improved all the six days, by all that will rest with him on
the seventh, and that desire to cease from their labors in the fruition of the
faith, the life, the power; the faith, the life, the power living, becoming and
performing all in them. And he that does not improve the Talent, he that does
not follow on in the pure light, but either sits down by the way, or is
deceived with an Image of what once was true in him, he can never arrive at
the land of rest (though perhaps he may arrive at that which he may call so)
but, when the eternal witness awakes in him, he will find the want of it, and
bitterly bewail his grievous mistake.

Now in this hard travel, and grievous labor under the close laws and
spiritual Commandments of the life (hard I mean, yea, very hard to the
unrenewed part, though easy and natural to that which is renewed and born of
God) it pleases the Lord now and then to give a day of refreshment, causing
his life so powerfully to spring up, that it even sensibly is, and does all in
the heart. This is a Sabbath, wherein the soul rests in the powerful movings
and operations of the life, and does not find any stress of trouble, or
hardship or labor upon it, but sits still in the power, is at ease in the
life, in the etertal virtue, which lives, and moves and is all in it: and no
pain, no trouble, no grievousness of any Command is felt; but to it all is
easy, all is natural, all is purely pleasant, the life (to which all its own
laws, Statutes, ordinances, judgments, ways and paths are easy) performing
all it calls for, even as fast as it calls for it. And here not only a Sabbath
of days, but also a Sabbath of vveeks, yea sometimes a Sabbath of years
(besides the everlasting Jubilee or year of perfect redemption it self) are
known and witnessed by such as have vvaited on the Lord, in singleness of
heart under the yoke of his Spirit, for the bringing down of the rough and
untovvard nature, and for the raising up of the meek and lowly heart.

But here it is exceeding easy, running out and starting aside: it is easy
running out from under the yoke to avoid the bitterness of the hardship to the
earthly part; it is much easier running out on the day of rest, and so loosing
the truth in a joy and rejoicing, even such an one as might have a true ground.
Oh who can but think the bitterness of death is past, when all enemies are
vanished, and there is nothing left but the Lord and the soul embracing each
other! and who can but be unwilling to come back again to his labor, and to
the residue of his hard travel afterward! and yet it is far better to return
to the work in the Vineyard, and to suffer again with the seed, then to keep up
the rest in a notion, and so to lose the life and pure presence and virtue of
the seed, when it returns unto and calls back to the labor. Oh how many have
perished here, suffering a divource from that which led them into the rest, not
being willing to go back again with it to fill up the residue of its
sufferings, which were yet behind, and so have kept up a false, dead, notional
rest, after the true Sabbath was ended.

Now there is no way for such, but to wait to feel the living breath, the
quickening virtue, the dayspring from on high, which by the brightness of its
rising can discover this false rest, this dead rest, this notionall rest, this
ease in the earthly, in the fleshly, in the understanding part, which they
uphold by things they have formerly gathered from the Scriptures, or from their
own (perhaps once living) experiences; but now hold, out of the feeling and
possession of the life, in the dead part. But that it is thus with them, they
can never see, until the light, from which they have erred, spring up and
discover it to them: and when the light does arise and discover it, they will
find the way of return and the path of redemption much more difficult to them,
then it was at first. Yet it is better to part which the ease of the flesh, and
to undergo the pangs of a new birth, then to miss of the inheritance in the
good land.

There are three steps or degrees of the blessed estate: First There are
desires, thirstings and breathings begotten after the life. Secondly, There is
a laboring in the service (under the yoke) by the virtue which springs from
the life. Thirdly, There is a Rest, or sitting down at ease in the life. By the
stirring of life in the soul, desires after life are kindled: he, in whom the
desires are kindled, and who feels the eternal virtue, cannot but be running
the race: he whom the Spirit of the Lord finds faithful in running the race,
it pleases the Lord ever and anon to be giving him a taste of the rest. Thus
the spring stirring, the soul cannot but move toward its center: and as it
enters into, and fixes in its center, it partaketh of the rest. N^w to know
the leadings of the Spirit forward and backward into these (into desires, when
he pleases, into the labor and service of the life, when he pleases; into
the sweet rest and perfect repose in the life, when he pleases;) here is the
safety and sweet progress of the renewed spirit. That man who is born of the
spirit, is to wait for the movings, breathings and kindlings of the Spirit in
him: and when the Sun arises, he is to go forth to his labor in the light
thereof, and in the night and withdrawing of the Sun, to retire: And when his
seventh day of rest comes, he is to receive it from, and enjoy it in the
Spirit; and afterward to be willing to begin his week again, even till his
whole race and the full course of his Pilgrimage be finished. Yet if it were
possible for man after he is come to Christ, to abide perfectly with him, to
cease from lust, to keep within the faith, to draw naturally in the yoke, to
bow in the Spirit continually to the Father of Spirits, there would be a
continual Sabbath kept in the passage, even before the great, full and perfect
Sabbath in the end. The hardness, and unease of the labor, is because of a
part contrary to the life, which when it is worn out, there will be no more
labor, but the yoke will become the rest, and all the motions and operations
of life will flow forth naturally in the rest. And here is the Patience and
Faith of the Saints, to wait under the yoke, under the daily cross to that Part
which is to be brought and kept under, till all the bonds of Captivity be broke
through by the life, and the vail of flesh rent from the to to the bottom (the
remaining of which, is that which stops the free current of life) and then
shall the soul enter into the holy of hol^es, obtaining the full possession of
the everlasting inheritance and of the eternal redemption, and know sorrovv,
tears, bonds, sickness, death, captivity (no nor so much as grapling with them,
or traveling out of them) no more, but the enjoyment of the plenty and fullness
of the life reaping all the pleasant fruits of life, in the rich land of life
for evermore.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS Propounded to the JEWS, That they may hear and consider,
and their Hearts at length may be Turned toward that which alone is able to
Convert Them to God, that they may once more become his People, and enter into
an Everlasting Covenant with him that may not be broken, that so they may abide
in his Love and Covenant of Life, and remain his People for ever.
Consideration I.
WHat great Love, Mercy and Kindness God showed to that People, above all
Nations and Peoples under Heaven. Of his own free love he set his heart upon
them, choosing them to be a People to himself. He brought them out of Egypt by a
mighty hand and outstretched Arm; he mightily preserved them in, and led them
through the Wilderness. He entered into a Covenant with them to become their
God, and betrothed them unto himself for his own Lot and Inheritance. He gave
them righteous Laws, Judgments, Statutes and Ordinances, both of Worship
toward him, and of an upright Demeanor and Conversation among themselves and
toward all men. He drove out the Heathen from before them, and gave them a
pleasant Land to possess, even the glory of all Lands, a Land flowing with Milk
and Honey. He built an habitation for himself among them, first a moving
Sanctuary or Tabernacle, afterward a more settled abiding place or Temple
(which Solomon built) wherein was the Ark of his presence, where he was to be
sought unto and enquired of by them, and toward which their Prayers were to be
directed, and there was a Mercy-seat, whereof they had large experience, and he
ever and anon sent Prophets among them, to reprove their errors and
blackslidings, and to set them to rights again. He raised up Judges likewise to
defend them: and although they were weary of his Government, desiring a King
after the manner of the Nations so vehemently, that they even forced a King
from him, yet he took him away from them, and after him chose a man after his
own heart, to feed Jacob his People and Israel his Inheritance, who fed them
according to the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of
his hands. What should I say more? what was wanting of Love, of Care, of
Goodness, of Kindness, of Mercy, of Gentleness, of any thing that a People
could desire of their God? I say, what was wanting of all this on Gods part?
What could he have done more for his Vineyard, than he did do? Nay he emptied
upon them all the Goodness, all the Mercy, Love, Favor, etc. that that
Covenant would hold to the full, yea and more too: for he bare with them more
than that Covenant required him to bear, and redeemed them oftener than that
Covenant engaged him, yea many time turned he his anger away, and did not stir
up all his wrath, as he might often have done according to the tenor of that
Covenant. Yea in all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them: And he was still ready to say in his heart, Surely they
are my People, Children that will not lie, at length they will see their error,
repent and be true to me: insomuch as he was never weary of saving them, of
trying them again and again, of stirring up his Bowels of Love and Pity to
Redeem them, of sending his Servants and Prophets among them to warn and
reclaim them, even till at last it was manifest that there was no remedy but he
must cast them off, and provoke them to jealousy by a foolish Nation ( Deuteronomy.
32.20, 21.) drawing them nigh to him, who had been Worshipping Stocks and
Stones, making them become a People, who had long been no People, and casting
these out of his sight, making them become no People, who had so long been his
chosen peculiar People, in Covenant with him, and nigh unto him above all the
Families of the Earth.

Consid. II. What constant Rebellion and stiffness of Spirit that People all
along expressed toward the Lord, what wild sour Grapes they still brought
forth to him, sour Love, sour Obedience, sour Worship and Sacrifices, such
as the pure palate of the Lord could find no relish nor savor in: but as
Moses had told them, that it was not for their Righteousness God chose them to
give them the good Land to possess, for they were a Rebellious and stiff-necked
People, Deuteronomy. 9.6, 7. So it was not for their Goodness that God continued his
love to them, for they were all along provoking him, Jer. 44.4. When God came
to show that great Mercy to them of Redeeming them out of Egypt, and bid them
cast away their Idols, they would not cast away their Idols, Ezekiel. 20.7, 8.
neither did they regard that Mercy of Redemption from the House of Bondage, and
from the Iron Furnace, but said to Moses it was better for them to stay in
Egypt and to serve the Egyptians, Exodus 14.12. Again in the Wilderness, how did
they provoke him all that forty years of Mercy, how did they err in their
hearts from his pure fear, and from Love to him, and from Faith and Confidence
in him! how did they murmur against him, and against Moses and Aaron their
Leaders! how did they forget his Works and his Wonders continually! When they
came near the Land, and should have gone in to possess it, then they would not,
but repined and rebelled because of the talness and strength of the Enemy, and
of their Cities: and when they were forbid to go, then they would go and fight
with them. What should I mention the time of the Judges and of the Kings, how
often the Lord made them smart by their Enemies in their own Land, how often he
gave them up to Captivity out of their Land, even till at length that great
Captivity of Babylon befell them, and since that a greater Captivity and
Desolation than that of Babylon?

Consid. III. Whether God, having tried this People even to the utmost, by that
Covenant which he made with them by Moses in Mount Sinai, may ever please to
try them so any more: Or if there yet remain any Mercy or Love from God toward
them, whether it is not to be expected another way, and upon another account?
This is very necessary and profitatble for them to consider, that they may not
be looking that way for Mercy and Favor from God, in which it is never to
come, and so have their eyes and hearts diverted from that way according to
which it is to come: for this must needs put them back exceedingly, if their
eyes be looking out one way, and the Love of God has chosen another channel to
run toward them in. This may make them refuse the very Mercy, Love and
Redemption when it comes, suspecting it not to be it, because it comes not in
the way and after the manner that they look for it. Now God has expressly said,
that when he shall be pacified toward them* and shall look again upon them
with an eye of Favor to do them good, it shall not be by their Covenant (which
could never last, but was still broken on their parts) but by his own
everlasting Covenant, which he would establish to them, Ezekiel. 16.60. etc, It
would therefore diligently be enquired by them, What Covenant it is which is
called their Covenant, verse. 61. And what Covenant it is which is called Gods
Covenant, verse. 62. That they may withdraw their eyes and hopes from the one,
from whence their Redemption, Recovery and Mercy cannot come, toward the other
from whence it is to come? To which Query, for their sakes, it is in my heart
to return this Answer.

Answ. Their Covenant is that which they entered into with God, the Covenant
that their hearts chose to unite with God by: and that was to this effect, That
if God would show them his Will, they would obey it. Go thou near (said they to
Moses) and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou unto us all
that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it and do it,
Deuteronomy. 5.27. Thus they thought, but the Lord knew otherwise, for O says the
Lord that there were such an heart in them, etc. verse. 29. and Moses knew
otherwise, he knew that they would corrupt themselves, and that evil would
befall them in the latter days, Deuteronomy. 31.29. But Gods Covenant was the free
Covenant he made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the Covenant of his Grace, the
Covenant of his free Love, whereby he was able to reach them in Egypt, upon the
cry of the Seed in them (in the midst of their Idolatries, and to bring them
out and do them good notwithstanding their stubbornness and stiff-neckedness)
even before the other Covenant was made. This Covenant of Love was Gods
Covenant. This is the Covenant God remembered to them in the days of their
youth, while they were young and tender, and not yet grown up to be a people
under the other Covenant: and this is the Covenant which lasts for ever, which
is not founded upon their obedience, but on God's free Love to them for his own
Name sake, and for their Fathers sake with whom he freely made it.

Quest. What does this Covenant contain?

Answ. Putting his Fear in the Heart, writing his Laws in the Mind, pouring of
pure clear Water upon them to wash away the pollutions of their inward parts,
circumcising the filth of the Heart, healing the backsliding Nature by creating
of a right Spirit within, and keeping of the created Spirit right by the
presence of that Spirit which created it: See Jer. 31.31, 32. Ezekiel. 36.25, etc.
Hosea 14.4. This is God's Covenant, this is the new Covenant, which is to be
made with the House of Israel and Judah when God redeems them: and they can
never be redeemed but by this Covenant, but are to remain desolate, until the
Spirit be poured out from on high upon them, Isai. 32.15. until their Hearts be
circumcised to love the Lord their God, until his fear be placed there, and
they thereby caused to walk in his ways. As therefore they receive the Spirit,
are brought into the fear, have the Law written in their minds and become
subject thereto, so will they taste of this Covenant, be brought into Redemption
by it, and become a glory inwardly, and outwardly also upon the Earth.

Quest. What is the way for them to have the fear of God put in their Hearts,
to have their Hearts circumcised, to receive the Spirit and his Laws into their
minds, and so to come into this Covenant?

Answ. There is no other way but that to which Moses himself directed them,
after God had made the other Covenant with them, and tried them long by it,
together with many Temptations, Signs and Wonders both before and after it; and
seeing by all these they had not had an Heart to perceive, nor Eyes to see, nor
Ears to hear, Moses at length directs them to another Covenant, the Word
whereof would give them Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, and an Heart to
understand. Which Covenant was a Covenant besides the former, Deuteronomy. 29.1. And
was indeed the Covenant concerning Life or Death eternal, chap. 30.15. (the
other being but a Covenant of their outward state, made with them after their
coming out of Egypt, upon their deliverance there from, and according to their
choice to become a People to God according to it.) This Word, Moses tells them,
was near them (nearer then that which was spoken by God on the Mount, and
afterward written in Tables of Stone.) The voice of this Word and the
Commandment thereof was nearer, that they need not seek any where abroad for
it, but only listen at home to hear its speech, obey it in the faith, and live
for ever, Deuteronomy. 30.11, etc. This is the way for them and all Men to come into
this Covenant, and there is no other; There is a Light shining in the Darkness
of Man's heart, which Springs up in him, and casts forth it is rays to discover
and draw him out of the Darkness: Now as this Light is felt, loved, understood
in Spirit, hearkened and cleaved to in the pure Faith, which it begets; that
which cleaves to it, is drawn out of the darkness by it, into the Covenant of
the pure eternal Light, where God is, and whither all they are translated, who
are drawn to him in and by this Covenant, as they are kept, preserved, and
continue in the Faith, Love and Obedience of it. Now I would yet put these few
things more to them.

First, Whether that People of the Jews, as they stood related to God in that
Covenant (given by Moses at Mount Horeb) with the Covenant it self and all
things appertaining thereto, were not a shadow of some inward and Spiritual
thing afterward to appear and be made manifest in its season. Whether they
themselves were not a shadow of a more inward and Spiritual People, to be
gathered to God by the inward and Spiritual Covenant; and whether their outward
Covenant was not a shadow or visible representation of that Covenant, and the
Laws of it a shadow or representation of the inward Laws* which were to be
written in the hearts of that Spiritual People? Was not their Tabernacle, or
Temple, a shadow of the true Tabernacle or Temple, seeing God dwells not in
Temples made with hands, but in a poor, humble, contrite Spirit, and in the
Heart that trembles at his Word, Isai. 57.15. and chap. 66.1, 2. So was not
their circumcision a shadow of the circumcision which is to pass upon the
Hearts of God's chosen? Were not their Sacrifices types or representations of
the Sacrifices of praise and of a broken Heart? Psalm. 51.17. and Psalm. 50.14.
Was not their Canaan, or Holy Land, a type of the true Holy Spiritual rest
which the faith gives entrance into? Their City Jerusalem a Tipe of the
Jehovah-shammah? Their Priests and Levites Tipes of the Spiritual Priesthood,
which was to offer the pure offering and Spiritual Sacrifices among the
Gentiles? Malac. 1.11. Mark that place, if it did not plainly foretell the
casting off of the Jews, with the rejecting of their Offerings, Priests and
Levites, and God's raising up a seed among the Gentiles, where he would have a
more acceptable People and Worship, even a pure Spiritual People, and a pure
Spiritual Offering.

Secondly, If they were Types, Representations, or Shadows of somewhat Spiritual
to come, then were they not to give place to that which is Spiritual when it
came, and so to be swallowed up in it? Is not the Spiritual Glory, the Glory?
the inward Jew, the Jew indeed? the circumcision of the Heart, the choice
circumcision? the offering up of praise and of a broken Heart, the acceptable
Sacrifice? the Land of Life and Righteousness, the true Land of rest to the
living by Faith? Is not the Spiritual City, House, or Temple which God builds,
the Jerusalem or Temple of the new Covenant? Is not this the choice House to
God? and is not this Spiritual Glory to be expected in the days of the Messiah,
and all the Tipes and shadows of Moses, which pointed at him, to end in him,
when once he comes to set up his true, inward, invisible, substantial Glory
among his inward and Spiritual People? When the day of Messiah dawns, shall not
Moses his shadows fly away? O that your Eyes were opened to behold the inward
Glory of Life, the good things of the new Covenant, the great Treasure and
Riches which are revealed and possessed in the Spirit; by the Spirits that are
redeemed unto God, that ye might partake thereof; and then your Eye would not
be so much on that which is outward, which if ye had even to the utmost of your
desires, are not comparable to the inward.

Lastly, Search the Prophets, see if the Messiah is not first to come in a
despiseable way, as a man of sorrows, Isai. 53.2, 3. whose visage in that
appearance was to be more marred then any man's, Isai. 52.14. and consider
whether he was not to be cut off, though not for himself, Dan. 9.26. and then
to sit at the right Hand of God, until his Enemies be made his Footstool; Psa.
110.1. before he come in that Glory wherein ye expect him. So that if he be not
thus come already, then that coming of his is yet to be expected, and his Hands
and Feet are yet to be pierced by you, and then afterward ye may look upon him
whom you have pierced, Zach. 12.10. and all the Families of Israel mourn
bitterly apart for it, ver. 12.

When Moses gave the Law, the vail was over his face: your Fathers were not
able to bear the Light wherein the Law was given, nor the Light wherein the
Prophecies of the Prophets were given, and so they still erred from the Law,
were offended at the Prophets while they were alive, and mis-understood their
words after their death. Now do not ye search into Moses and the Prophets, in
the same Spirit of error as your Fathers did, being shut out from the Light of
them, even as they were? If it be thus, if the vail be over your hearts, if ye
be ignorant of the true Light* of the true eternal Power wherein the Scriptures
were given forth, ye must needs mis-understand them mis-understand Moses,
mis-understand the Prophets, mis-understand the things spoken concerning the
Messiah, and so not be able to see unto the end of those things ministered by
Moses, and of that ministration which was to pass away, nor into the beginning
of the ministration of the Messiah, which was to succeed it. O turn within to
the Word nigh in the Heart, that the true Jew may be begotten and formed in
you, and his Light may arise and overspread you, that in that Light ye may see
the Light of Moses, and the Light of the Prophets, and not gather false
meanings from their words, but understand them a right in the same Holy Spirit,
and enjoy the blessedness they spoke of and directed to, which lies in the
inward raising up of an inward Seed, and not in an outward conformity of the
outward man, while the heart and mind remains unchanged and unrenewed, which
can never be made new by any ministry of the Letter without the Spirit, but
alone by the ministry of the Spirit, whether with or without the Letter, as he
pleases.

J. P.

THE END.

