TO THE JEWS NATURAL, AND TO THE JEWS SPIRITVAL; With a few Words to England my
Native Country, etc.

Some Sensible, Weighty QUERIES, Concerning some things very sweet and
necessary to be experienced in the Truly-Christian State.

whereunto is added A Postscript, Containing some Queries on Isa. 50^10, 11. A
Scripture of Deep Counsel and Concern to the darkened and distressed states, of
some among those that fear and obey the Lord.

By ISAAC PENINGTON.

Printed in the Year, 1677.

TO THE JEWS NATURAL, AND TO THE JEWS SPIRITVAL; With a few Words to England my
Native Country.

Whereunto are added two or three Queries touching the River and City of God,
and the pure Stilness, wherein God is known and exalted-

As also some Questions answered concerning the true Church, Ministry and
Maintenance under the Gospel, and about the Lamb's war.

Written in Traveling Bowels By ISAAC PENINGTON.

Truly God is good to Israel, to such as are of a clean heart,

Psalm 73.11. Behold an Isralite indeed, in whom is no guile,

Joh. 1.47. For he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit and not in the
letter, whose Praise is not of men, but of God,

Romans 2.28, 29. Behold, the Days come says the Lord, that I will punish all
them which are circumcised with the uncircumcised, Egypt, and Judah, and Edom,
and the Children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that are in the utmost corners,
that dwell in the wilderness; for all these Nations are uncircumcised, and all
the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart,

Ier. 9.25, 26. Printed in the Year, 1677.

THE PREFACE.
WHat a day of distress, and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, is to
come upon the wicked and ungodly World (even upon man, who was created in the
Image of God, but is now fallen from it, and found out of it, and in another
Image very unlike it) the eye which the God of this world has blinded, and the
heart which he has hardened by sin and transgression, has no sense of.

What a day of distress and misery some in this nation (and in other parts of
the World) have already met with; how they have felt the Weight of Sin upon
their Spirits, and what a sore thing it has been to them to feel their Souls
separated from that God that made them (who is the Husband and Father, King and
Preserver of Souls that are found in his Image and Nature) how they have been
inwardly captivated by a Foreign Power, and oppressed, and made to serve under
sin, and could hear no effectual Tidings of his appearance who was able to
save, but their Spirits were ready to sink, and their Hope of Redemption, from
that which oppressed and captivated them, almost cut off; this being an inward
State and Condition, has been altogether hid from the Eye which is outward.

How the Lord at length appeared unto these (his Bowels having long rolled over
them, and he having long waited to be gracious to them, even till the fully
acceptable and set time was come) how his Light has shined in and upon them,
how he gathered those dry Bones together, and breathed Life into them, and made
them live; this is also altogether an hidden thing from the Eye of the World.

How the Lord, who appeared to them, has exercised and tried them; how he has
judged them, and how he has saved them; what Desolations he has made inwardly
in them, and what he has built up there; what an Hammer, a Sword, a Fire, etc.
his pure Word of Life has been in them; How that Birth which could live
without God, without his inward Life, or upon Words and Knowledge without Life,
has been famished, until by the Pain of the Famine its very Life and Breath
has been taken from it, and it crucified with Christ, by the Pain of the Cross
of Christ; and what Birth has been raised and crowned afterward, and
beautified with the Ornaments of Righteousness and Salvation, yea, with the
endless Love and Mercy of its God; and how the Lord is with his People, and
dwells and walks in them, and how he has humbled them to walk with him; and
how in Fear and Humility they do walk with him in the Light of the Day
everlasting, even as God is Light, and walks in the Light of his own Day; these
are very strange and unknown things to the Wisest and most Prudent in Religion
at this Day, who are not gathered into the Mystery of Godliness (nor into the
Spirit, Power and Glory of the Father) where these things are revealed in and
by the Son.

What Faith the Children of Wisdom have, in the Wisdom and Power which has
appeared; what Confidence they have in the Lord their God, that he will stand
by them in all their Exercises and Trials, both inward and outward; and what
Experiences they have had of the Lords standing by them in both; how his
Faithfulness does not fail, and how their Faith in him is upheld and preserved
by him, that it does not fail in the stormy time, or Hour of greatest Distress;
and how their Eye is unto him, and their Hearts with him in the Calms, so that
their God is all in all unto them continually; (And who knows this, but they
that have it!) Oh who can utter or declare the Sweetness and Certainty of this,
where it is enjoyed!

What Love also the Lord sheds abroad in their Hearts, and how he teaches and
causes them to love, by often circumcising their Hearts, and cutting off that
which hinders the pure Love from springing in them; and how they love others
in the Love wherewith God (who is Love) has loved them; and how natural it is
to them to pray for their Enemies, and to bless them that curse them, and do
Good for Evil, but cannot requite Evil for Evil, being transplanted into and
growing up in the Root that is good, and sends up good sap and Virtue into
them, which nourishes all that is good in them, but is Death and Destruction
to the Remainders of evil, as the Lord pursues and finds it out; Oh how
impossible is it for the Heart of man to conceive or understand!

Now, I also having tasted of the Mercy and Goodness of the Lord, and having
been brought out of a State of great Misery and Sorrow of Heart into the
Redemption and Joy of God's chosen; and having found the Lord faithful to me,
and giving me Faith in the Appearance of his Spirit and Power in me, and true
Love (tender Love) not only to my Brethren in the Truth, but to all Mankind
springing in me, and diverse Fruits issuing forth from it, some of them at this
time I cannot but publish, and the Lord open the Hearts of those whom it
concerns, that they may find some Help, Benefit and Furtherance by it; for it
is the Joy of my Heart to receive Good from God, to be filled with his
Blessings, to have my Cup overflow, and that others ^ay be helped, refreshed
and gladed therewith, and by the sweet Taste thereof led to wait for the
opening of the same Root and Fountain of Life in themselves, to yield living
Sap, and send forth living Streams in them Day by Day*

Somewhat in the Love of God to the Jews Natural, or seed of Abraham after the
Flesh.
O the Glory of your state outward, who were the people whom God once chose and
loved, and manifested his Power and Presence among, above all People! Whose
Land was the Glory of all Lands, to which God brought you out of Egypt by an
outstretched Arm, through a dreadful Wilderness, wherein ye were tempted,
tried and exercised, and the succeeding Generation fitted to enter into. O what
Laws and statutes, and righteous Judgments did God give you, such as no Nation
besides had! What a Temple had ye to appear before God in, and the Ark of the
Covenant, and holy Priests, Kings and Prophets! And how nigh was God to you, to
be enquired of by you; and how ready to hear your Prayers, in all that you
called upon him for! The eternal God was thy Refuge, and underneath were the
everlasting Arms (the Lord was thy Rock, and thou wast built upon him) and he
did thrust out the Enemy before thee, and did say. Destroy. And when the Arm of
the Lord did destroy them before thee, thou did dwell in safety alone, and
the Lord was a Fountain of living waters to thee, and his Heavens did drop down
Fatness upon thee. Happy wast thou O Israel, who was like unto thee, O People
saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy help, and who was the Sword of thy
Excellency! And thine Enemies were sound Liars unto thee, and thou did tread
upon their high places: And it might have been still so with thee, had thou
not been unmindful of the Rock that begat thee, and forgotten God that formed
thee: For thy Glory should not have been taken from thee, but swallowed up in a
higher Glory, wherein thou might have had the first and chiefest share,
had thou not, by thy almost constant Rebellion and Unbelief, provoked the
Lord against thee; not only often to afflict, but at last utterly to cast thee
off from being a People, and chose a people in thy stead, who should bring
forth better Fruits to the Lord of the Vineyard, then thou in thy Day had
done.

Yet when thy state was thus glorious, it was not a state of the
truly-substantial, lasting glory, but a shadowy state or representative
thereof. Thy day of glory was not the day of the Messiah, the day of
everlasting Light inwardly, wherein the Lord alone is exalted, inwardly in the
Hearts of all, in whom he b^eaks down all that is contrary to the Light of his
Day. Thy Day was but the day of the outward shadows of the heavenly substance;
but when that day (the day of the inward substance and glory) shined, thy
shadows or shadowy state was to fly away, and to be swallowed up in the pure
substance and spiritual Kingdom of the Messiah.

Thy birth from Abraham after the Flesh; was not the birth which was to inherit
the Promise in the Kingdom of the Messiah: but there is a birth inwatdly born
of the Spirit, born after Abraham in his Faith, who travels inwardly, as
Abraham did outwardly, and seek an inward Country and City, whose builder and
maker is God: To these the spiritual Kingdom and Promises belong.

Thy circumcision was but the circumcision outward, the circumcision of the
Flesh; it was not the circumcision of the Heart. That i^ the circumcision of
the inward Jew, which indeed the Scripture called for from you, because there
was somewhat near you, which would have so circumcised you, had ye hearkened and
given up to it: but ye, as a people, were not so circumcised, but were a
stiffnecked people (as Moses and the Prophets were still complaining of you)
uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, resisting God's Spirit, both in your own
Hearts and in the Prophets, until the Lord was provoked to take away both
Vision and Prophet from you.

The Egypt, in which your Fathers were in bondage, and Pharaoh who oppressed
them, was but the Egypt outward, and Pharaoh outward. There is an inward
Egypt, wherein the spiritual seed, the inward man, the soul is in Bondage; and
there is a spiritual Pharaoh, that oppresses the spiritual seed, in spiritual
Egypt. And there is a stretching out the Arm of the Almighty inwardly, to
break the strength of the inward Pharaoh, to pierce Leviathan the crooked
Serpent, and to deliver the soul from under his captivity.

The Wilderness also your Fathers were led through, was but the outward
Wilderness; where they were tempted and tried by the Lord many ways, that he
might do them good in the latter end. But the inward Israel, after they are led
out of the inward Egypt, are tried in the inward wilderness; where they are
judged after the flesh, and that wasted in them* which is not to enter into and
inherit the good land, where they are tried in the furnace of affliction, and
their filth purged away by the spirit of judgment and burning, that the
righteous nation, which has received the holy inward law, and keeps the Truth,
may enter into the good land, city and kingdom of the Messiah, and inherit the
blessed promises of life and salvaton there.

Moses, your great Prophet, was a Type of the great, lasting, standing Prophet,
whom God would raise up like unto Moses, who was to give his inward law; as
Moses did the outward; and to lead all the spiritual Israel, as Moses did the
outward Israel, and his Word was to be heard and stand in all things whatsoever
he shall say unto his People: and whosoever will not hear and obey this
Prophet, shall be cut off from among the holy, spiritual, and inwardly living
People.

Joshuah, who succeeded Moses, led but into he figurative Rest; he was but a
Figure of him, that inwardly leads into the inwad and spiritual Rest; which the
true Jews, which are inwardly created and formed by God, and made a willing
People in the day of his Power enter into.

The Pillar of Cloud and Pillar of Fire in the Wilderness, were but Figures of
the spiritual Pillar of Cloud and Fire, by which the spiritual Israel are led
and defended in the glorious gospel-day of God's spirit and power, read Isa.
chapter 4 which speaks of the gospel-day, and the Pillar of Cloud and Fire to be
created therein, and of the defense which is to be on all the inward and
spiritual glory.

The Land of Canaan, the outward good Land an^ Kingdom of Israel, was but a
Figure of the inward Land and Kingdom of the inward Israel, in the days of the
Messiah. This is the Land of Judah, in which the Song is sung, because of the
inward strong City, where God appoints salvation for walls and bulwarks, which
the righteous nation which keeps the Truth enter into, Isa. 26.

Their outward Kings in that Land, and particularly David, were but Types of
the spiritual King, the spiritual David, whom God would raise up to the
spiritual People, who should seek the Lord their God and David their King, who
shall be their spiritual shepherd and ruler, whom God has appointed to fed
them in the Integrity of his Heart, and to guide them by the skilfulness of his
hands, who is King of Righteousness tnd Peace inwardly, and who ministers
Righteousness and Peace to the sheep and lambs of his pastures.

Their outward Priests (even their Highpriests) were but a representation of
the great High Priest of God, who was to be a Priest for ever, after the order
of Melchizedeck, Psalm 110.

Their outward Covenant (made with them from the outward mount Sinai, upon the
giving of the Law, and holy Statutes and Ordinances, by which they were to live
and enjoy God in their outward state) was but a shadow of the inward and
spiritual Covenant, the new and everlasting Covenant, which God makes with his
inward and spiritual people in the latter days.

Their outward Law, as (...) written and engrav'n in tables of stones, was but
a shadow of the inward Law, which God puts into the Children of the new
Covenant, insomuch that they need not go outwardly to learn the Knowledge of
God, or his will or law; but the inward Israel find it inwardly written within.
There the Isles, who wait for the law of the spirit of Life, for the Law of the
Messiah; receive the Ministration of the Law (in the spirit and Power of the
Messiah) which they wait for.

Their outward Mount Zion, on which the outward Temple was built, by Solomon
that wise King, that righteous King, that peaceable King, was a figure of the
inward Mountain, whereupon the inward House is built in the days of the
Gospel, in the days of the Messiah. And to this Mountain are the spiritual
people to come up and worship. And this is the Zion and Jerusalem (even inward
and spiritual) from which the Law and Word of the Lord go forth in the days of
the Messiah. And the spiritual house of Jacob combind or agree together, to
walk in the Light of the Lord, who sends forth his Light and Truth, and leads
them to his holy Hill, and to his Tabernacles.

Their outward Tabernacle and Temple, sanctified by God for him to dwell and
appear in, was a shadow of God's inward dewlling place in man, I will
tabernacle in them. God dwells not in Houses or Temples made with hands, that
is not the place of his rest, as says the Prophet Isaiah; but the high and
lofty One, that inhabits Eternity, whose Throne is in Heaven, and the Earth his
Footstool, he dwells also with him that is of an humble and contrite spirit,
to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the spirit of the contrite
ones.

Their outward Sabbaths were not the lasting Sabbath or Rest of the Gospel, but
given them for a sign; but the day of Redemption from sin, the day of resting
from sin, the day of ceasing from the Works of the flesh, the day wherein God
is all, and does all by his spirit and power inwardly, and wherein he alone is
exalted; this is the day of rest, which the Lord has made for the spiritual
Israel, and which they are glad of and rejoice in.

So their Incense and Sacrifices were not the lasting Incense and Sacrifices,
but shadows thereof. The prayers of the Saints, when God pours out the spirit
of prayer and supplication upon them, and they pray to him therein, that is the
Incense. Let my prayer be directed before thee as Incense, and the lifting up
of my Hands as the evening Sacrifice. And this was the Incense and a pure
Offering, which in every place was to be offered up to God's Name among the
Gentiles, when his Name should be great among them, as Malachy foretells. And
what said David of old when God's spirit and the holy vision was upon him?
Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire, mine Ears have thou opened: Burnt
Offering and Sin-Offering have thou not required. Then said I, lo I come, in
the volmn of the book it is written of me: I delight to do thy Will, O my God:
yea, thy Law is in the midst of my Bowels. The Sacrifices of God are a broken
Spirit (rent your hearts nd not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God) A
broken and a contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise. The offering Praise
to God from a sincere Heart, and the ordering of the Conversation aright, these
are the Sacrifices well-pleasing to God; for sacrifices were not the thing
which God mainly required of outward Israel: but this OBEY MY VOICE: And
Obedienc is more acceptable then all other sacrifices, and to hearken then the
Fat of the choicest Rams.

Besides, those outward sacrifices could not remove or take away sin from the
Conscience, but he that came to do the will, and to put and end to those
sacrifices and oblations, which were but outward and imperfect, he does both
wash and take away sins from within, and also bring in Everlasting
Righteousness, where his Light shines, and his pure Life springs inwardly in
the Heart.

And this is the substance of all the shadows, even the Light eternal, the Word
eternal, the Son of the living God (who is Light, as the Father is Light) the
Word nigh in the Mouth and Heart, the Word of the New Covenant, the which Moses
directed your Fathers to, Deuteronomy. 30. And by which the Lord speaks, and has
spoken throughout the world ( Psalm 50.1.) and teaches every man that
hearkeneth to his voice, to do justly, love Mercy and walk humbly with his God,
as it is expressed by the Prophet Micah.

Now to you Jews of the outward line of Abraham, whose return to the Lord my
soul most earnestly desires after, and for which I have most vehemently and
wrestlingly prayed to the Lord, are some few weighty Queries upon my heart.

Query 1. How came David to pant so after the living God, like the Heart or Hind
after the waterbrooks? Was it not from the quickening Virtue of this inward
word, which Moses the man of God had directed the mind to? Read Psalm 119. and
see how he breathed for Quicknings from this word, on which all depends. And if
ye come to experience this word, and the quickening virtue of it, and follow the
Lord on therein, ye will soon come to know the day of the Messiah, and the
glory of his Kingdom, which is not outward, transitory and of a perishing
nature; but inward, spiritual and eerlasting (as David well knew, and spoke
sensibly of, Psalm 145. and elsewhere.

Qu. 2. What are the waters, which every thirsty soul is invited to? Are they
not the waters of the Messiah? Are they not waters that flow out of the wells
of salvation? Isa. 12. Do not the Spiritual Israel draw spiritual water out of
the wells of the Savior, in the Days of the Messiah? What is it to come to
these waters? O that ye experimentally knew! But this I will tell you, from
true and certain Experience, that if ye come to take notice of this word of
Life, which God has placed nigh in your Mouths and Hearts, to separate between
the Evil words and evil thoughts of the Enemie's begetting and bringing forth,
and the good words and good thoughts of God's begetting and bringing forth, and
incline your Ear to it, and come from that which it reproves in you, and draws
you from to it self; your souls shall soon come to live, and he that gives you
Life, will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of
David: But ye must still mind him as a witness, and leader, and commander
inwardly in your Hearts, that ye may be preserved in the Covenant, and enjoy
the Blessings of it. see Isa. 55.

Qu. 3. Did not the Messiah come at the set time, at the time set by the holy
Spirit of prophecy? Did he not come in the prepared Body to do the will? And
did he not do the will? And after his Obedience to his Father, was he not cut
off, though not for himself? And after his cutting off, were not you made
desolate? Why were ye made desolate? Why did such a stroke come upon you, as
never before? O consider it. Read Dan. 9.24. to the end of the chapter, and let
him that reads understand.

Qu. 4. What was that Curse, and on whom did it light, Let their Table become a
Snare to them, etc. Psalm 69. was it not on those that gave gall and vinegar to
the Messiah to drink, whom David was a figure of, and spoke in spirit
concerning? Whose Eyes are always darkened? Does not the vail lie still on your
whole Nation? Do ye know the inward mountain, where the vail or face of the
covering is destroyed? In the inward day and light of the Messiah it is
destroyed. There, that which vails the noble eye of the m^nd is known, and also
that which destroys and re^oveth it. To what purpose is it for you to read
Moses and the Prophets, when the vail is so upon you, that ye cannot see what
is to be abolished, and is abolished, by the dawning of the glorious day of the
Messiah, and what is to remain and never to be abolished? There is a Jewship,
there is a Circumcision, there is a Sabbath, there is a Rest, etc. for the
inward and spiritual people, which is to remain, and never to be abolished.

Qu. 5. Who were those that God would hide his Face from, and see what their
end should be; because they were a froward Generation, children in whom was no
faith? Who were they that moved God to Jealousy, and provoked him to Anger?
And what was the people and foolish nation he would provoke them to Jealousy
and Anger with? Deuteronomy. 32. Was it not the spiritual, the holy nation inwardly,
the true Jews, whom God took from among the Gentiles, whom he appeared among,
and was a God and a Father to, when he cast off and forsook the Jews outward,
and left them to be a Desolation?

Qu. 6. Who are those that shall be hungry, when God's Servants shall eat? And
thirsty, when God's Servants shall drink? And ashamed, when his Servants shall
rejoice? Are not your souls hungry and parched for want of the spiritual
sustenance, which the living God satisfies his servants with, making (...)
feast of fat things to them on his inward holy mountain? And are not ye ashamed
of your expectations of the Messiah, while the servants of the Lord, rejoice in
him their Prince and Savior, and witness him daily a Leader and Commander to
them? What is the People whom the Lord has slain and made desolate (are not ye
a slain people to God, alienated from his Life, Spirit and Power, dead in your
litteral Notions and Observations?) And what are the servants of the Lord, whom
the Lord has called by another Name, even a Name that ye never knew? see Isa
66. And consider, how all your day God spread out his Hand to you and ye were
rebellious and would not hear; and now night is come upon you, and your
visitation, as such a people, is and has been long ended.

Qu. 7. Did not God signify by the Prophet Malachy, that he had no Pleasure in
you, nor would accept an Offering at your Hand? And did not he also signify
the choosing of the Gentiles in your stead, that the called among the Gentiles
should be his people, and his Name, which ye had profaned, should be great
among them, and their Incense and pure Offering in every place be accepted,
even from the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same? Read Mal. chap.
1.

Qu. 8. Now the inward people, and the inward Covenant, the New Covenant are
brought forth; shall ye ever be owned or regarded as an outward People,
according to your outward Covenant any more? Will not all such expectations
fail you for ever? Ye have looked, from generation to generation, for the
coming and appearing of the Messiah outwardly, after an outward manner: But his
coming and appearance is inward; and he sets up his Kingdom, his everlasting
Kingdom in his Saints, and in their Hearts he rules inwardly, and the Messiah,
the seed of the Woman bruiseth the Head of the serpent there. O that ye knew
the substatce! O that ye knew the Word of Life in the Heart, and were turned
to it, and daily faithful and obedient! That ye might feel it crushing and
dashing the power of sin and corruption in your Hearts. This is the
Consolation, Hope and Joy of the inward and spiritual Israel! O that ye might
be made partakers thereof; and that your long outward captivity and desolation
might at length end in inward Freedom and Redemption! Amen.

Somewhat of Concern to the Jews spiritual, who are of the Seed of Abraham
spiritually, or according to the Faith, and gathered, in this day of God's
Power, to the true and everlasting Shiloh.
THE Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet
until Shiloh come, and unto him shall the Gathering of the People be, Genesis
49.10.

Old Jacob, in the Spirit of Prophecy, saw that Judah was to have the Scepter,
the kingly Power; and it was not to depart from him, it was to be his Right,
and the Lawgiver was to be between his Feet; till Shiloh came; then the Right
was Shiloh's, to reign and to give Laws to his People, whom he should gather
out of the Kingdom of Darkness, and from Satan's Power into his own inward,
spiritual and everlasting Kingdom. This was the true King, God's King, whom he
would set up on the holy Hill of spiritual Zion; and all the holy, inward,
spiritual gatherings of all People, scattered from the holy, living Power, must
be to him.

I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, until he come
whose Right it is, and I will give it him. And his Dominion shall not pass
away, or the Scepter and law-giving Power shall not pass away from him, as it
did from Judah, nor shall his Kingdom ever be destroyed, Dan. 7.14. but God
will give to him the Throre of his Father David, and he shall reign over the
House of Jacob forever; and of his Kingdom there shall be no end.

Qu. But who are the People that shall be gathered to him?

Answ. The People that shall he^r his voice, and come at his call, that shall
receive the instruction of Wisdom, and feel the drawing Power and Virtue of the
Father, in the Day of his Power. It is written in the Prophets, All thy
Children shall be taught of the Lord. And every one that is taught and learneth
of the Father, comes to the Son, comes to the Messiah, comes to the Shiloh,
to the word eternal, to the word of Life in the Heart.

Qu. Was not the Messiah promised to the Jews, to come of them, and to be
appropriated to them?

Answ. He was promised to them, and to come of them, but not to be appropriated
to them: But he was to be the Universal Savior to all that should come under
his Ensign and Banner. He shall set up an Ensign for the Nations, and he shall
sprinkle many Nations, etc. And God promised, that he would give his Son (his
elect choice Servant) for a Light to the Gentiles.

Qu. Were the Jews then excluded?

Answ. No: They were to be gathered to Shiloh, as well as others; Nay, the Lord
had a special regard to them. The Gospel was first preached to them. They had
the first Offer, or the first Call to the spiritual Glory. They were the
Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant God made with their Fathers; unto
whom God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless them, in turning
away every one of them from their Iniquities. And the whole Nation, turning
from their Iniquities, should have been gathered by him, and should have
enjoyed the Blessing of his Day and Kingdom: Yea, the first gathering was from
among them, and the first glorious Gospel Church was at Jerusalem where the
Spirit and Power of the Lord Jesus did most eminently and wonderfully break
forth; and great Grace was upon them all. But the Nation was not gathered to
Shiloh, nor did come under his Scepter and Government; but only a remnant of
the Nation. So these being gathered, the rest were cast off; and the Ensign was
carried among the Gentiles, and the great gathering was there among them.

Qu. How is it manifest, that the great Gathering to Shiloh, was to be from
among the Gentiles?

Answ. By many expess Prophecies of Scripture, and Promises to the Messiah,
that he should have the Gentiles for his Inheritance and Possession. When God
establishes his King, the Messiah, upon the holy Hill of spiritual Zion,
notwithstanding all the Heathens rage against him, and the People of the Jews
imagining a vain thing (thinking to keep the Body of him in the grave, who was
the Resurrection and the Life) what says the Lord to him? Ask of me, and I
will give thee the Heathen thine Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the
Earth thy Possession, Psalm 2. The Lord said in another place, It is a light
thing, that thou should be my Servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the preserved of Israel; I will also give thee for a Light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth, Isa.
49.6. Again the Lord says further, From the rising of the Sun, even unto the
going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every
place Incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure Offering: For my Name
shall be great among the Heathen? says the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 1.11. Sing O
barren, thou that did not bear; break forth into singing and cry aloud, thou
that did not travel with Child; for more are the Children of the Desolate
th^n the Children of the married Wife, says the Lord, Isa. 54.1. Who was the
married Wife, who was the Mother in the Days of the first Covenant? was it not
the Jerusalem below; Who was then Desolate and Barren? was it not another
Jerusalem, which is free, and the Mother of all the spiritual Children? Why was
she now to rejoice and sing? But because she was to break forth on the right
hand and on the left, and her Seed was to inherit the Gentiles, and make the
desolate Cities to be inhabited, ver. 3. The Covenant on Mount Sinai did bring
forth a great People, whereof Jerusulem that was below was the Mother. The
Covenant afterward made, besides that in Horeb, whereof the Word nigh in the
heart and mouth is the Foundation (by which Word God circumcifeth) was, as yet
Barren, and did not bring forth a People to the Lord. But this Covenant was to
have a time, the Jerusalem above was to have a time, wherein her Seed should
inherit the Gentiles; and the Maker the Husband should be called the God of the
whole Earth, ver. 5. Read Gal. 4. and see how the Apostle of the Gentiles
expounds this Mystery, showing which is the free woman and her free Children;
and which is the bond woman, and which the bond Children, who are cast out in
the Day of God, and in the shining of his Heavenly Light inwardly, and cannot
inherit the glorious Kingdom of the Gospel, with the Children of the free
woman. And consider, who were the People in the time of the first Covenant?
Who obtained Mercy then? Were they not the Jews? And who were not a People,
and who did not ob^ain mercy, but were left out of the love and mercy of the
first Covenant? Were they not the Gentiles? And did not the Lord promise, that
he would have mercy on them that had not obtained mercy; and that he would say
to them that were not his People, THOU ART MY PEOPLE, and they shall say, MY
GOD, Hos. 2.23. compared with Romans 9.26. Was not this once gloriously
fulfilled in the first Visitation of the Gentiles? And is it not again
gloriously fulfilled in his now visiting them again with the fresh Sound of
the everlasting Gospel, as was promised, Rev. 14.7.

O what a Promise is that, concerning the Day of God, that In that day there
shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of the People, to it
shall the Gentiles seek, and his Rest shall be glorious, Isa. 11.10. Is not
This the Day wherein the holy Mountain is known and that nothing can hurt or
destroy there? And does not the Knowledge of the Lord cover his Land, his
Earth, as the Waters do the Sea? And does not the Root of Jesse the Rock of
Life and Salvation, stand for an Ensign, placed so by God, and who can displace
it, or shake them that are built on the inward Mount Zion? Yea, is not the Rest
of the weary Soul, when (...)comes hither, found to be very glorious? And when
this Ensign is more fully lifted up, shall not the Gentiles more abundantly
come unto God, from the Ends of the Earth, and bewail their dead and estranged
Estate from God (saying, Surely our Fathers inherited Vanity, and things
wherein is no Profit, Jer. 16^19.) And shall they not turn from all their
Idols, to serve the living God? These. 1.9. And concerning the Messiah it was
promised, that in his Name should the Gentiles trust, and the Isles should
vvait for his law, and he should bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles, Isa.
42.11. with Mat. 12.21.

But what should I mention any more Scriptures unto you concerning this thing,
whenas ye have so large, full, certain and daily Experience of it, in that
which is pure and living of God, which never deceived nor can deceive any; for
ye are begotten, by his Spirit, into his own Image and Nature, and have
received the Spirit of Adoption, where^n ye cry Abba, Father, to the Father of
Spirits. He found you, indeed, in a strange land, under great Captivity and
Alienation ftom him. Ye have been in Egypt, in Sodom, in Babylon spiritually:
But the mercy of the Lord has followed you thither, and the Arm of the Lord
has reached to you there, and has cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon: Yea, he
whom the Lord has given for a Light to the Gentiles, has shined to you there,
in the midst of your Darkness. So that God sent among you the Prophet like unto
Moses (though far above Moses) and hearing him, he led you out of Egypt, and by
the Rod of his Power did Signs and Wonders and valiant Acts there, breaking
that Power, which with a strong Hand held you captive there, and oppressed you.
And ye have known the Travel, Trials and Temptations in the spiritual
Wilderness, and the falling of the carcases which were to fall there, and the
holy leading by the Pillar of Cloud and Fire through all the Entanglements and
Dangers therein. Yea, and the faithful among you, the tried and prepared among
you, have passed over Jordan (the River of pure Judgment into the good Land,
and come to witness David and Solomon (who are one in Spirit) your King, who
rules in Righteousness, and ministers to you Peace everlasting. And ye have an
High Priest there, not after the Order of Aaron, but after the Order of
Melchizedeck, who is made the Everlasting High Priest of God, not after the Law
of a Carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an Endless Life, whose lips
preserve the knowledge of the law for you, in that endless power of Life; who
ministers for you and to you in that endless Power, and intercedes with Power
and Efficacy, and sprinkles the Blood of the Covenant upon you, which takes
away sin from your Hearts and Consciences. So that ye know the inward Jew's
state, the inward Holy Land and Kingdom, the inward Circumcision, before ye
enter into that Land; and the inward Lamb, the inward Passover, the inward
Mount Zion and Jerusalem; the inward Sacrifices and Incense, the inward
Tabernacle, Temple and Ark of the Covenant, the inward Table of Shewbread, the
inward Manna, the inward Rod that buddeth, the inward Candlestick, and the
Lamps, which are never to go out in God's Temple. And what should I say more?
All that that people were to be outwardly, in an outvvard Way and State, has
God made you inwardly in the Substance: And what God would have been to them
outwardly, had they obeyed his Voice, and kept his Statutes and Judgments;
that he is to you inwardly, who are the called, and chosen, and faithful
Followers of the Lamb: And ye are the enjoyers of their B^essings and Promises
inwardly. O the glory of your State, to the Eye that is opened to see it!

Now somewhat does remain on my Heart unto you.

O be daily sensible of the tender Goodness and Mercy of the Lord, which is
broke forth among you. What Mercy, what Love has the Father shown unto you,
that ye should be thus accounted the Children of God! that they which were once
nigh, should be removed so far off; and ye which were so far off, should be
brought so nigh, and should forever inherit the sure mercies of David! For, of
a Truth, the Lord will never forsake you; but his mercy endures forever toward
you, and your Stakes shall never be removed: but this inward Building shall
stand forever. This Zion is the Place of God's Rest, where he will dwell
forever, whereof the outward Zion was but a Figure.

2 dly, Remember what the Lord promised himself concerning you. When he was
weary of that people, and continually complaining of them; O what did he
promise himself concerning the People he would bring forth, by the Spirit and
Power of the Messiah, in the latter Days! Did he not promise himself, that
they should be an holy People, an inwardly circumcised people, a People that
should please him; Sheep that should hear the Shepherd's Voice, and be healed
by him, gathered home to him, and so follovv and learn of him the Shepherd;
that they should all know him, from the least to the greatest; and that he
would forgive their Sins, and heal their Backslidings, and they should not
return to Folly or backslide any more; as the Children after the Flesh always
did? Is not this the People, whom indeed God has formed for himself, who shall
show forth his praise?

3 dly, Remember what a Covenant God has prepared to make with you, as ye
incline your Ears to him, and are led by him, into the holy agreement with him;
even a Cevenant which is not weak, as the old Covenant was, but is full of
Virtue and Vigor, to enable you to do whatever God requires of you. Mark what
it contains, Putting God's Fear into you: Not the Fear which is taught by man's
precepts, which man may get into hi^ carnal mind; but which God places as the
Trasury of Life in the Heart, as it is written, The Fear of the Lord is his
Treasure, Isa. 33.6. And, O who knovvs the preciousness of this Treasure! How
it cleanses the Heart and keeps it clean, and will not suffer the mind that
is seasoned with it and kept to it, to depart from the living God! It fenceth
from Unbelief, it fenceth from Disobedience, it will not suffer the Soul so
much as to meddle with any Appearance of Evil. O precious, glorious, blessed
Treasure! Happy is the man^ that fears always with this Fear! Another
precious thing this Covenant contains, is. The Law written in the Heart, that
it shall be as near yea, nearer then sin is, in the Heart that is made tender,
and has the Law of the Spirit of Life written in it. Who knows what it is to
have the Law of Love the Law of Life, the Law of the Spirit, the Law of Faith
the Law of new Obedience livingly written by God in his Heart! Surely none can,
but they in whom God writes it! And such cannot but desire to have it written
in their Hearts, by his blessed Finger, daily more and more. But this Covenant
contains yet more, even the putting of his own Spirit within them, to be a
Fountain of Life there, a Fountain of Strength and Wisdom there, to make them
more and more willing in the day of his Power, and to cause them to walk in his
ways, and keep his Statutes and Judgments and do them, that the Lord their God
may bless them and delight in them.

O who would not long after, and take up the Cross and Shame, to enjoy the
Glory of this State! O what has God done for a poor despised Remnant among the
Gentiles! O who would not desire to keep this blessed Covenant with the Lord,
that he might fully enjoy the Lord that the Marriage with the Maker might be
witnessed, in his Loving Kindness and Everlasting Righteousness, and all
Unrigteousness and Uncleanness might be put away, removed and separated from
the Heart forever. Ah the Virgin-Spirit, which the Lamb loves, and delights to
marry with! He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, and he must part with
all that is old, evil, unclean and corrupt in him, that would be joined to the
Lord, and become one Spirit with him. O who would lose the precious Fear of the
Covenant, which is clean and endures forever, and keeps clean and chaste to
the Lord forever! And who would miss of one Law, which God has to write in
the Hearts of his Children, when every Law is a Law of Life, and changes the
Mind into the Nature of the Lawgiver! And who would grieve God's Spirit, which
is our Comforter? Or quench that which kindles the pure Flame of Love and Life
in our Hearts? Much less can any of his dear and tender Children be willing to
vex him, by manifest Carelessness and Disobedience, who gives us to drink of
the River of his Pleasures!

O my dear Friends, ye do not know the great Travail of my Heart, that all the
Children of the Lord might walk before him in all well-pleasing, that we might
come all into Covenant, into the full Covenant, and walk fully with him in the
Covenant, that his Anger might be forever turned away from us all, and he might
never be wroth with nor rebuke any of us any more. It is written on my Heart,
the breaking forth of this Glory would reach the Jews. And though they be cast
off, as to their outward State, and not so to be owned, or come into that Glory
any more, yet there is a Day of mercy and Love for them, as to that inward
State of Life and Redemption, which their outward State typified: And the
breaking forth of the full Glory of the Gentiles, and the manifestation of
God's mighty Power and Presence with them (they being made by God a People to
him, and so walking with God, as none possibly can, but those, who are created
anew and so made by him) this might provoke the Jews (the poor scattered
forsaken Jews) to seek after the Lord their God, and David their King, inwardly
to be revealed in them, and rule among them.

The Lord God of our Life and tender Mercies, carry on to Perfection this
blessed Work of his, which he has so mightily begun, and so mightily hitherto
carried on; and keep us in the Sense of his good Spirit, and in tender and holy
subjection thereto, and in Unity together in the Life, wherein we have been
gathered and preserved, and in pure Judgment over all the Workings of the Enemy
every where, and in the Gospel-love one to another, and to all men, even our
greatest Enemies, that we may seek the good of all men, even the rescuing and
preserving all out of Sin and Wrath, as much as in us is possible, that the
pure Light, wherewith our God and Heavenly Father has enlightened us, may shine
in us, and the Life wherewith he has ^uickned us, may live in us, and we may
feed on nothing but Life, and grow in nothing but Life and Truth, to the great
Glory of our Heavenly Father, and to the great Joy of our Hearts, Amen.

A few words to England my Native Country.
O Land of my Nativity, O my dear Countrymen,
THE pure Power of the Lord is upon me, and the Springs of Life open in me; and
among many other things, I am melted in Love and Desires after your Welfare:
and this is in my Heart to say to you. If I now testify to you in Truth, of a
Pearl, a heavenly Pearl, an everlasting Pearl; will ye not hear me? If I tell
you, your Heart is the Field, or Earth, wherein it is hid; will ye not consider
of it? If the everlasting Gospel be preached again, which contains true Tidings
of Redemption from sin; will ye not listen after it? If the Kingdom of God, and
Righteousness of Christ, be to be revealed within; would ye not willingly learn
to wait for it there, and beg of God that the Eye may be opened in you, which
alone can see it, when it does appear. Indeed God's Visitation is upon this
Nation, in an especial manner; his Light and Power is breaking forth in it,
against the Darkness and Power of the Spirit of Satan, which has captivated
and still captivateth many. Ye desire outward liberty, and the enjoyment of
your outward rights; would ye not be free inwardly? Free from the base,
earthly, selfish nature and spirit, which man fallen from God, and the Glory
wherein he created him, is degenerated into? Oh, is not the Power of God, and
life of Christ able to restore man to this? He that created man at first so
glorious, in his own Image; is he not able to create him anew? Oh hear, my dear
Countrymen; the Power is revealed, which creates anew; and they that receive
it, and are as Clay in the Hands of the great Potter, given up to be formed by
it, are daily created (by the Operation of it) anew, into an holy, heavenly,
innocent, living, tender, righteous Frame Day by Day; and are made willing,
daily more and more to be the Lord's, in this Day of his Power; and do receive
Power to become Sons, and strength against their Souls Enemies: And the
glorious work of Redemption, which God has begun in them, the Arm of his
strength mightily carries on in them, to their Comfort, and his everlasting
Praise. There is a spiritual Egypt and Sodom, as well as there was an outward;
and there is a spiritual Wilderness, and Canaan also And the Arm of God's Power
inwardly and spiritually has been revealed in this spiritual Egypt, Wilderness
and Canaan, as really as ever it was in the outward. Do ye not read of a
Jew-inward, and a Circumcision-inward, and the leaven-inward, and keeping the
Feast of Unleavened Bread, even of Bread that is not leavened with sin? And he
that eats of this unleavened Bread, it unleavens him of sin, and leavens him
with Life and Holiness: For it is an holy Bread, and a living Bread. This is
the Bread which comes down from Heaven, which they that feed upon live, and
they that live feed upon. And though they be many, yet feeding upon this Bread,
they become come one Bread one living Body. consisting of a living Head, and
living Members; for the same life and pure heavenly nature, which is in the
head, is communicated by him to the members.

But how shall we find this, may some say?

I will tell you how we found it, and here none can miss of it, that sweep the
House and make a diligent and faithful search after it. That in the heart of
man, which turns against sin, discovers sin, draws from sin, wherein God
ministers help against sin, that is it. That is the Pearl hid, that is the
Kingdom hid, in that is the Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith,
in all that receive and give up to this holy leaven. This is of the Nature of
God and Christ, this is a measure of his Light, of his pure life, this is the
law and commandment everlasting, which God writes in the hearts of the
spiritual Israel, For the inward Jew has inward tables, where the inward law
is w^it, for the inward eye to read. O how nigh is God inwardly, to the inward
people, in this our day! O the pure glory is broke forth! But, alas, men are in
their several sorts of Dreams, and take no notice of it. What shall the Lord do
to awaken this Nation? In what way shall his Power appear, to bring down
Unrighteousness, and to bring up Righteousness in the Spirits of People? Do ye
not think the Lord has been at work, and is still at work? How could Deceit be
so wasted inwardly, and Truth so grown inwardly, and overspread more and more,
and gain ground in the Nation, if the hand and Power of the Lord were not with
it, blessing it. O take notice of the handywork of the Lord, ye children of
men, and wait to feel Truth near, and to partake of the living Virtue and Power
of it; that ye may feel your Hearts creating anew, and the old Heavens and
Earth may inwardly pass away, wherein dwells Unrighteousness and the new
Heavens and the new Earth may be inwardly witnessed, wherein dwells
Righteousness. O that this Nation might become a Paradise of God! O that every
one might be sensible of his Presence, and Power, and Kingdom, and righteous
Government inwardly in the Heart, from the King that sits on the Throne, to the
Beggar on the Dunghill. Surely man was not made for himself! surely he was not
made such a Creature as now he is! but in the holy Image of God, with love in
his heart to God above all, and to his Neighbor as to himself. O what are the
Religions and Professions of several sorts, where this love is not found! The
Lord is restoring his Image, and bringing forth the true, pure Religion again.
The Pearl, the Truth contains and comprehends it. O buy the Pearl, O buy the
precious Truth: sell all that is contrary to it for it; take up the Cross to all
that is evil in thee, as the Light in thee makes it manifest, and thou shall
have the free Possession of it in thy heart, and feel it a root of Life, a
treasure of Life, a well of Life, out of which the living water will be daily
springing up in thee, unto Life everlasting, Amen.

The 22d of the 7th Mon. 1676.
Three Queries upon three verses of the 46th Psalm.
Verse 4. THere is a River, the Streams whereof shall make glad the City of
God; the holy Place of the Tabernacles of the most High.

Query 1. Which is the River, and what are the Streams thereof, which make glad
the City of God? And which is the City of God which they make glad? Which are
the Tabernacles of the most high, and which is the holy Place of those
Tabernacles? O my dear Countrymen, that every one in this Nation did
understand and enjoy these thing! For the Lord is ready to beget a Will, to
beget a Thirst in the hearts of the Children of Men: And whosoever thirsts,
whosoever will, is called to the Waters, and may come to the Waters, and take
of the Water of Life freely, ( Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17.) yea, to the full
satisfaction of their Souls. For indeed this is the Day of God's Power, wherein
he does make his people willing to come to him, and to abide with him the
Fountain of living Waters: And those that do come to him, and abide with him,
he abundantly satisfies with the Fatness of his House, and gives them to
drink of the River of his Pleasures, Psalm. 36.8, 9. Mark, God is the Fountain
of living Waters, with him is the Fountain of life, a River of Pleasures, a
River whose Streams make glad the whole City, even the holy Place of all the
Tabernacles of the most high: And he gives his Citizens to drink of it; and
whoever drinks of it, it makes them glad, it refreshes their life. O that
more knew what this means.

Ver. 5. God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help
her, and that right early, or when the Morning appears, or from the Morning
appearing.

Qu. 2. How is God in the midst of this City? (Is it not more gloriously, in an
inward way, then ever he was in the Temple in the outward Jerusalem, in an
outward way?) How is she built? How is she founded and situated? How comes it
about, that she shall not be moved? How is God her Refuge and Strength, and
present help in time of Trouble? After what manner does God arise inwardly and
scatter his Enemies? How does the Morning Light help her! after what manner,
when the Enemy comes in like a Flood, does the Spirit of the Lord lift up a
standard against him? Ah, blessed are they that know, and experience, and live
in the Enjoyment of these things. O that this whole Nation did so. Were it not
worth the suffering of much, the denying of much, and the bearing of much
Judgment to come to this?

Ver. 10. Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among (or in) the
Heathen: I will be exalted in the Earth.

Qu. 3. What is that Stilness, wherein God is known to be God; not outwardly in
notion, but inwardly in the heart? What is that Silence of Mind, wherein God
teaches his Israel in the new Covenant to know him as he is; even all of them,
from the greatest to the least? How will God come to be exalted in the Heathen,
and in the Earth? Is it not by the Light of his Day breaking forth and shining
in them? Where this Day breaks forth in any heart, does it not bteak down and
destroy the Kingdom of Darkness inwardly? And does not the King of glory
consume the man of sin, the wicked one that was exalted in the Temple before
(which Temple belonged of right to God) with the spirit of his mouth, and
destroy him with the Brightness of his coming, or appearing, Isa. 11.4. 2 These.
2.8. Then is the Day known, wherein the Lord alone is exalted. O that this Day
were more known, and the Lord, who is indeed worthy, were more exalted,
and all Flesh become his Footstool forever!

Concerning the true Church and Ministry under the Gospel, and the Maintenance
thereof, some few Questions answered in Truth and Plainness of Heart, and left
to the Witness and Testimony of God in other men's Consciences.
Question 1. WHich is the true Church, or the Gospel Church, or he Church,
according to the new Covenant? For ^here was an old Covenant, and a Church
according to that under the Law: And there ^s a new Covenant, and a Church
according to that under the Gospel.

Answ. For the clearing of this, to the hearts and Consciences of People, let
us enquire and consider what the new Covenant is, and then it will more easily
appear, which is the Church according to the new Covenant.

The new Covenant according to plain scripture, and according to manifest
experience, ^n this blessed Day of the shining of the Gospel Light in men's
heatts, is a Covenant o^ God's putting his Law in the inward parts o^ People,
and writing it in their hearts; and of his becoming their God, and making them
hi^ People, and of teaching them all to know him (inwardly and experimentally)
from the least to the greatest, and of being merciful to their unrighteousness,
and remembering their sins and iniquities no more, Jer. 31.33, 34* Heb. 8.10,
11, 12.

Now if this be the new Covenant, the Covenant of the Gospel Church, then they
are the Gospel Church, who are the People o^ God according to this Covenant;
who have the law put by God into their inward parts and writ in their hearts;
and so according to this law and covenant, have God to b^ their God, and are
his People, and are taugh^ by him to know him (as it is written, All the
Children shall be taught of the Lord, Isa. 54.13 and John 6 45.) and whose
unrighteousnes^ God has been merciful to, and whose sins and iniquities he
remembereth no more, being washed away from their Consciences by the Blood of
the everlasting Covenant, which the Blood of Bulls and Goats could never do. S^
that this is the new Testament-Church (o^ Gospel Church) a Church of Jews
inward a^ the Law-Church was a Church of Jews outward: A Church of inward
Worshippers, o^ Worshippers in Spirit and in Truth, John 4.23. as the
Law-Church was a Church of Worshippers outward: A Church of inward circumcised
ones, as the Law-Church was a Church of outwardly circumcised ones, Romans 2.29.
A Church of such as are inwardly holy, as the Law-Church was to be a Church of
such as were outwardly holy: A Church of such as offer inward Incense and
Sacrifices, as the Law-Church was a Church of such as offered outward Incense
and Sacrifices: A Church of inwardly redeemed ones, from the inward, Egypt,
from the inward Darkness and Power of Satan, as the Law-Church was a Church of
such as were redeemed from the outward Egypt, and the Power of Pharaoh
outvvard: A Church that has the inward Ark, ( Rev. 11.19.) the inward
Presence, the inward Manna, etc. as the outvvard Church of the Jews had the
outvvard.

Qu. 2. Which is the true Gospel Ministry, and who are the true
Gospel Ministers?

Answ. Those whom Christ sends forth, in the Spirit and Power of his Father,
to gather and build up this Church. Christ had all Power in Heaven and Earth
given him, even to ths very End, to gather, defend and build up his Church. And
he bid his Apostles vvait for the same Power, and sends forth his Ministers in
the same Power; that they may be able Ministers of the Gospel, which is not
Words but Power, even the Power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1.16. The new
Covenant stands is not in Letter, but in Spirit and Power and they that are
the Ministers of it, must receive Life, Spirit and Power from Christ (the
Head) and minister in that Spirit, Life and Power to the Members; or they
cannot nourish and build them up: Yea, they must preach and minister to the
World in it, or they are not able to gather out of the World into it. Christ
the Lord o^ his Church, the Foundation of Life in his Church, the everlasting
Rock, is a living Stone, and his Church is built of lively Stones: And how can
any minister Life unto them, or build them up in the Life, Spirit and Power;
but who a^e in the Life, Spirit and Power, and who receive Life, Spirit and
Power from the Head, to furthe, quicken and build up the living Members with?
The Milk, which nourishes the living Babe, is living, which must come pure
from the Breast of Life, and not be mixed with man's Wisdom or
Brain-inv^ntions, or it cannot yield pure Nourishment. What then must the
Bread and Wine, and Water of the Kingdom be, whereon the Children and Heirs
of the Kingdom must feed, or they cannot be satisfied? And the Ministers of the
Gospel are Stewards of this heavenly Life, this heavenly Spirit, this heavenly
Power, this heavenly Treasure, which they have in the earthen Vessels, and
which God enables them to bring forth, for the feeding of his Lambs and Sheep.
Christ said unto Peter, Love thou me more then these? Peter answered him, Yea
Lord, thou know that I love thee. If it be so, Feed my Lambs, feed my Sheep
said Christ to him. But how should he feed them? In what should he feed them?
With what should he feed them? All Power, says Christ, is given me in Heaven
and in Earth, and I am to ascend to my Father, and to receive the Fullness of
his Spirit; and do ye wait, and ye shall receive abundantly of the same spirit
and power, and then in that spirit and power ye shall be able to feed my Lambs
and Sheep, that are begotten and gathered to me in it: But out of it none is
able to feed and build them up; for that is the very thing they are to be fed
with, and built up in^ Indeed a man may be a Minister of the letter, a Minister
of the law, without the spirit and power, but of he Gospel he cannot possibly;
for that consists not in letter, but in spirit, 2 Cor. 3. And the Faith that is
to be begotten there, is not to stand in the Wisdom of man, but in the Power
of God. The Gospel-state, the Gospel Church, the Gospel-building begins in the
Power, and is carried on in the Power, and finished or perfected in the Power,
and the whole Ministry of the Gospel is to partake of this Power, and minister
in it, or they can do nothing in this work. Christ Jesus our Lord begun it in
this Power, and none can carry it on without this Power. The Lord God of Glory
laid the foundation; Behold I lay in Zion for a Foundation, etc. Isa. 28.16. 1
Pet. 2.4, 5, 6. And the quickening spirit alone is able to make living stones,
and spiritual stones; and the Lord alone is able to build them up, by the
operation of this spirit and power; and they that are the true Ministers of the
Gospel, minister in this: and are to wait for it daily from God, that they may
minister in it.

Qu. 3. What is the Maintenance of the Ministers of Christ, or what is to be
the Maintenance of the true Ministers under the Gospel?

Answ. Christ, who has sent them forth to minister in his Name, has provided
for them; and they that are his true Ministers, are satisfied with what he has
provided for them, Mat. 10.10. being careful not to make the Gospel, which is
to be an inward Blessing, outwardly chargeable to any. The Mind of the true
Ministers is about the Service of Christ, how they may be faithful to him,
gather souls to him, feed them with the Bread of life from him; not what they
shall have from men, for so doing; for such covet no man's Gold or Silver, etc.

Some Question answered concerning the Lambs War.
Question 1 WHO is the Lamb?

Answ. H^ that takes away the sins of the world. The Word which was in the
Beginning Behold the Lamb of God, said John, John 1.1. and ver. 29. He that was
born of the Virgin Mary after the Flesh; and was also the Man-child, born of
^he travelling-church, after the Spirit. Rev. 12.5.

Qu. 2. Who makes War with the Lamb?

Answ All that are in Wickedness, in Darkness, in Sin and Corruption, and under
the Power thereof, who strive to defend and maintain this Kingdom against the
appearance of his light, spirit and power in them.

Qu. 3. What strength have they on their side, that make War against the Lamb?

Answ. The strength of the great red Dragon, who has seven Heads and ten
Horns: and in every one of his Heads is Wisdom, and in every one of his Horns
there is Power. So that dreadful is the Battle that is fought between them,
either inwardly in the Heart, or outwardly in the World, when Christ appears
in his light, spirit and power to assault and break down the Kingdom of
Darkness, and to set up his own Kingdom, which must be set up, even in the
World, Dan. 7.14.27. Rev. 11, 15.

Qu. 4 Did the great red Dragon and his Army, never (in no respect) prevail in
this Battle?

Answ. Yes; for even while the Lamb, and his pure life and holy Testimony have
prevailed, so that the Dragon and his Army could get no ground over them
inwardly; but salvation (the wall and bulwark of God's Heritage) and strength,
and the Kindom of God, and the Power of his Christ did prevail inwardly; yet
the Dragon, even then has prevailed over their goods, liberties and lives
outwardly: and he drove the Woman, the true Church out of her Place, as I may
say, that she was forced to fly into the Wilderness, he so sorely assaulting
her: Yea, after that also, he made War with the Remnant of her seed, and cast
some of them into Prison, and drunk the Blood of those that would not drink his
false Church's Cup, but keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of
Jesus, Rev. 12. and chap. 2.10. yea the Beast, to which he gave his Power
(which had seven Heads and ten Horns like him, chap. 13.1.) made War with the
saints, and over came them outwardly, though he could not overcome them
inwardly; for he could not make them to worship him, ver. 7, 8. Nay, nor the
second Beast neither, though he had Horns like a Lamb, and spoke like a Dragon,
and exercised all the power of the first Beast, and did great wonders, and had
power to give Life unto the Image of the former Beast, and would kill all that
would not worship the Image of the Beast; and would suffer none to buy or sell,
but such as had the Mark or Name of the Beast: Yet neither could this Beast
overcome the Followers of the Lamb, as to their inward Life and Testimony,
though it had power to kill and suppress them outwardly, ver. 11. to the end,
and chap. 14.9. to ver. 13. which plainly shows the saints had patience, and
kept the Commandments of God and the Faith of Jesus, and would not worship the
Beast and his Image, nor receive his Mark, either in Forehead or Hand.

Qu. 5. What was the Cry up and down Nations, when the Dragon and the Beast
thus prevailed, and when the false Church carried her Cup of Fornications up
and down through Kingdoms and Nations, and made the Kings and Inhabitants of
the Earth drink thereof; and who would not drink thereof she would not let them
buy nor sell, but impoverish, imprison them, and drink their Blood? Rev. 17.2.
and 6.

Answ. The Cry every where was, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make
War with the Beast? Indeed, there appeared no Power any where, able to
withstand or resist this power, which the Dragon had, who gave it both to the
Beast which arose out of the Sea, and to the Beast which arose out of the
Earth; both which joined together, to persecute all that would not drink of the
false Church its Cup, which was Golden without, but full of Abomination, and
Filthiness of Fornication (fornicating from the holy Life, Spirit and Power of
the Lamb inwardly who is the Head of the true Church, and true Worshippers,
Rev. 13.4. and chap. 17.4 5.

Qu. 6. What is the time of the Dragon's, the Beast's and false Church thus
Prevailing against the true Church, in reference to the outward, though they
cannot prevail against its inward Life and Testimony; but that (through
Patience and Suffering^) prevails over and reigns inwardly, in the midst of all
their Cruelty and oppressing of the outward Man?

Answ. It is the time of Antichrist's reign, and sitting in the Temple as if he
were God, and exalting himself over all that is called God, and which ought to
be worshipped. It is the time of the true Church its being in the Wilderness,
and of the Man-child's (which the true Church brought forth) being caught up to
God, which things were to last, according to Scripture account, 1260. days, or
a Time, Times and half a Time, 2 These. 2.3.4. Rev. 12.6.14.

Qu. 7. What will the Lamb do, when this time is out?

Answ. He will come and make War again, he will come with his heavenly Armies,
armed with spiritual Armor, and fight an heavenly Battle; yea, he will judge
and make War in Righteousness, against the Unrighteousness of the Dragon, and
the Beast, and the false prophet; and his heavenly Armies shall follow him
their Captain and Leader, on white Horses, clothed in fine linen, white and
clean; who shall fight in his spirit and power, against all that he fights
against: And out of his Mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite
the Nations; and he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, and make the spirits of
all his Opposers bow under him, and fly to shelter themselves from that Wrath
which they cannot escape* O who would not kiss the Son, that he might not
provoke the Lamb to Wrath against him, whose Wrath is dreadful! Rev. 19.11.
to the end, Psalm 2.11.

Qu^ 8. What shall the Cry be, when God's Spirit and Power prevails over the
Dragon's Spirit and and Power, when the Lamb gets the Victory, when he smites
the Earth with the Rod of his Mouth, and with the Breath of his Lips shall slay
the Wicked; when he brings down the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet, and the
false Church Mother of Harlots (which has drunk the Blood of his Saints) with
his Vials, Plagues, Woes, Thunders, etc? When Babylon the great City falls,
which made all Nations drunk with her spiritual Wine of Fornication?

Answ. Then the Power, which does this, shall be magnified. Then it shall be
said no more, who can make War with the Beast? but who can withstand this
Power? Who can make War with the Innocent, Righteous Lamb (who has his sword
in his Mouth) and with his tenderhearted, faithful Followers, and prosper? Who
shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorify thy Name: For all Nations shall come
and worship before thee; for thy Judgments are made manifest. Great and
Marvelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty, Just and True are thy Ways, thou
King of Saints, Rev. 15.3, 4. Yea, a great Voice of much People in Heaven shall
say, Allelujah, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our
God: for True and Righteous are his Judgments* for he has judged the great
Whore, which did corrupt the Earth with her Fornication, and has avenged the
Blood of his Servants at her, Hand, chap. 19. ver. 1.2.

Now does it not concern all people to consider, which is Zion God's holy
Mountain, and which is the Jerusalem of his building, the holy City of God, the
holy Church of God, the Mother of all the truly living Children; for the
Jerusalem which is above and which is free, is the Mother of them all, Gal.
4.26. And also which is Babylon, the City built by man, and the Spirit of
Antichrist, in a kind of likeness, but not in the real nature of the true
Church, that they may wait for and follow God's Call to come out of her, and
may not partake of her sins, of her sorceries ( Rev. 18.22.) of her Fornication
from the pure Life, Spirit and Power, and seting up Worships, and compelling
people to worship in her forms (which are out of the Life, and out of the
Power) that they partake not of her plagues; which will indeed be very
dreadful, such as shall affright any from coming near her, or meddling with her
spiritual sorceries and fornications any more, Rev. 18.4. and ver. 9, 10. O
therefore let every one consider what the Beast is, what his Image, what the
Mark in the Forehead what in the right Hand; and take heed he be not found
worshipping the Beast and his Image, or receiving his Mark, either in his
Forehead or right hand; lest God make him to drink of the Wine of his Wrath,
which is poured out without Mixture, into the Cup of his Indignation, and he be
tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the Presence of the holy Angels, and in
the Presence of the Lamb, and have no rest Day nor Night, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. I
had rather run great hazards outwardly, and suffer much Affliction and
Persecution from Men, to keep my Soul true to God; in the spiritual Worship and
Testimony, which he has given me, against all false Ways and invented
Worships, then expose my Soul to the hazard of drinking of this dreadful Cup of
God's Indignation, which the Lord God of tender Mercies, teach men and give
them true Wisdom to avoid and escape, Amen.

THE CONCLUSION.
BEhold my Servant shall deal prudently he shall be exalted and extolled, and
be very high. As many were astonished at thee; (his Visage was so marred more
then any man, and his Form more then the Sons of Men) so shall he sprinkle many
Nations; the Kings shall shut their mouths at him: For that which had not been
told them, shall they see; and that which they had not heard, shall they
consider, Isa. 52.13, 14, 15*

Thou art fairer then the Children of Men: Grace is poured into thy Lips;
therefore God has blessed thee forever. Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most
mighty; with thy Glory and thy Majesty. And in thy Majesty ride prosperously
because of Truth, and Meekness, and Righteousness, and thy Right Hand shall
teach thee terrible things. Thine Arrows are sharp in the Hearts of the King's
Enemies, whereby the People shall fall under thee. Thy Throne O God is forever
and ever: The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter. Thou love
Righteousness and hate Wickedness, therefore God, thy God hoth anointed thee
with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows, Psalm 45. ver. 2. to 8.

Strengthen ye the weak Hands, and confirm the feeble Knees: Say to them that
are of a fearful Heart, be strong, fear not; Behold, your God will come with
Vengeance, even God with a Recompense, he will come and save you. Then the Eyes
of the blind shall be opened, and the Ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. Then
shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the Tongue of the dumb sing; For in the
Wilderness shall Waters break out, and streams in the Desert. And the parched
Ground shall become a Pool, and the thirsty Land Springs of Water: In the
Habitation of Dragons, where each lay, shall be Grass with Reeds and Rushes.
And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of
Holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for those: the
wayfaring men though Fools, shall not err therein. No Lion shall be there, nor
any ravenous Beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there: But the
redeemed shall walk there. And the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come
to Zion with Songs, and everlasting Joy upon their Heads: They shall obtain Joy
and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee away, Isa. 35. ver. 3. to the
end.

Blessed be the Lord God of Life forever, ^hese Scriptures and many more, are
sweet^y and preciously fulfilled in the hearts of a Remnant, in this our Day.
They were once *in a degree) fulfilled, in the Day of the Ap^earance of the
word of Life, in the prepa^ed Body of Flesh. They were again mo^e ge^erally
fulfilled, in the Day of the pouring ^ut of his Spirit, and gathering a people
to ^im, both from among the Jews and Gentiles. whom he did sprinkle with his
holy Life, Spirit and Power. And they are again fulfilled ^n the hearts of
many, after the long Night of Darkness, and great and large Apostasy from ^he
Spirit and Power of the Apostles. Blessed, O blessed be the Lord, the Sun of
Righ^eousness has again shone forth, and appeared inwardly in a glorious,
living, powerful manner, to them that have feared his Name; and he has been a
God of Vengeance to the Man of Sin, yea, to all that was dark, fleshly and
corrupt in them; and a God of Mercy and tender Bowels, to those which pan^^^
after and waited for his Salvation: And the healing Virtue, from under the
VVings of the Savior, and the holy Anointing has dropped upon the Eyes of the
blind the pu^e Eye Salve, and they have been opened; and the Ears of the deaf,
by the Voice of the Son of God, have been unstopped; and the inwardly and
spiriually lame have leaped as an Heart; and the Tongue, which could not name
God in Truth and Righteousness, but has been dumb before him, and before men
also, could not but sing, because of the breaking forth of the Waters and
Streams of Life upon the thirsty land and parched ground, making them a pool
and springs of water: Which land, which thus is changed from its wilderness
and parched state, into an holy, fresh and living state, the Dragons do not
lodge in, nor is it any more an Habitation or Cage for unclean and noisome Birds
(as great professing- Babylon the Mother of Harlots, with all her fleshly,
professing-Daughters is) but Life dwells there; the holy one is in the midst of
this land, and it brings forth the fruits of Life and Righteousness, to the
righteous and holy one. And here the King of Glory's Highway, even the way of
Holiness is known; which none, but those whom he makes holy can walk in. Let
men profess what they will, yet being unclean in Heart and Coversation, they
cannot pass over to come into this Way; but the holy, they which are made holy
by God, and keep to, live in, and follow that which is holy, though way faring
men, and though otherwise Fools; yet they shall not err here, but be preserved
by the holy Power, in the holy way, which is prepared and cast up for these.
And as for that which would tear and destroy, it shall not be found on all that
holy Mountain, where these live and feed. Yea, here is the House of God, and
Throne of God, and God the Judge of all, and Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, and the Blood of sprinkling, where the ransomed of the Lord enjoy the
Presence of the Bridegroom, whom God has set King, and who reigns on his holy
Hill of inward and spiritual Zion, and causes them to sing, who feel him reign
(even the everlasting Seed of Life to reign inwardly in the Heart) Oh,
everlasting Joy is upon their Heads; they have obtained Joy and Gladness, and
Sorrow and Sighing flees away, when the Joy unspeakable and full of Glory is
felt springing in the Heart, from the Sense of the Presence and Enjoyment of
the Bridegroom; for of a Truth, the Lord has comforted Zion, yea, he has
comforted many of her waste places (he was angry with her Daughters, before
their filth was purged away by the Spirit ^udgment and Burning, since that time
his Anger has been turned away, and he has comforted them, Isa. 12.1. etc.)
and he has made her Wilderness, in many hear^s, like Eden, and her Desert like
the Garden of the Lord (even like the Garden that he waters) and how can Joy
and Gladness but be found here, with Thanksgiving and the Voice of Melody? Isa.
58.11. and chap. 51.3. Thus it is with such of the gathered People and Nation
of the Lord, that hearken and give ear to him, and have known the Law of Life
to proceed out of his Mouth, and his Judgment to rest for a Light, ver. 4.

THE END.
THE CONTENTS.
First, A Preface concerning God's visiting and appearing to his distressed
People in this and other Nations. II. Somewhat in the Love of God to the Jews
Natural, p. 1. III. Somewhat in the same Love to the Jews Spiritual, p. 16. IV.
A few Words to England my Native Country, p. 31. V. Three Queries on three
Verses of Psalm 46. p. 36. VI. Some Questions answered concerning the true
Church, Ministry and Maintenance, under the Gospel, p. 39. VII. Some Questions
answered touching the Lamb's War. p. 45. VIII. The Conclusion, containing some
precious Scriptures concerning Christ's inward Appearance, and his powerful
Working against his Enemies, and in and for his People, with some few Words
added thereupon.

