A JUST REBUKE TO One and Twenty Learned and Reverend DIVINES (So called) Being
an Answer to an Abusive Epistle against the People called Quakers, subscribed
by Thomas Manton, Thomas Jacomb, John Yates, John Sheff^eld, Anthony Palmer,
Thomas Cole, Thomas Doelittel, Richard Baxter, William Cooper, George Griffith,
Matthew Barker, John Singleton, Andrew Parsons, Richard Mayo, Thomas Gouge,
William Jenky^, Thomas Watson, Benjamin Needler, William Carslake, Stephen
Ford, Samuel Smith,


By William Penn.

Quid enim iniquius, quam ut oderint homines quod ignorant, etiam si res
meretur odium,

Tertul. Apologet. -- The Lord, frustrateth the Tokens of the Stars, and makes
Diviners mad, that turns wise Men backward, and makes their Knowledge
foolish,

Isa. 44.24, 2^. Printed in the Year 1674.

A JUST REBUKE TO One and Twenty Divines, (So called) etc.
THe CAUSE of the GOD of TRVTH has rarely wanted the Endeavors of men of
greatest Power and Literature in almost every Age to slander it, nor the
constant Adherers to it, contumelious Treatment for their Integrity: No Virtue
has been so Conspicuous, no Quality so Great, no Relation so Near, as to
protect them from the Fury of blind Tradition and prejudiced Education. But as
this ought not to discourage any that pursues so Good and Heavenly an
Interest, especially, when the Invincible Faith, Patience and Hope of those
Holy Ancients that so heartily espoused it, stand before us as so many bright
Examples and Encouragements; so neither have the many and great Attempts of Men
of diverse, yea opposite Interests, to render us Unfit for the Earth, and (what
in them lies) to invalidate our Claim to Heaven, abated one Grain of our Love
to, Confidence in and Zeal for that worthy Cause: And Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Essays have been Insuccessful, their
Designs frustrated, and not one of their Weapons formed against our Sion has
yet prospered; But -- Crescit sub pondere Virtus. These very Sufferings God
has turned to our Enlargement, daily rewarding our Tribulations with Patience,
and our Conflicts with Joy in the Holy Ghost; fulfilling to us that comfortable
Saying of the Apostle, All things shall work together for good to them that
love him. Having this Encouragem^nt from God, what Injury soever we sustain
from Men, well may we say with that Kingly Prophet, Whom should we fear? Of
whom should we be afraid?

With that Godly Resolution, which becomes the Justness of my Cause, I enter
upon my present Work, and first of the Occasion.

We have been long threatened with a Report of the joynt-Endeavours of many
Minist^rs, which raised several into an Expectation of some notable Piece, some
grave and moderate Disquisition of what had been as frivolously as foully
managed by our other petulant Adversari^s, that the Controversy so long
depending, might terminate with some Advantage to such as had made any sober
Enquiry after it; but we had no sooner received and looked into the Book, then
we saw our selves under a very great Di^appointment; for instead of some New
Essay, behold! an Old Discourse new vampt, or a new Impression of a Book twice
largely considered, and some think, effectually Answered, I mean, John Faldo's
Quak^rism no Christianity, but now recommended, as the Title Page tells us, by
the Epistles of many Learned, and Worthy Divines.

But since it has pleased so many Persons under that Character, to fall in
with his Di^course against us, to Commend it so highly, Recommend it so
earn^stly, and bestow so liberal an Elogie on him that wrote it, I think I may
without any the least Injustice, look upon them as Authors of th^s Impression,
and consequently (by espousing his Endeavors) R^sp^nsible to the People called
Quakers, for all those Miscarriages therein rightly chargable by them upon him:
And I no ways doubt, through God's Assistance to evidence their Concern in
this Affair to carry with it an utter Inconsistency with that Superbe Title
they have either given themselves, or the Author or Book s^ller conferred upon
them for the good turn of their so seasonable Epistle, viz. LEARNED, REVEREND
and WORTHY DIVINES; Words that make a fine Jingle, and please and blow up Vain
People at a strange rate.

The first Paragraph of their Epistle is a great Truth, both worthy of the
Minds of good Men, and necessary to be considered at any's Entrance into the
Judgment of another's Cause; It runs thus:

One and Twenty Divines. That, as God is the Wise Distinguisher of Good and
Evil; and so loves the Good in any, as not to abate his Hatred of their Evil;
and so hates the Evil, as to love all that is Good; So is it no small part of
the Wisdom and Integrity of his Servants to Imitate him herein; and not like
Men blinded by Partiality, to just^fie all in those whom they like, and Vilify
all in those they d^slike, etc.


W.P. One would think by this that you had Imitated God in your Conduct toward
the Quakers; and doubtless you writ it, that those that read it should think
so: but why? I know not; unless because you looking upon your selves his
Servants, such ought to do so or else to give greater Credit to your Work then
your selves perhaps believe it deserves: But let us hear what Use you the great
Men of Uses, make of this Introduction; I find it in the next Paragraph in
these Words.


One and Twenty Divines. This Justice we must and will observe toward this
People, called, Quakers, -- The Fear of God and Love of Truth forbids us to
render them Worse or Better then they are.


W.P. Better! there is little Fear you will: You may turn Pelagian in the Case,
and exclude all Divine Assistance; for I hope none are so ignorant in this Age,
as to think that Men of your Stamp need special Grace to keep you from the Sin
of rendering the poor Quakers Better then they are: How much Worse will be the
Question? I confess, you say fair; but what if you break your Word with us?
Must not your Censure of us fall upon your own Heads? And will it not be
reasonable for us to interpret your Use of so true an Expression to be a Trick
to decoy People into a Belief, that you had taken right Measures of us, whilst
you have really dealt most unjustly with us.

Let me a little expostulate with you in this Matter. You have either read or
not read the Book ye recommend: If you have not read it, certainly you have
done very Ill to recommend it, since you know not what you recommend; which is
not to Imitate God, or do the Quakers Justice: If you have read it, you
manifestly entitle your selves to all the Evils of it. Again, since the
Strength of the Book depends upon Testimonies out of our Writings: either you
have compared his Citations with the Books themselves, or ye have not; if you
have not (and I am apt to think that is your Case) you commend him, and condemn
us by rote: If you have compared and considered them, you must needs have
offered great Violence to your Understandings in giving your Approbation, which
anon we shall so undeniably evidence, as it would have been comparatively your
Virtue, to have recommended the Book without reading it or examining the
Citations.

Besides, the most of what he charge upon us to be our Principles, are not so
laid down by any one of us, nor, say we, sayable by any of us upon our real
Principles; but are such Consequences as he through Ignorance or Malice has
indirectly drawn from our Words: For Instance, That there is no other Judgment,
Heaven or H^ll, then what is within us in this Life; Which is so far from being
our Principle in Our Words, that it is as inconsistent with the Truth of our
Creed, as Darkness is with Light: Charge this upon him, and he will tell you, I
doubt not, That this is not the Quakers Faith in terminis, but the Consequence
of it; but then it is to be observed, that he must have the making of it. I
would fain know of you, if you would be so treated with the Respect to the
Articles of your own Creed? Would you esteem it just in me, to give my
Consequence for your Principle, supposing I thought it a true Consequence,
especially if you reject it? For Example; You are most, if not all of you,
strict Calvinists in the Point of Election and Reprobation; would you take it
for a candid Representation of your Judgment, that I should proclaim it to the
World, T. Manton, T. Jac^mb, etc. believe, That God is the Author of Sin; That
God's Secret Will crosses his Revealed Will; That no Man is obliged by the
Laws either of God or men; That Men are not the Cause of their own Destruction;
That there are neither Rewards nor Punishments, etc. because perhaps I believe
those Consequences to be deducible from the Calvinistical Principle? I am
persuaded you would look upon me as an Injurious Person in so doing; yet this
has been the Practice of your Reverend Author J. Faldo: and which is le^s to
your Credit, you have notwithstanding commended him in it, which, how well it
suits with On^ and Twenty Learned and Reverend Divines, I leave to their
Judgment who understand what Persons of such a Character ought to do and be.
But I hope you do not think this to be Imitating of God; if you do, your Case
is desperate.

But ^ad your Carriage been less blamable in these Particulars, it had not only
been your Discretion, but Duty, to have enquired if ever any thing had been
writ in Answer to this Discourse you recommend, by any of that People that it
was writ against; if there had, to have procured and perused it, before you had
so freely spent your peremptory Judgment against us.

You generally fling Infallibility at us, though it be about Matters of highest
Importance to Salvation, as if it were a Capital Sin to be assured of what a
Christian ought not to make a Doubt of, and yet nothing below asscribing such
an Infallibility to your Reverend Author, can excuse you in not examining him
by our Discourses, before you conferred so kind ^n Epistle upon his Book: I ask
you, if the like Practice would please you in your own Ca^e? you have proved,
it does in ours, which makes not for your Honor: Some of you are Writers your
selves, and thereby have ascended to no small Degree of Fame for some thing or
other; tell me honestly if you would think it a Piece of Justice in any Class
of Men to recommend a Book most abusive of your Religion to the World, for an
Ingenious Essay, an Exact Account of your Belief, a Tract that in Matter, Proof
and Style (your own Words) merits the Notice of all such as desire an
Information concerning your Principles of Religion, whilst you both disown the
Principles of Religion it calls yours, and in Two large Answers have detected
him of several hundred Miscarriages against your Persons and Principles? I am
persuaded you will provide better for your selves. But if you must needs be so
liberal, me thinks your Recommendation had been better bestowed upon his
Vindication, since his writing That, proves, This wanted it; and if it wanted
it then, it wants it still, and yet it seems the Book Vindicated must be the
Defense of the Vindication, and all the Return I am like to have to my
Rejoinder, bating The Epistle of many L^arned, Reverend and Worthy Divines, in
Praise of such a Book, and ^uch an Author: May none of you, at least in this
Temper, be Inquisitors when I am to be examined for my Religion!

I shall now fall more closely to the Matter of your Epistle.


One and Twenty Divines. The Quakers preach another Gospel, and endeavor to
seduce well-meaning Souls, to whom they speak in unintelligible Words, and from
whom they hide the Poison of their Antifundamental Doctrines.


W.P. Here is a great deal in a little, and very sowerly said: Were it as True
as it is False, the Day were yours.

You say, We preach another Gospel: You do but Say it, and I thank God, You can
Do no more. But does it become One and Twenty Learned and Reverend Divines, to
give so general and black a Charge, without making any the least Offer to Prove
it? Is not this to Calumniate rather then to ^onfute us? If you say, your
Reverend Author, John Faldo, has done it for you, I must tell you, that he is
an Irreverent Abuser of God, the Christian Religion and the Quakers; and which
is more to my Contentment, whatever it be to his and yours, Some, and No
Quakers too, think, I have proved him such. And let me ask you, If it be
Another Gospel, To own Remission and Eternal Salvation by the Son of God, both
as he appeared above 1600 Years ago in the Flesh, and as he reveals himself
within in Power and Spirit? What is the Gospel or Glad Tidings, but Deliverance
from Sin here, and Wrath to come? And what can effect this, but the Powerful
Grace of God that brings Salvation, which is dispensed by Him to all men, who
is full of Grace and Truth?

For the other part of your Accusation, That we should Say one thing and Mean
another; It is by Consequence, to call us the worst sort of Knaves, by how much
a Deception in matters of Eternal Moment, is more impious then any Cozennage
about things of this Life; and yet you would be thought Charitable Men, and
say, We want it: Is this the Way to supply us? But I would willingly know of
you, By what Skill you arrive at the Knowledge of our Hearts? Inspiration is
one part of our Heresy, if your Reverend Author is to be credited: The
Scripture can not be your Rule in the Point; for that nowhere says, The
Quakers Say one thing and Mean another: and if you measure us by our Words, you
must grant, that either you do not understand us, or we mean very Good Things;
for you elsewhere say, That our obnoxious Tenets we usually mask under
Expressions Doubtful, Unintelligible or under Scripture and Orthodox Phrases:
If Doubtful, your Consequences can not be Certain; If Unintelligible, you infer
that which you do not know; If Scriptural and Orthodox, you must either tell
us, how you come to know our Meanings to be Contradictory to our Phrases, and
prove them such, or you must acknowledge that we stand upon Equal Terms with
your selves; I do not say, upon no better, for as great Infidels as you would
have us to be, we have both Discretion and Religion enough, not to write such
Abusive and Contradictory Things, as so fluently drop from the pens of One and
Twenty Learned and Reverend Divines. But your Incharity far exceeds your
Indiscretion; You make us to know Poison, and to hide Poison, giving for
Antidotes, Destructives to the Souls of Men and Women. I would fain know, why
the Conscience of a Quaker should not be as good as the Conscience of a
Presbyterian or an Independent? what Mischiefs have we made our selves Authors
of to the World, that it should not be as valid every Jot? Have we no Souls to
be saved? Is there no Desire in us that they may be saved? No Honesty? No
Con^cience? No Fear of God? All animated to such Evil Purposes, as the Wilful
Damning of our selves, and the Proselyting others into Eternal Misery; and
rather then not compass such an End, expose our selves to all sort of
Sufferings in this World? Oh bitter Invective! God, the Searcher of Hearts,
will require this Injustice at your hands: You have unworthily traduced the
Reputation of those who dare meet with you upon a public Test, to prove their
Integrity to God and Men. Why will you give such occasion to remind you of Old
Stories? But of that anon. Had you judged us Ignoramus's, you had been kind to
the Cruelty of making us designed Murderers to our own and other men's Souls:
God forgive you: But this I must tell you, that it is not We, That say one
thing and think another; but You, and such as you are, that make us think
another thing then what we say, and then entitle us to your own Inventions. I
must further tell you, We make it not our Business, as you falsely insinuate, to
decoy People into antifundamental Principles: for besides that we know none to
be such that we hold, we make not our Religion to stand in a Belief of so many
verbal Articles; but a Conformity of Soul to the Grace of God. It is a great
part of our Work, to dehort People from curious Enquiry after Notions and
Opinions, be they never so true in themselves; knowing how much more beneficial
it is to Men, and well-pleasing to God, to have an Honest Heart, then a Full
Head: DOING is degenerated into TALKING, and the LIFE of Religion into
Contention about the NOTION of it; Such Christians will not stand in God's Day:
Besides, many of those, who are otherwise remote enough from saying any thing
in favor of the Quakers, do frequently acknowledge, that They generally preach
and press Good Living. It is our Desire to bring men into a Sense of God's
Grace in their own Hearts, and to know the effectual Operatio^s of it, to the
Renewing of their Mind to God; And That Divine Assistance within, and right Use
of the holy Scriptures without, are enough to inform them of what is fit to be
believed. And though you would have People think very severe things of us, with
respect to the Scriptures of Truth, by telling them, the Quakers hold, That the
Scriptures are not the Word of God, nor a Rule of Faith and Pract^c^, yea, that
we readily assert it in so many words: I must tell you, you have acted with us
herein far from men of common Ingenuity; A man might, at this rate by Scripture
prove, There is no God, if he would but leave out, The Fool has said in his
Heart. We deny the Scriptures in that sense wherein you deny them to be the
Word of God, that is to say, The Word that was in the beginning with God, and
was God, which you call the Ess^ntial Word; and, because we find in no place
that it calls it self The Word of God, we rather choose to say, The Scriptures
given forth by Inspiration, are the Words of God. The like Abuse you put upon
us about denying them to be a Rule of Faith and Practice: you leave what makes
for us behind, that you may make your Advantage of what you take; That the
Scripture is not a Rule in all things therein expressed, you your selves consess,
respecting the Dispensation of the Jews, and other things; and that there may
be somethings wherein the Scriptures cannot be a Rule, I presume you will not
deny: and that they are not a Rule in any Case, the import of your Charge, we
utterly deny; for we believe and know they contain many godly Rules: I shall
place this to the rest of your Account of Calumnies, and so proceed.


One and Twenty Divines. Though the Reverend Author has showed you how much
infidelity is among them, and how many of the very Essentials of Christianity
their Leaders contradict, and how consequently they are indeed no Christians;
yet it is not his purpose (as he plainly premiseth) to fix this sad Character
upon all those who pass under the Name of Quakers -- There are diverse of them,
who are honest and well-meaning Persons. --


W.P. Methinks you are got into a very kind mood, of a sudden, but it holds not
a whole page; for you tell us soon after, That the whole Body of this People
seems to be judicially deserted of God: If so, then no more Christians then
their Leaders, as you are pleased to call them; neither Honest nor
Well-meaning, unless God judicially d^serts honest and well-meaning People. In
the next page you call them Wasps of Satan's H^ving, who have Hives, but no
Honey, or sweetness of Spirit, except for themselves. The less we have, the
more you have* And would not one think you all Honey by your Writings? How can
you expect that we should have any to spare, whom you make to have so little,
if any at all? And what need is there of giving to them that think they have so
much already? The Truth is, we are Wasps, and you are Bees by one and the same
Figure: We know that you have always a good Name for your selves, and have long
loved the Honey-Pot; But where did you get it? Did you gather it? No such
mat^er. Of who then? Of the People, no doubt; they Toil, and you Talk; they are
the Bees, and you so many cunning Hivers, at the Tinkling of whose Bells the
silly Bees assemble, and when you have safely Hived them, your next Business is
to take their Honey from them. Howbeit, if we are Wasps, then not Bees, by
which I suppose you intend Christians; if so, your Charity is at an end, and
those you Christian'd with J. Faldo just now, you do here manifestly
Unchristian; unless Wasps be Christians, and that Christians, while such, may
be judicially deserted of God, and hived by the Devil. Methinks such
Contradiction becomes not Men of your Style and Pretenses.

But tell me, why are we judicially deserted of God? Is it not because we have
judiciously deserted you? And don't you therefore say we are hived by the
Devil, because we will not let you hive us? speak Truth Fain would you have it
(according to the old Proverb) as your Bell tinketh, the poor Quaker thinks.
But blessed be God, his Grace has made us wiser then such Teachers; we know the
Heavenly Voice of our spiritual Shepherd, and can no more suffer our selves to
be carried away with a Worldly Ministry; and that I aver to be such, which is
not founded upon the Revelations and internal Motions of God's Holy Spirit, a
Principle you do, in the Person of your Reverend Author J. Faldo, not only
deny, but deride, who is so far from showing any Infidelity amongst us, that
his Book is but a Proof of his own Injustice; and not that our Principles, but
his corrupt Consequences contradict the Essentials of Christianity. This is an
Inadvertency in you that well deserves, as my Reproof, so your Repentance. But
to your next Passage.


One and Twenty Divines. And the Truth is (excepting some Juggling Socinianiz'd
Persons or Papists that assume their Name) there are few of them who are Men of
so much Understanding and Consistent Principles, as to be Able and Willing to
give a Methodical and Intelligible Account what they themselves or their Party
hold.


W.P. A quick Way to do a Quakers Business at once: He must either be an
Ignoramus, a Socinian, or a Papist, choose him whether; if an Ignoramus, he is
laughed at; if a Socinian or Papist, he is hated. Does this flow from the
Beeishness of your Nature, Juggling Socinians, Papists or Ignoramus's? These
Expressions do not quadrate with the Titles of L^arned and Reverend Divines.
What is it but to tell us, you resolve to render the Quakers odious, and if
they have nothing of themselves, you will adapt any thing that is hateful of
other Persuasions into theirs, that you may bring them into Suspicion and
Abhorrence with your People: However, you are so constant to contradict your
selves, that you grant to some of us both an Ability and Willingness, to render
a Methodical and an Intelligible Account of what we and our Friends believe,
after having rated us for designed Obscurities and affected Vnintelligibleness.
But that I may not leave you so, let me tell you, first, that both Socinians
and Papists have written, and that with Severity against us; next, The Labors
of no Adversary has had more grateful Acceptance in the Thoughts of your
Reverend Author J. Faldo, then a noted Socinian, of whose Attempt he speaks
thus, I resent it as one of the best and most ingenuously managed that ever I
read against that Sort of People, meaning the Quakers: He also, both in his
first Book and in his Vindication, as heartily advocates the Cause of a
Socinian against me, as if he had been doubly feed to the Work: Besides all
this, we have been of late both publibkly and vehemently, yet groundlesly,
exclaimed upon, for denying the Man Christ Jesus, and asscribing the Christship
to the Divinity alone; and you know the Socinians own him to be but a bare Man;
and that some of our eminentest Adversaries in that Controversy were assisted
by Socinians, I am able to prove: But to what Pitch of Inconsistency may not
the Pride, Passion and Prejudice of Men raise them? You think it enough to do
our Business, to pin the Pope at our Tail: but you may remember how unjust you
thought such Suggestions from some of the former Prelates of the English
Church, who made the same Use of your Separation; and as well as you
Presbyterians and Independents agree against us, both of you have mutually
Jesuited one another; the Refuge of Malice, when drove to a Pinch. To conclude,
I must tell you, we are neither Socinians nor Papists; and I do hereby require
at your Hands to produce one Socinian or Papist that goes under the Name of a
Quak^r among us; till when you remain under the Just Imputation of Slanderous
Persons. But let us see what is next.


One and Twenty Divines. Diverse Honest, W^ll meaning and Ignorant Persons have
fallen in with the Quakers, supposing them by their plain Habit, Austerity and
rude Deportment to be the strictest, and therefore the Holiest Sort of
Professors -- And thu^ seeing no farther, they become Quakers, from the same
Principles in the main, and from the same Dispositions, as the more Ignorant
Votaries among the Papists are Carthusians, Franciscans, and other such like
Monks and Nuns.


W.P. I would fain ask you, if you can yet think your selves Men of Charity?
You elsewhere say we want it; and at this Rate we may do so for all you. Behold
the Brand you set on every Soul that leaves you! Can you satisfy your
Consciences, that you have herein shown the Justice you promised us, in
describing the Quakers, or Imitated the Rectitude of God in the Measures you
have taken of us? Truly if you can, they are greatly to be suspected: Give us
one Instance of any Honest or Well-meaning Person, that for the sake of those
outward Appearances became a Quaker, which in other Terms is, to expose
themselves to the bitter Anathema's of such Highpriests as your selves, the
Severity of their dearest Relations, the Penalties of Magistracy, and to the
general Reproach of the Multitude: Methinks, upon second Thoughts, you should
not have such good ones of your selves, and such bad ones of your Neighbors;
But though you take so little Care of being tender, nay Just to us, yet you
should be more circumspect for your selves: You tell us in the Person of J.
Faldo, That the Quakers deny to perform any Thing relative of Religion, bu^
upon Inspiration or Motion of the Spirit; And you all know, or may know, the
Papists turn not Carthusians, Franciscans, etc. upon such Pretenses, or as
being so disposed: You, or your People have affirmed, That they by such Works
think to merit Eternal Life; Whether it be true or fal^e, let them look to
that; sure I am, that such as say, Those Works are my Works, and that upon my
Principle, who otherwhile tells the World, That I admit of no Work in Religious
Matters, but by the Impulse of God's Spirit, contradict themselves to purpose,
and that you have done. Popery brought into Company with what you call
Quakerism, does your Work with some of your Vulgar; but your Comparison had
shown less of Envy, if you had pleased to produce those Principles, and
describe those Dispositions you unworthily insinuate Quakers and Monks in
common to be acted by. But methinks, your frequent frothy Reflections upon our
Deportment as Monk^sh and Cynical, etc. look more then ordinarily ugly from the
Mouths of such as profe^s themselves to be of the Race and Stock of Ancient
Puritans, whose little Bands, cropped Lock^, exceeding plain Apparel, severe
Aspects, with many more Instances of Preciseness and Austerity, as you call it,
were the Subjects, frothy Minds played upon: You do not think B. Jonson acted
like a Christian-Man in his Comical Representation of Puritans, and yet your
selves called Learned, and Reverend Divines, have shown as much Injustice,
though it may be, one and Twenty more of you could not show so much Wit.

It is known to God with what Sincerity we are acted in Obedience to the
Convictions of his own Spirit, and that it is not Affected Singularity, but
Real Conscience, that engages us to those things you make the Subject of your
Mo^kage and Contempt; and God has to reckon with you for the Liberty you give,
and your People take: To indulge them in that Unchristian Latitud^, and fling
Monkish Aust^rities upon us, who through Fear of offending Almighty God, by
giving Way to a Worldly Appetite, conscientiously live under some more then
ordinary Restriction is, to deal deceitf^lly with them, and injuriously with
us; and God will judge for these Things. The Truth of the Matter is, you are
Angry the People can live without you; and rack your Wits to bring that
Principle* People and Way into Suspicion and Hatred, whose Self-denial judges
you and yours: your Interest in People stands in that, which when the
Everlasting God shall terribly shake all Things, will fall; and such as have
vainly conceited themselves Christians upon your Character, they will be found
without their W^dding-Garment. But the Truth is, nothing is well with some Men
that a Quaker does; if he be retired, he is sullen; if plain in his Apparel,
Cynical; if careless about Salutation, Proud; his Industry must be
Worldly-Mindedness; his Mod^rate Uses of Imjoymens, Penuriousn^ss; his
Hospitality, Fl^sh-Pleasingness; his being at a Word, a Decoy for Custom and a
New Way of Cheating; if he refuse to answer any Questions relating to Religion,
eit^er he can give no Account of his Religion, or he he holds some Error he is
afraid to discover; if he does answer them, either it is Nonsense or
Equivocation: In short, his Virtues must be Vi^es; but thi^ is his Resolution,
if to be, as he is be to be Vile, he will be more Vile; and I doubt not but God
will plead our Cause against you, and evidence to you and all Men, that we have
not pursued Cynical Singularities, nor Affected undue Separation; but with Holy
Fear and Sincerity of Soul have been herein resigned to the Good Will of God,
as he has made it known by the Light of his Son in our own Consciences; and
this I affirm, that all those Endeavors many vigorously employ to vilify an
Inward Principle, and dissuade Persons from believing in it, waiting upon it,
and being guided by it, center in the rankest Atheism, because the Sense and
Influence upon the Mind, is the most sensible, express and constant Argument
for God and his pure Religion, which lost, makes Way for Infidelity. But as in
Point of Doctrine, so in Conversation you believe we are not all alike; your
Words are these:


One and Twenty Divines. And yet some of them being Rich, and grown into
Estates in the World, can and do live in as Flesh-pleasing Fullness, Splendour
and indulging to a sensual Life, as others whom they have condemned.


W.P. I would willingly know these Persons, who they are, and where they live:
Did you love Truth and your own Credit, ye would scarce be so lavishing of your
Words. You say, We condemn all but our selves; what is the Consequence but
this, if you speak true, That there is not a Person in the World that is not a
Professed Quaker, who either has more Ability to-live Flesh-pleasing, or that
actually does indulge himself more to a Sensual Life then some Quakers can and
do, Which way to save your Credit, I know not, unless you make it appear that
the Quakers are both as Rich as other Men, and as indulgent to themselves in
all sensual P^easures. I perceive, rather then the Quakers shall want Faults,
you will make some for them; a Practice very unfit for One and Twenty Learned
and Reverend Divines! But to do you right, you are kind in your Cruelty; you
provide against believing what you say, by saying what is incredible of us.

I shall now consider your Recommendation of his Book.


One and Twenty Divines. Wherein the Quakers Principles are more thorrowly
investigated then in any Book which we have seen; and we judge it for Matter,
Proof and Style, to be especially useful for those who need, or desire
Information concerning the Quakers and their Principl^s.


W.P. Had we no other Weapon, this were enough to Wound your Cause incurably;
for first, he has laid down about 20 Principles in the Quakers Name, 18 of
which are not only None of theirs, as so expressed, but not so much as by
Consequence: That they are none of ours, it is enough we say so, unless our
Faith is not to be taken at our Mouths, but at our Adversaries. He that tells
me I believe that which I do not believe, is either Foolish or Dishonest, and
his Confutation is not of me, but of himself. That they are not our Principles
by Consequence, I have abundantly proved, both in my Answer and Rejoinder:
However, Matter, Proof and Style you commend it for. The Matter of it lies in
the Proof of it: What Proof and what Style, I am willing to show you; and
first, as to Proof. Who would not think it excellently performed, that has
such an Epistle, and so subscribed, on Purpose to recommend it?

But that so many Men, with such fine Titles, may ^e guilty of great Mistake
and Abuse, I will produce you Ten Instances of Notorious Perversion, any one of
which were unworthy even of such poor Heathen as ye think us to be, referring
you to my Answer and Rejoinder for a more complete Detection of his
Miscarriages.

1. John Faldo affirms, That W. Smith had not one Exhortation to read the
Scrip^ures; nay, Qu. no Chr. page 45.
that the main Design of the Book was to deny them, and throw Dirt upon them;
yet J.F. cites him concerning the Scriptures, thus:

Child, Then the Scriptures are to be owned and believed, etc? My Answer, page
42.


Father, Yes, They are to be OWNED and BELIEVED; Rejoinder, page 60, 61, 62.
and they that do not so, are to be DENIED.

Observe. Can any thing be more inconsistent, then your Reverend Author? Is it
this sort of Proof you commend? Can you think this the Way to convert such
Infidels, as you deem us to be?

To this let me add another notable Passage in the same Discourse he faults
with Dirting and Denying the Scripture. Rejoy. ibid.


Quest. Of what Service are the Scriptures as they are given forth and recorded
without?

Answ. MUCH EVERY WAY unto those that have received the same Spirit from whom
they were given forth, for unto such they are PROFITABLE, and MAKE WISE unto
Salvation; and are unto them of Service, for INSTRUCTION, EDIFICATION and
COMFORT.

Obs. Is there no Exhortation lodged in these words? And is this to Deny or
throw Dirt upon the Scriptures? If any shall object W. Smith's making the
Spirit necessary to the profitable Reading of the Scriptures, let them go to W.
Tindal, J. Bradford, Bp. Jewel, J. Philpot, Luther, Calvin, Peter Martyr and
others, they will preach them the same Doctrine; which I have observed in my
Rejoinder, and may easily be found in my Catalogue of Authors.

Qu. no Chr. p. 117, 119
2. My second Instance shall be this, That he makes W. Smith call the
Scriptures Traditions of men, Earthly Root, Darkness, Confusion, Corruption;
All out of the Life and Power of God; My Rejoinder, from page 141. to 157.
which he only asscribed to degenerated Men, their Worship, Imaginations and
Traditions.

Shall this be called Proof or Perversion? Doubtless a Proof of nothing, but of
that hateful sort of Perversion.

Qu. no Chr. page 41. Answ. p. 35. Rejo. p. 424.
3. That the Quakers understand by Knowledge according to the Flesh, the Use of
the Understanding, though sanctified: which is also a grofs Abuse both of our
Words and Sense.

Vind. p. 50. Rejo. p. 194, 195.
4. That I. Penington should call Visible Worship, as such, the City of
Abomination.

This is a downright Forgery; and your Praise of his Proof makes you
Accessories: Look on it as you will.

Qu. no Chr. part 3. p. 88. Answ. p. 250.
5. That by Traditions of Men, we understand the Scripture, or written Word. A
base Abuse of our Words.

Qu. no Chr. page 89. Answ. p. 251, 252. Rejoy. p. 395, 396.
6. That the Quakers mean by the Vail that is over People, their Belief of the
Man Christ Jesus born of the Virgin Mary, to be now existing in Heaven. An
Impiety of ^is own Inventing and your Approving!

7. From W. Smith's saying, that the present Practice of the Sacraments, as,
Baptizing with a Cross, Qu. no Chr page 163.
and counting the Bread and Wine the Flesh and Blood of Christ, arise from the
Pope's Invention, You in the Person of John Fal^^, give out, That W. Smith
calls the Lord's Supper the POPE's INVENTION.

At this rate, what will your Testimony be worth? Little, certainly, with such
as know Good Coin from B^d.

8. Vindic. from p. 75. to 87.
From Edw. Burrough's making the Light of Christ within to be One in Nature
with the Spirit of Christ; J. Faldo infers, That the Quakers hold the Soul to
be God: as if that had been said of the Soul, Rejo. p. 348, 349, 350.
which was said of the Light of Christ shining in the Soul, or that they were
Synonymous.

What cannot a Man of his Skill in This black Art do? yet this is your own
Reverend Author, who for his Proof against the Quakers, is not a little in your
Books.

9. Qu. no Chr. p. 9, 10.
Because G.F. rejected that carnal Notion that confines the Infinite
Omnipresent God to a Residence only above the Stars, he makes no Difficulty of
inferring, Answ. p. 14. Rejo. p. 420.
That we deny the Manhood of Christ Jesus. As Absurd as Base!

10. From our affirming that such a kind of Reading of Scripture as the
Pharisees used, and to those Ends, Qu. no Chr. page 190.
makes men harder to be wrought upon to true Conversion then the Heathen, John
Faldo infers, Rejo. p. 126, 127, 425.
That reading the Scriptures, and getting Knowledge thence, puts men into a
worse Condition then the Heathen; and that there is scarcely any thing more
Dangerous then reading the Scriptures: Yea, he accuses us of Charging the
Miscarriages of men's Souls on the Knowledge the Scripture BY GOD's BLESSING
does convey.

Behold at what rate your Reverend Author has investigated our Principles! you
have said truly in saying, he did it thoroughly; for he has scarcely touched
any Thing, that he has not thoroughly abused; yet this is the Man whose
Attempts so obnoxious as you see, you have adventured to commend. You say, you
judge it (among other Things) for the PROOF of it, to be especially useful for
those who desire Information concerning the Quakers and their Principles: That
ever Men of your Age, Experience and Reputation should precipitate themselves
into any Thing so foul and scandalous! Can you believe this is Imitating God,
and being Just to the Quakers? I hope your Condition is not yet so dangerous.

I think fit further to add for the Information of the Ignorant, that J.F.
began with us in this Book, called Quakerism No Christianity; I answered him in
a Book, entitled Quakerism a New Nick Name for Old Christianity; against this
he put forth his Vindication, unto which I made my Rejoinder, consisting of
TWENTY THREE CHAPTERS, in which I vindicated our Principles, stripping them of
those frightful Vizards and hateful Disguises he put upon them, confirmed them
by many Scriptures and Reasons, and to complete our Defense, produced in favor
of the whole above TWO HUNDRED TESTIM^NIES out of both ancient and modern
Authors. Besides all this I faulted his Conduct and Behavior in this
Controversy, in above FOUR HUNDRED PARTICULARS, and that under distinct
Sections.

None of which has he taken notice of, how much soever it stood his Credit
upon; but after his own Proof of his Books, wanting a Vindication, he reprints
it to consummate the Controversy. To me it is a manifest Token that the Man
has gotten to a Ne plus ultra, and therefore goes back again; and doubtless,
were not his Cause deeply sunk, it should never need the Help of One and Twenty
Divines, and those termed so Learned and Reverend as you are, to recover it,
and yet you see at what a Rate you have performed your Task: We have Hopes you
will be better advised the next Time; I am sure your Circumstances need it.

And that you have as well abused us in your STYLE as Proof, and therefore
proportionably deferve the Censure of Impartial Readers, I shall produce some
Instances out of your Epistle and his Book (I may say yours; for ye have made
it so by adopting it:)

First, In your Epistle,

A strange Sort of People, preach another Gospel, and endeavor to seduce
well-meaning Souls; Poison of their Anti-fundamental Doctrines; Infidelity
among them; Juggling Socinianized Persons; Papists; Carthusians; Franciscans,
and other such like Monks and Nuns; Judicially deserted of God; arrived to
Pride and Ignorance; seek Backbiting, Reviling and Reproaches; nauseous
Conceitedness; Deluded Souls; Barbarous Language; Pitiful Ignorance; No
Christians; subverting Christianity; Wasps of Satan's Hiving.

This is the Language of your own Epistle, that do not love Reflections nor
Railing, if we will believe you.

Now for the Style of your Reverend Author in his Books, whom you would, have
us believe is a Friendly Person to the Quakers.

Of our Light.

Ignis fatuus; the second Antichrist; the Quakers Idol; Pernicious Guide and
Savior; Fancyful Teacher: And in his Vindication, A Sord^d, Sinful, Corrupt
and Ridiculous Thing.

Of our Religion and Friends.

Quakerism made its Way by, and began in Blasphemies against the Lord Jesus
Christ; Quakerism entered the World, as if Hell were broak loose, and
Possessions of Satan were to make Way, and fit Souls for the Quakers Spirit;
Blasphemy and Idolatry. Our Friends ( Quakers so called) Dark-Lanthorn-Men;
being hid with Palpable Knavery and Impudence; Absurd and Blasphemous Idiots;
Prodigiously Wicked; Oh the Hell-Dark Expressions of the Quakers Preachers,
speak the Amazing Delusions of Satan. And in his Vindication, A Presumptuous
and Blind Accuser; a Sophister; an Haman; an Accursed Ham; a Treacherous and
Wilful Deluder; a Madman; an Hangman; an Infallible Stager; a Fool; an Ape; a
Dunce; an Impudent Forger; and what not?

Is this to act like a FRIEND to the Quakers, or give Testimony of a Large
Spirit and Principle, as you (to make a foul Matter fair) have so untruly
intimated? Doubtless, no Man has taken more Pains to abuse a poor People, then
J. Faldo has to misrepresent the Quakers; yet this very Style you more
especially recommend: Can you yet think your selves Learned, Reverend and
Worthy Divines, Men of Conscience and Honor? And the Truth is, you were very
hard put to it to make up the Recommendation; for in the Scope of four Pages,
you three times compare us to Papists and I^fidels; thrice charge and aggravate
our designed Obscurity, with abundance of Impertinency and Contradiction; four
Times go over our Separation from you; and last of all, you five Times charge
us with Singularities, enlarge and grow Elegant upon it, Repetitions, Tautology.

And by the Way I must needs take this notice of the New Advertisement in this
Impression.

First, That he most horribly abuses us in saying, We pretend all our
Ministers to be Infallible. More then ten Times over has he both scornfully
and untruly cast this at us: We asscribe not an Infallibility to Men, but to
the Grace of God, and to Men so far as they are led by it; for that it
certainly teaches what it does teach.

Secondly, Whereas he insinuates, as if I allowed of every Passage he cited, as
of the Books and Authors themselves: This is so great an Untruth, that many of
them are misquoted, and almost every one of them mis-applyed; and this I have
largely and frequently complained of in my Answer, and more particularly in my
Rejoinder. I leave off Wondering at him; for he seems to have prepared his
Conscience for any thing that may countenance his Attempts against the Quakers;
which gives us Cause to suspect the altering of the folio of the Old Book in
this Impression, is done on Purpose to hinder the Reader from finding his (in
my Answers thereto referred) Miscarriages. But to you again.

Suppose we are as bad as you bespeak us; how can we help it? Your Principle
takes away all Liberty from our Wills, and tells us of being ordained to all
these Mischiefs: Would you have us better then we can be? that is, to expect
Impossibilities at our Hands? Or would you that we should attempt to invalid
God's Immutable and Absolute Decree, which, besides that it cannot be done
(allowing your Notion) were a great Impiety but to think of; you should either
change your Creed in this Particular, or seem less concerned at the Event of
Things confessedly Irremedable. I remember an Old Book published by Three and
fifty Presbyterians, some of whom help to make up your One and Twenty Reverend
Divines; it is called A Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ and our Solemn
League and Covenant (for you know they must go togethe^) the Bent of it is to
collect the then held Errors, and bitterly to Exclaim on all that hold and
plead for, or incline to favor a Toleration; and such were Episcopalians,
Independents, Anabaptists, etc. Among many other these are brought in for
Capital Ones. 1. HIERARCHY. 2. INDEPENDENCY. 3* An Opposition of the Doctrine
of Election and Reprobation, as you hold it. 4. The Doctrine of the Freedom of
Man's Will. 5. That Christ died for all Men; or that the Benefit of Christ's
Death extended to all Men. And some Leaves off, thus express themselves,
Doubtless, that old Serpent, called the Devil, has been the grand Agent in
propagating these stupendous Errors, all which Errors, Heresies and
Blasphemies, we are confident we may loath, execrate and abhor, and that
without the least Breach of Charity. Oh the Strength and Religion of this
Charity, that can loath, execrate and abhor to think that Christ dyed for all
Men, or that all Men may be saved! as plain Scripture as any in Scripture. This
they call the Presbyterian Testimony, which in plain English does but loath,
execrate and abhor the Belief of the Generality of Christendom. And that you
may yet know your selves better, observe this Passage; The Cursed Blasphemies;
the general Looseness; the spreading Heresies of our Times have in a manner
born down before them the Authority of the sacred Scriptures, the Life and
Power of Godliness, and our solemn League and Covenant; but above all, Our
Souls are wounded, to think with what Hope and Industry a TOLERATION of all
these Evils is endeavored. Which in short amounts to this; 1. All that
quadrate not wi^h Presbytery is Error, Heresy or Blasphemy. 2. That above all
things it wounds them to think of having such tolerated as believe and maintain
them. This Doctrine (with some Allay) in the Episcopacy you exploded for
Antichristian, Popish and Tyrannical. When through such Pretenses you had
mounted the Chair, by a notable Figure, called Self-Interest, it became an
excellent Doctrine with you, yea a most necessary part of your Creed: Pray tell
me if this be Imitating of God? being Just to all men? Doing as you would be
(...) by? Can you yet be so blind as not to see your selves to be a great way
off from Christian Charity, and an universal Communion of Christians, that even
make Believing of plain Scripture, a Reason for your Abhorrence of their
Communion that so believe; unless they will subject such obnoxious Passages to
Calvinistical Interpretations? Is not this like the Egyptian Tyrant, that
stretched all longer that were ^horter, and cut all shorter that were longer
then Himself? This shows, you Caesar-like, would have had ^o Equal, and
resolved to reign alone, come what will of those you now have learned to call
Christians: It is but too manifest that the genuine Sense of your Faithfulness
to promote God's Cause and Interest, is YOUR SELVES.

But you are several times angry with us for our Separation.


One and Twenty Divines. They seek by Backbiting, Reviling and Reproaches, to
disgrace the Doctrines, Practices and Persons of others, that they themselves
may seem more exce^^ent and glorious then all that have been excellent before
them, and that they may not be thought unworthy of some Communion themselves,
grow presently of Opinion, that all the rest of the World of professed
Christians, are so ignora^^ (...) so bad, as to be unworthy of Communion with
them.


W.P. Methinks that it is not only an ill way to be thought more Excellent and
Glorious then all that were before us; but that no Man that refuses to
captivate his Sense and Reason to serve the Interest of whatsoever you say or
do, can believe that we should take such an improbable Way to Glory: Such
juggling Socinians and Papists, as you make the chief of us to be, should
better understand their Business, then to be guilty of so much broad and
distastefull Folly, in doing of it; but what cannot you say of the Quakers, who
rather then not say enough, will be impertinently Tautological, and say the
same thing in four pages five times over, to fix an Odium in the Minds of
People against us; What is this but to do what you condemn?

But the Truth is, you have so well expressed the Matter for your selves, that an
unwary Reader would think you equally Enemies to Separation, and Reviling those
you separate from. But of a^^ men this Language is most infufferable from you,
who have transcended in the Guilt of those things you seem so heartily to
censure. You are made up of Presbyterians and Independents; let me a little
Expostulate with you: Argumentum ad hominom.

I will begin with you who are called Presbyterians; Are you not Separatists
from the Church of England? You know you are; And pray, what is the Ground of
your Separation? Is it Difference in the Essentials of Religion? you know, you
say it to be only in some matters of Discipline; for this you have divided your
selves, and smartly vindicated your Separation, witness Galaspee in Scotland,
and Smectimnaeus in England. Was it not a great Reason of the Wars, that
divided so many Famili^s, shed so much Blood, and exhausted so great a
Treasure? Did it not lay Episcopacy in the Dust, and excite the Parliament in
these very Terms? Elijah opposed Idolatry and Oppression, so do ye: Down with
Baal's Altars! Down with Baal's Priests! Do not, I beseech you, consent unto a
Toleration of Baal's Worship in this Kingdom, upon any Politic Consideration
whatsoever. Which is as much as to say, Away with the Archbishops, Bishops,
the wh^le Ministry and Worship of the Church of England. Again, The Morthes of
your Adversari^s are opened against you, that so many D^linquents (that is to
say, Royalists) are in Prison, and yet but very few of them brought to their
Trial (Did he mean, to relea^e them?) And says another of your eminent
Brethren before the Commons, Aug. 28. 1644. Ye cannot Preach nor Pray them down
directly and immediately -- Well, That which the Word cannot do, the Sword
shall: To render which saying authentic, the Apostle is brought in two lines
after. I could set out this part of your Story to the Life, but at this time
shall forbear: nor do I delight in this, but since I must needs mention Your
Separation, how can I do it without telling who it was you separated from? And
can I do it more heartily then in your own Words? I wish there had been no need
for it: Only from hence you may observe your sort of Dislike of Separation; and
how notably Presbyterians revile even Men that are one with them in the
Essentials of Religion. Behold, a short Instance of your Carriage to the Church
of England you separated from! Let us now take a short view of your Treatment
of those that dissented from you: You showed the Independents the way, first to
separate upon Conscience, and then to plead Conscience for Separation; and how
reasonable it was that Conscience should be Tolerated. Are you constant to your
selves? Do you give what you will take? No such matter: But let us hear you.
Matters of Religion, (says Dr Corn. Burges in his Sermon before the House of
Commons, November. 5. 1641.) ly a Bleeding; all Government and Discipline of the
Church is laid in her Grave; and all putredinous Vermin of bold Schismatics
glory in her Ashes, making her Fall their own Rising to mount our Pulpits. That
the Independents are concerned under the term Schismatics, Dr Cawdrey bestows
an whole Book upon it, which is Entitled, INDEPENDENCY a great Schism; yet
some of these great Schismatics are some of the One and Twenty Reverend and
Worthy Divines. I find another of your Brethren, October. 22. 1644. that tells us
of Parliamentary Heresies, saying, You are the Anabaptists, and you are the
Antinomians; these are your Errors, if they spread by your Connivance. Was not
this spoaken like a Man of Charity, one that disdained not the Communion of
other Christians that are not altogether of his Mind? A Virtue commended by you
in your Epistle. Another eminent Person of your Way, before the Parliament
Sept. 12. 1644. We are grown beyond Arminianism, Brownism, Anabaptism; we are
come to the downright Libertinism, that every man is to be left to the Liberty
of his own Religion: An Opinion most pernicious and destructive, says he. And
another of your Brethren in his great Zeal, before the House of Commons, 1644.
styles them Bastard Imps of the Whore of Babylon: Though you know that many of
you plead a Romish Succession for your Ministry, and consequently that you
ministerially descend of what you call the Whore; think on it as you will. But
all this is exceeded by a zealous Presbyterian, who in his Book, called, The
Gangraen, etc. Part 1. p. 91. querieth thus; Shall the Presbyterians Orthodox
Godly Ministers be so cold, as to let Anabaptism, Brownism, Antinomianism,
Libertinism, Independency come in upon us, and keep in a whole skin, when
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. hazarded the loss of their Preferments to withstand
the Toleration of Popery? Where not only Anabaptists and Independents are
rendered unworthy of a Toleration by this great Presbyterian; but their
Persuasion rendered more intolerable then Popery. I would ask G. Griffith, M.
Barker, R. Mayo, M. Palmer, T. Cole (who help to make up the One and Twenty
Learned and Reverend Divines) if this Man was a Wasp or a Be? one that had
more of Sting or Honey? Well -- what is his Resolution? Let Us therefore, says
he, fill all Presses, and cause all Pulpits to ring, and so possess Parliament,
City and whole Kingdom against the Evil of Schism, and a Toleration, that we
may no more hear of a Toleration, nor of separated Churches, being hateful
Names in the Church of God, AMEN' AMEN. All I shall say of the Man is this; he
was hearty in his Work, and what he did, he did with all his Might. Another of
them runs so high, that he impeacheth Gamaliel for a loose Naturalist, a
Time-serving Politician, a second Achitophel, and only because he was for
Toleration; when you know, the rest of the Jewish Counsel were for Persecution:
If you will not believe me, peruse I. Words Sermon before the Commons, 1645.
How agrees this with your present Desires of Indulgence, and Thanks for it? Let
me say, there is the same Exception against you upon this Doctrine, as any
other sort of Dissenters: But, as ill as this man thought of Worthy and Prudent
Gamaliel, his Counsel has been strong and sea^onable, even in Presbyterian
Apologies. But lest you should reject these Evidences of your rank Severity to
others though for minute Differences, as being but the Opinion of 3 or 4 men, I
will conclude with the Judgment of the Presbyterian Ministers in the City of
London, presented in a Letter to the Assembly of Divines sitting at West
minster 1645. INDEPENDENCY is a Schism; they draw and seduce our Members from
our Congregations; a Toleration of it will be followed with inevitable
Mischiefs; They erect separate Congregations, under a separate and undiscovered
Government; The refuse Communion with our Churches in the Sacraments: And are
such men fit to commend Christian Communion to others, who themselves break it,
and impeach one another at this bitter rate for doing so? But what follows? The
Godly, painful Orthodox Ministry will be discouraged and despised; the Life and
Power of Godliness will be eaten out by frivolous Disputes and vain Janglings;
it is too much to be doubted lest the Power of the Magistrate should not only
be weakened, but even utterly overthrown, considering the Principles and
Practices of Independents, together with their Compliance with other Sectaries,
sufficiently known to be Anti-magistratical; Hereby we shall be involved in the
Guilt of other Men's Sins, and thereby be endangered to receive of their
Plagues; It seems utterly Impossible (if such Toleration should be granted)
that the LORD SHOULD BE ONE, AND HIS NAME ONE IN THE THREE KINGDOMS.

This seriously considered, let me ask you, if you did not think these
Independents either so Ignorant, or so Bad, as to be unworthy of your Communion
with them, or being so much as tolerated in their separated Communion from you?
Certainly, if so small a Difference as that which remains between you and the
Independents, finds not Charity enough with you to be tolerated, not only the
Quakers have no Reason to expect Toleration from you, had you Power in your
hands: But there is great need, that you should be ashamed of Censuring others,
or being so Narrow-spirited, as not to Commune with People of a different
Persuasion in Matters confessedly of greater Moment, then that upon which you
have exercised so much Gaul.

That You that are INDEPENDENTS, have thought the Presbyterian: Unworthy of
your Communion, it is needful only that we put you in mind of your Separating
from them, and sitting down in distinct Congregations under a different
Discipline and Administration of Ordinances; The Reason of which, if we will
believe the Presbyterians in the Account they gave to the Parliament, was,
because you esteem them Prelatical, Tyrannical and Antichristian in their
Ministry: An ancient Acquaintance of mine, who had more Learning and Discretion
then to be one of your Learned and Reverend Divines, in his Book against D.
Cawdrey, does ^ffirm, That Ministry that comes through Romish Succession, and
is no Ministry without it, can be no better then a Romish Ministry; and the
Truth is, I am of his mind. J. Cotton, Brownists Apol. J. Cann, ancient
Independents also writ in Defense of Separate from National Communion.

From hence and that second great War between you and the Presbyterians, who
should inherit what you had jointly gotten from another Party, are none of the
clearest Proofs to us of your Brotherly Love and Christian Communion, though a
great Check to both of you for your turning Judges, who are such notorious
Criminals; and yet I will not say but the Presbyterians Fury was your
Provocation. In short; As the Reason you have both rendered of your Separation
from the Church of England, and One from Another, is Greater Purity of Worship
and Discipline; so We had never separated our selves from you, but upon the
same Principle: And if this will not serve your turn, when You that are
Presbyterians, have given better Satisfaction to the Church of England for your
separate Communion; and when You the Independents, have in the like Case
answered the Presbyterians, and the Anabaptists, you, We shall, we hope, not be
wanting to our selves in any necessary Vindication of OUR CAUSE.

I am sorry you have given me Occasion to remind you of your Separation among
your selves: However, this deserves the Notice of all Impartial Readers, that
though you were so Bitter, and all Wasps one against another for your
Separation; yet that now you are Confederated against us without any
Provocation, then such as was the Cause your selves pretended for your own
Separation: So that to use your own Words with better Reason, You are the Men
that have no Honey nor Sweetness of Spirit, except for your selves. And I must
needs say, that notwithstanding your Reflection upon us, as Destroyers of
Christian-Communion, you have been so fond of your own Apprehensions, that many
of your Way have lost the Friendliness so commendable in Civil Society; and
some, no small Preachers neither, have vehemently dehorted their Hearers from
so much as conversing with us, no not about the Lawful Things of this World, so
far as may be avoided; nay, one of them was so extravagant as openly to
profess, He had rather his Hearers should go to a BANDY-HOUSE, then to a
Quakers Meeting: To such a Degree of Bitterness are some of you arrived, for all
your Pretenses to Charity. I am sure if you had had any Regard to those Natural
Truths you are forced to confess, make up Part of our Religion, viz. To do as
you would be done by; remembering that for all these Things God will bring you
to Judgment; you would never have dealt o^t such hard Measure to us; and it
cannot be too much lamented, that men will not make the best of their Accord,
so far as they do accord; I mean what you do, if you mean what you writ, viz.
That God so hates the Evil, as yet to approve and love all that is Good; and
that his Servants should not dispraise all in those whom they dislike:

For We own ONE GOD; we fear him as well as own him; and through his GRACE are
enabled to perform the Works of Righteousness, whose Fruit is Peace: We believe
this Grace is communicated to us through Jesus Christ our Lord; that he is the
Only and Complete Savior, as well from the Pollution as Guilt of Sin; that
without his Holy spirit we cannot please God; that therefore it is Reverently
and Incessantly to be waited for, to inform, enable and conduct us through the
whole Exercise of our Life, respecting our Duty toward God and Man; we also
believe that there is an Eternal State for Sheep and Goats, Godly and Ungodly,
and a Day in which God Almighty will judge the Secrets of all Men by Jesus
Christ, rendering to every Man according to the Deeds done in the Body: And
this we do believe without any Mental Reservation whatever, and find daily
Comfort both in Believing and Living accordingly; nor do I know that you in any
thing contradict this, in Words, at least. Now that your Zeal for your Way of
Religion should transport you beyond all Natural Tenderness or Affection, as
the Apostle renders it (your Duty to every Man as he is God's Workmanship) and
then glory in so great a Vice as a Christian Virtue, by terming it Godly Zeal,
etc. which is no more but an Unwarrantable Heat for your particular
Persuasions; I must needs say, is a great Way off from that Moderation that the
Apostle exhorts us to make known to all Men. It is an ill Way of admiring Grace
which destroys Nature, and such, I must needs say, some of yours is, or has
been, who have sacrificed Universal Love, Natural Affection, Relation, the
Liberties and Lives of Men diff^rently perswad^d to the Promotion of your so
much Beloved Interests: Remember T. Edward's Gangraen, and the London-
Ministers Petition, and the New England Tragedy. How exceeding short does this
fall of the Admirable Sweetness of his Nature, who is Lord of the
Christian-Religion, that was so far from Indulging Hatred to his Conscientious
Friends, that he forbid it to his greatest Enemies? Can you call for Fire from
Heaven upon Dissenters, and rather then not compass their Destruction, kindle
Fire on Earth to devour them, and yet with any the least Pretense to Modesty
cheek others for Incharity and S^paration? But take this with you, that good
Notions will signify little to the Comfort of an ill Soul at God's Bar; it
will not be Well H^ld, but Well Done Good and Faithful Servant. Preferring
Opinion before Piety has filled the World with Perplexing Controversies, and
Men's Censures have been according to Notion, not according to Conversation: It
is not what Works, but what Faith? though Works best of all define and evidence
what Faith is. But this Age has no Kindness for Good Works; the more the
Pity: Loose Men slight them in Life, and you in Doctrine; A Man cannot plead
for them, but at the Hazard of being counted a Papist. Tell you such an one is
a Virtuous Person, and you an^wer us commonly, He is a Good Moral Man, but he
has no Saving Grace; as if Grace and Morality were at as great Distance as
London and Constantinople: These Notions have abused Religion, and greatly
injured the Souls of People; 1. By giving them to conceit themselves
Christians, though Unlike Christ. 2. In Distinguishing between a Good Man and a
Christian, from whence has flown that Stinginess of Spirit, that denies any to
have Saving Grace that fall not in with their Principles, and so divides Gr^ee
from Virtue, which God has Inseparably joined. This is the Doctrine that
deceives Men, which make them too great for the rest of Mankind: Moral Men are
no Company for them; they may be that, and go to Hell for their Pains, if what
some of you say be true. It is the Presbyterians special Grace that saves; for
Morality's Part, alas! she is a poor Heathen, an Alien, an Infidel, without the
Pale of the Church and Mercies of the Covenant; but then it is to be understood
of the Scotch One.

Oh I beseech you for the sake of Jesus Christ, by whom alone God will judge
you and I in the Dreadful Day of Account; let the Universal Principle in your
Consciences have Power with you; the Divine Fruit of which is, first, A
Discovery of Duty to be done; and as clo^ed with there, next, Power and Ability
to perform it, which strips you of Self, and Glorying in it, and will work all
necessary Works In you and For you: It will first correct and then comfort you;
Its Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace; To Faith it
adds Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge, to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance
Patience, and to Patience Godliness, to Godliness Brotherly-Kindness, and to
Brotherly-Kindness CHARITY. Contend not against it; your Credit is a Temptation
to you; sacrifice it for the sake of your own and other Men's Souls upon the
Altar Self-denial, and that Humble and Heavenly Obedience you owe to the God of
the whole Earth; and think not Repentance a Work to Mean for you, because you
have been so long Preachers of it to others; your Time hastens on, and in the
Grave it will be too late: If it was John's Honor to receive him when he came
in Flesh; let it not be your Judgment to reject his coming in Spirit: God knows
I have no Ill Will but much Kindness for you; I wish you were as truly taught
of him, as you are great Teachers of others: could my Desires prevail, you
should be such upon better Terms; but as Woe be unto them who are sent and don't
preach; so Woe be unto them who do preach and are not sent; It is not hard in
this Sense to be Righteous overmuch, to be too Officious, and to act Thanklesly
for God.

Oh that we may all consider what we are Building with, and whether our Works
will stand the Trial of God's Fire! whose Terrible Day hastens upon the World,
in which he will severely plead with all Flesh that has corrupted its Way
before him; as with the Gentile, so with the Jew! as with the Profane, so with
the Professor, Who has had a Name to live, and yet will be found Dead, who
calls himself a Jew, and yet is not; a Christian, and is not; who runs, and God
has not sent him, who cries, thus says the Lord, and God has never spoaken
by him: Let us therefore be persuaded into a Serious Examination of our selves
and Preparation for this Great and Notable Day of the Lord, that the Sound of
the last Amazing Trump may not surprise us, or any of us be overtaken at
unawares, but in Godly Fear wait till our great Change comes, that with Holy
Habakkuk, we may all find Rest to our Souls in the Day of Trouble, Amen.


Your Friend in much Sincerity, W.P.

A POSTSCRIPT.
AS for his Appendix, its an arrant Cheat obtruded upon the Reader. The
Title Page be speaks it a new Piece; whereas it is no other in the Matter, and
for a great Part of the Words of it, then what has been answered by me again
and again. It consists of two Parts; 1. Two Letters of our Friends, with his
usual disingenuous Discants; which Letters are justified from his Black
Imputations in my Rejoy^der, and another Discourse, called Judas and the Jews.
The second Part of the Appendix is a Collection of our Principles, which both
in my Answer and Rejoinder I have proved to be his own Indirect and Foul
Consequences from our R^al Principles, which lie at his Door, or rather now at
his One and Twenty Learned and Reverend Divines, that have so Imprudently
espoused his Cause; and recommended his Endeavors.


