THE Scattered sheep Sought after.

1. In a Lamentation over the general loss of the powerful presence of God in
his people, since the days of the Apostles, with a particular bewailing of the
withering and death of those precious buddings forth of life, which appeared in
many at the beginning of the late troubles in these Nations, with the proper
way of recovery for such.

2. In some Propositions concerning the only way of salvation; where is an
answer given to that great objection, That the light which convinces of sin,
is the light of a natural conscience; and a brief account rendered of the ground
of men's misunderstanding Scriptures.

3. In exposing to view the fundamental Principle of the Gospel, upon which the
redeemed Spirit is built.

4. And in some Questions and Answers, (by way of Catechism, for the sake of
the simple hearted) directing to that Principle, and fixing in it.

By Isaac Pennington.

When Ephraim spoke trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he
offended in Baal, he died. And now they sin more and more, etc. Therefore they
shall be as the morning cloud, and as the early dew, etc. Hos. 13.1, 2, 3. Yea
his spring shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up, ver. 15. We
have all been as sheep going astray; but blessed be the everlasting Arm, which
has gathered any of us to the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. O come to the
fold, O scattered Sheep come to the fold: Wander no longer from mountain to
hill, but remember your resting place, the ol^ resting place of Israel, even
the m^untain of the Lords house, where Israe^ may lie d^wn and feed in peace,
and no ravenous beast can disturb. O house of Jacob let whoredom, wine, and
new wine, no longer stea^ away your hearts, but come let us walk in the light
of the Lord. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1665.

The PREFACE,
MY people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me the Fountain of
living waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no
water. This was ever and anon the complaint of the Lord concerning Israel, from
the beginning to the end. The Lord did delight to beget, nourish, and bring up
that people for himself; but they were almost continually revolting from him,
and rebelling against him. He did mighty things for them, but they still forgot
him. He redeemed them by his outstretched Arm, he fed them, he defended them,
but they knew him not (Isa. 1.3.) but decked themselves with the ornaments
which they had from him, and then lift up the heel against him, Ezekiel. 16.7.
etc. Deuteronomy. 32.15. In plain terms, they got what knowledge they could from him
into their own vessels, and then they could set up for themselves, live of
themselves, without fresh bublings up of life from the spring, from whence
their knowledge came (the Priests said not, Where is the Lord? but could handle
the Law, and teach the knowledge of it without him: and the Prophets could
prophecy by another Spirit, Jer. 2.8.) And thus the Lord God of life lived not
in them, but they lived upon such things as once came from the life, but (being
separated from the spring) were dead, and nourished but the dead part in them,
the part estranged from God. And thus, though their professions were great, and
they multiplied prayers, and sacrifices, and fasts, and drew nigh to God with
their lips, yet their hearts were far from him. They had forsaken the Fountain,
they drank not of the waters of the spring (of the rock that followed them) but
they drank of the waters of their own Cisterns. They set up that knowledge of
the Law for their light, which they had hewed out with the tools of their own
understanding, without that spirit that wrote it. This was Isreal's error of
old; they drank very zealously of the waters of the Law, but they drank it not
from he spring, but out of the Cisterns which themselves had hewed.

And as it was thus with Israel of old so has it been with Israel since. The
Christian Israel has been always backsliding, always forgetting the Lord;
still getting what they could from him to live of themselves, but refusing to
live on h m: getting what knowledge they could from the Scriptures without him,
getting what they could from their exercises and experiences, but neglecting
the sp^ing of their life. And so this Israel also dies, this Israel likewise
withers, and becomes a scorn to the beathen: for though they speak great words
of their God, yet they themselves are but as the heathen, uncircumcised like
them, unacquainted with the virtue and power of life like them, always
striving against sin in that which cannot conquer, and so they also are slaves
under their lusts and corruptions, like the heathen, and know not the truth
which makes free indeed.

Exceeding great has been the apostasy of this age. Mighty was the appearance
of God inwardly in his peoples Spirits, mighty was the appearance of God
outwardly in the Nation, many ways and great hopes there was of a through
reformation. But how suddenly was the pure Spirit of the Lord forgotten, and
departed from, and his work overturned both within and without; inwardly in his
peoples spirits, and outwardly in the Nation, whose revolting was but a type of
the inward. And how has the Spirit of the Lord mourned after his people, often
reproving them for their backslidings! but they have been (as Israel of old,
like the deaf Adder) justifying themselves, and complaining against the
witnesses of God (as Israel did against his Prophets) who from the Lord
testify against them. And it cannot be otherwise; for the dead waters in
Isreal's hewn Cisterns, will never agree with the waters of the living
Fountain, but will withstand their testimony.

How shall the charmer charm wisely enough, to make apostate Israel hearken to
his voice! I have not back slidden, says one in one form; I have not
back-slidden, says another in another form: I am not back-slidden says one in
one notion; I am not back slidden says another, in another notion; I am
believing, hoping, and waiting in what the Lord has already revealed, and
following on to know him. This has been thy manner from thy youth, that thou
obedst not my word, but still have been justifying thy self, as if thou had
obeyed. And yet your backslidings are written upon your foreheads, as with the
point of a Diamond, for who among you retains his freshness? an evident
demonstration that ye are departed from the spring, and hold your knowledge,
experiences, and h pes in the dead part, and your chiefest prop of comfort is
the remembrance of what ye once had. Ah poor, barren, dead souls, is this your
best support? Return, return, enter into the house of mourning, and let the
living lay it to heart.

A Lamentation with a call to mourning and Lamentation, etc.
O Israel, the royal seed, the plant of renown, the living offspring of
eternity; O daughter of Sion, who did once shine with the beauty and glory of
life, what is become of thee! how art thou held captive, and chained up in
Babylon! how do thou lie fullied among the pots! how are the wings of thy
Dove clipped! how art thou covered, and polluted with the filth of the whole
earth!

O take up a Lamentation, weep O Israel, mourn O daughter of Jerusalem bewail
thy widdow-hood, thy desolation, thy loss of Husband, thy sad captivity, thy
banishment out of thine own land, and thy thraldom in the land of thine enemy.

What is become of thy God, the mighty God of Jacob, whose outstretched arm
has been able to save and redeem his seed out of bondage? What enemy has been
able to stand before him? What wild Boar out of the Wood, or wild Beast out of
the Forest, was able to break into his Vineyard, while he kept the fence?
where is that arm that smote Rahab, and slew the Dragon? Where is that hook
that he was wont to put into the nostrils of the Leviathan? Pharaoh is alive,
the wise Egyptians have power, Egypt holds the seed in bondage, Gebal, Ammon,
and Amalek, the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tire, are all able to smite
Israel, and to stop up the well-springs of life. Awake O arm of the Lord, and
awaken Israel, that thou again may become his Savior in the sight of all the
Nations; and let all the house of Israel, being awakened, mourn in the Spirit
of the Lord after the Lord.

What is become of thy Messiah, the Lords anointed, the Captain of the Lords
hoasts, the Angel of the Covenant of life, who was wont to go in and out before
thee in fighting of the Lords battles, who was the Prince and Savior in the
land of peace and rest, who walked in the midst of the candlesticks, who was
thy King thy shepherd thy temple wherein thou worshippedst, and the eternal
light of thy life in the Land of the living?

What is become of that holy spirit which q ickned thee to God, and which lived
in thee being quickened? which kept thee alive in him that lives, and made thee
taste the sweetness of life continually? Where is the anointing, which suppled
thee all over with the oil of gladness and salvation? Where is the comforter,
that refreshed thy spirit continually, and led thee into all truth, teaching
thee all the things of God, according to thy measure of growth in the life?
Where is the Spirit of thy Father, which Spirited thee with thy Fathers nature,
which begot and brought forth the life, power, glory, majesty, eternity of thy
Father in thee?

What is become of Sion, the holy Mount, whereon thou wast built? Sion, the
fortress of holiness, where is it? What is become of Jerusalem the holy City,
thy Mother whereof thou wast born? What is become of that Covenant of life, in
whose womb thou wast begotten and brought forth, and by whose milk, and breath
thou wast afterward nourished and brought up?

Where are all the fruits of the holy Land? the pleasant Grapes, the sweet
Figs, the precious Olives, that yielded Wine and Oil to make the heart glad,
and to refresh the countenance of the Lord of Life? Where Is the joy in the
Lord, the obedience to the Lord, the praying, the praising, the living, the
walking in his Spirit, the entering into and bringing forth fruit in his pure
understanding, and in his holy unspotted will and movings in the purified heart?

Alas, alas, Babylon has prevailed, her King has reigned, Sion has been held
in bonds, and that which has sprung up under her name, has been the filthy
off spring of Babylon, the seed of the Mother of Harlots; and these have
brought forth sower fruit, loathsome fruit, finely painted to the view of that
eye which cannot search into it, but loathsome in its nature. This has been the
State of the apostasy since the days of the Apostles, wherein that which has
not been of God has reigned, and that which has been of God has suffered,
and been reproached as if it had not been of God, and has panted and mourned
after the springing up of the spring of its life, and its gathering into it.

The deep sense of this has afflicted my Soul from my tender years, the
eternal witness awakening in me, and the eternal light manifesting the
darkness all along unto me, though I knew not that it was the light, but went
about to measure its appearances in me, by words which it self had formerly
spoken to others, and so set up my own understanding and comprehension as the
measurer, although I did not then perceive or think that I did so. Thus
continually (through ignorance) I slew the life, and sold my self for a thing
of nothing, even for such an appearance of life, as my understanding part could
judge most agreeable to Scriptures. This the Lord blew upon, though its
comeliness was unutterable (the life still feeding my Spirit underneath, from
whence sprang an inward beauty and freshness:) then such a day (or rather
night) of darkness and distress overtook me, as would make the hardest heart
melt to hear the relation of; yet the Lord was in that darkness, and he
preserved me, and was forming of me to himself; and the taste I had then of
him, was far beyond what ever I had known in the purest strains of my Religion
formerly. And the Lord powerfully shut up my understanding, and preserved my
life from the betrayer. But yet that was not perfectly destroyed in me, upon
which the Tempter might work: and the Lord suffered him to lay a snare, and my
feet were entangled unawares, in so much as the simplicity was betrayed, and
the fleshly part grew wise by those exercises wherewith the Lord had tried me.
This poisoned me, this hurt me, this struck at the root of my life, and death
insensibly grew upon me. The Devil (the envious seeds-man) cousened me with the
Image, which before I had had in the truth opening my understanding part (by
the subtilty of temptation and deceit) which the Lord had been destroying; and
letting that in, which the Lord had shut out: and then the Lord took away, and
shut up from that part, that which before he had opened to the seed, whereby
the way of life became stopped, and the way of death opened in a Mystery. And
then I could talk of universal love, of spiritual liberty, etc. and wait for
the glorious appearance of life, having lost that which formerly gave me the
sense of its nature: yea, at length I could seek to the creatures for what they
could yield, and strive to rub out the time of my misery without the immediate
presence of the life of the Creator. And as for this despicable people (whom I
now own in the Lord) I could measure them, I could fathom them: I could own
their standing, and yet see their shortness, and could (with satisfaction to
my spirit) write death upon them, as the end of that dispensation of life, into
which I saw them entering, and in part entered. Here was my standing, when the
Lord drew his sword upon me, and smote me in the very inmost of my soul: by
which stroke (lying still a while under it) my eyes came to be opened; and then
I saw the blindness of that eye, which was able to see so far, and the
narrowness of that heart and spirit, which was so large and vast in
comprehending: and my Soul bowed down to the Lord to slay this, to starve this,
to make a fool of this; yea my desire was (to present sense) as great after the
death of this, as after the enjoyment of life in the Lord.

And now this has opened a fresh spring of sorrow in me, a mourning over the
just one, which has been slain by me. O how cruelly, how often have I
murdered that, which came to give me life! how often have I sought to have my
own understanding, my own comprehension, my own will and affections in Religion
live, and the righteous pure immortal principle die! though I did not then call
it my own (as other men do not now) but took it to be of God, and to be the
thing that was to live: for I also was deceived, and thought the Bastard (which
was a false conception) was to inherit not knowing him to be the Bastard, but
taking him for the right heir. And my soul is exceedingly enlarged in me
toward those, who at this day lie under the power of the same deceit, who have
slain the Lord of life as well as I, and in whom the contrary nature lives
under a covering; who cannot possibly see that this (which now lives in them)
is not the heir until the same eye be opened in them.

The life that was stirring, at the beginning of the trouble of these Nations,
was very precious: it did unite to God, it did unite to one another; it kindled
an universal sense of the captivity, of the bondage, of the great oppression of
Israel, and a joint cry went up to God for deliverance. And God heard the cry,
and arose to deliver, and did begin to break the yoke, both outwardly in the
Nation, and inwardly in peoples spirits.

But then the tempter did also set himself at work, again to entangle Israel.
For this end he brings forth likenesses of that which Israel desired, and was
seeking after. He brings forth several forms of worship to allure some with,
several sorts of notions to allure others with, several fresh appearances of
life, of love, of liberty, to tempt the people of God aside from following that
spirit which rose up to deliver. Thus comes he forth, and prevails: he divides
in Jacob, and scatters in Israel; drawing one part to this form, another part
toward that form; one to this Notion, another to that Notion; one to this
inward Image, another to that spiritual Idol; and all from the life, all from
the power, all from the Savior, all from the deliverer: and so the work stops.
It stops in the Nation, and it stops in peoples spirits, and men generally
wheel about, and center again, and apply themselves to make Images like the
Images they had destroyed: and so the Captivity returns, Israel is turned back
into his bonds, and the Spirit which oppressed him before, again crusheth him,
and rules over him. And so great has the breach been upon Israel, that the
Spirit of the world is become hardened, and thinks there is an end of this work
of God, and now they may venture again to settle both Church and State, upon
the old Principles of that wisdom which the Lord was shaking.

And now, where is the people whom the Lord was redeeming; where is the praying
people, the panting people, the mourning people, the people that could have
traveled from sea to sea to have had the will of God revealed? are they not
run into the earth? is not the spirit of the earth come over them? are they not
dividing the spoils? The inward Jew, the renewed nature is sunk, lost, made a
prey of, the Gentile, the Heathenish Spirit has risen up, and seated it self
in a form of worship, or in some high Notions of knowledge, on which that
Spirit (which knows not the Tree of life) loves to feed. Some are stark dead,
no sense at all in them, but life quite swallowed up of death. Others perhaps
are still pressing toward the Kingdom, but in the wrong nature, in that which
shall never obtain; and they may there meet with some enjoyments, but not
enjoyments from or of the true thing, but of the likeness which the enemy has
painted to deceive them with: and they may also wait and hope that the Kingdom
will come, and yet be out of that which knows its coming, and can alone prepare
the heart for its appearance. Yea some are got so high, that they are even in
the Throne: They have the love, the life, the liberty, the joy, the peace of
the Kingdom (as they imagine.) They can reign as Kings without us, without that
nature and principle wherein our life lies. But these mighty ones, these
Princes the Lord will pull from their seat, and raise up the humble, the meek,
the low in heart, the beggar from the dunghill, and give to him the Throne of
his glory.

Now this, my life in love says to you all, as the proper and only way of your
recovery and redemption, come to that which can judge you. Sion is to be
redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness. If Sion be
redeemed, if the seed be again raised, that Spirit which has got up above it
(and keeps it down) must be judged, and brought under by judgment. How was
Israel of old to be recovered from her idolatries and whoredoms, but by owning
and coming to that light in the Prophets which manifested, and judged it? Ye
also have worshipped Idols, ye also have run a whoring from the Lord, and have
been inflamed with Idols under every green Tree. Every new Idol, every fresh
appearance, every lively likeness has tempted you aside from the living God.
When one way of worship has been dry and barren, ye have left that; when some
notions of things have appeared empty and shallow, ye have been weary of them;
but the next new Idol, under the next green Tree, has drawn you aside into the
bed of whoredom, where ye have lost true fellowship with the true God of life,
and have been betrayed of the seed of life, which he began to quicken and raise
from the dead. Now come to that which judges the Idol, the Idol-maker, the
whorish Spirit which tempts aside from the true husband, and that Spirit
which is liable to be Tempted; and let these be cut down by the judgment, and
then the true seed of life will spring and flourish again. There is no other
way, be not deceived. That must be awakened in you which can judge you, and
must bring forth its judgment in you unto Victory, if life in you ever rise and
get the dominion over death. And that Spirit which now rules in you (and keeps
the life down) knows this very well, and therefore endeavors all it can, to
keep you from owning judgment. He would feign keep the light in others from
judging you, Do not judge, says he, All judgment is committed to the Son.
True, but shall not the light of the Son judge? shall not the light of that
candle which the Lord has lighted in one heart, discover and judge the darkness
in another heart? Light does make manifest, and its manifestation is its
judgment, the uttering of the words are but the declaration of what the light
in the heart has done before, and cannot but do; for as long as it is light,
where ever it come, it will and cannot but discover and judge the darkness it
meets with, though the darkness cannot own either its discovery or its
judgment, but must needs except against it. Now if he cannot do this (which is
utterly impossibly for the dark spirit to do) then, in the next place, he
fortifies and hardens the heart, as much as he can, from receiving the
judgment, by persuading him to look upon it as the judgment of another spirit
like his own, and not as the judgment of the light, And so what Paul said
concerning man's judgment (that it was a small matter to him to be judged by
man's judgment) the same will he say concerning this judgment. And yet, as the
greatest judgment of man, in the highest strain of the comprehending part,
shall fall: so the lowest judgment of the light in the weakest child shall
stand; and all the exalted ones of the earth shall in due time fall before it,
though now (in the present elevation of their minds) they may rise high above
it, and trample it down. Therefore be not afraid to judge deceit. O ye weak
ones, but be sure that the light alone in you judge; and lie very low in the
light, that that part, which the light in you judges in others, get not up in
you, while the light is making use of you to judge it in others.

And now ye poor lost souls (who find the need of judgment, and any willingness
within you to embrace it) wait first, for the rising of the Judge of Israel in
your hearts, and in the next place wait for the joining of your hearts to him;
both which are to be done by his eternal light, which manifests and gives his
life. In the lowest shining of this light there is the judgment, and there is
the King himself (who is not severed from the least degree or mersure of his
own light) bow down to him, kiss his feet; know the nature of the thing, and
subject to it: worship him here in his humiliation, receive him in his strokes,
in his smitings (and observe, and turn from that in your selves which smites
him) and ye shall one day see him in his majesty, in the power of his love, in
his everlasting healings and embraces. And know assuredly, that that which will
not worship him here, will not be fit to worship him there, nor shall not; but
shall only tremble at the dread of his majesty, and be confounded at the
sweetness of his love, but not be able to bow down to it in the true life. For
that Spirit which is out of the life, is shut out in its highest desires,
hopes, seize, enjoyments, seemingly spiritual rest, universal love,
liberty and peace, as well as in its darkest and grossest paths of pollution.
Therefore wait to know the nature of things, that ye may not be deceived with
the highest, choicest, and most powerful appearances of death in the exactest
image of life, not stumble at true life in its lowest and weakest appearance.
And this ye can only attain to by a birth of, and growth up in the true
wisdom, which slaies that spirit which lives on the same things in the
comprehension, and gathers a stock of knowledge and experiences in its own
understanding part. These are words of tender love, and they will also be words
of true life, where the Fathers earth opens to drink them in, to whose good
pleasure and blessing my soul commends them.

Some Propositions concerning the only way of Salvation.

1. That there is no way of being saved from sin and wrath eternal, but by that
Christ alone which died at Jerusalem. There is no name, virtue, life, or power
under heaven given, by which lost man may be saved, but his alone.

2. That there is no way of being saved by him, but through receiving him into
the heart by a living faith, and having him formed in the heart. Christ saves
not as he stands without at the door knocking, but as he is let in; and being
let in, he brings in with him that life, power, and mercy which breaks down the
wall of partition, unites to God, and saves. The Jews could not be saved
formerly by belief of a Messiah to come (with the observation of all the Laws
and Ordinances of Moses) nor can any now be saved by belief of a Christ already
come (with observation of all that the Apostles Commanded or Practiced) but
alone by the receiving of him into the heart, who there works out the Salvation.

3. That there is no way of receiving Christ into the heart, and of having him
formed there, but by receiving the light of his spirit, in which light he is,
and dwells: Keep out the light of the spirit, keep out Christ; let in the light
of the spirit, let in Christ: for the Father and the Son are light, and are
alone known and received in the light, but never out of it.

4. That the way of receiving the light of the spirit into the heart (and
thereby uniting with the Father and the Son) is by harkening to, and receiving
its convictions of sin there. The first operation of the spirit toward man
lying in the sin, is to convince him of the sin: and he that receives not the
convincing light of the spirit, the work is stopped in him at the very first;
and Christ can never come to be formed in him, because that light, whereby he
should be formed, is kept out. And then he may talk of Christ, and practice
duties (pray, read, and meditate much) and gather comforts from promises, and
run into Ordinances, and be exceeding zealous and affectionate in all these,
and yet perish in the end. Yea the Devil will let him alone (if not help him in
all this) knowing that he has him the surer thereby, he being (by the strict
observation of these) kept out of the danger of his condition, which otherwise,
perhaps, he might be made sensible of.

Object. But I may be deceived in harkening to a light within, for while I
think that I therein hearken to the light of the Spirit, it may prove but the
light of a natural conscience.

Answ. 1. If it should be but the light of a natural Conscience, and it draw
thee from sin (which separates from God) and so prepare thee for the
understanding, believing, and receiving what the Scripture says of Christ,
this is no very bad deceit; but if in the result it should prove to have been
the light of the Spirit, and thou all thy life time have took it for the light
of a natural conscience (and so have despised, or at least neglected, if not
reproached it) thou will then find that this was a very bad deceit.

2. I can show thee by express Scripture, that it is the work of the spirit to
convince of sin, Joh. 16.8. And again, that the Law (which is spiritual)
manifests that which is corrupt and carnal, Romans 7.14. But where can thou
show me from Scripture, that a natural conscience can convince of sin?

3. Let any man give heed to the light in his heart, he shall find it to
discover his most inward, his most secret, his most spiritual evils, which a
natural light cannot do: for that which is natural cannot discover that which
is spiritual.

4. The Apostle says, That it is the grace which has appeared to all men,
which teaches not only godliness, but also sobriety and righteousness, Tit.
2.11 12. The light of the fallen nature is darkness, can teach nothing of God;
what any man learns now of the true knowledge of God, he learns by grace, which
shines in the darkness of man's nature, to leaven it with the true knowledge,
though man (being darkness) can by no means comprehend it, and so cannot give
it its true name.

Therefore take heed lest (through ignorance) ye blaspheme the holy light of
the pure Spirit, calling that natural (looking on it with the carnal eye) which
with the spiritual eye is seen to be spiritual. For thou that do this, wilt
be be also erring on the other hand, calling thy carnal meanings and
conceivings (about the mind of the Spirit of God in Scripture) spiritual. And
he that thus puts darkness for light, must needs put light for darkness; and
then call evil good, and good evil: and so err from the Spirit of God in the
whole course of his Religion, even in the most inward exercises of it.

Man by nature is dead in trespasses and sins, quite dead, and his conscience
wholly dark. That which gives him the sense of his death, and of his
darkness, must be another thing then his nature, even the light of the spirit
of Christ, shining in his dark heart and conscience. It is the seed of the
woman which not only destroys, but also discovers all the deeds of the
Serpent. Now this seed, this light is one in all, though there have been
several dispensations of it: One to the Heathen, in whom it springs up after an
hidden manner, even as it were naturally, from whence it had the name of the
Light of Nature (though it be the mystery of life and salvation hid in them,
Col. 1.27. this mystery in the Gentiles, it is ill translated among:) another
to the Jews, in whom it was more vigorously stirred up by a Law given, who by
types, and shadows, and righteous exercises according to the Law, were to be
awakened to the living principle, Mich. 6.8. Another to the Christians, in whom
it was livelily brought forth to light and life, by an especial dispensation of
grace; in so much as that which was the Mystery in the Gentiles, and veiled
from the Jews, being opened in them, was found to be Christ the hope, Col.
1.27. But under all these dispensations, the generality of men have fallen
short of the glory of God, and missed of the substance. Therefore the Lord God
is now bringing forth the substance it self, but under such a vail as hides it
from the eye of man's wisdom, under what dispensation soever he be, and how
high soever in that dispensation. To some it seems natural, to others legal; to
some it seems from the power of Satan (or at least they pretend so) to others
it seems the ministry of John Baptist. Thus men guess at it in the wisdom of
their comprehensions, waiting the true line and plummet to measure it by.

Now to you who have not waited to learn in the wisdom of God the names of
things (which there are given according to their nature) but in the
forwardness of your spirits, from your gathered knowledge, without the living
power have ventured to call that natural, which in the eternal wisdom is seen
to be spiritual (and which has been able to effect that, which all that
knowledge which ye call spiritual, could never do) let me propose th
consideration of one Scripture to your Consciences in the sight of God.

The Scripture is that in Job 28.12. to the end.

Where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding? Man
knows not the price thereof, neither is it found in the land of the living.
The deep says, it is not in me; and the sea says, not in me. It cannot be
gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for the price thoreof, etc.
Whence then comes wisdom, and where is the place of understanding? seeing it
is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the fowls of Heaven.
Destruction and death say, we have heard the fame thereof with our ears. God
understands the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof, etc. And he
said unto man, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart
from evil is understanding.

Now consider well:

First, Is this natural wisdom or spiritual wisdom that is thus precious?
What is this that destruction and death have heard the fame of? Is it the
wisdom of nature? or is it Christ the wisdom of God?

Secondly, Where is the place of this? where does God point man to find this
wisdom? He points him to the fear, Unto man he said (he has showed thee, O
man, what is good) Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart
from evil is understanding. Go to the fear, there it is taught, that is the
wisdom: learn by the fear to depart from evil, that is the understanding. This
is it which is so precious, which nothing can equalize or value, here is the
place of it, thus it is to be learned. Sin overspreads all the land of
darkness, there is no fear of God before men's eyes there, there is no learning
of the fear there, all the wisdom that man can come by, cannot teach it* he
that learneth to fear God, to depart from evil, must learn of Christ the wisdom
of God, and must deny all the varieties of the wisdom of men, which undertakes
to teach it, but cannot.

Thirdly, What is that in every man which teachech the fear? which teaches to
depart from evil? Every man has in him an eye that sees the evil; what is that
eye which the God of this world does so strive to blind, and does so generally
blind? Every man has in him an enemy to evil, one that never consented to it,
but still reproves it, and fights against it, even in secret: what is this?
This is no less then a ray from Christ the wisdom of God, out of the seat of
the fear in every heart, to lead into the fear, where the Law of departing from
eniquity is learned; and so this ray, being harkned unto, and followed in the
fear, brings up into the love, into the life, into the light, into the wisdom,
into the power. Do not shut your eyes now, O ye wise ones, but open your
hearts, and let in that which knocks there, which can and will save you, being
let in, and which alone can save you, For it is not a notion of a Christ
without (with multitudes of practices of self-denial and mortification
thereupon) which can save, but Christ heard knocking, and let into the heart.
This will open the Scriptures aright; yea this is the true key, which will
truly open words, things, and Spirits; but he that opens without this key, is a
Thief and a Robber, and shall restore (in the day of Gods Judgment) all that he
has stolen; and woe to him, who when he is stripped of what he has stolen,
is found naked. The Scriptures were generally given forth to the people of God;
part to the Jews, part to the Christians. He that is born of the life, has
right unto them, and can read and understand them in the Spirit, which dwells in
the life, But he that is not born of the Spirit, is but an intruder, and does
but steal other men's light, and other men's conditions and experiences into his
carnal understanding, for which they were never intended, but only to be read
and seen in that light which wrote them. And all these carnal apprehensions of
his (with all the faith, hope, love, knowledge; exercises, etc. which he has
gained into his Spirit hereby, with all his prayers, tears and fasts, and other
limitations) will become loss to him, (for he must be stripped of them all, and
become so much the more naked) when God recovers his Scriptures from man's dark
Spirit (which has torn them, and exceedingly profaned them with his
conceivings, guessings, and imaginings) and restores them again to his people.
The Prophets, and Apostles who wrote Scripture, first had the life in them; and
he who understands their words, must first have the life in him. He that
understands words of life, must first have life in himself. And the life (from
which the word came) is the measurer of the words, and not the words of the
life. And when the Scripture is interpreted by the life and Spirit which penned
it, there is then no more jangling and contending about it; for all this is out
of the life, from and in that Spirit, nature, and mind where the lust, the
enmity, the contention is, and not the unity, the love, the peace. But this is
it which undoeth all, the dead spirit of man reads Scripture, and from that
wisdom which is in the death (not knowing the mind of the Spirit) gives
meanings: and from believing and practicing the things there spoken of (which
death may do, as well as speak of the fame) gathers an hope that all shall be
well at last for Christ's sake, though it feel not the purification, the
cleansing, the circumcision which cuts off the body of sin and death here (for
it is not to be cut off hereafter) and so gives an entrance into the
everlasting Kingdom, where the King of righteousness is seen, known, and
worshipped in spirit.

The Fundamental Principle of the Gospel.

This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you,
That God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, 1 John 1.5.

This was the message which Christ gave his Apostles to make way into men's
hearts by. This is the first thing that is proper for the mind to receive which
lies in the darkness; namely, that there is no darkness in God, nothing but
light. Darkness is excluded from him, and the mind that lies in darkness
cannot have union or fellowship with him: Therefore he that will be one with
God, and partake of his life, must come out of the darkness, which has no
place with God, into the light where God is, and in which he dwells.

The work of the Son is to reveal the Father, and to draw to the Father. He
reveals him as light (as the spring of light, as the fountain of light) and he
draws to him as light. When he gives to his Apostles the standing message
whereby they were to make him known to the world, and whereby men were to come
into fellowship and acquaintance with him, this is it, That God is light, and
in him is no darkness at all.

Christ Jesus, the Son of God, he is the image of his substance, the exact
image of this light, the light of the world, who is to light the world unto
this substance. So that as God the Father is to be known as light, so Christ
the Son also is to be known as light. He is the only begotten of the Father of
lights, the alone image wherein the eternal substance is revealed and made
known. And he that receives this image, receives the substance; and he that
receives not this Image receives not the substance.

Now there is a breath or spirit from this substance in this Image, which draws
to this Image (thus the Father draws to the Son) and the Image again draws to
the substance (thus the Son draws to the Father) And so harkening to this
breath, the mind and soul is led out of the darkness into the Image of light
(which is the Son) and by the Image into the substance: and here is the
fellowship which the Gospel invites to. Joining to this breath, being
transformed by this breath, living in this breath, walking in this holy
inspiration, there is an unity with the Father and the Son, who themselves dwell
in th^^ breath, from whom this breath comes, in whom this breath is, and in
whom all are who are one with this breath.

This breath purges out the dark breath, the dark air, the dark power, the
mystery of death and darkness, and fills with the breath of light, with the
breath of life, with the living power, with the holy pure mystery.

Now as the Father is light, and the Son light, so this breath, this spirit
which proceeds from them both, is light also. And as the Father who is light,
can alone be revealed by the Son who is light: so the Son who is light, can
alone be revealed by the spirit who is light.

He then who hears this message, that God is light, and feels himself
darkness and in darkness, and is willing to be drawn out of the darkness,
into fellowship with God who is light: This is requisite for him to know,
namely, how he may be drawn out, who it is that draws, and which are the
drawings, that he may not resist or neglect them (waiting for another thing)
and so miss of the true and only passage unto life. Wherefore observe this
heedfully.

None can draw to the Father but the Son: none can draw to the Son but the
Father: and both these alone draw by the spirit. The Father by his Spirit draws
to the Son, and the Son by the same spirit draws to the Father: and they both
draw by the spirit as he is light, as he is their light lighted to that end.
For as the Father is light, and the Son light, so that Spirit which draws to
them, must be light also. He is indeed the breath of light, eternally lighted,
to draw to the eternal Image of light, and then to the eternal substance, which
eternally dwells in that eternal Image.

Q. But how may I know the Spirit and its operations, that I may follow him,
and be led by him, both to the Son and to the Father, and so come into the
everlasting fellowship?

A. The Spirit is to be known by those motions and operations which are proper
to him, which flow alone from him, and from nothing else.

Q. What are they?

A. Convincing of sin, and reproving for sin, which nothing can truly discover
and reprove but the light of the Spirit. Darkness cannot make manifest
darkness, but whatsoever makes manifest is light. All the discoveries of
darkness in the hidden world of the heart, are from Christ the Sun of
Righteousness, by his Spirit, what name soever men may give it, who know not
this Sun, nor its light, nor the true names of things in the light, but have
named even the things of God in the dark, and according to the dark
apprehensions and conceptions of their own imaginary mind. But this I say to
such as are so ready to beat their brains and dispute, leave contending about
names, come to the thing, come to that which reproves thee in secret, follow
the light that thus checks and draws; be diligent, be faithful, be obedient;
thou shall find this lead thee to that, which all thy knowledge out of this
(even all that which thou call Spiritual light) will never be able to lead
thee.

And when thou art joined to this light, it will show thee him whom thou have
pierced (even so as never yet thou saw him) and open a fresh vain of blood
and grief in thee, to bleed and mourn over him; and work that repentance in
thee, which thou never wast acquainted with before; and teach thee that faith,
to which yet thou art a stranger; and teach thee that self-denial, which will
reach to the very root of that nature which yet lives, even under that, and by
means of that which thou call spiritual light; and will lay such an yoke on
thy neck, as the unrighteou one is not able to bear, yea such an one as the
hypocrite which is able to hide it self under confessions of sin and forms of
zeal, knowledge, devotion and worship) shall be daily tormented and wasted with.
And then thou shall know what it is to wait upon God in the way of his
judgments, and find the powers of life and death striving for thy soul, and
daily floods and storms encompassing and attending thee, under which thou will
assuredly fall and perish, unless the everlasting arm of Gods power be
stretched out for thee, and be continually redeeming thee. And then thou will
feel and see how sin is pardoned, and how it is bound; how death brake in upon
Adam, and how it daily breaks in upon mankind; and what that standard is, which
the spirit of the Lord lifts up against the powers of darkness. And then
thou will come clearly to perceive how that which thou have called religion
formerly (which flowed not from this principle) has been but the invention of
thine own imaginary mind though thou fatheredst it upon the Scriptures, as most
men do most of their inventions about Doctrine and Worship) wherein thou have
been in a dream of being changed, and yet remainest still the same in nature,
and have had a name that thou have lived, but art still dead; a name of being
sanctified, but still unclean; a name of being justified, but still condemned
by the light in thine own conscience, which is one with him who is thy Judge,
and who will judge according to it. And so, as that which is real takes place
in thee, so that which has been but imaginary will pass away.

A short Catechism, for the sake of the simple-hearted.
Quest. What is the estate and condition of all men by nature, as they are
begotten of the seed of the evil doer, and come out of the loins of the first
Adam?

Answ. A state of sin and darkness, a state of death and misery, a state of
enmity against God, a state accursed from God, exposed to his wrath and most
righteous judgments, both here and hereafter.

Q. What brought Adam to this estate? and what keeps the sons of Adam in it?

A. Feeding on the tree of knowledge, from which man is not excluded to this
day, though he is from the tree of life.

Q. How came Adam at first, and how come men still to feed on the tree of
knowledge?

A. From a lustful appetite and desire after the forbidden wisdom, sown in
their hearts by the envious enemy of their souls, who is continually twining
about this tree, and tempting men and women to eat of it, persuading them that
the fruit thereof is good for food: and indeed it is very desirable to their
eye, and promises fair to make them everlastingly wise, but still fails.

Q. What is the forbidden fruit?

A. It is knowledge without life, knowledge in the earthly part, knowledge
acquired from below, not given from above. This promises to make men as God,
and to give them the ability of discerning and distinguishing between good and
evil, which is Gods peculiar property. Eating of this fruit undid Adam, undid
the Gentiles, undid the Jews, undid the Christians, they all feeding on the
tree of knowledge, and departing from the life in their several dispensations.

Q. How does this fruit undo man?

A. The wisdom and knowledge (which they thus gather and feed upon) perverts
them, makes them wise in the wrong part, exalts them against the life, duls the
true appetite, and increases the wrong appetite, in so much as that there is
not so much as a desire in them after God in truth, but only to get knowledge
and wisdom from what they can comprehend. By this means whatsoever was
afterward ordained to life, became death to man. Thus the Gentiles liked not
to retain God in their knowledge, but fell by their dispensation, provoking God
to cast them off, and give them up to the vanity of their imaginations. And
thus the Jews (whom God then chose) fell likewise by their dispensation, God
for this cause giving them up to their own hearts lusts, and rejecting them
from being a people. And the Gentiles (whom God ingrafted into the true Olive,
in the Jews stead) they also after the same manner fell by their dispensation.
Thus each of these fell by gathering wisdom from the letter, but missing of the
life in every of these dispensations.

Q. What is the food which man should feed on?

A. The tree of life, the word which lives and abides for ever, which is in
the midst of the garden of God, which word was made flesh for man's weakness
sake, on which flesh the living soul feeds, and whose blood the living spirit
drinks, and so is nourished up to eternal life.

Q. But had Adam this food to feed on? and was this to be the food of the
Gentiles, Jews and Christians in their several dispensations?

A. God breathed into man the breath of life, and man became a living soul: and
nothing less then life it self could satisfy his soul at first, nor can to
this day. Every word of God that comes fresh out of his mouth, is man's food
and life. And God speaks often to man, showing him what is good, but he
cannot relish or feed on this, but desires somewhat else, through the error
and alienation of his mind. And what God speaks now to man (if that be man's
life) Adam had much more of it before his fall. And for the Jews, Moses tells
them the word was nigh them, in their heart, and in their mouth: and Paul also
tells the Christians so. So that the word is not far from any man, but men's ears
are generally stopped against it, by the subtilty of the serpent, which at
first deceived them.

Q. But did not the Jews seek for eternal life, in reading and studying the
Scriptures under their dispensation? and do not the Christians now seek for
life, and to feed on life?

A. Yea they did, and do in their own way, but they refuse it in Gods way. Thus
Adam after he had eat of the tree of knowledge, would have fed on the tree of
life also, but he was shut out then, and so are Christians now. And if ever
they will feed on the tree of life, they must loose their knowledge, they must
be made blind, and be led to it by a way that they know not.

Q. This is too misterious for me, give me the plain literal knowledge of the
Scriptures.

A. Is not the substance a mystery? is not the life there? The letter of any
dispensation kills: it is the spirit alone that gives life. A man may read
the letter of the Scripture diligently and gather a large knowledge therefrom,
and feed greedily thereon, but it is only the dead spirit which so feeds, but
the soul underneath is lean, barren, hungry and unsatisfied, which when it
awakes, it will feel.

Q. But may not the dead spirit ar well imagine mysteries in every thing, and
feed thereon?

A. Yea it may, and the error here is greater then the former: but in waiting
in the humilty and fear, to have the true eye opened, and the true mystery
revealed to the humble and honest heart, and in receiving of that in the
demonstration of the spirit, out of the wisdom of the flesh, here is no error,
but the true knowledge, which springs from life, and brings life.

Q. How may I come at this mystery?

A. There is but one key can open it, but one hand can turn that key, and but
one vessel, but one heart, but one spirit, which can receive the knowledge.

Q. How may I come by that heart?

A. As thou being touched with the enemy did let him in, and did not thrust
him by with the power of that life which was stronger th^n he, and nearer to
thee. Even so now, when thou art touched and drawn by thy friend, (who is nigh)
and thereby find the beginning of virtue entering into thee, give up in and
by that life and virtue, and wait for more; and still as thou feel that
following, calling, and growing upon thee; follow on in it, and it will lead
thee in a wonderful way out of the land of death and darkness, where thy soul
has been a captive, into the land of life and perfect liberty.

Q. But can I do any thing toward my own salvation?

A. Of thy self thou can not, but in the power of him that works both to
will and to do, thou may do a little at first: and as that power grows in
thee, thou will be able to will more, and to do more, even until nothing become
too hard for thee. And when thou have conquered all, suffered all, performed
all, thou shall see, and be able understandingly to say, Thou have done
nothing, but the eternal virtue, life and power has wrought all in thee.

Q. I perceive, by what is said, that there is a Savior, one which has
virtue, life and power in him to save, but how may I meet with him?

A. Yea, he that made man pittieth him, and is not willing that he should
perish in the pit into which he fell, but has appointed one to draw him out,
and save him.

Q. Who is this Savior?

A. He is the Tree of Life I have spoken of all this while, whose leaves have
virtue in them to heal the Nations. He is the plant of righteousness, the
plant of Gods right hand (have thou ever known such a plant in thee, planted
there by the right hand of God?) He is the Resurrection and the Life, which
raises the dead soul, and causes it to live. He is the spiritual Manna,
whereupon the quickened soul feeds. Yea, his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood
is drink indeed, which he that is raised up in the life feeds on, and finds
the living virtue in them which satisfies and nourishes up his immortal soul.

Q. But has not this Savior a name? What is his name?

A. It were better for thee to learn his name by feeling his virtue and power
in thy heart, then by rote. Yet (if thou can receive it) this is his name,
The light, the light of the World, (a light to enlighten the Gentiles, that he
may convert and make them Gods Israel, and become their glory.) And according
to his Office, he has enlightened every man that comes into the world, though
men neither know the light that comes from him, nor him from whom the light
comes; and so notwithstanding the light is so near them, remain strangers to
it, and unsaved by it.

Q. Why do thou call him the light? are there not other names every whit as
proper, whereby he may as well be known?

A. Do not thus let up the wise and stumbling part in thee, but mind the thing,
which first puts forth its virtue as light, and so is thus first to be known,
owned, and received. Yet more particularly, if thou have wherewith, consider
this reason: We call him light, because the father of lights has peculiarly
chosen this name for him, to make him known to his people in this age by, and
has thus made him manifest to us. And by thus receiving him, under this name,
we come to know his other names. He is the life, the righteousness, the power,
the wisdom, the peace, etc. but he is all these in the light, and in the light
we learn and receive them all: and they are none of them to be known in spirit,
but in and by the light.

Q. How are the other names of Christ known in and by the light?

A. Letting in the light (which convinces of, and warreth against sin) the
life stirs and is felt, and the life leads to the word which was in the
beginning, and gives the feeling of that also. And in the word, the
righteousness, the peace, the wisdom, the power, the love is felt; and he is
made all these to those who are led into, and kept in the light. And when the
powers of darkness appear with mighty dread, and there is no strength to
withstand them, this lifts up a standard against them, and calms all the
tempests, and cures all the wounds and diseases of the soul, anointing it with
the everlasting oil, so that now I can sensibly, and with clear understanding
call it my Savior, the Captain of my salvation, my Christ or anointed, my
Husband, my King, my Lord, my God.

Q. Where does this light shine?

A. In the darkness at first: but when it has vanquished, expelled and
dispersed the darkness, it shines out of it.

Q. What is that darkness wherein the light shines?

A. Man: man's heart, man's conscience, man's spirit. This is the world, which
Christ the Sun of righteousness is the light of, in every part whereof he
causes the rays or beams of his light to shine at his pleasure, though in no
part the darkness can comprehend the least shining of his light?

Q. How then can it ever be converted thereby?

A. The darkness is not to be converted. Every man in this state is
reprobated, and the wrath abides on him. So that the darkness is rejected,
and man in the darkness; but man touched by the light, made sensible of it,
and following it in the life and power which it begets, is drawn out of the
horrible pit, and saved.

Q How may I do to find the light in the midst of the da^kness of my heart,
which is so great, and this seed so small?

A. By its discovering and warring against the darkness. There is somewhat
which discovers both the open and secret iniquity of the corrupt heart,
following it under all its coverings of zeal, holiness, and all manner of
voluntary humility, and self righteousness (with which the true light ^^ver
had unity) and sometimes may cause secret misgivings that all is not well, but
there may be a flaw found in this covering, and in the end it may prove too
narrow for the soul. This which thus warreth against the darkness, to bring
people off from all false foundations, to the true and living foundation, this
is the light, and thus thou may find it, at some time or other at work in thy
heart, if thou mind it.

Q. Having found the light, how may I come to feel the saving virtue and power
of it?

A. By believing in it. For the virtue and power springs up in the heart that
believes in it.

Q. How can I believe in it, am not I dead?

A. There is a creating, a quickening power in the light, which begets a little
life, and that can answer the voice of the living power.

Q. Yea, If I could find any such thing begotten in me, then I might be drawn
to assent that that (though never so small) might believe, but surely my dead
heart never can.

A. Have thou never found a true honest breathing toward God? have thou never
found sin, not an imaginary, but a real burden? This was from life; there was
somewhat begotten of God in thee, which felt this: It was not flesh and blood
in thee, but somewhat from above. And if this had known the spring of its life,
and not been deceived from it by the subtilty, it would have fed upon, and have
grown up in the virtue and power of the spring, from whence its life came.

Q. Why then, by this, all men have power to believe.

A. In the light which shines in all, and visits all, there is the power: and
this power strives with the creature to work it self into the creature; and
where there has been the least breathing after life, there has been a taste
of the power: for this came from it. But the great deceiver of souls, lifts up
men's mind in the imagination, to look for some great appearance of power, and
so they slight and overlook the day of small things, and neglect receiving the
beginnings of that, which in the issue would be the thing they look for.
Waiting in that which is low and little in the heart, the power enters, the
seed grows, the Kingdom is felt, and daily more and more revealed in the power.
And this is the true way and door to the thing, take heed of climbing over it.

Q. What is it to believe in the light?

A. To receive its testimony either concerning good or evil: and so either to
turn toward or from, in the will and power which the light begets in the heart.

Q. How will this save me?

A. By this means, that in thee which destroys thee (and separates thee from
the living God) is daily wrought out, and the heart daily changed into the
Image of him who is light, and brought into unity and fellowship with the
light, possessing of it, and being possessed by it, and this is Salvation.

Q. We thought salvation had been a thing to be bestowed hereafter, after the
death of the body: but if it be thus, then salvation is wrought out here.

A. So it is, even in all that are saved: for there is no working of it out
hereafter, but here it is wrought out with fear and trembling, and the believer
(who is truly in unity with the life) daily changed from glory to glory, as by
the Spirit of the Lord.

Q. But show more particularly, how Faith or believing in the light works out
the Salvation.

A. First, it causes a fear and trembling to seize upon the sinner. The Lord
God Almighty, by the rising of his light in the heart, causes the powers of
darkness to shake, the earth to tremble, the hills and mountains to melt, and
the goodly Fruit Trees to cast their fruit. And then the plant of the Lord
springs up out of the dry and barren ground, which by the dews and showers from
above, thrives, grows, and spreads till it fills Gods earth.

2. In this fear and trembling, the work of true repentantance and conversion
is begun and carried on. There is a turning of the Soul from the darkness to
the light; from the dark power to the power of light; from the spirit of
deceit, to the Spirit of truth, from all false appearances and imaginations
about holiness, to that which the eternal light manifests to be truly so. And
now is a time of mourning, of deep mourning, while the separtion is working,
while the enemies strength is not broken and subdued, and while the heart is
now and then feeling it self, still hankering after its old lovers.

3. In the belief of the light, and in the fear placed in the heart, there
springs up an hope, a living hope in the living principle, which has
manifested it self and begun to work. For the Soul truly turning to the light,
the everlasting Arm, the living power is felt: and the Anchor being felt, it
stays the soul in all the tossings, troubles, storms, and tempests it meets
with afterward, which are many, yea very many.

4. Faith, through the hope works righteousness, and teaches the true wisdom
(and now the benefit of all the former trouble, anguish and misery begins to be
felt, and the work goes on sweetly.) All unrighteousness is in the darkness,
in the unbelief, in the false hope; faith in the light works out the
unrighteousness, and works in the righteousness of God in Christ. And it
makes truly wise, wise in the living power, even wise against the evil and to
the good, which no man can learn elsewhere.

5. In the righteousness, and in the true wisdom which is received in the
light, there springs up a love, and an unity and fellowship with God the Father
of lights, and with all who are children of the light. Being begotten by Christ
the light, into the nature of the light, and brought forth in the Image, there
is an unity soon felt with God the Father, and with those who are born of the
same womb, and partake of the same nature. And here is a willingness and power
felt in this love, to lay down the life, even for the least truth of Christ's,
or for the brethren.

6. Belief in the light works patience, meekness, gentleness, tenderness and
long suffering. It will bear any thing for God, any thing for men's souls sake.
It will wait quietly and stilly for the carrying on of the work of God in its
own soul, and for the manifestation of Gods love and mercy to others. It will
bear the contradiction and reproach of sinners, seeking their good, even while
they are plotting, contriving and hatching mischief, laying many subtle snares,
and longing thereby to entrap the innocent.

7. It brings peace, joy, and glory. Faith in the light breaks down the wall of
darkness, the wall of Partition, that which separates from the peace, that
which causes the anguish and trouble upon the soul, and so brings into peace.
Christ is the skilful Physician, he cures the disease by removing the cause.
The unskilful Physicians they heal deceitfully, crying peace, peace, while
there is no peace, while that which breaks the peace is standing; but Christ
does not so, but slaies the enmity in the heart by the blood of his cross, so
making peace. And this is true peace certain peace.

Now finding the clods of earth removed, the enemy, the disturber, the
peace-breaker trodden down, the sin taken away, the life and power present, the
soul brought into the peace, here is joy, unspeakable joy, joy which the world
cannot see or touch, nor the powers of darkness come near to interrupt. Here Is
now no more crying out, O wretched man: and who shall deliver, etc. but a
rejoicing in him who has given victory, and made the soul a conqueror, yea
more then a conqueror. Wait to feel that, thou who art now groaning, and
oppressed by the merciless powers of darkness. And this joy is full of glory,
which glory increases daily more and more, by the daily sight and feeling of
the living virtue and power in Christ the light, whereby the soul is
continually transformed (and changed more and more) out of the corruptible,
into the incorruptible; out of the uncircumcision, the shame, the reproach,
into the circumcision, the life, the glory.

Q. Does the light do all this?

A. Yea, in them that turn toward it, give up to it, and abide in it. In them
it cleanses out the thickness, and darkness, and daily transformeth them
into the image, purity and perfection of the light. And this nothing can do but
the light alone.

Q. What makes men generally so averse from the light?

A. Their unity with the darkness, which the light is an enemy to, discovering
and disturbing it.

Q. But wise men, knowing men (men who are looked upon as having most light)
they also are enemies to this light, and speak hardly of it.

A. Was it not always so? Did any of the Rulers or wise Scribes and Teachers
of the Law believe in him formerly? and is it any wonder if such believe not in
him now?

Q. What may be the reason, why the wise men formerly have not, and now cannot
believe in the light?

A. There are two great reasons for it:

1. Because they cannot comprehend it. They can comprehend the knowledge which
they can gather out of the book of Nature, or out of the books of the Law and
Prophets, or out of the books of the Evangelists and Apostles, but they cannot
comprehend the light which all these testify of (so that such a kind of
knowledge they can receive, but the light they cannot) for it is not to be
comprehended, but gathers into it self, and comprehends.

2. Because it is an utter enemy to them. It will not wink at the closest of
their evils, nor speak peace to them therein. Their own gathered knowledge may
speak peace to them, but this will not. Thus the Jews could speak peace to
themselves, from their Temple, Ordinances and Sactifices, though they walked in
the stubborness and uncircumcision of their hearts, resisting the checks and
motions of the holy spirit there: and thus the Christians can speak peace to
themselves from a belief and hope through Christ's dying at Jerusalem (though
they know not him in them, and are at a distance, and not one with that in
their hearts which is of Christ, and in his power and authority checks and
reproves for sin) but the light will not speak peace so, but only where the
virtue of the living blood is felt, cleansing away the sin.

Q. But there are many professors, strict professors (who, without doubt have
once tasted of the living virtue) what makes them such enemies to the light?
for there are none speaks more against it then they.

A. 1. Because they are fallen from what they once had, for if they were in
that living principle, which once gave them a true taste of life through the
Scriptures, they could not but know and own the light, which was the thing
which gave them the taste, and would have preserved their relish, had they
known how to turn to it, and abide in it.

2. The light is a witness against all their knowledge and religious practices
and imitations from the Scripture, which they hold and practice out of the
light, in the unrighteousness, even in that part which is not to know or be
the worshipper. And can ye blame them, that when the light is so great an enemy
to them, that they also turn head against it? How is it possible, that having
slain and murdered the just one in themselves, they should acknowledge and give
him his due honor in others?

Q. But have the strict professors, who pretend great things in honor of
Christ, murdered him in themselves?

A. Yea verily, as really as the Scribes, Pharisees and people of the Jews put
him to death at Jerusalem: for what they do to the least appearance of his
light in their hearts, they do it unto him: Yea, our Lord Christ at this very
day, is as really crucified in their spiritual Egypt and Sodom, as he was
without the gates of Jerusalem; and his righteous blood cries as loud against
the professors of this age, as ever it did against the Jews: and they are
hardened against him by a conceited knowledge, which by their imaginations they
have gathered from the Scriptures, just as the Jews were, but the eye in them
can no more see it, then the eye in the Jews could.

Q. Surely if they knew the light to be the only living way, they would not be
such enemies to it.

A. Yea I believe concerning them (as was said concerning the Jews) that if
they knew it, they would not crucify the Lord of glory: for I bear many of
them record, that they have a great zeal, though not according to knowledge. But
at present very sad is their state; for the God of the world has blinded that
eye in them, which alone can see the truth; and with that eye, wherewith they
now strive to see, they shall never see with comfort. Yea, so exceeding gross
and thick are many of them become, and their hearts so fat, that in stead of
feeling the want of the spirit of God in themselves, and mourning after it,
they can mock at the appearances of it in others, and speak contemptibly of a
light within, where Christ says the light is: For, says Christ, Take heed
that the light which is in thee be not darkness, for if, etc.

Q. But will not they reply, that they do not oppose (much less mock at) the
light of the spirit, but only that which ye ignorantly call the light of the
spirit?

A. If we have found it to be the light of the spirit, and to work that in us
and for us, which no other light ever could, do not blame us for giving in our
testimony that it is that light. And take heed how ye reproach us with
ignorance, seeing many of us have passed through all that which ye call
knowledge: but our light is a new and strange thing to you, and ye are not yet
able to judge it.

Q. But may not men obtain eternal life by reading the Scriptures, without
knowing or owning this principle of the light?

A. The true end of men's reading the Scriptures, is to turn them to the light.
The Scriptures contain messages concerning God, concerning Christ, concerning
the Spirit, the end whereof is to turn men to the power and life, which can do
the thing for them: which God, which Christ, which Spirit fill all things, and
are within in the heart, as well as without. The word is nigh thee, in thy
heart, and in thy mouth, says Moses to the Jews, says Paul to the Christians.
And to what end do they tell them it is there? but that there they should wait
upon it, to hear its voice, and to obey it. Now mark, though men could practice
and perform all things mentioned in the Scriptures, yet not being turned to
this, they are not in the way of salvation: for the way of salvation is not a
particular path or course of Ordinances and duties prescribed in the
Scriptures, but it is a new way, a living way, a way that the wisest
professors, out of it never knew (I will lead them in paths they have not
known.) So that while men know not, nor are not turned to the light and power
whereof the Scriptures testify, all their reading of the Scriptures, praying
and practicing Ordinances and duties there mentioned, are but in vain, and in
the end will prove but a false covering, and not the covering of the spirit.

Q. But how did men do formerly? for this is but a late notion about the light;
have none ever been saved that have not embraced this notion?

A. I speak not of embracing a notion, but of turning to the thing it self,
whithout which none ever was, or can be saved: for it is that alone can save,
and it saves only them that are turned to it. Now if any man so read the
Scriptures, as thereby to learn to turn to this, he may feel that which will
work salvation in him, though he know not its name. For as darkness, being
turned to, works death in a mystery, though its name be not known, but it may
appear and be taken for light; so light being tu^ned to, works life in a
mystery, although he in whom it works, should not be able to call it by its
name.

Q. Then by this, a man may be saved, though he should not know the litteral
name Jesus, or the litteral name Christ, etc.

A. The names are but the signification of the things spoken of, for it is the
life, the power (the being transformed by that) that saves, not the knowledge of
a name. And Christians mightily deceive themselves herein, for they think to be
saved by believing a relation concerning Christ, as he appeared in a fleshly
body, and suffered death at Jerusalem. Whereas Christ is the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever: and the saving knowledge reveals him, not only as he was
then, but as he was the day before, and as he will be for ever. And this
knowledge is also revealed in the Scripture, but they are so drowned in the
Letter, wherewith the carnal part is so filled, that the spiritual eye cannot
open in them to see: and so that which was ordained for life, becomes death to
them, and they perish, they perish just as the Jews did: for their eyes are
with held by a wisdom which they have grown up in from the Letter, from the
beholding the mystery of life in the spirit, which alone can work out, and save
from the mystery of death.

Q. But did not God formerly work life in men by their reading of the
Scriptures, and by the preaching of such godly Ministers, as are now despised,
and counted Antichristian?

A. When men read the Scriptures formerly in the times of thick darkness, and
when some of those (who were not made Ministers according to the order of the
Gospel) preached in the simplicity of their hearts, according to the best light
of their feeling and experience, the Lord pitied the simplicity of their
hearts, and secretly refreshed this principle in them by such reading, and by
such preaching. But now this principle is made manifest, their reading and
setting up a knowledge of the Scriptures without this (which was the thing even
then from whence they had their life) yea in opposition to this, this
increases their death and bondage, and shuts them out of life.

Q. Well I will keep to the Scriptures, and wait for light there, let who will
follow this new light.

A. Will thou keep to the Scriptures in opposition to that light, which alone
can give thee the knowledge of the Scriptures? what kind of knowledge will thou
gather from the Scriptures? Not a knowledge which will humble thee, and cleanse
thy heart; but a knowledge which will puff thee up, and fit thee for the
slaughter. While thou art from the light, thou can not know the Scriptures,
nor the power of God, but art exalting thine own imaginations, conceivings, and
reasonings about the sense of Scriptures. And this thou will one day know with
sorrow, when God calls thee to an account for thy boldness, in putting senses
and meanings upon his words without his light.

Q. I am almost startled?

A. Many have fallen, and more must fall: for the sharp Axe of the Lord is
preparrd to cut down every professor, with all his profession and religious
practices and imitations from Scripture, which stand not in the pure life.
Happy art thou, if thou now fall by that hand, which now strikes at many in
great loving kindness and mercy, that he might raise them up again, and fix
them firm on the true foundation. But miserable are those, whose eyes are
withheld, till the day of their visitation be overslipt, and so they continue
keeping their corrupt standing, and confidence in their fleshly knowledge of
Scriptures, for they also must fall, but their fall will be otherwise.

Mind therefore this my single hearted advice.

Let thy Religion be to feel the pure principle of life in the pure vessel of
life, for the eye must be pure that sees the life, and the heart that receives
it. And faith is a pure mystery, and it is only held in a pure conscience. Know
that in thee that purifies thee, and then thou know Christ, and the Father
and the Spirit: and as that lives and grows up in thee, so shall thou know
their dwelling place, and partake of their life and fullness.

THE END.

