THE CONSIDERATION OF A POSITION Concerning the Book of Common Prayer, AS ALSO
Of some Particulars held forth for Truths, by one EDMUND ELIS, styled a
Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

With a Warning of Tender Bowels to the Rulers, Teachers and People of this
Nation, concerning their Church and Ministry.

Likewise a few Words concerning the Kingdom, Laws and Government of Christ in
the Heart and Conscience; it is Inoffensivenesse to all Just Laws and
Governments of the Kingdoms of men.

By Isaac Penington the Younger.

Behold, I come as a Thief. Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
Garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame,

Rev. 16.15. LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the
Black-Spread-Eagle and Windmill in Martins Le Grand, 1660.

THE PREFACE.
CHRIST, the Eternal Son of God, the substance of all the Types and Shadows of
the Law, was made a Priest to God, not after the Law of a carnal Commandment,
but after the Power of an endless Life. He came in the Power of the Father, he
received the Power, he ministered the Power and in the Power. Thus he gathered
together living stones, built them into a living Temple for the Father of life
to dwell in, that they might be filled with the Power, dwell in the Power, and
be to the glory of the Power. The Church of Israel, the Church of the Old
Testament, the Church of Moses, was gathered by the Letter, was to be ordered
by the Letter, was to keep and observe the Law of the Letter, was to have
Priests and Sacrifices according to the Letter: but the New Testament Church
was to be of true Jews, of Jews gathered in the Power, Circumcised by the
Power, renewed in the Power, etc. So that he is not a Jew any longer, who is
one outward, nor that Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh; but he is a
Jew, which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart in the
Spirit, and not in the Letter. We are the Circumcision, says the Apostle,
which Worship God in the Spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh. The
New Testament state is a state of substance, even of that spiritual substance,
which the Law held out in shadows. The Jew is inward, the Circumcision inward,
the Sacrifices inward, the Church inward, the Ministry inward, the Worship
inward: all is in Spirit, in Life, in Power, in Virtue; the whole state is
answerable to the High Priest of our Profession, even after the Power of the
endless life. By the Eternal Spirit was he made a Minister, by it he preached (
the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel, etc. Luke 4.18.) through it he offered up himself a Sacrifice without
spot to God, Heb. 9.14. and in the same Power runs the vein of the whole
dispensation of the Gospel, for it is a ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8.
Take away the Life, take away the Spirit, ye take away the stones of this
Building, ye take away the Church, ye take away the Ministry, ye take away all.

Now about this inward Building there was an outward Court, which had its
Being, State, and Honor from the presence of the inward life. The virtue of
the inward Building did cast a reflection, and bring forth an outward state (as
it cannot but do, where ever it appears in its riches and glory.) This state
stood firm in the days of the Apostles, till Gods measuring and removing of
his Temple, Altar and Worshippers, and his giving up of the outward Court (it
having lost the life and virtue, which flowed into it from the Temple, while
the Temple remained within it) to the Gentiles, who under the Gospel are such
as are Uncircumcised in Spirit, and can Worship in the outward Court without
the Spirit. The enemy indeed fought hard against the Life and Power, but he
could not there prevail, the Gates of Hell could not prevail against the true
Church, which brought forth the Man-child, nor against the Man-child whom she
brought forth, but the Man-child was caught up to God, and the Woman fled into
the Wilderness. Then that Church, State and Worship, which depended upon their
presence, was dissolved: For how could it be otherwise, when both the
Man-child, which was the Head of the Church (from whence the Virtue, Life and
Influence did flow into the whole Body) and the Woman (or Church) her self also
were both gone out of sight? So that the Ministry of Eternal life, and the
Temple, wherein the life was ministered, being both removed, they are neither
of them henceforvvard to be found in that place, where they were beheld
before, (and where most eyes would be ready to look for them again) but there
where the Spirit had hid them.

Now mark diligently, what kind of esteem the true Church has had in the
World, ever since her disrobing her self of her outvvard garments and flight
into the Wilderness, and how her true Seed have been handled. The Dragon
immediately casts a flood after her; her beautiful raiment being put off, and
she clothed in the habit of a Widovv, the eye of the World could no longer see
and acknovvledge her to be the Church, but disdain, reproach, revile her. This
is her lot all the days of Antichrist, she is misrepresented by the Dragons
flood of reproaches, and looked upon as a strumpet, as one that pretends to
Christ for her Lord and Husband, to his Spirit, to his Kingdom, to his Truth
without a just right, and the remnant of her Seed are still made War with by
the Dragon. Who have been the hunted ones, the hated, the persecuted in all
Nations, but the tender-conscienced, who receive the Law of Christ into their
hearts, bowing to him in their Worship and Conversation, and dare not bovv or
Worship according to the Doctrines and Cammandments of men?

Now the true Church or Temple being thus removed, the outvvard Court becomes
the Habitation and Place of Worship among the Gentiles, all the time of the
Churches abode in the Wilderness. The Spirit of the Lord having left it, the
heathenish spirit (man's earthly Nature and Wisdom) the spirit of Antichrist
enters into it, and upholds the Form of the former Building (so far as it
judges necessary) and here it is found Worshipping, and making a great show
of Holiness and devotion, but in the mean time makes War with the true
Worshippers, who cannot Worship in the outvvard Court (since the Spirit of the
Lord has left it and given it to the Gentiles) but follovv the Church into the
Wilderness, and Worship in that Temple which God has removed thither.

O where is the eye which can read these things, as they are written either
in the Letter, or in the Spirit. Antichrist is a Mystery of Iniquity, which
works, and gets up, and reigns under an appearance of Godliness; and he that
will discern him and his false vvayes of Worship, must have that eye, which
sees beyond the appearance of things, into their nature: and in this is the
Discovery of him, and the Redemption from him. And happy is he, who is not
defiled with Women, but abides in the true Virginity, expecting and preparing
for the appearance of the Bridegroom.

The CONSIDERATION of a POSITION concerning the Book of COMMON PRAYER; As also
of some Particulars held forth for Truths, etc.
THere is a Position laid down in some Printed Letters, concerning the use of
the Common Prayer Book, tendered by one Edm. Elis (who professes himself to be
a Minister of Jesus Christ) to Mr. Hughes, and Mr. Ford (as he styles them)
against which Position he entreats me, if I find upon my Spirit any thing to
be objected against it, to discover it in exact and punctual expressions. This
desire of his is set down in Print after the Letters.

His Position or Assertion is this: That a man may Worship God in Spirit, and
in Truth in the use of that form of Prayer for Morning and Evening, which we
call the Common Prayer.

Now whoever would weigh this Assertion aright, must have the Balance of the
Sanctuary, and must put it into the Scale with an equal hand; and then looking
with that eye, which is given to see the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, to
him who is born of God, the Truth or Error of it is easily discerned.

True Prayer is the breathing of the Child to the Father which begat it, from
the sense of its wants, for the supply of those wants.

The Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: So is every one that is
born of the Spirit, John 3.8. God by the Breath of his Spirit, begets a man out
of the Spirit and likeness of this World, into his own image and likeness. He
that is thus begotten: wants Nourishment, wants the Divine Warmth, the Breasts
of Consolation, the Clothing of the Spirit, the Garment of Salvation; wants
the Bread of Life to feed on, wants the Water of Life to drink, wants strength
against the enemies Assaults, wisdom against his Snares and Temptations, wants
the arm of the Deliverer to preserve and carry on the work of Redemption daily,
wants Faith to deny the fleshly Wisdom, that so he may Trust and Feel the
Virtue of the Arm of the Deliverer, wants Hope, Patience, Meekness, a clear
Guidance, an upright Heart to follow after the Lord: yea very many are the
daily wants of that which is begotten by the Breath of God, in its state of
weakness, until it be drawn up into the Unity of the Body, where the full
Communion with the Life is felt, the Heart satisfied, and the wants drowned.

Now the breathing of this Child to the Father, from the sense of these wants,
for his Supply, that is Prayer: nay though it be but a Groan, or Sigh, which
cannot be uttered or expressed, yet that is Prayer, true Prayer, which has an
acceptance with the Lord, and receives a Gracious Answer from him: And he that
begets the Child, teaches him to Pray, even by the same Spirit which begat
him. In watching daily to the Spirit, the Child is kept sensible of the Will of
the Father, and in his Light he sees the Way wherein he is to walk, he sees
also the Enemy when he is coming, yea and the Snares he is privily laying, and
he feels his own weakness to withstand or escape: And in this sense his Heart
cries to the Father of Spirits for Preservation, for him to stand by him, for
him to step in in the needful time, even in the Season of Distress. And thus,
watching to the Spirit, the Life of a Christian is a continual course of
Prayer: He prays continually. This is the Living Prayer of the Living Child,
which consists not in a Form of Words, either read out of a Book or conceived
in the Mind; but in feeling the Breath of its Nature issuing out, from the
Principle of Life in it, to the Living Spring, which is the Father of it; who
by causing his virtues to spring up in it, nourishes it to Everlasting Life.

But now, man who is not born of the Spirit, but (by conceiving some of the
Truths of God in the Wisdom from below) has attained to some change of Opinion
and Conversation, he pretends to be this Birth from above, though indeed he is
born but of Bloods, or of the Will of the flesh, or of the Will of Man, John
1.13. and what God begets in, and gives to his True Child, he will be
imitating, though he be out of the Nature and Spirit, where the True Child is
begotten, and where the True gift of the Father is received by him. He will be
believing, though he has not received any Proportion of the Living Faith from
the Hand of the Father; he will be forming Repentance and Sorrow for sin,
though his Heart be not turned from it; he will be hoping in Gods Mercy,
although he be both from off the Foundation, and from under the shadow of the
Mercy-seat; and he will be praying, though he has neither received the Spirit,
nor be taught by the Spirit to pray: And so being from that which should guide
him, and teach him the truth and way of Worship as it is in Jesus, he runs out
into the inventions and imaginations, and sets up a way of his own choosing;
which he having much considered of, and beat out by reasonings, and fenced
about with Arguments, he grows wise in his own eyes, and now verily believes it
to be the way of God, and that he is able to maintain it against all opposers.
Thus one man, he is for a Form; another man, he is against a Form, and for
conceived prayers; and each think themselves able to maintain their own, and to
overthrow each other. But Oh that that ear were open, which can hear the truth,
that where there is any true, honest, upright desire after God, from the
simplicity of the heart, it might not be thus betrayed through the subtilty of
the fleshly wisdom, which lies lurking in the wise, reasoning, knowing part, to
betray the poor weak Babe. The natural man, the reasoning man, the
understanding man, the wise man according to the natural wisdom, cannot
understand the things of God. Here Is no learning to pray aright, to believe
aright, to hope aright, to mourn aright, to rejoice aright, etc. But this
wisdom must be brought to nothing (1 Cor. 1.19.) and a man must become as a
child to all knowledge, as let in this way: And he that so becomes a child, is
taught to pray, to believe, to wait, to hope, and all that is necessary to
eternal life.

Now as the Father teaches to pray, so he gives desires or words (if he
please) according to the present need. Sometimes he gives but ability to sigh,
or groan (if he give no more, he accepts that.) Sometimes he gives strong
breathings, and plenty of words to pour out the soul in before the Lord. But if
a man should catch those words, and lay them up against another time, and offer
them up to God in his own will, this would be but Will Worship and abomination.
This I have known experimentally, and have selt the Wrath of God for it. That
is Prayer, which comes fresh from the Spirit; and that is a true desire, which
the Spirit begets: but the affections and sparks of man's kindling please not
the Lord, nor do they conduce to the Souls rest, but will end in the Bed of
sorrow, Isa. 50.11.

Now as touching the Book of Common Prayer, or Prayers conceived without the
immediate breathings of the Spirit, I shall speak mine own experience
faithfully, which is this: I have felt both these ways draw out the wrong
part, and keep that alive in me, which the true Prayer kills. And he that
utters a word, beyond the sense which God begets in his spirit, takes God's
Name in vain, and provokes him to jealousy against his own soul. God is in
Heaven, thou art on Earth, therefore let thy words be few. The few words which
the Spirit speaks, or the few, still; soft, gentle breathings which the Spirit
begets, are pleasing to God, and profitable to the Soul: but the many words,
which man's wisdom affects, hurt the precious life, and thicken the vail of
death over the Soul, keeping that part alive, which separates from God; which
part must dye, e're the Soul can live.

The true Prayer is by that which God begets, in the virtue of his Spirit (
praying always in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. Jude 20.) in the time he chooses:
for the Spirit breaths as well when he lists, as where he lists; and man
cannot limit him when he shall breath, or when he shall not breath, but is to
wait the seasons of his breathing, and so to watch unto Prayer.

Now if the Prayer be in words (for there is a praying without words) then it
must be in those words which he pleases to give, from the sense which he
kindles, and not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, or would choose to
use. And indeed, in the true Religion, and in every exercise of it, man's wisdom
is kept out, and nailed to the Cross, by which means the immortal life is
raised and grows in the true Disciple. He believes, he hopes, he waits, he
prays, he mourns, he rejoices, he obeyes, etc. in the Cross to the mortal
part: not as man's wisdom teaches, or would teach, or can teach any of these
things; for his Sacrifice is still an abomination, even to the wise Egyptian
part in himself (O wise man, abase thy self before the Lord in his Spirit, that
thou may read this and live) but as the life teaches, as the Wisdom from
above teaches, which breaks down, shuts up, confounds and destroys
man's wisdom, while he is teaching his Babe.

Thus have I answered, in the simplicity of my heart, to the nature of the
thing, so far as the Lord has pleased to draw forth my spirit; and in sinking
down to that, which thus opened my spirit, my Answer may easily be read and
assented to: but to that which is in the disputing wisdom, out of the feeling
of the hidden life and virtue, it may prove a Mystery.

Afterward, he also entreats me to peruse seriously, and to lay deeply to
heart (in the real fear and dread of the great God) some particulars which he
teaches for Truths.

I perceive he is offended at the questioning of his Ministry, and that the
main intent of his proposing these, is to justify his Ministry; which if they
were true, yet the preaching of them would not prove him, or any man else, to
be a Minister of Jesus Christ: for it is not preaching things that are true,
which makes a true Minister, but the receiving of his Ministry from the Lord.
The Gospel is the Lords, which is to be preached, and it is to be preached in
his Power; and the Ministers which preach it, are to be endued with his Power,
and to be sent by him. The Apostles themselves, though they had received
instructions concerning the Kingdom from Christ's own lips, both in his
lifetime, and after his Resurrection ( Act. 1.3.) and had received a Commission
from him to teach all Nations, Matthew. 28.18, 19. Yet this was not sufficient to
make them able Ministers of the New Testament; but before they went abroad to
Preach, they were to wait for the Power, Act. 1.4, 8. And when they had
received it, they were to minister in it, that men might be converted to the
Power and by the Power, that the Faith of persons might not stand in the wisdom
of their words (which Paul might have abounded in, as well as others) but in
the Power of God, 1 Cor. 2.5. And this was it made Paul minister in fear and
trembling,, lest the wrong part in him should minister, lest the earthly
understanding part should be holding forth the Truths of God out of the Life,
out of the Power; and so he should Convert men to the Wis^^m of the words he
spoke, and not to the Power, v. 2, 3. This was it he was sent for, to turn men
from darkness to light, from the Power of Satan to God (Acts 26.18.) from the
spirit of enmity and death to the Spirit of Love and Life: and this he was
careful of in his Ministry, that men might not run away with his words and miss
of the thing. And this also was the way whereby he discovered true and false
Ministers, I will come and know (says he) not the speech of them which are
puffed up, but the Power: for the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in Power,
1 Cor. 4.19, 20. Many men might catch their words, and run away with them and
Preach them, but they could not Minister in the Power. Now the Kingdom, which
the Gospel Ministers are the Preachers of, consists not in words, but in Power.
God has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of
the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. The Ministry of the New Testament is a Ministry of the
Spirit, and it cannot be without the Spirit. It is a reaching to men's
Consciences in the demonstration of the Spirit and of Power (1 Cor. 2.4. and 2
Cor. 4.1, 2.) which being felt in the heart and turned to, this converts them
to God.

The Ministry of the Gospel does not consist in a bare opening of the Letter
(or raising of Doctrines and Uses from the Letter, which the wisdom of man may
easily perform) as the Ministry of the Law did: but in bringing men to the
feeling of the Spirit, even of the Eternal Power of God which redeems, in
turning men from the darkness to the Light, in setting their faces toward the
Power. The Gospel is the substance of what was shadowed out in the Law; and he
that Ministers it, must Minister substance. He must have the heavenly Treasure
(that is the substance) in his earthen vessel, 2 Cor. 4.7. and he must give out
of this Treasure into the vessel which God prepares: and that he may do this,
he must Minister in the Spirit and in the Power. His words must not be such as
man's wisdom would teach, or as man's comprehension would gather, but such words
as Gods Wisdom prepares for him, and puts into his mouth. He that will be a
true Minister, must receive both his gift, his Ministry, and the exercise of
both from the Lord; and must be sure in his ministering to keep in the Power, or
he will never win others to the Power: but in keeping in the Power, while he is
ministering, and standing in the cross to his own understanding and wisdom,
giving forth the truths which the Lord chooses to have him speak, in the words
which God chooses, even in the words which are ministered to him by the Power;
in thus ministering he shall save both his own Soul and those that hear him,
even all who in fear and meekness receive the ingrafted Word, which is able to
save the Soul. For alas, alas, many have received words of Truth, and
apprehensions of Knowledge, whereby they hope to be saved: but how few are
acquainted with that Knowledge which stands in the Power, which alone converts
and keeps alive unto God! O how many Souls are to be answered for by them, who
take upon them to be Pastors from God, who have fed the Flock with words, with
Discourses which they have made, and have ruled over them with force and
cruelty, but have wanted the love, the tenderness, the Light and Power of the
true Shepherd! O what will these do, when God requires his sheep at their
hands! O that there were an heart to consider. Ye Shepherds of England, little
do ye know what is toward you.

Now for those things themselves, which he says, he principally endeavors to
make known to the sons of men, there is a mixture in them; which, if he could
singly apply himself to wait of the Lord, in the meek sober Spirit, out of the
consultations, wisdom and confidence of the flesh, it might please the Lord to
make manifest to him.

The first particular of those, which he lays down for Truths, is, That the
good things of this life, honors, riches, etc. unless we make use of them in
the service of God, are but vanity, and vexation of spirit; And in no wise any
more capable to satisfy, or content an immortal Soul, than Lime, and Ashes,
and Cobwebs, and such like trash are to satisfy, and keep in health the bodies
of those persons, who through the depravedness of their appetite, desire to
feed on them.

Answ. Christ by his Ministry, calls his Disciples out of the world, up to
the Father, out of the honors, riches and what ever else is of the world. How
can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor
that comes from God only? John 5.44. And the rich man, he bids him sell all
and follow him. And the Apostle John says, Love not the world, neither the
things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father
is not in him. For all that is in the world, the just of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world, 1
John 2.15, 16. He that will be a Disciple of Christ, must travel out of the
earthly into the heavenly, leaving all that is of this world behind him,
possessing nothing as his portion, but him who has called him out of his
Country, from among his kindred, and from his Father's house to another Land,
kindred and habitation. So that here they are Pilgrims and Strangers,
Sojourners and Passengers, unknown to the world and of a strange garb,
behavior and appearance in it, not enjoying any thing as the world enjoyes,
not using any thing as the world uses, not honoring men or receiving honor
from men, as the world gives or receives honor, but honoring men in the Lord,
and receiving honor from the Lord: and what ever they seem to retain of the
earthly things, they hold as Stewards under the Lord, not using or disposing of
them as they think good, but waiting for the discovery of the Masters pleasure,
who is to order, in his Counsel and Wisdom, all that is his own to his own
glory. The Law required a tenth part to be given up to the Lord: the Gospel
requires all; Soul, Body, Spirit, Goods, good Name, etc. even that the whole
possession be sold and laid at the Masters feet: and he that keeps any thing
back, cannot be a Disciple, cannot be a Soldier of Christ, but must needs
entangle himself with the affairs of this life. This is sound and savoury, even
the Truth of Jesus, as it is known and felt in the renewed Spirit: but his
Words, if he measure them in the pure Light of God, he will perceive not to
have sprung thence, but to have been formed in the earthly wise part, even in
that wisdom, understanding and comprehension, which is shut out of the
Mysteries of Gods Kingdom.

For his second, That nothing but the enjoyment of God, the Fountain of all
Goodness, can truly and really content an immortal Soul: And for his third,
That no man can enjoy God, but he that loves him with all his heart, and with
all his Soul, and (for his sake) his Neighbor as himself: I own both the
things themselves and these words, and I felt a good savor in them at the
reading of them: only let me say this, if he put men upon striving after these
things, without pointing them to the gift where the strength is received to
perform, and where the waiting is to be for the strength, he cannot preach them
profitably to his hearers.

To his fourth, That, though every sincere Convert, or regenerate person loves
God continually with his whole heart, as to the habit, or root of holy love;
yet whilst he is in the body, he may sometimes fail of the Act, or fruit of it,
and may offend God through the love of the creature. Which Truth (so much
opposed in these days) is clear, and manifest in the holy Scriptures:
particularly in the Records of the heinous sins of the Prophet David, and Peter
the Apostle.

Answ. The Lord Circumciseth the heart of Believers under the New Covenant, to
love the Lord their God with all their heart, that they may live: he causes
the Plant to spring up out of the dry and barren ground, which he waters with
his Blessing; and he lays his Axe to the Root of the old Tree, hewing at it,
even till he has cut it up: he engrafteth the Eternal Word into the heart, and
by it is daily purifying thereof, fulfilling the good pleasure of his goodness
therein, and carrying on the Work of Faith with power: and the Ministry which
he gave, was for the perfecting of the Saints. (Ephesians. 4.12, 13.) which
Ministry exhorted and encouraged Believers (from God's Promises of his presence
and powerful operation of his Spirit in the hearts of his Sons and Daughters)
to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Now that the corrupt Tree shall never
be cut down whilst man is in the body, that the heart shall never be thoroughly
circumcised to love the Lord, but be in danger of offending God through the
love of the Creature: this doctrine and belief springs not from the pure
Fountain of Life and Power, but the reasoning part has gathered it from it is
conceivings beneath the Power.

The Seed of God cannot sin (for as he is pure which begets, so is that pure
which is begotten of him) nor can man sin, who is born of it and abides in it:
and if God please to perfect the Birth and the work of Circumcision, What can
hinder a man from being wholly born of it and from abiding in it? Indeed a man
that strives in his own strength, either against sin or toward holiness, may
well doubt of ever having it accomplished: but he that feels the Eternal Power
beginning the work, and carrying it on daily, cannot doubt but he can perfect
it, yea, and is encouraged (by the feeling thereof) to hope and wait on him for
the perfecting of it.

As for his instances of David and Peter, they reach not the thing: For though
David and Peter did fall, yet both David and Peter might attain an higher state
before they went out of the body, then they were in before they fell. David was
a great Prophet, and Peter a precious Disciple, but yet there was an higher
Estate to be administered, even the receiving that which the Prophets prophesied
of, and which the Disciple was to wait for. The Disciples who had known Christ,
and had been taught by him, and had received a Commission from him, to whom all
Power in Heaven and Earth was given, yet were to wait for a Further and Higher
State, even for receiving the Promise of the Father, the Power from on High,
that he that was with them might be in them, John 14.17. John was as great as
any Prophet, and yet he that was least in the Kingdom, was greater then he.
Read the Acts of the Apostles, behold what a precious people was brought forth,
even in the beginning of the Apostles Ministry, how full of Faith, how stripped
of the world, how single-hearted to God and one toward another, Acts 2.42.
etc. and Acts 4.32. etc.) What would these be, abiding and growing up in the
Vine? The cutting off of sin, is necessary while in the Body, but to make the
committing of sin necessary while in the Body, is a great Derogation to the
Power of Gods Grace, and to the Mystery of Faith, which overcomes the evils of
the Heart, and the Worldly Nature within; purifieth the Conscience from dead
works, and is held in the Pure Conscience. O that men knew the Power, and the
Faith which stands in the Power: For then would not they judge it so impossible
to be cleansed by the Faith through the Power. O that Light, that Light, that
Pure Light of the Spirit, wherein the Living Blood runs, which cleanses from
all sin, and keeps clean them that abide and walk in it! If this were but a
little felt, such Doctrine as these (which are gathered in the comprehension
from words read, without being let into the thing it self) would soon vanish,
and find no place in the Heart where the Power dwells, nor in the understanding
which is renewed, preserved and fed by the Power. For the things of God are to
be known, and held in the understanding which is given of God (which
understanding is of the Spirit, and is Spiritual) and not wirh the natural
understanding, which cannot receive the things of the Spirit, but only a
carnal apprehension and sense of the words of the Spirit, according as a man
can beat them out with, and comprehend them in his reasoning part.

To the fifth, That the Souls of the faithful are always growing in grace,
whilst they are in the body; and at the instant of death, or separation from
the body, our Lord Jesus shall present them to the Father without spot, or
blemish.

Answ. Christ presents to the Father, when he has purified the heart and
mind, and made it fit for Gods pure life and presence. He has received the
fullness from the Father, and has freely given of his grace and of his truth to
the sons of men, to regenerate them, to cleanse and sanctify their hearts, and
make them fit for God to dwell in. He sits in his Temple as a Refiner and
Purifier of Silver (who is like a Refiner's Fire and like Fuller's Soap) and
when he has purified his Disciples, his Children, his Levites, he presents
them to the Lord, for the Lord to Tabernacle and dwell in: when he has
thoroughly consecrated them, he presents them as Kings and Priests to his
Father, to offer up an Offering for Righteousness, and to reign with him in his
Kingdom, Mal. 3.3. Rev. 1.5. And there were some so purified by the leaven of
the Kingdom (which purges out the old leaven by degrees, even till at length
it has made the lump wholly new) that to them all things were pure, Titus 1.5.
There were some come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general
Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to God
the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just men, made perfect, and to Jesus
the Moderator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling, Heb. 12.22,
23, 24. Thus it was before the Apostasy: yea, and after the Apostasy there were
some found standing on Mount Sion again, such as had learned the New Song, such
as were redeemed from the Earth, such as were not defiled with Women, (with any
of the false Churches or their false ways of worship) but had kept their
Virginity in the Wilderness. If ye would know who these were, they were the
first fruits unto God and the Lamb after the Apostasy, who were thoroughly
cleansed by the Spirit of burning, insomuch as in their mouth was found no
guile, but they were without fault before the Throne of God, Revel. 14. v. 1.
to 6.

The Work of the Spirit of Christ in the heart is an inward work, and does not
consist in outward time or seasons, but in spiritual degrees and seasons: which
when they are finished, the heart renewed, the spirit changed, the work wrought
out; then the glory of the Father is revealed, the entrance into the
everlasting Kingdom Ministered, and then there is a sitting down in the
everlasting Mansion, even with Christ in the Heavenly places which he has
prepared, where they that are redeemed, and purged, and sanctified, sit
together with him: and as the body cannot hinder his entering into the spirits
of his Saints, and his dwelling in them, no more can it hinder their entering
into him and dwelling in him.

Now there are several exercises of Spirit, several measures of Faith, and
several degrees of Life and Glory. Some are under the Clouds, some in the Sea;
some in Egypt, some in the Wilderness; some waiting for his appearance, some in
the enjoyment of him already appeared. In some the work of Regeneration, of
Sanctification, of newness of Spirit and Life is but begun, in others it is
interrupted and they come to a loss; in some it is much carried on, even
toward consummation, and some are already complete in him, finding fullness of
satisfaction in him (in whom the everlasting Springs are opened, to the full
content of their hearts) and bring forth fruit to him, to the full content and
satisfaction of his heart. In the Apostles days there were those that waited
for his coming, and there were those also that knew him come, and had received
the good understanding from him, and were in the Eternal life, John 5.20.

Yet this does not exclude growth, for the fullness is infinite: and though a
perfect state may be attained in the perfect gift, yet there is a growth in the
perfection (for Christ who was perfect, and in whom was no guile, grew in
Wisdom and Knowledge, and in favor with God and men.) And as God is infinite,
so that which is transplanted into him, there is no growth in him; but the
Tree, which stands in God's holy Earth, by his pure River of waters, shall grow
for ever into his endless life and fullness.

To his sixth, That no man can so know God as to love him with all his heart,
and with all his Soul, but through the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him
Crucified: Who, by those grievous sufferings which he endured when he was upon
Earth, made satisfaction to the justice of God for the sins of all those that
believe in his Name: so that it is as consistent with the justice, as with the
mercy of God, to forgive them their sins, and make them heirs of eternal life.
God is just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

Answ. The knowledge of Christ is life Eternal, and in his Cross is the
spiritual virtue, which cuts off the uncircumcision of the heart, whereby it is
enabled to love the Lord. Now Christ is the Lord from Heaven, the quickening
Spirit, who sows the Seed of the Kingdom in the heart, and causes it to
spring up; out of which Seed the Faith, the Love, the Hope, the Meekness, the
Patience, and every spiritual fruit springs and grows. And he that is thus born
of this Seed, and receives the knowledge of life which springs from this Seed,
he cannot but love him which begat him, and he reapeth the fruit of all that
Christ did and suffered in that prepared body: and God is both just, and the
Justifier of him, who is thus united to Jesus. But that man who knows not
this Faith, nor is acquainted with the love which springs from this Root, and
which is of this Divine nature, but thinks to be justified by applying to
himself what is related in the Histories concerning Christ; this man deceives
his Soul, and misseth of the true Justification: for God is just, who has made
the Promise sure to the Seed, and has shut out man, further than he is born of
the Seed, and found in the Seed. But he who abides in the Seed, and in whom
the Seed finds pleasure and abides, he cannot miss of the Promise, of the
everlasting Righteousness, the Reconciliation, the Peace, the Joy, and whatever
else God gives to the Seed.

To his seventh and last, That the ready way to receive Christ, the only
Light, by which we may see the way to Heaven: or so to believe in him that we
may be saved by him, is, to forsake all that we have, that we may be his
Disciples: that is to say, to take off our affections from things on the Earth,
and to set them on things above, where Jesus sits on the right hand of God:
putting our trust and confidence in the free, and in the infinite mercy of God,
through Christ, to be guided by him in all our ways, to be led by his good
Spirit in all those ways of grace and holiness, through which we must pass
before we can attain to glory.

Answ. To know Christ as the Light eternal, (as he was yesterday, is to day,
and will be for ever) to trust this Light in its convictions, calls, and free
openings of love, to feel its living virtue, and in that virtue to give up all
that's of the earthly nature and spirit, to sell it for the everlasting
inheritance, this is indeed the way to life. But it is not the doing of things
which is of value, for man may imitate and strive to do much, and may go a
great way in forsaking all, and in taking off his affections from things,
(inasmuch as he may give all his goods to the poor, and his body to be burned,
and yet it profit him nothing:) but it is the doing of things in the virtue, in
the life, in the power which comes from Christ, which is of acceptance with
God, and of advantage to the soul. Every motion and operation of true life
springs from the root of life, and has the virtue of the root in it: and that
which differenceth it from all men's imitations, and from all the likenesses
which the earthly spirit can frame, is the nature and virtue of the root being
found in it. Therefore he that will be a true Christian, must eye Christ the
spring of his life, and keep in the feeling of his living virtue, and in that
offer up all his Sacrifices of faith, love, and obedience to God: and he that
will be a true Minister, must wait upon the power himself, to be an Instrument
(in the hand of the power) to direct men to this, and to preserve and build
them up therein.

But alas, this is the Stone, which the wise Builders have all along refused!
The Builders before the coming of Christ, they got a knowledge concerning the
Messiah to come, but being unacquainted with the thing it self, rejected both
it at its coming, and also the Vessel wherein it appeared. And the Builders all
along the Apostasy, gat a knowledge of Christ come, and preached Believing in
him crucified as the way to life; but the living Stone, the living thing it
self (which is both the foundation, the Cornerstone, and the top Stone of the
Building) they have been ignorant of, and ready to persecute every appearance
of it. Christ can no more now appear in Spirit, than formerly he could in that
prepared body of flesh; but the wise Builders now are as ready to cry out
against him for a Blasphemer, a prophaner of Gods Ordinances, a deceiver of the
people (yea, a Witch or one that has a Devil) as the wise Builders then were.
But Wisdom in all ages is justified by her Children, and of none else. He that
is born of the Wisdom, he can discern the womb, and own the fruit and
branchings forth thereof under the mean dark vail, whereby it hides it self
from all the fleshly wise of every age. The Kingdom of God comes not by
observation, the wisest Scribes and Pharisees could not know it by all the
observations, which they could gather out of Moses and the Prophets Writings;
nor can any now know it, by any observations they can gather out of the
Apostles Writings: but by being born of that spirit whereof they were born, and
by being formed in that womb wherein they were formed, by this means alone is
the thing come to be known which they knew. He that receives the same eye,
sees the same thing, according to his measure: and coming to the life, wherein
they received the Truth, the words which they spoke concerning the Truth are
easy. Thus as they were writ in the Spirit, so are they there along truly
read: and being so read, they become exceeding profitable to that which so
reads them: but man guessing, and imagining, and reasoning in his carnal wisdom
concerning the things of God, and so gathering senses and meanings about the
words and expressions of Scripture, does but build up a Babel, which the
eternal Life and Power will throw down (when ever he appears) with that which
built it. O that men were wise to wait for the discovery of the true Rock, and
of the true Builder upon that Rock, that that City and Building might be raised
in them, which God alone can rear, that they might not be left desolate and
miserable in that stormy day, which will shake all Buildings, and Foundations,
and Rocks but our Rock: wherein all Professors, and Preachers, and high
Notionists, and what ever sort else can be named (who have stumbled at Gods
living Truth, and at the pure appearance of his redeeming Power, which in this
age has mightily broke forth, after the long dark night of Apostasy, to the
sight of every eye which is opened in the Spirit) shall confess with tears,
sorrow, anguish and shame, that their Rock is not in our Rock, they themselves
being Judges. For though all sort of Professors generally own Christ as the
Rock in words, yet most miss of the thing: and the subtle Enemy has made use
of a Notion, or apprehension of the thing in the carnal mind, to deceive them
of the thing, to keep them from feeling the eternal virtue, the living Power of
Life in the heart, which is the Arm of Gods Salvation, whereby Christ draws
man's lost soul and spirit out of the Pit, out of the Grave, out of Sin and
corruption up to the Father. But O how are poor hearts deceived, who think by a
believing of what Christ did, of a satisfaction he made for them while he was
here on Earth, though they lie in the Pit all their days, though they carry
the body of sin about with them to the very last of their time here in the
body, and have not felt the Arm of God's Power breaking down their spiritual
enemies, their lusts, their corruptions, and redeeming them from them, yet hope
to be saved in the end, and to be presented without spot or wrinkle to God!
Christ had the name Jesus given him, because he was to save his People from
their sin: and no man can truly and livingly know the name Jesus, further than
he feels the saving virtue of it: but he that effectually feels the virtue, he
indeed knows the name, and can bow at the name, feeling his lusts and enemies
bowed under by the power thereof, and that raised up in him, which can Worship
the Father in the Spirit and in the Truth. O that the sons of men knew, O that
the Teachers and Professors of this age knew, what they have so long reviled
and trampled upon! Surely they would mourn bitterly, kiss the Son, and escape
the wrath.

Now, if the Lord please to smite any ones earthly wisdom and comprehension
(which is the main thing which stands in the way of the pure openings and
revelations of the life) and give him the feeling of any thing here written,
let him in fear acknowledge the Lord, sacrificing to his goodness, and waiting
upon him to be kept in that feeling, not magnifying or villifying any of his
Instruments, but in meekness and humility embracing the instructions of the
Almighty, from the hand which he pleases to give them forth by. As for me, I
am but a Shell; and if this party knew me (who sets me up so high, preferring
me above many, whom the Lord has preferred far above me) he would soon
acknowledge me to be a very poor, weak, contemptible one: yet this I must by no
means deny, that the pure Liquor of the eternal Life, at its pleasure springs
up and issues out through me; though I can also in true understanding say,
that it issues out far oftener and much more abundantly through others. Let it
have its honor, where ever it appears; and the Lord bring down that in peoples
hearts, which hinders the owning and receiving of its virtue.

A Warning of tender Bowels to the Rulers, Teachers, and People of the Nation,
concerning their Church and Ministry.
THat there was a Fight between the Dragon and his Angels, and Michael and his
Angels, concerning the New-Testament-Church and Ministry, is manifest even from
the Letter of the Scriptures, Rev. 12.

That the Dragon and his Angels, though they could not get the better, as
relating to the Power, yet that they did get the better as relating to the
Form, insomuch as that they overcame the third part of the true Ministers, and
drew them from their standing in the Firmament of Gods Power, off to their
earthly Ministry, and that the Church her self also was fain to fly into the
Wilderness, from the face of the Dragon, for her safety and preservation, where
she was to be nourished and sed by God all the time of Antichrists Reign; this
likewise is not only revealed in the Spirit, but is also manifest from the
Letter, Rev. 12.

That after this flight of the true Church and overcoming of the true Ministry,
the Dragon erected his false Church and Ministry (which had but at best the
Form without the Power) over all Nations, Peoples, Multitudes and Tongues, this
is also as evident, to them that read the Prophecies of the Revelation, in the
Light of that Spirit that wrote them. Is nor the false woman (after the true
woman was fled) manifestly described? Rev. 17. which has a bewitching Cup of
Fornications, v. 2, and 4. Mark, She has not the true Cup of Blessing, her cup
is not filled with the Wine of the Kingdom, it is not the Cup of the true
Spouse, (which keeps chaste and loyal to the bed of the Husband) but the cup of
Fornications, wherein is a Form of Doctrine, and Discipline, and Order, and
Church Government which leads from the life, which be witnesses from the Power,
which luls asleep in a Form of profession and worship of Christ, without
knowledge of, guidnace by, and subjection to his Spirit. And this is the
Government, Ministry, and way of Antichrist, where ever it is found: how
curiously soever the cup be gilded, yet it is but the cup of Fornication,
which bewitcheth the heart with its golden appearance, and then leads it into
adultery from the life. And the Dragon does not only set up a false Church
over the Nations (in many parts whereof the truth had before appeared) Rev.
17.15. but a false Ministry also. There Is a false Prophet (which deceives with
Miracles and false appearances of truth) advanced in this corrupt state: which
false Prophet continues and upholds his deceit over the Nations, till the
mighty appearance of Christ in Spirit and Power, do judge him, Rev. 19.20. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. There Is a Beast with Horns like a Lamb, who does great Wonders, so
that he makes Fire come down from Heaven on the Earth, in the sight of men,
and deceives them that dwell on the Earth, etc. Rev. 13.13, 14. Insomuch as he
draws the Kings and Inhabiters of the Earth (in a Mystery of deceit) into the
Bed of Whoredom and false Worship, instead of the pure way of Life, and pure
Worship of the living God, in his Spirit, and in his truth, Rev. 17.2.

Is it not further manifest, that this false Church and false Ministry, set up
in the World by the power of the Dragon, persecute Gods Witnesses to the truth,
in all the ages of Antichrists reign? So soon as ere the Church was fled into
the Wilderness, the Dragon forthwith went to make War with the remnant of her
seed, which kept the Commandments of God, and had the testimony of Jesus
Christ, Rev. 12.17. And it was given unto him to make War with the Saints, and
to overcome them: and power was given him over all Kindreds, Tongues, and
Nations. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
World. If any man have an ear let him hear, Rev. 13.7, 8, 9. And he had power
to give life unto the Image of the Beast, that the Image of the Beast should
both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast,
should be killed. And he causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free
and bond, to receive a Mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads. And
that no man might buy or sell save he that had the Mark, or the name of the
Beast, or the number of his Name, Rev. 13.15, 16, 17. Yea, the Woman (the false
Church, which the Dragon had set up, by his power in the Nations, instead of
the true) was drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17.6. O the misery, and lamentable hard usage of the
Witnesses of Jesus, who have been true Lambs, born of the Power, faithful to
the Power, witnessing against every Form and appearance of Religion, Doctrine
and Worship, which has appeared without the Power (even in the days of
greatest profession and highest devotion under the Apostasy from the Power) how
have these been hunted, persecuted, devoured by the Wolves in the Sheeps
clothing, who had got the outside, the garment, the Name of Christ and
Christianity, the profession of Church, Ministry, and Ordinances, but have
wanted the life, the virtue, the thing it self; and so have turned against it,
and kept it down, that they might keep up their Form! For let but the Power
appear, the Form without the Power is soon detected to be what it is. And this
is properly Antichrist and Antichristianisme, to wit, Not openly to appear in a
direct denial of Christ, his Truths and Worship, but to set up a way of
knowledge and worship without his Spirit. Another spirit creeping into the
Form, that is Antichrist (and the setting up observation and practice of the
Form out of the Life and Power, that is Antichristianisme) and this is the
persecuter, destroyer, and devourer about Religion.

Now though the Lord has suffered this false Church, and false Prophet to
reign long in the Dragons power, and to revile and worry his poor Lambs, in
every age of Antichrists Reign; yet the Lord has appointed a season to judge
this false Church, Rev. 17.1. to cast the false Prophet into the Lake, Rev. 19.
v. 20. yea and to torment with fire and brimstone, all the false Worshippers,
Rev. 14.9, 10, 11.

O how deeply does it concern England, her Rulers, her Teachers, yea the whole
People thereof, to consider their Ways, to consider their Worship, to consider
their Church State, to consider their Ministry, that they be not overwhelmed at
unawars in the bitter wrath of the Almighty, before which there is no standing.
O that they could mourn, and pray, and wait for the eye of Gods Spirit, for his
pure Light, which searches and discovers all the deceits of Antichrist; that
they might not be bewitched with any of the wine of the fornication of the
false Woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands, to
entangle her lovers in, and keep them from the pure bed of Life, where the
Father of Life, with the Son and Spirit, are enjoyed and worshipped.

If men consult concerning these things in the wisdom of the flesh, they will
be entangled and err; for that eye cannot see the Mysteries of the Kingdom, or
the course either of Truth or Deceit. The Gospel, the Eternal Truth, the true
Church, the true Ministry, are all Spiritual, (not new shadows, as the things
under the ministration of the Law were, but Spirit and Substance) and they can
only be seen by the spiritual eye of the children of Wisdom. The wise Hunters,
and diligent Enquirers, into the comprehending part, cannot find the Womb or
the way of Life, or the way of the Worship of that which is begotten in the
Life, or Gods way of Ministry, which he has appointed for the feeding and
preserving of the Life. The Prophets of old could not be known, discerned, or
owned by the fleshly eye of observation in Israel, after the flesh, (but they
still rejected them, esteeming and magnifying the false Prophets above them)
how much less can the Prophets and Ministers of the New Testament be seen by
man's eye? Are they the Prophets and Ministers of Christ, which a Nation cries
up for such, and which the eye of the wise men therein admires, and pitches
upon? or, are those they which the renewed eye, in the Light of the Lord sees
to be fitted, sanctified and called forth by Christ unto that service? Ah poor
England, must thou fall into the pit before thine eyes be opened!

The great Controversy of this Age is about Church and Ministry, which must
carry it, the Form or the Power; Whether the Church and Ministry, shall take
place which was before the Apostasy, or that which has sprung up in or since
the Apostasy? Whether man's wisdom shall determine which is the true Church and
its true Ministry, or whether the Spirit of God shall determine it? Whether a
Nation, with the Ministers it sets up, shall be the Church and Ministry? or
whether Gods holy Nation (which he calls and sanctifies by his Spirit) and
the Ministers which he chooses, and sends to gather and build up his in the
holy Faith and pure power of Life, shall be the Church and Ministry? Our eyes
wait on the Lord to see this Controversy determined, and our hope of help is
in his Arm, nor are we at all affrighted at the rising of any strength against
us (our hearts being given up to Gods Truth, and to suffer for its Testimony,
according to Gods will, meekly and patiently in his strength) but we pity this
poor land, yea in the depth of bowels we pity the Rulers, the Teachers and
People therein. O that they might be humbled, and in fear of the great God,
surrender to him his due, before he appear in his strength to force it from
them.

Of the Kingdom, Laws, and Government of Christ in the Heart and Conscience,
its Inoffensiveness to all just Laws and Governments of the Kingdoms of men.
Christ's Kingdom, Gods Kingdom, the Kingdom of Heaven (for they are all one and
the same) is that seed of Eternal Life, which God has hid in the hearts of the
sons of men, whereby he gathers them back unto himself, brings them under
the Yoke of his Government, rules over them, and reigns in them.

This Kingdom is likened to a grain of mustard seed, for its smalness; to a
Pearl, for its Riches, Value and Worth; to Leaven, for its spreading nature:
and many other Parables did Christ make use of to discover it by, as to a piece
of Silver, which the woman that lost it, lighting the candle, sweeping the
house and searching it diligently, at length found it even there where she had
lost it.

Man fallen from God, is become lost as to the Lord, and as to his own
happiness in the Lord, being driven from his blessed presence, and divine
Image, Life and Spirit, into the earthly Spirit, Image and Life which he chose.
Yet in this Earth, in this Field of the World God has hid somewhat, even the
everlasting Pearl; which when man is awakened to seek, and finds in the
living Breath, in the Eternal Light of Life; it is able to redeem him, it is
able to overspread, (he becoming subject to the Laws, Leadings, Teachings and
Power of it) and leaven him into the Likeness and Image of the pure Life and
Spirit.

Or not men knew the Gift of God, O that men knew the purchase of the blood of
Christ, O that men knew that Spiritual good thing, which Christ (who died for
them) has given to Redeem them by, that in that they might be united to
Christ, and so by him be Renewed and Restored to God. For as the Father
receives none but through the Son; so the Son receives none but in that Gift,
which he bestows from the Father. He owneth no Faith, no Love, no Hope, no
Repentance, no Obedience, but what springs from that, and stands in that.

Now as man is Born of this, is Leavened by this, (as he becomes a fool in his
own earthly wisdom and excellency of the fallen Spirit, and becomes a Babe, a
Child, Simple, Innocent, etc.) so he enters into the Kingdom, being ingrafted
into the Root through the virtue of this which is given him from the Root, and
so grows up in this, and this in him. And here is the new Nature, the new Life,
the new Heart, the new Spirit, in which the Unity and Fellowship with God is
again known, and the Disunion with the World, the Wisdom, the Interests, the
Fashions, the Customs, the Fears, the Hopes, the Delights, the Joys, of this
World and whatever else is of it. For Christ, as he is not of the World, so he
calls men out of the World; and they which follow him, and become his
Disciples, go out of the World after him; that is, travel in Spirit and
Conversation from what is of the Earth, from what ever is not of the Father,
but of the World. They are not of the World, even as I am not of the World
(says Christ concerning his Disciples, John 17. therefore the world hates
them.

The Laws of this Kingdom are given forth in the Kingdom, from the Covenant of
life, which is made there in Christ. They are written in the heart, in the
mind, as far as it is renewed. There the fear is put, there the eternal Wisdom
is opened, there is Sion known, and the Jerusalem which is from above, and the
Laws of eternal life issue fresh from it, and are revealed by the life, in the
heart which is turned toward the life. There sin is reproved, and everlasting
Righteousness manifested, in the Light which cannot deceive: and as the heart
is made subject under the yoke, so sin is wrought out and Righteousness brought
in; and under the Cross, or yoke of life, the blood of the everlasting Covenant
runs through the vessel, to keep it pure, sweet, clean and fresh in the life.

This then is the Government of Christ, to be subject to his Spirit, which
appears and opens his will, in the gift of grace which comes from him; to feel
his living breath, by which the heart is begotten to God, out of the Region of
darkness; to know the movings, the stirrings, the leadings, the steps of the
Lamb, who is the Captain of our Salvation; and to follow him where ever he
goes, doing all things that he commands, forbearing all things that he forbids,
without murmuring, without disputing.

Who ever will be of the inward Israel, the spiritual Israel, which Christ
redeems out of the spiritual Egypt, and leads through the spiritual Wilderness
into the Land of Rest, must know his Leader, must receive his Spirit, and
follow it faithfully. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his, he is none of the spiritual Israel: and if any man follow not the Spirit
of Christ, through all the travels in the Wilderness, (but either sits down by
the way, or lies overcome by any kind of enemies, and comes not to the end of
his journey, finishing the warfar and fight of Faith) he falls short of the
rest. O that men were awakened to consider of things as indeed they are: for
Religion is not such an outward Form of Doctrine, or Worship of any sort, as
men generally (whose poor Souls are deceived through the subtilty of the powers
of darkness) are too apt and willing to apprehend; but it consists in Spirit,
in Power, in Virtue, in Life: not in the oldness of any Form which passes
away, but in the newness of the Spirit, which abides for ever; in being born
of the Spirit, in abiding in the Spirit, in living, walking and worshipping in
the Spirit, yea, in becoming and growing into Spirit, and into eternal Life:
for that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. O that the sons of men would
hearken, that they might taste of the sweetness and riches of the goodness,
which the Father in his free love has opened in the spirits of many, and has
let the spirits of many into. O that men would suffer the wearing out of this
earthly spirit and wisdom, that they might become like God, be formed into and
live in his Image. How long shall the Destroyer in every age, prejudice men
against them in that age, which seek their good with their hearts! How long
will the world stand in enmity against the generation of God's choice, and
provoke the Lord to wrath against them! Surely the spirit of this world will
try it out to the very last against the Spirit of God: for indeed, the spirit
of this world is not subject to the Spirit of God, nor indeed can be, and so
cannot endure the Government of his Kingdom (which is not of this world) to be
set up in the sight of it.

Yet the Government of Christ and his Kingdom, is not opposite to any just
Government of a Nation or People. Christ's Government is a Righteous Government
of the heart, or inner man chiefly, which does not oppose a Righteous
Government of the outward man. Nay, those who are Christ's subjects, and singly
obedient to his Law of Righteousness in their spirits; are more faithful to
men, and more subject to any just Law of Government, than others can be: for
their fidelity and subjection is out of love, and for Conscience sake. But this
is it which offends the world, men many times make Laws in their own will, and
according to their own wisdom (now the wisdom of the world is corrupt, and has
erred from the guideance of God) and are not free from self ends and interests,
not being gathered into that, which cleanses and keeps pure the naturals.
Now that which is of God, cannot bow to any thing which is corrupt in man: it
can lie down and suffer, and bear the plowing of long and deep surrows upon its
back, but it cannot act that which is against its life. It cannot be disloyal
to its King, to gratify the spirit of this world; but what Practice or
Testimony its King calls for, against the evil and corruption of this world, it
must obey singly and faithfully.

God in every age so brings forth and orders his innocent Lambs and People,
as that they are still offensive to the present age. The Lord fitteth them, and
calls them forth to be Witnesses against the evils of the present age, How
can they but offend it? Can darkness choose but hate the light, which speaks
against it? How can darkness in Power and Dominion, bear to be reproved by a
mean contemptible appearance of the Light, in mean and contemptible vessels?
For God chooses the weak, and foolish things of this world, and things that are
not, to bring to naught things that are. Look into former ages, How did God
reprove the Kings and Princes of Israel? Not by the eminent Priests and
Prophets, whom they expected to be taught by, but by Herdsmen, by Plowmen, by
Prophets which they despised. How did he overcome the Heathenish world, yea,
and the Jewish corrupted state? Was it by wise learned men (by the learned
Scribes and Pharisees among the Jews, or by the wise Grecians among the
Heathen) or by Fishermen and Publicans? And how shall the recovery out of the
Apostasy, and the reproof of the Antichristian world be? Shall it be by wise
Synods and Councils of learned and Orthodox men among them (as they speak?) Or
shall it be by the learning of the spirit in such as these contemn? When God
has the rich Treasure of the Knowledge of his Kingdom to manifest in the
world, he chooses earthen vessels, weak vessels, poor contemptible persons (he
appears there, where the eye of man least look for him) that the excellency of
the Power might appear to be of him wholly, and that the vessel might rob him
of none of the glory of it. Now the Lord has not only chosen, in this day of
his great appearance in Spirit to the spirits of his People, mean instruments,
but mean things also, foolish things, weak things, the keeping on of an Hat,
the use of ordinary Language, the appearing in mean habits and despised
gestures, yea, and in a foolish way of Preaching (indeed it is so, to that
which has not the savor of the Virtue and Power of the life in it) And how
can the wisdom of man but stumble at it? Who would think that God should
require such things, or appear in such thirds? O living eternal Power, how is
thy migthy Presence and Appearance veiled from all, that look for it in any way
of man's observation, or judge it with the eye of man's wisdom! Verily, thou art
a God that have hid thy self from the earthly spirit in its utmost wisdom, yea,
in its utmost search after the knowledge of, and in the midst of the highest
porfession of Religion! Which of the Wise, which of the Scribes in this Age can
discern any of thy Paths, or so much as one of thy Footsteps! Oh that men
would fear before the Lord, and be sure to Govern in that which is of God, and
then they should harm none of His, nor hazard the shaking of their Government:
but whatever is not of God, both within and without, must fall in the day of
Gods Power. O happy is he, who is now made willing to part with that, which God
is determined to rent from man, that his standing may be in that which cannot
be shaken. For there has been a great Earthquake in this Nation, both of
things without and of things within; and there yet remains somewhat to be
shaken both without and within, that the Glory of God may have room to appear.
O England, Kiss the Son lest he be angry: Let all such Laws and Customs as are
not of Him, fall before Him, and whatever is of Him, let it bow unto Him (both
within and without) that his wrath break not forth like a fire, which none can
quench. For the Lord has mighty things to bring to pass, and he has a mighty
Arm of Power to effect them by, and what shall be able to stand before him,
that stands in his way?

Faults in Printing.
Page 11. line 23. for, of read on. p. 15. l. 1. r. Doctrines. l. 37. r.
Mediator. p. 16. l. 12. r. times. p. 17. l. 6. r. so to that. l. 7. r. end of
growth. l. 8. r. ever and ever. p. 18. l. 18. f. it r. all. p. 19. l. 29. f.
along r. alone. p. 20. l 9. f. in r. as p. 21. l. 19. f. the r. this. l. 37. f.
sed r. sed p. 22. l. 14. 15. f. he witnesses, r. bewitches. l. 27. 1. does.

THE END.

