A Salutation of Love and tender Good-VVill TO THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE Peace,
for the County of Bucks, and such others in that County, and also throughout
the Nation, as are concerned in the Contents hereof.
IF I should warn you of the Day of the Lord (which is a Day of terrible wrath
to the transgressing Nature, but of peace, love, and tender mercy to the
righteous, innocent, suffering Seed) If I should tell you that this Day is
hastening upon this Nation, and upon the whole Earth; and if this should
affright you, and cause you to cry unto the Lord to deliver you from that
Nature, and from those sinful courses, which make you but as fit fuel for his
fire, in the day of its hot burning: I say, if by this means ye should be thus
prepared for this Day, and yet this Day come not so suddenly as ye might
expect, yet that would be no loss, or cause of grief unto you. But if this Day
should suddenly come, and find you in your sins, and so the fierce wrath of the
Lord break forth upon, and afflict your souls, and the day of your Mercy and
Redemption be wholly passed over by you, This would be matter of unutterable
grief and sorrow to you, and the remembrance of your former ease and pleasures,
would but increase the sense and anguish of your misery.

Certain I am, There is a Day of giving account for sinning against God, and
for oppressing that in your Consciences, which discovers to you, and checks you
for your sins; and this will as certainly come, as the day of sinning now is:
And then every man must receive from God according to his works, and reap the
fruit of the deeds done in the body: Then every soul must inherit according to
its Nature, and every Vessel be filled, with what it is fitted to receive; that
which is fitted for mercy, with mercy; that which is fitted for wrath and
misery, with wrath and misery: And then the distressed sinner will wish, O that
I had an hour to escape; O that God would once more give me a moment of
repentance, and of turning from sin.

O consider, Is it a slight thing with you, that the infinite God, who is
little concerned in you (being perfectly blessed and happy for ever without
you, but as his love, mercy, and tender nature makes him concern himself about
the salvation of your souls) should give you so large a time of Repentance, and
so many discoveries of the evils of your ways (when at any time ye are retired
and serious) and so many checks and warnings in your hearts, as the vilest of
sinners, at times, have more or less from him? Can ye lengthen out the day of
mercy? Can ye limit God how long he should strive with you? O why do ye harden
your hearts? why do ye hearken to the lusts, desires, temptations and counsels
of the earthly mind, which in all Ages has undone all that have listened
thereunto?

There is no way of avoiding the eternal, insupportable wrath of God, but by
traveling out of that nature, spirit, and course, which it is to. Him that
sowed to sin and corruption under the Law, the Sacrifices would not save then;
nor him that sows to sin and corruption under the Gospel, the Sacrifice of
Christ will not save now: But he that is saved by Christ, must be sanctified
and redeemed from sin and corruption by him; which, Christ works by his
principle of life sown in the heart; which principle turns against the
contrary principle, discovering its nature, and evil dark ways, and drawing
from, and leading out of them. O therefore, Let me in love entreat you, all my
dear Countrymen (indeed I have no end in it, but your good) to mind that in
your hearts, which discovers your evils to you, that therein ye may feel the
power of life drawing you from them, and helping you against them: Greater is
the power in this, than the power that is in the contrary principle, as those
that hearken to it, and become subject, by experience feel. And what if ye lose
a few fond pleasures for the present (which indeed are beneath the true state
of a man) ye will lose a great deal of misery too, and your gain at last will
be exceeding great.

If ye would know, whether I speak truth in these things, Come to the true
Balance, and wait on the Lord, till by him ye be made able to weigh. My
meaning is, Join to the good Spirit of the Lord, when ye sind it stirring in
your own hearts: give up unto it, let in its strength upon you; in its warmth
and drawing virtue, give up to forsake the evil and pursue the good: Fear not
the multitude of evils in the heart, nor the long accustomedness unto evil, the
Lord will help the willing soul out of them. And in this obedience to the good
Spirit of the Lord, there will be an understanding received to know the things
of God, and to try words and sayings, whether they be of him, or of man. And he
that tryes in this balance, cannot be deceived (the measure being equal and
just, and proper to the things which are therewith to be measured) whereas the
wisest of men, trusting either to their own Understandings and Judgments, or to
the Judgments and Understandings of others, are liable to be deceived: And then
ye will acknowledge what love this sprang from, and what Light and Life it
sprang up in, though through a weak and contemptible Vessel.

Isaac Penington.

Concerning PEACE and GOOD WILL.
THe true Peace is in the new Nature, which puts an end to the warring and
fighting spirit inwardly, and turns the whole strength of the Battle against
the enemies of the soul. In the old Nature there are lusts after Dominion, and
after Liberty to the flesh, and fulfilling the self-will of the earthly mind:
But these are all brought down in the renewed Spirit, by the power, love, and
sweetness of the Gospel of Peace. Here is indeed uprightness of heart to the
Lord, quietness of spirit under whatever the Lord suffers to be, and good will
toward all men, waiting on the Lord for his seasons of tender Bowels, with
strong cries and tears, even for those, who, to the eye of man, may seem so
hardened against God and his Truth, as to be out of the reach of mercy.


