THE AXE LAID TO THE ROOT OF THE OLD CORRVPT-TREE* AND The Spirit of deceit
struck at in its nature, from whence all the error from the life, among both
Papists and Protestants has arisen, and by which it is nourished and fed at
this Day.

In a Distinction between the Faith which is of man, and the Faith which is of
GOD.

And in some Assertions concerning true Faith, its nature, rise, etc. Its
receiving of Christ, its abiding and growing in his living Virtue.

With a warning concerning adding and diminishing from the Scripture in
general, (and the Prophesies of the Revelation in particular.) Discovering
what it is, and the great danger of it, with the only way of preservation from
it, where is added a Short touch about the Use of Means.

As also a brief History concerning the state of the Church since the days of
the Apostles.

With an Exhortation to the present Age.

By the movings of the Life, in a friend to the Living truth of the most High
God, but an utter enemy to the spirit of error and blasphemy, where ever it is
found, as well in the strictest of the Protestants, as among the grossest of
the Papists.

Isaac Penington the younger.

LONDON: Printed and are to be sold by Lodowick Lloyd, at his shop next the
Castle in Cornhill, 1659.

THE PREFACE
THere was a glorious day, and bright appearance of truth in the times of the
Apostles. They had the true Comforter, who led them into all truth, and kept
them alive in truly, and truth alive in them. By this Spirit they, as living
stones, were built up a spiritual house, founded upon Sion the holy mount,
into Jerusalem the holy City, which is the church of the living God, the pillar
and g^ound of truth. And here they had their conversation in heaven, with God
the Judge of all, with Christ the Mediator, and with the Spirits of ^ust men
and the holy Angels, which always behold the face of God. They lived in the
Spirit, they walked in the Spirit, they prayed in the Spirit, they sung in the
Spirit, they worshipped in the Spirit, and in that understanding which the
truth had made free, and had God dwelling with them, and Christ walking in the
midst of them; and by the presence and power of his life in them; were truly
dead unto sin, and alive unto God, they being not strivers against sin with
man's legal spirit, but by the power of grace, which made them more then
conquerours through him that loved them. This was part of the glory of that
state, in that day of the Sunshine of the Gospel.

But behold, a thick night of darkness overspread the beauty of this? Some
false brethren went out from the true Church into the world, getting the Sheeps
clothing, making a great outward appearance, and drew the world after them,
yea and some from the very Churches themselves: (how hard was the Apostle Paul
sain to plead with the Corinthians about his own Apostleship and Doctrine that
he might preserve that Church from the false Apostles!) And when they had
gathered a sufficient party in the world, they made head against the true sheep
and lambs of Christ, fought with them, and overcame, them. And when they had
overcome them that had the living testimony of Jesus, and the true power and
presence of the Spirit among them, they set up their own dead form making a cry
all over the nations of the earth, Revelation is ceased, there is no looking
now for such an infallible spirit, and such immediate teachings as the
christians had in the Apostles days, who had the anointing to teach them all
things: but they point men to traditions, to the church, as they call it (which
title the whore has engrossed since the days of the Apostles) or to
searchings of the Scriptures, and reading expositions upon it, and bodies of
divinity, formed by the understanding part in man to instruct the understading
part. Thus the whole course of religion and of the knowledge of God, came to be
out of that Spirit and life wherein it first came forth (and wherein it first
stood) and consisted in doctrines of men, and a form of worship and knowledge
which the wisdom of man had framed, in an imitation of that which formerly
stood in the life.

And now men being gone from the life, from the Spirit and his immediate
teachings, into an outward form of knowledge and worship of God in the wrong
nature; now Antichrist is got up, and the Dragon sits in the Temple, appearing
there as if he were God, giving out laws and ordinances of worship in public,
and putting men upon duties and exercises of devotion in private, and he is
obeyed and bowed down to in the observation of these; but the true living God
is not known; nor his secret still voice (which calls out of these) heard,
because of the great noise which the Dragon makes in his Temple (for so it is
now, he having gained it, though it was once Gods) about his laws and
ordinances of worship, which he would have all compelled to, and none suffered
to testify against them that they are his, and not the Lords.

Yet it pleased the Lord, all the night of this darkness, to raise up some*
witnesses against the Dragon, and all his invented forms of worship, though
they were still hunted, persecuted, knocked down, and their testimony cried out
against as error, heresy, schism and blasphemy, and the ways, worships and
ordinances of the whore the beast and the dragon still cried up as the truth.
Thus the Papists, they cried out against the Protestanus as heretics and
schismatiques, who were witnesses against them; and the Protestants, they cried
out against the nonconformists, seperatists and brownists, who were witnesses
against them; and every sect cries out most against them, who are led further
from the apostasy, and raised up by the Lord as witnesses against them, against
their setting down in their form, and not pursuing the guidance of that
spirit, which would lead them quite out of the darkness, and not have them sit
down by the way.

Now the Lord God in these latter days, has not only raised up witnesses
against the Whore, the Dragon, the Beast, the false Prophets, with all their
inventions which they have set up instead of the truth: but has assayed, and
begun to deliver his people out of this Egyptian darkness; and to bring them
back to the light of the land of Canaan. And now great enemies have appeared,
the sons of the night exceedingly strengthening themselves to keep out the day
light, every one crying up his own form, and all joining hand in hand against
the power: yea and that spirit, which first tempted from God, is exceeding
busy to cause those whom the Spirit the Lord has been drawing out of the land
of darkness, to make a Captain to return to Egypt, or at least to sit down in
some form, or some pleasant notion of things by the way and not to follow the
Lord, through all his intricate leadings in the vast howling Wilderness, til he
bring them into the possession of the true rest. What a work there was to
quench that spirit which stired in the Protestants against Popery, and to fix the
in Episcopacy, and in the use of the Common prayer book? When that was detected
and turned from, then Presbittery endeavored to take its place, and to bring
it its directory: but the pursuit of the Lord was so hot against that, that it
stunk presently, and his mighty hand would not suffer that so much as to arise
Much about the same time, Independency and Anabaptism appeared and contended;
and there was a more simple and honest thing stirring there, then in the other:
and accordingly the blessing of the Lord (which was not to the form, but to the
life that was stirring within) did appear more among them But they, fixing
there, lost the life and simplicity to which the blessing was, and met with the
death and the curse, which is the proper reward of the form: for any form out
of the life, kills the life; and its reward is death to it self. The form kills
the life, which stirred underneath, and made it appear with some freshness; and
when the life, from which it had its seeming beauty and luster dies, then it
soon withers and dies also: so that the living principle being once slain,
there remains nothing but the dead spirit feeding on the dead form. There was
one more pure appearance, and nearer to the Kingdom then all these, which was
of seeking and waiting: but death overcame this also, making a form of it, and
stealing in some observations from the letter of the Scriptures concerning the
Kingdom, whereby their eyes were with held from beholdingthe inward principle
and seed of life within, to look for some great appearance of power without
(such as was among the Apostles) to set things to rights; and so they were held
captive by the same spirit in their seeking and waiting, whereby the others are
held in their forms. Thus have persons generally missed the following of that
good Spirit, which began to lead them out Egypt, the dark Land; and loosing
their guide, have fixed somewhere or other by the way, resting in some form, or
in some notion or expectation of things (according as in their wisdom they
have imagined from their skill in the letter) short of the life it self. Thus
have their carcasses fallen in the Wilderness.

Now this I have to say to you all. All you who rest in any form whatsoever, or
rest in any notion or apprehension of things short of the life it self, ye had
even as good have stayed in Egypt, as to fix by the way, and to take up a rest
in the Wilderness, short of Canaan. In plain terms, ye had as good have abided
in Popery or in Episcopacy, ye had been as acceptable to God there, as here.
Not that I say your forms of Indepedency, Anabaptism, or seeking, are as bad as
Popery, Episcopacy, or Presbittery; nay they are all somewhat nearer, and the
last of them very much nearer: but your fixing there, and the dead spirit
feeding there on the dead thing, is as remote from life, as if it had gone
quite back again. And this dead spirit is as hateful to God here, as it is
among the Papists, yes and in one sense more, because it makes a pretense
beyond them.

And the truth is, ye have gone back again, though not in the direct, form,
yet into that very spirit, wherein Poperey's strength and kingdom lies, and so
are become one of the beasts names, and your strength and defense lies in the
beasts horns, either in the outward powers of the earth, or in that inward
knowledge of things and wisdom from the letter, which is out of the life, and
so are not yet come out of the City Babylon. For mark, The spirit that fixes
in a form short of the life, is the same that whored from the life: and the
same spirit is the whore still, in what form soever she be. The spirit that
rose up in the life, against the death and corruption whereof Popery wholly
corsisted, was a good spirit, and this spirit would pass through all forms,
till it meet with the life: it is the other spirit that says to thee, thou
host gone far enough, and so tempts to stay by the way. And he who hearkens to
this spirit, and stays any where by the way, he is caught with the old whore
in a new dress, and is drinking the cup of fornication afresh. And then like
the Papists, he runs to the powers of the earth, to defend his form, against
the witnesses of God (and that is his cover under which he persecutes, and there
he lies hid) or at least to his own wisdom and reason, to strengthen himself
with arguments for fixing here, and against going any further. And then he
grows wise in the flesh, and cries out against them, who are still led by the
same spirit to press on further, as weak, silly, giddy, Unsettled, seduced
people, that can never know when they are well. Thus the wise Episcopalians
revlied the simple-he-arted non-conformists, who pursued further then they: and
the non conformists, when they lost their simplicity and begun to stick,
reviled those that pursued beyond them* and thus at this day, those who are
pressing on in the spirit, are disdained by those who have took up their
station in the flesh, and with their two great horns, of earthly power and
earthly wisdom, are they pushing at them.

Look about you, look about you, all sorts of devout professors, see where ye
are: are you not dead in your forms? is not the good old puritan principle
(wherein once was true life in its measure) dead and buried there? Consider
with your selves, has that grown in your forms, or has it been slain there?
Speak the truth in your own hearts, Can ye truly say, from a sercible feeling
in the life, that that principle is still alive in you? If it were so, ye could
never be drawn to persecute, no nor to suffer persecution, ye that have power
to hinder it: but if that seed be choked, then ye may well connive at, if not
further the enemy, and plead for him, and join i^terests with him. While Abel
lived in you Cain could not rise up in his dominion, but now the righteous seed
is' slain, the murdering nature appears. O hasten out of this spirit, hasten
out of Babylon, cast off the spirit of popery, return to the old puritan*
principle: Do not cry it up in deceit, to oppose the present appearance of
truth, which is grown up further in it; but subject that dead formal earthly
spirit to it, which is fallen beneath it: and when ye are come to a true touch
f life there, ye may be able to own the same truth in its growth to a further
measure. But while thou art in the dead unde^standing and from the power and
life of truth in thine own particular, do thou think to be able to measure
truth aright in others. Nay, thou measurest by a false appearance of things in
the fallen understanding, and in the wisdom which thou have gathered there,
since thou thy self fellest from the living principle: and this must needs
commend that most, which is nearest to it, and not that which is nearest to
truth. And this is the great error of this age, men with a gathered knowledge
from Scripture-words, without the true faith and life, go about to measure that
life and knowledge which comes from the faith: and because it suites not with
the apprehensions which they have taken into their minds, they condemn it. And
thus being in the stumbling wi^dome and way of observation, to which truth was
never revealed, but was ever an offense, they stumb'e at it: and thus men
generally dish, and split themselves against the same rock now, as the
Pharisees did of old. Now this understanding must perish, and this wisdom in
men be brought to naught; before that can be raised up which can judge aright.

Hearken therefore to my exhortation, as ye love your souls, Come out of popery
indeed and in truth, come out of the spirit of popery; burn the whore in her
new forms, as well as in her old: Cast off all these new names of the Beast,
under which the old spirit has made a prey of the life in your own particulars,
and lies lurking to make a prey of the life in others, and to force it into its
own deceitful forms of death, and slay it. Leave defending your faith and
church by the Beasts horns, and come to that faith and church which is
received, gathered, and defended by Christ the one horn of salvation. Leave
your reasonings and disputings in that wisdom which has slain the life, and
come to that wisdom which comes from the life, and springs up in the life; and
ye will find more certainty and satisfaction in one touch of true life, then in
all the reasonings and disputes of wise men to the worlds end. The ground
wherein men's religion grows (even of the most zealous) is bad, even the same
ground wherein the Pharisees religion stood and grew; and it has brought forth
such kind of fruit, namely, such a kind of conformity to the letter, as theirs
was, which stands in the understanding and will of man, rearing up a pleasant
building there, but keeps from the life, and from building in it. But the true
religion stands in receiving a principle of life, which by its growth forms a
vessel for it self s and all the former part, wherein sin on the one hand, or
self righteousness on the other hand stood and grew, passes away.

These things following strike at the King of Babylon himself, yea even at the
very root of the Antichristian spirit in every man, which he that can mild y
receive the stroke of, may feel the true Spirit of life (which lies slain
underneath) spring up in him, and give life to his soul; which, when it is
delivered, will be able truly to know and rejoice in the Lord its Savior. And
when the root of that spirit is cut down (which never brought forth sweet
pleasant fruit unto life, but only sour fruit, finely p^inted and dressed for
the eye and palate of death) its body, branches, leaves and fruit will wither
and dye daily, and truth come to grow safely.

A Distinction between the faith which is of man, and the faith which is of
GOD: One whereof is the Faith of Sion, the other the Faith of Babylon; the one
laying hold on Christ, as he is revealed the King of life in Sion, the other
lays hold on an Historical relation of Christ, the fame whereof has sounded
in Babylon.
THere is a faith which is of a man's self, and a faith which is the gift of
God; or a power of believing which is found in the nature of fallen man, and a
power of believing which is given from above. As there are two births, the
first and the second; so they have each their faith, and each believe with
their faith, and seem to lay h^ld on the same thing for life; and the
contention about the inheritance will not be ended, till God determine it. Cain
will sacrifice with his faith, and he believes he shall be accepted: if he had
not believed so, he would not have been so angry when he found it otherwise.
And the Cainish spirit in man, the vagabond from the life of God, which has
not an habitation in God, nor the eternal life of God abiding in him, he is
busy with the same faith at this day, and has the same expectation from it,
as Cain had.

This is the root of the false religion, of the false hope, of the false peace,
of the false joy, of the false rest, of the false comfort, of the false
assurance, as the other is the root of the true. In this faith which is of man,
and in the improvement of it stands all the knowledge, zeal, devotion, and
worship of the world in general, and of the worldly part in every man in
particular: but the true knowledge, the true zeal, the true devotion, the true
worship stands in the faith which is given of God, to them which are born of
the immortal seed, which li^es in God, and in which God lives for ever.

Now it deeply concerns every man to consider, from which of these his
knowledge, religion, and worship proceed, and in which of them they stand: for
if they proceed from, and stand in the faith which is of man, they cannot
please God, nor conduce to the salvation of the soul; but though they may taste
very pleasantly to man's palate now, and administer much hope, and satisfaction
to him at present, yet they will fail at the time of need: For as Christ said
concerning the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, so may I say
concerning this faith: Except your faith, with the works of it, exceed that
faith and all the works of it (even to the utmost improvement thereof) which is
to be found in man's nature, it will never lead you to the kingdom of God, nor
be able to give you any right to the inheritance of life; For he that will
inherit, must be the right heir, must have the faith of Abraham, the faith of
Isaac^ which springs up from the root of life in the seed* and this leads the
seed into that spring of life (out of which it shot forth as a branch) which is
the inheritance promised to the seed. And here is Christ, Alpha and Omega, in
every particular soul, where life is begun and perfected, ^unning its course
through time, back to that which was before the beginning.

Therefore observe and consider well, what this faith which is of a man's self
can do, and how far it may go in the changing of man, and in producing a
conformity of him to the letter of the Scriptures. And then consider where it
is shut out, what it cannot do, what change it cannot make, what it cannot
conform to, that so the true distinction may be let into the mind, and not a
foundation laid of so great a mistake in a matter of so great concernment.

1. A man may believe the history of the Scriptures, yea, and all the doctrines
of them (so far as he can reach them with his understanding) with this faith
which is of man. As by this faith a man can believe an history probably related
to him; so by this faith may he believe the historyes of the Scriptures, which
are more then probably related. As by this faith a man can receive doctrines of
instruction out of Philosophers books, so by the same faith he may receive
doctrins of instruction out of the Scriptures. Reading a relation of the fall
of man, of the recovery by Christ, that there is no other way to life, etc.
This faith can believe the relation of these things, as well as it can believe
the relation of other things.

2. This being believed from the relation of the history of these things, this
naturally sets all the powers of man on work (kindling the understanding will
and affections) toward the avoiding of misery, and the attaining of
happiness. What would not a man do, to avoid perpetual extremity of misery
on soul and body for ever, and to obtain a crown of everlasting blessedness?
This boils the affections to an height, and sets the understanding on work to
the utmost, to gather all the rules of Scripture, and to practice all the
duties and ordinances therein mentioned? What can the Scripture propose to be
believed, that he will not believe? What can it propose to be done, that he
will not do? Must he pray? he will pray. Must be heat? he will hear. Must he
read? he will read. Must he meditate? he will meditate. Must he deny himself
and all his own righteousness, and duties, and hope only for salvation in the
merits of Christ? he will seem to do that to, and say, when he has done all he
can, he is but an unprofitable servant. Does the Scripture say he can do
nothing without the Spirit? he will acknowledge that too, and he hopes he has
the Spirit; God has promised the Spirit to them that ask it: and he has asked
long, and asks still, and therefore he hopes he has it. Thus man by a natural
faith grows up, and spreads into a great tree, and is very confident, and much
pleased, not perceiving the defect in his root, and what all his growth here
will come to.

3. This being done with much seriousnes and industry, there must needs follow
a great change in man: his understanding will be more and more enlightened, his
will more and more conformed to that, to which he thus gives himself up, and
to which he thus bends himself with all his strength* his affections more and
more warmed, he will find a kind of life, and growth in this according to its
kind. Let a man's heart be in any kind of study or knowledge, applying himself
strictly to it, he gathers understanding in his mind, and warmth in his
affections: so it is also here. Yea this being more excellent in it self, must
needs produce a more excellent understanding, and a more excellent warmth, and
have a greater power and influence upon the will.

4. Now how easy is it for a man to mistake here, and call this the truth?
First, he mistakes this for the true faith, and then he mistakes in applying to
this all that which belongs to the true faith: and thus entering into the spirit
of error at first, he errs in the whole course of his religion, from the
beginning to the end. He sees a change made by this in him, and this he
accounts the true conversion and regeneration. This leads him to ask and seek
and pray, and this he counts the true praying, the true seeking, the true
asking. This cleanses (after its kind) his understanding, will, and
affections, and this he takes for the true sanctification. The justification
which is to the true believer, he also aplyes to this faith: and so he has a
peace, ^ satisfaction, a rest here, and an hope of happiness hereafter. Thus
he receives what is already revealed, and he waits for what may be further
revealed, which he can embrace and conform to, turning still upon this center,
and growing up from this root. And he that does not come hither in religion,
falls short of the improvement of man's nature and of the faith that grows
there, (which naturally leads all the powers of nature hither, and fixes them
here) which is but dead. And now this man is safe, he is a believer, he is a
worshipper of God, he is a Christian, he is an observer of the commands of
Christ: when the overflowing scourge comes, it shall not touch him: all the
judgments, plagues, threatenings in the Scripture belong not to him, but to the
unbelievers, to them that know not God, to them that worship not God, to them
that observe not the commands of Christ: thus by his untempered mortar, from
his false faith; he has built up a wall against the deluge of wrath, which wall
will tumble down upon him when the wrath comes. The growth of this faith, and
great spreading of it into all this knowledge, zeal, and devotion, has not
changed the nature of it all this while, but it is the same that it was at the
beginning, even a power of nature in the first birth, and all these fruits are
but the fruits of the first nature, which is still alive under all this. All
this can never kill the principle out of which it grows, but feeds it more and
fattens it for the slaughter.

Thus far this faith can go: But then there is somewhat it is shut out of at
the very first. There is somewhat this faith cannot receive, believe, or enter
into. What is that? It is the life, the power, the inward part of this. Though
it may seem to have unity with all the Scriptures in the letter, yet it cannot
have unity with one Scripture in the life: for its nature is shut out of the
nature of the things there witnessed. As for instance, it may have a litterall
knowledge of Christ, according as the Scripture relates: of his birth,
preaching, miracles, death, resurrection, ascension, intercession, etc. Yea,
but the thing spoken of, it knows not. The nature of Christ (which is the
Christ) is hid from that eye. So it may have a litterall knowledge of the blood
of Christ, and of justification, but the life of the blood which livingly
justifies, that birth cannot feel; but can only talk of it, according to the
relation it reads in the Scripture. So it may have a litterall knowledge of
sanctification, but the thing that sanctifies, it cannot receive into it
self. So for redemption, peace, joy, hope, love, etc. it may get into the
outward part of all these, but the inward part, the life, the spirit of them,
it is shut out of, and cannot touch or come near, nor can it witness that
change, which is felt and known here. And here is the great contention in the
world, between these two births, the one contending for their knowledge in the
letter, and the other contending for their knowledge in the life* the one
setting up their faith from the natural part, calling it spiritual, and the
other who have felt the stroke of God upon this (and thereby come to know the
difference) setting up the faith of the true heir, which faith has a different
beginning, and a different growth from the other, and will be welcomed into the
Land and Kingdom of life, when the other will be manifested to be but the birth
of the bondwoman, and be thrust forth with its mother to seek their bread
abroad: for the seed of the bondwoman is not to inherit with Isaac, the seed of
promise.

Quest. What then is that faith which is the gift of God, and which is distinct
from this?

Answ. It is that power of believing which springs out of the seed of eternal
life, and leavens the heart, not with notions of knowledge, but with the powers
of life. The other faith is drawn out of man's nature, by considerations which
affect the natural part, and is kept alive by natural exercises of reading,
hearing, praying, studying, meditating in that part; but this springs out of a
seed of life given, and grows up in the life of that seed, and feeds on nothing
but the flesh and blood of Christ, in which is the living virtue, and immortal
nourishment of that which is immortal. This faith at its first entrance,
strikes that part dead in which the other faith did grow: and by its growth
perfects that death, and raises up a life which is of another nature, then
ever entered into the heart of man to conceive. And by the death of this part in
us, we come to know and enjoy life: and by the life we have received, know, and
enjoy, we come to see that which other men call life (and which we our selves
were apt to call life formerly) to be but death. And from this true knowledge,
we give a true testimony to the world of what we have seen and felt, but no man
receives our testimony. It grieves us to the heart, to see men set up a
perishing thing as the way to life, and our bowels are exceedingly kindled,
when we behold an honest zeal and simplicity betrayed, and in tender love do we
warn men of the pi^, into which they are generally running so fast, though men
reward us with hatred for our good will, and become ou^ bitter enemies because
we tell them the truth, and the most necessary truth for them to know; which
they can bear neither in plain words, nor yet in parables. Yet be not rough and
angry, but meekly wait to read this following parable aright, and it will open
into life. The parable is briefly this.

That which sold the birthright, seeks the birth right, with tears and great
pains, but shall never recover it: but there is one which lies dead (which has
the promise) which stirs not, which seeks not, till he is raised by the power
of the fathers life, and then he wrestles with the father, prevails, and gets
the blessing from him. Therefore know that part which is up first, and is so
busy in the willing and in the running, and makes such a noise about duties,
and ordinances, and graces, to keep down the life which it has slain: and know
that seed of life which is the heir, which lies underneath all this, and must
remain slain, while this lives; but if ever ye hear the voice of the Son of
God, this will live, and the other dye. And happy for ever will he be, who
knows this! but misery will be his portion, who cannot witness a through change
by the Almighty power of the living God, but has only painted the old nature
and Sepulcher, but never knew the old bottle broken, and a new one formed,
which alone is able to receive and retain the new wine of the Kingdom, whereas
the other (Pharisee like) can only receive a relation of the letter concerning
the Kingdom.

SOME Assertions concerning faith, its nature, rise, etc. with its receiving of
Christ, and what follows thereupon, namely, a growing in his living virtue,
with a knowledge of the true, living, unerring rule, and an obedience to it in
the life.
Assertion I.
THat the true faith, the faith of the Gospel, the faith of the Elect, the
faith which saves the sinner from sin, and makes him more then a conqueror
over sin and the powers of darkness, is a belief in the nature of God; which
belief gives entrance into, fixes in, and causes an abiding in that nature.
U^belief enters into death, and fixes in the death: faith gives entrance
into, and fixes in the life. Faith is an ingrafting into the Vine, a partaking
of the nature of the Vine, a sucking of the juice of life from the vine, which
nothing is able to do but the faith, but the belief in the nature. (And
nothing can believe in the nature, but what is one with the nature.) So then,
faith is not a believing the history of the Scripture, or a believing and
applying the promises, or a believing that Christ dyed for sinners in general,
or for me in particular; for all this may be done by the unbelieving nature
(like the Jew) but an uniting to the nature of God in Christ, which the
unbeliever starts from, in the midst of his believing of these. Yet I do not
deny that all these things are to be believed, and are believed with the true
faith: But this I affirm, that they also may be believed without the true
faith, and that such a belief of these does not determine a man to be a believer
in the sight of God, but only the union with the nature of that life from
whence all these sprang, and in which alone they have their true value.

II.
That the true faith springs from the true knowledge, or comes with the true
knowledge of the true nature of God in Christ, which it believes in. He can
never believe in the nature of God, who has not first the nature of God
revealed to him. If a man search the Scriptures all his days, hear all that
can be said by men concerning God, Christ, faith, justification, etc. be able
to dispute about them, and think he can make his tenets good against all the
world; yet if he has not received the true knowledge of the nature of these
things, all his professed faith in them cannot be true.

III.
That the true knowledge, is only to be had by the immediate revelation of
Christ on the soul. No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the
Son reveals him. The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear, shall live. There is no raising of a dead soul to life, but by the
immediate voice of Christ. Outward preaching, reading the Scriptures etc may
direct, and encourage men to hearken after and wait for the voice, but it is
the immediate voice of Christ in the soul, which alone can quicken the soul to
God: and till the light of life shine immediately from Christ in the heart, the
true knowledge is never given, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Therefore they that never yet heard
the immediate voice of Christ, are still dead in their sins, and have not yet
received the true living knowledge, but a dead litterall knowledge, which gives
a false shining of things in the dead part, but kills the life. Indeed the
proper use of all means, is to bring to the immediate voice, life, and power;
and till this be done, till the soul come to that, to hear that, to feel
that, to be rooted there, there is nothing done that will stand, but men stick
by the way, crying up the means the means, and never knowing, tasting, or
enjoying the thing which the means point to* But he that knows God, comes into
the immediate presence; and he that daily lives in God, lives in the immediate
life; and the true faith leads to this, giving the soul such a touch and taste
of it at first, as makes it unsatisfiable without it. By this Christ cuts off
the Jews with all their zeal and knowledge, Joh. 5. 37, 38. Ye have not heard
his voice at any time, nor seen his shape* and ye have not his word abiding in
you. There Is the hearing of the voice, the sight of the shape, and the having of
the word of God abiding in the heart, which gives both the hearing of the
voice, and the sight of the shape, and keeps the soul quick and living in the
life. The voice gives life, the sight of the shape daily conforms into the
image, which is beheld by the eye of life, and the word abiding in the heart
nourishes, and feeds the living soul with the pure bread of life. But the Jews
knew not this, but were crying up their Sabbaths, the Law of Moses, the
ordinances of Moses, the Temple of God, the instituted worship of God, and so
were shut out of the thing it self, (which those things ended in) and out of a
capacity of receiving it. And thus many zealous ones at this day, not having
come to this, no more then the Jews did, but sticking in the letter of the
Gospel, as the Jews did in the letter of the Law, stumble at the present
dispensation of life, and cannot do otherwise.

IV.
That Christ's immediate revelation of the nature of his Father, is to his
babes. Not to the wise, not to the zealous, not to the studious, not to the
devout, not to the rich in the knowledge of the Scriptures without: but to the
weak, the foolish, the poor, the lowly in the heart. And man receives not these
revelations by study, by reading, by willing, by running, etc. but by being
formed in the will of life, by being begotten of the will of the Father, and by
coming forth in the will, and lying still in the will, and growing up in the
will, here the child receives the wisdom which is from above, and daily
learns that cross which crucifies the other wisdom, which joins with and
pleases the other will, which loves to be feeding on the shadowy and husky part
of knowledge without life. Therefore if ever thou desire to receive this
knowledge from Christ, know that eye in thy self that is to be blinded, which
Christ will never reveal the Father to: read at home, know the wise and prudent
there, whom Christ excludes from the living knowledge. And if thou can bear
it, that eye that can read the Scriptures with the light of its own
understanding, that can consider, and debate, and take up senses and meanings
of it, without the immediate life and power: that is the eye, that may gather
what it can from the letter, but shall never see into the life, nor ^ast of the
true knowledge: for Christ* who alone opens and gives the knowledge, hides the
pearl from that eye.

The true knowledge is only powered into the new vessel. It is the living soul
alone, that receives the living knowledge of the living God from Christ the
life. The old nature, the old understanding is for death and destruction. The
wisdom of flesh (though painted never so like to the spiritual wisdom) is not
to be spared any where, but that wisdom with all its zeal, and growth, and
progress in religion must perish. All men's knowledge of the Scriptures which
they have gathered into that part, will profit them nothing, but hinder them.
Every building which the leprosy of sin has overspread, is to be pulled down:
therefore he that has had only the old house swept and garnished, never
received the true knowledge (from whence the true faith spring*) but his life
lies in the oldnesse of the letter (in the conformity of the dead part to that)
and he knows not the virtue of the knowledge of God in the newnes of the spirit
(the vailt being over his heart) which is only given to the new understanding.

V.
That this faith, which springs from the true knowledge, is Gods gift, and is
not that power of believing which is to be found in man's nature, but of another
nature, even of the nature of the giver. And when man is called to believe, he
is not called to put forth that faith wherewith he believes other things, but
to receive and exercise the gift of faith which is from above. That which is to
be believed in, is spiritual: and that must be spiritual which believes in
it. Man, with all the powers of his nature, is shut out: it is another thing,
distinct from man, which is let into life, and which lets man in. For man
receiving the faith, entering into the faith, and becoming new-formed in the
faith, then he also may enter: but till then he is shut out, and knows not
the life, let him believe, and read, and pray, and hear, and exercise himself
in that which he calls duties and ordinances never so much: for all these, set
up in the wrong part in man, they only feed the wrong part; and that withal
its food and nourishment, falls short of the life. Therefore the true entrance
into religion, is to feel that power, which slayes man's natural ability and
propensity to believe, that so the gift of the true faith may be received: for
there is no rising up and living of the second, without the death of the first,
with all his natural faculties and powers.

VI.
That by this faith alone which is the gift, which is from above, (and not that
faith which grows either in the wilderness or garden of the old nature, and is
fed by the oldness of the letter, and not by the newness of the Spirit) is
Christ received. For Christ can be received, by the faith alone that comes from
him: and that faith which comes from him, cannot but receive him. Man's faith
refuses him: it receives a litterall knowledge of him from what it hears
from men, or from what it reads related in the Scripture concerning him, but
refuses the nature of the thing: and it cannot be otherwise; for man's faith
not being of the nature of it, cannot but refuse it. But this faith, which is
given of God, which is from above, being of the same life and nature with
Christ, cannot refuse the spring of its own life, but receives him
immediately. There is no distance of time, but so soon as faith is received,
Christ is received, and the soul united to him in the faith. As unbelief
immediately shuts him out, so faith lets him in immediately, and centers the
soul in him: and the immortal soul feels the immortal virtue, and rejoices
in the proper spring of its own immortal nature. But the faith of man never
reaches this, never receives Christ, but only a relation of things concerning
him: and with that faith which stands in the letter, opposes that faith which
stands in the life. And here is the spirit of Antichrist, here is the mystery of
iniquity working out of one form into another: for Antichrist does not
directly deny Christ, or deny the letter, but cries up Christ, cries up the
letter, cries up ordinances, but so as they may feed the faith of his own
nature, and maintain an hope there. And thus the spirit of man is at unity with
what will feed his own, with what interpretations his own understanding can
gather out of the Scriptures. And thus can he cry up Christ, and say he hopes
to be saved by him, while the spirit of enmity against the nature of Christ
lodges in his heart. This is Antichrist, where ever he is found, and this is
his faith, and great is his knowledge, and many are his coverings; but the Lord
is searching him out, who will strip him, and make his nakedness appear.

VII.
That Christ is received as a grain of mustard seed. Christ is such a thing, as
every eye, but the eye of this faith despises. He is the stone, which the
wisdom of the builders in all ages has rejected. They look for a glorious
Messiah, but they know him not in his humiliation in the little seed, out of
which he is to grow up into his glory: and so they missing of the thing, build
up only with high imaginations in the airy mind concerning the thing. As when
God sent Christ in the flesh, there was no form nor beauty in him; The Jews,
whose hope and expectation lay there, yet saw no manner of comeliness, no
desireablenesse in him: Even so is it now; When God comes to offer him to
those, that think they place all their hopes in him, they see no loveliness in
him, but refuse him daily. What this little thing, small like a grain of
mustard seed, can this be the glorious Christ, which the Scriptures have spoke
so much of? why we know the descent of this (its father mother and kindred are
with us) we find this in our own nature. Thus, like the Jews of old, they make
a great noise about Christ, but refuse the thing it self. And this is for want
of the true eye of faith, for if they had that eye, they would see the virtue
in the little seed, and receive him in his humiliation in their hearts, where
he knocks daily for entrance, and be content to wait till this grain of
mustard seed grow up into a great and glorious tree. But for want of this eye,
they keep him out, and let in the painted murderer, who dwells in them, and
covers himself, with a knowledge, a zeal, a faith, an hope, etc. in the old
nature, in the old vessel, in the old understanding: and thus they give God and
Christ good words, while the evil spirit has their hearts, and dwells there,
bringing forth his own old evil fruit under an appearance of devotion and
holiness. Hear now, ye wise in the letter, but strangers to the life; There is
a twofold appearance of Christ in the heart. There is an appearance of him as a
servant to obey the law, to fulfill the will of the Father in that body, which
the father prepares there for him: and there is an appearance of him in glory,
to reign in the life and power of the Father. And he that knows not the first
of these in his heart, shall never know the second there. And he that knows not
these inwardly, shall never know any outward visible coming to their comfort.
For if Christ should come outwardly to reign (as many expect) yet to be sure he
would not reign in thee, whose heart he has not first entered into and subdued
to himself, which is only to be done by his appearance there first as a
servant, and then as a King. But what estate are Christians (so called) now in,
who know not him in them who is able to serve the Lord, but are striving and
fighting in that nature where sin has the power, and which can never overcome,
being not in union with, but strangers to that life and power which is the
conqueror? Therefore let all consider in the depth of their heart, for this is
infallibly true: They that never received the seed of life in their hearts,
never received Christ; and such shall never and such shall never be free from
sin while they live (for having not received the son, who makes free, how can
they be free indeed? nor be free from wrath when they are dead: For that faith
concerning Christ will not save them hereafter, which did not bring them to
receive Christ here.

VIII.
That this seed being received, grows up into its own form, or is formed in
that creature, into which it is received. It there grows up into the body, in
which it is to serve the Lord, and which body is to be glorified, when it has
finished its service. As a seed cast into fitted earth, or the seed of man or
beast sowed in a fitting womb, receives form and growth into a plant or living
creature: so is it with this seed in its earth. Open the true eye, O ye
Christians, and begin to read the mystery of godliness!

IX.
That this creature, or the spirit of life this creature (which it is in union
with, and which is never separated from it) is the Christians rule, Gal. 6. 15,
16. 1 John 2. 27. Heb. 8. 10, 11. The Son is never without the Spirit of the
Father, no not in the seed: and the Spirit of the Father is the sons rule.
Outward rules were given to a state without, to men who were not brought to the
life, but were exercised under shadows and representations of the life: but the
Son who is within, who is the substance of all, who is the life, who is one
with the Father, whose proper right the Spirit is, he is not tied to any
outward rule, but is to live and walk in the immediate light of the Spirit of
his own life. And he that has the Son, has this rule: and he that has not
this rule, has not the Son. And he that has not the Son, has not the true
faith (which immediately receives him) and so is no Christian, but has stolen
the name from the letter, having never received the nature from the Spirit, to
which alone the name belongs.

X.
He that has Christ (or the seed of eternal life, which is Christ) formed in
him, which seed the Spirit always dwells in, and utaer is absent from, which is
the same Spirit which gave forth the Scriptures, he is a capacity of
understanding those Scriptures which that Spirit gave forth, as that spirit
leads him into the understanding of them. But he that has not received that
which is like the grain of mustard seed, and so has not Christ, nor his Spirit
(what ever he may pretend to) he by all his studies, arts, languages, reading
of expositors, conferences, nay experiences, can never come to the true
knowledge of the Scriptures: for he wants the true key, which alone can open.
He may have got a great many wrong keys, none of which can open, but wants the
true key of the true knowledge, and so is shut out of that, and only let into
such a kind of knowledge, as the wrong key can open into. And with this kind of
knowledge the merchants of Babylon have long traded, but their day is expiring
apace, and their night of lamentation and howling hasteneth.

XI.
Though he can understand the Scriptures, as the Spirit leads him into the
knowledge of them, and can set his zeal to the truth of them, yet he cannot
call them his rule: for having received the life for his rule, and knowing it
to be so, he cannot call another thing it. He that has received the new
covenant into his heart, with the laws of the life thereof written there by the
Spirit of life, who does write them there even in the least of all that
believe, as well as in the greatest, he knows that this living writing is his
rule. The Scriptures give relation where the covenant and law of life is writ,
and if I will read it, thither must I go whither the Scriptures point me. I
must go to Christ the book of life, and read there with that eye which Christ
gives, if I read the things of life. And the Scriptures are willing to
surrender up their glory to Christ, who was before them, and is above them, and
shall be after them: but there is a false spirit, which has seated it self in
a litterall knowledge of the Scriptures, and has formed images and likenesses
of truth from it (every one after the imaginations of his own heart) and all
these fall, if Christ the life appear: and so this Spirit cries up the
Scriptures now in a way of deceit, just as the Jews cried up Moses. It was a
good remove to withdraw the ear from the false Church, and to listen to the
true testimony which the Scriptures give of Christ: but it is the seducing
spirit which tempts to stick by the way, and to rear up buildings and forms of
knowledge from the letter of the Scriptures, and not to come to feel after,
unity with, and live in Christ the life. And unless ye come to this, your
reading of the Scripture is vain, and all your gathering rules of practice, and
comforts from promises, will end in vanity: for until ye know, and have
received the thing it self, ye are at a distance from that to which all
belongs. A lively and glorious testimony of truth has God held forth in this
age, at which all that stick in the letter cannot but stumble; and there is no
possibillity of knowing or receiving it, but by feeling the true touch of the
inward life of it. Wisdom is justified of her children: but they that are not
born of her, cannot justify her womb or birth.

To the Jews who were an outward people, there was an outward rule given, a law
of commandments, statutes, judgments, and ordinances, proper to that state
wherein they were, and to that thing to which the ministry was: But all this
was to be done away, and to end in that which all this represented. So that to
Christians, Christ the substance being come, which is the end of all these
shadows, the true Jew being raised in the immediate life, now there is a
necessity of the immediate life for the rule. To them under the Gospel, to them
who are come to the substance, to them who are begotten and born in the life,
there can be norule proportionable to their state, but Christ the substance,
Christ the life, here he alone is the light, the way, the truth, the rule, the
Spirit is here the rule, the new creature the rule, the new covenant the rule,
all which are in unity together, and he that has one of them, has them all,
and he that has not them all, has none of them. So that directions taken out
of the Scripture, cannot be the rule to him who is the true Christian, but the
measure of grace, the measure of light, the measure of the Spirit, the measure
of the gift received into the living soul from the spring of life, this is the
alone rule of life. But Christians in the degeneration have lost this, and so
have taken up words for a rule, (which were not given to that end) and so with
deductions by the earthly part, they feed the earthly part. What is fed by men's
Scripture knowledge, but the earthly understanding? the earthly will heated,
the earthly affections warmed; and of the fruits of this earth they bring
sacrifices to God: and they are angry that God has raised up Abel, their
younger brother, who offers up the Lamb of God to God, and serves the living
God in his own living spirit, and with the faith that comes from him. Abels
religion stands not in that part wherein all other men's religion stands, but in
the death of that part; and in the raising up of another part, wherein life
springs. Can ye mildly receive these gentle leadings? do not provoke the the
tender heart of the Lamb against you, who also has the voice of a Lion, and
can roar terribly out of his holy mountain against the enemies of his life and
Spirit.

A Necessary warning, and of very great importance to all that call themselves
Christians, and hope for a share in the book of life, and the escaping the
damnation of hell, which is their portion whose names are written in the book
of death, and blotted by God out of the book of life, though they hope to find
them written there. Here and consider.
IT is recorded, Rev. 22. 18, 19. If any man shall add unto these things, God
shall add unto him the plagues, that are written in this book. And if any man
shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take
away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy City, and from the
things which are written in this book.

Great are the plagues that are written in this book, even the pouring out of
eternal wrath without mixture, torment day and night in the presence of the
Lamb, etc. As the growth, and fullness of the mystery of iniquity is spoken of
in this book: so the measuring out of the fullness of wrath to it, is spoken of
also. And great is the life and blessedness, that is here promised to those
that fight with, and overcome the mystery of iniquity, and receive not any of
the marks or names of the beast, nor are subject to any of his horns, though
^e push never so hard with them. Now to meet with all the plagues here
threatened, and to miss of all the blessedness here promised, is it not a sad
state? Why, he that adds to these things here spoken, or diminishes from the
words of this prophecy, the Lord has said this shall befall him. Therefore in
the fear of that God who has spoken this, and will make it good, let every one
search who is the adder, who is the diminisher?

Now mark, see if this be not a clear thing. He that gives any other meaning
of any Scripture, then what is the true proper meaning thereof, he both adds
and diminishes* he takes away the true sense, he adds a sense that is not
true. The Spirit of the Lord is the true Expositor of Scriptures, he never
adds nor diminishes: but man (being without that Spirit) does but guess,
does but imagine, does but study or invent a meaning, and so he is ever adding
or diminishing. This is the sense says one, this is the sense says another,
this is the sense says a third, this says, a fourth: another that is witty,
and large in his comprehension, he says they will all stand: another, perhaps
more witty then he, says none of them will stand, and he invents a meaning
different from the^ all. And then, when they are thus expounding them they will
say, take the sense thus, it will yield this observation, or take it thus, and
it will afford this observation. Does not this plainly show, that he who thus
says, has not the Spirit of the Lord to open the Scripture to him, and
manifest which is the true sense, but is working in the misery of darkness?
And yet this very person, who is thus working with his own dark spirit in the
dark, will in words confess, that there is no true understanding or opening of
Scripture but by the Spirit of God. If it be so, how dare thou set thy
imagination, thy fancy, thy reason, thy understanding on work, and so be
guessing at that which the Spirit does not open to thee, and so art found
adding and diminishing?

Now he that is adder, he that is the diminisher, he cries out against the
Spirit of the Lord, and charge him with adding and diminishing: for man being
judge, he will judge his own way to be true, and Gods to be false. That which
is the adding and diminishing, he calls the true expounding of the place: but
if the Spirit of the Lord immediately open any thing to any son or daughter, he
cries this is an adding to the word: The Scripture is written, there are no
more revelations to be expected now, the curse says he, is to them that add.
Thus he removes the curse from his own Spirit, and way of study and invention
to which it appertains, and casts it upon the Spirit of the Lord. And man
cannot possibly avoid this in the way that he is in: for having first judged
his own darkness to be light, then in the next place he must needs judge the
true light to be darkness. He that has aforehand set up his own invented
meaning of any Scripture to be the true meaning he must needs oppose the true
meaning, and call it false, and so apply himself to form all the arguments he
can out of other Scriptures, to make it appear false. Thus man, having begun
wrong in his knowledge of the Scriptures, stands engaged to make use of them
against the Lord, and against his own soul; and yet really in himself thinks
that he makes a right use of them, and that he serves the Lord, and that he is
not opposing his truth, but opposing error and heresy; while he himself is in
the error, and in the heresy, and against the truth, being a stranger to that
Spirit, in whose immediate life and presence the truth grows.

Did the Lord in these words, of forbidding to add or diminish upon so great a
penalty, lay a restraint and limit upon his own spirit, that it should no more
hereafter speak in his sons and daughters, or did he intend to lay bounds upon
the unruly spirit of man? Did God leave man's spirit at liberty to invent and
form meanings of his words, and bind up his own spirit from speaking further
words afterward? When Moses said, thou shall not add nor diminish, was this
to be any stop to the Prophets, in whom God should speak afterward? Is not
this one of the subtle Serpents inventions, to keep up the esteem of man's
invented meanings as the true sense, and to make a fortification against the
entrance of that spirit, which can discover all his false interpretations of
the true words of God, and to make him see that he is the adder and the
diminisher, and that his name will not be found in the book of life, when the
true light is held forth to read by.

But this is general, extending to all Scriptures, my drift is more particular
concerning adding to the things, or diminishing from the words of the book of
this prophecy.

There are two things chiefly spoken of in this book, Mystery- Sion, Mystery-
Babylon: the true Church, the false Church: the Lambs wise, the whore: the
hiding of Mystery- Sion, the appearing of Mystery- Babylon in her place: the
flying of the Church out of her heaven into the wilderness, leaving all behind
her which she could not carry along with her, even all the ordinances and
institutions of Christ, wherein once she appeared worshipping and serving God;
and the starting of the false Church into her place; taking up all that she had
left, even all the ordinances and institutions of Christ in the letter, thus
covering her self with the form of godliness, with the sheeps clothing, that
she might pass the better for the true Church: And the Dragon, who managed
the war against the woman and her seed, raises up first one beast, and then
another, and sets this whore on the top of them, who with the cup of
fornication makes all the earth drunk, all nations, peoples, kindreds, tongues,
languages. And the beast he has his horns every where, his marks every where,
his names every where, and also his image in every part of Babylon. And who
will not worship him, he fights with; yea such as are led by God to rent from
the whore, he calls schismatics, heretics, blasphemers, and persecutes them
as persons not worthy to live. Thus the state of things is quite changed, the
power of truth lost, the form set up without it; those that seek after the
power hated, persecuted and blasphemed, those that lie still under any of the
beasts forms, they go for good Christians; for members of the visible Church,
^o called by them.

Now mark: He that calls any thing the Church, but what this book calls the
Church, he adds: he that does not know the wilderness, and own the Church in
the wilderness, he diminishes: The Church of Rome is not the Church in the
wilderness, the Church of Scotland is not the Church is the wilderness, the
Church of England is not the Church in the wilderness, the several gathered
Churches are none of them the Church in the wilderness: all these have sprung
up since the Churches flight, and have appeared in her ab^ence* usurping her
name, appropriating it to themselves, but God (who gave it to the Church) has
not given it them; and so they must loose it again, when God brings back the
Church out of the wilderness. So he that calls those, which formerly were the
institutions and ordinances of Christ, which the woman left behind her, and
which the harlot has got and attired her self with, which she now appears in,
and wherewith the Dragon is now worshipped, he adds to this book, which says
the outward court was given to the Gentiles, and the true Church had nothing
left her but the inward temple, wherein alone the true worshippers worshipped:
and they that worship elsewhere, are the false worshippers worshipping in false
Temples, in Temples of the whorish spirits building take it either outwardly or
inwardly, for it holds true in both: He that makes the beasts names fewer then
they are, or his marks fewer then they are, or his horns fewer then they are,
or his image less then it is, be diminishes. And the danger hereof is not
small. For if any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in
his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, which is powered out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and
he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy
Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: and the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever. And they have no rest day nor night, who
worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name,
Rev. 14. 9. c.

Now this I affirm, whosoever has not the name of Sion, the mark of Sion, which
he received of her in the wilderness, where the living God is with her, and
where he is taught by God the laws of the wildernesse-worship, and in some
measure to testify against all the corrupted ordinances, and institutions
which have the beasts marks, and go now abroad in the world under the beasts
name: I say, whoever has not the true mark of Sion, it is impossible for him to
avoid the mark of Babylon: and he who avoids not the mark, cannot escape the
plagues. But he that has the mark of Sion, he by a secret inward instinct of
true life, is led from the marks of Babylon: and if he faithfully follow the
guidance, from out of all the names, and from under all the horns.

It is nor enough to rent from Popery, and sit down under the power and
government of the same spirit in another form, or to rent from Episcopacy, and
the same spirit sit down in Presbitery; or to rent from Presbitery, and the
same spirit sit down in a form of Independency, or Anabaptisme; or to rent from
these, and the same spirit sit down in a way of seeking and waiting, and
reading of words of Scripture, and gathering things from thence without the
life: but the true religion consists in knowing, and following a true guide to
the Church in the wilderness, and there to receive the mark, the living
mark, which will preserve out of all inventions, and further progress of the
dead spirit.

Now therefore look about you, know the spirit of whoredom, and see how ye have
been begotten in the adultery, and born of the whore, and have served the
Dragon, and worshipped his dead idols, and not the living God. And be not
satisfied with changing of forms and dresses) which are but the several
deceitful appearances of the whore (but put off that spirit; least when ye have
hated the whore, and burnt her flesh as she appeared in one form, ye give your
selves up to her again, when she appears in another form: for the plagues are
not so much to the form wherein the whore appears, as to the whorish spirit:
and whosoever is found under her dominion, in any of her territories, under any
of her forms, with that mark of hers upon them which belongs to that
particular form, though never so curiously painted, he shall drink of the
unmixt cup of wrath.

Therefore tremble all sorts of people, pluck off your false coverings, see the
shame of your nakedness, while it may be for your advantage so to do. The
Angel is gone forth, the corn is reaping and gathering into the garner, many
Lambs are brought into the fold of everlasting rest, Sion is redeeming, the
true life is rising, the whorish spirit is judging, the door of life is yet
open: do not lie secure in the whores wisdom! Do not lie slumbering, and
reasoning, and disputing from the letter of the Scripture, till the gathering
be finished, till the door be shut, till the eternal flames seize upon you,
and ye find your selves in the bosom of hell unawares, and see the children of
the Kingdom in Abraham's bosom, but your selves shut out, and left to weep and
wail and gnash your teeth.

Quest. But how may I avoid adding to the things, and dimishing from the words
of this prophecy, and of other Scriptures, that I may not meet with the weight
of this curse, or miss of the blessing?

Answ. Do thou ask this question from thy heart, in the simplicity, out of
the fleshly wisdom? then hearken with that ear, and thou shall set thy seal to
mine answer.

1. Wait for the key of knowledge, which is Gods free gift. Do not go with a
false key to the Scriptures of truth, for it will not open them. Man is too
hasty to know the meaning of the Scriptures, and to enter into the things of
God, and so he climbs up over the door with his own understanding, but he has
not patience to wait to know the door, and to receive the key which opens and
shuts the door: and by this means he gathers death, out of words which came
from life. And this I dare positively affirm, that all that have gone this way
to work, have but a dead knowledge, and it is death in them that feeds upon
this knowledge, and the life is not raised. Consider now the weight of this
council in the true balance! There is no opening of the Scriptures, but by
the true key: nor is there any coming at the key, till the Lord please to give
it. What then is to be done, but only to wait (in the silence of that part
which would be forward, and running before hand) till the key be given, and to
know how to receive it, as it is offered in the light, and not to wait in the
will, or expect to receive it according to observations in the fleshly wisdom
from the letter?

2. Let not thy understanding have the mannaging of this key, when it is given,
but know the true opener, the skillful user of the key, the hand which can only
turn the key aright: and let him have the mannaging both of his own key, and of
thine understanding. Do not run in thine own understanding, or in thine own
will to search out the meaning of Scripture: for then thou feedest with the
Scripture, that which it is the intent all words of life to destroy: but as
thou waitest for the key at first, so continually wait for the appearances and
movings of the user of the key, and he will shut out thy understanding and will
continually, which would still be running after the litterall part of
Scriptures, and let thee into the life both of the prophecies and doctrines
thereof. Man when he has received a true gift from God, he would be mannaging
of it himself, and to be sure he will manage it for himself (for the
gratifying and pleasing of himself, and not for God) and then God, being
provoked, takes away the substance, and leaves him the shell. Therefore he that
has received a gift, must be very watchful against that which would betray,
or he may easily loose it: for though the gifts and caling of God are without
repentance, yet if that lay hold of the gift which was not called, and to which
it was not given, the Lord will thrust that by, and take away his gift from it.

3. Do not grast any of the fruit of the tree of life upon the tree of
knowledge, for it will not grow there: an appearance, a likeness of the true
fruit may grow there, but the true fruit it self will not. My meaning is, do
not make a treasury of knowledge in the understanding part which is to perish,
but know the true treasury of all the things of life, which is in the life it
self, and in that understanding which is formed, kept, and lives in the life.
Lay no manna by to feed upon in the old store house (lest the fleshly part
should be running thither, when its fleshly appetite is kindled after food) but
daily receive the continual bread from the hand of life. The wisdom of the
life strikes at ^hy wisdom and understanding, and if ever thou will grow wise
any more there, thou loosest this, and can not possibly retain it: for that
part is then getting up in thee, in which it cannot be held, but only a shadow,
an image, a resemblance and likeness of it, which feeds and pleases that part,
which fain would have life, but cannot know it, and therefore is necessitated
to make images and likenesses, of things in Heaven or things in earth, that it
might have somewhat.

4. Take not up a rest in openings of things, though by the true key. Take heed
of over-valluing that kind of knowledge: for that part which over-vallues that
knowledge, will presently be post up with it: but there is a more excellent,
and safer kind of knowledge to be pressed after, which is a knowledge of things
by receiving of them. There is a knowledge of things, by the Spirits opening
the words which speak of them (or by inward immediate prophecies from the word
of life in the heart:) this is an excellent knowledge, and not to be found in
the earthly part of man; yet the earthly part (when this knowledge is given) is
very apt to be swelled and exalted with it: but then there is also a knowledge,
which arises from the gift of the thing it self. This knowledge is very
precious, and much more full and certain then the other, having the nature and
immediate power of life in it self, and so is perfectly able to preserve. As
for instance, to make it more plain: There may be a knowledge of
Justification, by the Spirits opening the words written in Scripture concerning
justification, and the blood of sprinkling, (and this is a good knowledge,
where there is a true opening of it from the Spirit:) but then there is a
knowledge by feeling of the blood of sprinkling in the heart, and by seeing with
the new eye the way of its justification; and in this knowledge is the power
and the cleansing of the life received, which in the other was but spoken of.
Therefore rest not in openings, or prophecies, or true meanings of these things
(though this kind of knowledge is very excellent, and has been very rare) but
wait to feel the thing it self, which the words speak of, and to be united by
the living Spirit to that, and then thou have a knowledge from the nature of
the thing it self: and this is more deep and inward, then all the knowledge
that can be had from words concerning the thing.

5. When thou feel things, then seek their preservation in the proper spring
of their own life. Let the root bear thee, and all thy knowledge, with all
that's freely given thee of God. When thou feel thy self leavened with the
life, and become a branch shot out of the life, then learn how to abide in the
life, and to keep all that's given thee there, and have nothing which thou may
call thine own any more, but to be lost in thy self, and found in him. Know
the land of the living, wherein all the things of life live, and can live no
where else.

Now in all this, in this whole course, from the very first step of it, there is
certainty, there is stability, there is infallibility. From the very first
opening of the true key, I begin to learn somewhat of God, and to learn
certainly, and feel an assurance and establishment in it: and growing up here,
I grow up in the true learning, and in the true settlement, and so I am not
unlearned and unstable, wresting the Scriptures to my own destruction: for I
take none of the knowledge of the Scriptures from my self, from my own
understanding, from my own study and invention, or from the studies of other
expositors, but from a certain hand. And how can he rest Scripture, who is kept
single, and has no desire to have any thing to be the meaning of it, but what
is the meaning, nor no will to know the meaning, further then the good will of
him whose Spirit penned it, thinks good to give forth the meaning to him; and
who waits to receive this, not to feed the lustful knowing pare in himself,
but to feed the life with it? and when the life has no use for it, he is
content to have it shut up, and to be without it: I say, how is it possible for
this man to wrest Scriptures? But now, a man that has taken in a body of
knowledge already, he goes to the Scripture, and bends it to make it speak
answerable to that: and where it speaks contrary, he invents a way to make it
comply, and so wrests Scriptures forward and backward, to make them speak
agreeable to what he has already received and believed. Thus every sort of
persons, papists and protestants, bend the Scriptures, to make them speak
conformable to their opinions and practices, not having the true, learning,
which gives to read them in the true Original, where the knowledge of what
they speak and mean is certain: and so they are also unstable, and subject to
be shaken by a wind of reason which is stronger then their own. And this
wresting of Scripture is to their own destruction; for that part, which is so
much as desirous to bend a Scripture, is to be destroyed; and that part cannot
receive the true knowledge, but stumbles in its own wisdom and way of seeking,
at the wisdom of Cod, and at the true way of finding.

But the foregoing council, faithfully hearkened unto, will preserve out of
this, and also bring to the true means, and to the true use of the means, which
all nations, who have drunk of the whores cup, have erred concerning, and taken
the false for the true. The strength of this wine has made all nations,
peoples, tongues and languages to mistake, who in the heat of their drink have
cried up the means, the means, the ordinances, the ordinances etc. not
perceiving how this heat came from the spirits of the whores wine, and not from
the sober, meek, calm, gentle leadings of the Spirit of Christ, and so in a
fleshly zeal have set up the whores means instead of the lambs means, and
contend for them with the whores spirit and weapons. Now it is impossible for
any man so, much as to know the true means, till the whores wine be purged out
of him: for that will make him err in judgment, and take the false for the
true. And which way shall he ever come to the Kingdom, which has lighted upon
the wrong means? or how shall he ever come to the true means, who never yet saw
the witchery of the whorish spirit from the life, and how he himself has been
bewitched, and cosened with the false instead of the true? as for instance.

Prayer, that is generally taken for a means, Ask, and it shall be given you;
seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened to you. If Parents, which
are evil, know how to give good gifts to their children: how much more shall
the heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him. This therefore
is an undoubted thing, that prayer is a means.

Answ. True, there is a prayer which is a means, and there is a prayer which is
not a means. There is a prayer which is an ordinance, and there is a prayer
which is an invention. There is a prayer which is the breath of the true child,
and there is a prayer which is the breath of the fleshly part, a breath of the
whorish spirit. There is a prayer of the first birth, and there is a prayer of
the second birth, both which cry and weep to God for the samething. Now the one
of these is the true means, the other not: one of them is Christ's ordinance,
the other is antichrists ordinance. Now the question is, which of these thy
prayer is? whether it be thine own breath, or Gods breath? whether it come from
the renewings of the Spirit of life, or from thine own natural part painted?
for accordingly, it is either the true means, or the false means. If it be the
true means, it shall have the thing, the Spirit, the life, the kingdom it
prays for: if it be the false means, it can never obtain it. Papists, they
pray; Protestants, they pray; some in forms, some without forms; some
meditating before hand, some not meditating: are all these the true means, or
are any of them the true means? The breath of the true child is the only true
prayer; and he prays only in the moving, and in the leading of that Spirit
that begat him: and this is a prayer according to the will, in the life, and
from the power. But all men's prayers, according to times they set the
themselves. or according to formings of desires in their own minds, which they
offer up to God with the nature and heart that sins against him, these are
false means, and may satisfy the drunken spirit erred from the li^e, but are
no means to the truth.

Can thou pray? how came thou to learn to pray? wast thou taught from
above? or did thou gain the skill and abillity, by the exercise and
improvement of thine, own natural part? Did thou begin with sighs and
groans, staying there, till the same spirit that taught thee to groan, taught
thee also to speak? Wast thou ever able to distinguish the sighs and groans of
the Spirits begetting, from the sighs and groans of thy own natural and
affectionate part? and has that part, with all its sighing^, groaning,
desires, endeavors, etc been thrust aside, and the seed immortal raised, by
the Spirit of eternal life, which teaches to cry and mourn, and at length to
speak to the Father for the preservation and nourishment of its life? If it
has been thus with thee, then thou have known that prayer which is the true
means. But if otherwise, though thou pray never so long, and with never so
great affections and strong desires, this is all but the false means, with its
falls warmth from the fall fire, this is but the means which the whorish Spirit
(which is not in union with the life and power, but keeps the seed in bandage)
has set up instead of the true means. And this can never lead to truth, but
keeps alive Gods enemy under this pleasant covering: neither is this the
worship of the living God, but as it is from another spirit, so it is to
another spirit.

O learn to be sober! come out of this drunken fury, and consider things mildly
and seriously. Do not make a great outcry of ordinances, ordinances; the means,
the means. This is the voice of the clamorous woman, who with her loud noise,
would fain keep you from listening after the still voice of true wisdom, which
cannot be heard in the midst of this great noise and hurry in your spirits; but
consider which are the true ordinances, which are the true means; which are the
likenesses man has framed, and which is the true thing it self. And if ye could
once be mild, gentle and calm, and turn from your own wisdom and fleshly
knowledge of things it might please God to remove your stumbling blocks, and to
open that eye in you which can see the antichristian nature, and discern
between the coverings, which it has formed to hide its deceitful spirit
under, and the true garment and clothing of life. But the seed of the Kingdom
is little, and ye are great, how can ye enter into it? the pearl lies hid in
the field, and ye are gazing up to Heaven how can ye see it? Christ is
descended into the lower parts of the earth, and ye are using means to ascend
upwards in the wrong nature, how can ye meet with him? the Gospel has been
hid, the Sun has not shined, it has been night, and ye have got many falls
candles; which way can ye acknowledge the little glimmering of the day star,
who have such satisfaction in the warmth of your false fires? ye are far from
the true light, who have not yet received so much of it, as to discover the
darkness of the night! Ye are too high, too wise, too knowing for Christ, or
for the sight and acknowledgment of the true means which lead to life. And if
ye could once come to see this, there might be some hope but in that wisdom
wherein your life and knowledge stands, ye are shut out: and ye are reasoning
and stumbling at the stone, while others (who are broken in spirit, and in
meekness and humility led to try) find it a sure foundation, even a foundation
of eternal life for the true seed of life, and are built into the living City,
which is made without hands, and without any of the tools of man's wisdom.

A Brief History of the state of the Church since the days of the Apostles,
with the living seal to it, which he that has eternal life abiding, in him,
can read and witness; but that wisdom zeal and devotion which is in the death,
cannot.
AFter the universal degeneration and corruption of the Jewish state, and the
putting an end to the shadows thereof, by the appearance and succession of the
substance, it pleased God to dissolve that people, state and policy, and by
the power of his life (without either the wisdom or strength of man) to set
upon the heathenish world, which he subdued and brought under the power of his
life. By his Apostles and messengers, who preached the everlasting Gospel, the
word of eternal life, he gathered assemblies up and down the nations, whom the
nations by all their persecutions could not subject; but they reigned over them
in the power, authority, and dominion of God: For they were Kings and Priests
to God in the sight of all the Nations, and they did reign upon the earth; in
so much as the heathenish spirit of man, observing their order in the Spirit,
and the wisdom and power of the Spirit among them, who by his living light was
able to search the hearts of those that came to observe them, could not but
acknowledge, that God was in them of a truth.

Now the next thing to be expected, is Satan's opposition against this power of
life, and his stratagems to undermine it. He withstood the growth and
settlement of the Church, all that he could by open force, making use both of
the heathenish devout worshippers, who fought for their Jupiter, their Diana,
and other gods and goddesses, and of the Jewish devout worshippers, who fought
for their Temple-worship, with the Laws and ordinances of Moses, which were now
expired. But neither of these would do, but the Church in the power of life
gained ground upon him, and did rather thrive and increase, then diminish by
this opposition. Therefore now he falls to this stratagems, he gets some false
brethren out of the Church ( they went out from us) these he clothes as Angels
of light, puts the sheeps clothing on their wolvish nature, makes them appear
as like the Apostles as may be, endues them with an excellent taking knowledge
of life and spirituallity in appearance, forms in them an image of the truth,
and inspires this image with the spirit of his own life, and with these he goes
forth into the world, and gathers the world about him. Now the world was
presently taken with this (the world went after him) for this is that the world
would have, an appearance of religion, an image of truth, but their own spirit
in it. The worldly spirit, that flies off from the life, from the power, can
readily close with this, because it is its own. Bring forth never so high
notions of religion and spiritual wisdom, the world will hug them, the world
will feed on them, the world will cloth it self with them. The world can
swallow, and digest any thing but life. Any pleasant picture of things in
heaven will down with the world: but the nature, the life, the truth, the
Spirit, Christ in his true arid living cross, this will not down with the
world.

Now the Devil having thus set up his false image in the world, and gathered a
party after him, then he sets upon the Church: and the battle goes very hard,
life striving to defend, and death to overcome, How hard did the Apostles
strive in their day, to keep their converts to the simplicity of truth, and to
the way thereof (which even then began to be evil spoken of) writing Epistles
to the Churches, warning them of the false Apostles, and wishing them to stand
their ground! yea Christ himself writes several Epistles from heaven to some
of them, cheking their backslidings and encouraging them to renew their zeal
and strength, putting them in mind of the Crown which attended the victory. But
at length the Divill with his stratagems prevails, gets the possession of the
Churches territories, and the Church is feign to fly for her preservation: and
such of her seed as are left behind her, the enemy makes war against, slayes,
drinks their blood.

Now here is an end of all the glory of that state: now the Divil has gained
the world again: The same spirit, that lost it under the heathenish power (for
there he was conquered) recovers it under an Antichristian appearance; setting
up the same wickedness, and the same course and current of death under forms of
Antichristian religion, as he had done before under forms of Heathenish
devotion.

Thus the Devil being conqueror, having gained the field, he divides the
spoils among his army: he tak^s whatever was the Churches, and make, his own,
and ranks them in his way of Antichristian religion and devotion: so that now
hence forward, those things which were once Christ's and the Churches, they are
no^ all his, and distributed by him among his followers. He gives the name
Church to the whore which he sets up, he gives the name Christian to his
Disciples, he prescribes baptism, and the Supper (which he calls Sacraments)
and praying, and preaching, and singing, which he calls public ordinances,
and be prescribes private duties and exercises of devotion; and he gets the
letter of the Scriptures, and forms multitudes of meanings and expositions, and
has lying signs and wonders for such as need them, that he might keep all the
several Brigades of his army quiet under his pay, and might have some pleasing
wares of traffic for every sort of his Merchants in his Babylon. For this is
the City of that King which he built aster his conquest over the life, and
which he has enriched with the spoils from the life. And here all his subjects
shall have content, they shall have what they will, if they will but be
faithsull to him in the main. Call for what likeness, what invention, what
appearance of truth they will, they shall have it, so they will but be content
without life. No notion about the Spirit will be deny them, so they will be
content with the notion without the presence of the living Spirit. They shall
have light in their understandings, warmth in their affections, joy, peace,
hope, comfort out of the Scriptures. They shall apply as many promises to
themselves as they will, have what they will, do what they will, so they keep
out of the feeling of the living principle: but if once that stir, and there be
any harkening after that, then he begins to show his tyranny on the one hand to
force them back, and his stratagems on the other hand to tempt them aside from
it.

The devil having thus gained the form, and enriched himself with the Churches
spoils, and slain them which had the living testimony, then he falls to
corrupting the form: For that filthy spirit, though he can cloth himself with
the form to deceive from the life, and abid there, to keep down the life; yet
he does not much love it, he loves his own form better: and when he is out of
fear of assaults from the life, then he returns to his own form again, or
patches up a garment more suitable to his own nature, taking i^ somewhat of the
other with it, to make his own pass the better (for if he should have returned
to the direct heathenish forms of idolatry and false worship he could not so
well have ^ayn hid: therefore he makes a mix u^e of somewhat which was
prescribed the Jews, with some things sound practiced among the Christians.)
Thus he brought in inventions of crosses, and images, and beads, and pictures,
and relics, and ceremonies beyond number, insomuch as not only the life and
power was lost, but the true likeness also, even so lost, that it is impossible
for all the wisdom of man, to recover the knowledge of the likeness again.
Men have striven much, but they never could form a true likeness of the
Primitive Church, and the way thereof.

Now, though it is the desire of the Devil to keep men in the grossnesse of
darkness, yet rather then loose them, he will let them have some part of the
form again: nay he will tempt them with a gaudy appearance of the form, to keep
them from meeting with the power and life, when he perceives true secret inward
stirrings in them, which will not be quieted without somewhat. Thus, when there
was a stirring against Popery, he tempted a^i^e into Episcopacy: when that
would hold no longer, then to Presbitery: when that will not serve, into
Independancy: when that will not keep quiet, but still there are searchings
further, into Anabaptism: if that will not do, into a way of seeking and
waiting: if this will not satisfy, they shall have high notions, yea most
pleasant notions concerning the Spirit, and concerning the life, if they will
be but satisfied without the life: yea they shall have all the liberty in the
creatures they can desire (the best painted liberty) if they will but be
satisfied without that liberty, which stands not in the creatures out of the
life, but over the creatures in the life. And he that turns aside to any of
these, he is still under the dominion of that spirit, and there he holds his
knowledge, and there he performs his worship, and there he has his unity, his
liberty, his life, his rest, his peace, his joy, his hope. Now no man can
worship God, till he comes out of every part of this Babylon, and his feet
touch Sion, though there may be a secret panting, and an unknown safety, and an
acceptance of the poor mourning soul in the passage Yea, all sorts of people,
here ye were accepted, in your stirrings after life, in harkening to the
leadings of life from out of the Babilonish Spirit: but your turning aside to
the Babilonish wisdom in a new dress, and sitting down in a new form of her
inventing, has brought you to a loss of life, and has made you hateful to
the living God, who has drawn his sword against you, and has prepared his
vialls, his thunders, his plagues, his woes: and ye must drink of his cup with
sorrow, as ye have drunk of the whores cup with pleasure. Ye that have found a
bed of pleasure in any of your forms, or in any of your notions, and so have
found ease in the Sion of the whores painting; ye must be cast into the bed of
sorrow, and know the fire the Gods Sion, and the furnace in his Jerusalem, if
ever ye become an habitation for God, or expect to feed on his holy mountain.

The condition of the Church all this while (all this time of Satan's reign in
forms of knowledge and worship) has been very lamentable, and is expressed in
Scripture by parables and resemblances of a sad state. She has been as a City
pulled down, like a ruined City, which needs rebuilding, before she can come to
be a City again, ( when the Lord shall build up Sion.) She has been like a
wilderness, barren, undressed, unregarded. She has been like a mournful
widow, whose husband has been rent from her, and her children slain. She has
lost all her ornaments, all her garments, all her ordinances, all her
appearances and ways of life, in so much as the ways of Sion mourn. But
Babylon, the mother of harlots, she has got all the beauty, all the glory, all
the Churches attire, all the Churches ordinances, and all the trade and
trasfique runs thither, and she is cried up for the true Church; and if any
dare speak a word against her, and for the true Church indeed, they are
exclaimed against for schismatics, and heretics, and war prepared against
them, and some or other of the beasts horns presently pushing at them. Thus it
has gone all the time of the Apostasy, the whore has flourished with the name
of the Church making great merchandise of souls, selling their formal stuff
for money; and abundance of children has the whore brought forth, and nourished
with her milk of deceit: but the true woman, the Lambs wife with her seed, and
the living food from her living breasts, have had no place on the earth.

But this state of things is ended in part, and ending apace. The Lord God of
life is arisen out of his holy habitation to assault the Dragon, to discover
and strip the whore, to recover a possession for his life in the earth, to make
room in the world for his Church, which he is bringing out of the wilderness.
The battle is begun, the territories of Antichrist are assaulted, the Lamb has
appeared on his white horse, and has gathered many of his called, faithful
and chosen about him, the Ensign is li^ted up: the light (which searches the
inwards of the enemies dominions) has appeared, and his inmost power and
wisdom is not feared, but the Lord God is feared, and the Dragons arm withers,
and the head of his policy (whereby he ensnared and entangled from the life)
is crushing, glory to the endless power of life for ever and for ever.

Be wise now therefore, and loose not your share in the immortal Crown. Take
heed how ye be found fighters against the Lamb, in the wisdom and power of
Babylon which is to fall, Painting will not pass now: That blood of the Lamb
is felt, which washes off the whores paint, even all her painted notions of the
blood of christ, and of sanctification and redemption, etc. the whorish nature
being discovered underneath all these. Ye have got the name of Church, the name
of Christians, the name of ordinances, etc. by the whores help, but the nature
of life ye want: and the living power is come to recover the name from you, and
we, his living witnesses, testify to your faces, that ye shall not enjoy it,
but the name and the thing shall go together; and he that has not the thing,
shall also loose the name. Yea, your eyes shall see that ye have been the
sacrilegious ones, who have stolen holy names and tirles, which ye never
received from the hand of God; but the whorish spirit (which out of the life,
and an enemy to the life) has handed them to you. And this is told you in dear
and tender love, that ye might not perish, but have eternal life abiding in
your hearts, and the new name written by the Spirit of life on your foreheads,
which all that know the writing of the life, may be able to read and
acknowledge.

There are several touches of these things, in diverse of of the Epistles of
the Apostles: but the full relation is given forth in that book of the
Revelation, which was penned by the Spirit of God, to be read in the light of
the Spirit, and so to be a preservative against the overspreading contagion of
Antichristianism. Adn it is said, at the entrance into it, Blessed is he that
reads, and they that hear the words of this prophests, and ke^p those things
which are written therein. But men having lost the Spirit, have not been able to
read it, and having lost the right ear, they have not been able to hear the
words it speaks: and how then could they keep the things written therein? He
that does ^ot understand what he is warned against, how is it likely he should
be preserved by the warning? The Spirit of God judged this warning necessary
but the spirit of deceit cries it is a deep thing, not to be meddled with. Now
this is a plain demonstration, that men generally are overtaken with the
whoredom, and drink of the whores cup, and submit themselves to the beast, and
exalt his horns, and receive his mark, and some or other of his names; because
they have not the knowledge of that which discovers these things, and was given
by the Spirit of God to forewarn, and so to preserve out of them. He that
knows not the mystery of iniquity working under a form of godliness, may not
he easily be deceived with the mystery of iniquity? He that knows not what is
become of the true Church and ministry, and where to look for them, may not he
easily own a fall Church and ministry? He that knows not the Spirit of the
Scriptures, which the Church carried with her, when she left the letter behind
her, may not he easily set up the letter for his rule? He that knows not the
living mark and name of a Christian, with which the Spirit of life seals all
the Lambs, of Christ in the life, may not he easily give this name to himself,
and to others who have not this mark, but the beasts mark? He that knows not
the true faith, the true love, the true hope, the true joy, the true peace, the
true rest, the true consolation in Christ the life (the true meeknes and
patience of the S^ints, etc.) may not he easily set up shadows, or liknesses of
these (which he gathers from the letter of the Scriptures, and the promises
thereof, receiving the knowledge of them into the wrong part, and applying them
to the wrong thing) instead of these? Ah poor hearts! The book of the
Revelation is easy to that Spirit that wrote it: and it was not given forth to
be laid by as useless; but to be serviceable in the hand of the Spirit, for
the ages after the days of the Apostles; and in the true light it is easily
read: and they that can read it, can see that in it, which they that cannot
read it, cannot believe. And this is plainly seen, That the^e is but the Spirit
of truth, and the Spirit of deceit: but the Lambs wife, and the whore (which
has whored from the Spirit, which has made use of the lotter, to run a
whoring from that Spirit that wrote it:) that there is but the true Church, and
the false Church: but life, and death: but form, and power: but Christ the
mystery of godliness, and Antichrist the mistary of iniquity: but God, and the
dragon: God in the Church or Temple in the Wilderness, and the dragon in the
worlds, churches and temples, appearing there as if he were God, giving sorth
laws and ordinances like God: and all the world falls down before him, and
worships him as if he were God; and hopes by this worship which they perform to
him, and by their faith and hope which they receive from him, to be saved at
last. I say there are but these two: and he that is joined to the one of these,
is not joined to the other. Let him that reads, understand: which he may
easily do by the wisdom of the Spirit, but never can by the wisdom of the
letter. For though we know how to join these two in the life, yet there is a
necessity of seperating them at present, till the letter be gained out of the
hands of the whorish spirit, which has built up several forms of knowledge,
religion, and worship in mystery- Babylon, by the letter without the life, all
which must fall with Babylon.

AN Exhortation, relating to the workings of the mystery of Iniquity; and the
mystery of godliness in this present age.
ALL people upon earth, who love your souls, and have any true secret pantings
after God, look to the nature of your Spirits, and look to the nature of those
things ye let into your minds; least ye take in death for life, error for
truth, and so sow to your selves corruption, and rear up a fabric in mystery.
Babylon, which will be turned into desolation and utter ruins, by the power of
life from Sion.

Strong is the Spirit of deceit that is entered into the world, and glorious and
very taking are his images and likenesses of truth, which will deceive all but
the very elect, who were chosen from the foundation of the world, and whose
eyes are opened to see the foundation of life, which was before the foundation
of the world.

It has been an heavy dull time for many ages: There have only been witnesses
hitherto raised against Antichrist, and he has sound it an easy matter to
knock them down, and keep up his ways of profaneness, and of formal
superstitious kinds of devotion, up and down all the nations. But now it is a
quick time, the Spirit of the Lord God has arisen, the searching eye is
opened, the pursuit after the very Spirit of Antichrist is begun, yea very
quick and fresh is the scent of that Spirit which hunteth the whore; and now
she goes forward and backward, traverses her ground, changes her paint and
colors often, shifts her garments continually, and uses all the art she can to
save her life. Now the king of Babylon opens his treasury, brings forth all his
likenesses, all his images, all his appearances; with some or other of them (if
it be possible) to tempt the simple soul, and keep it satisfied therewith, in
some of his chambers of darkness and imagery, out of the life and power.

Therefore now be warned and look about you, and be not cosened with any of the
wares of Babylon, where the merchandise and traffic is for souls, and where
all the wares of deceit are, which are proper to cosen souls: but seek for the
nature of that thing, which the inward pantings of your heart at any time have
been after; and waif for the opening of that eye, which can see, through all
manner of paint, to that nature: and keep low in the life, simple and
honest-hearted, and then gaudy appearances will not take with you; for they are
only temptations to the aspiring part, which is lifted up above the pure, low,
humble principle: and if that part were brought down, ye would be safe: but
while that stands, ye will not be out of the danger of temptations. Now this
know:

There is nothing whereof Sion is built, but the likeness of it is in Babylon:
and the likeness is very taking, even more taking to that eye which is open in
men, then the truth it self. The truth is a plain simple thing, it is not
gaudy in appearance, its excellency lies in its nature* but the appearances of
truth which Satan paints, are very gaudy, very glorious, seemingly very
spiritual, very pure, very precious, very sweet; they, many times, even ravish
that understainding and those affections, that are out of the life, Oh what
shall I say! shall I speak a little of the wares of Babylon? where is there an
ear which can hear me? yet he that opens my mouth, can open thine ear.
Therefore set me speak a little plainly.

1. There are many glorious falls births in Babylon. There is no inheriting the
Kingdom, but by being born again. This doctrine the king of Babylon
preaches: he is sain to do so, else the letter of the Scripture would
overthrow his kingdom. Now therefore to keep from the true new birth, he has
his images of the new birth, his several false births. A great while outward
baptism, and a formal knowledge was enough to make a man a christian: but now
since that is discovered, and will not do, he brings forth better births; he
has inward changes of the mind (multitudes of them) fit for every one who is
seeking after the life, to be tempted from the life with: and he tempts every
one with a proper bait, with that which is taking to him in his present estate.
What changes any kind of knowledge by virtue of the notion (with the devils
quickening power added to it) can produce in any man, the Devil can transform
man into. Yea many are these changes: and he that does not know the nature of
the true birth, may easily be deceived with that which is just like the thing
he looks for. A man looks for a new birth, for an inward change: he looks for a
knowledge to change him: he shall have just the very likeness of that which
his heart desires, the lively likenese, the devil is ready at hand to furnish
him with it: which way can the man, who never saw the true thing, espy the
cheat?

2. There are many glorious desires in Babylon, many pantings, many breathings
after that which this birth of Babylon takes to be life. The devil has these
wares, these images in his shop too. As he has a false birth in imitation of
the true, so he has false breathings for his false birth. If his child could
not seemingly breath toward God (as if he were a natural child of God) he
would soon be detected: therefore he inflames him with desires of growth, with
desires of enjoyment of that which he calls life, with seeming desires of
serving and glorifying God: and here come in the prayers of the fleshly birth,
which are many times carried on with exceeding great earnestness of the
fl^shly part to which also the father of this birth given answers. And now
which way can deceit be so much as suspected here? And yet here also the
deceiver lodges, and herein he works, raising strong desires in that part
wherein he dwells, that he may alla^ those pure desires, which otherwise would
be arising from the life underneath, and which (notwithstanding all this)
sometimes do arise, especially when the soul is in anguish.

3. There Is false food in Babylon, false knowledge to feed this wrong nature
with. There Is knowledge falsely so called. There Is several appearances of all
the truths in Sion. There Is outward knowledge of the letter, and there is inward
mystical knowledges and each of these have their warmth, and their freshness,
and do nourish up this child, and cause it to grow. Yea what knowledge and
experience; (which at first sprang from the true life) this spirit makes a prey
of, and daily brings into his Babylon, therewith to feed and fatten that which
is born of him, and to cover the old deceitful nature under, which is not
slain thereby, but daily lives and moves and puts forth it self: this is
certainly felt by that, which is made sensible in the life, but hard to be
spoken, because the deceived heart is so gross* and the ear so heavy Now here
the painted whore, which has dealt treacherously with the life, fits as a
Queen, and saves, she shall see no sorrow: This knowledge is certain to her,
these experiences, she has had the feeling of, and knows they can never be
shaken. But O thou Princess of Babylon, the Lord will strip the, the Lord will
unbare thy inwards, and thine own eyes shall see they nakedness, which shall
be for a perpetual reproach among all the inhabitants of Sion: and then thy
dark deceitful spirit, shall have no more to say against those, who now see
through thy covering to thy nature, in the light; and judge thee (not of
themselves, nor in their own wills and understandings) but from the true power,
and in the true guidance of the life, whose work it is to pursue, overtake and
judge death even to death. For all this knowledge, and all these experiences in
thee (though thou see it not, nor can see it with that eye wherewith thou
look to see) are held captive by that which transgressed and has erred from
the life, and are made use of to keep thy soul in bands: and as they are thus
held, death and the curse must overtake them, or that life in thee, from which
they first sprang, can possibly arise. Grasp not after the knowledge of this in
the understanding part, but wait for the sense of it from that life, which lies
slain underneath these, and by that part which exalt^ these.

4. There are false keys to open the several chambers of imagery in Babylon.
This food man cannot gather of himself, it must be given to him: this
knowledge man cannot get into by himself, but as this spirit leads him, and
opens to him: for he has the keys of death, and opens into the treasures of
death. Now this hugely confirms a man in the deceit, without the least
suspicion of it. Why, says he, I had not this knowledge from my self, I came
not to it by mine own skill or understanding, but it was given me, it was
opened to me: and it came in fresh, and warmed my heart, begetting sweet and
pure disires in me, and has made me eye the glory of God, and not my self.
Ye^, it might come thus in the likeness, and work the likeness of this in
thee; and yet it self not be truth, nor be able to work the truth of this to
thee and this is proper to deceive thy very heart, and make thee a pleasant
inhabitant of Babylon, and a joyful worshiper of the Kingt thereof, whom
through this deep deceit, and most subtle false appearances in thy heart, thou
mistakest for the King of Sion.

5. This false spirit has his false crosses, his self combats and fightings.
The very Papists have not only their wooden and stone crosses, but they have
also then ways of self-denial, their ways of crossing the natural part, of
resignation to the divine will (as they call it) of fighting against
corruption, etc. It is manifest, that a man must deny himself, or else he
cannot be a Christi^n (his own will must not, cannot live, if he truly give
himself up to Christ:) therefore that spirit, which lies lurking to deceive,
hoth several ways of self denial to teach (all which must have some
hardness in them to the natural part, or else they would not pass:) and
these may produce great, and constant conflicting in the flesh, and yet the
fleshly nature be still kept alive under all these conflicts and exercises of
self denial. He has a circumcising knife, which cuts off a great deal, but
always spares the nature: and as long as the nature is speard, the Devil still
has that wherein he can dwell.

6. He has his false love to God and man, and his false zeal for God Love and
zeal are two distinguishing things. All men conclude, that love determines a
man to be a Christian, and so they take up some appearance or other of love,
somewhat that satisfies themselves that their love is right, both to God and
man. The very Papists, who are full of blood and cruelty, yet pretend to love:
they have an image of love which contents them. But there are far higher
images, even images of universal love and sweetness, which no eye can
perceive, but that which knows the truth. And take one word from me, ye to whom
it belongs: all ye that cry up universal love, from the sweet sense of its
image, ye shall one day know, that one act of particular love from the true
nature, exceeds this in its utmost extent.

7. He has his false life. The devil has not only a dead formal religion,
but he has a resemblance, and imitation of the quicknings of the Spirit. The
devil puts his life into this image, where need requires. He has not only a
dead litterall knowledge, but he has paintings of the life: he draws a thing
to the life: he makes his dead image of truth, as like the living substance of
truth, as possibly he can; insomuch as his images of life, at a distance,
without being beheld in the true life, cannot but be taken for living. Now here
is the depth of deceit, when the devils images of life in the heart, are taken
for the living thin, for the life it self.

8. He has his false liberty. There is a glorious liberty in the Gospel:
there is perfect freedom in the service of the life: there is liberty in the
power of the life over all the creatures. God made all things for man, and he
denies him nothing, he being in subjection to him in the life, and using all in
the dominion of the life. Now the devil paints a liberty like this, yea a
liberty that seems greater then this, even a liberty wherein the fleshly part
(whose very nature is eternally shut out of the nature of true liberty) has
scope; which liberty is not surrounded, nor cannot be surrounded by the power
of life, as this is: and in this painted liberty, that spirit which painted it
lives, which: paint the true liberty takes off, slaying that which calls it
liberty, and gathering in the name of liberty from this false appearance, to
that which is liberty indeed. And by the way, he that can read this, let him:
The perfection of the true liberty lies in the perfection of bonds, in the
perfect binding down of that which is out of the life: for the true liberty, is
the liberty of the life, and of nothing else: and when all that is contrary to
the life, is perfectly bound down, then the life has its full scope, without
the least control of the fleshly part: and when the life lives, then that
which is joined to the life lives also.

Now here is the mystery of iniquity, here is the inward Kingdom of darkness,
here is the glory of Babylon! Here Is he that contends for the Kingdom, for the
inheritance! Here the son of the bondwoman (thus dressed, thus furnished, thus
filled within and without) will have it go for granted that he is the right
heir: and yet all this while wants the nature of that which is to inherit, and
cannot possibly receive that nature into himself, but only such images before
mentioned. And if in tender love to his soul, from a clear sight of this
thing, we warn him, and bid him look about, he cries do not judge. He really
thinks he is right in the main, and he seems willing to refer it to the day of
trial. Ah poor hearts! the eye is opened which can see. That which has judged
the deceit in us, can also judge the deceit in thee. Cannot the spiritual eye
see things in its kind? to what end has God given it? Can (...) see and
judge natural things in the natural part? So can they see and judge
spiritual things who are in the light, and who live in the life: yea we shall
continue judging thee in the ^e^^, and in the humility, till God open that in
thee which can s^^l to our judgment.

Object. How difficult do you make the way to life, if not utterly impossible?
If all this be true, who can be saved?

Answ. The way to life is very difficult, yea and impossible to that part in
man, which is so busy in willing and running toward life: but it is as easy
on the other hand, to that which the father begets, raises up, and leads.
The wayfairing man though a fool shall not err. The wisest and richest
Merchant in Babylon, connot set one step in it: the least child in Sion cannot
err there. Therefore know that in thy self, to which it is so hard; and know
that which God has given to thee, which will make it easy.

Thou have a living talent given thee by God, let not thine eye be drawn from
that; but join to that: keep there, and thou art safe: and that will open thine
eye to see all deceits, just in the very season and hour of temptation. For
thou must expect to meet with all these temptations, as thy growth makes thee
capable of receiving them. And as they come, the true eye being kept open, they
will be seen: and being seen, they will easily be avoided in the power of life,
for in vain the net is spread in sight of the bird. Therefore that thou may
be safe.

1. Know the light, the eternal light of life, the little glimmerings and
shinings of it in thy soul. This comes from the rock, to lead thee to the rock:
and if thou follow it, it will fix thee upon the rock where thou can not be
shaken.

2. Keep in the light, keep within the the hedge, step not out of thine own,
keep out of the circumference of the spirit of deceit, the power of whose
witchery and sorcery extends all over the regions of darkness.

3. Love simplicity, love the nakedness of life, stand single in the honesty
of the heart, out of the intricate subtle reasonings, and wise consultings
about things: for by these means the serpent comes to twine about and deceive
thy soul: but in the simplicity of the movings of life, in the light, lies the
power, the strength, the safety.

4. Lie very low continually, even at the foot of the lowest breathing and
appearances of the light. Take heed of being above that wherein thy life lies:
for the wisdom, the power the strength, yea the great glory lies in the
humility: and thou must never be exalted, thou must never come out of the
humility, but find and enjoy the honor and glory of the life in the humility.

5. Mind the reproofs of the light, for that will still be setting thee to
rights. That will still be bringing down that which would get up above, and
there lies the preservation. Oh the chastnings of the light, the sweet
chastenings of the love by the light! These are healing stripes. This brings
down the exalter, and that in thee which loves to be exalted, and to be seeking
the honor of the spiritual riches, before the humility is perfected.

Thus in love to souls, have I powered out my soul before the Lord, and held
forth gentle leadings, even to the most stubborn and stiff-necked.

THE END.

