A WARNING OF LOVE FROM THE Bowels of Life, TO THE Several Generations of
Professors of this AGE, that they may Awaken and Turn toward the Life, to be
truly cleansed and saved by its powerful Living Virtue, before the storm of
Wrath break forth and theover-flowing Scourge overtake them, which will sweep
away the strongest and most wel-built refuge of Lies, and sink those souls
(even into the pit of misery) which are there found, when the storm comes.
Held forth in four Propositions, Assertions, or Considerations concerning Man
in his Lost Estate, and his Recovery out of it.

Propos. 1. That Man is fallen from God.

THere is an Everlasting, Infinite, pure Fountain and Wellspring of Life, from
whence all Creatures came; from whence their Life, Being, Motion, Virtue and
Rest flows, in which they all have a place and standing according to their
nature, estate, temperature and course of operation in his eternal counsel, who
made all, disposes of all, rules in and over all eternally: Whose everlasting
kingdom and dominion (which was before all, and will be after all) cannot be
excluded by any power or dominion which arises after it; but only so far as
it self has pleased it has given way to that power of darkness, which is
contrary to it: which how it sprang up, what it has to do, and how it is to
vanish, is not for man's comprehension to fathom.

In this Spring of life, man had an especial place and standing. The Lord had
created and placed him Supreme, under himself, over the works of his hands,
gave him his Kingdom here on earth under him, gave him his Image to rule in,
even a sufficient measure of that eternal wisdom in which he formed him, to
which he was to be subject himself, and by which he was to reign over and order
all with delight, joy, and comfort in himself, to the praise and glory of him
who formed all, and had given him the dominion over all. Here was the sweet
estate, the sweet peace, the sweet liberty, the sweet unity of all, all being
kept and preserved in that Life, Virtue, Wisdom, Goodness, Power and Love
wherein they were made, the creatures naturally becoming subject to, serving
and obeying man (man using them and ruling over them not in the Tyranny, not in
the Lust, not in the Vanity, not in the Excess; but in the Righteousness, in
the Love, in the Meekness, in the Moderation, in the Divine Wisdom, in the pure
power and virtue of the Life) man likewise naturally vailing to his Maker,
walking in his Light, living in his Life, shining in his Beauty, conquering and
triumphing (over all that might assault) in his strength, and continuing
perfect and straight before him in purity and cleanness of heart, in that
sweet, precious, preserving fear, which naturally springs up in the heart of
the creature (not degenerated) toward his Creator and Preserver. Now, what
could man want, having the Spring of Life so near him? What could he desire in
the Purity, in the Life, which the Father of Life could have withheld from
him? Had he asked the Spirit, could the Father have denied him? and had he
stood still a while in the Life, out of the Lust, could he have forborne asking
the Spirit? Had he not so suddenly been tempted to the Tree of Knowledge, surely
he had eaten of the Tree of Life, and had lived for ever.

But man being in honor, lodged not one night, (HE FELL THE FIRST NIGHT, read
me who can) but became like the beasts that perish. He lost the Divine Image,
and then had at best but the Natural: but that, depending upon the Divine, the
beauty thereof was lost too. He lost the Eternal Wisdom, he lost the Spring, he
lost the Godhead, he lost that which was to reign over the Creatures, and then
he became but as the Creatures, nay worse then the creatures. What he
henceforth knows of God (as he stands in the Degeneration) he knows naturally,
like bruit beasts (even by the natural exercise of his mind, with the faculties
thereof, even as the beasts learn and know by their nature, after their kind)
and in what he thus knows, he corrupts himself worse than the beasts. Let the
Lord try him never so much, never so often, drop down of the dew of heaven upon
him, send him line upon line, precept upon precept, now a little and then a
little, yet he still remains brutish, both in his understanding, receiving,
and in his making use of it all. Still he forgets the truth, and loses himself
in the image, gets a notion, an imagination, a comprehension of somewhat into
his natural part (which changes him not inwardly, but still he is the same in
his root, ground and nature) but the Life, the Eternal virtue he is still
estranged from, and so is brutish in all his knowledge and apprehensions of God
and his Truths, brutish in his worshipping of him, brutish in his belief and
hopes, and his immortal soul perishes under all. Outward Israel was a true and
full resemblance of him, who had many Teachings, a pure Law of Worship, and
sacrificing, many Prophets to reduce and restore them to the right path of
holiness and obedience, but still they were erring in their hearts from the Lord
and his pure Law of Life, not knowing their Owner or their Masters Crib, so well
as the Ox or Ass did theirs, Isa. 1. 3.

Propos. 2. That Man, by all the imaginations that can enter into his heart,
and by all the means he can use or courses he can run, cannot return back to
God again, or so much as desire it.

The Fall of Man from God is such, that it has benumbed all his senses, yea so
bereft him of them, that he cannot feel his own estate. He is dead, spiritually
dead, and can no more feel his death, his spiritual death, then a man naturally
dead can his natural death. He is bewitched into a fools Paradise, where he
has a new Life, a new Virtue, a new Wisdom, a new Kingdom, a new Dominion
(which is indeed but Death) with which he is so transported, that he forgets
the old; and in this new spirit and estate, cannot so much as desire after it.
Men speak of the Relics of the Image, which the first man had: Ah poor
deceived hearts. What Relics of Life are there in a Dead Man? What Relics
of purity in a man wholly degenerated and corrupted? Nay, nay; The Spiritual
Image, the Divine Image, the Eternal Life, the pure Power and Virtue is wholly
lost, and there is nothing left, but what is captivated and destroyed through
the degenerating power. There is nothing at all of the Eternal Kingdom, of the
Spiritual Image, of the Divine Life to be found in fallen Man, but a little
seed; and that Seed not so much as sown in his earth, as he stands in the
degeneration; for the sowing of it is the beginning of the work anew. And now,
who can read this Riddle? The Kingdom is within every man, and yet not so much
as sown in any man, till the springing up of the eternal virtue according to
the Eternal pleasure; nay the earth is not so much as prepared to receive the
Seed, until the Lord send his Plough into the heart. So that it is impossible
for fallen Man to attain to so much as one true breathing, or desire after God
again; this must arise from the Grace, from the Mercy, from a New begetting (by
the free gift) toward Life, toward the Divine Image again, which was slain in
Man (and the impression of it on him wholly lost) ever since the Foundation of
the world in his heart, which God has set there, ever since he chose it. And
indeed fallen Man degenerated Man (would the Spirit of the Lord let him alone,
and not disquiet him) likes his own estate well enough. The world being written
in his heart, his thoughts and desires are centred there, and of themselves
reach no further. Might he but have the enjoyment of the creatures without, and
the enjoiment of such a kind of earthly knowledge and Wisdom within, as he now
aspires after, he would sit down in Egypt and Babylon, resting fully satisfied
with Egyptian knowledge and wisdom, and with the Babylonish treasures (might he
have enough of them) and never think of Sion, and the pure holy Land of Life
any more.

But when the Eternal stirs in him, when the pure Light opens at any time, then
he has some little Glimmerings of his estate, then he has some sense of his
fallen condition, and some desire to remedy it; What does he then? Then he
bestirs himself to get somewhat to cover him, then he gathers stones and makes
mortar to build up a Wall and raise a Tower, that he may not lie open to the
deluge of Wrath; for, by this stirring of the life, he has some little taste
and sight, that he is not one with the life, but departed from it. The soul
being awakened by the opening of its own spring in it, begins to feel the want
of its spring: It wants the true Virtue, the true Peace, the true Joy, the true
Comfort and Refreshment, the true Rest, the true Liberty, the true Life, the
true Light; and for want of this, its estate is miserable: And in the stirring
of the Spring, it feels this misery; and in this feeling it groans, it mourns,
it pants, it cries out, and the creatural earthly spirit can have no rest
because of it. What therefore does the creature do to still this cry? Why, it
joyneth, as it were, with the soul, it uses all the means it can to attain
that, which the soul sees the want of: It inquireth after God, hearkneth out
after those that know him, studieth the Law, observes the Statutes and
Ordinances, performs the Duties, Believes, Prays, Hops, Waits: nay,
what is it, which the creature will nor set upon in this distress (especially
if the Convictions of the Eternal Light pursue and follow him close) to still
the cry of the soul, and to attain the price of the Eternal Inheritance, which
is set before the Soul, which the Soul can never be at rest or satisfied,
without some assurance of, and progress toward? But all this will not do. Man
in all his own obedience, as well as in his disobedience is shut out. There is
a flaming sword which turns every way, to keep the way of the Tree of Life;
insomuch as man can by no means come at the way to the true life, nor enter
into the strait and narrow Path that leads thereto, but as he is cut to the
heart, his life let out, and as he dies, and comes into unity with that which
slayes him, and keeps the way from him. So that man, in his running to God is
thrust by, as well as in his running from him: in his willing and desiring
after him he is rejected, as well as in his willing against him. It is not of
him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. Mark,
There is a Birth of Bloods, a Birth of the will of the Flesh, a Birth of the
will of Man, Joh. 1. 13. all these will, all these run (some of them very hard)
but they are all thrust by, and dis-regarded by the Lord both in their willing,
and in there running. There are many found running the race, but one obtains the
prize, which one is he that is born of God, to whom when God gives the prize,
he will say to all the other Births (notwithstanding all their Willing and
Running, their Believing, Hoping, Praying, etc.) Depart from me I know you not,
ye are the fruit of a strange Womb, not of my Spouse, and so must not inherit
my Kingdom. And as all these will be cut short of the Inheritance at last; so
all that they do at present, is loathsome to the Lords soul. The sacrifice of
the wicked is abomination; how much more when he brings it with a wicked
mind, Prove. 21. 27. His Sacrifice, his Worshipping of God, his Praying, his
reading of Scriptures, his meditating thereon, and of God, and his Works, his
Believing, Hoping, Waiting, fearing of Threatenings and applying of Promises,
etc. all is abomination. The wicked man, he whose heart is not circumcised by
the Lords Eternal Spirit, whatsoever he can, or does Sacrifice to God, the Lord
loathes, and it cannot profit his soul.

Object. Yea, when he does them in hypocrisy, so they are.

Answ. Nay, more then so. When he does them with an evil heart, they are much
more abominable, how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind? but let
him bring it with a good mind with that which he calls the good heart (for the
circumcised heart, the heart of the true New Birth is only the good heart, not
that heart which every false Birth is apt to call good) let him bring it with
that heart, which he takes to be the upright heart, with an honest intention,
so far as he knows, take his Sacrifices at the very best, at the very purest he
can attain to, yet then they are Abomination.

And the reason hereof is plain and manifest. The Fountain is unclean, the Root
in him is corrupt; And who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Make the
Tree good, and his fruit will be good: But while the Tree is bad, the Fruit
cannot be good. Now can the holy God be pleased with that Sacrifice which comes
from the unclean Spring? Can God own or approve that knowledge of himself, that
Faith, that Love, that Obedience, that Integrity, or Uprightness, that Industry
or Diligence, those Prayers or Breathings, which man pumps up out of the old
Cistern? Nay all these must into the Pit, with the common Filthiness and
Pollutions of the earth: And when the Lord rakes this aside from the several
sorts of Professors, what will be left in them? Oh how many have builded up a
wall, dawbing it with untempered Mortar, which will not stand in the day of
Trial, nor shelter them from the Eternal Flames? Oh what yelling and roaring
will there shortly be in such, as by no means would be warned, but would be
justifying of themselves in their false knowledge and practices, and reserving
their Fabrics of Religion to the trial of the day! and the day will try them
indeed, even to the bitter perplexity and anguish of their hearts, when they
come to see that there is now no way of escape, but they must lie down in the
bed of Eternal Sorrow, Misery, and Torment, and in utter Separation from that,
wherein they thought they had a large and unquestionable share.

Propos. 3. That all Professions of God and of Christ upon the earth, all
knowledge and beliefs whatsoever, with all practices of Duties and Ordinances of
Worship, save only such as proceed from, and are held in the pure life, are but
as so many Fig Leaves, or deceitful Plasters, which may skin over the wound,
but cannot truly heal it.

The wound of man is deep by the Fall: He has really lost God, is shut out of
his Commonwealth, yea (in that estate) is altogether without hope (for the hope
springs from Gods Visitation of him with his Light, and from the living
Promise.)

That which recovers man is the Eternal Virtue, the Endless Power, the Life
Immortal, the Christ of God.

Now what ever knowledge man gathers (whether from the Book of the Creatures,
or from the Scriptures, or any other ways) or what ever man professes, or what
ever man practices out of this, it is but a cover of his own, but a formed
thing, but his own Image of Truth, of Knowledge, of Faith, of Love, of
Obedience, of Worship; it is not the Living Truth the Living Knowledge, the
Living Faith, the Living Love, the Living Obedience, the Living Worship: And so
it is but mortal, but fleshly; and when it coms before the Eternal flames, it
will not abide them, but vanish. All flesh is grass: all the Knowledge, the
Faith, the Love, the Worship, the Obedience, the Righteousness, etc. which man
(who is ignorant of the leadings and power of the Life) can come at, is but
Grass: yea the flower of it, the seeming beauty and goodliness of it, the very
choicest of it in any sort of Professors, is but as the flower of the field; it
may make a fair show there, but when the Lord cutteth it down with his fickle,
and when his Sun rises upon it with its burning heat, it will soon wither, and
his fire will soon devour it, so that its very place shall be found no more? What
will become of all the fruit that flesh has born, when God makes bare, and
cutteth down the root? what will become of all Mortal Knowledge of the
Scriptures, Mortal Worship, the Faith and Obedience which has its root, growth
and spreading in the mortal part when the Lord heweth at it with his immortal
Axe? Do not deceive your selves; There is nothing will stand but what is
immortal, and that which is gathered into it, and so one with it: no Knowledge,
no Faith, no Love, no Obedience, no Worship, no Hopes, but what spring from the
Seed, are gathered into the Seed, and live in the Seed. This will abide, when
all that springs from man and has its place and residence in the mortal part
(and not in the true Treasury) will come to an end, and disappoint all who have
fixed their hopes of the inheritance there:

Propos. 4. That the living Seed of Eternal Life, which God has hid in Man
underneath his earth, has in it the Living Virtue, which alone can heal Man
and restore him to God.

That which heals of the Death is the Tree of Life, whose Rind or Bark, whose
Leaves, whose Blossoms, whose Fruit, whose Boughs and branches, whose Bulk or
Body, with the whole Sap thereof, is all healing, and there is nothing else can
heal. Let man catch all the knowledge that ever sprang from the Life; If he
could believe (I mean in the man's part) all that ever the Life spoke, if it
were so that he could perform all that ever the Life called for, yet this would
not heal him at all: Whereas the least virtue from the life, springing up into,
and livingly retained in the Life's vessel, truly refreshes and heals. The Seed
in all its springings up, and shootings forth in the heart, lets out of its
healing virtue. Let (...) proof, a Conviction, a Judgment, a Condemnation,
which wounds that part which has erred from the life, yet even in that there
is a secret, hidden healing of somewhat else. The smitings of the righteous
principle are as Balm, and its reproofs as an excellent Oil. Thy Rod and thy
Staff comfort me. Light is sown for the righteous, and Joy for the upright in
heart; in all the tearings, smitings and rendings of the earthly part (with
which the Seed also suffers) and the faith, in which these are received is the
present substance of the healing, from the eternal virtue hoped for.

Now, who will be wise? let him become a fool in the flesh: Who will be strong?
Let him become weak in the man's part. Who will be saved by the Eternal Power?
Let him cease from the man in himself. Who ever would be able, in the Life, to
do all things, let him sink into that himself which is not, that it may bring
to naught all things in him that are, that so it alone may be; and he, by it
being brought to nothing, will easily become all in it. This is the true way of
Restoration of Redemption; first to be lost, to be overcome, to be drowned, to
be made nothing by that which is not, that that may come to BE in him, and he
be quickened raised up and perfected in that, and so become possessour of the
Fullness. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong; but he
that daily loses his strength, and his ability to know, or so much as to will
or desire (even till at length he become nothing at all) in him is the Corrupt
at last destroyed, and the mortal swallowed up of the Life. He that feels the
pure Seed springing up; and by the growth of that is daily Begotten, Quickened,
Raised, Justified, Sanctified, Circumcised, Baptized, fed in one part, and
starved in another: When the work of Begetting, Quickening, Raising,
Regenerating, Justifying, Sanctifying, Circumcising, Baptising is finished in
him, and he is thoroughly begotten into the Life, quickened by the Life, raised
in the Life, Regenerated, Justified, Sanctified, Circumcised and Baptized
through the Life; he shall have the Kingdom, wear the Crown, enter into the
joy of his Lord, weilding the Scepter of Righteousness with his Lord, in his
Kingdom for ever. Now this work is to be done in the heart on this side the
grave; for after death comes Judgment for the things done in the body; and the
Tree is to be disposed of, according as it is found at its fall, either to the
fire, or to grow and flourish in the Land of Life. Therefore be not sloathful,
but watch unto the movings of the Living Seed, that its work may be perfected,
that it may arrive at its Stature, and come to its full growth and may finish
its Service and Testimony, that so it may enter into its Habitation, and
receive you with it into its Everlasting Mansion, where every Servant, and
constant Sufferer with the Seed, shall be welcomed of its Father, and remain
partaker of their Joy and Fullness for Ever.

ISAAC PENNINGTON The younger.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Wind mill, in Martins le Grand, 1660.


