AN ADDRESS TO PROTESTANTS UPON THE Present Conjuncture.

In II. Parts.

By a Protestant, William Penn.

Printed in the Year 1679.

TO THE READER.
Sober Reader,
THe Present Affairs of this Kngdom are upon a Strong and Unusual Motion: to
what Point they tend, or where they will Center, must rest with God, that only
is Omniscient. This makes it Hard either to Write or Speak: perhaps I shall be
able to do neither without Disadvantage to my self; but I will do it with as
little to the Matter as I can. And truly, I say it with some Comfort, the
Clearing of an Oppressed, yet Peaceable Conscience prevails more with me, than
the Safety of Silence. And yet I have no Reason to think, there is an Hazard in
the Case, when the Public Fast secures the Undertaking; and that I am sure, I
propose nothing for my End besides the Glory of Almighty God, the Good of
Mankind, and more especially the Peace and Happiness of my own Country. In
which if I succeed not, it is no more, than what has befallen the Endeavors
of Most Excellent Persons: we must not measure our Duty by Success. Being
therefore not discouraged in my self, and having a strong Hope, that Almighty
God will favor this Honest Address with his Blessing. I beseech thee, Reader,
peruse it with a Serious and Composed Mind, and with that Meekness and Charity,
which becomes a True Protestant and a Christan to have.

Thine in Sincerity for the Public Good W. Penn.

AN ADDRESS TO PROTESTANTS UPON THE Present Conjuncture.
My Friends and Countrymen,
IF ye believe, that there is a God, that he is Holy, Just and Good, that he
Made us, that we Owe our selves to him, and that he is not Careless of us, but
the Constant Observer of our Thoughts and Actions; and that as he is the
Rewarder of them that fear, love and obey him, so he is the severe Punisher of
all such as transgress his Law, and break his Righteous Commandments: if (I
say) ye believe these things, and not only, that there is a Final Day of
Reckoning, but that God even in this World recompenses his Judgments upon the
Wicked, and visit Nations with his hot Displeasure because of their Impiety
(which has been the Experience and Confession of all Ages) then it belongs to
us of these Kingdoms to reflect upon our selves, and to take a true View of our
Actions, since Divine Vengeance is at the door. And for the Lords sake, let us
have a Care in the doing of it, since God will not be mocked; and that our
miscarriage in such an Inquiry will be as only our own Infelicity, so of
infinite Moment to us. I must needs be Plain and Earnest here; for if we
miscarry in the Search, we shall certainly miscarry in the Cure. Sin gives the
deadliest of all Wounds to Mankind; I grieve to say it, but it is too true;
there is no Wound so slightily healed: we rather seek our Ease, than our
Security, like those Fools that love the pleasantest, not the safest Potions.
It is ill at all times, to flatter a Man's Self; but it is most Fatal about
Repentance: Something men would keep, something men would hide; and yet they
have to do with that Searcher of Hearts, from whom its impossible they should
hide any thing. This Folly increases our Account, endangers our Cure and makes
our Condition Desperate, if not Irrecoverable.

O England, my Native Country, Come to Judgment, bring thy deeds to the true
Light; see whether they are wrought in God or no. Put not off thy self with
Hay, Straw and Stubble; for they will burn, and the Fire is at the Door, that
will consume them: he is coming, whose Reward is with him, and will give every
one according to his Works. Let us therefore Examine our selves, Try our
selves, Prove our own selves, whether Christ be in us or not; if his Spirit,
his Nature, his Meekness, his Patience, his great Self-denial dwell in us; if
not, we are yet Reprobates, yet under the Reproofs of the Almighty; the Charge
and Guilt of Sin; and his Witness in our own Consciences sends up Evidence to
Heaven against us every day: this I justly fear and take to be our Case. Let us
therefore strictly look into our Conversations, and with an impartial Eye take
a view of those Sins, that most severely Cry to the Great Judge against us. And
they appear to me to be of Two Sorts; the one relating more particularly to the
State, the other to the Church (if I may without Offense use that Distinction)
for my Witness is with God, I intend not Provocation, but Edification.

Those Impieties that relate more particularly to the State to correct, are
Drunkenness, Whoredoms and Fornication; Excess, in Apparel, in Furniture and in
Living; Profuse Gaming; and finally Oaths, Profaneness and Blasphemy.

Drunkenness, or Excess in Drinking, is not only a Violation of God's Law, but
of our own Natures; it does of all other Sins rob us of our Reason, deface the
Impressions of Virtue, and extinguish the Remembrance of God's Mercies and our
own Duty: It fits men for that, which they would abhor, if Sober. The Incest,
Murder, Robberies, Fires and other Villainies, that have been done in Drunken
Fits, make Drunkenness a Common Enemy to Humane Society. It renders men unfit
for Trust or Business, it tells Secrets, betrays Friendship, disposes men to be
Trappanded and Cheated: Finally, it spoils Health, weakens Humane Race, and
above all provokes the Just Isa. 28. 1, 3, 7.
God to Anger, who cried thus of Old; Woe to the Drunkards of Ephriam! the
Drunkards of Ephriam shall be trodden under feet: they have erred through Wine,
and through Strong Drink are out of the Way; the Priest and the Prophet have
erred through Strong Drink, they erred in Vision, they stamble in Judgment.
Again, Woe unto them that are Mighty to drink Wine, and men of strength to
mingle strong drink. Woe unto them that rise up early in the Morning, that they
may follow strong drink; that continue until night, till Wine inflame them: and
the Harp, and the Viol, the Tabret and the Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts;
but they regard not the Work of the Lord, neither consider the Operations of
his hands. Therefore Hell has enlarged her self and opened her Mouth without
measure, and their Glory and their Multitude, and their Pomp, and he that
rejoices, shall descend into it.

Yet you will bear me witness, I do not wrong the present Humor of too many in
this Nation, and those not of the lowest Quality, in saying, that it is too
often the beginning and top of their Friendship: it is their Common Diversion
and Entertainment; I might safely say, the Poor of England could be maintained
by their Excess. Oh! has the God of Heaven given men Plenty for such Ends? or
will this kind of Improvement of their Worldly Talent give them Peace in the
Day of Judgment? But that men should do all this without shame, nay, glory in
it too, is greatly to be lamented; for it is not only Appetite, but the Vanity
of Conquest excites not a few, as if it were matter of Triumph to Drown a Man's
Reason, and to Degrade him to the Beast. Let us hear upon the whole matter the
Sentence pronounced against Prove. 23. ver. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
them by the Wise Man; Who has Woe? who has Sorrow? who has Contentions? who
has Babbling? who has Wounds without Cause? who has Redness of Eyes? They
that tarry long at the WINE, they that go to seek mixed WINE. Look not thou upon
the WINE, when it is Red, when it gives his Color in the Cup, when it moves
it self aright; at the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an
Adder. Thine Eyes shall behold strange Women, and thine Heart shall utter
perverse things.

Here is much of the Mischief of Drunkenness in a little, and of the Excess and
Wantonness of the Drunkard; But did ever any Age come near ours, when the very
Tasting of the several sorts of Wine (that are liberally drunk of at many
Tables) is enough to distemper a Temperate Head? But that such, Excesses should
be, while the Backs of the Poor are almost Naked, and their Bellies miserably
pinched with Hunger, is almost as great a shame to our pretenses to Policy, as
those (I fear) we Unwarrantably make to Religion. Oh! that we were fit to
receive that Heavenly Exhortation of the Apostle, Be not Drunk with Wine,
wherein is Excess; but be filled with the Spirit, (but God knows, this is mocked
at! He goes on) speaking to your selves (not in Lampoons nor Obscene Songs,
that excite Lusts, but) in Psalms, and Hymns and spiritual Songs, singing and
making Melody in your Heart to the Lord, giving Thanks always for all things
unto God and the Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Next crying Sin is that of Whoredom and Fornication. From one of the
Cleanest People under Heaven (I fear) we are become one of the most-Inchaste
(at least in and about London.) The French have sufficiently revenged
themselves upon us by the loose Manners they have brought amongst us, of which
this makes a great part: but I must needs say to their Credit, they keep their
Wits in their Debaucheries, whilst we by Over doing them in the Imitation of
them lose both. What is become of that Ancient Education of the Kingdom? our
Integrity, Gravity and Manhood, which gave our Men so great Reputation in the
World, is it not turned into Swearing and Drinking, Fidling and Dancing, fine
Clothes, a Duel and a Wench? their Profaneness is their Wit, and their base
Crafts must be called Policy. But where is that Retired Breeding, which made
our Women as famous for their Virtue, as they were always held for their
Beauty? alas! there has been a sort of Industry used to subdue their Native
Modesty, as if it were an Indecent thing to have it, and Arts practiced to make
them Hardy against their own Blushes, and master their shy and bashful
Disposition (so peculiar to Chastity) into an Unconcerned Confidence: as if it
were their Perfection to be Insensible of any ill, and to be Tame at all
things. Strange! that Sobriety should be turned into Levity! and Lust called
Love! and Wantonness, good Humor! to introduce which, nothing has been so
Pernicious, as the Use of Plays and Romances amongst us, where the warm and
uneven Passions of our Youth, easily transported beyond the Government of their
Reason, have been moved and excited to try that in Earnest, which they have
seen in Jest.

But which way soever this Ungodly Latitude came in, certain it is, that what
forty years ago was not fit to be named, is now practiced without any Scruple.
Marriage, which is Gods Ordinance, and as lovely to Chaste Minds as lawful, is
now grown a Dull Thing, Old and Clownish, kept up only for Issue, and that
because the Law will have it so; A sort of Formality not yet thought fit to be
abrogated, so that, what was once ordained of God for many other Helps and
Comforts, and permitted by the Holy Apostle to prevent Lust (Better Marry than
Burn) is by the Extravagant Growth of Vice turned to quite the Contrary. For
some Men and (which is worse) some Women too, have said, They could love their
Wives and Husbands, if they were not their Wives and Husbands; (tho that be the
true Reason, why they ought to love them) It is in short to say: If they were
in that Condition, in which they ought not to love them, they could love them;
but being in that Condition, in which they ought to love them, they declare,
they cannot love them: Yet Alas! Christians, and Children of God: what a shame
is this, and Scandal to Society! But for God's sake, let this Impiety be laid
to Heart! let not the Marriage Bed be so horribly defiled! let not our Virgins
be so basely abused! It destroys Honor, Fortitude, Health; it pollutes
Houses, and makes the Issue of the Nation Spurious; It occasions great
Unkindnesses, Rents, Confusions and Divisions in Families, between Husband and
Wife, Parents and Children, Masters, Mistrisses and Servants: it spots their
Name; but above all, the poor Children are unhappy, that wear an Ignominy they
never deserved. In fine, it teaches Young Men to slight Marriage, and Married
Men to break their Contracts: If Religion were not interested in it, yet the
Breed of the Nation is Visibly injured by it; Good Horsemen are more Nice and
Careful in their Studs, the Policy of the Nation is concerned in preventing the
Mischiefs, that follow such Licentious Practices. But if we will consider the
share that Religion has, both in Virginity and in Marriage, we shall find many
severe Sentences past upon the Violators of them. Thou shall not commit
Adultery, says God; The Adulterer shall be put to Death, says the same God: I
will be a Exodus 20. v. 4. Lev. 20, 10. Mal. 3, 5. 1 Cor. 6, 9, 13, 15, 18, 19,
20. chapter 3, 17.
swift Witness against the Adulterer, says the Lord. Know ye not, that the
Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived; neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate persons, nor Abusers
of themselves with Mankind. And the Holy Apostle gives the Reason, The Body is
not for Fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the Body: Know ye not
(says he) that your Bodies are the Members of Christ.? shall I then take the
Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot? God forbid! Flee
Fornication: he that commits Fornication, sins against his own Body.
what! (says he) know ye not, your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which
is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? for ye are bought
with a Price; therefore glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit, which are
God's. If any Man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. O can men
profess to believe these things, and lead that wretched Life they live! But yet
again hear this Man of God: But Fornication and all Uncleanness or Covetousness
let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints; neither Filthiness,
nor foolish Talking nor Jesting, which are not Convenient; but rather giving of
Thanks. For this ye know, that no Whoremonger, nor Unclean person, nor Covetous
man, who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and God.
Let no man deceive you with vain Words; for because of these things comes the
Wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience: be not ye therefore pertakers
with them, and have no fellowship with the Unfruitful Works of Darkness; but
rather reprove them: See then, that ye walk Circumspectly, not as Fools, but as
Wise, redeeming the Time, because the Days are Evil. (Ephesians. 5, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
11, 12, 15, 16.) I shall Conclude with these two Passages: Marriage is
Honorable in all, and the Bed Undefiled; but Whoremongers and Adulterrers Heb.
13, 4. Rev. 21, 8.
God will judge! The other is this: But the Fearful and Unbelieving, and the
Abominable and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerens, and Idolaters, and
all Liars shall have their part in the Lake, which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, which is the Second Death; This alone ought to deter all People, who
have any respect for Holy Scripture, and do believe the Mind of God to be
declared therein. Let then both Cities, Courts, Houses and Streets be swept of
such Iniquity; let the Law have its course, let not God be provoked to destroy
us: and let all such turn to God by unfeigned Repentance; that Sobriety,
Chastity and Virtuous Conversation may return again among us: so shall we
escape the Wrath, that for this with other Enormities is ready to break out
against us.

The Third Crying Sin of this Land is its Great Excess, and that in several
Kinds; In Apparel, in Furniture, in Feasting. An Excess is the Mis-using of any
thing, by not observing a Moderation: that which is lawful in it self, may be
Abused in the Use of it. What is more Allowable, yet what is more Abused than
Cloths and Victuals? The End of Apparel is to cover Nakedness, keep People
Warm, Distinguish Sexes; but the End is perverted: it is used more for Ornament,
for Pride, for Lust; to beget Esteem and to draw Honor to the Person that
wears it: A Mean, an Effeminate, a Wretched way to Honor; yet such was the
Folly of the Age, that few things are yet more Reverenced: it opens Doors, gets
Access, obtains Dispatches, carries away the Cap and the Knee from most other
Pretenses. The Truth is, this Vanity abuses the Reason of Just Respect: for
True Quality, if plain, is not to be known among Fine Cloths. But it does not
only Confound all Reasonable Distinction, and those Civil Degrees that are
among People; but it begets Pride: they think themselves some Body, if they are
Fine; Plain Cloths must give them the Way and the Wall, and keep its Distance
too. It introduces Effeminacy, and excites to Wantonness: it provokes to
Prodigality, and leads People to Idleness. But there is a sort of Madness in it
too: for it is not so much the Apparel, as the Trimming; not the Cloths, but the
Cut, the Mode, the Figure: and as often as this changes, Cloths grow Useless,
that are not half worn out. This is an Iniquity against the Good of the
Government, as well as against God; and there is so strong a Temptation in it,
that not a Few turn Naught to be Fine, as well as the Fine turn Naught. In
short, there is no Good, Prudence or Convenience in this Excess; the Law of God
and of the Land is against it: The third Chapter of Isaiah is almost entirely
employed Isa. 3.
against it, in which God does not only rebuke the Haughty Looks, the Wanton
Eyes and Enticing Mean and Behavior of the Women of those Times; but declares
his Resolution to Take away the Bravery of their Ornaments, Chains, Bracelets,
Rings, Jewels and Changeable Suits of Apparel, and that their Perfume should be
turned into a Stink, and instead of a Girdle there should be a Rent, and
instead of Well-set Hair Baldness, and instead of a Stomacher a Girding of
Sackcloth, and Burning instead of Beauty. Thy Men (said God) shall fall by the
Sword, and thy Mighty in the War: and her Gates shall lament and mourn; she
being desolate, shall sit upon the Ground.

This was also the Sin of Tyrus, as ye may see Ezekiel. 27. For Pomp and Pride she
excelled in those days: she boasted in her Splendour and sumptuous Living; her
Buildings were Lofty, her Furniture Stately, her Apparel Costly: but her End
was Terrible, and her Destruction very Great. And God expressly threatens by his
Prophet Zephaniah; I will punish the Princes and the Kings Children, and all
that are clothed with strange Apparel. What is this strange Apparel? is it New
Fashions? then we are guilty with a witness. Or is it the Fashions of strange
Countries? it is still our own Case: We have been more Careful to receive the
Law from France for our Clothes, than from Christ for our Conversation; and so
Prevalent is the Humor of that Country with us, and Powerful the Ascendant it
has over us, that we seem to be Frenchmen, only we live in England. But in
this, as also in all other things the Christian Religion excells, and that for
the Good of Civil Society: It reproves this Excess, limits the Vain Mind of
Man, and teaches that decent Plainness, which becomes the Providence and
Gravity of Civil Government. Hear the Language of the holy Apostles, in whose
Doctrine we all pretend to believe, I will therefore (says St. Paul) that
Women adorn themselves 1 Timothy 2, 9, 10.
in Modest Apparel, with Shamefacedness and Sobriety, not with Broidered Hair,
or Gold, or Pearls, or Costly Array; but (which becomes Women professing
Godliness) with Good Works. The same Doctrine is repeated by the Apostle Peter,
who 1 Pet. 3, 3, 4, 5.
speaking to the Christian Women, to whom he wrote; Let not your Adorning be in
that Outward Adorning of Plating the Hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of
putting on of Apparel; but let it be the hidden Man of the heart in that which
is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a Meek and Quiet Spirit, which is in
the sight of God of great Price: For after this manner in the Old Time the holy
Women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves. Would to God! I could say
for the Women of our Age, that they trusted in God too, and adorned themselves
with no other Ornaments, than what agreed with the Modest and Humble Plainness
of these Christian Times.

But the Law of the Land as well as the Christian Law reproves this Excess,
they only want to be refresht and enforced by the Care of our Superiors; were
they Strictly put in Execution, it would not only prevent much Mischief, and
enerease the Wealth of the Kingdom, but make Private Men in a little time thank
the Just Severity of the Government. For it will help to keep them within
Compass, to preserve (which is one way to increase) their Estate, to enlarge
their Trade, provide better for their Children, and open their hands more
Liberally to the Poor: And this I am sure, God requires at our Hands.

What I have said against Excess in Apparel, is also applicable to Excess in
Furniture: For as Finery is more valued than Clothes, so is the Furniture, than
the House. It is a most Inexcusable Superfluity, to bestow an Estate to line
Walls, dress Cabinets, embroider Beds, with an Hundred other unprofitable
Pieces of State: such as Massy Plate, Rich Chiny, Costly Pictures and Painted
Windows of no use in the Earth, only for Show and Sight: the Interest of which
Money so ill employed, might probably Maintain the Poor of a Numerous Parish. O
Lord God! have thou given us Plenty, and should we see others Want? should we
clothe our Dead Walls, and let thy Poor go Naked? Can we feed our Eyes with
these Objects, and not feed the Hungry with Bread? and spend our Money upon
Lifeless Pictures, but shut up our Bowels to thy Living Image, the Poor and N
edy of the Earth? Rebuke this Evil Mind, and bring down the Pride of all Flesh,
O Lord! for thy Name's sake.

The Last Excess is that of Feasting and Voluptuousness, Immoderate Eating and
Drinking, with that strain of Mirth and Jollity, which is the Mode and Practice
of the Times. Dives is almost got into every Family, especially those of Note
and Estate: it is Want of Wealth, and not Will, that the Greatest Part of the
Nation is not guilty; they mostly sin to their Ability: that is sad! But the
Sin of Voluptuousness is swelled to that Bulk, that there are more Receipts for
Eating and Drinking, than there are Precepts of Life in the Old and New Law:
the Book of Cookery is grown as big as the Bible, and I fear, read, to be sure,
practiced oftener. In this Art the Lust of the Flesh is deeply concerned; there
is not so much Care of the Stomach as of the Palate, of Health as Pleasure:
it is the Taste, the Gust, the Relish, that makes the Victuals go down;
therefore the Sauce is preferred before the Meat. Twelve-penny worth of Flesh
with Five Shillings of Cookery may happen to make a Fashionable Dish; plain
Beef, Mutton, or any other thing is become Dull Food: But by that time its
Natural Relish is lost in the Crowd of the Cook's Ingredients, and the Meat
sufficiently disguised to the Eaters; it passes under a French Name for a very
Good Dish. But there is one thing in this Impiety more than ordinarily
Condemnable; it destroys Hospitality and wrongs the Poor: For that Expense,
which is now flung away upon a Vicious Palate, upon a French Soup or Sauce, in
former Times afforded several Dishes of substantial Victuals; which did not
only feed Strangers or Neighbors, but the Poor, who have now little more than
(what the Dogs had then) Empty Dishes to lick. This is Abusing the Providence
of God, Tyrannizing over the Creatures made for man's Use, and sacrificing
their Poor Lives not to our Lives, but to our Lusts: It Is against such as
these, that the Creation groans, and from whose Intemperance it cries to be
delivered.

God in all Ages has had a Controversy with Voluptuous Men, and the
Testimonies of sacred Records are Strong and Numerous against them: I will
mention a few of them. Voluptuousness was the Sin of the Old World; they were
Eating and Drinking, Marrying and giving in Marriage, pleasing the Lust Genesis 6.
Mat. 24. 37, 38, 39.
of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, until the Day of the
Flood. This also was the Condition of Sodom; Christ himself has expressed it in
these words: In the Days of Lot they did eat, they drank, they Genesis 19. Luke
22. 28, 29.
bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; the same Day, that Lot went out
of Sodom, it rained Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all. The
Prophet Ezekiel has it in these words, speaking to Jerusalem; Behold, Ezekiel. 16.
49, 50.
the was the Iniquity of thy Sister Sodom, Pride, Fullness of Bread and A
undance of Idleness was in her and her Daughters; neither did she strengthen
the Hand of the Poor and Needy, and they were Haughty, and committed
Abomination before me; therefore I took them away, as I saw good. And it is
very Remarkable, that the Voluptuou^ness of the Israelites was joined with
their Idolatry. It is said, that when Moses was in the Mount, the People
Impatient of his Stay sat down to Eat and to Exodus 32.
Drink, and rose up to Play: they had got a Calf of Gold, and were Dancing
about it. But it was a Dismal Ball, and they paid dear for their Junket; for
several Thousands were Slain: and it is said, That God Plagued the People.
Job's Children had as Ill Success in their Festivals, they went from Job 1.
House to House Eating and Drinking; and a Tempest rose, and smote the Four
Corners of the House and Killed them. But most express is that Complaint of God
by the Mouth of the Prophet Amos against the Voluptuous Jews: Ye that put so
far away the Evi Day, and cause the Seat of Violence to come near; that lie
upon Beds of Ivory and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and eat the Lambs
out of the Flock, and Calves out of the midst of the Stall. That Chant at the
Sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of Music like David:
that drink Bowls of Wine and anoint Amos 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and chapter 8. 10.
themselves with the chief Ointments; but they are not grieved for the
Affliction of Joseph. Therefore now shall they go Captive with the First that
go Captive, and the Banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed.
And I will turn your Feasts into Mourning, and all your Songs into Lamentation;
and I will make the End thereof as a bitter Day.

I shall Sum up these Excesses, and Conclude the Instances with the Story of
Dives, more commonly known, then reverently believed: It is delivered to us by
the Great Lord of Truth in these Words. There was as Certain Rich Man, which
was clothed in Purple and Fine Linen, and fared Sumptuously every Day. And
there was a Certain Beggar, named Lazarus, which Luke 16. 19 -- 26.
was laid at his Gate full of Sores, and de^iring to be fed with the Crumbs,
which fell from the Rich Man's Table: moreover the Dogs came, and licked his
Sores. And it came to pass, that the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels
into Abraham's Bosom. The Rich Man also died and was buried: And in Hell he
lift up his Eyes, being in Torments, and sees Abraham afar off and Lazarus in
his Bosom. And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his Finger in water, and cool my Tongue,
for I am Tormented in this Flame. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in
thy Lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus Evil things; but
now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And besides all this, between us
and you there is a Great Gulf fixed, so that they which would pass from hence
to you, cannot, neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence.

This Great Passage comprehends the State of Men in both Worlds; it shows to
us, what that Life is in this World, which leads to Misery in the Next, and
what to Happiness. No Sensual Man, no Voluptuous Person, not those that deck
themselves with Delicate Apparel, and fare Sumptuously every Day, that love
their Back and their Belly more then God and the Poor, shall be received into
Abraham's Bosom, or dwell in Blessedness forever; let none deceive themselves,
the Jealous God will not be mocked: If ye Sow to the Flesh, ye shall reap
Corruption; but if ye sow to the Spirit, ye shall reap Life Everlasting. They
that live in Pleasures, Kill the Just, they Crucify the Just Witness in
themselves: such Treasure up wrath against the Day of Wrath. Woe, Anguish and
Tri^ulation to every Soul that does Evil, whether Jew or Gentile, Professor or
Profane, Christian or Infidel: For the Dives's under all these Names must be
turned into Hell; but such as through Patience and Well-doing wait for
Immortality, as poor Lazarus did, after all their Poverty, Neglect and Hunger
shall receive Glory, Honor and Eternal Life. And truly, it is some Comfort to
the Miserable in this World, that they shall not live always in it, and that
they have to do with a God, who is no Respecter of Persons: This Judge is
impartial; the Poor are upon Even Terms with the Rich; and it will not be
Quality, but Integrity; not Riches but Righteousness, which will recommend us
to him. No wonder then, if the Prophet Jeremiah in the Name of God, charged the
Ancient Jews Not to go into the House of Feasting; and that Ecclesiastes should
say, That it is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to the House of
Feasting, since so many Evils follow it. But there is one Feast, that even
Christ himself allows us; though I have little Reason to believe, it will be
Imitated, when I consider the Natural Aversness, that is even among Professed
Christians to his Self-denying Precepts and Example. Then said Jesus, When thou
make Luke 14. 12, 13, 14.
a Dinner or a Supper, call not thy Friends or thy Brethren, neither thy
Kinsmen nor thy Rich Neighbors, lest they also bid thee again, and a
Recompense be made thee (This would beget Feasting, the thing which is to be
avoided: no such matter.) But when thou make a Feast, call the Poor, the
Maimed, the Lame, the Blind, and thou shall be Blessed, for they cannot
recompense thee; but thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just.
There are few, that strive to obey this Counsel; there is so little of Fashion
or of Interest in it. What! Persons of Quality feast the Poor? Carve for the
Maimed, and feed the Blind? it is too Mean, too Ignominious: If they have the
Bones, the Scraps, the Crumbs, it is well: No, no, this Doctrine is too like him,
that taught it, to be practiced by them that are so Unlike him; they that
follow him in these things, must Take up the Cross, Despise the Shame, and Sow
in Hope: But because there is an Everlasting Recompense for those that do; I
fervently desire of God, that it would please him to put it into the Minds of
both Magistrates and People to Love Mercy, Do Justice, Walk humbly with the
Lord, and Meekly and Charitably toward all men. I beseech you in the Tender
Bowels of a Christian Man to consider of the Present Conjuncture: is this a
Time for Feasts and Reveils, Plays and Pastimes, when the very Wrath of God
seems to hang by a slender Thread over our Heads? O! let your Moderation be
known unto all men, now the Lord is so near at hand.

And I do humbly pray the Supreme Authority of this Land, to put a speedy Check
to these Exorbitances, to Discountenance these Excesses by the Revival of those
Old Laws, and in making of such New Ones, as may be thought convenient to
prevent such Pride and Prodigality. For I think, I may both with Modesty and
Truth affirm, if the very Unnecessary Expenses of most Ranks or Degrees in this
Kingdom could be brought into one Public Purse, they would arise to Three
Times more Money, than either is given or is requisite to the Maintenance of
the Poor that are in it: and whether this be a thing Practicable or no, it
matters not; the very Preventing of that Excess, which is amongst us, will be
pleasing to Almighty God, and one Way or other Beneficial to the Government.

It may not be improper for me here to add by way of Appendix to this Head of
Excess the Sin of GAMING, an Invention of much Mischief in the World, and
therefore inconsistant both with Christianity and Civil Government. The Evils
that attend it, are neither small nor few: It is First a Great Enemy to
Business, and that Just Care, that people ought to have for the Discharge of
their Respective Capacities in their Civil Affairs. Next, It is one of the
Greatest Thieves to Men's Estates: Many brave Families have been ruined by a
Gamester: That which has been got by the Care and Prudence of a Father, it may
be has been lost in one Night by the Extravagant Humor of a Son: But that the
Reward of Virtue should be the Stake of Folly, and the Acquest of Worthy
Ancestors exposed to the Chance and Hazard of the Die, is such Impiety to God's
Providence, Ingratitude to Parents, Injury to their own Families and Disgrace
to the Government, that I conceive, it may very well deserve the Care of our
Superiors, to prevent that Extravagancy for the future. Thirdly, It is a great
Consumer of Time. They who are addicted to Gaming, are the most Idle and
Useless people in the Government; and give me leave to say, that men are
Accountable to the Government for their Time: there ought to be no Idleness in
the Land; for that End Bridewels are provided. Of many other Sins people are
Weary, but of this never, unless to Sleep, or Eat, or for Want of Money to
Play: We are commanded to Redeem the Time, because the Days are Evil; but
these people choose rather to Lose their Time, and fall into the Evil, they
should avoid. A Gamester and a Christian are as opposite as a Saint and a
Sinner; for the Christian looks to God in the increase of his Estate, the
Gamester to Skill and Chance; and there is no more of God in his Mind, than
there is in his Game: and it cannot be otherwise. Fourthly, Therefore Gaming
deserves to be suppressed, because it has been the Occasion of Breach of
Friendship, Quarrels, Bloodshed and Murder: if we ought to shun the Occasions
of Evil, to be sure we ought not to indulge them.

The Last Mischief that belongs to Gaming (which I shall mention at this time)
is the Horrid OATHS and Passionate Imprecations used by the generality of
Gamesters; but because they are not confined to Gaming, but run through the
whole Conversation of men, they may very well challenge a place among those
FourCrying Sins, that I found my self Obliged in Conscience to Complain of to
such, as have Power in their Hands to punish and suppress them. I have
therefore reserved to speak of Oaths and Blasphemies till last, because I take
them to be the most Provoking Sin. The other Enormities of Drunkenness,
Whoredom and Excess in Apparel, Furniture, Feastings and Gaming do more
immediately relate to our selves; and are therefore Sins against God, because
they are a Transgression of that Order, which he has placed in the Nature of
things: but Oaths and Blasphemies must be referred to God himself; they are
Sins committed more immediately against his Being, his Name, and the Majesty
and Dignity of his Nature. It is Horrible to hear, how he is called upon about
every thing, be it never so Trivial; yea, about nothing, and worse than
nothing. He is Summoned at their Games, their Sports, their Obscenities, in
their Drunkenness, Whoredoms, Murders, Rapines and Treachery: there is a
Generation that cannot speak without him, though they live without him; They
would make him a Voucher of all their Falsehood and a Witness for their Lies, as
often as they would have them believed. But I tremble to Remember, with what
Presumption some Men, when transported into Rage, Invoke him to Damn those,
they are Angry with, yea, themselves too! and how Impiously they send him at
their pleasure upon the Errands of their Vengeance! Can there be greater
Blasphemy, then to dare so much as to think, that the Holy, Wise and Just God
should be the Executioner of their Passion, and Fury, and the Avenger of their
Malice and Corrupt Interests! And it is Observable, that if in any thing they
are Crossed or Disappointed, they fall a Swearing, Cursing, Damning,
Blaspheming, as if the Name of God should make them Satisfaction; and that it
were a Sort of Ease to them, to deliver themselves of a Burden of Oaths.

But that which aggravates this Evil, is the Impudence of the people that
commits it: they are not Contented to use it at Home and at Alehouses and
Taverns abroad; but in the open Streets, Markets and Fairs, in the most
Notorious Places of Commerce and Traffic, to the Dishonor of God, the Grief
and Offense of Sober Men, and the Bad Example of those that are not so. But
this Shameful Impiety ends not here; it has not only prevailed with the
Popula^^, the Cannale, the Vulgar; but the Men of Quality, the Gentry and the
Nobles of the Realm, to whom God in his Providence has been more Propitious
placing, them at the Distance of Example and Imitation to the Multitude. Even
those, that ought to be the Heads of our Tribes the Leaders of the people,
whose Virtue should at least keep Pace with their Quality, are guilty with this
Base Custom; and too many of them more concerned in it, than the Meanest of the
People. And to carry this Practice to the Utmost Hight of that Mischief it
seems Capable of doing, but too many (God knows!) of those in Authority use it,
even the Men, that by Law should suppress it! And if Men of Office and Power
ought in their several Trusts to be a Terror to Evildoers, methinks, they
should not suffer the Name of the God of the Nation (whom they pretend to
worship) to be so profanely used and blasphemed; and least of all, that they
should be the Men themselves, that Commit the Enormities, they should punish.
To say Truth (and with Grief of Soul I speak it) so Universal is this Contagion
in the Kingdom, that not only the Youth, but the Children are infected: The
Boys of seven Years Old, that in my time did not think upon an Oath, are now
full of their God-damnyou's and God-damn-me's at their Sports and Plays! And
the Women of our Nation (especially those of any Rank) who by a Reserved
Education and the Modesty of their Sex were scarcely ever heard to Curse even
what they did not like, (much less to Swear upon Ordinary Occasions) are some
of them grown Hardy enough to do Both. At whose Door must all these Mischiefs
lie? I beseech God to put it into the Hearts of our Superiors, to Use their
Utmost Diligence, to rebuke and suppress this and the like Impieties!

We profess our selves to be Christians, Followers of that JESUS, in whose
Mouth no Guile was ever found, what Precept did he ever give us? what Example
has he left us to Countenance this Practice? It Is true, he Charged his
Disciples, Not to Swear at all; but we cannot think our selves to Obey him,
when we Swear at Every thing? pray consider the great Difference there is
betwixt Christ and such Christians. Christ is Lord of a more Perfect Law, than
that which came by Moses, that admits of Oaths in some Cases; but they were
Few, and must be kept upon great Penalties: This New Law of JESUS takes away
Oaths by taking away the Cause and Need of them, namely, Falsehood and Distrust;
and by planting Plainness, Truth and Integrity in the Natures of Men, which
makes them such Faithful Disciples to him, and so entirely Brethren to one
another, that there seems no farther Use for Oaths among Men under that
Qualification. Ye have heard of Old Time (says Christ Jesus) [that Men should:
Swear: not when they please, nor yet Swear Vainly? No such matter: What then?]
Thou shall not For-swear thy self, but Perform thy Vows unto the Lord: This was
thus far Good; it was the Perfection of the Law. So it was Not to Kill, Not to
Commit Adultery; but Christ Jesus carries it higher: Thou must not be Angry;
Thou must not look upon a Woman to lust after her; Thou must not Swear at all:
Thou must not do that, which was Mat. 5.
Allowed or Dispensed with under the Law. For what the Law could not do through
Weakness, I am come to do: Therefore let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay,
Speak Truth; what is more, is Needless, nay, it is Evil. This is the Doctrine of
Jesus: Certainly then there can be no Agreement between him and the Swearing,
Damning Christians of this Age, who are so far from Obeying him, whose Name
they take, that they are not come to the Righteousness of the Law, that
condemns all Vain Swearing: but lie under the Heavy Judgment of the Lord for
the Breach of his Third Commandment, [ Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord
thy God in Exodus 20. 7.
vain: for the Lord will not hold him Guiltless, that takes his Name in vain.]
It is esteemed a Profanation of things set apart for Divine Worship, to employ
them in our Common and Ordinary Services; and is it not Profanation with a
Vengeance, to suffer the Name of the Great God to be prostituted at Every Turn
by Lewd and Debauched people? Can we be so Careful of our own Names, and so
Careless of Gods? Is it Possible, that we can be so Tender of our selves, and
so Unconcerned for him? for him, I say, who Made us, and gives us Life, Breath,
and Being, to whom we Owe our selves, and all that we are. But that Men to
Right themselves, upon every little Affront should oppose their Lives to Utmost
Peril, and not find in their Heart so much as to Rebuke the Indignities daily
put upon Heaven, is an Ill Proof of Zeal and Religion. But as Insensible as
such are of their Duty, God is not wanting to his own Glory: he has forbidden
these thihgs; let Men disobey at their Peril. Ye shall not Swear by my Name
falsely; says God, neither shall thou Profane the Name of thy God, I am the
LORD. Hear O ye Swearers, the Judgment of God has denounced against you! Every
One that Swears shall be Cut off, [how Cut off?] FROM GOD: Again, The Land is
full of Adulteries; and Jer. 23. 10, 19. Zach. 5. 3
because of Swearing the Land Mourns: Behold! the Whirlwind of the Lord
shall heavily fall upon the Head of the Wicked.

To this I shall add a Brief Reflection upon that Pernicious Sin of
PROFANENESS so near a kin to Oaths and Blasphemy. Such is the Degeneracy of
the Age we are fallen into, that Profaneness does not only go Unpunisht, but
boldly lays Claim to Wit, and fills the Conversation of too many of those, that
think themselves raised above the Genius of the Vulgar. He is reputed Formal,
that will not be Rude to Sacred Things; and a Man Insipid, of no Sense or Salt,
who cannot Jeer Devotion: And which is strange, they make the Bible a sort of
Common Place; but it is for Mockery, not for Piety. The Phrases they use, are
picked to Abuse that Holy Book; and that Profaneness is placed to the Account
of Wit: But truly, if Men must Rallie Religion at the Peril of passing else for
Fools, and Abuse Scripture to purge themselves from the suspicion of
Reverencing it, there is here an Unhappiness in being Conscientious, and on the
side of this World the Temptation to be Profane, is stronger than the
Encouragement to be Virtuous. For this is my Soul grieved, that Men should use
their Wit to Abuse him, that gave it them: and that though there is more to be
said for Religion, than there can be said against it, both with Respect to its
Reasonableness and Usefulness, and that the Hazard of being Irreligious, is
incomparably greater on the part of these Atheistical Scoffers, than of Men
professing to fear God and believe another World; they would yet be so Constant
and Obstinate in their loose and lewd Conversation! But if the Profaning of
the least thing, that was Dedicated to the Worship of God in the Times of the
Law, was so Heinous a Sin; what should we say, when men ^tick not to Profane
the Name of God himself, and scoff at his Revealed Will, so much Greater, than
either Temple, or Altar, or any of those Rites belonging unto them!

And to you all, that live in the Practice of these Crying Sins I have at this
time insisted upon, this I say unto you in the Fear of God: REPENT OF THE EVIL
OF YOUR DOINGS! Bring not down the Judgments of God upon this Land; they may be
the Affliction of many, but they will be your Punishment: ye shall pay the
Reckoning of their Sufferings in the other World, and God will charge you with
the Calamity that they shall Endure! Remember, before it is too late. Dreadful
Things are denounced against the Wicked; Therefore go not on to Gratify your
Hearts Lusts and to forget the Living God; for this shall be the End of such
Works, that God will certainly bring you to Judgment: And who may Abide the Day
of that Coming? and who shall Eccles. 11. 9.
stand when he appears? No Flesh can stand in his Presence. Consider the
Awakening Saying Mal. 3. 2.
of the Apostle, That the Righteous scarcely are saved; and if so, Where shall
the Ungodly, where shall the Wretched Sinner appear? How shall such be able to
hold up their Heads in the Day of his Wrath, in the Hour of his Judgment, at
that Great Time of Reckoning, when a Final Account shall be past, when all must
render an Account of the Deeds they have done, and receive the Reward due unto
them? Therefore while it is to day, harden not your Hearts against God and his
Law: flatter not your selves; To be Christians, ye must be like Christ: and if
ye will be Saved from Wrath, ye must be Redeemed from Sin. Increase not
therefore Guilt upon your Consciences by Rebelling against the Light, that
shines in them: but lay your Impieties to Heart, mourn with true Contrition of
Soul, and yet love Righteousness, and hate Iniquity; and ye will prevent the
Civil Magistrate, and probably avert the Indignation of God, that hangs over
the Nation.

Having thus ended my Reflections upon the Five great Crying Sins of the
Kingdom, and my Reproof of the Actors and Promoters of them; give me leave to
make my Humble and Christian Address to you, that are in Authority. And in the
First place, I beseech you to remember, that though ye are as Gods on Earth,
yet ye shall Dye like Men; that ye are Encompassed with like Passions, and are
subject to Sin. Such therefore of you, as may be concerned in any of these
Enormities (to whatever Degree of Guilt it be) I beg you in the Name of God to
search your selves, and to be Just to your own Souls. O! let the Mercies and
Providence of God constrain you to Unfeigned Repentance! Turn to the Lord,
Love Righteousness, Hate Oppression, and he will turn to you, and love you and
bless you.

In the Next place, be pleased to consider your Commission and examine the
Extent of your Authority: ye will find, that God and the Government has
empowered you to punish these Impieties: and it is so far from being a Crime,
that it is your Duty. This is not troubling Men for Faith, nor perplexing
People for Tenderness of Conscience: for there can be no Pretense of Conscience
to be Drunk, to Whore, to be Voluptuous, to Game, to Swear, Curse, Blaspheme
and Profane; no such Matter: these are Sins against Nature and against
Government, as well as against the Written Laws of God. They lay the Ax to the
Root of Humane Society, and are the Common Enemies of Mankind: 'twas to prevent
these Enormities, that Government was instituted; and shall Government Indulge
that, which it is Instituted to Destroy? this were to render Magistracy
Useless, and the Bearing of the Sword Vain: there would be then no such thing
in Government, as A Terror to Evildoers; but every one would do that which he
thought Right in his own Eyes. God Almighty defend us from this Anarchy!

There are Three Great Reasons, which enforce my Supplication. The First is,
The Preservation of the Government, which by such Improvidence and Debauchery
is like to be greatly Weakened, if not Destroyed. The Industry, Wealth, Health
and Authority of the Nation are Deeply concerned in the Speedy and Exemplary
Punishment of these Extravagancies. This is the Voice of Interest for the
Common Good of the Whole Society, Rulers and Ruled.

But there is an Higher Voice, unto which Christian Men ought to have Regard,
and that is the Voice of God, who requires us to Fear him and obey his
Righteous Commandments at the Peril of making him our Enemy, whom we should
make our Common Friend and Protector; for upon his Goodness depend our very
Natural and Civil Comforts. So that it is our Interest To be Good: and that is
none of the least Arguments for Religion, that the Piety and Practice of it is
the Peace and Prosperity of Government; and consequently, that Vice, the Enemy
of Religion, is at the same time the Enemy of Humane Society. Who then should
be more concerned for the Preservation of Virtue, than Government? who in its
Abstract and True Sense is not only founded upon Virtue, but without the
Preservation of Virtue it is impossible to maintain the Best Constitution, that
can be made. And however some particular Men may prosper, that are Wicked, and
several private Good Men Miscarry in the things of this World (in which sense
things may be said to happen alike to all, to the Righteous as to the Wicked)
yet I dare boldly affirm (and challenge any Man to the Truth of the thing) that
in the many Volumns of the History of the Ages and Kingdoms of the World there
is not one Instance to be found, where the Hand of God was against a Righteous
Nation, or where the Hand of God was not against an Unrighteous Nation? and
where a Just Government perish't, or an Unjust Government long prosper'd?
Kingdoms are rarely as Short lived as Men, yet they also have a Time to Die:
but as Temperance gives Health to Men, so Virtue gives Time to Kingdoms; and
as Vice brings Men betimes to their Grave, so Nations to their Ruin: It Is the
Reason given by God himself for the Destruction of those Countries, that he
gave into the Hands of the Children of Israel; They were Full of Uncleanness,
Adulteries, Fornication and other Impieties. And though he is Sovereign Lord of
the World, and may dispose of the Kingdoms therein as pleases him (for he that
gives, can take away; and he that builds, can cast down: and Mankind is but a
Tenant at Will to receive or surrender at his Lord's Good Pleasure;) yet he
uses not that Prerogative to Justify his Gift of those Countries to the Jews:
but at the End of his Prohibition of Unlawful Marriages and Unlawful Lusts he
charges them in these words; Defile not you your selves in any of these things:
for in all these the Nations Levit. 18. 24, 25, 26, 28.
are defiled, which I cast out before you; And the Land is defiled: therefore
do I Visit the Iniquity thereof upon it; and the Land it self VOMITETH OUT her
Inhabitants. Ye shall therefore Keep my Statutes and my Judgments, and shall
not Commit any of these Abominations, neither any of your own Nation, nor any
Stranger, that sojourneth among you; that the Land Spue not you Out also, when
ye defile it, as it Spued Out the Nations, that were before you.

So Readiness Disobedience was his Destruction, and his Sin made Way for David's
Title: Saul died (says the Sacred Story) for his Transgression; this made the
Philistines Conquerors: his own Sins Beat him and Killed him. Saul died for his
Transgression; then if he had not sinned, he had lived; he had beaten his
Enemies and kept the Kingdom? yes, the place implies it. This then should deter
all Men, but Kings especially, who have so much to lose here, and so much to
answer for hereafter. But what was Readiness Sin? It was First, not keeping, but
disobeying the Word of the Lord, both as it came by the M^^th of Samuel, God's
Prophet, and as it spoke the Mind of God to him in his own Conscience (for
Moses had said before, that the word of God was nigh in the Heart, and in God's
Name commanded the Children of Israel to Obey and Do it:) In short, he refused
the Counsel of God, and God for his Counselor. For in the Next place he
betakes himself to One that had a Familiar Spirit, for Advice (says the Story)
He enquired not of the Lord, therefore he Slew him and turned the Kingdom unto
David. There are too many people troubled with Familiar Spirits; it were well,
if they were less Fami^iar with them: Had Saul trusted in God, he needed not to
have been driven to that Straight; He that was made King by God's Appointment
and endued with a Good Spirit, so basely to degenerate, as to run to a witch
for Counsel! To this Darkness and Extremity Iniquity will bring Men. And truly,
a Woe follows all such persons; answerable to that Expression of God by the
Prophet: Woe unto them that take Counsel, and not of me. when Saul (says the
place) was little in his own Eyes, God honored him; he made him Head and King
of the Tribes of Israel: but when Saul grew 1 Samuel 15, 17.
Proud, God deserted him and for his Disobedience destroyed him. And what
befell the Family of Saul, in some After-Ages befell both Kings and People, and
Worse; for their Land was Invaded first by the Egyptians, and then by the
Caldeans and Babilonians: Their Temple was rifled, their Treasures taken, and
their Kings, Princes, Nobles, Artificers, and Mighty Men of Valor 2 Kings 24.
14.
(yea all, save the Poorest of the people) were killed or carried away Captive
by the King of Babylon. The Reason rendered is this: Because the Kings did that,
which was Evil in the sight of God, and stifned their Necks, and hardened their
Hearts from turning unto the Lord God of Israel; and because the Chief of the
Priests and of the People transgressed very much after all the Abominations of
the Heathen: 2 Chro. 36.
and when God sent his Messengers to Reprove and Warn them (and that out of his
Great Compassion;) they Wickedly Mocked his Messengers, Despised his Words and
Mis-used his Prophets, till his Wrath came upon them.

I will here End my Instances out of Sacred Story: and let us now briefly
Consider, what the Histories of other places will tell us; that we may Observe
some Proportion of Agreement in the Providence of God throughout the World.

The First Empire had Nimrod's Strength, and the Wisdom of the Caldeans to
establish it; and whilst their Prudence and Sobriety lasted, they prosper'd: No
sooner came Voluptuousness, then the Empire decayed; and was at last by the
Base Effeminacies of Sardanapalus (in whom that Race ended) transferred to
another Family. It was the Policy of an Assyrian King to subdue the Strength of
Babylon (then under good Discipline) not to Invade it with Force, but to
DEBAUCH it. Wherefore he sent in Players, Musicians, Cooks, Harlots, etc. and
by those means introducing Corruption of Manners, there was little more to do,
than to take it. Nebuchadnezzar by his Virtue and Industry seen in the Siege of
Tire and in many Great Enterprises, recovered and enlarged the Empire; and his
Discipline (those Times considered) was so Excellent, that it was praised in
Scripture. But when he grew Proud and Foolish, forgetting that Providence, that
had shown itself so kind to him, he became a Beast and grased amongst Beasts;
till God, whom he had forgotten, had restored him the Heart of a Man and his
Throne together.

He dying left Evil-Merodach Heir to his Crown, not his Conduct, nor the
Knowledge of what God had done by him: In his Time Pride and Luxury increased,
but came not to its full Pitch, till the Reign of Belshazzar, who did not only
as Nebuchadnezzar, live, but dye a Beast. In him we have the Exact Example of a
Dissolute and Miserable Prince; he thought to fence himself against Heaven and
Earth, dissolved in Pleasures he worshipped no other God: His Story may make us
well Conclude, that God and Man deserts those, that desert themselves, and
neglect the Means of their own Preservation. The City was taken before he knew
it, and the Sword almost in his Bowels, before he believed it: his Sensuality
had wrapped him up in such a Desperate Security. But he fell not by the Hand of
one like himself; God, who had determined the End, prepared the Means. Cyrus
and his Persians were the Men: the people were Poor, Inh^biting a Barren
Country; but Hardy and of Sober Manners. Cyrus God had endued with Excellent
Natural Qualities, cultivated (as Story tells us) by the Care of Four of the
Most Temperate, Just and Wise Persons of those Times: this was he, whom God
honored with the Name of his Shepherd, and was the Executioner of his
Vengeance upon the Assyrians. While he reigned, all was well, but after he and
his Virtuous Companions deceased, their Children fell into the Vices of the
Assyrians; and though they Reigned from the Indus to the Hellespont, they soon
became the Conquest of the Greeks.

Never was there a greater Instance given of the Weakness of Pomp and Luxury,
than in the Resistance made at Thermipoli, where 300 Virtuous Spartans
encountered the Vast Army of Xerxes, consisting of no less then Seventeen
Hundred Thousand Men. In short, the Defeats of Salamity and Platea, the
Expeditions of Xenophon with Cyrus the Younger almost into Babylon, and the
Wars of Agesilaus into Asia made it Evident, that Greece wanted only Union and
an Head, to make her self Mistress of that Vast Empire.

At last comes Alexander of Macedon, with the best Disciplined People that was
then known: The Dispute was short, where Steel was against Gold, Sobriety
against Luxury, and Men against (Men that were turned) Women. Thus the
Persians, prepared by their own Vices, God delivered into the Hands of the
Greeks, who as much excelled them in their Virtue, as they were short of their
Dominion and Wealth. But this lasted not long; for Ale ander, who died young,
survived his Virtue and Reputation by falling into those Vices of the Nations
God had given him Power to Trample under Foot; insomuch that he, who was before
Generous, became Barbarous and Tyrannical. Egypt, Asia and Macedon held up
their Heads a while; but not resisting the Torrent of Lewdness, that came upon
them, suffered themselves to be overwhelmed with Misery and Confusion.

Nor has this Calamity been peculiar to Monarchies; for several Republics have
fallen by the same Mischief. That of Lacedemon or Sparta, so Severe in her
Constitution, and so Remarkable for the Virtue of her People (and that for many
Ages) at last growing slack in the Execution of her Laws, and suffering
Corruption insensibly to Creep into her Manners, she became no more
Considerable, but Weak and Contemptible.

The same may be said of Athens, the Great School of Learning, and of all the
Republics of Greece most Famous for her Virtue and Philosophy (when that word
was understood not of Vain Disputing, but of Pious Living) she no sooner fell
into Luxury, but Confusion and Revolutions made her as Inconsiderable, as she
had been Great.

Rome, as she was the Greatest Commonwealth, so the greatest Example of
Gentiles in Virtue and Vice, in Happiness and in Misery: Her Virtue and
Greatness are Commemorated by Austin the Father, and the latter made the Effect
of the former. [God (says he) gave the Romans the Government of the World, as
a Reward for their Virtue.] Their Manners were so Good: and their Policy so
Plain and Just, that nothing could stand before them. And truly, they seemed to
have been employed by God to punish the Impious, and to instruct the Barbarous
Nations: and so very Jealous was she of the Education of her Youth, that she
would not suffer them to converse with the Luxurious Greeks. But Carelessness
with length of Time overcoming the Remarkable Sobriety of her Manners, who
before seemed Invincible, she falls into Equal, if not Greater Miseries, than
those that went before her (though she had not only Warning enough from those
Examples, but from Hannibal's Army and her great Enemy) For one Winter's
Quarter of Hannibal and his Army in the Luxurious City of Capua proved a
greater Overthrow to them, than all the Roman Consuls and Armies. They that had
been Victors in so many Battles, turned Slaves to Dancers, Boufoons, Cooks and
Harlots; so as from that time they never did any thing Suitable to the
Reputation gained by their Former Actions; but fell without much Difficulty
into the Roman Hands. Nay, not long before Rome her self encountered one of the
greatest Dangers, that ever had befallen her by the Corruption of her own
People, in the same Place, by the like Means: and though this Defection was
recovered by those that remained entire in their Manners; yet after the
Overthrow of Antiochus, Mithridates, Tygranes, that the Riches and Vices of
Asia came with a full stream upon them, the very Heart of the City became
infected: and the Lewd Asiaticks had this Revenge in their own Fall, that they
ruined by their Vices those they were no ways able to resist by their Force,
like the Story of the Dying Centaure. Thus Pride, Avarice, Luxury having
prepared Rome for Destruction, it soon followed. Virtue now grew Intolerable in
Rome, where Vice dared not for Ages to show its Face. The Worthiest Men were
cut off by Proscriptions, Battles or Murders, as if she resolved ipsam Virtutem
exscindere: She destroyed her own Citizens, and sent for Strangers to protect
her, which ruined her. Which proves, that the Kingdom or State, that under God
does not subsist by its own Strength, Prudence and Virtue, cannot stand; for
the Goths, Hunns and others despised to serve those, whom they excelled in
Power and Virtue, and instead of Guarding took their Dominion from them. And
truly, it might rather be called a Journey, than a Military Expedition, to go
and pillage Rome; so weak had her Vices made her: she that was feared by all
Nations, became the Prey of all Nations about her. Thus ended that Once Potent
and Virtuous Commonwealth.

The Vandals in Africa soon became Effeminate and Lewd; which brought upon
themselves speedy Ruin. The Goths set up a Powerful Kingdom in Spain and Part
of France; by the Sobriety of their Manners it flourished near Four Hundred
Years: but its End was not Unlike the rest. Two corrupt Princes Vuitza and
Roderic by their dissolute Example debauched the People, insomuch that men run
an Hazard to be Virtuous: This made their Destruction Easy to those, whom God
sent against them; which were the Mores, occasioned by the Last of these Kings
dishonouring Count Juliano' s Daughter. In the Time of his Calamity in vain did
he expect the Aid of those that had been his Flatterers, and the Companions of
his Vices: His Security (the Effect of his Luxury) was his Ruin. For whilst he
thought he had no body to Subdue, but his own People; by Abusing them he Cut
off his own Arms, and made himself an Easy Prey to his Real Enemies: And so he
perished with his Posterity, that had been the Cause of the Mischief, which
befell that Great Kingdom. However, so it came to pass, that the Remainder of
the Goths mixing with the Ancient Spaniards (to that Day distinct) recovered
the Liberty and Reputation of the Kingdom by an Entire Reformation of Manners
and a Virtue in Conversation as Admirable, as the Vices, by which their Fathers
had fallen, were Abominable. But the present impoverisht State of Spain can
tell us, they have not continued that Virtuous Conduct of their Ancestors: the
Increase of their Vices has decayed their Strength, lessened their People and
their Commerce.

But why should we overlook our own Country? that whether we consider the
Invasion of the Romans, Saxons or Normans, Neglect of Virtue and Good
Discipline (and the present Inhabitants giving themselves up to Ease and
Pleasure) was the Cause (if Gildas the Britain, and Andrew Horn may be
credited: for as the First bitterly Inveighed against the Looseness of the
Britains, threatening them with all those Miseries, that afterward followed;
so the Last tells us, that the Britains having forgotten God, and being
overwhelmed with Luxury and Vice, it pleased God to give the Land to a poor
People of the Northern Parts of Germany, called Saxons, that were of plain and
honest Manners.) God is Unchangeable in the Course of his Providence as to
these things; The like Causes produce the like Effects, as every Tree does
naturally produce its own Fruits. It Is true, God is not Careless of the World;
he feeds the young Ravens, clothes the Lillies, takes Care of Sparrows, and of
us, so as not an Hair of our Head falls to the ground without his Providence:
but if Men despise his Law, hate to be Reformed, spend their Time and Estate in
Luxury and persist to work Wickedness; he will visit them in his Wrath, and
consume them in his s^re Displeasure. To Conclude, Wars, Bloodshed, Fires,
Plunders, Wastings, Ravishments, Slavery and the like, are the Miseries that
follow Immoralities (the Common Mischiefs of Irreligion) the Neglect of Good
Discipline and Government. Nothing weakens Kingdoms, like Vice; it does not
only displease Heaven, but disable them. All we have said, proves it; but above
all the Iniquity and Voluptuousness of the Jews, God's Chosen, who from being
the Most Prudent, Pious and Victorious People, made themselves a Prey to all
their Neighbors. Their Vice had prepared them to be the Conquest of the First
Pretender; and thus from Freemen they became Slaves. Is God asleep, or does he
Change? shall not the same Sins have the like Punishment? at least, shall they
not be punished? Can we believe, There is a God, and not believe, that he is the
Rewarder as of the Deeds of Private Men, so of the Works of Government? ought
we to think him Careful of the Lesser, and Careless of the Greater? this were
to suppose, he minded Sparrows more than Men, and that he took more Notice of
Private Persons than of States. But let not our Superiors deceive themselves,
neither put the Evil Day afar off; they are greatly Accountable to God for
these Kingdoms. If every poor Soul must Account for the Employment of the small
Talent he has received from God, can we think, that those High Stewards of God,
the Great Governors of the World (that so often Account with all others) must
never come to a Reckoning themselves? yes; there is a Final Sessions, a General
Assize and a Great Term once for all, where he will Judge among the Judges, who
is Righteous in all his ways: There Private Men shall answer only for
themselves, but Rulers for the People as well as themselves. The Disparity that
is here, will be observed there: and the Greatness of such Persons, as shall be
then found Tardy, will be so far from Extenuating their Guilt, that it will
fling Weight in the Scale against them. Therefore give me leave (I do beseech
you) to be Earnest in my Humble Address to you; why should ye not, when none
are so much concerned in the Good Intention of it? Thus much for the First
Reason of my Supplication.

My SECOND Reason urging me to this Humble and Earnest Supplication, is the
BENEFIT of POSTERITY. I would think, that there are few People so Vicious, as
to Care to see their Children so; and yet to me it seems a plain Case, that As
we leave the Government, they will find it: If some Effectual Course be not
taken, what with Neglect and what with Example, Impiety will be entailed upon
our Children. Certainly it were better, the World ended with us, than that we
should transmit our Vices, or sow those Evil Seeds in our Day, that will Ripen
to their Ruin, and fill our Country with Miseries, after we are gone; thereby
Exposing it to the Curse of God and Violence of our Neighbors. But it is an
Infelicity we ought to bewail, that Men are Apt to prefer the Base Pleasure of
their Present Extravagancies to all Endeavors after a Future Benefit; which
besides the Guilt they draw upon themselves, our Poor Posterity must be greatly
injured thereby: Upon this Occasion I shall take the Freedom to say something
of Education.

The Truth is, we are so much out of Order in the Education of our Youth, that
I wish I could say, that we had only the Sin of Neglect to answer for: I fear,
the Care has rather been to Educate them in a Way of such Vanity, as ends in
great Inconveniences here, and must needs find Vexation of Spirit hereafter.
Our Universities have made more Loose, than Learned: and what Extravagancy is
begun there, is Usually perfected Abroad, or at our own Inns of Court at Home,
that now and then afford us a few Able Lawyers; but the Generality are like the
Man of Old, who returned home Seven times Worse than he went out. The Genius of
this Nation is not Inferior to any in the World; it is Industrious, it is Wise,
it is Honest, it is Valiant, yet Soft and Merciful. And (without Partiality) we
have had Men, that have excelled in Every Worthy Qualification: But I must
needs say, it has been more owing to the Goodness of God in the Disposition of
our Natures, than the Prudence and Care of those who had the Charge of their
Education. It was the Saying of a Wise Man; Train up a Child in the Way he
should go; and when he is Old, he will not depart Prove. 22. 6.
from it. This is proved to us every Day; but it is in the Wrong Way, in the
Way of Idleness, Wantonness and Impurity of Manners: it is worth While and High
Time to make the Experiment the other Way; to try, what the Suppression of Vice
and the Encouragement of Virtue will do? in this our Superiors must begin, and
give their Example, as well as show their Power. There is scarcely any one
thing, that so much needs the Wisdom of the Nation in the Contrivance of a New
Law, as the Education of our Youth, whether we consider the Piety or Prudence
of our Manners, the Good Life or Just Policy of the Government: There is such
an Example of what Industry may do, in the Practice of the Jesuits, that I hope
the Present Conjuncture will make the Proposal of the thing more Welcome to you.

That the Interest of the Jesuits is the Greatest in the Roman Church and
Empire, is so far from being doubted, that all Protestants Note, The Jesuits
Interest, the Greatest in the Roman Church.
wish, it were; it is our Trouble rather than our Scruple: it may be, some other
Orders are of the same Mind, being much Ecclipsed since the Rise of this Great
Interest. Ye know, they appeared about the time of the Reformation; and applied
themselves with all Conceivable Industry to secure the Tottering Papacy against
the Progress of it: In this Attempt they Ventured so much farther, than any of
their Predecessors in the Church; that they have been esteemed of Merit the
Great Ministers and Governors of the Chair for some Last Ages. Indeed, they
have almost Engrossed the whole Power of Church and State; to them all other
Orders seem but Small Retailers: their Great Politicians, their Philosophers,
Orators, Historians and Mathematicians are generally found amongst this
Society: so that we scarce see any thing of Note come out from Men of that
Religion, which is not subscribed E. S. J. The Fame and Apprehension of their
Extraordinary Learning, and the Arts they have to recommend it, have made their
Order the Choice of most Princes and Men of Quality of that Religion for the
Education of their Children, in whom they have Carefully instilled with their
Instructions and Principles that peculiar Respect to their own Society, as has
greatly served to the Advancement of it, when they have grown to Age and Power.

But that which above all other Stratagems has prevailed to extend their
Dominion in the Roman Church, has been their Erecting of Schools (where they
have Colleges) for the Free Education of Youth: The very Doing of it Gratis
makes it look like Charity with the Poor, that have little to give; and with
the Rich, that seldom love to part with Money, to be sure, it is no Objection.
Thus Obliging the Parents, they next fall to making themselves Grateful with
the Children: and here they Exercise not a little Skill. They Strictly Observe
the Diverse Humors and Dispositions of their Scholars, and take great Care not
to baulk their Capacity by Cross or Unsuitable Studies. But when once they are
fixed, every Youth according to his Genius it is not Easy to be believed, what
pains they take to Allure them to their Studies; how they will Tempt them with
Childish Rewards, and Excite them to their Book by raising an Emulation among
them: So that to Excel is more than a Rod; and Victory, than any Chastisement
whatever. By these Arts they fit all Capacities with Suitable Study, and
Cultivate them to the Pitch of Learning, they are Capable of; and all with that
Obligation upon the Youth to Love them; that from thence forward they become
Partial Devotees to the Advancement of the Honor and Interest of that Society.
To Conclude, they have got into their Hands the Education of the Generality of
the Youth of the Romish Religion in every Country, from the King to the
Peasant; and being Masters of them, when Boys, they turn Governors and
Confessors to them, when they are Men, so that all seem to have fallen into
their Hands, and being but one Entire Interest throughout the World, and
maintaining a most punctual Correspondence, they must needs have the Knowledge
and Disposal of the Affairs of States and Kingdoms by that Share, they have in
the Counsels of Princes, and that great Reliance that is upon their Judgment
and Ability. This, if we regard only the Romish Religion, shows great Wit,
Design and Industry: but if we consider well how Formidable these Arts render
them to Protestant Kingdoms, it will become us to use our utmost Prudence to
Secure our selves. And there seems not to me a more Effectual Remedy, than a
Wise and Virtuous Education of our Youth. In order to it let us improve Methods
not inferior to theirs, but for better Ends: Let us use our Skill to improve
the Childrens Natural Abilities to excite them to Virtue and Endear the True
Interest of their own Country to them. I will briefly set down, what at present
occurs to me as a good Way of Education.

(1.) First, Let Care be taken To breed up Youth in MORALITY: for Virtue
prepares the Mind, helps the Understanding and gives Industry to compass this.
Let no Books be used in Schools, in which there may be the least Indecency,
there were (and not without Reason) Ancient Canons against the Reading of such
Heathen Authors; and not a few Learned and Sober Men have rebuked that Practice
amongst us: It is an Affront to Christianity, yea, to our Natures, to fetch our
Wit or our Manners from them. It were well, if some Tracts of Moral Virtues and
Invectives against Vice were written in those Languages we would have Youth to
learn: for in such Discourses they might obtain Good Manners with the
Languages; whereas by tying up Schools to Heathen Authors, our Youth has
learned Base Obscenities and a Corrupt Conversation.

(2.) In the Next place, I would propose some of the easier Parts of
Mathematics and the Knowledge of Plants and Natural Bodies to be composed on
purpose after a Familiar Manner, that they may be Instituted in the Knowledge
of Nature, and learn Things at the same time they learn Words.

(3.) The Last Sort of Books, which I would recommend (and are in my Opinion
most suitable to their Maturity of Age and Understanding) are such as relate to
the Histories and Transactions of our own Kingdom; the Interest of the True
Protestant Religion and Civil Policy amongst us. But because there are very few
(if any) of these Discourses extant, it were Worth the Care of our Superiors,
and an Act deserving Praise, That some Skilful, Socer and Judicious Men were
set to work for the Composure of some small Tracts of this Nature; and as an
Appendix to the whole, that there might be a Summary of the Most Virtuous and
Infamous Actions of Former Times, with the Rewards and Punishments they have
received from God and Just Government: that by the Power of Example they may be
deterred from Vice, and provoked to an Honest Emulation of the Virtues and
Reputation of the Ancients.

(4.) In the Fourth place, Cross not the Genius of your Youth, Match their
Talents well; for if ye do not s^te their Studies to their Understandings, it
will be Drawing up Hill, Going against the Grain or Swimming against the Tide:
that which will be gained, will be little; and with so much Labor and Time
too, as will not quit Cost. It should be greatly the Care of those, who have
the Charge of Youth, to make the Ways of Learning Easy and Cheerful; which
leads me to --

(5.) My Last Observation: Let all Honest Arts be used by Masters of Schools to
provoke their Youth to Learning without much Fierceness or Beating: For that
Sort of Education has nothing of the Free and Generous Disposition in it; which
might be raised and improved in Youth by more Gentle and Reasonable Methods.
They that are taught to obey only for Base Fear, make that Fear and not Reason
the Rule of their Obedience; and this grows in too many with their Age, that
they turn mere Mercenaries and worship Violence. In short, Make Instruction
Easy, Correction Reasonable: Convince them of their Miscarriage with Mildness,
then Pardon them; and finally excite them to Amendment by Smiles and Favor.
This awakens the Noble Part and excites Youth to effect that, which may
ingratiate them with their Tutors; who, if they at any time commit an Error,
should rather show themselves affectionately Sorry for them, than bitterly
Angry. Plato being greatly displeased with his Servant, and going about to
Correct him, gave the Wand to one that stood by, saying: Do thou beat him; for
I am Angry. Chastizement should be used with Reason and Reluctance: a Discreet
and Cool Hand may direct the Blow right and hit the Mark; when Men of Fury
rather ease their Passion, than mend their Youth: especially, if the Correction
exceed the Fault; for that hardens: This very Bruitishness is more Injurious to
the Nature of our Youth, than usually their Instruction is beneficial.

Upon the whole Matter I take the Boldness to say, That if we would Preserve
our Government, we must endear it to the People. To do this (besides the
necessity of present Just and Wise things) we must Secure the Youth: and this
is not to be done but by the Amendment of the Way of their Education, and that
with all Conceivable Speed and Diligence. I say, the Government is Highly
obliged: it is a sort of Trustee for the Youth of the Kingdom, though now
Minors, yet will have the Government, when we are gone. Therefore depress Vice
and cherish Virtue, that through good Education they may become Good; which
will truly render them Happy in this World, and a Good Way fitted for that
which is to come. If this be done, they will owe more to your Memories for
their Education, than for their Being.

My THIRD and Last Reason for this Serious Supplication to the Civil Magistrate
is so Great, that I find Difficulty to express it: It Is the GLORY of that GOD,
that Made us, that has so often Delivered us, and does so plentifully provide
for us; who sent his Son into the World to Save us, and waits every Day to be
Good and Gracious to us. But he has so particularly and with that
Transcendency set the Marks of his Favor upon you, both in your Restoration
and Protection, as scarce any Age can parallel: O! Let a Steady Virtue be the
Return of these Mercies, and a Pious Care to Retrieve and Encourage Morality
(the very Basis of our Government) be the Humble Token of your Gratitude! It is
your Office; ye do but comply with the Reason of your own Institution: God
expects it and Good Men beseech it from you. There is much in your Power at
this time, to make this the ISLAND OF PEACE AND LASTING TRANQUILLITY. Lose not
the Present Opportunity: Revive the Laws against these Gross Iniquities;
terrify all Evildoers, Cherish them that do well. Provide for the Poor, that
their Stock may not be Abused, nor their Cries pierce Heaven against you
because of Neglect; and God may yet Vouchsafe to spare us.

Your Sins (said God of Old) have withheld Good Things from you: it is
Righteousness that exalts a Nation; but Sin is the Reproach of any people.
Would ye Prosper? then please God; and if ye will please him, ye must put away
the Wicked from amongst you. It was both his Complaint and the Cause of his
Judgment in Former Ages: There are found Wicked Men among my people, they lay
Wait, as he that sets Snares; they set a Trap, they catch Men: as a Cage is
full of Birds, so are their Houses full of Deceit. Therefore they are become
Great and waxen Rich; they are waxen Fat, they shine. They OVERPASS or OVERLOOK
the Deeds of the Wicked, they Judge not the Cause of the Fatherless; yet they
prosper. These were no Small Folks, but Men of Power, such as got largely by
the Government, and employed their Authority to Enrich themselves, and not to
relieve the Oppressed. I must needs say (and can with great Truth) That
Mis-government is the Occasion, though the Devil be the Cause of that Mischief
and Ruin, that attends Nations.

What Kingdoms has God destroyed, and Cities turned into Rubbish, because of
National Evils too much occasioned by the Remisness of Magistrates? the slack
Hand, that the Rulers of Israel held over that Unhappy people, made Way for
their Unsubjected Passions and Corrupt Affections to break out into most Vile
Impieties: but if Men shall be left to their own Licentiousness, to Commit Sin
with Greediness, and with Impunity both despise the Laws of God and Men, all I
can say is this; God, who is Jealous of his Glory, the Great Avenger of his Law
upon Rebellious Nations, will withold his Mercies, and hasten his Judgments
upon us!

Hear the Word of the Lord (said the Prophet Hosea) ye Children of Israel; for
the Lord has a Controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land: by Hos. 4. 1, 2,
3.
Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing and Committing Adultery they
break out, and Blood touches Blood; therefore shall the Land mourn. And by the
Prophet Malachi God threatens that people thus: I will come near to you, and I
will be a swift Mal. 3. 5.
Witness against Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against False
Swearers and such as fear not me, says the Lord of Hosts. Yea, to that Degree
was that Magistracy degenerated, that they thought it a Vain Thing to serve
God, to keep his Commandments: They called the Proud Happy; yea they that workt
Wickedness, were set up (they were Advanced to Places of Honor and Trust) and
they that tempted God, were delivered: But the Word of the Lord was unto them a
Reproach; they had no Delight in it: They made a Mock at Sin, laid Snares for
the Innocent, and (like us) made Men Offenders for a Word, for a good Word, a
Word of Reproof or an Harmless Opinion. Well but what followed? Shall I not
visit for these things, says the Lord? shall not my Soul be Avenged on such a
Nation as this? Truly, it is our very Case; the same Impieties are daily found
amongst us: Certainly God is offended, his Spirit grieved, and Heaven is set
against us. For the Lord's sake, Do your Duty in this present Conjuncture, and
mistake not your Measures: Let every thing have its Due Weight and Place with
you; that is the Way to Succeed. Ye are now Warmly concerned in the Discovery
and Prosecution of a Jesuitical Plot (a Design (it seems) to Destroy the King,
and blow up your Religion and Wrest the Government out of your Hands) in this
doubtless ye do well; and all Just Care to preserve the Peace of the Kingdom
from such Mischievous Conspiracies, is Most Commendable in you, and deserves
and draws all Due Acknowledgments from Honest and English Minds. But I beseech
you, Let God have a share in your Concern; Remember him as well as Your selves:
Ye confess, this Great Discovery is only owing to his Goodness; shall we be
then more Zealous for our own Safety, than for his Glory? who, when all is
done, must Save us or we are Lost. Let us make him our Friend, who is stronger,
than the Combinations of all our Enemies; and guard our selves against that
which can only bring their EVIL DEVICES to pass, OUR SIN: for that is their
Strength and the Poison of their Arrows; let us Confess and Forsake it; let us
Humble our selves under the Mighty Hand of God, that it may not Grind us to
Powder. And truly, if our hearts were not harder than Adamants this Testimony
he has given us of his Care over us (notwithstanding all our repeated
Provocations given him) should break us into deep Contrition. O! let his
Long-suffering prevail upon us to Unfeigned Repentance! then shall we stand
Clear Men before God; and if so, he will quickly make our Enemies to fly before
us. If there be any Truth in Sacred Story, any Credit to be given to Christian
Religion or the Experience of Ages, this, that I say of God and Government is
True; it is our Duty, yea, our Interest, the truest and easiest Way to Safety:
for God has decreed, The Nation and Kingdom, that will not serve him, shall
perish, yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted (Isa. 60. 12.) But Great is
their Peace, that Love this Law; It shall go well with the Righteous, but it
shall go Ill with the Wicked: upon them God has threatened to Rain Snares,
Difficulties, Perplexities; they shall not know, which way to turn. I am not
against the Use of Means: Men have not Wisdom and Power for nothing; but then
let them use them in the Fear and Name of God: Cursed is he that puts his
Strength in Man, and his Confidence in the Arm of Flesh. And in another place:
Woe to them, that go down to Egypt for Help, and stay on Horses and trust in
Chariots, because they are Isa. 31. 1, 3.
many; and in Horsemen, because they are very strong: but they look not to the
Holy One of Israel, neither seek the Lord. 'Twas his Reproof to the Nation that
professed him, That they should seek to the Stratagems, and rely upon the
Strength of Heathen Nations, rather than upon Faith in him, the Living God; and
the Reason he gives (in the third verse) is great, viz. The Egyptians are Men
and not God, and their Horses Flesh, and not Spirit: when the Lord shall
stretch out his Hand, both he that helps, shall fall, and he that is helped,
shall fall down, and they all shall fail together. If then the Hand of God be
so much stronger than Man, for the Lord's sake, let us lay hold of it; let that
fight our Battles and decide the Controversy: He that trusts to the Lord,
shall never be confounded. It was the saying of a Great King and a Great
Conqueror, By thee I have leaped over a Wall, by thee I have run through a
Troop, etc. who preserved the Israelites from Pharaoh's Fury, threw down the
Walls of Jericho, when the Priests blew or sounded the Rams-horns; with more of
the like kind. And we must not think, that God is altered, that Faith is
weakened, that no Wonders are reserved for the Latter and Christian Ages. The
Truth is, that Faith (generally speaking) is lost, and that holy Confidence now
a days is esteemed Presumption; it is become a Principle, that such things are
not to be expected: so that we shut up or bar from our selves the True and
most-Powerful Way of Deliverance. Let us not betake our selves to the Common
Arts and Stratagems of Nations Incredulous of the Strength of the God of
Israel, who is the God of True Christians too. O! that our Faith may be greater
than our Arms! no matter for the Strength of our Enemies, if God be our
Strength: and truly, it is vain to acknowledge a Providence in Humane Things,
and not to confide in him and rely upon him, that provides for us. I was Young
(said David) and now I am Old, but I never saw the Righteous forsaken, nor his
Seed begging Bread: It shall go well with the Righteous. Therefore fear God,
put away the Evil that provokes him, and trust not in Man, but in the Living
God; and it shall yet go well with England.

What Noble Feats did the, Ancients do by FAITH! and shall Christians have less
than Jews had? Is not God the same? yes; he is Un-Changeable: but Alas! we are
not the same; that is our Mischief. Christ did not many Mighty Works in some
places, because they believed not in him: if our Confidence be not in God, our
Hopes will prove Vain, and our Success will fail us. We shall but have MEN of
our side, not God; Flesh and not Spirit: and if we should be so Unhappy, as to
make this our Strength; both the Helpers and Helped will fall together. But let
Nineve teach us better things, and may her Zealous King be the Example of ours:
and let all the people say Amen! The Sutableness of which Story to our present
Occasion makes me choose to End this First Part of my Address with it.

For Word came unto the King of Nineveh; Yet Forty Days, and Nineve shall be
Overthrown. And he Arose from his Throne, and he laid his Robe from him, and
covered him with Sackcloth, and sat in Ashes. And he caused it to be
proclaimed and published through Nineve (by the Decree of the King and his
Nobles) saying; Let neither Man nor Beast, Herd nor Flock taste any thing; let
them not feed, nor drink Water. But let Man and Beast be covered with
Sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, LET THEM TURN EVERY ONE FROM HIS
EVIL WAY, and from the Violence, that is in their Hands. Who can tell, if
God-will turn and repent, and turn away from his Fierce Anger, that we perish
not. And God saw their Works, that they turned from their Evil Way; and God
repented from the Evil, that he had said, that he would do unto them, and he
did it not.

O God, thou that workest Wonders in the Earth, whose Power cannot be
Controlled, in whose Hands are the Souls of Men and the Spirits of all Flesh,
who can turn them in a Moment! Turn thou the Hearts of King and People unto
thee, and One unto another. Do thou proclaim a FAST FROM SIN throughout these
Sinful Kingdoms; let Wickedness and Oppression find no place among us. Turn
away thy Fierce Wrath, Wipe away our Reproach and Love us Freely, O God, for
thy dear Son' s sake!

THE SECOND PART OF THE Address to Protestants UPON THE Present Conjuncture.
HAving then finished the First Part of my Address relating to the Immoralities
of the Times, and left it with the CIVIL MAGISTRATE (as in Conscience I found
my self Obliged to do) whose Peculiar Charge it is, and (I Earnestly and Humbly
desire and pray, that it may be his) Great Care Effectually to Rebuke them; I
shall betake my self to the Second Part of this Address, that more immediately
concerns us as Professed Christians and Protestants. But before I begin, I desire
to premise (and can with much Sincerity Declare) that I intend not the Reproach
of any Person or Party: I am weary with seeing so much of it in the World: for
it gains nothing, that is worth keeping; but hardens to a Desperateness, what
it is our Duty to endeavor to soften. But if without Offense I may speak the
Truth, that which to the best of my Understanding tends to the Present
Settlement and Future Felicity of my Poor Country; I shall (by God's Help)
deliver my self with that Modesty, Plainness and Integrity, that becomes a Real
Christian and a True Englishman.

Those Capital Sins and Errors, that relate to the ECCLESIASTICAL STATE or
Church-Capacity of these Kingdoms, and which are so Inconsistant with Christian
Religion and purest Protestancy, and that above all displease Almighty God, are
--

First, Making Opinions Articles of Faith, at least giving them the Reputation
of Faith, and making them the Bond of Christian Society.

Secondly, Mistaking the Nature of True Faith, and taking that for Faith, which
is not Gospel-Faith.

Thirdly, Debasing the true Value of Morality under pretense of Higher Things,
mistaking the very End of Christ's Coming.

Fourthly, Preferring Humane Authority above Reason and Truth.

Fifthly, Propagating Faith by Force and Imposing Religion by Worldly
Compulsion.

These I take to be those Church Evils, that have too much infected even these
Parts of the (reputed) Reformed World. And though the Roman Church for the most
part has transcended all other Societies in these Errors (and may in a sense
be said to be the Mother of them, She from whom they took Birth, by whom they
were brought forth and propagated in Christendom) yet there has not been that
Integrity to the Nature of Christianity, and First Reason of Reformation from
Papacy in our own Country, as had been and is our Duty to conserve.

First, In that Opinions pass for Faith, and are made Articles of Faith and
enjoined to be embraced as the Bond of Communion.

That this is so, let us take the most impartial View we can, and we shall find
it to be true, both of the National and many other Select Societies. That I may
be understood in the Signification of the word OPINIONS, I explain it thus:
Opinions are all those Propositions or Conclusions made by Men Doctrines of
Faith and Articles of Communion, which either are not Expressly laid down in
Scripture, or not so evidently Deduceable from Scripture, as to leave no Reason
of Doubt in their Minds of the Truth of them, who sincerely and reverently
believe the Text: or lastly such, as have no New or Credible Revelation to
avouch them.

That this is our Case, let the several Confessions of Faith published by
almost every Party in England be perused, and ye will find such Propositions
translated into Doctrines of Faith and Articles of Communion, as are (First)
not only not Expressed in Scripture, but perhaps not Deduceable from Scripture.
If one Party may be but believed against another, this will want no Evidence to
prove the Point. And (in the Next place) such as are (though not Expressed, yet
it may be) Deduceable as to the Matter of them; but either carried so high,
spun so fine or so disguised by Barbarous School-Terms, that they are rather a
Bone of Contention, than a Bond of Concord to Religious Societies. Yet this has
been the Unhappiness even of this Kingdom after all the Light of Reformation,
which God has graciously sent amongst us, Men are to be received or rejected
for denying or owning of such Propositions. Will thou be an Episcopalian? then
Sign the Thirty-Nine Articles, Renounce the Covenant and Conform to the
Discipline and Jurisdiction of the Church. Will thou be a Presbyterian? Embrace
and Keep the Covenant, subscribe the Westminster-Confession and Directory: and
so on to the End of every Society, that grounds Communion upon Conformity to
such Propositions and Articles.

What a Stir have we had in England about the poor word (...)! He that says, it
signifies an Higher Office than (...), shall have no part or fellowship with
us: On the other hand, they that will debase Episcopos to Presbyteros and turn
Levellers of Episcopal Dignity, shall be Excommunicated, silenced, punished. Is
not this Fact? can any deny it, that love Truth more then a Party? The Fire
kindled by this Contention, has warmed the Hands of Violence: It had been
well, if Men had entertained Equal Zeal against Impiety, and been but half
as much Enemies to the Sin, as they have been against one another.

If we look a little back, we shall find, that the Debate of Free Will and
Unconditional Reprobation filled this Kingdom with Incharitableness and
Division. In the Arch-Episcopacy of Abbot (reputed in himself a Good Man) who
ever held, that Christ died so for all Men, that all men might be saved (if
they would accept the Means) and that none were absolutely decreed to Eternal
Reprobation; waa near akin to Heresy, and Excommunicated as an Enemy to the
Free Grace of God, which, it seems, lay in being Narrow.

In the time of Archbishop Land the Tide turns: those that hold an Absolute
Election and Reprobation without regard had to the Good or Evil Actions of Men,
and assert, that Christ only died for the Elect, and not for all; must be
discountenanced, displaced and pointed at as Men out of Fashion, though at the
same time Conscientious, Sober and (at worst) Mistaken, to be pitied rather
than prosecuted, and informed rather than confounded.

This Controversy begot the Synod of Dort: he that reads the Epistles of that
Judicious man J. Hails of Eaton upon the Matter and Conduct of the Assembly,
will find cause of being sad at Heart; too many of them talked of Religion
without the Spirit of it. Men perhaps Learned in Books, but few of the
Sticklers gave any great Testimony of their Proficiency in that Science, which
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated. This Flame
(kindled between Arminius and Episcopius, etc. for the Remonstrants; and
Gomarus, Sibrandus, etc. for the Predestinarians) distracted Holland not a
little, and had an ill Influence upon the Affairs of England, at least so far,
as concerned the Church. But the Mournfullest part of that History is, the Ill
Usage Martinius Cr^cius the Bishop of Landaff and others had: who though they
were acknowledged to be Sound in the Faith of those Times (which generally
followed the Judgment of Calvin, as to the mean points controverted) yet if at
any time they appeared moderate in their Behavior, gentle in their Words and
for Accommodation in some particulars with the Remonstrators or Free willers;
Gomarus and his Followers not observing that Gravity of the Assembly, the Rules
of Debate, and least of all the Meekness of Christian Communion, fell foul of
their Brethren, reproached their Tenderness, and began to fix Treachery upon
their Sober Endeavors of Accommodation; as if they intended to execute as well
as maintain their Reprobation, and blow up their Friends rather, than not
destroy their Adversaries.

But if we will yet rise higher in our Enquiry, and view the Mischiefs of
Earlier Times, the Fourth and Fifth Centuries after Christ will furnish us with
Instances enough. We cannot possibly forget the Heavy Life, some men made about
the Observation of Easter Day, as if their Eternal Happiness had been in
Jeopardy; for so far were they degenerated from the Love and Meekness of
Christianity, that about keeping of a Day (which perhaps was no part, but to be
sure, no Essential part of the Christian Religion) they fell to pieces,
reproached, reviled and hated one another. A Day was more than Christ, who was
the Lord and End of Days; and Victory over Brethren better, than the Peace and
Concord of the Church, the Great Command of Jesus.

But the Remarkable and Tragical Story of Alexander Bishop of Alexandria and
Arius his Priest, in their known Debate about the Nature and Existence of the
Son of God, with the lamentable Consequences thereof, (as all Writers upon that
Subject have related) witnesses to the truth of what I say. The Bishop's
Curiosity, and the Niceness of Arius, the Presumption of the one to expound
beyond the Evidence and Simplicity of the Text, and the Captious Humor of the
other, that would not bate the Bishop any thing for his Age or the Rank he held
in the Church; but Logically exacted the Utmost Farthing of the Reckoning,
began the ^ray. Which, as it became the Perplexity of Church and State some
Ages, so it raged to Blood; and those that had been persecuted like Sheep by
the Heathen not long before, turned Wolves now to each other, and made sport
for the Infidel, doing their work. Nay so much more Christian was Themistius
the Philosopher, that in his Oration (called CONSUL) he commended and advised
the Emperor Jovianus to Exercise Moderation, and to give that Liberty of
Conscience, which professed Christians refused to do to each other: who seemed to
think, they never did God better Service, than in Sacrificing one another for
Religion.

Did we duly reflect upon the Unnatural Heats, Divisions and Excommunications
among them, the many Councils that were called, the strong and tedious Debates
held, the Translations of Sees, the Anathemas, the Banishments, Wars, Sackings,
Fires and Bloodshed that followed this Unnatural Division, that sprang from so
nice a Controversy; one would verily believe no less, than that Religion it
self had been in Utmost Hazard: that Judaism or Paganism were overrunning
Christianity; and not, that all this Stir had been made about an Iota: For the
whole Question was, whether HOMOUSIA or HOMOIUSIA should be received for Faith?
in which the difference is but the single Letter [1] Certainly, we must do
Violence to our Understanding, if we can think, that these men were Followers
of that Jesus, that Loved his Enemies and gave his Blood for the World; who
hated their Brethren and shed one another Blood for OPINIONS: The
Heathen-Philosophers never were so Barbarous in their Differences.

But how easily might all these Confusions have been prevented, if their Faith
about Christ had been delivered in the words of Scripture; since all sides
pretend to believe the Text? and why should any man presume to be Wiser than
the Holy Ghost? It Is strange, that God and Christ should be wanting to express
or discover their own mind! or that the words used by the Holy Ghost, should
have that Shortness, Ambiguity or Obliquity in them, that our frail Capacities
should be needed to make them more Easy, Proper and Intelligible! But that we
should scarcely deliver any one Article of Faith in Scripture-Terms; and yet
make such Acts the Rule and Bond of Christian Communion, is in my Judgment an
Offense heinous against God and Holy Scripture, and very Injurious to Christian
Charity and Fellowship. Who can express any Man's mind so fully, as himself?
and shall we allow that Liberty to our 2. Pet. 1. 21.
selves, and refuse it to God? The Scriptures came not in Old time (said the
Apostle Peter) by the will of Man; but holy Men of God spoke, as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. Who can speak better or express the Mind of the holy
Ghost plainer, than the holy Ghost? the Scripture is the Great Record of Truth,
that which all these Parties in Controversy agree, to be the Declared Mind and
Will of God, they Unanimously say, It ought to be believed and professed as such.
If this be true, in what Language can we so safely and properly declare our
Belief of the Truths therein contained, orexpress those Truths, as in the very
Language of the Scripture?

And I cannot see, how those Persons can be excused in the Day of God's
Judgment, who make men Heter^dox or Heretical for refusing to subscribe their
Articles of Faith, that are not in Scripture-Terms, who at the same time offer
to declare their Belief of God, Christ, Spirit, Man's Laps or Fall, Repentance,
Sanctification, Justification, Salvation, Resurrection and Eternal Recompense
in the Language of Holy Scripture? It Is preposterous and a Contradiction, that
those, who desire to deliver their Faith of Truth in the Language of Truth,
should not be reputed True Believers nor their Faith admitted: for this were to
say, that therefore their Faith is not to be received, because it is declared
in the Language of that very Truth, which is the Object of that Faith, for
which it ought to be received, and which is on all hands concluded to be our
Duty to believe. It seems then, we must not express our Belief of God in his
Words, but our own; nor is the Scripture a Creed plain or proper enough to
declare a True Believer or an Orthodox Christian.

Are not things come to a sad pass, that to refuse any other Terms, than those
the Holy Ghost has given us, and which are confessed to be the Rule or Form of
sound Words, is to expose a Man to the Censure of being Unsound in the Faith
and unfit for Christian-Communion! Will nothing do, but Man's Comment instead
of God's Text? his Consequences and Conclusions in the room of Sacred
Revelation? I cannot see, how any Man can be obliged to receive or believe
revealed Truths in any other Language, than that of the Revelation itself,
especially if those that vary the Expression, have not the same Spirit to lead
them in doing so, or that it appears not to me, that they have the Guidance of
that holy Spirit. If the holy Ghost has left Doubts in Scripture (which is yet
irreverent to believe) I see not how Men can resolve them; it is the Work of
that Spirit. And since Men are so apt to Err, Doubts are better left in
Scripture, than by us. But it is to cross that Order of Prudence and Wisdom
among Men, who choose to Conform their Expressions to the things they believe.
If any honest Man has related a Story to me of something he has seen, and I
am to declare my Faith about it, if I believe the Fact, I will choose to deliver
it in the Terms of the Relator, as being nearest to the Truth.

Suppose a Father dying makes his Last Will and Testament, and (as he thinks)
so plain, that there can be no Mistake made by the Executors, but what is
wilful: if they instead of proving this Will and acting according to the
plainness of it, turn Commentators, make more Difficulties than they find, and
perplex the whole Matter to the Children and Legatees, and send them to the Law
for their Right; will we not esteem such Executors Ill Men, and justify those
Persons concerned in their Refusal of the Paraphrase? God has at sundry times
and in diverse manners by his Prophets, his Beloved Son and his Apostles
delivered to the World a Declaration of his Will and Testament; but some have
claimed and taken to themselves the Keeping, Explanation and Use of it: so as
those, that choose to be concluded by the Letter and Text of this Testament in
its most important Points, expose themselves to great prejudice; for they are
excommunicated from all other share in it, than the punishment of the Breakers
of it, which is part of their Anathema, who of all others are most guilty of
Adding or Diminishing, by undertaking to determine (for others as well as
themselves) the Mind and Intention of the holy Ghost in it.

But if it be true (as true it is) that few have writ of the Authority of
Scripture, that do not affirm, the very Penmen of it to be not only inspired by
the Holy Ghost, but so extraordinarily acted by him, as that they were wholely
asleep to their own Will, Desires or Affections, like people taken out of
themselves, and purely Passive (as Clay in the hand of the Potter) to the
Revelation, Will and Motion of the Spirit, and for this End, that nothing
delivered by them might have the least Possibility of Mistake, Error or
Imperfection, but be a Complete Testament of the Will of God to men; I cannot
see which way such Men can excuse themselves from Great Presumption, that will
notwithstanding have the Wording of Creeds of Communion, and reject that
Declaration of Faith as insufficient which is delivered in the very Terms of
the Holy Ghost, and deny those Persons to be Members of Christ's Church, that
in Conscience refuse to subscribe any other Draught, than their Lord has given
them.

Two things oppose themselves to this Practice: First, The Glory of God and the
Honor of the Scriptures; for it naturally draws people from the Regard Due to
God and the Scriptures and begits too much Respect for Men and their
Traditions. This was the Difficulty Christ met with and complained of in his
time; they had set up so many Rabbis to learn them Religion, that the Lord of
the True Religion could hardly find a place amongst them. And what did they do?
They taught for Doctrines the Traditions of Men: They gave their own and their
Predecessors Apprehensions, Constructions and Paraphrases upon Scripture for
the Mind and Will of God, the Rule of the Peoples Faith. They were got near at
this pass in the Church of Corinth, when they cried out, I am for Paul, I am
for Apollo, and I am for Cephas, though they had not the same Temptation.

And that which followed then, ever will follow in the like Case, and that is
DISTRACTION; which is the Contrary to that Second thing, that opposes it self
to this Practice, and that is the Concord of Christians. For Peace's sake
consider it, Lo here and Lo there always followed; one of this mind, and
another of that: As many Sects as Great Men to make and Head them. This was the
Case of the Jews, and yet I do not hear, that they devoured one another about
their Opinions and Commentaries upon Scripture: but the Christians have done
both, Divided and Persecuted too. First, they have Divided, and that mostly
upon the score of Opinions about Religion: they have not been Contented with
the Expressions of the holy Ghost; they liked their own better. And when they
were set up in the Room of Scripture, and in the Name of Scripture, SUBMISSION
was required upon pain of Worldly Punishments: This dissatisfied Curiosity,
this Unwarrantable (what shall I say?) this Wanton Search has cost Christendom
dear, and poor England of any part of it.

I design not to grate upon any to revive old Stories or search old Wounds or
give the least Just Occasion of Displeasure to those that are in Present Power:
yet I must needs say, that Opinion on one side or the other has been the cause of
much of that Discord, Animosity and Confusion, that have troubled this Kingdom.
And it seems to have been the great Stratagem of Satan to prevent the spreading
of the Glorious Gospel of Salvation in the World, by taking men off from the
serious pursuit of Piety and Charity, Humility and holy Living, Peace and
Concord; and under pretense of more raised Apprehensions and sublime Knowledge
of Religion to put them upon introducing Curious and Doubtful Questions, that
have given occasion for Contention and Persecution. This was no more
uncondemned, than unfore-seen of the Apostle Paul who exhorted his beloved Son
Timothy, To avoid 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.
those that doted about Questions (those Men, that would be thought Skilful,
Inquisitive Searchers after Truth, such as love to exercise their Faculties and
improve their Talents; but let us hear his Judgment) of which (says he) comes
Strife, Railing, Surmises, perverse Disputings of men of Corrupt Minds. And the
truth is, none else love such Disputings; they, who seek a daily Victory over
the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and press fervently after Fellowship with
God and that Consolation, that ensues such an Employment of their time, have
very little to lose upon Contention about Words. I could wish I were able to
say, that Vain Controversy were not our Case! But this is not all, the Apostle
does expressly tell Timothy, that if any man consent not to wholesome Words, even
the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine, that is according to
Godliness, he is Proud, knowing nothing, but doting about Questions, etc. such
as used Philosophy and vain Deceit (as he writes to the Colossians) Col. 2. 8.
Beware, says he, lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit,
[that is, draw them away from the Simplicity of the Gospel and the wholesome
Words of Christ] after the Traditions of men, after the Rudiments of the World,
and not after Christ. He used no humane Wisdom, yet he spoke Wisdom, but it was
in a Mystery, not to the humble Disciples of Jesus; nothing was plainer: but it
was a Mystery to the Wise Men of this World. And truly, they that are not
unacquainted with the more degenerate Ages of the Greek Philosophers, how
Philosophy (once taken for the Love of Virtue and self-Denial, which they
esteemed truest Wisdom, and was begun by men of Ordinary Rank) became little
else, than an Art of Rangling upon a multitude of Idle Questions, and so they
entertained the Apostle Paul at Athens) may very well guess, which way Apostasy
entered among Christians; especially, when we consider, that in the third and
fourth Centuries the Heathen-Philosophers had the Education of the Christian
Youth, and that no man had any Reputation among the Christian Doctors, who were
not well Initiated in the Philosophy, Rhetoric and Poetry of the Gentiles.
Which made way for Impurity of Language, and laid a Foundation for great Feuds
in the Church; Christ and his Doctrine must be proved by Aristotle and his
Philosophy. Yes, Aristotle muff explain Scripture, and by Degrees Methodize the
loose Parts of it, and reduce them to Formal Propositions, Axioms; and by the
Help of such Philosophers the poor Fishermen were taught to speak
Metaphysically, and grew Polite in the Sense of Athens, that (to say true) had
been neither guilty of Using no^ Understanding it. But as the First Rules of
Philosophy were few and plain, and consisted in Virtuous Living; so the
Christian Religion was delivered with much Brevity, yet much Plainness, suited
even to the Capacity of the Young, the Ignorant and the Poor, to inform their
understandings, subdue their affections and convert their Souls to God, as well
as Persons of more Age, Knowledge and Ability.

And truly, when we consider the Smalness of the Writings of the Evangelists,
the Shortness of Christ's Sermons, the Fewness of the Epistles writ by the
Apostles, and the Many and Great Volumns of Commentators and Critics; we may
justly say, The Text is almost Lost in the Comment, and Truth hid rather than
revealed in these heaps of fallible Apprehensions. Where by the way let me say,
that the Voluminousness of the Books is no small token of the Unclearness of
the Writers; the more Evident and better digested and Matter is, the more easy
and short it will be in expressing. But after the Christians had declined the
Simplicity of their own Religion, and grew Curious and Wanton; Loving God above
all, Their Neighbors as themselves and Keeping the plain Commandments of
Christ, that relate to good Life, became but Ordinary and Homely things; their
Easiness rendered them Contemptible. They gave but little pleasure to
Speculative Minds; they had nothing in them above Ordinary Capacities: and it
seemed hard, that men of Inquisitive and Raised Spirits should sit down with
the Lesson of RUSTICKS and PEASANTS: Philosophers did not do so; and they would
be like other Nations: 'Twas not enough now to know, There was a God, and that
he was but One, Just and Good, the Observer of their Actions and the Rewarder
of their Deeds; and that therefore they should serve him: But they must be
distinctly informed of his Nature and all his Attributes, his Purposes and his
Decrees, and the Suitableness of them all to the Line and Plumet of their
Understandings: So that God was to be, what their Conclusions would allow him
to be; that yet knew not themselves, their own Beings and their Extents. Nor
did it satisfy that there was a Christ, that this Christ was the Son of God,
that God so loved Mankind, as beholding him in a way of Destruction, he sent
his Son to proclaim pardon upon true Repentance, and offered a General
Reconciliation to as many as received and embraced his Testimony; and that to
that End he laid down his Life a Ransom, Rise and Ascended, and gave his good
Spirit to lead his Followers in the Way of Truth and Holiness. But they must
search into the Secret of this Relation, how and after what manner he is the
Son of God? his Nature, Power and Person must be discus'd; they will be
satisfied in this, before they can find in their Hearts to believe in him. Next
Whether he be the Cause or the Effect of God's Love? What was that Prize he
paid, that Ransom he gave? and how he died for us? if Properly and strictly or
Tropically and elegantly to satisfy the Justice of God? and whether God could
or could not have Saved man an other way? If this Mercy were offered to all, or
but some? and whether Acceptance and Repentance be with the Consent of the
Creature, or by an Irresistible Grace? what Body he Rise and Ascended with? and
what Bodies we shall have in the Resurrection, in Nature, Stature and
Proportion? Lastly, What this Spirit is, that comes from Christ? if it comes
from God also? whether it be God, or an Inferior Minister? how it Exists? If a
Person, in what Relation, Degree or Dignity it stands to the Father and Son?
with abundance more of this Unreasonable Strain, flowing from the Ungoverned
and Restless minds of men. No man would be used by his Servant, as they serve
God: he must wait our Leisure, before we will believe, receive and obey him;
his Message is Obscure, we don't understand it; he must gratify our
Couriosity; we desire to be better satisfied with it, before we believe or
deliver it; It comes not presently up to Mens's Understandings; it is too
obscurely expressed, we will explain it and deliver it with more Caution,
Clearness and Success, then it is delivered to us. Thus God's Revelation has
been scanned and his Precepts examined, before Licensed: Men would be wiser then
God, more wary then the holy Ghost. Our Lord (it should seem) understood not,
what a kind of Creature Man was; he wanted his Wisdom (belike) to admonish him
of the Danger; or happily he thought not upon that Corruption, which should
befall Mankind in these Latter Ages of the World: which might require the
Abilities of Men to supply the Wants and Defects left by the Holy Ghost in the
Wording of the Scripture. -- I wrong not this Practice, I render it not more
Odious than it is; it is an Inexcusable piece of Presumption; that which debases
the External Testimony of God and draws men off from that which is Eternal too.
It introduces the Traditions of men in the Room of God's Records, and makes
their Judgment and Results the Rule of Christian Faith and Canons of Christ's
Church. This is one of those Things, that made Rome so hateful and her Yoke
Intolerable to our Predecessors: Pretended Deductions from Scripture put in the
Room of Scripture, with a Supersedeas to all Dissent upon never so Just a
Ground of Dissatisfaction.

I beseech you Protestants by the Mercies of God and Love of Jesus Christ
ratified to you in his most-precious Blood, FLY ROME AT HOME: Look to the
Enemies of your own House. Have a care of this Presumption, carry it not too
high; lay not Stress, where God has laid none, neither use his Royal Stamp to
Authorize your Apprehensions in the Name of his Institutions.

I do not say, that men are never to Express their Minds upon any place of
Scripture to Edification; there is a Christian Liberty not to be denied; but
never to Articles of Faith, that ever ought to be in the Very Language of Holy
Writ. Ye see, how the Contrary has been the great Makebate in all Ages, and
the Impositions of such Opinions, the Privilege of Hypocrites, but the Snare
of many honest Minds; to be sure, the sad Occasion of Feuds and miserable
Divisions. It was plainly seen, that by the many Disputes that rise from hence,
Men's Wits were confounded with their matters, Truth was lost and Brotherhood
destroyed: thus the Devil acted the Part both of Opponent and Defendant, and
managed the Passions of both Parties to his End, which was DISCORD. And but too
many were ready to persuade themselves from the Miscarriages on both sides,
that nothing certain could be concluded about Religion: for it so fell out,
that whilst men were perpetually wrangling and brawling about some one Opinion
of Religion, the most Important Points of Faith and Life were little regarded.
So that a Godly Man was distinguished from an Ungodly by this one thing (let
his Life have been almost, what it would) that he seemed To maintain the
Opinions in Vogue; and to abhor that Doctrine, which in some one or two Points
might be reputed Heretical.

O! that we could but see how many and how great Defeats Satan has given to
the Work of God in the hearts of men! what Desolations he has made by this one
Evil CONTROVERSY, begot of Opinion and used for it! and how few have Contended
for the Faith, as it was once delivered to the Saints! he must be a Man of
Brass, that could not choose to weep at these Calamities! And truly I must
desire to take leave sometimes to bewail this broken Condition of Christendom,
and to bestow my Tears in secret upon these Common Ruins: And I beseech God
Almighty with a Soul sensibly touched with the Mischiefs, that naturally flow
from this Practice, to Awaken you to a most-Speedy and Serious Consideration,
your Present Standing and AMENDMENT of that Miscarriage in this and all other
points, that may concern your Good and his Glory. Put away Wrath! away with
Clamors! away with Arrogance and Impatience! Let that Holy Spirit of God, which
we in common profess to be the Christians Guide, have the Ordering of our
Understandings in Spiritual things, lest Ignorance should mistake, Interest
wrest or Prejudice pervert the Sense of God's Book. For as too many are
Ignorant of the Divine Truth through their own Concupiscence and vile
Affections (that carry them away to the Desire of other things, and therefore
easily mistake about Nice or Obscure Matters;) so there are not a few, who come
to search the Scriptures as with Pre-possess'd Minds, that are sorry to meet
with a Contradiction to their own Judgment instead of being glad to find the
Truth, and use their Wits to Rack out another Sense, than that which is
genuine: which sort of men use the Scripture for its Authority not its Sense or
Truth.

All this while the Head is set at work not the Heart; that which Christ most
insisted upon, is least concerned in this sort of Faith and Chris^tanity; and
that is, KEEPING HIS COMMANDMENTS. For it is Opinion, not Obedience, Notion and
not Regeneration, that such men pursue: This Kind of Religion leaves them as
bad as it finds them, and worse; for they have something more to be proud of.
Here is a Creed indeed, but of what? the Conclusions of men? and what to do? to
prove they believe in Christ; that (it seems) never made them. It had been
happy for the World that there had been no other Creeds, than what he and his
Apostles made and left. And it is not the least Argument against their being
needful to Christian Communion, that Christ and his Apostles did not think so;
who was not wanting to declare the WHOLE COUNSEL of GOD to the Church.

To Conclude, if ye desire Peace, love Truth, seek Piety and hate Hypocrisy,
Discord, all those things called Articles of Faith and Canons of the Church,
that are not to be found in Express Terms in Scripture, or so plainly
Authorized by Scripture, as may with ease be discerned by every Honest and
Conscientious Person. And in the Room of those Numerous and Disputed Opinions
(made the Bond of External Communion) let some Plain, General and Necessary
Truths be laid down in Scripture Terms, and let them be few: which leads me to
the Next point, and that is FAITH, generally mistaken in the very Nature of it.

The Second Mischief, that is amongst us, is the Misunderstanding of the Nature
of FAITH: Whence it comes to pass, that men take that for Faith, which is not;
and sit down in a Security pernicious to their Eternal Happiness. I shall
briefly say something, of What is not Faith, before I speak of that, which
appears to me to be Truly and Scripturally such.

The Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ is not only not believing men's Opinions and
Determinations from the Sacred Text (of which I have so freely delivered my
self) but it is not merely the Belief even of the things contained in Scripture
to be True: For this the Devils and Hypocrites do, and yet very Bad Believers;
they refuse not the Authority of Scripture. The Devil made Use of it to Christ
himself; but he would have the Explaining and Applying of it: and since he
could not hinder the Divine Inspiration, if he may but be allowed the
Exposition, he hopes to secure his Kingdom. Since then the Verity and Authority
of both History and Doctrine may be believed by the Devil and Hypocrites, that
are false to their own Faith and Knowledge; we cannot without great Injustice
to the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, (which is the Faith of all his
Followers) allow, That a mere Belief of the Verity and Authority of the History
and Doctrine of Scripture is that true and precious Faith.

Faith then in the Sense of the holy Ghost is by the holy Ghost thus defined:
viz. The Evidence of things not seen and the Substance of things hoped for.
Heb. 11. 1.
This is General and runs through all Ages; but I shall express it thus: True
Faith in God, is entirely believing and trusting in God, confiding in his Ephesians.
2. 8.
Goodness, resigning up to his Will, obeying his Law and relying upon his
Conduct d^an Mercies respecting this Life and that to come. This is in
Scripture called the Gift of God: and well it may, for it is Supernatural; It
crosses the Pride, Confidence and Lust of Gal. 5. 6.
man: It grows out of the Seed of Love, sown by God in the Heart; at least, it
works by Love: and this distinguishes it from the Faith of Ill Men and Devils;
that though they do believe, they don't Love God above all, but something else
instead of God, and are full of Pride, Anger, Cruelty and all manner of
Wickedness. But this Faith that works by Love, that Divine Love, which God
plants in the Heart, it inclines Man, and gives him Power to forsake all that
displeases God: and every such Believer becomes an Enoch Translated, that is,
Changed from the Fashion of this World, the Earthly Image, the Corrupt Nature;
and is renewed in the Likeness of the Son of God and walks with God. The Just
shall live by Faith; they have Heb. 2. 4.
in all Ages lived by this Faith; that is, been sustained, supported,
preserved; the Devil within nor the World without could never conquer them.
They walked not by Sight, but by Faith; they had regard to the Eternal
Recompense: No Visible things prevailed with them to depart from the Invisible
God, to quench their Love or slacken their Obedience to him, the Great
Testimony of their Faith in him. This Holy Faith excludes no Age of the World;
the Just Men, the Cornelius's in every Generation have had some degree of it:
'twas more especially the Faith of the Simpler Ages of the World, such as
those, in whom the Patriarchs lived, who having not an Outward Law, became a
Law to themselves, and did the things contained in the Law; for they believed
in God, and through Faith obtained a good Report. But because that it has
pleased God (in Order to Man's Recovery from that grievous Laps, Disobedience
had cast him into) Heb. 1. 1.
at sundry times and in diverse manners to appear to the Sons of men, first, by
his Prophets, and last of all by his Son; and that these several Manifestations
have had something peculiar to them and very remarkable in them, so that they
claim a place in our Creed; It will not be amiss, that we briefly consider them.

The first was that of the Prophets, in which Moses preceded, by whom the Law
came to the Jews, but Grace and Truth to mankind by Jesus Christ. The first
brought Condemnation, the last Salvation; the one Judgment, the other Mercy:
which was glad Tidings indeed. The one did fore-run the other, as in Order of
Time, so in Nature of Dispensations: the Law was the Gospel begun; the Gospel
the Law fulfilled or finished: They cannot be parted.

The Decalogue or Ten Commandments were little more, than what had been known
and practiced before; for it seemed but an Epitome and Transcript of the Law
writ in Man's heart by the Finger of God: This is confessed on all hands and in
all Ages since. This therefore must needs be a Part of our Creed; for it
relates to that Righteousness, which is Indispensible and Immutable: The other
part of their Constitution (that was peculiar to their Politic, Typical and
Mutable, the Gospel is either Unconcerned in it, or else ended it by the
bringing in of a more Enduring Substance. But Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ: Grace is opposed to the Condemnation of the Law, and Truth to Shadows:
This is the most-Excellent Dispensation; it is ours, and it becomes us to weigh
well our Interest in it.

God, who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has Heb. 1. 1. John 3. 16, 17.
in these last days spoken to us by his Son. For God so loved the World, that
(after all the World's Provocations by Omissions and Commissions) he gave his
Only Begotten Son into the World, that the World through him might be saved.

And here Two Things present themselves to our Consideration: First, the
Person, who he was? what his Authority? Secondly, his Message, his Doctrine,
what he Taught: which though never so Reasonable in it self, depended very much
in its Entertainment among the People upon the Truth of his Mission and
Authority, that he was no Impostor, but came from God, the Promised Messiah.
This was done Two Ways; by Revelation and by Miracles. By Revelation, to such,
as were as well prepared and inclined as honest Peter, the Woman of Samaria,
and those that were moved to believe him from the Authority in which he spoke
so Unlike that of the Formal Scribes. By Miracles, to those, that being blinded
by Ignorance or Prejudice, needed to have their senses struckwith such
Supernatural Evidences: from many of whom this Witness came, that he was the
MESSIAH, the Christ and SON of GOD.

In fine, all was done within the Compass of People, among whom he daily
conversed, that was needful to prove, he was from God and had God's Message to
declare to the World. Insomuch that when some of his Disciples were not so firm
in their Belief of his Authority, as he deserved at their hands; he calls his
own Works to prove his Commission and convict them of Infidelity: If ye will
not believe, that the Father is in me, that he does these Works by me; believe
me for the very Works sake, Thus he argued John 14. 10, 11. John 10. 36, 37, 38.
with the Jews: Say ye of him the Father has sanctified and sent into the
World, thou Blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God? if I do not the
Works of my Father, believe me not (this is reasonable; he that will Judge the
World, offers to be Tried himself; he goes on) But if I do, though ye believe
not me, believe the Works, that ye may know and believe, that the Father is in
me. And he laid the Sin of the Jews upon this Foot, viz. That they rejected
him, after he John 15. 24.
had made proof of his Divine Mission by such Extraordinary Works, As no men
among them all could do: which (to give them their Due) they do not deny; but
shamefully pervert and foolishly abuse by attributing them to the Power of the
Devil. To which Malice and Slander he returned this Inconfutable Answer; A
Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand: What! cast out Devils by the
Prince of Devils? it is a Contradition, very Madness it self.

I have nothing to do now with Atheists, or those that call themselves Theists;
but such as own themselves Christians: and shall therefore keep to my Task,
namely; What of the Christian Dispensation is so Peculiar and Important, as to
challenge of Right the Name of Articles of Faith? I say then, That the Belief
of Jesus of Nazareth to be the Promised Messiah, the Son and Christ of God,
sent to restore and save Mankind, is the first and was then the Only requisite
Article of Faith without any Large Confessions, or an Heap of Principles or
Opinions resolved upon after Curious and Tedious Debates by Councils or Synods:
and this may be proved both by Example and Doctrine.

It is evident from Example, as in the Case of Peter, who for having believed
in his heart and confessed with his Mouth, That JESUS was the Christ Mat. 16 16,
17. John 1. 49.
and SON of GOD, obtained that Signal Blessing, Mat. 16. This made Nathaniel a
Disciple; Rabbi (said he, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel.
It was the like Confession, that made amends for Thomas's Incredulity, when he
was sensibly assured of the Resurrection of Jesus, My Lord and my God. This was
also the Substance of Martha's Confession of Faith to Jesus, when he said to
her; I am the Resurrection and the Life; he that believeeth in me shall never
dye: believe thou this? She answered; Yea, Lord, I believe, that thou art the
Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the World? She answered him not
as to that Particular of the Resurrection; but in General, that he was the
Christ, the MESSIAH, that was to come into the World, and that suffised. 'Twas
a Confession not unlike to this, that the Blind Man made, to whom Christ gave
John 9. 35, 38.
Sight, when Jesus said but to him, Do thou believe on the Son of God? Lord,
said he, I do believe; and be worshipped him. What shall we say of the rare
Faith of the Centurion, preferred by Christ himself before any in Israel, Mat.
8. 10. John 4. Matthew. 15, 23, -- 28.
though a Gentile? the Faith of the Woman and Inhabitants of Samaria, that he
was the Messiah? of that Importunate Woman that cried to Jesus, To cast a Devil
out of her possessed Daughter, and would not be put off, to whom Christ said: O
Woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. To which let me
add the Faith of the People, that brought the Man Sick of the Palsy to Christ,
who uncovered the Roof to let Mark 2. 4, 5. Chapter 5. 22.
him down to be touched: The Faith of Jairus the Ruler; and of that Good Woman,
who pressed through the Crowd to Matthew. 9. 20, 21, 22, 27.
touch the Hem of Christ's Garment, to whom Jesus said, Be of good Comfort,
Luke 18. 35, 42. Chap. 17. 15, -- 19. Chap. 7. 45, -- 50.
Daughter, thy Faith has made Thee whole: Also the Two Blind Men, that followed
him out of the Rulers House, crying; Thou Son of David, have Mercy on us: To
whom when Jesus had said, Believe ye, that I am Acts 2. 37, -- 47.
able to do this? they Answered, YEA, LORD: then touched he their Eyes and
said, According to your Faith Acts 10. 24, -- 48.
be it unto you. Also the Blind Man near Jericho: The Leprous Samaritan that
Christ cleansed: And that Notable Acts 8. 27, -- 37.
Passage of the Woman, that kissed his Feet and anointed his Head, to whom he
pronounced this Happy Sentence; Thy Faith has saved thee, go in Peace.

I will conclude this with that Famous Instance of the Thief upon the Cross,
who neither knew Luke 23. 42, 43.
nor had time to make a Large Confession, like the Creeds of these days: but
it seems he said enough; Lord, remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom.
And Jesus said unto him; Verily, I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me
in Paradise. By which it is easy to learn, that 'twas the Heart not the Mouth,
the Sincerity not the Words, that made the Confession Valid.

Nor was this only in the Days of Christ the Effect of his Gracious
Dispensation or peculiar Indulgence, Aftertimes afford us the like Instances.
This was the main Bent of Peter's Sermon: and when the Three thousand believed,
that he, whom the Jews had crucified, was both Lord and Christ, and repented of
their Sins, and gladly received his Word, they are said to have Acts 2. 37, --
47. Acts 10. 24, -- 48. Acts 8. 27, -- 37.
been in a State of Salvation. Thus Cornelius and his Household and Kindred, so
soon as Peter declared Jesus to be the Messiah, and that they had believed, the
Holy Ghost fell upon them; and they were received into the Christian Communion.
But the Story of the Eunuch is very pat to our purpose: As he rid in his
Chariot, he was reading these words out of the Prophet Isaiah, viz. That he
was led as a Sheep to the Slaughter, and like a Lamb dumb before the Shearers,
so opened he not his Mouth. In his Humiliation his Judgment was taken away: and
who shall declare his Generation? for his Life is taken from the Earth. Philip
joined to him and asked him, If he understood what he read? he desired Philip to
interpret the mind of the Prophet, if he spoke of him self or another? Philip
upon the place preached to him Jesus: the Eunuch was so well persuaded by the
Apostle, that coming to a Water, he said, What does hinder me to be Baptized?
Philip answered him; If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may: To
this the Eunuch replied; I believe, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Upon
which he was Baptized: and it is said, He went away rejoicing: which indeed he
might well do, that felt the Comfort of his Faith, the Remission of Sin and the
Joys of the holy Ghost.

I will conclude these Examples with a Passage in the Acts of Paul at
Thessalonica, it is this: Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, Acts 17.
2, 3, 4.
and Three Sabbath-dayes reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening and
alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead:
and that this Jesus (said he) whom I preach unto you, is Christ. And some of
them believed and consorted with Paul and Silas: and of the devout Greeks a
great multitude, and of the Chief Women not a few. Thus we may plainly see,
that they were Baptized into the Faith of Jesus, and not into Numerous
Opinions; and that this one Confession from true Faith in the heart was the
ground and Principle of their Church Fellowship: then God's Church was at
Peace; she thrive: there were then no Snares of Words made to catch Men of
Conscience in. Then not many Words, but much Integrity; now much Talk, and
little Truth: Many Articles, but O ye of little Faith!

Nor was this only the Judgment and Practice of that Time out of Condescension
to Weakness, and Charity to Ignorance; for both Christ Jesus himself and his
Apostles (those blessed Messengers of holy Truth) have doctrinally laid it
down, as the great Test to Christians, that which should distinguish them from
Infidels, and justly entitle them to his Discipleship and Christian Communion
one with another. Then said they to Jesus, what shall we do, that we might work
the Works of God? Jesus answered and said to them; This is the Work of God,
that ye BELIEVE ON HIM, whom God has sent. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, he
that believes on me, has Everlasting Life. And John 6. 28, 29. -- 47. Chapter 8.
24.
upon another Occasion to the Jews he said: For if ye believe not, that I am
HE, ye shall die in your Sins: It must follow then, that if they did believe
him to be the Messiah, the Anointed of God to Salvation, they should be saved.
Most plain is that Answer of the Apostles to Acts 16. 30, 31.
the Jailer, when he came trembling to them and said; Sirs, what must I do to
be saved? Believe (said they) on the Lord Jesus Christ, To. 10. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13.
and thou shall be saved. The Apostle Paul confirms this in his Epistle to the
Romans, when he says: If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the Dead, thou
shall be saved. For with the heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with
the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation: For the Scripture says, Whosoever
believes on him, shall not be ashamed. For there is no difference between the
Jew and the Greek; for the same Lord over all is rich unto all, that call upon
him. For whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. This
was the Word of Faith which they preached; and he testified, that it was Deuteronomy.
30. 14.
nigh in the heart, as Moses had done before him. And says the Apostle John on
this Occasion, Who is a Liar, but he that denies, 1 John 2. 22.
that Jesus is the Christ? -- Hereby know ye the Spirit of God; every Spirit
that confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God. Again says
he, Whosoever Chap. 4. 2, -- 15.
shall confess, that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in
God: Yet once more he affirms, Whosoever believes Chap. 5. 1.
that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God.

I will conclude these Doctrinal Testimonies out of Scripture with a Conclusive
passage John uses toward the end of his Evangelical History John ^0. 30, 31.
of Jesus Christ: And many other Signs truly did Jesus in the Presence of his
Disciples, which are not written in this Book: But these are written, that ye
might believe, that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye
might have Life in his Name. In which place Two things are remarkable: First,
That whatever things are written of Jesus, are written to this end, that we
might believe, that Jesus is the Christ. Secondly, That those that sincerely
believe, shall through him obtain Eternal Life. Certainly then, if this be
true, great must their Incharity and Presumption be, who have taken other
measures, and set another Rule of Christianity, than Jesus and his Apostles
gave. This sincere Confession contented Christ and his Apostles; but it will
not satisfy those, that yet pretend to believe them: 'twas enough then for a
Miracle and Salvation too, but it goes for little or nothing now. A man may
sincerely believe this, and be stigmatized for a Schismatic, an Heretic, an
Excommunicate: but I may say (as Christ did to the Jews in another Case) From
the Beginning it was not so.

But I expect here to be Assaulted with this Objection; If this be all, that is
necessary to be believed to Salvation, of what use is the rest of Scripture?

I answer, Of great Use, as the Apostle himself teaches us; All Scripture is
given by Inspiration 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good Works. It concerns the whole Life and Conversation of a
Man; but every passage in it is not therefore fit to be such an Article of
Faith, as upon which Christian Communion ought or ought not to be maintained.
For though it be all equally True, it is not all equally Important: There is a
great Difference between the Truth and Weight of a thing. For Example: It Is as
True, that Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate, as that he suffered; and that
he was pierced, as that he died; and that he did eat after his Resurrection, as
that he rise from the Dead at all; but no Person of common Understanding will
conclude an Equal Weight or Concernment in these things, because they are
Equally True: The Death of Christ was of much greater Value than the Manner of
it; his Resurrection, than any Circumstance of his Appearance, after he was
risen. The Question is not, whether all the Truths contained in Scripture are
not to be believed; but Whether those Truths are Equally Important? and if the
Belief with the heart and Confession with the mouth, that Jesus is the Christ
and Son of God, be not as sufficient now to entitle a man to Communion here and
Salvation hereafter, as in those times? against which nothing can be of Weight
objected.

If it be said, that this Contradicts the Judgment and Practice of many great
and good Men.

I answer; I cannot help that. If they have been tempted out of their own
Curiosity or the Corruption of Times to depart from the Ancient Paths, the
Footsteps of purest Antiquity and best Examples; let their Pretenses have been
what they will, it is Presumption: and it was Just with God, that Error and
Confusion should be the Consequence of those Adventures; nor has it ever failed
to follow them.

Lastly if it be alleged, That this will take in all Parties, yea, that
Schismatics and Heretics will creep in under this General Confession, since
few of them will refuse to make it.

I do say, 'Twould be an Happy Day. What Man loves God and Christ, seeks Peace
and Concord. that would not rejoice, if all our Animosities and Vexations about
Matters of Religion were buried in this one Confession of Jesus, the great
Author and Lord of the Christian Religion, (so often lost in pretending to
contest for it?) View the Parties on Foot in Christendom among those called
Protestants, observe their Differences well, and how they are generally
maintained; and you will tell me, that they are rent and divided about their
own Comments, Consequences and Conclusions: not the Text, but the Meaning; and
that too, which perhaps is not in it self Essential to Salvation (as the
Dispute betwixt the Lutherans and Calvinists, the Arminians and Predestinarians
and such like.) Is it not lamentable to think, that those, who pretend to be
Christians and Reformed ones too, should divide with the Winds and fight as
pro^ Aris and Focis for such things, as either are not Expressly to be found in
Scripture, or if there, yet never appointed or intended for such Prime Articles
of Faith by Christ or his Apostles. Should they then erect their Communion on
another Bottom, or break it for deviating from any other Doctrines, than what
they (in terminis) in so many words have delivered to us for necessary?

If we consider the Matter well, I fear it will be found, that the Occasion of
D^sturbance in the Church of Christ has in most Ages been found to lie on the
side of those, who have had the Greatest Sway in it. Very pertinent to our
present Purpose is that Passage of J. Hales of Eaton in his Tract concerning
Schism: It has (says he) Tract of Schism, (printed with other things) page
212, 213.
been the Common Disease of Christians from the Beginning, not to content
themselves with that Measure of Faith, which God and Scriptures have expressly
afforded us; but out of a Vain Desire to know more than is Revealed, they have
attempted to DISCUSS THINGS, of which we can have no Light neither from Reason
nor Revelation. Neither have they rested here, but upon pretense of
Church Authority (which is NONE) or Tradition (which for the most part is but
FIGMENT) they have peremptorily concluded and confidently imposed upon others a
Necessity of Entertaining Conclusions of that Nature; and to strengthen
themselves have broken out into Divisions and Factions, opposing Man to Man,
Synod to Synod, till the Peace of the Church vanished without all Possibility
of Recall. Hence arose those Ancient and many Separations amongst Christians,
Arianism, Eutychianism, Nestorianism, Photinianism, Sabellianism, and many more
both Ancient and in our Time.

And as he has told us one great Occasion of the Disease, so he offers what
follows, for the Cure: And were Liturgies (says he) and Public Forms of
Service so framed, as that they admitted p. 215, 216, 217, 218.
not of particular and private Fancies, but contained only such things, as in
which all Christians do agree, Schisms on Opinion were utterly vanished.
Whereas to load our Public Forms with the Private Fancies upon which we
differ, is the most-soveraign Way to perpetuate Schism unto the World's End. --
Remove from them, whatsoever is scandalous to any Party; and leave nothing, but
what all agree on: and the Event shall be, that the Public Service and Honor
of God shall no ways suffer. -- For to charge Churches and Liturgies with
Things Unnecessary, was the First Beginning of all Superstition. -- If the
spiritual Guides and Fathers of the Church would be a little sparing of
Incumbring Churches with Superfluities, and not over-rigid either in reviving
Obsolete Customs, or imposing New, there were far less Danger of Schism or
Superstition -- Mean while wheresoever false or suspected Opinions are made a
piece of the Church Liturgy, he that separates, is not a Schismatic: for it is
alike Unlawful to make Profession of known or suspected Falsehoods, as to put in
Practice Unlawful or Suspect Actions. He further tells us in his Sermon of
Dealing with Erring Christians, That it is the Unity of the J. Hales, Golden
Remains, p. 49, 50.
Spirit in the Bond of Peace, and not the Identity (or Oneness) of Conceit
which the Holy Ghost requires at the Hands of Christians -- A better Way my
Conceit cannot reach unto, then that we should be willing to think, that these
things, which with some Show of Probability we deduce from Scripture, are at
the best but Our Opinions. For this peremptory Manner of setting down our
Conclusions under this High Commanding Form of Necessary Truths, is generally
one of the greatest Causes, which keeps the Churches this Day so f^r assunder;
whenas a Gracious Receiving of each other by Mutual Forbearance in this kind
might peradventure in time bring them nearer together.

Thus much of this Great Man concerning Schism, the Cause and Cure of it: and
for the Notion of Heretics he will help us altogether as well. For though they
are generally taken for such as err in Judgment about Doctrines and Articles of
Faith, yet if this Man may have any Credit (and perhaps none of his Profession
has deserved more) he tells us, that Heresy is an Act of the Will, not of
Reason, and is ind eeda Lie, not a Mistake: else (says he) how could that
known Speech of Austin go for true, Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo: I may
err, but I am unwilling to be an Heretic. And indeed this is no other, than
what Holy Scripture teaches; A Man that is an Heretic, after the first and
second Admonition reject; knowing, that he that is such, is Tit. 3. 10, 11.
subverted and sins, being CONDEMNED OF HIMSELF. Which is as much as to say,
that no body is an Heretic, but he that gives the Lie to his own Conscience
and is Self-condemned: Which is not the Case of Men merely Mistaken, or who
only err in Judgment. And therefore the Term of Heretic is as Untruly as
Uncharitably flung upon those, that Conscientiously dissent either in point of
Discipline OF Doctrine from any Society of Christians: and it is not hard to
observe, that those who have best merited it, have most liberally bestowed it.

But to show you, that neither true Schismatic (who is One, that unnecessarily
and unwarrantably separates from that part of the Visible Church, of which he
was once a Member) nor true Heretic (who is a Wilful Subverter of True or an
Introducer of false Doctrines; a Self-condemned Person) can ever shelter
himself under this Common Confession of Christianity sincerely made, Let us
consider, that who-ever so declares Jesus to be the Messiah and Anointed
Savior of God to Men, must be supposed to believe all that of him, with
respect to which he is so called. Now that for which he is so denominated, is
that which God sent him to do: the Reason and End of his coming he could best
tell, who has told us thus; I am come, that ye may have Life, and that ye may
have it more abundantly. The World was as dead in Trespasses and Sins, the
guilt and defilement of Transgression had killed the Soul as to Spiritual Life
and Motion; and from under this powerful Death he came to redeem the Soul unto
Life: in short, to restore Man from this Fearful Degeneracy, his Disobedience
to God had reduced him to.

The Way he took to accomplish this Blessed Work was First, To preach
Repentance and the Approach of the Kingdom of God, which is his Rule and his
Authority in the Hearts of men, which brings us to the Second thing to be
believed, namely --

What he Taught?

1. First, his Doctrine led Men to Repentance: Repent, for the Kingdom of God
is at hand. No Man could receive the Kingdom of God, John 3. 20, 21.
whilst he lived under the Kingdom and Power of Satan: so that to Repent is not
only to bring their Deeds to the Light (which Christ exhorts Men to;) but to
forsake that, which upon Examination appeared to be Evil. Wherefore I conclude,
that such as have not been acquainted with this Holy Repentance, do not
sincerely believe, neither can Rightly confess Jesus to be the Christ the Son
of God, the Savior of the World. Therefore says the Apostle, Let him that
names the Name of the Lord, depart from Iniquity: plainly implying, that those
do rather Profane than Confess the Name of the Lord, who do not Depart from
their Iniquities. And (says the Apostle in another place) No man can call
Jesus LORD, but by the Holy Ghost: Which opens to us the Nature of the True
Confession, to wit, That the True Confession of Jesus to be both Lord and
Christ is from such a Belief in the Heart, as is the work of the Holy Ghost;
and those that do not Confess him or call upon him by Virtue of the
Overshadowings of this Divine Spirit and Power, are not truly Christians, true
Worshippers, Believers and Disciples.

Furthermore, they that receive Christ, receive his Kingdom, his Power and
Authority in their Souls; the strong Man that kept the house, becomes boun^,
and his Goods spoiled by this stronger man the LORD's CHRIST, who is come from
Heaven to dwell in us and be the Hope of our Glory: for so he was preached to
the Gentiles. This Kingdom (the Apostle tells us) stands in Righteousness,
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: and Christ tells us, where it is to be set up?
The Kingdom of God is within you, says the King himself; and where should the
King be, but in his own Kingdom? they are blessed, that feel him to Rule and
that live under the swaying of his Righteous Scepter: for when this Righteous
One Rules the Earth, the Sons of Men rejoice.

So that no Man can truly Confess and rightly Believe Jesus to be the Christ
and Son of God, that does not receive him to be his King, to rule his Heart and
Affections. For can a Man be said to believe in one, that he will not receive?
but To as many as received Christ of Old, gave he Power to become the Sons of
God, which were born not of Blood, nor of the Will of the John 1. 12, 13.
Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God. What is this will of God? Paul
answers the Question: The Will of God is your Sanctification; for this Christ
came into the World. So that those that believe and receive Christ, he is made
to them Righteousness, Sanctification 1 Cor. 1. 30.
and Redemption; that is, he has saved them from their Sins, Guilt and
Defilement, and sanctified them from their Corruptions: they live now by the
Grace of God, that teaches them to be of a Sober, Righteous, Godlike Life. Ye
shall know them by their Fruits, says Christ of the Pharisees; so shall Men
know them, that sincerely believe and confess Christ by their sanctified
Manners and Blameless Conversations. And woe to them that make other
Distinctions! for God has made no other; there will be but Goats and Sheep at
the Last Day, Holy and Unholy, Just and Unjust. Therefore let that be our
Distinction, which ever was and will be God's Distinction: for all other
Measures are the Effects of the Passions and Presumptions of Men.

But because it may be expected, that I should fix upon some few General Heads
of Christian Doctrine from the Mouth of Christ and his Apostles as requisite to
Christian Communion; I shall proceed to mention, what Christ eminently taught.
He that reads his Sermon upon the Mount, will find in the Entrance, how many
States and Conditions Christ Mat. 5.
Blessed; The Poor in Spirit, The Mourners, The Meek, They that hunger after
Righteousness, The Merciful, The Pure in Heart, and the Peacemakers; which
indeed Comprehend the whole of Christianity. By Mourners we understand true
Penitents, Men of Unfeigned Repentance; which leads them not only to Confess
but Forsake their Sins. This Godly Sorrow makes Men Poor in Spirit, Empty of
themselves, wanting the Light, Life and Power of Jesus to support and sustain
them; in which as they sted fastly walk, the Atonement of the Blood is felt,
and it cleanses them from all Unrighteousness: which makes them Pure in Heart.
And in this Condition no Food will serve their Turn but Righteousness; after
this they Hunger and Thirst more than for the Bread that perishes. They are
full of Meekness* and Mercy, Making Peace and Promoting Concord, wherever
they come: For being themselves reconciled to God, they endeavor to reconcile
all Men unto God and one unto another.

In short, let us bring it home to our Consciences and deal faithfully with our
selves. Do we know this Holy Mourning? this Godly Sorrow? are we Poor in
Spirit? not Self-conceited, but Humble, Meek and Lowly in Heart, like him that
bid us be so? Do we Hunger after the Kingdom of God and Righteousness of it?
and are our Hearts purified by the Precious Faith of the Son of God? Infine,
Are we Merciful? Tenderhearted? Lovers of Peace more than lovers of our
selves? Persecuted rather than Persecutors? such as receive Stripes for
Christ's sake, and not those that beat our Fellow Servants? No Man has true
Faith in Christ Jesus, that is not acquainted with these Blessed
Qualifications: This is Christ's Doctrine; and to believe in him is to obey it
and be like him.

The great Intendment of this Sermon is to press people to a more Excellent
Righteousness than that of the Scribes and Pharisees. For (says Jesus to the
Multitude) Except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, Verse. 20.
ye shall in no Case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

(1.) He taught, not only that Killing but Anger without a very* Just Cause
Verse. 21, 22.
is Unlawful to his Disciples.

(2.) he prefers Concord above Devotion, Mercy before Sacrifice; He that Verse.
23, 24, 25.
will not use his Utmost Endeavor to be reconciled to his Brother, shall find
no place for his Prayers: And Every Man is this Brother.

(3.) He not only forbids Adultery, which the Law forbids; but Lust: the Verse.
28, 29, 30.
Ax of his Doctrine is laid to the Root of the Tree; it reaches to the First
Seeds of things, to the Innermost and most hidden Conceptions of the Mind.

(4.) From Keeping and Performing Legal Vows to not Swearing at all: and Verse.
33, 34.
indeed, what Use can there be of any Swearing, where Men's Yea is Yea, and
their Nay, Nay.

(5.) He taught Not to resist Evil, but to suffer Loss rather than enter into
Contention: his Divine Wisdom did foresee, how much Verse. 39, 40.
easier it would be, to Overcome the Violent Passions of Men by Patience than
Controversy. And he that considers the Unruliness of some Men's Dispositions,
their Heats and Prejudices, it will be found, that it is not always a Real
Injury or Loss, but Passion, Revenge or Base Interest, that sets them to Suits
and Clamours.

(6.) He taught us the Highest Complesance and Charity: If any Man compel thee
to go a Mile, go with him ^wain. Be of an Easy and Ready Verse. 41.
Mind to Do Good, and to all Friendly Offices be easily persuaded; and in which
rather exceed than fall snort.

(7.) He taught as great Liberality and Charity; to give to him that asks, and
from him that would borrow, not to turn away: in short, to be Verse. 42.
Stewards of our External Substance for the Good of Mankind, according to our
Respective Abilities.

(8.) He advances the Doctrine of Loving Friends to the Degree of Loving
Enemies. Ye have heard (said Jesus) that it has been said, Verse. 43, 44, 45.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor and shall hate thine Enemy; but I say unto you,
Love your Enemies, bless them that Curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them that despightfully use you and persecute you. Surely then,
where no Anger dwells, no Revenge can grow; and if we must love Enemies, there
is no Man left to be hated. This is the Doctrine of that Jesus, that laid down
his Life for all: and this is the End for which he preached it, That (says he)
ye may be the Children of your Father, which is in Heaven; for he makes his
Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and on
the Unjust, It is as much as if Christ had said; No Man can be like God, that
does not Love his Enemies, and who cannot do good to all: Consequently, he that
does Love Enemies, and is ready to Do good unto all, he is like God the Father,
that is in Heaven, who is Love.

(9.) Christ teaches us to avoid Ostentation Mat. 6. 1.
in our Charity: Take heed that ye do not your Alms before Men to be seen of
them.

(10.) He teaches us the Duty of Prayer, where and what: not in the Corners of
the Streets Verse. 5, 6.
nor in the Synagogues to be seen of Men; but in the Closet, in the secret of
the Heart betwixt God and the Soul.

(11.) He forbids Hoarding and Laying up of Money in Bank; presses Treasuring
up of Wealth Verse. 19, 20.
in Heaven: and the Reason is this, that the one is Corruptible, and the other
is Incorruptible.

(12.) He teaches Dependence upon the Providence of God; calling the
Dis-trustful, O ye of little Faith. Which of you (says he) by taking Thought
can add one Cubit to his Stature? therefore Ver. 25. to the end.
take no Thought, saying, What shall we eat or what shall we drink, or
wherewith shall we be clothed? for after all these things the Gentiles seek;
for your Heavenly Father knows, that you have need of all these things. But
seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you.

(13.) He sets up a Discrimination or Distinction between false and true
Prophets, those that are his Disciples, from Counterfeits. Ye shall know them
(said Christ) by their Fruits: Do men gather Grapes of Thorns or Figgs of
Thistles? even Matthew. 7. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
so every good Tree brings forth Good Fruit, but a Corrupt Tree brings
forth Evil Fruit. A Good Tree cannot bring forth Evil Fruit, neither can a
Corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit: Wherefore by their Fruits ye shall know
them. This was the Distinction given by Christ to his Followers; the Tree was
not accounted Good or Bad by the Leaves, but the Fruits; not by the Opinions,
but the Holy living. The Faith in that Day was an Entire Resignation and
Dependence upon God, and not a Subscription to Verbal Propositions and
Articles, though never so True: that was the Work of Aftertimes, more Corrupt
and Superstitious Ages. But --

(14.) Lastly Christ preaches the General Judgment. Many will say to me in that
Day [what Day? the Day of Account and Final Reckoning Ver. 21. to the end.
with Mankind:] Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name
cast out Devils and done many wonderful works? And then (said Christ) will I
profess unto them, I never knew you, Depart from me, ye that work Iniquity. Not
every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but
he that does the Will of my Father, which is in Heaven. Therefore whosoever
hears these Sayings of mine and does them, I will liken him unto a Wise Man,
which built his House upon a Rock, and the Rain descended and the Floods came,
and the Winds blew and beat upon that House, and it fell not; for it was
builded upon a Rock. And every one that bears these Sayings of Mine, and does
them not, shall be likened unto a Foolish Man, which built his House upon the
Sand: and the Rain descended, and the Floods came and the Winds blew, and beat
upon that House, and it fell, and great was the Fall of it, And it came to
pass, when Jesus had ended these Sayings, the People were astonished at his
Doctrine: for he taught them as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes.

By all which it is most plain, that as Christ is the Rock, on which true
Christians build; so none can be said truly to build upon this Rock, but those
that keep his Sayings, that do his Commandments, that obey his Doctrine.
Wherefore that Faith of JESUS to be the SON and CHRIST of GOD must be such a
Faith, as does the Will of the Heavenly Father, and keeps THESE SAYINGS of
Christ.

There are Two places, in which Christ seems to sum up his blessed Doctrine:
One is this, Therefore all things, whatsoever ye would, that Men Matthew. 7. 12.
should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets;
Which Christ came not to destroy, but to fulfill. But the other Passage seems
to be more full, the first relating only to our Dealings with Men; this Second
Passage comprehends our Duty both to God and Men, viz. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39.
thy Heart and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind; this is the first and
great Commandment: and the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. In these two Commandments hang all the Law and the
Prophets.

This is the Perfection of the Christian Religion, the Great Commandment of
Christ, the Certain Token of Discipleship. A new Commandment (said Christ) I
give unto you, that ye Love one John 13. 34, 35.
another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another: by this shall all
men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another. Again,
Christ speaks to his Disciples; If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in
my Love, even as I have kept my Father's Commandments, and abide in his Love:
and this is my Commandment, that ye Love one another, as I have loved you. Yet
once more: Ye are my Friends, if ye John 15. 10, 12, 14, 17.
do, whatsoever I command you; and these things I command you, that you Love
one another. He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that
loves me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him and will manifest my self to him: but he John 14. 21.
that loves me not, keeps not my Sayings. So that only those are Friends,
and Disciples of Christ Jesus that do his Sayings and keep his Commandments,
and the Great Commandment of all is LOVE: for upon this One Commandment all the
rest depend.

For he that loves God above all, will leave all for God; not one of his
Commandments shall be slighted: and he that loves his Neighbor, will much more
love the Household of Faith. Well may such be True Christians, when their Faith
in Christ works by LOVE, by the Power of this Divine Love: he that dwells in
this Love, dwell in God, 1 John 4. 16.
(if John say true) for he is Love. And in this he recommended his Love unto
us, that he sent his only Begotten Son, -- that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have Everlasting Life: Also herein did Christ manifest
his Love, in John 15. 12, 13, 14.
laying down his Life for us. This is my Commandment (said Christ) that ye Love
one another, as I have loved you: and, Greater love has no Man than this, that
a Man lays down his Life for his Friends; ye are my Friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you. Indeed he gave his Life for the World, and offered up
One Common Sacrifice for Mankind: Heb. 10.
and by this One Offering up of himself once for all he has forever perfected
[that is, quitted and discharged and taken into Favour] them that are
sanctified; who have received the Spirit of Grace and Sanctification in their
Hearts: for such as resist it, receive not the Benefit of that Sacrifice.

This Holy Offering up of himself by the Eternal Spirit, is a Great Part of his
Messiahship; for therein he has both confirmed his Blessed Message of
Remission of Sins and Life Everlasting to as many as truly believe in his Name,
and given himself a Propitiation for all that have sinned, and so came short of
the Glory of God: in so much that God is said by the Apostle Paul to be Just,
and the Justifier of him, which believes in Jesus, whom God has set forth to
be a Propitiation Romans 3. 25, 26, 27.
through Faith in his Blood to declare his Righteousness for the Remissions of
Sins that are past, through the forbearance of God.

Unto which I shall Join his Mediatorship or Advocacy, linked together both by
the Apostle Paul and the beloved Disciple John: the first in these 1 Timothy 2. 5,
6.
words; For there is One God and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all to be testified in due Time.
The Apostle John expresses it thus: My little Children, these things write I
unto you, that 1 John 2. 1, 2.
you Sin not; and if any Man sins, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous; he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for
ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World.

So that (to be Brief) the Christian Creed so far as it is Declaratory, lies
eminently in a Confession of these Particulars. Of the Divine Authority of the
New as well as of the Old Testament Writings; and therein of these Great,
General and Necessary Truths expressly, to wit, Of Christ, his Miracles,
Doctrine, Death, Resurrection, Advocacy or Mediation, the Gift of his Grace,
Faith and Repentance unto Remission of Sins, the Necessity of Keeping his
Commandments, and lastly of Eternal Recompense. -- Less once than all this
would have done; and it does not show the Age more Christian, but more Curious,
indeed more Infidel, that there is this Stir made about External Creeds of
Communion: for Distrust of Brethren and Incredulity among Christians is no
small Sign of their Decay of Faith toward God; From the Beginning 'twas not so.

But it may be here Objected, How shall we know, that such a Declaration of
Faith is sincere? I Answer, By recurring to that Evidence, which God shall give
us. They that can try Spirits under the most-Sheeplike Clothing, have the
most-Immediate and Certain Proof; but let it suffice, that Christ has told us,
By their Fruits ye shall know them. If any Man, says Christ, will come after
me, let him take up his Cross and follow me: and in another place Matthew. 16. 24.
he tells us thus; My Sheep hear my Voice, and I knew them and they follow me;
that is, They are led by my Spirit, they live my Life, they John 10. 27.
obey my Doctrine. And the Apostle Peter assures us, that True Faith purifies
the Heart: and no Acts 15. 9.
Impurity can flow from a pure Heart. You may know this Faith by that Way, by
which Abraham's Faith was known to be True, to wit, Obedience. He believed God,
that is, He Obeyed God; he submitted to the Will of God and relied upon his
Goodness: He that gave me my Son by a Miracle, can Romans 4. 2 Cor. 4. 13.
work another to save him; To God all things are Possible. It is called by the
Apostle Paul The Spirit of Faith; something more near and inward, than any
External Articles and Declaration of Faith, that from whence all True
Confessions and good Works come; which made the Apostle Paul thus to say; We
give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our Prayers,
remembering 1 These. 1. 2, 3.
without Ceasing your Work of Faith.

'Twas this true Faith, that brings forth Works of Righteousness, by which Abel
Offered to God, Enoch was Translated, Noah was saved: it is said of him, that
he became Heir of the Righteousness, which is by Faith. By this Faith Abraham
left his own Country, and obeyed the Voice of God. By Faith Moses was preserved
from his Childhood; and when he came to years, refused to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter: by Faith he forsook Egypt, and passed the Red Sea. By Faith
the Walls of Jericho fell down, and Rahah was saved. By Faith Gideon, Barak,
Sampson, Jephtha, David, Samuel and the Prophets subdued Kingdoms, wrought
Righteousness, obtained Promises, Heb. 11.
stopped the Mouths of Lions, quenched the Violence of Fire, escaped the Edge
of the Sword; with much more too large to be uttered.

This is that Faith, which the Apostle James magnifies against all false
Faiths: Faith (says he) if it has not Works, is dead. A Man may say, Thou have
Faith, and I have Works; Jam. 2. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my
Works. And as if he had foreseen the Men of Creeds and Articles, he speaks on
this wise: Thou believe that there is One God, thou do well; the Devils
also believe and Tremble. But will thou know, O Vain Man, that Faith without
Works is dead. Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works, when he had
offered Isaac his Son upon the Altar? see thou how Faith wrought with his
Works? and by Works was Faith made perfect. -- And he was called the Friend of
God.

And the Exhortation of the Apostle Peter is a plain Discrimination of true
Faith; And besides this, giving all Diligence, add to your Faith 2 Pet. 1. 5,
6, 7, 8, 9.
Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to
Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly
Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness Charity. For if these things be in you and
abound, they make you, that ye shall neither he barren nor unfruitful in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacks these things, is blind,
and cannot see far off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old Sins.

I will seal up these Scripture. Testimonies of Faith with that Account which
is given us by the Apostle John; For whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the
World: and this is the Victory, that overcomes 1 John 5. 4.
the World, even our Faith. Who is he that overcomes the World, but he that
believed, that Jesus is the Son of God? So that the Belief in the Son of God
must have this Evidence to prove it true, that by it Men are born of God and
overcome the World: so that their Faith is false, whom the World Overcomes. I
am not of this World, says Christ Jesus; neither can that Faith be, that is
called the Faith of the Son of God.

There are Three Passages left us upon Record by this Beloved Disciple of Jesus
of Great Weight and Importance to us; when he had discoursed of the
Propitiation and Advocacy of Christ, he does immediately add; And hereby do we
know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. He 1 John 2. 3, 4, 5, 6.
that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the
Truth is not in him. But whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is the Love of
God perfected: hereby know we, that we are in him. He that says, he abides in
him, OUGHT HIMSELF ALSO SO TO WALK, EVEN AS HE WALKED.

The Second Passage very pertinent to this present matter is in the next
Chapter; My little Chap. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
Children, let us not love in word neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth.
And h^reby we know, that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts
before him: For if our Heart condemn us, God is greater than our Heart, and
knows all things. Beloved; if our Heart condemn us not, then have we
Confidence toward God: and whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we
keep his Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. And
this is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son JESUS
Christ, and love one another, as he gave us Commandment.

The Third and last Passage, which I shall mention on this Account is in his
fourth Chapter of the same Epistle, viz. And we have seen and do testify, that
the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of Chap. 4. 14, 15, 16, 17.
the World. Whosoever shall confess, that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells
in him and he in God. And we have known and believed the Love, that God has to
us: God is Love; and he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and God in him.
Herein our love is made perfect, that we may have Boldness in the Day of
Judgment, because AS HE IS, SO ARE WE IN THIS WORLD.

These are the Holy Fruits of all that love God and believe in Christ, that are
the Family of the Faithful, regenerated and redeemed from the Earth; Wherever
two or three of them are met together, Christ is in the midst of them; they
neither Ask nor Hope in vain. With this Character let us take a View of all
Persons and Societies of Christians throughout the World, not forgetting our
selves: let us hereby try their Faith and Religion and our own; if it be of God
the Father, it is Pure and Undefiled, Jam. 1. 27.
it leads them that have it, to Visit the Fatherless and Widow in their
Affliction, and to keep themselves Unspotted from the World: Is this our Case?

If it be Objected, Which way shall we obtain this like Precious Faith? I
answer: They must take diligent Heed to the Light and Grace, that comes by
Jesus, that Candle of the Lord, which he has set up in our Souls: we must bring
our Deeds to this Light, see, if they be wrought in God or no? For this gives
us to discern betwixt the Precious and the Vile; the one gives Joy, the other
brings a load of Guilt upon the Soul: do we not know, that we Do the things we
ought not? and that we Leave undone the thin^s we ought to do? this will be our
Judgment: For therefore Men are Condemnable, because they knon.

These therefore, that would obtain this precious Faith, that overcomes the
World, must embrace the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which this Faith is
begotten: and they, who believe not in this Grace, nor receive it in the love
of it, nor give themselves up to be taught and led by it, can never be said
truly to believe in him, from whom it comes, any more then the Jews may be said
to believe in God, when they rejected him that came from God, his Beloved Son.
He that denies the Measure, can never own or receive the Fullness. John bears
Record, John 1. 14, 16, 17.
that he was Full of Grace and Truth, and that of his Fullness they received,
and Grace for Grace: for the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came
by Jesus Christ: So that it is utterly Impossible for a Man to believe in
Christ, and not to be taught by the Grace that comes from him and by him.

It Is a Common saying of People in these days, We are not under the Law, but
under Grace; who are in Truth under Sin and the Law of Death, Subjects to the
Prince of the Power of the Air, who reigns in the hearts of the Children of
Disobedience; and their Lives show it: No; those are under Grace, that live the
holy Life of it. For the Grace of God, that brings Salvation (says the
Apostle Paul, Tit. 2. ii. 12.) has Appeared to All Men, teaching us, that
denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts we should live Soberly, Righteously and
Godly in this present World: These are the People that believe in Christ unto
the saving of the Soul. This is that Blessed Light, which shines in the hearts
of those that believe, and gives them the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ: the Ancients walked in it, and found Eternal Life by it.
I am the Light of the World, said Christ, he that John 8. 12.
follows me, shall not walk in Darkness, but have the Light of Life. The Saints
Armed themselves with it against the fiery Darts of Satan, and by the Virtue
and Power that is in it, were enabled Romans 13. 12, 13, 14.
to overcome Temptation. And this will be the Condemnation of Disobedient Men,
that they see, but shut their Eyes; know the Light, but rebel against it.
Christ by his holy Light in the Conscience shows Men their Danger, warns them
of it before it comes upon them: no Man on Earth can plead either Ignorance or
Surprise.

It Is true, the Candle of the Wicked is often put out; But that it implies,
it is often lighted, and that men Sin against Conviction, against Sight and
Knowledge: it is wilful, and that is dangerous. No Faith in Disobedience will
do, no Faith without holy Fruits, holy Works, will save. Men must be born
again, if ever they will enter into the Kingdom of God: there is no Fellowship
between Christ and Belial; People must part with their Vile Affections and
Inordinate Desires, or they are no Company for Christ, they have no Share in
him. What part can Pride have in Humility? Wrath in Meekness? Lust in
Self-denial? Revenge in Forgiveness? To pretend, to believe in Christ, and not
to be like him, is a Contradiction. 1 John 1. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9.
This is the Message (said the Beloved Disciple) which we have heard of him,
and declare unto you, that God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all: If
we say, that we have Fellowship with him and walk in Darkness, we lie and do
not the Truth. The Truth is, all such Faith and Profession, are a Lie in the
Right Hand, a Cheat upon a Man's Self. But (says he) if we walk in the Light as
God is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from ALL SIN. If we say, that we have no Sin
[to be cleansed from] we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us: But if
we confessor Sins, he is Faithful and Just to forgive us our Sins, and to
CLEANSE us from ALL UNRIGHTEOUSNESS.

To Conclude, Christ Jesus the Son of God and Savior of the World is Holy,
Harmless and Undefiled, and so must his Followers be; he is no Head of a
Corrupt Body, nor Master of Rebellious Servants: he that has not the Wedding
Garment, must be cast out; the Branch that brings not forth Fruit, will be cut
off. But those that truly believe in his Name, walk in his Light, and are
taught by his Grace to renounce the Lusts of the Eye, the Lusts of the Flesh
and Mark 3. 32, 33, 34, 35.
Pride of Life; the Unjust Profits, Pleasures and Pomps of this World, and
choose to follow him in his own Holy Way of Regeneration: the same is his
Brother, his Sister and his Mother. And whatever Losses they may sustain for
his Mat. 19. 28, 29.
Names sake, they have the Promise of an Hundred fold here, and the Inheritance
of Everlasting Life.

And I do fervently beseech Almighty God, the Giver of all Saving Faith,
mercifully to Vouchsafe more and more to beget a Serious Enquiry in us, What
that Eaith is, which we have? who is the Author of it? and what Fruits it has
brought forth? that we may not profane the Name of God by a Vain Profession of
it, nor abuse our selves unto Eternal Perdition; But that we may endeavor (by
God's Assistance) to approve our selves such Believers, as sincerely fear God,
love Righteousness and hate every Eyil Way, as becomes the Redeemed of God by
the precious Blood of his Son. Since therefore we are not our own, but the
Lord's, who has bought us with that Great Price, let us glorify him in our
Bodies, in our Souls and in our Spirits, which are his. Then shall we be
Children of Abraham indeed, Heirs of the Promises, partakers of that
Resurrection and Life, that Immortality and Glory, which God the Righteous
Judge will one Day plentifully distribute to them that abide in this precious
Faith unto the End.

This naturally brings me to my Third Head, and an Unhappiness we have long
labored under, to wit;

A Debasing of the true Value of MORALITY under pretense of Higher Things,
mistaking the very End of Christ's Coming.

By MORALITY I understand Virtuous Living, Purity of Manners, that Justice,
Temperance, Truth, Charity and Blamelesness in Conversation, which may well
Denominate the Man that lives that Life, a MAN JUST; in short, one that does
unto all men, as he would have all Men do unto him, this is the Moral Man. It
is Notorious, how small an Estimate Two sorts of people have put upon him, the
Profane and the Professors (the Publican and the Pharisee:) The First despise
him as too Squeamish, Nice and Formal, they deride his Regularity and make a
Jest of his Preciseness. And thinking No Man can be good, because they are
Naught; and that all must needs fall by those Temptations they will not resist;
they construe Sobriety to be a Trick to decoy Mankind, and put a Cheat upon the
World. If they hear any one say, Such a Man is a Sober and Just Person, They
have learned by themselves to call him Knave; that he has a Design upon some
body by being Just in little things, to Cheat in things of more Moment. This
Man is very Unfashionable among Men of Immoral Principles, for his very Looks
and Life carry a Reproof with them upon Vicious Men, who, as if Virtue were
their Common Enemy, are in Combination against the Lovers and Entertainers of
her. Because such true Virtuos^ will neither do the Ill things, they would have
them, nor flatter them in the Ills they do; and therefore where Ill Men have
the Power, Good Men are sure to be made the Common Enemy.

But the Reproaches that Men of Morality receive at the Hands of Lewd Men, are
more their Honor than their Suffering. But that which is most of all Anxious,
is that Morality is denied to be Christianity; that Virtue has any Claim to
Grace, and that those, who glory to be called Christians, can be so Partial and
Cruel, as to renounce a mere Just Man their Society, and send him preaching
among the Heathen for Damnation. And pray, what is the Matter? Why! though this
Person be a sober Liver, yet he is but a General Believer; his Faith is at
large: It Is true, he believes in God. but I hear little of his Faith in Christ.
Very well: Does he not therefore believe in Christ? or must he therefore be
without the Pale of Salvation? Is it possible that a Man can truly believe in
God and be damned? But as he that believes in Christ, believes in God, so he
that believes in God, believes in Christ: For he that believes on him, that
raised up Jesus from the Dead, his Faith shall be imputed to Romans 4. 22, 23, 24.
him for Righteousness. And says Christ himself; He that believes my Word, and
believes on him that sent me, has Everlasting John 5. 24.
Life: Has he that believes in God, no Interest in this Expression? But more
particular is that place of the Apostle to the Hebrews, viz. For he that comes
to God, must believe that he is, Heb. 11. 6.
and that he is a Diligent Rewarder of them that seek him. Now. if those who so
belie^e, can come to God, the Moral Man's Condition is not Dangerous even in
the strictest sense of the Word, not only such as have a General Faith of
Christianity, and never adhered to any particular Party (a Sense, we shall anon
consider) but even those, who never heard the History of Christ, nor had a
distinct Knowledge of him, as we profess him.

For it seems a most-unreasonable thing, that Faith in God and keeping his
Commandments should be no Part of the Christian Religion: but if a Part it be
(as upon serious Reflection who dare deny it?) then those before and since
Christ's time, who never had the External Law nor History, yet have done the
things contained in the Law, their Consciences not Accusing nor Hearts
Condemning, but excusing them before God, are in some degree concerned in the
Character of a true Christian. For Christ himself preached and kept his
Father's Commandments; he came to fulfill and not to destroy the Law; and that
not only in his Romans 8. 4.
own Person, but that the Righteousness of the Law might be also fulfilled in
us.

Let us but soberly consider, What Christ is? and we shall the better know,
whether Moral Men are to be reckoned Christians? What is Christ but Meekness,
Justice, Mercy, Patience, Charity and Virtue in Perfection? can we then deny a
Meek Man to be a Christian? a Just, a Merciful, a Patient, a Charitable and a
Virtuous Man to be like Christ? By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice,
says Wisdom, yea, the Wisdom that is from above (see Prove. 8. 15.) so may I
say here; By Christ men are Meek, Just, Merciful, Patient, Charitable and
Virtuous. And Christians ought to be distinguished by their likeness to Christ
and not their Notions of Christ, by his Holy Qualifications, rather than their
own Lofty Professions and Invented Formalities. What shall we say then of that
Extravagancy, which those Men are guilty of, who upon hearing a sober Man
commended, that is not of any great Visible Profession, will take upon them to
cast him off with this Sentence; Tush! he is but a Moral Man: he knows nothing
of saving Grace; be may be damned for all his Morality. Nay, some have gone so
far, as to say and preach (if not Print) That there are Thousands of Moral Men
in Hell.

But it is worth our while to consider, that he that sins, is not saved by Grace
in that state, and that the Virtuous Man is the Gracious Man: for it is the
Nature and End of true Grace, to make Men so. Unanswerable is that Passage of
the Apostle, (to the Romans) Therefore if the Uncircumcision keep the
Righteousness of the Law, shall not his Uncircumcision Romans 2. 26, 27, 28, 29.
be counted for Circumcision? and shall not Uncircumcision which is by Nature,
if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by the Letter and Circumcision do
transgress the Law? For he is not a Jew, who is one outwardly, neither is that
Circum^ision, which is outward in the Flesh; but he is a Jew, which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the
Letter, whose praise is not of Men, but of God. So that he that keeps the Law
of God and abstains from the Impurity of the World, that is the good Man, the
Just Liver; he is the Apostle's true Jew and Circumcision.

Wherefore it is not Ill expressed by that extraordinary Man J. Hales of Eton:
The Moral Man (says he) is a Christian by the surer Side, that is, Speculations
may fail, Notions be mistaken, Forms wither; but Truth and Righteousness will
stand the Test: the Man that loves them, will not be moved. He tells us, That
the Fathers had that Opinion of the Sincerity of the Life of some Heathens,
that they believed, God had in Store for such his (even Saving) Grace, and that
he would make them Possessors of his Everlasting Kingdom. And measuring their
Satisfaction by the Pleasure I took in reading, what the Author both quotes and
Comments upon this Subject, I will venture to transcribe him at large, Viz.

Let it not trouble you, (says he) that I entitle them to some part of our
Christian J. Hales of Eton, Golden Remains, Of dealing with Erring Christians,
page 36, 37.
Faith, and therefore without Scruple to be received as Weak, and not to be
cast forth as Dead. Salvianus disputing What Faith is; Quid est igitur Credulit
as vel Fides? (says he) Opinor fideliter hominem Christo credere, id est,
Fidelem Deo esse, hoc est, Fideliter Dei mandata servare. What might this Faith
be? (says he) I suppose, it is nothing else, but Faithfully to believe Christ;
and this is to be Faithful unto God; which is nothing else, but Faithfully to
keep the Commandments of God. Not therefore only a bare Belief, but the
Fidelity and Trustiness of God's Servants faithfully accomplishing the Will of
our Master, is required as a part of our Christian Faith.

Now, all those good things, which Moral Men by the Light of Nature do, are a
part of God's Will written in their Hearts: wherefore so far as they were
Conscientious in performing them (if Salvianus his Reason be good;) so far have
they Title and Interest in our Faith. And therefore Regulus that Famous Roman,
when he endured infinite Torments, rather than he would break his Oath, may
thus far be counted a Martyr and Witness for the Truth. For the Crown of
Martyrdom sits not only on the Heads of those, who have lost their Lives,
rather than they would cease to profess the Name of Christ; but on the Head of
every one that suffers for the Testimony of a good Conscience and for
Righteousness sake.

And here I cannot pass by one very General gross Mistaking of our Age. For in
our Discourses concerning the Notes of a Christian Man, by what Signs we may
know a Man to be one of the Visible Company of Christ; we have so tied our
selves tothis outward Profession, that if we know no other Virtue in a Man, but
that he has Cond his Creed by heart, let his Life be never so profane, we
think it Argument enough for us to account him within the Pale and Circuit of
the Church. On the Contrary side, let his Life be never so Upright, if either
he be little seen in, or peradventure quite ignorant of the Mystery of Christ,
we esteem of him but as dead. And those, who conceive well of those Moral good
things, as of some Tokens giving Hope of Life, we account but as a kind of
Man^ohees, who thought, the very Earth had Life in it. I must confess, that I
have not yet made that Proficiency in the Schools of our Age, as that I could
see, why the Second Table and the Acts of it are not as properly the parts of
Religion and Christianity, as the Acts and Observations of the First? If I
mistake, than it is St. James that has abused me: for he describing Religion
by its proper Acts, tells us, that True Religion and undefiled before God and
the Father, is, to visit the Fatherless and the Widow in their Affliction, and
to keep himself unspotted of the World. So that the thing which in an Especial
refine Dialect of the New Christian Language signifies nothing but Morality and
Civility, that in the Language of the holy Ghost imports True Religion. Thus
far J. Hales.

He has said so much on this Account, that there is little need, I should say
any more; yet give me leave to add: Did Men mind the Language of the Holy Ghost
more than their own Conceits, they would not Style those Moral Men in a way of
Disgrace, that are not of their Forms; it would suffice, That those, that fear
God and work Acts 11. 34, 35.
Righteousness, in all Nations are accepted of him; That Christ himself has
said, He that does the Will of my Father, which is in Heaven, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven; and of them that work Iniquity, Depart from me, I know
you not.

My Friends, let us not deceive our selves, God will not be mocked; Such as we
sow, we shall certainly reap. The Tree is known by its Fruits, and will be
Judged according to its Fruits: The Wages of Sin is Romans 6. 23.
Death, Men will find it so: and every Man shall receive his Reward suitable to
his Wor^k. For People to talk of Special Grace, and yet be carried away by
Common Temptations, it is Provoking to God: but to conceit, that the Righteous
God will Indulge his people in that Latitude, which he condemns in other Men,
is Abominable. It Is Sanctification, that makes the Saint; and Self-denial, that
constitutes the Christian; and not filling our Heads and Elevating our Fancies
by applying those Promises to our selves, which as yet we have no Interest in,
though we may think they belong to no body else: this Spiritual Flattery of our
selves is most pernicious. I cannot but say with the Apostle, It Is neither
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Jew nor Gentile (this nor Romans 2. 29. Gal. 6.
15. Heb. 12. 14.
the other thing) but the New Creature created after Christ Jesus in Holiness:
for without Holiness no Man shall ever see the Lord. And what is Holiness, but
Abstaining from Wickedness? and what is that, but keeping the Law of God? Great
Peace have they, that love thy Law, said Psalm. 119. 165.
David, that had known the Trouble of Breaking it; Therefore it is, that Grace
and Truth is come by Jesus Christ, to help us to fulfill the Law, not to Excuse
our Disobedience of the Law: And John 1. 16, 17.
what before we were Unable, this gives us Force to do. So that Christianity is
not an Indulgence of people under Weakness and Disobedience, but the
Completing and Perfection of that Righteousness, which without him was but
Short and Imperfect, through that Grace and Power that came by Jesus Christ.

Give me leave, I beseech you, for I have a Godly Jealousy upon me; I fear,
lest the very End of Christ's Coming is Mistaken: And of how Dreadful a
Consequence such a Mistake would be, you cannot possibly be Ignorant that
believe, there is No Salvation in another Name. Let us hear the Testimony of
Scripture: They are the Words of Christ himself; I must Luke 4. 43.
peach the Kingdom of God, for therefore am I sent. Now, what is this Kingdom
of God, but God's Government? and where is this Kingdom and Government to be
set up, Christ also tells us; Behold the Kingdom of God is within you. chapter 17.
20.
So that the Reason of this being sent, is to destroy the Kingdom and
Government of the Devil, the Strong Man, that kept the House, the Heart, and to
erect and establish the Kingdom and Government of God in the Soul. Thy Kingdom
come, thy Will be done: Luke 11. 2.
Would to God, people would but consider what they Pray for! For they are
scandal'd at the thing they ask, and both neglect and revile the Substance of
their own Prayers, Thy Kingdom come, and thy Will be done; but believe neither.
It was the Office God designed his Son to. The Thief John 10. ^1.
(says Christ) does not come, but to kill, to steal and to destroy: That is; To
steal away the Heart from God, and to kill and to destroy all Good Desires and
Inclinations in the Soul: for the Devil is this Thief and Destroyer. But I am
come, says Christ, that they might have Life, and that they might have it more
abundantly. O Death, (...) will be thy Death; as if he had said, I will kill
that, which killed the Soul. I will breath the Breath of Life into it again;
and by my Spirit and Grace I will beget Holy Motions and kindle Heavenly
Desires in it after God, after the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness
thereof: This is the Newness of Life. And I will not only restore that Life the
Soul has lost; but I will increase it: I will add to it, that it may have Life
more abundantly.

Indeed he was Anointed of God for this Purpose, and is therefore called the
Restorer of Paths, the Repairer of Breaches and the Builder up of Waste Places;
that is, he is ordained of God for the Recovery of Man from his Fallen and
Disobedient State. This is the Reason of his Name: Thou shall call his Name
Matthew. 1. 21.
Jesus (said the Angel) for he shall save his People from their Sins: Not from
Wrath only, but from Sin, which is the Cause of Wrath. That is; Of Bad Men he
will make them really good Men, and of Sinful and Unholy he will make them Holy
and Righteous Men, who truly believe in him. This is the Burden of John's
Testimony: There is one (says he) that comes after me, is mightier than I,
Matthew. 3. 11, 12.
he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire; whose Fan is in his
hand, and he will THOROUGHLY PURGE his Floor. And seeing Jesus coming to him,
said, Behold the Lamb of John 1. 29.
God, which TAKES AWAY the SIN of the World.

I know the Use, that too many make of these Scriptures, as if they were an
Hebraism borrowed from the Old Sacrifices: which may be said, To take away Sin
by taking away the Guilt; and not, that the Natures of Men are restored and
perfected. And indeed, this is that Sense, which I dread above all others;
because it perverts the End of Christ's Coming, and lodges Men in a Security
pernicious to their own Souls. For though it is most true, that Remission of
Sins was and is preached in his Name and Acts 10. 43. Ephesians. 1. 7.
Blood, and that Sin in a Sense may be said to be Taken away, when the Guilt of
the Sins is removed by Remission; yet this is only of Si^s past, that upon
Repentance are forgiven: But this is not the Whole, Full and Evangelical Sense,
as Christ's own words do plainly import. For (says he) the Son of Man is come
to save that which was Lost: Matthew. 18. 11. Luke 1^. 10.
And upon another Occasion he expresses himself to the same purpose, and
almost in the same words, For the Son of Man is come to seek and to save that
which was Lost. Now, who is this that is Lost, but Man? and in what Sense can
Man be said to be Lost, but by Sin and Disobedience? that which cast him out of
the Presence and Garden of God, and put him in a Condition of Eternal Misery.
If Christ then came to Save Lost Man, he must be understood to Save him from
that, which puts him into a Lost Condition, that is Sin; for The Wages of Sin
is Death, and the Servant of Sin is a Son of Perdition.

Christ has determined this Point beyond all Exception in his Discourse with
the Jews (John 8. 31, 32, 33, 34.) Then said Jesus to those Jews, which
believed un him, if ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples indeed;
and ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you Free. What Freedom
was this? Certainly from Sin; suitable to that passage in chapter 17. 17.
his Prayer: Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. But some Jews
present, proud of their Privileges, apprehended not the Liberty Christ spoke
of; and therefore answered him thus: We are Abraham's Seed, and were never in
Bondage to any Man; how say thou, Ye shall be made Free? Jesus answered
them; Verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever commits Sin, is the Servant
of Sin. In which place it is very remarkable that Men are only to be
distinguished by their Works, that no Claims, Privileges, Successions or
Dissents are available; but He that commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin. So that
Christ's Free Man is he that is Freed from Sin; this is his Follower and
Disciple. And as Christ opposed the Works of the Jews, (who unjustly sought to
kill him) to their Pretensions they made to Abraham's Seed; so must we oppose
the Actions of Ill Men to their better Professions: we must faithfully tell
them; He that commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin. From which Servitude Christ
came to Save his people, and is therefore called The SAVIOR and the REDEEMER.

This Doctrine is closely followed by the Apostle Paul in his sixth Chapter to
the Romans. Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death, that like
as Christ was raised up from the Dead by the Romans 6. 4, 6, 11.
Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in Newness of Life -- Kn^wing
this, that our Old Man is crucified with him, that the Body of Sin might be
destroyed: that henceforth we should not serve Sin. -- Likewise reckon ye also
your selves to be Dead indeed unto Sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. As if he had said; The End of Christ's Coming is to turn People from
their Sins; and that those, who persist in their Disobedience, resist the
Benefits, that come by him.

Let not Sin therefore reign in your mortal Body, that ye should obey it in the
Lusts thereof. Neither yield ye your Members as Instruments of Unrighteousness
unto Sin; but yield your selves unto God, as those that are Alive from the
Dead, and your Members Romans 6. 12, 13, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23.
as Instruments of Righteousness unto God. -- Know ye not, that to whom ye
yield your selves Servants to obey his Servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether
of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness. -- For when ye were the
Servants of Sin, ye were free from Righteousness. What Fruit had ye then in
those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for the End of those things is Death.
But now being made Free from Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your
FRUIT UNTO HOLINESS, and the End Everlasting Life. For the Wages of Sin is
Death; but the Gift of God is Eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

To Conclude, nothing can be more apparent, then that Freedom from Actual
Sinning, and giving Newness of Life to the Souls of Men, was the great Reason
of Christ's Coming, and the End for which he has given us out of his fullness of
Grace and Truth, and Grace for Grace, and that to be under Grace and not under
the Law, is not to have Liberty to do that now, which ought not to have been
done before (as the Ranters interpret it;) but to be Freed from the
Condemnation of the Law, First through Remission of the Sins that are past upon
Faith and Repentance, and next, by Fulfilling the Righteousness of the Law, in
receiving and obeying the Light and Grace that comes by Jesus Christ.

Very pertinent is that Passage of the Apostle Paul (to Titus) to our present
purpose, for it seems to comprehend the End of Christ's Coming, the Faith and
Duty of his people; which our Great Seldom after all his Painful Readings and
Curious Inquisitions said but a little before his Death, was the Most-Weighty
Passage of the whole Bible to him, as the Bible was the best of Books in the
World, viz: For the Grace of Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.
God, that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men, teaching us, that
denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts we should live Soberly, Righteously and
Godly in this present World, loo^ing for that Blessed Hope, and the Glorious
Appearing of the Great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from ALL INIQUITY, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people Zealous of Good Works.

In which Comprehensive Passage we find the End of Christ's Coming to be Our
Redemption from all Iniquiquity, both to blot out our Sins that are past, and
to purify our Hearts from the Sin that remains. We have the means that works
and brings this Salvation into our Souls, which is the Grace, and the Way, by
which this Grace does accomplish it, is by Teaching us to deny Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present
World. Which has this great Encouragement joined to it, that those who so live,
have only right to look for that blessed Hope and the glorious Appearing of the
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

I will add the Testimony of his Beloved Disciple John, who has defined to us
the End of Christ's Coming thus: Whosoever commits Sin, Transgresses also
the Law; and ye Know, that 1 John. 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
he was manifested to take away our Sins. And to show that this is understood
not only of the Guilt of Sins past, but of the Nature and present Power of Sin
in Man, observe what follows; Whosoever abides in him (Christ) SINS NOT. As
if this Apostle had foreseen the present Mischief Christianity labors under
both on the side of Evil Men and but too many Mistaken Professors, he adds;
Little Children, let no Man deceive you: he that does Righteousness is
Righteous, even as he is Righteous; he that commits Sin is of the Devil, for
the Devil sinned from the Beginning [Now comes his most express Passage to the
Matter in hand] For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
DESTROY the Works of the Devil: Which is more than the Remission of Sins that
are past; here is the DESTRUCTION of the Power and Kingdom of Satan. They that
know not this, know not Christ: for as we, so our Lord is known by his Fruits,
by the Works which he works in us; therefore it is said, that His own Works
praise him.

He therefore that lives in Sin, denies Christ by denying the End of his
Coming: The Fool did not say with his Mouth, but in his Heart, There is no God;
yet but too many now adays plead with their Tongues and Pens, for Sin Term of
Life by endeavoring to show the Impossibility of overcoming Sin. But what
says this Apostle further of the Business? Whosoever is born of God, does not
commit Sin: In this the Children of God are manifest and the Children of the
Devil, whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God; neither he that loves
not his Brother. But if Chap. 1. 7.
you walk in the Light, as God is in the Light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin.
Again: He that says, he abides in Christ, ought Chap. 2. 6, 14.
himself also so to walk, even as Christ walked. A little lower in the same
Chapter he says: I have written unto you Young Men, because ye are strong, and
the Word of God abides in you, and ye have OVERCOME the Wicked One.

I will add one Scripture-Testimony more in the present Case, and it is this:
Herein (says Chap. 4. 17.
John) is our Love made perfect, that we may have Boldness in the Day of
Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this World.

Behold now the true End of Christ's Coming, viz. To SAVE FROM SIN and to purge
us from all Iniquity; that he might present us to God without Spot or Blemish.
Let us not then Flatter our selves, for we shall be the Loosers: neither let us
make the Impossibility through our Infidelity, which a Grain of Sincere Faith
can make not only Possible but Easy: What has been, may be again, nay, in this
Case must be: Did the First Christians overcome the Wicked one? so must the
Last Christians too: were those Ages led by the Holy Spirit and taught by the
Grace of God to live God-like, or like God in the World? so must we of these
Latter Ages too, if we will be blessed forever; that having put off the Old
Man, the Devil and his Works; we may put on Christ the new and heavenly Man,
the second Adam, with his Holy Life and Works, so shall the Fruits of his
Spirit shine through us, which are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Patience,
Gentleness, Gal. 5. 22, 23.
Faith, Meekness, Temperance; for they that are Christ's have Crucified the
Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts: They hear his Voice that leads them out
of the Concupiscencies John 10. 4, 5, 27.
of this Vile World, and they follow him, and he gives unto them Eternal Life,
and a Stranger they will not follow: The World, the Flesh and the Devil make up
this Stranger, and those that are carried away by this Stranger are in an
Unreconciled State to God, and so dying must inevitably perish. Well, then
will be true Christians? Have we Faith, then let us take the Advice of that
good man 2 Pet. 1. 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Peter; Let us add to our Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to
Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness,
and to Godliness Brotherly-Kindness, and to Brotherly-Kindness Charity: For
says he, if these things be in you and abound, they make you, that ye shall
neither be barren nor unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But
he that lacks these things is blind, and cannot see far off, and has
forgotten that he was purged from his Old Sins. Wherefore the rather Brethren,
give Diligence, to make your Calling and Election sure; for if ye do these
things, ye shall never fall. For so an Entrance shall be ministered unto you
abundantly into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
The Fourth Great Ecclesiastical Evil, is Preferring HUMANE AUTHORITY above
Reason and Truth.



This and the next Evil (which is the Last now to be considered, to wit,
Propagation of Faith by Force, Religion by Arms) are the Two Legs, upon which
the false Church has in all Ages, under this degeneracy we find the Jewish
Church at Christ's coming, and he complains of it, Ye teach for Doctrines the
Traditions of men, ye seek to kill me, a man that has told you the Truth: But I
challenge the whole Account of Time and Records of the World, which are come to
the hands of this Age, to tell me, When, where and by whom these Principles
have been received, improved and used with any sort of Proportion or
Comparison, with the Practice of that Church, which has long prided her self
with the Name of Catholic and Christian. And yet I could wish nothing of these
Two Ill Principles had found any place amongst us, that call our selves
Protestants; for to them are properly owing most of that Ignorance
Superstition, Idolatry, Animosity, Persecution and Bloodshed that have been
among Christians, since the Christian Profession has grown to any Power in the
World. I shall consider them severally (respecting us) and in their due Order,
with as much Brevity, as well I can.

That Humane Authority has been preferred above Reason and Truth, that is,
That the Apprehensions, Interpretations, Conclusions and Injunctions of Men
have been reputed the great Necessaries or Essentials to Salvation and
Christian. Comm^ion, insomuch as a Sober and Reasonable Dissent has been too
often overruled not by Weight of Argument or Evidence of Truth, but by the
Power and Numbers of Men in Ecclesiastical Office and Dignity, is (that I may
say Modestly) in some Degree true among us. The First Church Evil reprehended
in this Discourse, may begin the Proof, and give the first Witness upon this
part of the Charge, viz. That OPINIONS have been ma^^ ARTICLES of Faith, that
is, the CONSTRUCTIONS and CONCLUSIONS of MEN from Sacred Writ, and not the
TEXT it self have been enjoined and imposed as ESSENTIAL to Eternal Salvation
and External Christian Communion. Insomuch as no Reason, Scripture or purest
Antiquity have suffered to prevail against such Determinations, and too often
not enough to excuse those, that have pleaded for a Conscientious Dissent from
them; the Authors of them either resting upon the Authority of their own
Judgments, or conforming themselves to the Example of Ages less pure and clear.

I Conscientiously refuse to name Parties, because I am tender of giving the
least Offense; but upon a Just Observance of those Revolutions of Protestancy,
that have been amongst us, we may see, with what Stiffness (not to say
Obstinacy) several Models of Religion and Draughts of Creeds have been
contended for. I would beseech every Party in Christ's Name to look into it
self, for I don't, because such are best able (if they will be Impartial and
put no Cheat upon themselves) to make the Application. However I will name
those Points, about which the Authority of Man as it seems to me has been so
Positive of God, as to his Prescience and Predetermination; Of Christ, as to
his Natures and Personality, and the Extent of his Death and Intercession; Of
Free Will and Grace; Of Faith and Works; Of Perseverance and Falling away; Of
the Nature of the Church; And Lastly, of the Dignity and Power of the Clergy.

And if men please but to lay their Hands upon their Hearts, and cast their
Eyes upon the Scriptures, if they will but use the Light that God has afforded
them, and bring such Debates and Results to the Test of that Light and the
Sound Form of Words, the Holy Ghost has preserved amongst us; I need not take
the Employment upon me of pointing to Humane Authority among the several
Parties of Protestants as to these points; nothing will be clearer. For it is
about the Meaning of this and the Intention of that place of Scripture the
Contest has been and is; and how to maintain and propagate those Conceits; So
that the falling out is in the Wood of our own Opinions, and there the
Contention is kindled, that consumes all about our Ears. O that we would be but
impartial and see our overplus to the Scriptures, and retrench that redancy or
keep it modestly! for it is an horrid thing that we Protestants should assume a
Power of ranging our apprehensions with the Text, and injoining our
Imaginations for Indispensible Articles of Faith and Christian Communion.

But the next proof of the prevalency of Humane Authority amongst us
Protestants is The great Power and Sway of the Clergy, and the Peoples Reliance
upon them for the Knowledge of Religion, and the Way of Life and Salvation.
This is such plain Fact, that almost every Parish proves it. Is not Prophecy
(once the Church's) now engrost by them and wholly in their hands? Who dare
publicly preach or pray, that is not of that Class or Order? Have not they
only the Keys in keeping? May any body else pretend to the Power of Absolution
or Excommunication? muchless to constitute Ministers? Are not all Church Rites
and Privileges in their Custody? don't they make it their proper Inheritance?
Nay, so much larger is their Empire then Caesar's, that only they begin with
Births and end with Burials: Men must pay them for Coming in and Going out of
the World. To pay for dying is hard! Thus their Profits run to the Grave, and
that which is the Loss of others, is their Gain, and a part of their Revenue.

It Is of this great Order and Sept of Men only, that all Synods and
Convocations are (of modern Ages) compounded; and what they determine, is called
the Canons or Decrees of the Church; though Alas! they be only to Obey, what
they Ordain; giving us thereby to understand, that they want the Authority of
her Name, where they deny her to have a part, or to be present.

But they have not only been the Usual Starters of new Opinions, and the great
Creed-Makers among Christians, but the Sway they have with the People, makes
them so Considerable an Interest in the Eyes of the Civil Magistrate, that he
often finds it not for his Ends to disobliege them. Upon this it is, we see
them so Successful in their Solicitations of Public Authority to give its
Sanction to their Opinions and Forms; and not only recommend them (which goes
certainly a great way with the People) but impose the Reception of them, and
that on severe Penalties; in so much, that either men must offer up their
understandings to their Fears, and dissemble Conviction to be safe, or perish;
there is no medium. Something of this lies near us: God Almighty open our Eyes
to see both the Truth and Mischief of this thing.

But what shall I say of that Implicit Reverence the people have for the Clergy
and dependence upon them about Religion and Salvation, as if they were the only
Trustees of Truth, and high Treasurers of Divine Knowledge to the Laity: and we
daily see, that the blind Opinion they have of their Office (as that which is
peculiar to that order and not common to Christians, be their Gifts as they
will) disposes them to rely entirely upon their Performances. The Minister is
Chooser and Taster and every thing for them: They seem to have delivered up
their Spiritual SELVES, and made over the business of Religion, the Rights of
their Souls to their Pastor, and that scarcely with any Limitation of Trust
too: and as if he were, or could be their Garante in the other World, they become
very insolicitous of any further Search. So that if we would examine the
respective Parishes of Protestant as well as Popish Countries, we shall find
(and it is come to that sad pass) that very few have any other Religion then
the Tradition of their Priest: They have given up their Judgment to him, and
seem greatly at their Ease, that they have discharged themselves of the Trouble
of Working out their own Salvation and Proving all things, that they might hold
fast that which is good. And in the room of that care bequeathed the charge of
those Affairs to a Standing Pensioner for the purpose.

Thus the Clergy are become a sort of Mediators betwixt Christ and us, that as
we must go to God by Christ, so must we come to Christ by them; they must be,
it seems, like the high Priests under the Law, that only entered into the Holy
of Holies; whose Lips preserved Knowledge: and by whom we must understand a
Divine Oracle. As if the Mysteries of Salvation are not to be entrusted with
the Vulgar; or that it were a kind of Profanation to expose them to their
View: and the only way to make them cheap and contemptible to suffer Every
Christian to have the keeping of them: (though they belong to every Christian.)
But this Language (thanks be to God) is that of humane Authority, that would
magnify the Mysteries of Salvation by the Ignor^nce of those, that should know
them, as if the Gospel Dispensation were not that of a full Age, but Infancy or
Minority.

It Is true, the State of people under the Law and the Levitical Priesthood is
called a Bondage, Childhood and Minority, and the Law thereof is termed a Gal.
3.
School master to bring to Christ; but it is as true, that the State of
Christianity is reputed the Age of grace, freedom, manhood and Inheritance by
the same Apostle. And that we should have external Guardians of our Faith and
Religion upon us after we are come to Years of Discretion, that might be very
allowable under the ^mbroil Age of our Minority, is not to obtain greater
Freedom, but to make our Case worse. For it is more tolerable to be used as
Children when we are Children, and know nothing above that Condition, then when
riper Years have brought us to the Understanding and Resentment of Men. But it
is almost as unpardonable as it is unsufferable, to make that Infancy the
Perfution of the Christian-Religion, as if there were nothing beyond wearing a
Bib and being fed, carried and governed as Nurses please; that is, as the
Priests will. It is a Knowing and Reasonable, and not a blind Obedience, that
commends a Man; Children should be ruled, because they have no Understanding or
Choice; but because it is not so with Men, Reason ought to conduct them in their
Duty, that the Service they perform to God may be such, as the Apostle calls, a
Reasonable one: The Will is no longer Will if not Free, nor Conscience to be
reputed Conscience, where compelled. The Gospel is not the time of Ceremonial
Works but Faith, therefore not Coercive, because out of our own power; it is
the Gift of God.

But though this be very unhappy, that so excellent a Reformation, founded upon
the freest Principles of Inquiry, common to all-that had Souls to save, should
so miserably degenerate into Formality and Ignorance, Implicit Faith and blind
Obedience; yet that part of our History is most lamentable to me, where we find
the Noble Bereans, the diligent Inquirers, People that desire to prove all
things, that they may hold fast that which is good, such as would see with
their own Eyes, and that dare not transfer the right of Examination to any
mortal man, but who desire to make their Faith and Religion, the Faith and
Religion of their Conscience and Judgment, that on which they dare depend and
rest their eternal Happiness in the Day of Judgment, that, these I say, should
instead of being cherisht, be therefore exposed to the Displeasure of the
Clergy, the Scorn of the Rude Multitude, and the Prosecution of the Civil
Magistrate: this I confess is very anxious to remember, and I only do it for
this purpose, that it may put us in mind of our great Declension from Primitive
Protestancy, and how much Humane Authority has crept into the Affairs of
Religion since that time of the day, when we made it a prime Article of our
Protestant Creed to eject and renounce it. And that you may yet see your selves
short of your own Pretenses, if not contrary to your express Principles, and
how much you have narrow (...) your selves from the use of your First
Principles.

Suppose a Turk be convinced, that Christ is that, which he believed Mahomet to
be, the Greatest of all Prophets, That Mahomet was an Impostor, That Jesus is
the only Savior and Mediator; but being Catechistically taught the Two Natures
in one Person (the Hypostatical Union) in fine, the Athanasian Creed and other
Articles of Faith, or Rites of your Church not so clearly expressed in
Scriptures, and not easy to be apprehended or assented to, will not this poor
Creature be looked upon either as Infidel or Heretic? renounced all share in
Christ and Christian Fellowship, because his Weakness or Understanding will not
allow him to come up to the full Inventory of Articles believed and imposed by
you? Certainly you must either be partial, and give him that Liberty you deny
to Persons of equ^l Tenderness, or else you mustafter your present streightness
conclude him Infidel or Heretic. But I would beseech you that we may consider
if this bears any Proportion with the Wisdom and Love of God, in sending Christ
into the World to save you and me?

The Apostle became All unto all to win some; but this is becoming All unto
none, to force all: he thereby recommends the Utmost Condescension that can be
lawful; but this use of Humane Authority about Faith seems to make it unlawful
to Condescend: As if Force were better than Love, and Conformity (how ever it
become at it) than Christian Condescension.

The Blessed Apostle had his Eye to the Good Intention and Sober Life of the
Weak; and used an holy sort of Guile to catch them: he seems, as if he
^ssembled the Knowledge of those Averse Opinions which they held, or the
necessity of their embracing those Doctrines, which as yet they might not
believe. He fell not to Debate and Canvass Points in Difference between them,
which instead of Union would have enflamed the Difference and raised
Contention; No, no: He became all unto all, that is, He stooped to all
Capacities, and humbled himself to those Degrees of Knowledge that men had, and
valued that which was good in all; and with this Sweetness he practiced upon
them to their further proficiency in the School of Christ. These Allurements
were all his Injunctions, nay, in this Case he makes it an Injunction to use no
other: Let us therefore (says he) as many as be perfect be thus minded; Phil.
3. 15.
and if in any thing ye be OTHERWISE minded, God shall reveal even this unto
you. You shall not be imposed upon, stigmatized or excommunicated for Want of
Full Satisfaction, or because you do not Consent before Conviction; for God
shall REVEAL it to you; you shall see and know what you do, and to God you
shall owe your Knowledge and Conformity, and not to Humane Authority and
Imposition: your Faith shall not be implicit, nor your Obedience blind, the
Reason of your Hope shall be in you.

Pray let us compare this with the Language of our own Times; where People
cannot come up to the Prescriptions of men, but plead the Liberty of Dissent
(though with never so much Sobriety and true Tenderness of Conscience) they are
upbraided after this manner, Are you Wiser than your Superiors? Were our
Forefathers out of the Way? Did no body know the Truth till you came? Are you
Wiser than all our Ministers and Bishops and your Mother the Church? Cannot it
content you to believe as she believes? Is not this Pride and Presumption in
you, a Design to make and head Sects and Parties? with the like Entertainment.

Now this is that which you your selves, at least in the Persons of your
Ancestors have styled POPERY; yea, POPERY in the abstract, the Sum-Total of
that Mystery its great Master piece, to wit, IMPLICIT FAITH and BLIND
OBEDIENCE: If so? then say I, let us also have a care of Pop^ry in Protestant
guise, for that Popery is likely to do us most Injury that is least suspected.
I beg you by the Love of God and Truth, and as you would lay a sure Foundation
Piece here, and eternal Comfort to your own Souls, that you would consider the
Tendency of upbraiding and violently over ruling the Dissent of Conscientious
and Peaceable People: For if you will Rob me once of the Liberty of my Choice,
the Use of my Understanding, the Distinction of my Judgment, no Religion comes
amiss; inde^d it leads to No Religion. 'Twas the Saying of the Old King to the
then Prince of Wales and our present King; Make the Religion of your Education
the Religion of your Judgment: which to me is of the Nature of an Appeal from
his Education to his Judgment about the Truth of his Religion: And that
Religion, which is too tender to be examined is unsound. Prove all things, and
hold fast that which is good, lies an Impeachment against Imposition, delivered
upon Record by the Apostle Paul in the Name of the Holy Gh^st. 'Twas the same
Apostle, that commended the Bereans of Old, for that they diligently searched
the Scriptures, wheth^r those things delivered by the Apostles concerning the
Messiah, were true.

Nay, Christ himself to whom all power was given in Heaven and in Earth,
submitted himself to the Test: he did not require them to believe him, because
he would be believed; he refers them to the Witness, that God bore to him: If I
bear Witness of my self* my Witness is not true. John 5. 31, 32, 37, 39.
He also sends them to the Scriptures, pleads the Truth of his Authority from
that of his Doctrine and Miracles: If I had not done among them the Works which
none other Man Chapter 15. 24.
did. And finally challenges them to convince him but of one Sin: Which of you
convinces me of Sin? and if I say the Truth, why do ye Chapter 8. 46.
not believe me? He offers to reason the Matter, and submit himself to Truth;
and well he might, who was Truth it self.

But an IMPOSING CHURCH bears Witness of her self, and will be both Party and
Judge: it requires Assent without Evidence and Faith without Proof, therefore
false; Christian Religion ought to be carried on only by that way by which it
was introduced, which was PERSWAS^ON; If any man will be my Disciple, let him
take up his Cross and follow me: and this is the Glory of it, that it does not
destroy, but fairly conquer the Understanding.

I am not unacquainted with the Pretenses of Romanists to Ab^egation to a
Mortified and Self denying Life; and I do freely acknowledge, that the Author
of the German Theology, Taulerus and Thomas a Kempis, and others of that sort
of Men in their Communion, have written Excellent Practical Things, but there
is scarcely any thing of this Violent Popery in those Tracts: On the contrary,
the very Nature and Tendency of them is Diametrically Opposite to the present
Constitution of that Church, and all others that practice Imposition in
Religion.

And as it is one great Mark of the False Church to pervert the right End of
True Doctrine, so has she excelled in the Abuse of that Excellent Word
SELF-DENIAL: For she has translated it from Life to Understanding, from Morals
to Faith, Subjugare intellectum in Obsequium fidei (to subject the
Understanding to the Obedience of Faith) is the perpetual Burden of their Song,
and Conclusion of their Conferences. But what is this Faith? that which
conquers the World and purifies the Heart? by no means. But it is to believe
that the Church of Rome is the True Church, and the Pope Christ's Vicar, and
the Visible Head of that Church.

So as that Self denial, which relates to our Wills and Affections in a corrupt
State, they apply to the Use of our Understanding about Religion; as if it were
the same thing to deny that which we understand and know to be Evil (which is
the Christian Self denial) and to deny that very Knowledge and Understanding,
which is God's Gift and our Honor. Whereas Religion and Reason are so
Consistent, as that Religion can neither be understood nor maintained without
Reason. For if this must be laid aside, I am so far from being Infallibly
assured of my Salvation, that I am not capable of any Measure of Good from
Evil, Truth from Falsehood. Why? I have no understanding or use of any, which is
the same. All the Disadvantage the Protestant is under in this is that, of his
greater Modesty, and that be submits his Belief to be tried, which the other
refuses, under the Pretense of unaccountable Infallibility to that Authority
Reason decides.

So that whereas some people excuse their embracing of that Religion by urging
the Certainty that is in it, I do say, It Is nothing but Presumption. For a man
can never be Certain of that, about which he has not the Liberty of Examining,
Understanding or Judging: Confident (I confess) he may be; but that is quite
another thing than being Certain.

Yet I must never deny, but that every Christian ought to believe as the Church
believes, provided the Church be true; but the Question is, Which is that true
Church? And when that is answered; as a Man may Unlawfully Execute a Lawful
Sentence, so he may falsely believe as the True Church believes; for if I
believe, what she believes, only because she believes it, and not because I am
convinced in my Understanding and Conscience of the Truth of what she
believes, my Faith is false, though hers be true: I say, it is not true to me,
I have no Evidence of it.

What is this Church, or Congregation rather (as worthy Tindal every where
translates it) but a Company of People agreed together in the sincere
Profession and Obedience of the Gospel of Christ. Now look what Inducement they
severally had to believe and embrace the Gospel, that we must have to join with
them: for as they made not one another an infallible Authority to one another,
upon which they first embraced the Gospel; neither are we to ground our Belief
thereof upon their Authority jointly; but as they had a Rule to believe and
commune, so must we have the same Rule to embrace their Communion. So that that
Church cannot be the Rule of my Faith, that have the same Faith and Object for
my Faith that she has. I argue thus,

I must believe as the Church believes, that is, I must have the same Faith the
Church has; then I must have the same Rule, because the Church can be no more
the Rule of that Faith, then she can be that Faith of which some would make her
the Rule. If then the Church has Faith, and that Faith a Rule; and that she can
no more be the Rule of her own Faith, then she can be that Faith it self; it
follows, she cannot be the Rule of the Faith of her Members, because those
Members have the same Faith, and that they in Society are this Church. For that
which is the Rule of the Congregation's Faith in general, must reasonably be
the Rule of every Member's Faith that makes up that Congregation; and
consequently of every Member that may hereafter adhere to it. So that to talk
of believing as the Church believes; to flowrish upon that Self-denial and
Humility, which takes all upon Trust, and revile those with the bitterest
Invectives that are modestly scrupulous, and act the BEREANS; for their Souls
(who think that Easiness of Nature and Condescension might be better bestowed,
and in this occasion ill-timed and dangerous) is to put the Knife to the Throat
of Protestancy; and what in them lies to socrifice it to implicit Faith and
blind Obedience. For it cannot be denied but that the great Foundation of our
Protestant Religion is the Divine Authority of the Scriptures from without us,
and the Testimony and Illumination of the Holy Spirit within us. Upon this foot
the first Reformers stood, and made and maintained their Separation from Rome,
and freely offered up their innocent Lives in Confirmation. With good Cause
therefore it is the general Consent of all found Protestant Writers, That
neither Traditions, Councils nor Canons of any visible Church, much less the
Edicts of any Civil Session or Jurisdiction, but the Scriptures only,
interpeted by the Holy Spirit in us, give the final Determination in Matters of
Religion, and that only in the Conscience of every Christian TO HIMSELF. Which
Protestation made by the first public Reformers against the Imperial Edicts of
Charles the fifth imposing Church Traditions without Scripture Authority, gave
first beginning to the Name of Protestant, and with that Name has ever been
received this Doctrine, which prefers the divine Authority of the Scripture and
Spirit to that of the Church and her Traditions. And if the Church is not
sufficient implicitly to be believed, as we hold it is not, what can there else
be named of more force with us, but the Divine Illumination in the Conscience,
or Conscience in the best Sense of the Word, then 1 John 3. 20.
which God only is greater. But if any man shall pretend that the Scripture
judges according to his Conceptions or Conscience for other men, and that they
must take their Religious Measures by the Line of his Direction; such a person
makes himself greater then either Church, Scripture or Conscience.

And, pray, let us consider if in any thing the Pope is by our Protestant
Divinity so justly resembled to Antichrist, as in assuming Infallibility over
Conscience and Scripture to determine as he thinks fit; and so in effect to
give God, Scripture, Magistrates and Conscience the Law. To this they have 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
without scruple applied that to the Thessalonians; Sitting in the Temple of
God, exalting himself above all that is caled God.

To check this exorbitancy, the Apostle Paul demands, Who art thou that judge
another Servant? to his own Lord he stands or falls; which shows with great
Evidence that Christians of all sizes, great and small, are but Brethren, and
consequently all superiority, Lordship and Imposition are excluded; But if
there be a Difference it is in this, that as Christ taught, He that is greatest,
is to be Servant to the rest; but what is more opposite to a Servant then a
Lord, and to Service then Injunction and Imposition, and that on Penalties too?
Here it is that Christ is only Lord and Lawgiver, who is only King of this
inward Kingdom of the Soul: And it is to be noted that the Apostle did not write
this to a private Brother, or in some special Case, but to the Church, as a
General and standing Truth, and therefore now as Authentic and proper as then:
And if this be true, I cannot see how any, or even the most part of the Church,
that are still but Brethren to the rest, of one voluntary Communion and
Profession, can with any show of Reason impose upon them and escape the Reproof
of this Scripture; for all Societies are to govern themselves according to
their Institution and first Principles of Union. Where there is Violence upon
this part, Tyranny and not Order is introduced. Now since Persuasion and
Conviction began all true Christian Society, all Christian Societies must
uphold themselves upon the same free Bottom, or they turn Antichristian. I
beseech you here, let us examine our selves faithfully, and I am of belief that
something of this will yet appear amongst us, that show great Reverence to that
free Name.

But to make good their unreasonable conceit of Church Authority, they object
Christ's Words, GO TELL THE CHURCH, that is, say they, The Church is the Rule
and guide of Faith, whatever the Church agrees upon and requires your assent to
and Faith in, that you must necessarily believe. But though, as before, it is
confessed in a sense we must believe as the true Church believes, yet not because
she so believes, but for the same Reasons that she her self does so believe,
because none can truly believe as she believes, but must so do upon the same
principles and motives, for which they believed that first made up that
Christian Church: To talk of being the Rule and Guide in point of Faith, is to
contradict Scripture, and justle Christ out of the Office which is peculiar to
him and his Spirit; he is given to his Church an Head, that is, a Counselor, a
Ruler, a Judge, Isaiah 6. Romans 8. 14.
and is called a Lawgiver; and says the Apostle, The Children of God are led by
the Spirit of God. And he was Wisdom and Righteousness to the Church
Apostolic, and is so to his own Church all the World over. Besides, it is
absurd that the Church can be the Rule and Guide of Faith, for as such, she
must be her own Rule and Guide, the Faith of the Members being that of the
Church, which cannot be.

But what then can be the meaning of Christ's words, Go tell the Church? Very
well. I answer, it is not about Faith, but Injury? that Christ speaks, and the
place explains it self, which is this: Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Moreover, if thy Brother shall TRESPASS against thee, go and tell him his
fault, between thee and him alone (here is Wrong, not Religion; Injustice, not
Faith or Conscience concerned, as some would have it, to maintain their Church
power) if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother; but if he will not
hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or
three Witnesses every word may be established; and if he shall neglect to hear
them, TELL IT UNTO THE CHURCH; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be
unto thee as an Heathen man and a Publican. Verily I say unto you* whatever ye
shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on
Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven, etc. The matter and manner of which passaged
eliver'd by Christ shows that he intended not to set up Church power about
Faith and Worship; unto which all must bow, even without, if not against
conviction. The word TRESPASS and FAULT, prove abundantly that he only means
private and personal Injuries, and that not only from the undeniable
signification and use of the word TRESPASS and FAULT, but from the way Christ
commands for accommodation, viz. that the person wronged do speak to him that
commits the Injury alone, if that will not do, that he take one or two with
him; but no man can think that if it related to Faith and Worship, I ought to
receive the Judgment of one, or two or three against mine own. This has not
been the practice, at least not the principle of the most degenerated Church
since the Primitive times; for most, if not all agree, that nothing below the
Church can detemine about matters of Faith, and even many with reason cannot go
so far: yet Christ seems to fix a blame upon him that complies not with the
Person he has offended, but more if he refuse to give satisfaction, after one
or two have also entreated him; therefore it cannot relate to matters of Faith
and scruples of Conscience, but personal and private Injuries: Which is yet
clearer from this part of Christ's saying, viz. That in the Mouth of two or
three Witnesses every Word may be established. Which Implies a Trial and
Judicial proceeding as is customary in civil cases, about personal and private
Trespasses; for it were not so proper to speak of Witnesses on any other
account. This is interpreted beyond exception by the Apostle to the
Corinthians, where he reproves and 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2.
forbids them, to go to Law one with another before Unbelievers, arguing thus,
Do you not know that the Saints shall Judge the World, and if the World shall
be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? This shows the
meaning of Church Authority is those days, and is a natural Exposition upon
Christ's words (in case of Trespass and Refractoriness) Tell the Church. And
it is yet the Practice of all sober, just and quiet People, raher to refer their
Controversies to approved men, than to tare one another to pieces at Law.

But it is worth our notice that as any Decision up on an arbitration oblieges
only the Parties to sit down content with the awardment of such loss or gain as
they the Arbitrators think equal (as the next best way to accommodate
differences, and not that such awardment should alter their first Thoughts and
Opinion they had of their right, or force them to declare they are of the
Arbitrators mind.) So is it most unreasonable, where the Church is only an
Arbitrator about Personal trespasses or umpire at most, to imagine a Power to
determine and impose Faith, and that upon severe Penalties as well of this
(unto which Christ's Church has no relation) as of the other World; I say, this
very thing well weighed breaks all their Fallacies to pieces, and decides the
business beyond all contradiction between those that stand upon the Spirit
within and the Scripture without on the one hand, and such as merely rest upon
the Traditions of Men and Authority of the Church on the other hand. For if in
an Arbitration I am not bound to be of the Arbitrators mind, though for Peace
sake I submit to their Award, and that the Church Power in this place
controverted relates only to external and personal Trespasses, Injuries or
Injustices, as the place it self plainly proves, there can be no sense, reason
or modesty in the Earth, on the part of those high Church men, who would from
hence wring and extort the Power of defining, resolving and imposing upon all
people, under temporal and eternal punishment, Articles of Faith and Bonds of
Christian Communion.

I Conclude this of the Church with saying, that it is not Identity of Opinion,
but Justice, not Religious Uniformity, but Personal Satisfaction that concerns
the text, and therefore Reason, sober Conscienc^ and good Sense may at any time
lawful insist upon their claim to be heard in all their Scruples or Exceptions
without disrespect to that excellent Doctrine (when rightly understood) Go tell
the Church.

To this let me add something about this great Word CHURCH. Some men think they
are sure enough if they can but get within the pale of the Church that have not
yet considered what it is. The Word CHURCH, signifies any Assembly, so the
Greeks used it; and it is by Worthy Tindal every where translated Congregation.
It has a two fold sense in Scripture. The first and most excellent Sense is
that, in which she is called the Body and Bride of Christ. In this respect she
takes in all Generations, and is made up of the Regenerated, be they in Heaven
or on Earth, thus Ephesians. 1. 22. 5. 23, to 33. Col. 1. 16, 17. 18. Heb. 12. 22,
23. Rev. 21. 2. Chap. 22. 17. Here Christ only can be Head; this Church is
washed from all Sin, not a Spot nor a Wrinkle left; ill men have nothing to do
with this Church, within whose pale only is Salvation; nor is this Universal
and truly Catholic Church capable of being conveen'd to be told of Wrongs or
Trespasses. The other use of that Word in Scripture is always referred to
Particular Assemblies and Places, that is the Church which by Christ's Doctrine
is to be told of Personal Injuries and whose determination for Peace sake is to
be adhear'd to must of necessity be the adjacent or most contiguous company of
Christian Believers, those to whom the Persons in difference are by external
Society and Communion related; and that such private and distinct Assemblies
are so called the Church, is apparent from the acts and writings of the
Apostles the Church of Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia,
Thessalonica, Crete, etc. peruse these places, Acts 5. 11. and 9. 31. and 11.
22, 26. and 14 23, 27. Romans 16. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 2. and 4. 17. and 14. 4. Rev. 2.
and 3. Chap. By which it plainly appears that the Universal visible Church, so
much bragged of for the Rule and Judge of Faith, etc. is an upstart thing, and
like mean Families or ill got Goods, it uses false Heraldry to give it a Title.

For the Apostoilick times, to which all others must vail and by whom they must
be tried, know no such conceit; and the Truth is, it was then first started,
when the Pride of one man made him ambitious, and his Power able to bid for
Headship, Empire and Soveraignity; 'twas then needful to his being Universal
head, that he should first have an Universal body. But suppose such a Church
there were, it is utterly Impossible that such a Church could be called together
in anyone place, or at any one time to be told or to determine of any thing; so
that yielding the thing by them desired, it is useless and impracticable to the
ends they desire it for. But alas! who knows not, that loves not to be blind,
that the Church among them is the Priesthood, the few cunning men govern the
Majority, and entitle their conceits, the Canons of Christ's Church; and humane
Power and Force, the Policy and Weapons of this world, must back their decrees.
And all this comes from the Ignorance and Idleness of the People, that give the
Pride and Industry of the Clergy an opportunity to effect their crafts upon
them. For so mean spirited are the People as to take all upon trust for their
Souls, that would not trust an Archbishop about a slit Groat.

It Is prodigious to think what Veneration the Priesthood have raised to
themselves by their usurpt Commission of Apostleship, their pretended
Successions, and their CLINK CLANK of extraordinary Ordination. A Priest, a God
on Earth, a Man that has the Keys of Heaven and Hell; do as he says, or be
damned; what power like to this? The Ignorance of the People of their Title and
Pretenses, have prepared them to deliver up themselves into their hands, like a
Crafty Usurer, that hedges in the Estate on which he has a Mortgage; and thus
they make themselves ever in Fee to the Clergy, and become their proper
Patrimony. So that believing as the Church believes, is neither more nor less
then Rooking men of their Understandings, or doing as ill Gamesters are wont to
do, get by using false Dice. Come, come, it is believing as the Priesthood
believes, which made way for that offense wise and good men have taken against
the Clergy in every Age: And did the People examine their bottom, the ground of
their Religion and Faith, it would not be in the Power of their Leaders to
cause them to Err; an implicit Veneration to the Clergy begun the Misery! What!
Doubt my Minister! arraign his Doctrine, put him to the Proof! by no means; but
the Consequence of not doing it has been the Introduction of much false
Doctrine Superstition and Formality, which gave just occasion for Schism (for
the Word has no hurt in it, and implies only a Separation, which may as well be
right as wrong.)

But that I may not be taxed with partiallity or upbraided with sigularity,
there are two Men, whose Worth, Good Sense and True Learning I will at any time
engage against an entire Convocation of another Judgment, viz. Jacobus Acontius
and John Hales of Eaton, that are of the same mind; who, though they have not
writ much, have writ well and much to the purpose. I will begin with Jacobus
Acontius at large, and do heartily beseech my Readers to be more then
ordinarily intent in reading what I cite of him, their Care and Patience will
be requited by his Christian and very acute Sense.

It remains, that we speak of such Causes of the not perceiving, that a Change
of Doctrine is introduced, as consist in the Persons that are taught. Now they
are chiefly two, Carelessness and Ignorance. Carlesness for the most ^part
arises hence, In that the people trust too much to their Pastors; and per
swade themselves, that they will not slip into any Error, and that therefore
they have small need to have an Eye over them, but that they are bound rather
to embrace whatsoever they shall hold forth, without any curious Examination.
Hereunto may be added many other businesses, whereunto men addict themselves:
For that Saying is of large extent, Where men's Treasure is, there is their
Heart, and that other, No man can serve two Masters. Now, how it may come to
pass that after a people has once had a great Knowledge of Divine Truths, the
said Knowledge may as it were vanish away, besides that Cause which has been
even now alleged, we shall in another place make discovery of some other
Reasons. We shall for the present add only this one; That the people themselves
are in a perpetual kind of Mutation, some daily dying and departing, others
succeeding and growing up in their stead. Whence it comes to pass, That since
the Change which is made in every Age, is small, either the people cannot
perceive it; or if they do observe it, yet they esteem it not of such moment,
as to think fit to move any Difference thereabout. This thing also is of very
great force, to keep the people from taking notice of a Change in Doctrine;
when men shall persuade themselves, that they are not able to judge of matters
of Religion, as though it is, it is not, and other words used in Scripture, do
not signify the same which they do in common discourse, or as if nothing could
be understood without some great Knowledge in the Tongues and Arts or Sciences,
and as if the Power of the Spirit were of no efficacy without these Helps.
Whereby it comes to pass, that whilst they think they understand not even
those things which in some sort they do understand, being expressed in most
clear and evident words; they do at length arrive to that Blockishness that
they cannot understand them indeed; so that, though they have before their Eyes
a Sentence of Scripture so clear, that nothing can be more evident; yet if they
to whose Authority they in all things subject themselves, shall say any thing
point blank opposite thereunto, they will give credit unto them, and imagine
themselves not to see that which they see as clear as the Light. And by these
means verily it comes to pass, That when the Doctrine of Religion is corrupted,
the Mutation is not discovered: Furthermore, when the Doctrine is once begun to
be changed, it must needs be, that out of one Error another should spring and
propagate infinitely; and God, for Just Reasons of his own, blinding them, men
bring upon themselves so great Darkness, and slip into such soul Errors; That
if God out of Mercy open a man's Eyes, and let him see those Errors he lives in,
he can scarcely believe himself, or be persuaded that he was ever enveloped
with such blind Errors. Which thing is as true, and as well to be seen in Men
of greatest Learning and Experience. If thou shall thoroughly peruse the writings
of some of the Schoolmen (as they call them) thou shall in some places meet
with so much Accuteness, as will make thee admire. Thou shall see them
oftentimes cleave a fine Thread into many parts, and accurately Anotomise a
Flea, and a little after fall so foully, and avouch such Absurdities, That thou
can not sufficiently stand amazed; wherefore we must obey that Advice of the
Poet;

Principijs obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Resist betimes; that Medicine stays too long,
Which comes when Age has made the Grief too strong.
Now there is need of a double Caution: viz. That there be no Change made in
the Doctrine, when it is pure: And if any Change be made, that there be notice
taken of it. Now look what Change is made in this kind, all the Blame is laid
upon those whose Office it is to instruct the People; for though themselves are
the Authors of the Change, yet will the people impute it to the Ministers
Sleepiness and want of Care at least. It concerns therefore the Pastors and
Teachers to be Eagle eyed, and to be very well acquainted with those Causes
whereby the Change of Doctrine becomes undiscovered, and to have them at their
Fingers ends, and to be wary, that on no hand they may miscarry. Now it will be
an excellent Caution for the keeping of Doctrine pure, if they shall avoid all
curious and vain Controversies: If they shall set before their Eyes the scope
and end of all Religious Doctrine, and likewise a Series or Catalogue of all
such things as make to the attainment of that End (of which we formerly spoke;)
if they shall affect not only, the matter it self, but also the words and
phrases which the Holy Ghost in Scripture makes use of, and exceedingly suspect
all different Forms of speaking. Not that I would have them speak nothing but
Hebraisms; for so their Language would not be plain nor intelligible: but I
wish that they will shun all such Expressions, as have been invented by
overnice Disputants, beyond what was necessary to express the sense of the
Hebrew and Greek, and all those Tenets which men by their own Wits do collect
and infer from the Scriptures. Now of what Concernment this will be, we may
gather by this Instance: The Papists think it one and the same thing to say,
The Church cannot err; and to say in the words of our Lord, Wheresoever two or
three shall be gathered together in my Name, there will I be in the midst of
them. Yet is the Difference very great, which may thus appear; forasmuch as in
case any one shall conceive the Church to be the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops
anointed by the Pope: he hearing the aforesaid Sentence, will judge, that
whatsoever they shall decree, ought to be of Force. But if he shall rather mind
the words of our Lord, and shall consider that those kind of men, do regard
nothing but their own Commodity, Wealth and Dominion; he will be so far from so
understanding them, that peradventure not being able to allow the Deeds and
Practices of these Men, he will come to hope from those words, That if himself
with some other good Men loving God with their whole Heart, shall come
together, and unanimously implore the Assistance of God, shall be better able
to determi^ What it is that ought to be believed and practiced for the
attainment of Salvation, then if they should persist to put their Confidence in
such Pastors. Now this Rule, that the words of the Scripture ought to be used
rather than any other, is then especially to be observed, when any thing is
delivered as a certain and tried Truth, or as a Rule of Faith or Life, or out
of which any other thing is to be inferred. For in Expositions and
Explanations, as there is need happily of greater Liberty, so is there less
Danger if it be taken. For, whenas the Word of God, and the exposition thereof,
are at one and the same time both together in view, as it were; there no man
can be ignorant, that the Exposition is the word of Man, so that he may reject
it, in case it seem impertinent. And look by what means a man may hinder the
Doctrine of Religion from being changed, by the self-same he may find whether
it be changed or no. Now every man ought to compare the Doctrine of that Age
wherein he lives, with no other Doctrine then that which was out of question
spotless, which is the Doctrine of the Apostles. Wherefore, notwithstanding
that in our Age the Gospel is as it were revived, yet ought not any man thus to
think, That he ought to examine whether the Gospel has lost any of that Purity
whereunto it had at this time arrived; he ought rather to look again and again,
whether some Corruption do not yet remain, whether it be not in some part, as
yet not sufficiently restored to its ancient Purity and Luster: and confidently
persuade himself, That he cannot be (that I may so speak) sufficiently
superstitious, in rejecting every word which is not in the Scriptures.
Forasmuch as man will ever (...) more Wise and Wary than the holy Spirit, and
can very hardly forbear to mingle somewhat from his own head: so that whatever
comes from man, can never be sufficiently suspected. And because a thing will
be so much the better preserved, by how much the greater is the number of those
that keep it: the people ought often to be put in mind, That both the reading
of the Scriptures, and the Care of Religion belongs not to the Pastors of the
Church only; but that every one that would be saved ought to make diligent
search, whether any Corruption be already, or is for the future like to be
introduced; and this to do no less carefully, then if he were persuaded that
all beside himself were asleep: and whatsoever is wont to take the common
people off from such studies, Care must be taken that that thing be wholly
taken away. Concerning which matter, we shall more conveniently discourse anon.

Now, forasmuch as the profit will be small, if some private man shall observe
that an Error is introduced, unless he discover the said Error, and lay it
open: there must of necessity be some way how this may conveniently be done.
Now there cannot be a more fitting way, then that which the Apostle propounds
to the Corinthians. Let two or three Prophets speak, and let the rest judge;
and if any thing 1 Cor. 14.
be revealed to him that sits by, let the former be silent. For ye way all
prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be exhorted. If some one
person shall always speak in the Church, and no man at any time may contradict
him; it will be a very strange thing, if that one man be not puffed up, if he
do not fall into such a Conceit of himself, as to think that he is the only
man, that he only has understanding, he alone is wise: that all the rest are a
company of brute Animals as it were, who ought to depend only upon him, and to
do nothing but learn of him. And if any man shall think, that himself likewise
has some ability to teach, he will account that man an heinous offender. But
what says the Apostle to this? Did the Word of God come from you? or came it
unto you only? If any seem to be a Prophet, or Spiritual; let him acknowledge
what I write unto you to be the commands of the Lord. But if any one be
ignorant, let him be ignorant. Wherefore Brethren, labor that ye may
Prophecy, and forbid not to speak with Tongues, let all things be done
decently, and in order. It is exceedingly to be lamented, That this custom, and
the practice of this command of the Lord, is not again restored into the
Churches, and brought into use. But some men may say; Such is the rastness of
this Age of ours, such the boldness, such the impudence, That if it were
allowed to every one to speak in the Congregation, there will be no end of
Brawls and Contention. Why so? Is a man another kind of Creature now, then what
he was of Old? Thou will say, he is. For mankind has continually degenerated,
grown worse and worse, and seems now to have attained the top of Corruption. Is
it so indeed? But, suppose it to be so; Thou that art the Teacher of the
people, art not thou also thy self made of the same Mold? Art not thou born in
the same Age? Inasmuch as this ordinance principally was intended to keep
Pastors within the bounds of modesty: that they may understand, That they are
not the authors of the Word of God, that they have not alone received the
Spirit: by how much the more mankind has degenerated, by so much the greater
need is there thereof; for that there is now more rashness, Arrogance, Pride,
then of Old; this is true, as well of the Pastors and Teachers, as of the rest
of the people, Art thou a Prophet, have thou any portion of the Spirit? If thou
have not, so unfitting it is, that thou alone should speak in the
Congregation, that there will hardly be found any that desires rather to be
silenc't, then thy self. But if thou art a Prophet, if thou have the Spirit,
mark what the Apostle says, Acknowledge (quoth he) that those things which I
write, are the Commandments of the Lord. Go to then, On the one side we have
the judgment of our Lord, willing that Prophecy (for this is a Word that we are
obliged to use) should be common to all, and that not for the Destruction, but
the Salvation of the Church. On the other side, we have thy Judgment who
fear lest that may breed Contentions and Confusion; whose Judgment now ought
we rather stand to? If thou shall conceive we must stand to thine: consider
what thou assumest unto thy self, and what will become of thy modesty. Our
Lord, it should seem, understood not what a kind of Creature man was; he wanted
thy wisdom belike to admonish him of the danger; or happily he thought not upon
that Corruption which should befall mankind, whereby such a Liberty might prove
unprofitable. But Paul answers thee, That God is not the author of Contention,
but of Peace: Who well knowing what might move Contentions, what beget Peace,
and not loving nor willing to have Contention, but Peace, willed that this
liberty of Prophesying should be in the Church. What can thou say to the
contrary? what have thou to object against God himself, will thou accuse him of
indiscretion? No man has so wicked a Tongue, as to dare to do it. Yet if thou
shall diligently search thine Heart, thou shall find there a certain
disposition ready to contend even with God himself: Which motion of thy Heart
must by no means be hearkened unto, but sharply repressed, and wholely subjected
to the Spirit of God. It may seem peradventure an absurd thing, That after some
very learned person has spoken, some contemptible person shall be allowed to
contradict him. Can such a person so do without great rashness and temerity?
Were I to speak according to the judgment of man, verily I could not deny it.
But if we be really persuaded, That the knowledge of matters Divine, ought not
to be attributed to our Watching, Studies, Wits, but to God, and to his Spirit,
wherewith he can in a moment endue the simplest person in the World, and that
with no more labor or difficulty, then if he were to give him to one that had
spent Nestor's Age in study: What reason is there for me to judge that this man
does rashly and unadvisedly, if he shall arise and contradict? Is not the
Spirit able to reveal somewhat to him, which he has hidden from thee? Now, if
the Spirit have revealed somewhat to him, and to that end revealed it that he
might contradict, that by his means the thing may be revealed to the Church:
shall I say that he has done rashly in obeying the holy Ghost? And if thou
think otherwise, verily thou art not persuaded that the Spirit is the Author
and Teacher of this Knowledge, but that all the praise thereof is due to
Studies, Watchings, and the Wits of men. And if this be thy judgment, I tell
thee again, That thou art not only unworthy to be the sole Speaker, but worthy
rather to be the only person not permitted to speak in the Congregation.

And that thou may the better understand, that the most Unlearned ought to be
allowed to speak, consider, God will have himself to be acknowledged the Author
of his own gifts: he will not have his praise attributed unto our Studies or
Wits, but unto himself. But if the man that has spent all his Life in Study,
speak wisely, it is not attributed to God, but to study: In word, perhaps it
may be attributed to God, yet not without a vehement Reluctance of our
Judgment: and this is that which (I say) God will not abide. But if so be thou
shall hear a wise word come out of the Mouth of some unlearned Person, thou
must needs, whether thou will or no, acknowledge God to be the Author thereof.
So, when God was minded to give unto ^srael a Victory against the Midianites,
under the Conduct of Gideon; and Gideon had gathered together Thirty Thousand
Men, lest the Israelites should boast that they had gotten the Victory by their
own Strength, and not by the Assistance of God, (which might have been
conceived, if Gidean had fought with so numerous an Army) he would not suffer
him to have above Three hundred, that it might appear that he was the Cause of
the Victory, and not the Number or Valor of those that fought. Now, besides
the Glory of God, hereby great Profit does accrue to the Church. For if the
People shall see now one man, now another, endued with the Spirit, beyond all
Expectation; many will thereby be encouraged to hope for the same Gift, if they
shall ask it; many will learn and profit; and it will thereby come to pass,
that when Occasion shall be to choose a Minister, the Church shall not need to
call strange and unknown Persons to that Office, but she may have of her own
such as are fit to be chosen, Men whose Conversation and Manners are
sufficiently known. And when the number of such as are able to prophecy, shall
be great, the Church will not be forced to use such Pastors as from their very
Childhood have proposed to themselves such Offices as the reward of their
Studies; and addicted themselves to the study of Scripture and Religion, no
otherwise then they would have done to some Trade, whereby they meant in time
to get their Living: So that a Man can expect but very few of them to prove
other then Mercenary or Hireling Pastors.

Now, that it was the Custom of the Jewish Church, that all might thus
Prophecy; we may hence conjecture, in that it is upon Luke 4.
Record, Luke 4. how our Lord, upon the Sabbath day decording to the Custom,
came into the Synagoguge, took a Book and expounded a place of Esaias; and how,
being twelve years of Age he sat at Jerusalem in the Temple among the Doctors,
and did aispute. For he could not so do by virtue of any ordinary office,
forasmuch as his Age was incapable, neither did the Doctors know who he was.
Yea rather, our Lord in so doing must needs make use of the power which was
granted to every one to speak. It remained in the Christians Congregations
until the times of Constantine at the least. Forasmuch as we have these words
of Eusebius, the Writer of Church Eccl. Hist. lib. 9.
affairs, to that effect: If any man inspired by the Grace of God, should speak
unto the People, they all with great silence fixing their Eyes upon him gave
such attention, as if he had brought them some Errand from Heaven. So great was
the reverence of the hearers, such order was seen among the Ministers. One
after another, another after him. Neither was there only two or three that
Prophesied, according to what the Apostle said, but to all was given to speak;
so that the wish of Moses seems rather to have been fulfilled in them, when he
said, Would God all the People might Prophecy. There was no Spleen, no Envy,
the gifts of God were dispensed, every one, according to his ability,
contributing his assistance for the confirmation of the Church: And all was
done with love, in such sort, That they strove mutually to^honour each other,
and every one to prefer another before himself. But to the end this common
prophesying may be profitable to the Church, we must diligently mark what the
Apostle advises, For a sure thing it is, that the Pride of Man is so great,
that whatever has once fallen from him, he will by any means have it stand for
a Truth, neither can he suffer that any man should infringe the same. So that
if he might be permitted to judge, that last spoke, it will be a Miracle, if a
man in his Life time should see any one give way to him that contradicts him:
What is Paul's advice therefore in this case? Let two or three Prophets speak,
and let the rest judge. He will not therefore have the same Persons to be
Parties and Judges. And he adds a little after, And the Spirit of the Prophets,
is subject to the Prophets; for God is not the Author of dissension, but of
Peace. So that as soon as any man has spoken his own mind, he ought to rest
himself satisfied with the judgment of the rest, and not obstinately to make no
End of contending: if this be not done, a sure thing it is, there will be no
end of strife. But what if any man will not be content to submit to the
Judgment of the rest: Verily I would avouch, that being sharply admonished,
that he disturb not the Congregation, and that he go not against the command of
the Apostle, or rather of our Lord, commanding the Spirits of the Prophets to
be subject to the Prophets; he ought to be cast out of the Society, though he
should hold the prime place in the Congregation. The people likewise must
frequently be admonished; that liberty for any one to speak in the
Congregation, is not therefore granted by the Apostle, to the end every one
should speak what comes to his Tongues end, as if he were in a Market; but
whereas he gives liberty to him to speak to whom any thing is revealed, he
would have all Rashness and Impudence to be laid aside. He that reverences not
the Church of God, let that man know, he despises the Spirit of God, who is
President there; and shall be sure not to escape unpunished. Before a man
propounds any thing to the Church, he ought to consider again and again, how
sure a manifestation he has of that thing, and whatever the matter be, let him
be sure not to forget a sober, modest, bashful behavior, without which
virtues, doubtless no good can be effected. But here we must attentively
consider, both how far a man ^ught to submit to the judgment of the
Congregation, and who may deservedly be accounted a Troubler of the Church.
Verily, I conceive a man ought so far to give way, as that after I have
alleged what I had to say for my Opinion, if yet the rest shall not allow of
my Judgment, I ought to give over defending of it, and cease to be troublesome
to the Congregation concerning the same: But I ought not to be compelled to
confess that I have erred, or to deprecate any fault, whiles I do not yet
understand that I have erred, for so I should sin against God. He therefore is
a Troubler of the Church, that will not, so far as we have expressed, submit to
the judgment of the Church, but goes on to be troublesome; but especially that
man who would exact of another that which he ought not to do; viz. to recant,
being not persuaded that he is in an Error. But those men are commonly reputed
troublers of the Church who refuse to ratify whatever shall any ways fall out
of the Pastors Mouths. Again, in this place it may reasonably be demanded,
whether, when that a matter has been once or twice debated, and some man
knowing the judgment of the Congregation, would again reduce it into
Controversy, he ought to be heard, or enjoined silence, and take the matter
for determined. But of this we shall in another place more conveniently
dispute. That which remains therefore, is, that we wrestle with God, by daily
Prayers, to grant that we may have the use of this so sovereign and saving
liberty, so profitable to the Church, and that thereby we may reap abundance of
Fruit. And that he would, to that end, tame and break our Spirits with his
Spirit, and render them mild and gentle: and not suffer what he has ordained
for the confirmation and establishment of his Church, to be by the stubbornness
and perverseness of our Wits and Minds, turned to the mischief and destruction
thereof. With much more to the same purpose, too large to be here inserted.

What I have cited, makes an Apology for doing so, needless: his whole Book is
a most accurate account of Satan's Stratagems, to cause and keep up divisions
among Christians, deserving a first place with the most Christian Writers since
the Apostolical times. He was an Italian, of excellent Natural and Supernatural
endowments, Banished about Luther's times for the Gospel.

Let us now inform our selves of the Judgment of that great Man J. Hales upon
the matter in hand, viz To your second J. Hales, Of the Keys, page 170, 171,
172, 173.
Query, Whether the Keys were confined to the Apostles only? The Answer is in
no case hard to give, it may perchance in some case be dangerous; for there is
a Generation of men in the World (the CLERGY they call them) who impropriate
the Keys unto themselves, and would be very angry to understand, that others
from themselves should claim a right unto them. To your Question then, no doubt
but originally none received the Keys from the Mouth of our Savior, but the
Apostles only; none did nor ever could manage them with that Authority and
Splendour, as the Apostles did, who were above all most amply furnished with all
things fitting so great a Work. For whereas you seem to intimate, that the
preaching Mission was communicated to others, as the seventy two Disciples, as
well as the Apostles; you do but mistake your self, if you conceive that the
Keys of the Gospel were any way committed to them; for concerning the
Mysteries of Jesus Christ, and him crucified for the Sins of the World (wherein
indeed the opening of the Kingdom of Heaven did consist) they received it not,
they knew it not. To be the prime Reporters of this, was an honor imparted
only to the Apostles: Yet were they not so imparted, as that they should be
confined to them. Every one that heard and received the Light of the saving
Doctrine from them, so far forth as he had understanding in the ways of Life,
had now the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to his Power, both for his
own and others use. Every one, of what State or Condition soever, that has any
occasion offered him, to serve another in the ways of Life, CLERGY, or LAY,
MALE or FEMALE, whatever he be, has these Keys not only for himself, but for
the b^nefit of others. For if Natural goodness teach every man, Lumen de
Lumine, Erranti comiter monstrare viam, etc. Then how much more does Christian
Goodness require of every one, to his ability, to be a Light to those who sit
in Darkness, and direct their steps, who most dangerously mistake their way? To
save a Soul, every man is a Priest. To whom I pray you, is that said in
Leviticus, Thou shall not see thy Brother Sin, but thou shall reprove, and save
thy Brother? And if the Law binds a Man, when he saw his Enemies Cattle to
stray, to put them in their way; How much more does it obliege him to do the
like for the Man himself? See you not how the whole World conspires with me in
the same Opinion? Does not every Father teach his Son, every Master his
Servant, every Man his Friend? How many of the Laity in this Age, and from time
to time in all Ages, have by writing for the public good, propagated the
Gospel of Christ, as if some secret instinct of Nature had put into men's minds
thus to do, etc.

To this let me add his Sense of the force of the Fathers Authority in the
decision of Controversies, and how far the Ancients, whether Fathers or
Councils ought to be interrested in the debates of these times, which may not
be improper to the present subject, because not a few build upon their bottom.

You shall find (says he) that all Schisms have crept into the Church by one of
these three ways; either upon matter J Hales, Tract of Schism, p. 201, 202,
203, 204.
of Fact, or matter of Opinion, or point of Ambition. For the first; I call
that matter of Fact, when something is required to be done by us, which either
we know, or strongly suspect to be unlawful; so the first notable Schism, of
which we read in the Church contained in it matter of Fact; For it being, upon
Error taken for necessary, that an Easter must be kept; and upon worse then
Error, if I may so speak, (for it was no less than a point of Judaism forced
upon the Church) upon worse than Error, I say, thought further necessary, that
the ground for the time of our keeping that Feast, must be the Rule left by
Moses to the Jews; there arose a stout Question, whether we were to Celebrate
with the Jews, on the fourteenth Moon, or the Sunday following? This matter,
though most unnecessary, most vain, yet caused as great a Combustion. as ever
was in the Church; The West separating and refusing Communion with the East,
for many Years together. In this Fantastical Hurry, I cannot see, but all the
World were Schismatics: neither can any thing excuse them from that
Imputation; excepting only this, that we charitably suppose that all Parties
out of Conscience did what they did.

A thing which befell them through the Ignorance of their Guides, (for I will
not say their malice) and that through the just Judgment of God, because
through sloth and BLIND OBEDIENCE Men examined not the things, which they were
taught, but like Beasts of Burden patiently couched down, and
indifferently underwent whatsoever their Superiors laid upon them. By the way,
by this you may plainly see the danger of our appeal unto Antiquity, for
resolution in Controverted points of Faith, and how small Relief we are to
expect from thence. For if the discretion of the chiefest Guides and Directors
of the Church, did in a Point so trivial, so inconsiderable, so mainly fail
them, as not to see the Truth in a Subject, wherein it is the greatest Marvel
how they could avoid the sight of it; can we without imputation of extreme
grosness and folly, think so POOR SPIRITED persons competent Judges of the
Questions now on Foot betwixt the Churches? Pardon me, I know not what
Temptation drew that Note from me.

How these men will come off I cannot tell; they have ventured fairly, and yet I
think their case not hazard us at all; you have them in three points plain.
First, That relying upon the Clergy as Guardians of Truth to the People, and
the Peoples not examining the truth of things from them, is not Apostolical,
but Apostatical. Secondly, That no Councils or Fathers ought to be the Rule or
Judge of our Faith. Thirdly, That to save Souls every Man is a Priest; that is,
the people are interressed in the Christian Ministry, which is not tied to
Times, Places, Persons and Orders, as under the Law; but free to all that have
obtained Mercy and Grace from God; and therefore Peter calls the believers a
Royal Priesthood. So that every one is Priest to himself under the Gospel. But
all this I have mentioned with design, if it be possible, to beat men off that
superstitious and dangerous Veneration they carry to the Names of Church,
Priesthood and Fathers; as if they were to be said by them, and not by Christ,
who is only Head and Savior of the true Church. And truly, when I consider the
wild dependence some people have upon the Church, whilst they know not what
she is, and make it a Principle not to Inquire, I am amazed with what
Confidence, they expose their Souls. This Principle it is, and not Inquiry,
that makes men careless and unactive about their own Salvation. But let none
deceive themselves, as they Sow they must Reap. It Is not to be saved, to be
within the Pale of any visible Church in the World. That is putting an eternal
Cheat upon our selves. Ill things are Ill things, within or without the pale;
that matters not; and as Sin cannot be Christened, nor impiety reconciled to
Christianity by no Arts of men, so the Wages will be Death; eternal Death. To
be therefore of the Church, of which Christ is Head, the redeemed, regenerated
Church of Christ, is quite another thing, then to be of any visible Society
whatever; for in all such Communions there are but too many that have no true
Title to Christianity. If then that Immaculate Church of which Christ is head,
be made up only of holy and regenerated Souls throughout the Societies of
Christians; this will adminster but little Comfort to those that presume upon
their being within the Pale of the Visible Church.

But to proceed to those Scriptures that oppose themselves to humane Authority
in matters of Faith, etc.

There is one place of Scripture, that is irreconcilable to Implicit Faith and
Blind Obedience; He that believes, has the Witness In HIMSELF: 1 John 1. 10.
This general Rule respects no Persons, it is the Result of the Holy Ghost to
all Believers. Such have no need to go to Rome, nor Winefried's Well, to the
Shrines of Saints, the Priests nor the Church, for a Proof of their Faith; they
have an Evidence nearer home: they have the witness of their Faith and the
Reason of their Hope IN THEMSELVES.

It Is true, this is a Private Judge; but (as it happens) it is one of the Holy
Ghost's setting up, of all things I confess most destructive to Papacy no
doubt; for here is a Judge in every man, that sincerely believes, to whom he
must stand and fall in this and the other World. For (says the same Apostle)
If our Heart condemn us, God is greater then our Heart, and knows all things:
Beloved, if our 1 John 3. 20, 21.
Heart condemn us not, then have we Confidence toward God; The Witness in our
selves discharges us. The Spirit bears Witness with our Spirits, that wear
the Ch^ldren of God and Sons Romans 8. 16.
of the true Church; not she, that has fatted her self with the Flesh of
Saints, and died her Garments in the Blood of Martyrs; who has Merchandized in
the Souls of men: but of that Church who is Crowned with Stars, and Clothed
with the Sun, and has the Moon under her Feet: a Church of Light and Knowledge,
of Understanding and Truth, and not of Implicit Faith and Blind Obedience: one
that tramples upon all Sublunary Glory; and not she that makes her Pretenses to
Religion a Decoy to catch the World.

Of like Tendency is that notable Passage of the Apostle Paul to the
Corinthians; Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your 1 Cor.
13. 5.
own selves: Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be Reprobates? Here is not a Word of the Pope nor an External Judge,
no humane Inquisition or Authority. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the
Faith? prove your own selves: but which way shall we do this? by Christ, who is
the great Light that shines in our Hearts to give us the Knowledge of God and
our selves: He that believes in him, has the Witness in himself, he is no
Reprobate; his Heart condemns him not.

To which I will add another Passage to the same Purpose (in his Epistle to the
Galatians) But let Gal. 6. 4, 5.
every Man prove his own work, then shall he have Rejoicing in himself alone,
and not in another: FOR EVERY MAN SHALL BEAR HIS OWN BURDEN. Here every man is
enjoined to turn Inquisitor upon himself; and the Reason rendered shows the
Justice of the thing; because my Rejoicing must be in my self alone, and not in
another: I stand and Fall to no man: such as I sow, I must reap at the Hand of
God, if Paul say true. Men's Pardons are Vain, and their Indulgences Fictions;
For every man shall bear his own Burden in that great Day of the Lord. It
cannot therefore be Reasonable that another man should have the Keeping of my
Understanding at my Eternal Cost and Charges, or that I must entirely depend
upon the Judgment of a Man or Men, who erring, (and thereby causing me to err)
cannot be damned for me, but I must pay their Reckoning at the hazard of my own
Damnation.

I am not unacquainted with the great Objection that is made by Roman
Catholics and some Protestants too, High Churchmen perhaps, that Love the
Treason, but hate the Traitor; that love this part of Popery, but hate the
Pope, viz. There are doubts in Scripture, even about the most important Points
of Faith; some body must guide the Weak, there must be some one ultimate,
External and Visible Judge to appeal to, who must Determine and Conclude all
Persons as to their Doubts and Apprehensions concerning the Interpretation of
Scripture, otherwise So many Men, so many Minds; the Church would be filled
with Controversy and Confussion.

I answer, That the Scriptures are made more doubtful than they are by such as
would fain preserve to themselves the Umpiridge and Judgship of their Meaning.
I deny it in point of Fact, that Man's Duty is not most plainly expressed in all
that concerns Eternal Salvation; but it is very strange, that when God intends
nothing more by the Scriptures, than to reach the Capacities of Men as to
things on which their Eternal Salvation depends; yet that no Book, if such men
say true, should be so obscure, nor subject to so many Various, nay
Contradictory Constructions. Name me one Author, Heathen, Jew or Christian,
that ever wrote with that Obscurity and seeming Inconsistency, which some
gladly pretend to find in the holy Scripture, that they might have the Use and
Keeping of them from the Vulgar, and make their own Ends by it. Is then every
Body's Book to be understood but God's? Was that writ not to be understood? In
short, one of these two things must be true. Either that God intended Not to be
understood, or To be understood, in what he commanded to be written. If he
resolved Not to be understood, it had been better there had been nothing writ;
but if it was his purpose To be understood of Men, it must be supposed, that
what he caused to be written, was plain enough for men to understand, or he
mist his own Aim and End, and writ it to no purpose, which is absurd.

If it should be told me, That it is not denied, but that the Scriptures may be
understood by some body, but not by every body; for that the Great, Visible
Judge must needs understand them, because it belongs to his Office, to resolve
those Doubts, and determine those Controversies that may arise about
understanding them.

Answ. I must also say, that this is false in Fact. For its ridiculous to
imagine, that Luke did not make Theophilus his own Judge in the reading of what
he writ to him, or that the Apostles in writing to the several Churches, as
Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, etc. to whom they directed their Epistles, did not
intend that they should understand what they writ, or that they erected any
such Officer in the Church, as an Expounder of their Epistles to the Assembly
to be necessarily believed. For we know in those days The People made the
Church, they were the (...), the CLERGY, however it came about that it be now
engrossed into fewer hands; as you may see in 1 Pet 5. 3.
the Greek of Peter: (...); which (...) is translated Heritage in all our
Bibles. But this is as if the Priest's only were the Lord's Heritage, which
cannot be, for a Reason obvious to all, namely, that they reign as Lords over
God's Heritage or Clergy (forbid expressly by Peter) therefore not the Heritage
and Clergy over which they so rule like Lords: by no means. I will say no more
but this, it is no convincing Proof to me of their Humility. But to shut up this
Agument about the Difficulty of Understanding the Scripture and pretended a
necessity of a Visible Judge, I say, Whatsoever may be spoken, may be written;
or thus, Whatsoever a Visible Judge can now say, the holy Pen men by God's
Direction might have written; and what an Omniscient and Omnipotent God did
know and could do for Man's Salvation, an OMNIBENEVOLENT God, that tells us, he
delights not in the Death of one Soul, but rather that he should be saved,
would have done. And because God is as Omnibenevolent as Omniscient and
Omnipotent, we must conclude he has done it; and it is great Presumption and a
mean Shelter to Ignorance to raise a credit to Humane Devices, by beating down
the true Value of the Scriptures.

They are dark; what follows? they must not be read? what follows then? Why
then such Teachers may do as they list with the People. But did the Pharisees
with their broad Philacteries know God's mind better then the Prophets? or
could they deliver it clearer? no such matter; it is by the same strange Figure
that the Schoolmen know the mind of Christ better then the Apostles, and that
the Council of TRENT can decl^re Faith more clearly then the holy Ghost in the
Scripture has done; and yet this is the English of their Doctrine that hold to
us those Lights to read Scripture by, and that would have us seach their Canons
and Decrees, to find out the Mind of the holy Ghost in Scripture.

The Confusions that are pretended to follow such an Inquiry are but the
wretched Arts of ill men, as much as in them lies, to keep Light and Truth out
of the World: When the Net was cast into the Sea, there came some good some bad
Fish, that was not the Fishers fault they were no better. Inquiry is not to be
blamed for the ill use weak or worse men make of it: The Bereans might not all
believe, though they might all search; for men don't inquire with equal Wisdom,
Love and good Desire, some seek and find not: Some ask and receive not;
therefore James 4. 3.
must none ask or seek after that which is good? or because some ask or seek
amiss, will it follow that the thing it self is naught? If Superstition, Error,
Idolatry and Spiritual Tyranny be detected, and Truth discovered, will it more
then make amends for all that Weakness and Folly some men have brought forth by
the liberty of such an Inquiry? The Enemies of Light may be as Rhetorical as
they please upon the excess or Presumption of some, bolder then wise, and more
Zealous then Knowing; but if they had nothing to lose by the discovery, they
would never be the Enemies of a prudent Search. It is to be feared such get
that Obedience by a blind devotion; which no man could yield them upon better
Information; and is it reasonable that men of that Stamp should secure their
Empire by the Ignorance of the People? Ignorance ought to be the Mother of
Devotion with none but those that cannot be devout upon better terms; it is the
glory of a man that he is Religious upon Reason, and that his Duty and
Sacrifice are not blind or forced, but free and reasonable; Truth upon
Knowledge though vexed with Schism, wise and good men will choose before Ignorant
Religion with Uniformity. Enough of this.

But this Notion of an Infallible Visible Judge is as false in Reason as in
Fact. For first, it takes away the Use of every Man's Reason, and it is a
Contradiction to have any, unless he were such an Interpreter and such a Judge,
as would conclude us by Conviction, and not by Authority: that would be the
most Welcome person in the World. But to overruled my own Sight, to give the
Lie to my own Understanding, say Black is White, and that Two and Three make
Ten* thus, Subjugare intellectum in Obsequium fidei, to yield my Understanding
to such an In-evident Way of Faith, nay, which is worse, to believe a Lie: for
so it is to them, to whom the thing to be believed appears Untrue* is
most-Unreasonable.

If we must be Led, it had been easier and better for us to have been born
Blind, we might have followed then the Dog and the Bell, for we could not mend
our selves; but to see, and to be Led, and that in ways we see to be foul or
wrong, this is Anxious. Here lies the Dispute: and truly here the Question
might fairly end. Either put out our Eyes, or let us use them: but if we have
Eyes for our Minds as well as for our Bodies, I see no Reason, why we should
trust any man or men against the Eyes of our Understanding, any more than we
ought to confide in them against the Sense and Certainty of the Eyes of our
Bodies.

Where is the poorest Mechanic that would be paid his Labor in Brass half
Crowns for Silver by either Pope or Bishop? and can we be so brutish, as to
think our Nobler part void of Distinction about that Treasure which is of
eternal Moment? For though Peter was to feed the Sheep, yet the Sheep were not
to follow Peter but Christ: My Sheep hear my Voice and follow me, and a
Stranger they will not John 10. 4, 5, 27.
follow: Here is no Mediator betwixt Christ and his Sheep; nor does any body
else hear his Voice for them: but they hear his Voice themselves. And though
the Shepherd may have many Servants, yet he only is their Shepherd, and they
are only the Sheep of his Fold.

But there are three places of Scripture, that come fresh into my Remembrance,
that are very pertinent to the present Occasion. The first is this: That which
may be known of God, is Manifest in Men, Romans 1. 19.
for God has showed it unto them: That is, The Spirit of man being the Candle
of the Lord, God has enlightened it to manifest unto Man, what is necessary for
him to know both of God and himself. Here is no need of Wax-Candles or Tapers,
or a Visible Guide and Judge: for ^e that believes, has the Witness in himself.

Another Passage is this: Be ye Followers 1 Cor. 11. 1.
of me, even as I am also of Christ. In which the Apostle is so far from
setting himself up a Judge over the Church of Corinth, that he makes his appeal
to them concerning his Doctrine and Conversation bounding both with that of his
Lord Jesus Christ, and making them Judges of the Truth of his Conformity to
that Example. Be ye Followers of me: How? after what manner? What! Absolutely,
without Examination? must we believe thee without any Trial, and take what thou
say for granted without any more to do? no such thing. Be ye Followers of
me, even as I also am of CHRIST: I submit my self to be judged by you according
to that Rule, and all Men and Churches are to be thus measured, that lay Claim
to the Name of Christian.

The Third Passage is in his Second Epistle to the same Church of Corinth, it is
this: Therefore seeing we have this Ministry as we have received Mercy, we
faint not: but have renounced the hidden 2 Cor. 4. 1, 2.
things of Dishonesty, not walking in Craftinesses, nor handling the Word of
God deceitfully; but by manifestation of the Truth, commending our selves to
every man's Conscience in the sight of God. Here is the Utmost Imposition the
Apostle makes use of: he requires not Men to receive him without Evidence, and
refers himself to that of their own Consciences in the Sight of God. This was
the Way of making Christians then, and this is the Way of making and keeping
Christians now.

Conscience (in the best Sense) has ever been allowed to be a Bond upon Men in
all Religions; But that Religion, which under Pretense of Authority would
superceed Conscience, and instead of making Men better (the End of Religion)
makes them worse, by confounding all Distinction betwixt Good and Evil, and
resolving all into an Implicit Faith and blind Obedience unto the Commands of
a Visible Guide and Judge, is false, it cannot be otherwise. For to admire what
Men don't know, and to make it a Principle not to inquire is the last mark of
Folly in the Believer, and of Imposture in the Imposer. To be short, a
Christian implies a Man, and a Man implies Conscience and Understanding; but he
that has no Conscience not Understanding (as he has not, that has delivered
them up to the Will of another Man) is no Man, and therefore no Christian.

I do beseech you Protestants of all Sorts, to consider of the danger of this
Principle with respect to Religion. Of old'tw is the Fool that said in his
Heart there is no God; But now upon this Principle Men must be made Fools in
order to believe: Shall Folly, which is the Shame (if not the Curse) of a Man,
be the Perfection of a Christian? Christ indeed has advised us to become Little
Children, but never to become such Fools; for (as the Proverb is) this is to be
led by the Nose, and not by our Wits. You know that God hates the Sacrifice of
Fools: I will pray with the Spirit and with Understanding also, says the
Apostle. Let us commend that Testimony, which we believe to be true, to the
Consciences of Men, and let them have the Gospel privilege of Examination:
Error only looses upon Trial. For if this had been the Way to Christianity,
(with Reverence be it spoken) God had not made our Condition better, but worse:
For this translates our Faith and Dependence upon God, to Man, and the
Possibility, if not Probability of Man's erring exposes us to greater
insecurity than before. For where I never trusted* I never could be deceived.
But if I must abandon my own Sense and Judgment, and yield my self up to the
Faith and Authority of another (to say no more of the Blindness and La neness
of such Belief and Devotion) what Security can I have, that the Man or Men,
whom I trust may not (...) and deceive me? and that Deceit is irrepairable.

Again, since Mankind is a reasonable Creature, and that the more reasonable he
is in his Religion, the nearer to his own being he comes, and to the Wisdom and
Truth of his Creator, that did so make him, a Religion without Reason, Imposed
by an unaccountable Authority against Reason, Sense and Conviction cannot be
the Religion of the God of Truth and Reason; for it is not to be thought that
he requires any thing that carries any violence upon the Nature of his
Creature, or that gives the Lie to that Reason or Sense, which he first endowed
him with.

In short; Either Convince my understanding by the Light of Truth and Power of
Reason, or bear down my Infidelity with the force of Miracles: for not to give
me Understanding or Faith, and to press a submission that requires both, is
most unreasonable.

But if there were no other Augument then this, it goes a great way with me,
that as to such as have their understanding at liberty, if they are mistaken,
there may be hopes of reclaiming by Informing them: but where the Understanding
and Conscience are enslaved to Authority, and where Men make it a Principal
Doctrine to suspect their own Sense and strive against their own Convictions,
(to move only by other men's Breath and fall down to their Conclusions) nothing
seems to be left for the soundest Arguments and clearest Truths to work upon.
They had almost need to be re Created in order to be converted; for who can
reasonably endeavor to make him a Christian that is not a Man, which he cannot
be truly said to be, who has no understanding, or resolves not to use it, but
reject it, which is yet worse; for he that has no understanding has no
prejudice against it, but he that purposely denis and abuses it, is so much
worse, as that he turns Enemy to him that has and uses his understanding. He
therefore can never be convinced o^ his Error, who is prejudiced against the
necessary means of Conviction, which is the use of his Understanding, without
which it is impossible he should ever be Convinced.

To Conclude, I have reserved till last one Argument, which is ad hominem
unanswerable by us Protestants, and without yielding to which we cannot be
consistent with our selves, or be thought to do unto others, what we would have
others do unto us, and that is this: The Translation of the Scripture was the
painful work of our worthy Ancestors. This I call their most solemn Appeal to
the People against the Pope and Traditions of Rome in the business of their
Separation. For when the question rose of the divine Authority of this or the
other Practice in the Doctrine or Worship of the Roman Church, presently they
recur'd to the Scriptures, and therefore made them speak English, that they
might witness for them to the people. This appeal to the People in defense of
their Separation, by making them Judges of their proceeding against the Church
according to the Testimony of the holy Scriptures, puts every man in possession
of them. Search the Scriptures, say the first Protestants, Prove all things,
see if what we say against Pope and Church of Rome be not true; and in case any
difficulty did arise, they exhorted all to wait upon God, for the divine aid of
his Spirit to illuminate their understandings, that one should not impose upon
the other, but commend them to God, be Brotherly, Patient, Long suffering,
ready to help the Weak, inform the Ignorant, show tenderness to the Mistaken,
and with reason and moderation to gain the Obstinate. In short, Protestancy is
a restoring to every man his just right of Inquiry and Choice; and to its
honor be it ever spoken, there is greater likelihood of finding Truth, where
all have Liberty to seek after it, then where it is denied to all, but a few
Grandees, and those too as short sighted as their Neighbors. But now let us
Protestants examine, if we have not departed from this Sobriety, this Christian
Temperance? how comes it, that we who have been forgiven much, have our selves
fallen upon our sellow Servants, who yet owe us nothing? have not we refused
them this reasonable choice? have we not threatened, beaten and imprisoned them?
Pray Consider, have you not made Creeds, set Bounds to Faith, formed and
regulated a Worship and strictly enjoined all men's obedience by the help of the
Civil Power upon pain of great Sufferings, which have not been spared to
Dissenters, though in Common, Renouncers and Protestors with you against the
Pope and Church of Rome; for this the Land mourns, Heaven is displeased, and
all is out of due course.

To give us the Scriptures, and knock our Fingers for taking them! to Translate
them that we may read them, and punish us for endeavoring to understand and
use them as well as we can, both with respect to God, and our Neighbor; it is
very unreasonable upon our Protestant Principles. I wish we could see the
mischief we draw upon our selves, and which is worse, our cause, for the Papist
in this case acts according to his Principle, but we against our Principle,
which shows indeed, that we have the better Religion, but that we also are more
condemnable. For if we will consider it seriously, we shall find it not much
more injurious to Scripture, Truth and good Conscience that we believe as the
Church believes, then that we believe as the Church says the Scripture would
have us believe. For where is the difference, since I am not allowed to use my
understanding about the Sense of Scripture any more then about the Faith of the
Church: and if I must not receive any thing for Faith or Worship from
Scripture, but what is handed to me by the Church, or her Clergy, I see my self
in as ill terms, as if I had sat down with the old Doctrine of believing as the
Church believes. And had the Controversy been only for the Word Scripture,
without the use and application of it, (for at this rate that is all that is
left us) truly the enterprise of our Fathers had been weak and unadvised; but
because nothing less was intended by them, and that the Translation of the
Scripture was both the Appeal and Legacy of those Protestant Ancestors, for the
reasons before mentioned, I must conclude we are much degenerated from the
simplicity of Primitive Protestancy, and need to be admonisht of our
Backslidings; and I heartily pray to Almighty God, that he would quicken us by
his present Mercies and Providence to return to our first Love.

Let the Scripture be free Sober Opinion tolerated, Good ^ife cherisht, Vice
punished: away with Imposition Nicknames, Animosities, for the Lord's sake; and
let Holy Writ be our Common Creed, and Pious Living the Test of Christianity,
that God may please to perfect the good work he has begun, and deliver us from
all our Enemies.

I am now come to the last point, and that is PROPAGATION of FAITH by FORCE. In
which I shall, with the Ecclesiastics, consider the Civil Magistrates share
herein; for though the Churchmen are principally guilty, that being professed
Ministers of a Religion which renounces and condemns Force, they incite the
Magistrate to use it both to impose their own Belief, and suppress that of
other men's; yet the Civil Magistrate in running upon their Errands, and turning
Eexecutioner to their Cruelty upon such as dissent from them, involves himself
in their Guilt.

That in this Protestant Country Laws have been made to prosecute men for their
Difference and Dissent from the National Worship, and that those Laws have been
executed, I presume will not be denied; for not only our own Histories since
the Reformation will furnish us with Instances, but our own Age abounds with
Proofs. Thousands have been Excommunicated and Imprisoned, whole Familes
Undone, not a Bed left in the House, not a Cow in the Field, nor any Corn in
the Barn: Widows and Orphants Uncommiserated, no regard had to Age or Sex: and
what for? only because of their Meeting to Worship God after another (yet not a
less Peaceable) Manner then according to the Way of the Church of England.

Nor have they only suffered this by Laws intended against them, but after an
excessive rate by Laws known to have been never designed against them, and only
intended against the Papists; and in these Cases four times the Vallue has not
served their turn; we can prove 60 l. taken for 13 l. and not one Penny
returned, as we made appear before a Committee of the late Parliament, which is
the Penalty of four Offenses for one: to say nothing of the gross Abuses that
have been committed against our Names and Persons by men of ill Fame and Life,
that have taken the Advantage of our Tenderness, and the present Posture of the
Law against us to have their Revengeful and Covetous Ends upon us. And though
yet unredrest, not a Session of Parliament has past these Seventeen Years, in
which we have not humbly remonstrated our suffering condition: we have done our
Part, which has been patiently to Suffer and modestly to Complain; it is yours
now to hear our Groans, and if ever you expect Mercy from God, deliver us. The
late Parliament just before its Dissolution was preparing some Relief for us;
if that Parliament could think of it, yea, begin it, we hope you will finish
and secure it.

To remove all Scruples or Objections, that Politically or Ecclesiastically on
the part of the State or the Church, may be advanced against us in this
request, I shall divide this Discourse into these two Parts. First, Caesar's
Authority; next, the Church's Authority about Force in things that relate to
Faith and Conscience, with my Reasons briefly to both.

Our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ did long since distinguish the
Things of Caesar from the Things of God, in his plain and notable Answer unto
that ensnaring Question of the Jews, about paying Tribute to Caesar. Render
(says he) unto Cae^ar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the Things that
are God's; that is, Divine Worship, and all things relating to it belong unto
God, Civil Obedience to Caesar. God can only be the Author of right Acts of
Worship in the Mind: this is granted by all: therefore it is not in the Power
of any Man or Men in the World, to sway or compel the Mind in Matters of
Worship to God. Where this is attemped, God's Prerogative is invaded, and
Caesar (by which Word I understand the Civil Government) has All. For he does
not only take his own Things, but the things appertaining to God also. Since if
God has not Conscience he has nothing. My Kingdom, says Christ, is not of
this World, nor is the Magistrate's of the other World; Therefore he exceeds
his Province and Commission when ever he meddles with the Rites of it. Let
Christ have his Kingdom, he is sufficient for it, and let Caesar have his, it is
his Due. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things
that are God's. Then there are things that belong not to Caesar, and we are not
to give those to him such are Gods things, divine things; but those that belong
to Caesar and his Earthly Kingdom, must be of Duty rendered to him.

If any should ask me, What are the Things properly belonging to Caesar? I
answer in Scripture Language To love Justice, do Judgment, relieve the
Oppressed, right the Fatherless, be a Terror unto Evildoers, and a Praise to
them that do well; for this is the great End of Magistracy.

But perhaps my Answer shall be reckoned too general and ambiguous, and a fresh
Question started, Who are the Evildoers, to whom the Civil Authority ought to
be terrible? But this ought in my Judgment to be no Question with men that
understand the Nature of Civil Authority; for those are the Evildoers, that
violate those Laws which are necessary to the Preservation of Civil Society, as
Thieves, Murderers, Adulterers, Traitors, Plotters, Drunkards, Cheats,
Vagabonds, and the like mischievous and dissolute Persons: Men void of Virtue,
Truth and Sincerity, the Foundation of all good Government, and only firm Bond
of human Society. Whoever denies me this, must at the same Time say, that
Virtue is less necessary to Government than Opinion, and that the most Vitiated
Men, professing but Caesar's Religion, are the best Subjects to Caesar's
Authority, consequently, that other Men, living never so honestly and
industriously, and having else as good a Claim to Civil Protection and
Preferment, shall merely for their Dissent from that Religion (a Thing they
cannot help; for Faith is the Gift of God) be reputed the worst of Evildoers:
which is followed with exposing their Names to Obloquie, their Estates to Ruin,
and their Persons to Goals, Exiles, and Abundance of other Cruelties. What is
this, but to confound the Things of Caesar with the Things of God; Divine
Worship with Civil Obedience; the Church with the State, and perplex human
Societies with endless Debates about Religious Differences? Nay, is not this to
erect new Measures to try the Members of Worldly Societies by, and give an
Accession to another Power, then that which is necessary to the Constitution of
Civil Government? But that which ought to deter wise Rulers from assuming and
exercising such an Authority, is the Consideration of the pernicious
Consequences of doing so.

For, First, It makes PROPERTY, which is the first and most fixed Part of
English Government floating and uncertain; for it seems no Conformity to the
Church, no Property in the State; and doubtless, the Insecurity of Property can
be no Security to the Government: Pray think of that.

2dly, It makes me owe more to the Church then to the State; for in this Case,
the Anchor I ride by, is not my Obedience to Laws, relating to the Preservation
of Civil Society, but Conformity to certain Things belonging to the Doctrine
and Discipline of the Church; so that though I may be an honest, industrious
English man, a great Lover of my Country, and an Admirer of the Government I
live under: yet if I refuse to profess the Religion that either now is, or
hereafter may be imposed, be it never so false that is all one, I must neither
enjoy the Liberty of my Person, nor the quiet Possession of my Estate.

3ly, This not only alters the Government, by sacrificing Men's Properties; for
that which cannot be called a Sin against Property, nor an Offense to the
Nature of Civil Government, if any Transgression at all; but it narrows the
Interest and Power of the Governors: For proportionably, what Number they cut
off from their Protection, they cut off from themselves and the Government, not
only rendering a great Body of People Useless, but provoaking them to be
Dangerous; to be sure it clogs the Civil Magistrate in his Administration of
Government, making that necessary which is not at all necessary to him AS
CAESAR.

It is a Sort of DUUMVIRATESHIP in Power, by which the Civil Monarchy is
broken; for as that was a Plurality of Men, so this is a Plurality of Powers;
and to speak treely, the Civil Power is made to act the Lackey, to run of all
the unpleasant Errands the froward Zeal of the other sends it upon: and the
best Preferment it receives for its Pains, is to be Informer. Constable or
Jailer to some of the best Livers, and therefore the best Subjects in the
Kingdom.

Oh what greater Injustice to Caesar! then to make his Government vary by such
Modes of Religion, and him to hold his Obedience from his People, not so much
by their Conformity to Him, as to the Church.

4thly, This is so far from resembling the Universal Goodness of God, who
dispenses his Light, Air, Showers, and comfortable Seasons to all (and whom
Caesar ought alwaves to imitate) and remote from increasing the Trade, Populacy
and Wealth of this Kingdom, that it evidently tends to the utter Ruin of
Thousands of Traders, Artificers and Husband men and their Families, thereby
increasing the Charges, by increasing the Poor of the N^tion.

5thly, This must needs be a great Discouragement to Strangers, from coming in,
and settling themselves amongst us, when they have Reason to apprehend, that
they, and their Children after them can be no longer secured in the Enjoyment
of their Properties, then they shall be able to prevail with their Consciences,
to believe that the Religion which our Laws do now, or shall at any time
approve and impose, is undoubtedly true; and the Way of worshipping of God,
which shall at any time be by our Laws enjoined, is, and shall be more
agreeable to the Will of God then any other Way in which God is worshipped in
the World.

6thly, That way of Worship we are commanded Conformity to, does not make
better Livers (that is a Demonstration) nor better Artists; for it cannot be
thought, that going to Church, hearing Common Prayer, or believing in the
present Episcopacy, learns Men to build Ships or Houses, to make Clothes,
Shoes, Dials or Watches, Buy, Sell, Trade or Commerce, better then any that are
of another Persuasion. And since these things are Useful, if not Requisite in
Civil Society, is not prohibiting, nay, ruining such Men, because they will not
come to hear Common Prayer, etc. destructive of Civil Society; pray show me
better Subjects. If any object, Dissenters have not always been so; the Answer
is ready, do not expose them, protect them in their Lives, Liberties and
Estates; for in this present Posture they think they can call nothing their
own, and that all the Comforts they have in this World are hourly liable to
Forfeiture for their Faith, Hope and Practice concerning the other World: Is
not this to destroy Nature and Civil Government, when People are ruined in
their Natural and Civil Capacity, not for Things relating to either, but what
are of a Supernatural Import.

7thly, This deprives them of Protection that protect the Government.
Dissenters have a great Share in the Trade, which is the Greatness of this
Kingdom; and they make a large Proportion of the Taxes that maintain the
Government. And is it reasonable, or can it be Christian, when they pay Tribute
to Caesar, to be preserved in an Undisturbed Possession of the Rest: that the
Rest should be continually exposed for the peaceable Exercise of their
Consciences to God?

8thly, Neither is it a Conformity to True and Solid Religion, such as is
necessary to Eternal Salvation, wherein most parties verbally agree, but for a
Modification of Religion, some peculiar Way of Worship and Discipline: All
confess One God, One Christ, One Holy Ghost, and that it is indispensably
requisite to live Soberly, Righteously and Godlikely in this present evil
World; yet is one prosecuting the other for his Conscience, seizing Corn,
driving away Cattle, breaking open Doors, taking away and spoilng of Goods, in
some places not leaving a Cow to give poor Orphants Milk, nor a Bed to lie on:
in other Places Houses have been ^ept so clean, that a Stool has not been left
to sit on, nor so much as working Tools to labor for Bread. To say nothing of
the Oppr^brious Speeches, Bloody ^lows and Tedious Imprisonments, even to Death
it sel^, through Nastiness of Dungeons, that many Innocent People have suffered
for their peaceable Conscience only.

9thly, But this Way of proceeding for Maintenance of the National Religion, is
of an ill Consequence upon this account, Heaven is barred from all further
Illuminations. Let God send what Light he pleases, it must not be received by
Caesar's People, without Caesar's License; and if it happen that Caesar be not
presently convinced it is of God, at this rate I must either renounce my
Convictions, and lose my Soul to please Caesar, or profess and persevere in my
Persuasion, and lose my Life, Liberty or Estate to please God. This has
frequently occurred, and may again. Therefore I would entreat Caesar to consider
the sad Consequence of Imposition, and remember, both that God did never ask
Man Leave to introduce Truth, or make further Discoveries of his Mind to the
World, and that it has been a Woeful Snare to those Governments that have been
drawn to employ their Power against his Work and People.

10thly, This Way of Proceedure endeavors to stifle, or else to punish
Sincerity; for Fear or Hopes, Frowns or Favor prevail only with base Minds,
Souls degenerated from true Nobleness. Every Spark of Integrity must be
extinguished, where Conscience is sacrificed to Worldly Safety and Preferment;
so that this Net holds no Temporizers: Honest Men are all the Fish it catches:
but one would think they should make but an ill Treat to such as reckon
themselves generous Men, and what is more, Christians too: but that which
renders the Matter more unjustifiable, is, the Temptation such Severity puts
upon men, not hardy enough to suffer for Conscience, yet strongly persuaded
they have Truth on their Side, to desert their Principles, and smother their
Convictions, which in plain Terms is to make of Sincere Men Hypocrites, whereas
it is one great End of Government, by all laudable Means to preserve Sincerity;
for without it there can be no Faith or Truth in Civil Society. Nor is this
all; for its a Maxim worthy of Caesar's Notice, NEVER TO THINK HIM TRUE TO
CAESAR THAT IS FALSE TO HIS OWN CONSCIENCE; besides, raped Consciences treasure
up Revenge, and such Persons are not likely to be longer Friends to Caesar,
than he has Preferments to allure them, or Power to deter them from being his
most implacable Enemies.

11thly, There is not so ready a Way to Atheism, as this of extinguishing the
Sense of Conscience for Worldly Ends; destroy that Internal Rule of Faith,
Worship and Practice toward God, and the Reason of my Religion will be Civil
Injunctions, and not Divine Convictions; consequently, I am to be of as many
Religions as the Civil Authority shall impose, however untrue or contradictory.
This Sacred Tie of Conscience, thus broken, farewell to all Heavenly Obligations
in the Soul, Scripture, Authority, and ancient Protestant Principles, Christ
may at this Rate become what the Jews would have had him, and his Apostles be
reputed Turners of the World up-side down, as their Enemies represented them,
and the godly Martyrs of all Ages so many Self-Murderers; for they might justly
be esteemed Resisters of Worldly Authority, so far as that Authority concern it
self with the Imposition of Religion, because they refused the Conformity
commanded, even to Death.

And it may not be unworthy of Caesar's Consideration, if from these
Proceedings People are tempted to infer, there is nothing in Religion but
Worldly Aims and Ends, because so much Power is abused under the Name of
Religion, to vex and destroy Men for being of another Religion, that he hazards
the best Hold and Obligation he has to Obedience, which is Conscience: For
where they are taught to Obey for Interest, Duty and Conviction are out of
Doors. By all Means let Conscience be sacred, and Virtue and Integrity (though
under dissenting Principles) cherisht; Charity is more powerful than Severity,
Persuasion than Penal Laws.

Lastly, To the Reproach of this Course with Wise Men, it has never yet
obtained the End desired; for, instead of compliance, the Difference is
widened, the Sufferers are pitied by Spectators, which only helps to increase
the Number of Dissenters; for whoever is in the Wrong, few think the Persecutor
in the Right. This in all Ages having been the Issue of severe Prosecution of
Dissenters for Matters of Religion; what a Cruel, Troublesome, Thankless,
Succesles Office is it for Caesar to be employed in? May he take better
Measures of his Authority and Interest, and use his Power to the Encouragement
of all the Virtuous and Industrous, and Just Punishment of the Lazy and Vicious
in all Persuasions; so shall the Kingdom Flourish, and the Government Prosper.

Church Power supposes a Church first. It will not be improper therefore to
examine; first, What a Scripture. New Testament Church is; and next, what is
the Scripture-Power belonging to such a Church: A Scripture-Church, as she may
be called Visible, is a Company or Society of People, believing, professing and
practicing according to the Doctrine and Example of Christ Jesus and his
Apostles, and not according to the Scribes and Pharisees, that taught for
Doctrine the Traditions of men: They are such as are Meek in Heart, Lowly in
Spirit Mat, 11. 20.
Chaste in Life, 1 Pet. 3. 2. 2 Cor. 11. 2.
Virtuous in all Conversation, Phil. 4. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 15.
full of Self-denial, Mat. 16. 24.
Long-suffering and Patient, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
not only forgiving, Luke 6. 37.
but loving their very Enemies; which answers Christ's own Character of himself
Religion and Kingdom, which is the most apt Distinction that ever can be given
of the Nature of his Church and her Authority, viz. Joh. 18. 36.
MY KINGDOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD. Which well connects with Render unto Caesar
the things that are Mat. 22. 21.
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's.

It was an Answer to a very suspicious Question; for it was familiarly bruitd,
that he was Luke 13. 2.
a King, and came to possess his Kingdom, and was by some called the King of
the Jews.

The Jews being then subjected to the Roman Empire, it concerned Pilate,
Caesar's Deputy, to understand his pretentions, which upon better information he
found to center in this, My Kingdom is not of this World, else would my
Subjects John 18. 36.
fight for me. As if he had said, these Reports are a mere perversion of my
Peaceable and Self denying Intentions, an Infamy invented by malicious Scribes
and Pharisees, that they might the better prevail with Caesar to Sacrifice me
to their hatred and revenge.

I am Caesar's Friend, I seek none of his Kingdoms from him, nor will I sow
Sedition, plot or conspire his Ruin; no, Let all Men render unto Caesar the
Things that are Caesar's; that is my Doctrine; for I am come to erect a Kingdom
of another Nature then that of this World, to wit, a Spiritual Kingdom, to be
set up in the Heart, and Conscience Luke 17. 21.
is my Throne, upon that will I sit, and rule the Children of Men in
Righteousness; Titus 2. 12.
and whoever lives Soberly, Righteously and Godlily in this World, shall be my
good and loving Subjects, and they will certainly make no ill ones for Caesar,
since such Virtue is the end of Government, and renders his Charge both more
easy and safe then before. Had I any other Design then this, would I suffer my
self to be reproached, traduced and persecuted by a conquered people? were it
not more my Nature to suffer then revenge, would not their many provocations
have drawn from me some Instance of another kind then the Forbearance and
Forgiveness I teach? certainly were I animated by another principle then the
perfection of Meekness and Divine Sweetness, I should not have forbidden Mat.
26. 52.
Peter fighting, saying, Put up thy Sword, or endoctrinated my Followers to
bear Wrongs, but revenged all Affronts, and by Plots and other Stratagems have
attempted Ruin to my Enemies, and the acquest of worldly Empire; and no doubt
but they would have fought for me. Nay, I am not only patiently and with Pity
to Enemies) sensible of their barbarous Carriage toward me for my Good Will to
them (for their Eternal Happiness I only seek) but I foresee what they further
intend against me, they design to crucify me; And to do it, will rather free a
Murderer then save their Savior. They will perform that Cruelty with all the
Aggravation Mat. 27. 20.
and Contempt they can, deriding me themselves, and exposing me to the Ver. 27,
etc.
derision of others; for they will mock my Divine Kingship with a Crown of
Thorns, Verse. 29.
and in my Agonies of Soul and Body for a Cordial, give me Gaul and Vinegar to
Ver. 48.
drink: But notwithstanding all this, to satisfy the World that my Religion is
above Wrath and Revenge, I can forgive them.

And to secure Caesar and his People Luke 23. 34. Mat. 26. 53.
from all Fears of Imposition, whatever Authority I have, and how many Legions
of Angels soever I might Command both to my Deliverance and the Enforcement of
my Message upon Mankind; I resolve to promote neither with worldly Power; for
it is not of the Nature of my Religion and Kingdom. And as I neither assume nor
practice any such thing my self, that am the great Author, Promoter and Example
of this Holy Way; so have I not only never taught my Disciples to live or act
otherwise, or given them a Power I refuse to use my Self; but expressly forbad
them, and warned them in my Instructions, of exercising any the least Revenge,
Imposition or Coertion toward any. This is evident in my Sermon preached upon
the Mount, where I freely, publicly and with much Plainness, not only
prohibited Revenge, but enjoined Love to Enemies, making it to be a great Mat.
5. 44, 45, 46, 47.
Token of true Discipleship to suffer Wrongs, and conquer Cruelty by Patience
and Forgiveness, which is certainly a great Way off Imposition or Compulsion
upon other Men.

Furthermore, when I was strongly bent for Jerusalem, and sent Messengers
before to prepare some entertainment for me and my Company in a Village
belonging to the Samaritans, and Luke 9. 53, 54, 55, 56.
the People refused, because they apprehended I was going to Jerusalem; though
some of my Disciples, particularly James and John, were provoked to that
Degree, that they asked me, if I were willing that they should command Fire
from Heaven to destroy those Samaritans, as Elias in another Case had done; I
turned about, and rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what Manner of Spirit ye
are of; for am not come into the World to destroy Men's Lives, but by my
peaceable Doctrine, Example and Life to save them.

At another time one of my Disciples, relating to me some Passages of their
Travails, told me of a certain Man they saw, that cast Luke 9. 49, 50.
out Devils in my Name, and because he was not of their Company, nor followed
them, said he, we forbad him; as if they had thereby served and pleased me; but
I presently testified my Dislike of the Ignorance and Narrowness of their Zeal,
and to inform them better told them, they should not have forbid him; for he
that is not against us is for us.

My Drift is not Opinion, but Piety; they that cast out Devils, convert
Sinners, and turn Men to Righteousness, are not against me, nor the Nature and
Religion of my Kingdom, and therefore ought to be cherisht rather then forbid.
That I might sufficiently declare and inculcate my Mind in this Matter, I did
at another Time, and upon a different Occasion, preach against all Coertion and
Persecution for Matters of Faith and Practice toward God, in my Parable of the
Sower, as my Words manifest, which were these; The Kingdom of Heaven is likened
unto a Man which sowed good Seed in his Field; but while Men slept, his Enemy
came, and sowed Tares among the Wheat, and went his Way; but when the Blade
sprung up, and brought forth Fruit, there appeared the Tares also; so the
Servants of the Houshoulder came and said, did thou not sow good Seed in thy
Field? from whence then has it Tares? he answered, an Enemy has done Mat. 13.
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
this; the Servants said unto him, will thou then that we go and gather them
up? but he said NAY, lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the
Wheat with them, let both grow together till the Harvest, and in the Time of
Harvest I will say to the Reapers, gather ye together first the Tares, and bind
them in Bundles to burn them, but gather the Wheat into my Barn.

And that I might not leave so necessary a Truth misapprehended of my dear
Followers, or liable to any Mis-constructions, my Disciples, when together,
desiring an Explanation, I interpreted my words thus:

He that sows the good Seed is the Son of Man; the Field is the World: the
good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom; but the Tares are the Verse. 36, 37,
38, 39.
Children of the Wicked One; the Enemy that sowed them is the Devil; the
Harvest is the End of the World; and the Reapers are the Angels.

This Patience, this Long Suffering and great Forbearance belong to my Kingdom
and the Subjects of it, my Doctrine speaks it, and my Example confirms it, and
this can have no possible Agreement with Imposition and Persecution for
Con^cience. It Is true, I once whipped out the Prophaners of my Father's Temple;
but I never whipped any (...). I called, I cried to every one that thirsted to
come, and freely offered my Assistance to the Weary and Heavy Laden; but I
never imposed my Help, or forced any to receive me; for I take not my Kingdom
by Violence, but by Suffering. And that I might sufficiently deter my Followers
from any such Thing, as I profess my self to be their Lord and Master, so have
I commanded them to love one another in a more especial Manner. But if instead
thereof any shall John 15. 12.
grow proud, high-minded, and beat or abuse their Fellow Servants in my
Religious Family, when I come to take an account of my Household, he shall be
cut asunder, and appointed his Portion among the Unbelievers. Behold the
Recompense I appoint to Imposing Lordly Persons, such as count others Infidels,
and to make them such Believers as themselves, will exercise Violence toward
them, and if they prevail not, will call for fire from Heaven to devour them,
and if Heaven refuse them, will fall a Beating and Killing (and think, it may
be, they do God good Service) but their Lot shall be with Unbelievers forever.

Nay, I have so effectually provided against all Mastery, that I expressly
charged them, not to be many Masters; for one was their Master: I told them,
that the greatest amongst them was to be Servant to the rest, not to impose
upon the rest; nay, that to be great in my Kingdom, they must become as gentle
and harmless as little Children, and such cannot force and punish in Matters of
Religion. In fine, I strictly commanded them to love one another, as I have
loved them, who am ready to lay down my Life for the Ungodly, instead of taking
away Godly Men's Lives for Opinions; and this is the great Maxim of my holy
Religion, He that would be my Disciple, must not crucify other Men, but take
up his Cross and follow me, who am meek and lowly, and such so enduring shall
find Eternal Rest to their Souls; this is the Power I use, and this is the
Power I give.

How much this agrees with the Language, Doctrine and Example of Jesus Christ,
I shall leave them to consider, that read and believe Scripture; but some
affected to present Church Power, and desiring their Ruin that conform not to
her Worship and Discipline, will object, That Christ did give his Church Power
to bind and loose, and bid any Person agrieved tell the Church.

I grant it; but what binding was that? with outward Chains and Fetters, in
nasty Holes and Dungeons? nothing less: Or was it, that his Church had that
true Discerning in her, and Power with him, that what she bound, that is
condemned, or loosed, that is remitted, should stand so in God's Sight and
Christ's Account.

But tell the Church; and what then? observe Christ's Extent in the Punishment
of the Offender, If the Offender will neither receive private Admonition, nor
hear the Church, then (says Christ) let him be to thee as an Heathen, etc.
Here Is not one word of Fines, Whips, Stocks, Pillories, Goals, and the like
Instruments of Cruelty, to punish the Heretic; for the Purport of his Words
seem to be no more than this; If any Member of the Church refuse thy private
Exhortation and the Church's Admonition, look upon such a Person to be
obstinate, perverse, no more of you; let him take his course, thou have done
well, and the Church is clear of him.

Well, but say the Church Fighters of our Age, Did not St. Paul wish them cut
off that troubled the Church in his time? Yes: But with what Sword think you?
Such as Christ bid Peter put up, or the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word
of God? Give him leave to explain his own words; For though we walk in the
Flesh, WE DO NOT WAR AFTER THE FLESH; for the WEAPONS of our Warfare are NOT
CARNAL, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong Holds, casting
down Imaginations, and every high Thing that exalts it self against the
Knowledge of God, and bringing every Thought into Obedience to Christ.

What think you of this? Here are Warfares, Weapons, Oppositions and
Conformity, and not only no External Force about Matters of Religion used or
countenanced, but the most express and pathetical Exclusion and Rejection of
any such Thing that could be given.

It was this great Apostle that asked that Question, Who art thou that judge
the Servant of another? Romans 14. 4.
to his own Lord he stands or falls: but he shall stand; for God is able to
make him stand. Can we think that Imposition or Persecution is able to Answer
him this Question in the Day of Judgment? Do we with Reason deny it to the
Papacy? With what Reason then can we assume it to our selves? Let us remember
who said, Not that we have Dominion over your Faith, but are HELPERS of your
Joy. HELPERS, then not IMPOSERS nor PERSECUTORS. What Joy can there be in that
to the Persecuted? but if Paul had no such Commission or Power over Conscience,
I would fain know by what Authority more inferior Ministers and Christians do
claim and use it.

The Apostle Peter is of the same mind; Feed (says he) the Flock of God, not by
Constraint, etc. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3
neither as being Lords over God's Heritage. The Heritage of God is free, they
have but (...) Lord in and of their Religion, Christ Jesus, and they (...)
Brethren.

The Apostle Paul says, That where the Spirit of the Lord is there is Liberty
but where Coertion, Fines and Goals are there is no Liberty. 2 Cor. 3. 7.
Is it to be supposed that men in these days are instructed by the Spirit of
the Lord to destroy People in this World for their Faith about the other World?
it cannot possibly be, such mock at it? Again, says that Apostle to the
Christians of his time, You are called to Liberty, from what? Sin and Gal. 5.
13.
the Ceremonies of the Law. And shall the end of that call be the enthraling
Conscience to human Edicts in Religion under the Gospel? this would make our
Case worse than the Jews, for their Worship stood on divine Authority; and if
to make men free from them Christ came, and that those very Ordinances are by
the Apostle called beggarly Elements, is it reasonable that we must be subject
to the Injunctions of men in the Worship of God, that are not of equal
Authority?

The same Apostle yet informs us, For this end, says he, Christ both dyed and
rose again, that HE might be Lord both of the Dead and Living: But why do
thou jud^e thy Brother? then which, nothing can more expressly oppose the
Imposition, Excommunication and Persecution, that are among us; it is as if he
had said, Christ is Lord of Christians, by what Authority do thou pretend to
judge his Servants? thou also art but one of them: A Brother at most. Thou have
no Dominion over his Faith, nor have thou Commission to be Lord over his
Conscience; it is Christ's right, his purchase, he has paid for it. For this end
he both dyed and rose again, that he might be Lord of Dead and Living; that he
might rescue them from the Jaws of Oppression; from those that usurpt their
Consciences, and made a prey of their Souls. But why do thou judge thy
Brother? If not Judge, then not Persecute, Plunder, Beat, Imprison to Death our
Brethren, that must needs follow. Come, let us look at home, and view our
Actions, and see if we are not the Men.

In short, Let every man be fully Persuaded in his own mind, and if any thing
be short, God will reveal Romans 14. 5.
it; let us be patient. It was not Flesh and Blood that revealed Christ to
Peter, they are Christ's words, therefore let us leave off the Consultati^ns
and Weapons of Flesh and Blood, and trust Christ with his own Kingdom; he has
said, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and we cannot think that
he would seek to Hell Gates to maintain it; and if it is not of this World,
then not to be maintained by that Force and Policy, which are the Props of the
Kingdoms of this World. God, the Apostle tells us, has chosen the weak things
of the World to confound the mighty. Therefore he has not chosen the Strength
and Power of this World to suppress Conscientious People, that as to humane
force, are justly accounted weakest and most destitute in all Ages of defense.

I will here conclude my Scripture Proofs with this Exhortation or Injunction
rather of the Apostle. 1 Cor. 7. 23.
Ye are bought with a Price, not to be made the Servants of men. The Subject
here is not human, wherein human Ordinances are to be obeyed, that is not the
Question, but Divine, and those that for fear or favor of men desert their
Principles and betray their Consciences, they renounce their Lord, deny him
that bought them, and tread his Blood, the Price, under Foot. Ye are bought
with a Price, Christ has purchased you: you are not your own, but his that
bought you, therefore be not the Servants of men about God's things or Christ's
Kingdom, vail to no man's Judgment, neither make man's determinations your Rule.
Stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith he has made you free, and be not entangled
again into Bondage, for we are not come to that Gal. 5. Heb. 12.
Mountain that we cannot touch, to Sinai; we are not now to be kept under like
School Boys or Minors; that Imposition might be useful then, which is a bondage
now. Moses was God's Servant, and faithful, he saw, heard and went upon the
Mount for the People; but Christians are come to Mount Zion, to Jerusalem, the
Mother of Peace and Freedom. Much then depended upon the Integrity of Moses; it
pleased God then to appear by those ways; but now the Law is brought home to
every man's Heart, Heb. 8.
and every one shall know God for himself, from the least to the greatest. My
Sheep, says Christ, hear my Voice. And let us remember that there is no
possibility of deception here, where there is no necessity of John 10.
trusting. In fine, Ye are bought with a Price, be not made the Servants of
men. One is your Lord even Christ, and ye are Brethren. Mat. 16.


But methinks I hear a stout Objection, and it is this: At this rate you will
everthrow all Church Discipline, all Censure of Errors, if no man or men can
determine. My Answer is ready and short, No Scripture Church Discipline is
hereby oppugn'd or weakened, Let not the Sentence end in Violence upon the
Conscience unconvinced. Let whosoever will expound or determine, so it be according
to true Church discipline, which can be exercised on them only, who have
willingly joined themselves in that Covenant of Union, and which proceeds only
to a separation from the rest, a disavowing or disowning but never to any
Corporal or Pecuniary Punishment; the two Arms of Anti christ, or rather that
great Beast which carries the Whore.

But let us observe what sort of Church Government the Apostle recommends;
Avoid foolish Questions, and Genealogies, and Contentions, and Striving about
the Law; for they are unprofitable and vain: A Man that is an Heretic, after
the first and second Admonition, reject, knowing that he that is such is
subverted and sins, being CONDEMNED OF HIMSELF; or Self-condemned.

Its very remarkable; First, That this great Apostle instead of exhorting Titus
to stand upon Niceties, and sacrifice men's Nature I Comforts and Enjoyments for
Opinions of Religion, injoyns him to shun Disputes about them, leaving People
to their own Thoughts and Apprehensions in those Matters, as reputing the Loss
of Peace in striving greater, than the Gain that could arise from such an Unity
and Conformity: w^^ch excellently well coheres with another Passage of his; Let
us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in any thing Phil.
3. 15.
ye be otherwise minded, God shall REVEAL even this unto you: He did not say.
You shall be FINED, PILLAGED, EXCOMMUNICATED and FLUNG into Prison, if ye be
not of our Mind.

2dly, That, in the Apostles Definition, an Heretic is a Self confounded
Person, one conscious to himself of Error, and Obstinacy in it; but that are
not Conscientious Dissenters; for many Ten Thousands in this Nation act as they
believe, and dissent from the National Religion, purely upon a Principle of
Conscience to Almighty God. And with Men of any Tenderness or common Sense,
their continual great Sufferings in Prison and Estate, and their Patience under
them, are a Demonstration, or there can he none in the World.

Nor can their Persecutors disprove them, unless they could search Hearts, and
that is a little too far for a Fallible Spirit to reach, and an Infallible One
they deny. So that the Apostle makes not the Heretic to lie upon the side of
Mis-believing, or not coming up to his Degree of Faith and Knowledge, but upon
the side of Wilfully, Turbulently, Obstinately and Self condemnedly maintaining
inconsisting Things with the Faith, Peace and Prosperity of the Church.

Granting us then not to be Obstinate and Self-condemned Dissenters (and you
cannot reasonable refuse it us) how do you prove us Erroneous in the other
Part? All Parties plead Scripture, and that for the most opposite Principles;
The Scripture, you say, cannot determine the Sense of it self; it must have an
Interpreter: he must either be Fallible or Infallible; If the first, we are
worse then before; for men are apt to be more confident, and yet are still upon
as uncertain Grounds. If the last, this must either be an external or an
internal Judge; if an external, you know where you are without pointing; for
there stands nothing between you and Popery in that Principle. If an internal
Judge, either it is our selves, or the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us; not our
selves; for then the Rule is the Thing ruled, which cannot be; and if it be the
Spirit of Christ Jesus (and the Apostle tells us, That unless we have the
Spirit we are none of Christ's) then is the Neck of Imposition broken, and what
have thou to do to judge me? let me stand or fall to my own Master; And upon
this Foot went Luther, Calvin, Melan^on, Beza abroad; and Cranmer, Ridl^y,
Hooper, Jewel, Bradford, Philpot, etc. at home, and as good Men, and constant
Martyrs in Ages before them.

But suppose Conscientious Dissenters as ill Men as the Apostle describes an
Heretic to be; what is the Punishment? this is close to the Point; stand it.

3dly, A Man that is an Heretic after the first and second Admonition, reject;
that is, deny his Communion, declare he is none of you, condemn his Proceedings
by a public censure among your selves. What more can be strained by the
fiercest Prosecutors of Men for Religion out of these words?

But will we be governed by the Rules of Holy Writ? have we any true Veneration
for the Exhortations and Injunctions therein? then let us soberly consider,
what the Apostle Paul advises and recommends to his beloved Timothy upon the
present Occasion, and I dare promise an End to Contest and Persecution for
Religion. Flee Youthful Lusts; but follow Righteousness. Faith, 2 Timothy 2. 22,
23, 24, 25.
Charity, Peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure Heart; but
foolish and unlearned Questions avoid, knowing that they do gender STRIFES. And
THE SERVANT OF THE LORD MUST NOT STRIVE, but BE GENTLE UNTO ALL MEN, APT TO
TEACH, PATIENT, IN MEEKNESS INSTRUCTING THOSE THAT OPPOSE themselves, if God
peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth.

There is such a depth of Wisdom lodged in this one Passage, that I find
difficulty to express my self upon it, and yet I shall with pleasure endeavor
it. Here is both Faith and Government, Religion and Duty, all that becomes us
toward God, our Brethren, our Neighbors, yea, our Opposers and Enemies.

Flee Youthful Lusts: that is, avoid Sin turn away from every Appearance of
Evil, flee the Temptation as soon as thou see it, lest it ensnare thee; but
follow Righteousness, Charity and Peace; seek and love Holiness, and there will
be Charity and Peace to thy self, and in thee to all men. For the Kingdom of
God stands in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost; not in
Contest about Words, nor in maintaining foolish and unlearned Questions, such
as reach not the Soul, nor carry any force upon our Affections, that learn not
men to be better, to have more piety, virtue, goodness, but are mere Notions
and Speculations, that have no influence upon holy Living, or tendency to the
Regiment of our Passions. Such Questions as the Curiosity or Wantonness of
Men's Wit or restless Fancy are apt to start under Pretense of Divine Truth,
and Sublime Mysteries; these Niceties, Conceits and Imaginations of Men (not
bottomed on the Revelation of the eternal Spirit, but humane Apprehension and
Tradition) such Questions avoid, meddle not with them; but next to Youthful
Lusts, flee them by all means; for they draw to Strife, to Heats, Animosities,
Envy, Hatred and Persecution, which unbecome the Man of God; for says the
Apostle, He must not STRIVE, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient
(be their Rank, Notion, Opinion or Faith what it will, he must not be fierce
nor censorious, much less should he persecute or excite Caesar to do it for
him, no such matter) he must be apt to teach and inform the Ignorant: and in
case it succeed not, he ought not to be outrageous, or go about to whip or club
it into him; he must be patient, that is, he must not think to bend things to
his own Will or Time, but commit his honest Edeavours to God's Blessing, that
can raise of the Stones of the Street Children unto Abraham. The Want of this
Patience has been the Undoing of all.

But some will object, O but it is not Ignorance, it is Obstinacy and
Opposition: Hardly judged, my Friend; but admit it were so, here is a Recipe for
the Malady too, and that of the Apostle's prescribing. Observe the following
words; In MEEKNESS instructing those that OPPOSE themselves, if God
peradventure will give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth. Then
not Fining, Plundering, Beating, Stocking, Imprisoning, Banishing and Killing
even OPPOSERS themselves for Religion; unless there is a Way of doing these
things with Gentleness. Patience and Meekness; which I confess I, and I think
no Body else ever heard of.

But as the Apostle gives Timothy another Method then is now used by the Sons
of Violence, for reclaiming Opposers, so the Reason of the Counsel makes all
other Ways unlawful; viz. If God peradventur^ will give them Repentance to the
acknowledgment of the Truth. I would hereupon enter the List with a Pers^cutor;
Is Repentance in my own Power, or is it in thine to give me? the Apostle says
neither: it is God's Gift alone (If God peradventure will give them Repentance,
etc.) since Repentance then is in the Case, and that God alone can give it, of
what use are Violent Courses, which never beget Repentance? on the contrary,
they have rarely failed to raise Prejudice and beget Hardness.

But was this the Evangelical Rule and Practice? Yes, that it was; Oh then
whence comes Imposition, Force, Cruelty, Spoil of Goods, Imprisonments,
Knockings, Beatings, Bruisings, Stockings, Whippings, and Spilling of Blood for
Religion? What Church is that, whose Officers are so far from clothing the
Naked, as that they strip the Clothed; from feeding the Hungry, that they take
their Bread from them, and those poor Widows and helpless Orphans too; and so
remote from visiting the Sick and Imprisoned, that they drag away their Beds
from under them, and cast their Persons into Prison for Conscience sake? Nay,
they haled away an Honest Man from a Meeting to Goal at Reading, (a while
since) not permitting him to TAKE LEAVE of his poor Wife, newly delivered, and
in a DYING Condition, though she much desired it, and lived but just by the
Meeting house whence they took him. In fine, what are they that for no other
Cause pass such Dreadful Excommunications, as render the Excommunicants little
better then Outlawed Persons, subjecting their Civil and Natural Rights to
their Pride, Passion, Interest or Revenge, unless they will purchase their
Enjoyment at the dear rate of giving their own Consciences the Lie? For what
else can be the Consequence of conforming to that I do not believe? Is not this
to destroy sincere Men, and make and save Hypocrites?

Oh, that such as are concerned would soberly consider if any Thing is so
Scandalous to True Religion as FORCE. Who can think that Evidence Good that is
extorted? And what a Church is that, which is made up of such Proselytes, or
that employes such Means to make them? It Is base Coin that needs Imposition to
make it current, but true Metal passes for its own intrinsic value O where
is that Christian Meekness, Patience and Forbearance? How many have been
ruined, that were never exhorted, and Excommunicated before they were once
admonished? This is not to serve God, but Worldly Interest: its quite contrary
to Christ's Counsel and Doctrine: He came to save, and not to destroy Nature to
magnify his Grace. You pretend to hate J. Calvin's unconditional Reprobation,
yet practice it; If you say no, Conformity is your Condition: I answer, that
its as unreasonable to require an impossibility, as cruel to dam^ Men for not
doing it; For as you say, his Doctrine makes G^d to command them to repent,
that cannot repent, and yet damn them if they repent not; So you enjoin Men to
relinquish their present Faith and Worship, and conform to yours, which is not
in their power to do, yet damn them in a temporal respect if they refuse it;
For you make such an unavoidable Dissent, punishable with the Destruction of
Men's Liberties and Estates. You had better leave off valuing your selves upon
the Mercy and Well-natur'dness of that Tenet of the Universal Love of God to
Man kind, till you love more then your selves, and abom^nate that the Church of
England should be such an Elect to the Civil Government as utterly reprobates
the rest, as you pretend to detest the like Injustice in J. Calvin's Notion of
Election and Reprobation.

And the Truth of it is, this helps on Atheism as much as any Enormity in the
Land: when Witty Men, not willing to take Pains to examine after the Truth and
Excellency of Religion, behold Men that call themselves Christ's Ministers, and
the Apostles Successors and Followers, to affect and seek Government, and yet
twice deny it, when they go to receive it: That some others grow Lordly, live
Voluptuously, and watch after the biggest Preferments, not being excited by
most Service for God, but Earthly Power and Wealth for themselves; and at the
same Time persecuting Men of more Self-denial, for Matsters of Opinion about
Faith and Worship toward-God; so that No Conformity to this Church, No
Protection from the State. Which among Protestants is so much the more
unreasonable. First, Because they by these Courses implicitly own and assume
the highest Infallibility and Perfection, and yet deny any such Thing. For it
supposes that nothing is Truer, nothing Perfecter, or else they both persecute
Men to embrace a Fallible, and Inperfect Religion, and with cruel Penalties
provide against any thing more true or Infallible, and the greatest Injury to
the World that can be: for it is a plain Endeavor to frustrate all those
excellent Prophecies and gracious Promises God has given, and the holy
Scriptures declare of the latter Days. But Secondly, It exposes you to the lash
and scorn of the Papist unavoidably; for at this rate you, that with reason
think it Ignorance and Irreligion in the Papist to imagine himself discharged in
God's account, by believing only as the Church believes, conceive your selves
at the same time justified by believeing only as a few of your own Doctors, or
else as the State believes. But if the Church cannot use force in Religion, for
this reason, because she cannot Infallibly determine to the Conscience without
convincement, much less can a few Doctors or the Civil Authority use force
where they can much less judge. Unless you would make them the Civil
Executioners of your displeasure that have no Civil Power to give them such
Commission; and to be sure no Ecclesiastical to any Force or Violence about
Religion. For the Papist by judging his Principles, punishes them that believes
not as the Church believes, though against Scripture, but the Protestant, who
teaches every one to believe the Scripture, though against the Church,
persecutes against his own Principles, even them that in any particular so
believe, as he in General teaches them to believe. This is hard, but true upon
the Protestant; for what is plainer then that he afflicts Those that according
to his own Doctrine believe and honor holy Scripture, but against it will
receive no humane Interpretation though Universal? Them, I say, who interpret
Scripture to themselves, which by his Position none but they to themselves can
Inter-pret; Them, that use the Scripture no otherwise, by his own Doctrine, to
their Edification, than he himself uses it to their punishing, and so whom his
Doctrine acknowledges true Believers, his Discipline persecutes as Heretics.

To sum up all at this time; If we must believe as Caesar appoints, why not
then as the Church believes? But if not as either without Convincement, pray
how can force be lawful? Let me recommend one Book to you, that of Right claims
a place with you, and that is Bishop Taylor's of L^^erty of Prophecy, never
answered that I have heard of, and I have reason to believe never will be
attemp^ed; for indeed it is Unanswerable. That was the Judgment of a Bishop
under Persecution, I could be glad if it might be the practice of Bishops in
their power: I may say the same of J. Tillotson's sober and seasonable
discourse before the Commons on the fifth of November. And the truth is, I am
the more earnest with you at this time, because I find that God daily shows us
he has great good will to poor England. O why should we drive him from us by
our disobedience to him, and our Severities to one another. He has lately put a
price into our hands, and continues to prove his Favors upon us; all depends
upon a sincere Reformation and our perseverance therein.

To give Testimony of this; let us with our whole Hearts turn to Go^, and keep
his holy Law, and let us but be jealous of his Glory by punishing Vice and
cherishing Virtue, and we may assure our selves he will interest himself in our
safety. Of this we cannot doubt, for he who has begun to do it under our
Disobedience, will not desert us in our sincere Repentance. And as this is our
Duty to God, without which we vainly hope for deliverance, so is there a duty
we owe to one another, that is the next Requisi^e to our Preservation.

Let all Aspe^ities be avoided, Nicknames forbidden, and the oppressed
Protestant delivered. Receive the noble Principle of Liberty of Conscience, on
which the Reformation rise: For in vain do we hope to be delivered from
Papists, till we deliver our selves from Popery. This Coertion upon Conscience,
and Persecution for Religion are that part of Popery, which is most justly
hated and feared: And if we either fear or hate Popery for its Cruelty* shall
we practice the CRUELTY we fear or hate it for? God forbid: this were the way
to be deserted of God, and left to their Cruelty. The same Sins will ever fix
the same Odium, and find the fame Punishment wherever they are. If they burnt
your Ancestors, don't you strip and starve your Brethren. Remember the many
Thousands now perse^uted in this Kingdom for the sake of their tender and very
peaceable Consciences; Husbands are unnaturally separated from their Wives, and
Parents from their Children, their Corn, Cattle and Household stuff swept away,
perhaps at the Instigation of some lewd and indigent Informer, or to please the
mali^e of an ill disposed Neighbor. In the mean time many, once sufficient,
are exposed to Charity, the fruits of their honest Labor and Bread of their
Children being now made the Forfeiture of their Conscience.

Friends and Country men, there is deep Doctrine in this present Providence,
examine it well, that you may reap the benefit of it: And among the rest, let
me tell you, this is not the least part of it, that God is showing you Mercy,
that you may show Mercy, and has awakened you at the brink of the Pit, that you
may help your Brethren out of it. Be wise and considerate, 'twill be much your
own fault if you are not happy. And truly I have no manner of scruple, but God
will preserve us, if w^ will not cast away our selves. For our own Sins and
Folly can only direct the hand that seeks to Stab us; and shall we make it
succesful to our own ruin? Let us therefore turn away from all Impiety; let the
Magistracy discourage and punish it; and let us forhear, and love one another.
If we begin with God, we shall end with God, that is, with Success; Else be
assured, we shall only inherit the Wind of our own Invention, and be deserted
of him, then, when we shall most want him.

In short, reverence the present providence; though your Lives have not
deserved it, let your Lives now be grateful, and not abuse it. Pursue your
advantages thoroughly, but wisely; be as temperate as zealous, and to your
Enemies, as generous as just: Insult not over ill men for the sake of their ill
Principles, but pity their unhappiness, whilst you abhor the cause of it; let
them see that you had rather inform then destroy them, and take more pleasure
in their Conversion, then your own Revenge. This will be the greatest
coufutation upon them, that they be taught the Goodness of your Religion by the
mildness of it, and by its mercy, the Cruelty of their own. The Indian
Atabaliba rejected the Romish Baptism, because of the Spanish Tyranny, whence
it was usual with those poor Americans, to desire they might not go to Heaven
if the Spaniards went thither. I know there be little Arts used to prevent
Protestant Union, and that in a Protestant Guise; and it is a Trick, not of
yesterday, to put one Party of Protestants upon devouring four or five, that
both the Protestant Church may have the Odium of Eating or Devouring her own
Children, and that another Interest behind the Hangings may find the more easy
and creditable access to the Chair: It Is the Men of this Strain, though under
disguise, that now seek to distract you, and to effect it the better, old
Stories must be had up, Acts of Olivion violated, the dead disturbed, their
Tombs rifl'd and they haled out of their Graves to receive a new Sentence; That
Condemning the Living of that interest by the Dead, they might be deserted of
those, that to say we cannot be safe without them.

If any thing Sober and Judicious be proposed for allaying Asperities,
accomodating Differences, and securing to Prince and People a just and legal
Union of Interest as our Government requires, we must presently be told of 41.
and 42. as if there were a sort of Necromancy in the numbers, or that the
naming of those Figures (long since made Ciphers by an Act of Oblivion) has
power enough to lay the active and generous Spirits of our times; but they will
find themselves mistaken in their black Art, and that things as well as times
are changed; the Mask is off, and he that runs may read.

Men in their Pleas and Endeavors for Truth, Justice and Sincere Religion will
not be over born or staggered by such stale and trifling Reflections, rarely
used of late but to palliate wretched Designs, or dilcredit good ones, with men
of weak Judgments, though perhaps of loyal Principles.

I beseech you, let us not be unskilful in these Tricks, that we may not be
mistaken or abused by them; I cannot tell a ^ime in which the Minds of all
sorts of Protestants have been so powerfully and unanimously engaged to
endeavor a good Understanding between the King and People; And as I am sure it
was never more needed, so let me say no Age has put a richer Price into the
Hands of Men, or yielded a fairer Occasion to fix an happy and lasting Union
upon: in order to which let me prevail with you, that we may study to improve
this great Principle as the necessary means to it, viz. That God's Providence
and our own Constitution have made the Interest of Prince and People ONE; and
that their Peace and Greatness lie in a most industrous and impartial
Prosecution of it.

Those that teach other Doctrine, as that the Prince has an Interest apart
from the Good and Safety of the People, are the sole men that get by it, and
therefore find themselves obliged to study their misunderstanding because they
only are disappointed and insecured by their Union.

Experience truly tells us, that such Persons have another Interest than that
which leads to a common Good, and are often but too artificial in interesting
Princes in the success of it; but prudent and generous Princes have ever seen
that it is neither safe nor just; and that no Kingdom can be governed with true
Glory and Success, but there where the Interest of the Governor is one with
that of the Governed, and where there is the strictest Care to steer all
Transactions of State by the Fundamentals, or first and great Principles of
their own Constitution, especially since swerving from them has always made
way for Confusion and Misery in Government. Our own Stories are almost every
where vexed by this Neglect.

To Conclude, and sum up the whole Discourse; If you will both cure present,
and prevent future Grievances, it will greatly behove us to take a most
deliberate and unbiased View of the present state of Things, with their proper
Causes and Tendencies. Let us confront our Ecclesiastical Matters with the
plain Text and Letter of Holy Scripture; this is PROTESTANT: and let us compare
our civil Transactions with the ancient Laws and Statutes of the Realm; this is
ENGLISH. And I do humbly and heartily beseech Al mighty God, that he would so
dispose the Hearts of Prince and People, as that now Foundations may be laid
for a Just and Lasting Tranquillity to these Nations.

AN APPENDIX Of the CAUSES of PERSECUTION
I Impute all Persecution for Religion to these Seven ensuing Causes, though
properly speaking, there is but one Original Cause of this Evil, and that is
the Devil, as there is but one Original Cause of Good, and that is God.

The first Cause of Persecution is this, That the Authors and Users of it have
little or no Religion at Heart, they art not subject to the ground and first
Cause of true Religion in their own Souls: For it is the part of true Religion
to humble the Mind, break the Heart, and soften the Affection: To him, O God!
will thou have regard, said one of Old, who is of a broken Heart, and a
contrite Spirit, and that trembles at thy word; not one that breaks Pates and
plunders Goods for Religion. Blessed are they that Mourn, said Christ, they
shall be comforted; not those that sell Joseph, and make Merry. Blessed are the
poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God; those that are low in their
own Eyes; not such as devour and damn all but themselves. Blessed are the meek,
for they shall inherit the Earth; such as are gentile and ready to help, and
not Tyrannize over Neighbors. Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain
Mercy; what then shall become of those that are Cruel, under pretense of doing
it for Gods sake. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God; then Disturbers and Destroyers of their peaceable Neighbors
shall not be called so. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, for they shall be filled; but not those that hunger and thirst
after our Corn and Cattle, Houses and Land for Conscience sake. And Blessed are
you, says Christ, when Men shall Revile and Persecute you, etc. then not those
that Revile and Persecute others, and those Sober and Harmless: not one
Blessing to this Conscience-hunting Doctrine and Practice, that devour the
Widow and Orphant for Religion. Were men inwardly and truly Religious, they
would have that low Opinion of themselves, that tender regard to mankind, that
awe of Almighty God, that none of these froward Passions would have any sway
with them. But the mischief is, unmortified Passions pretend to Religion, a
Proud, Impatient, Arrogant mind would promote it, then which, nothing of Man is
more remote from it, and mistaking the Nature of Christ's peaceable Religion,
which, if the Apostle James say true, is to visit the Fatherless and widow, and
keep our selves unspotted of the World. They turn Widow and Fatherless out of
House and Home, and spot themselves with the Cruelty and Injustice of usurping
their poor patremony, the Bread of their Lives, and Sustenance of their
Natures; such men as these are devoid of natural Affection, their Religion has
no Bowels, or they are without Mercy in the Profession of it; which is the
quite contrary to true Religion, that makes us love Enemies, do good to them
that hate us, and kindly entreat those that despightfully use us: and so much
stronger, in Souls truly Religious, is the power of Love to Mankind then any
Selfrevenging Passion, that from an humble and serious reflection upon the
Mercies and Goodness of God to them, they do not only suppress any rising of
Heart against their Persecutors (much more against peaceable Dissenters) but
with much softness and charity commiserate their Ignorance and Fury; offering
to inform them, and praying that they may be forgiven. This is to be Religious,
and therefore those that Persecute for Religion are Irreligious.

2dly, The next Cause of Persecution, is the gross but general Mistake which
People are under concerning the Nature of the Church and Kingdom of Christ, for
the lamentable Worldliness of men's minds has put them upon those Carnal
Constructions, which have made way for all the external Coertion and Violence
used by bad, and suffered by good Men on the score of Religion from the
beginning. And no wonder if ordinary Persons tumble upon this Construction,
when the Disciples of Jesus showed themselves so ill read in the Mysteries of
his Kingdom, that after all the Intimacy they had had with him, they resrain'd
not to ask, When shall the Kingdom be restored to Israel. They looked abroad,
had a Worldly Idea in their minds; Jew like they waited for external
Deliverance from the Power of the Romans, rather then an Internal Salvation
from the Dominion of Satan, and interpreted that to Worldly loss and freedom,
which did relate to the loss and Redemption of the Soul; but Jesus taught them
better things; yet so, as not to deny or flatly discourage and rebuke them;
that (though true) might have been more then they could have bor^ therefore he
winds off with them upon the Time and the Season of the thing, knowing that the
Time was at hand, that they should be better taught and satisfied of the nature
of his Kingdom, unto which he referred them. When the Spirit John 16.
of Truth comes, it shall lead you into all Truth, etc.

That the Kingdom of Christ is not of this World, has been before observed, and
the Reason is so great, that all men of common Sense must allow it upon
Christ's Principle; for says he, then would my Servants fight for me; truly
implying, that because the Kingdoms of this World are evidently set up and
maintained by Worldly Force, and that he will have no Worldly Force used in the
Business of his Kingdom, therefore it is not of this World. Consequently, those
that attempt to set up his Kingdom by Worldly Force, or make that their
Pretense to use it, are none of his Servants; they are truly but Men of this
World; such as seek an Earthly, and not an Heavenly Kingdom; themselves, and
not Christ Jesus. Where by the way let me observe, That though the Jews, to
engage Pilate the more easily to their side, impeach't Christ of being an E^^e
my to Casar, they were Enemies, and He a Friend to Caesar: for he came to
reform the Lives of Men, to make them better Subjects, to obey Caesar, not for
Fear, but for Conscience sake (so would Caesar's Provinec have been easy and
safe.) But the Jews would have had him Caesar's Enemy, one that should have
forcibly rescued them from Caesar's Power; they waited for a Captain General to
begin the Revolt, and with an high Hand to over bear and captive Caesar, as he
had done them: and it is more than probable, that his Appearance being to
another End, they therefore rejected him, their Heart being set upon this.

But to return; Christ told his Disciples, that he had chosen them out of the
World; how? not to converse or live bodily in it? no such matter: but he had
chosen or singled them from the Nature, Spirit, Glory, Policy and Pomp of this
World. How Persons so qualified can make a Worldly Church or Kingdom, unless
they desert Christ's Doctrine, is past my Skill to tell. So that the Capacity
that Christians stand in to Christ is Spiritual, and not Worldly or Carnal; and
therefore not Carnal or Worldly, but Spiritual Methods and Weapons only are to
be used to inform or reclaim such as are Ignorant or Disobedi^ent. And if we
will give Ancient Story credit, we shall find that Worldly Weapons were never
employed by the Christian Church till the became Worldly and so ceast to be
truly Christian.

But why should I say the Church (the most abused word in the World) her
Leaders have taught her to e^^, and that of believing as the Church believes is
so far from being true in point of Faith as well as Reason, that the Church her
self his ever believed as the Clergy (that is, the Priests) believed, since
that sort of Men have practiced Distinction from and Superiority upon the
Laity. He that will peruse the Ecclesiastical Story delivered us by Eusebius
Pamphili, Secrates Scholasticns, Evagrius, Ruffinus, Sozomen, etc. will find
but too many and sad Instances of the Truth of this.

In short; Peoples apprehending the Church and Kingdom of Christ to be Visible
and Worldly, like other Societies and Government, have thought it not only to
be Lawful but Necessary to use the Arts and Force of this World to support that
Church and Kingdom, especially since this Interest of Religion has been
embodied with that of the Civil Magistrate; for from that time he has been
made Custos utriusque tabulae, and such as offend, though about Church Matters,
have been reputed Transgressors against the State, and consequently the State
interested in punishing the Offense. Whereas had Christians remained in their
primitive Simplicity and Purity, in the Self-denying, Patient and Suffering
Doctrine of Christ, Christianity had stood in Holy Living, not in Worldly
Regiment; and its Compulsion would have been Love; its Arms, Reason and Truth;
and its utmost Rigor, even to obstinate Enemies or Apostates, but Renouncing
of their Communion, and that not till much Forbearance had been used to them.

To sum up all; The Kingdoms of this World, stand in outward Bodily and Civil
Matters, and here, the Laws and Power of Men reich and are effectual. But the
Kingdom and Church of Christ, that is chosen out of the World, stands not in
Bodily Exercise (which the Apostle says profits little) nor in Times nor
Places, but in Faith and that Worship which Christ tells us is in Spirit and in
Truth; to this no Worldly Compulsion can bring or force men, it is only the
Power of that King of Righteousness, whose Kingdom is in the Minds and Souls of
the Just, and he rules by the Law of his own free Spirit, which like the Wind,
Blows where it lists: And as without this Spirit of Regeneration no man can
be made a Member of Christ's Church or Kingdom, so neither is it in the Power of
Man to command or give it, and consequently all Worldly force employed to make
men Members of Christ's Church and Kingdom is unnatural and ineffectual. I could
be very large upon this point, for it is very fruitful, and so much the cause of
Persecution, that if there were never another to be assigned, this were enough;
for upon due consideration it must needs meet with every man's Judgment and
Experience. I will here add the sense of memorable Hales of Eaton upon this
subject.

When our Savior in the Acts after his Resurrection was Discoursing to his
Disciples concerning the Kingdom of God, they presently brake forth into this
J. Hales Golden Essays, in his Sermon upon John 18. ver. 36. page 153, 154, 155.
Question, Will thou now restore the Kingdom unto Israel? Certainly this
Question betrays their Ignorance; their thoughts still ran upon a Kingdom like
unto the Kingdoms of the World, notwithstanding they had so long and so often
heard our Savior to the contrary: Our Savior therefore shortly takes them up,
Non est vestrum, your Question is nothing to the purpose; the Kingdom that I
have spoken of is another manner of Kingdom, then you conceive. Sixteen hundred
Years, et quod excurrit, has the Gospel been preached unto the World, and is
this stain spunged out yet? I doubt it. Whence arise those novel and late
Disputes, do notis Ecclesiae, of the notes and visibility of the Church. Is it
not from hence they of Rome take the World and the Church to be like Mercury
and Sosia in Plautus his Comedies, so like one another, that one of them must
wear a Toy in his Cap, that so the Spectators may distinguish them; whence
comes it that they stand so much upon State and Ceremony in the Church? Is it
not from hence, that they think the Church must come in l^ke Agrippa and
Bernice in the Acts (...), as St. Luke speaks, with a great deal of Pomp, and
Train, and Show, and Vanity; and that the Service of God does necessarily
require this noise and tumult of outward State and Ceremony? Whence comes it,
that we are at our Wits ends, when we see Persecution, and Sword, and Fire to
rage against the true Professors of the Gospel? Is it not because, as these
brings Ruin and Desolation upon the Kingdoms of the World; so we suppose they
work no other effect in the Kingdom of Christ? all these Conceits, and many
more of the like Nature, spring out of no other Fountain then that old
inveterate Error which is so hardly wiped out of our Hearts; That the State of
the Church and Kingdom of Christ does hold some proportion, some likeness with
the state and managing of temporal Kingdoms: Wherefore to pluck out of our
Hearts, opinionem tam insitam, tam vetustam, a Conceit so ancient, so deeply
rooted in us, our Savior spoke most excellently, most pertinently, and most
fully, when he tells us, that his Church, that his Kingdom is not of this
World.

In which Word of his, there is contained the true art of discovering and
knowing the true Nature and Essence of the Church. For as they which make
Statues, cut and pare away all Suporfluities of the matter upon which they
work; so our Savior, to shw us the true proportion and feature of the Church,
prunes away the World and all superfluous Excrescenties and sends her to be
seen, as he did our first Parents in Paradise, stark naked: As those Elders in
the Aprocryphl Story of Susanna, when they would see her Beauty, commanded to
take off her Mask: So he that longs to see the Beauty of the Church, must pull
off that Mask of the World and outward show. For as Juda in the Book of
Genesis, when Thamar sat Veiled by the Way-side knew not his Daughter from an
Where: So whilst the Church, the Daughter and Spouse of Christ sits veiled with
the World, and Pomp and Show, it will be an hard matter to discern her from an
Harlot. But yet further, to make the difference betwixt these Kingdoms the more
plainly to appear, and so better to fix in your Memories, I will briefly touch
some of these Heads, in which they are most notoriously differenced.

The first Head wherein the Difference is seen, are the Persons and Subjects of
this Kingdom: For as the Kingdom of Christ is not of this World, so the
Subjects of this Kingdom are Men of another World, and not of this. Every one
of us bears a double Person, and accordingly is the Subject of a double
Kingdom: The Holy Ghost by the Psalmist divides Heaven and Earth betwixt God
and Man, and tells us, as for God, He is in Heaven, but the Earth has he given
to the Children of Men: So has the same Spirit by the Apostle St. Paul divided
every one of our Persons into Heaven and Earth, into an outward and earthly
Man, and into an inward and heavenly Man: This Earth, that is, this Body of
Clay has he given to the Sons of Men, to the Princes under whose Government we
live; but Heaven, that is, the inward and spiritual Man, has he reserved unto
himself: They can restrain the outward Man, and moderate our outward Actions by
Edicts and Laws; they can tie our Hands and our Tongues; -- Illa se jactat in
aula Aeolus: Thus far they can go, and when they are gone thus far, they can go
no farther: But to rule the inward Man in our Hearts and Souls, to set up an
Imperial Throne in our Understandings and Wills, this part of our Government
belongs to God and to Christ: These are the Subjects, this the Government of
his Kingdom; Men may be Kings of Earth and Bodies, but Christ alone is the King
of Spirits and Souls. Yet this inward Government has influence upon our
outward Actions; For the Authority of Kings over our outward Man is not so
absolute, but that it suffers a great Restraint; it must stretch no farther
then the Prince of our inward Man pleases: for if secular Princes stretch out
the Skirts of their Authority to command ought by which our Souls are
prejudiced the King of Souls has in this case given us a greater Command, That
we rather Obey God then Men.

3dly, A third great Cause of Persecution for Religion is this, that men make
too many things necessary to be believed to Salvation and Communion.
Persecution entered with Creed making; for it so falls out, that those who
distinguish the Tree in the bulk, cannot with the like ease discern every
Branch or Leaf that grows upon it; and to run out the necessary Articles of
Faith to every good or true thing that the Wit of Man may deduce from the Text,
and so too, as that I ought to have a distinct Idea, or Apprehension of every
one of them, and must run them over in my mind as a Child would ^on a Lesson by
Heart, and that as the Creed of which I must not miss a tittle upon my
Salvation; this I think to be a Temptation upon men to fall into Dispute and
Controversy, and then we are taught, by long Experience, that he that has most
Power, will oppress his Opinion that is weaker, whence comes Persecution; this
puts Unity and Peace too much upon the Hazard. Mary's Choice therefore was not
of many things, but the one thing necessary, as Christ terms it, the Lord Luke
10. 42.
of the true Divinity; and pray what was this one needful thing, but Christ
Jesus himself, and her Faith, Love and Obedience in and to him: here is no
perplexed Creed to subscribe, no Systhime of Divinity to charge the Head with,
this One Needful thing was Mary's Choice and Blessing; may it be ours, and I
should hope a quick End to Controversies, and consequently to Persecutions.

4thly, Another Cause of Persecution, is The Prejudice of Education, and that
Bias Tradition gives to those men, who have not made their Religion the
Religion of their Judgment: For such will forbid all the Inquiry, which might
question the Weakness or Falsehood of their Religion, and had rather be deceived
in an honorable Decent, then be so uncivil to the memory of his Ancestors, as
to seek the Truth which sound must reprove the Ignorance of their Ages; of this
(the vainest of all Honors) they are extreme careful, and at the very mention
of any thing, to them new (though as old as Truth, and older then this World)
are easily urged into a Tempest, and are not appeased but by a Sacrifice. This
Ignorance and want of Inquiry helps on Persecution.

5thly, Another Reason and that no small one, is Self-love and Impatiency of
Men under contradiction, be it out of Ignorance, that they are angry with what
they cannot refuse, or out of private Interest, it matters not; their Opinion
must reign alone, they are tenacious of their own sense and cannot endure to
have it questioned, be there never so much reason for it; Men of these Passions
are yet to learn they are Ignorant of Religion, by the want they have of
Mortification, such Persons can easily let go their hold on Charity, to lay
Violent hands upon their Opposers; if they have power, they rarely fail to use
it so; not remembering, that when they absolved themselves from the tie of Love,
Meekness and Patience, they have abandoned true Religion, and contend not for
the Faith once delivered to the Saints, (which stood therein) but for mere
Words.

It is here proud Flesh and a capricious Head that disputes for Religion, and
not an humble Heart, and a divine frame of Spirit. Men that are angry for God,
Passionate for Christ, that call Names for Religion, and fling Stones and
Persecute for Faith, may tell us they are Christians if they will, but no body
would know them to be such by their Fruits, to be sure they are no Christians
of Christ's making.

I would to God that the Disputants of our time did but coolly weigh the
Irreligiousness of their own Heats for Religion, and see if what they contend
for will quit the Cost, will countervail the Charge of departing from Charity
and making a Sacrifice of Peace to gain their point; upon so seasonable a
reflection I am confident they would find that they rather show their love to
Opinion then Truth, and seek Victory more then Concord.

Could men be contented as he, whom they call their Lord, was, to declare their
Message, and not strive for Proselites, nor vex for Conquest, they would
recommend all to the Conscience, and if it must be so, patiently endure
Contradiction too, and so lay their Religion, as he did his, not in Violence
but Suffering; But I must freely profess, and in duty and Conscience I do it,
that I cannot call that Religion, which is introduced against the Laws of Love,
Meekness and Friendship: Superstition, Interest or Faction I may.

There is a Zeal without Knowledge, that is Superstition; there is a Zeal
against Knowledge, that is Interest or Faction (the true Heresy;) there is a
Zeal with Knowledge, that is Religion; therefore blind obedience may be
superstition, it cannot be Religion: and if you will view the Countries of
Cruelty, you shall find them Superstitious rather then Religious. Religion is
gentile, it makes men better, more Friendly, Loving and Patient then before.
And the success, which followed Christianity whilst the ancient Professors of
it betook themselves to no other defense, plainly proves both the force of
those passive Arguments above all corporal Punishments, and that we must never
hope for the same Prosperity till we fall into the same Methods. Are men
impatient of having their conceits owned? they are then most to be suspected.
Error and Superstition, like cracked Titles, only fear to be touched, and run for
Authority and number. Truth is plain and steadfast, without Arts or Tricks, will
you receive her, well: if not, there is no compulsion. But pray tell me, what
is that desired Uniformity that has not Unity? and that Unity, which has not
Love, Meekness and Patience in it? I beseech you hear me, for those men depart
from the Spirit of Christianity, that seek with Anger and Frowardness to
promote it. Let us not put so miserable a Cheat upon our selves, nor affront
upon Christianity as to think, That a most gentle and patient Religion can be
advanced by most ungentle and impatient Ways. I should sooner submit to an
humble opposition then to the greatest Zealot in the World, and sooner deliver
my self up to him that would modestly drop a controverted Truth, then to such
as seek tempestuously to carry it; for even Error, bashfully and patiently
defended endangers Truth in the management of impudent and hasty Zeal* and
gives to it that Lnstre which only good Eyes can see from Gold. Alas! it is for
want of Considering, that men don't see, that to disorder the mind in
Controversy is a greater mischief then to carry the point can be a benefit; in
that it is not to be Religious to apprehend rightly, but to do well; the latter
can scarcely be without the former, but the former often is without the latter,
which brings me to my sixth Cause of Persecution.

6 hly, Another, and that no small cause of Persecution is a misapprehension of
the word Religion. For when once the Ignorance or Prejudice of men has
persuaded them to lay more weight upon their own Opinion or D^ssent of their
Neighbors then in truth the thing will bear, to excuse their Zeal or justify
their Spleen, they presently heighten the difference to a new Religion; whence
we so frequently hear of such reflections as these, new Gospels and Faiths,
upstart Religions and Lights, and with the like Scare-crows amuse the Vulgar
and render their own design of ruining honest men the more practicable. But I
would obviate this mischief; for a new Religion has a new Foundation, and
Consequently where there is the same Foundation, there cannot be a new
Religion. Now the Foundation of the Christian Religion is Christ, and that only
is another Religion then the Christian, which professes another Foundation, or
corruptly adds to that Foundation by adding other Mediators, and introducing a
new way of Remission of Sin: Which cannot be said of the several sorts of
Protestants? therefore for Protestants to reproach each other with new
Religions and Gospels, and by their Indecent and Unchristian behavior to
enslave their own Reckoning, and draw into more discord, is a Sin against God,
an Injury to the common Cause of Protestancy, and to the Security of the Civil
Interest of that Country where the Inhabitants are of that Religion, as well as
a real Injustice to one another; for Protestants don't only agree in the same
Fundamentals of Christianity, but of Protestancy too, that is, in the reasons
of Separation from Rome, which indeed is Christianity. Let not every
circumstantial difference or Variety of Cult be Nicknamed a new Religion,
neither suffer so ill an use to be made of such Dissents as to carry them
beyond their true bounds; for the meaning of those Arts of ill men, is to set
the People further off from one another then they really are; and to aggrevate
Differences in Judgment, to Contrariety in affection, and when they have once
inflamed them to Variance and Strife, nothing can hinder Persecution but want
of Power, which being never wanted by the strongest side, the weakest though
truest, is oppressed, not by Argument, but Worldly Weapons.

The seventh and last Cause I shall now assign for Persecution is this, That
Holy living is become no test among us, unless against the liver. The Tree was
once known by its Fruits, it is not so now; the better Liver, the more
dangerous, if not a Conformist: this has made way for Persecution. There was a
time, when Virtue was Venerable and good Men admired, that is derided, and
Opinion carries it.

He that can persuade his Conscience to comply with the times, be he Vicious,
Knavish, Cowardly, any thing; he is protected, perhaps preferred. A Man of
Wisdom, Sobriety and Ability to serve his King and Country, if a Dissenter,
must be blown upon for a Phanatick, a man of Faction, of disloyal Principles,
and what not.

Rewards and Punishments are the Magistrates duty and the Governments interest
and support. Rewards are due to Virtue, Punishments to Vice. Let us not mistake
nor miscall things; let Virtue be what it al. ways was in Government, good
Manners, sober Living; and Vice, ill Manners and ill Living. Reduce all to
this: let such good Men have the ^miles and Rewards, and such ill Men the
Frowns and Punishments of the Government; this ends Persecution, and lays
Opinion to sleep. Ill men will make no more advantages by such Conformity, nor
good men no more suffer for want of it.

In short, As that Religious Society deserves not the Protection of the Civil,
which is inconsistent with the Safety of it; so those Societies of Christians,
that are not only not Destructive of the Civil Government, but Lovers of it,
ought by the Civil Government to be secured from Ruin.

God Almighty open our Understandings, and pour out the Spirit of through
Reformation upon us, that we may be all Conscientiously Disposed to seek and
pursue those things which make for Love, Peace and Godliness, that it may be
well with us both here and forever.

For yet a little while, and the Wicked shall not be: yea, thou shall
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be; but the Meek shall inherit
the Earth, and shall delight themselves in abundance of Peace. The Wicked
PLOTTETH against the Just, and ^nasheth upon him with his Teeth; the Lord shall
laugh at him; for he sees that his Day is coming, Psalm. 37. 10, 11, 12, 13.
The Judgment of King James and King Charles the first about Persecution for
Religion.
WE find it asserted by King James in his Speech to the Parliament in the year
1609. who said, That it is a pure Rule in Divinity, That God never loves to
plant his Church with Violence and Blood; and furthermore said, It was usually
the Condition of Christians to be Persecuted, but not to Persecute.

And we find the same things in substance asserted again by his Son, King
Charles the first, in his Book known by the Name (...), printed for R. Royston,
as follows.

Page 67. In his Prayer to God he said, Thou see how much Cruelty amongst
Christians is acted under the color of Religion; as if we could not be
Christians, unless we Crucify one another.

Page 28. Make them at length seriously to consider, that nothing Violent and
Injurious, can be Religion.

Page 70. Nor is it so proper to h^w out Religious Reformations by the Sword,
as to pollish them by fair and equal Disputations, among those that are most
concerned in the Differences, whom, not Force but Reason ought to convince.

Sure in Matters of Religion, those Truths gain most upon ^e^s Judgments and
Consciences, which are least urged with secular Violence, which weakens Truth
with Prejudices.

Page 115. It being an Office not only of Humanity, rather to use Reason than
Force, but also of Christianity to seek Peace and ensue it.

Some Words of Advice from King Charles the first, to the then Prince of Wales,
now King of England, etc.
Page 165. My Counsel and Charge to you is, That you seriously consider the
former Real or Objected Miscarriages, which might occasion my Troubles, that
you may avoid them, etc.

Beware of Exasperating any Faction, by the Crosness and Asperity of some men's
Passions, Humors and private Opinions, employed by you, grounded only upon
Differences in lesser matters, which are but the Skirts and Suburbs of
Religion, wherein a charitable Connivance and Christian Toleration, often
dissipates their Strength, when rougher Opposition fortifies, and puts the
Despised and Oppressed Party into such Combinations, as may most enable them to
get a full Revenge on those they count their Persecutors.

Page 166. Take heed that Outward Circumstances and Formalities of Religion
devour not all.

Difficulties in printing have occasioned some Faults, which pray Excuse and
Amend.
Page 8. line 18. after Quality add in saying. p. 14 l. 10. was r. is. p. 16.
l. 5. these r those. l. 27. Law r. Laws. p 27. l 5 with r of. p 29 l 31 of
dele. p. 33 l 1 has r have. p 39 l 10 r Salamin p 32 l 9 r who. p 56 l 11 this
r thy. p 63 l 22 the dele. l 31 and r if not. p 78 l 20 r of your. p 79 l 1 as
dele. l 26 r discord all, etc. p 82 l 3 whom r which. p 83 l 1 r mutable state.
p 105 l 24 in r on. p 11 1 l 1 r believes. p 118 l 2 preaching r packing. p
120 l. 32 their r your. p 132 l 8 r that impossible. p 133 l 24 r Ages stood. p
134 l 32 r have been. p 137 l 6 they r she. p 138 l 27 ^r the. p 139 l 9 r
therefore. l 16 read imbecil. l 23 r Perfection. p 140 l 28 r reject. p 143 l
14 r for peace. p 153 l 32 ci^il 1 personal. p 156 l 13 ever r over. l 30 r
hurt. p 178 l 7 Poper Judge. p 183. l 11 the dale. l 28 r and is it. p 184 l 26
r let us. p 185 l 14 those r three. p (...) l 22 intruded r intended p 202 l 4.
r concerned. p 208 l 17 r Pro^ 16 r is it reasonable. p 219 l 25 r undoing. p
225 l 18 recer^ (...) p 227 l 26 we r true. p 229 l; 29 r laid p 231 l 25^ and
dele. p 235 l 10 r Governments. l 13 this r the. p 241 l 11 his r their. l 22
refuse (...) refuse. p 244 l 3 r imprudent. p 245 l 4 enslave r increase.

THE END.

