NEW PROPOSITIONS. Propounded by The Earl of Pembrooke. The Earl of
Northumberland. The Earl of Essex. And the Earl of Holland.
To the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City in Guild Hall* On
Saturday being the 11. day of June, 1642. In the behalf of all the Commons in
England. Whereunto is annexed many Remarkable Passages With the numbers of
Horse that they have underwrit. Together with the substance of a Letter sent
from Holland. Wherein is declared that there are many hundreds of Carbines,
3000 great Saddles, 300 Barrels of Powder, 8. Pieces of Ordnance, which is
conceived to be bought with part of the money borrowed upon the Jewels of the
Crown, and to be transported to England. Also a Declaration from both Houses
of Parliament, concerning the Ordering of the Militia, directed to the
Deputy-Lievtenants of the respective Counties throughout all England, and
Dominion of Wales.

Ordered that this be Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed by T. Fawcet. June 14.* 1642.

New Propositions.
Several Propositions have lately been propounded by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, they leaving no way
unattempted, to gain his Majesty's Royal favor, and the peace of the
Kingdom, witness those 19. Propositions lately sent to York and presented to
His Majesty, yet nevertheless all their endeavors find a bad success and all
their care is rewarded with discourtesie, for it is too apparent that His
Majesty intends to raise War against the Parliament, for information is given
to the House that several Persons have endeavored (...) (...) Forces,
promising great rewards to those that would be ayding in that service, Likewise
the Lords and Commons received a Letter from Holland, which the Ear of
Northumberland read in Guild Hall, that there is at this time at Amsterdam many
thousands of Carabines and Pistols. three thousand great Saddles, 300 Barrels
of Powder, 8* pieces of Ordnance, making ready to be sent to England, for this
design, and it is thought to be bought with part of the money borrowed on the
Jewels of the Crown, likewise a Chain of Pearl and other Jewels sent back,
money being denied to be sent on them, by reason of the sat Order made by the
Parliament to the contrary.

These and the like Assurances of danger, caused the Lords and Commons now
resident in Parliament to publish several Propositions in general, to all the
Kingdom.

This was also the (...) that d^duced these Noblemen to make these other
propositions to this Honorable City, that being cheifely concerned in this
business.

The above named Earls, coming to the Hall where the Lord Major and Aldermen,
with the Common Council of the City were assembled.

The Earl of Northumberland read those Propositions which were published by
the Authority of Parliament, after which the said Earl declared upon what
grounds they did proceed, and their causes of fear, which were chiefly these.

1. Because his Majesty by the persuasions of the malignant (...)* does
endeavor to force a dissolution of the Parliament, to which end, by several
Persons, and in several Counties, he has endeavored to raise Arms.

2. That these Foreign preparations of ^rmer, purchased with the Jewels of
the Crown, can portend nothing less then such a dangerous design.

3. That those armed Cavaleers at York committing several outrages already on
his Majesty's Subjects, giving out several words against the Parliament, both
dangerous and scandalous, is a free Declaration of their intents, what they
intend to put in Act, if they once gain strength by their supposed Foreign
supplies.

To these they added these Propositions.

1. Whether it stood not for the better security of the City in general, to
venture a proportionable Stock for the maintenance of forces to defend and
secure the general from the danger of such intended Stratagems.

2. Whether it were not much better for those that had Plate or Money to put it
into a general stock, the faith of the whole Kingdom being engaged for the
return of it, then to let such Plate or Moneys be made pillage and prey to the
enemies of the Kingdom.

To which Propositions they added these Reasons.

That for such Moneys or Plate so ventured if the Kingdom stood, they were
assured to receive the value again with Interest, and the rest of their
estates secured, but on the contrary they could neither keep that, nor ought
else, their lives and estates running on equal hazard.

These Propositions with the Reasons were generally liked, and condiscended
unto.

Likewise the said Earls declared that they have underwrit for four hundrd
Horse,

Die Sabbati 4. Junij. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament* That the
Deputy-Lievtenants of the several and respective Counties within the Kingdom
of England and Dominion of Wale^, (...) Members of the House of Commons, be
hereby required and enjoined to be present at the days, and places which are,
or shall hereafter be appointed by the Lord Lievtenants, or their Deputies, for
the (...), Mustering, and Exercising of the In^^bitants of the said Counties,
according to the authority given unto them by an Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament. And it is further Ordered, That all Deputy-Lievtenants, as well
those that are Members of the House of Commons, as others, shall give such
dispatch by preparing of Warrants* Commissions* or Letters, and subscribing of
the same as the service shall require; And that such as shall refuse, or
neglect so to do, that their Names be certified unto us by (...)
fellow-Deputies, or any one of them that shall or do perform the said Service.

And it is further declared* that it is the intention of both Houses, for the
better encouragement of so good a Work, so much conducing to the safety of his
Majesty's person and Kingdoms that some of their Members at the times and
places appointed, or to be appointed for the execution of the said Ordinance,
shall be sent down to give their personal attendance upon the said Service.

Ordered to be printed*

Hen. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



FINIS.

