THe Reader may please to take notice that these short Annotations were written
within two months after the Publication of that Treatise of Human Reason.

REASON REGULATED OR, Brief Reflections, upon a (...) TREATISE of HVMAN-REASON.

By T. P.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1675.

Reason Regulated: OR, Brief Reflections upon a late Treatise of Human-Reason.
THE very same Motives, which caused that Ingenious Author to publish his
HVMAN-REASON and his Search into the Nature, and Quality of his Religion, ( and
those were [he says] to Communicate it is Effects to others;) carried me also
on, to a resolution of exposing these short Observations, to the View of some
of my Particular Friends; though. I must confess, the Extraordinary Quaintness,
and Rarity (not to say Intricacy) of his Arguments, were enough (at first
sight) to deterr, and startle a much stronger Humanist, than my self, from
opposing so great a Master of Reason: Yet when I considered, that if (according
to his own Principles) I followed sincerely the Dictamen, or sway, of my own
Judgment, (for Human Reason is nothing else,) I could not, as to the Period or
Effect, (which is to arrive at Truth, and Happiness,) possibly err, or be
misguided, nor consequently raise in him, the least Indignation against me;
This Consideration (I say) conquered all other Obstacles, and Arguments to the
contrary, and encouraged me to prosecute my Design: For (thought I) in this
Procedure (if he dares believe himself) my Reason (though directly opposed)
must perfectly agree with his. Now if this be Implicatory, and Absurd (which
truly in my Judgment, is in a very high Degree); He that broached the Opinion
must (if he can) either reconcile, or defend it.

FFirst he says, That the Variety of Guides in so long, and dangerous a
Journey; (meaning I suppose our Pilgrimage to Heaven) where he sometimes meets
with no Tract, or Path at all, and sometimes with so many, and those so
contrary in the Appearance of their First Entry; will confound him more than
the want, and in this Intricate Labyrinth, resolves to follow his own private
Reason, and Judgment: Which cannot Rationally disprove me in affirming, It Is
evident to most Men's Humane Reason, (upon a diligent and impartial search) that
the Directive part or Guides of Gods Church, are as discernable from all
Pretenders to, and Usurpers of that Office, as Light is from Darkness, or Day
from Night; and therefore His Plea of Variety (for all his Specious talk) will
hardly acquit him from a notorious and dangerous defect, and neglect in his
Reason, and Duty, (for a man may do all that possibly he can, and yet not do
all that is possible to be done) nor consequently can he ensure himself of
Future Secuity, and Happiness, (let him pretend never so carefully, and
constantly to follow the clearest Light of his own Reason) unless he can
Demonstrate (which is impossible) an impossibility of distinguishing true
Guides from false. Neither do we, in following the Direction of the Church,
relinguish, but punctually obey, our Reason: we grant, That must necessarily be
Previous, or Introductive, ( i.e. It ought to direct us to be directed); but
when it assumes (and this is the Vulgar, and Epidemical Error) the whole
Conduct in every Particular Occurrence to it self, it cease then to be our
North-Star; and becomes a mere Ignis fatuus, cheating us into dark, and
dangerous Pit-falls, and Precipices: To which that saying of Saint Bernard is
very Pertinent, and Applicable; He, that will be his own Teacher, will have a
Fool to his Scholar.

God not-seldom permits the Devil to transform himself into an Angel of Light,
which is an infernal Fallacy, hardly (if possibly) distinguishable by any
private Reason, or Industry; and therefore the same Merciful God, to prevent
our being entangled, and caught in so enticing, and treacherous a Snare, has
been pleased out of his Immense care, and love to Mankind, (for he ordinarily
works by secondary means,) to promise the Perpetual Illumination of the Holy
Ghost to those, whom he left, under Him, to Guide, Govern, and Instruct us
concerning all difficulties, we shall encounter in our Way to Heaven: So that
if we are deceived in being Governed, and Ruled by that Church, which our
Blessed Savior has commanded us (under Penalty of being accounted Heathens,
and Publicans) to obey; He, that can neither deceive, nor be deceived, has done
it. Which is both false, and impossible in the highest Degree.

And yet I do not deny but that God Almighty may so immediately irradiate a
Soul with Divine Light, as that it may be saved without an intermediate
Guidance of any Church at all, Fallible or Infallible. But, certainly, we must
not conclude what He Will do, from what he Can: and for a Man to desert the
Communion, and Direction of the Church, because God (if he pleases) can
otherwise save him, would be as desperate a Presumption, as for a Man to leap
out of a Good Ship into the Sea, because God strengthn'd Saint Peter once, to
walk upon the Water.

God Almighty (no doubt) can sustain a Man without any corporal Nourishment at
all; but I should think it a madness, for all that, in any Person to resolve
therefore to Eat no more; or to say, that Meat and Drink are not necessary for
the Preservation of his Life. Starving would infallibly convince him of his
Error, as Perdition will those that wilfully separate from the Church, out of
which there is no Salvation: And it is no more Uncharitable, or less true to
affirm this, than to say, Those, that were out of Noah's- Ark were inevitably,
and irrecoverably drowned in the Deluge: What greater Temerity, and Madness can
there be, than for a Man to disobey God's Positive Command in hopes of his
Favor, and Assistance some other extraordinary way: And therefore that Humane
Reason, or (what if I said?) Septicism; which devian's from that Method, and
rejects that irrevocable, and indispensable Injunction, Harken to the Church,
(be it never so speciously, and floridly proposed) can never issue from the
Father of Lights, but is Originally Created, or Kindled at the Wildfire of a
Flashing Fancy, that can have no longer Duration, or Permanence than Lightning;
which in an instant vanishes. Submitting our Judgments to Authority, or any
thing else whatsoever, (he says) gives Universality, and Perpetuity to Error.

This may Jingle pretily to some Ears, that itch after Novelty, and
Libertinism; but I shall never believe it Rational, unless he can Demonstrate,
that the fittest thing to hold Water is a Cullender; For he might as well have
told me, and as solidly (though in plainer Words); If you would keep, and
confine the Sea within it is due Bounds, and Limits, there is no better way in
the world, than to dig down the Banks, and demolish the Walls, and then you
need fear neither Inundation, nor Deluge. His vertitur Orbis.

A Man (I know) may see the Sky in a Pail of Fair Water, but I never before
heard (as he argues) that Heaven was to be seen in the Bottom of a Well; and
therefore that ordinary (or rather extraordinary) saying of Democritus, That
Truth lies in the Bottom of a Deep Well. I must confess, I do not well
understand: and so for fear of drowning shall let it pass, as too deep and
dangerous a Mystery for my shallow Reason to dive, or look into.

Thus some Critics of this Speculative Age, first turn their Brains, and then
all things Topsie-turvy; For if this Doctrine of Democritus be true, we must no
longer say, Look up, but down, to Heaven; and Pump, or draw up Salvation, as
they do water in Buckets.

He needed not, To have Enumerated the Various Sentiments of the Ancient
Philosophers, and no war ensuing. Thence to infer a possibility for
Christians of different Belief, to live (as to the Exterior) Harmoniously, and
Peaceably; For, doubtless, the Several Sects among us, if all the force they
use to reduce others to their way be (as it ought to be) only persuasive, not
compulsive, may (as in other dissenting Countries) move in our English Sphere
without clashing as the Planets do in their Regularly-Irregular Motions: If
this be all he drives at, there is no Difference at all between him and me.

Whether the Reformation (which he endeavors to vindicate) were the occasion
of so much Blood, Confusion, and almost Desolation in all those Countries,
which admitted (or rather were forced to) it; I shall not here dispute: but
it is out of Controversy they actually happened; which Dismal Effects (I must
confess) enforce me to believe that God Almighty's Benediction (for all their
specious Reasonings, and Religious Pretenses) never did, or will, go with it.

He runs on for several Pages very wittily, and Rethorically, to prove, That
every Man's Particular Reason, if well followed (and there is a Parenthesis) will
Infallibly carry him at last, though perhaps through many Tedious, and
Troublesome Wanderings, to his Eternal Happiness. Well; I am contented with
this, and say so too, but withal must ask him a Question, Why does not that
man well follow his Reason, who in all Doubts and Difficulties, (for certainly
such things there are) thinks nothing under Heaven more Rational, than to
submit to, and acquiesce in the Interpretation, Definitions, and Decrees of
General Councils? If he says, These all together, may Err as likely as he,
then I say, this, to my Reason, sounds as unreasonably as if he should say, One
Man may be as strong as ten thousand: and thus if his own Argument be good,
(whether the Victory be on his, or on my side) he is equally defeated. I grant,
a Christian (though without any Fraction, or Division [for certainly there is no
Plurality] in the Radical Unity,) may believe Various Articles by the same Act
of Faith: for it is Root, or Fountain (although it germinat's, and spreads into
several Branches, or runs in various Rivulets) is indivisibly one and the same;
(for doubtless a Man's Faith may increase without Variation): but to say (as
this Author) That a Man may be to day fully a Papist, seven years hence a
Protestant, and then What-he-fancyes-next; and that although be believes things
directly Opposite, evidently Contrary, Pro and Con, or forward and backward:
Yet if he be all the while Actuated, and moved by the same Soul of Faith,
(which he says is Conscience) it is still the same Numerical Faith. This I say,
is such a Preposterous piece of Jumbling Divinity, that although he may please
himself with the Fancy (for that is the very best) of it; I shall never believe
the God of Order, and Unity, can Fancy, or be Pleased with, such a Deformed
shapeless and Confused Variety; He might as well have told me (and I should as
soon have believed him) that a Man, if he be all the while vivify'd, or
actuated by the same instruments of Life ( viz. Heart and Vitals) though he be
set just upon his Head, he stands directly upon his Feet. Tricks of Activity
are commendable enough, but certainly it is desperate for a Man's Faith to leap
the Sommerset: And thus, Unity or Sameness of Belief (so often inculcated in
Holy Scripture) is quite thrown out of doors, and Divine Faith reduced to a
strong (or rather a Weak, and Wavering) Fancy.

Wherefore allowing His Philosophical Discourse, about Corporal Substances to
be true (for I grant in Sublunary Bodies there is, yet without any Alteration,
or Change in the Form or Species, (as he pretends may be in Faith), a perpetual
Flux; and that they must necessarily Trans-spire to make room for new
Nourishment;) Yet I deny, for the Reasons aforesaid, That only such a Fixed
Motion, or Variable Identity, (as he speaks of,) is requisite to a Man's Faith;
Nor truly can I perceive any better, or more solid Result from all his
surprising Arguments than this, That so Men do but believe, it is no great
matter for the What, or the Why.

He will still have his own sole and singular Reason to Counterballance (if not
outweigh) all Ecclesiastical Rule and Superiority, (as much as to say, The best
way to secure a Ship at Sea is, to take away her Anchor, and Rudder,) For what
is it (says he) you will trust your Soul with, in this Important Business? Is
it the Authority of Men? These verily may lead you into Error, and it is not
impossible into the worst and greatest of all, which is the Desertion of Christ
himself. Such a Possibility, I utterly deny, and, for my Confidence and
Warrant, produce the sacred Writ, where the Church is called, The Ground, and
Pillar of Truth: with the Divine Promise annexed, Against which the Gates of
Hell, shall never prevail: Now if this Gentleman can show such a Character
given, or Promise made to his solitary Reason: I Will submit and beg his Pardon;
if he cannot, then he must excuse me for doubting, his Reason did not take such
Directions as it ought, and might have done before it set forth? nor
consequently can he ascertain me, that it is purified from all Passion,
Interest, and Sensuality. Pride made the Greatest Angel a Devil, and a Man's
own Reason (too far trusted) turns to Madness.

The Arian Heresy (which he hints at) Clouded, but never Totally Eclipsed, or
Corrupted the Church, which will ever remain immaculate, and pure: For the
Western Parts felt little, or nothing of that Spiritual Pestilence, which in
less than four Years she happily Dispersed, and dissipated, as the Sun by
Degrees, does Mist's, and Vapors.

As to the Condemnation of Athanasius, and whatsoever sinister, or
Antichristian Proceedings, he charge the then-Pope with; If he would
vouchsafe to peruse some of our Ancient, or Modern Controvertists (who treat at
large of the Sanctions of General Councils); I presume, he would clearly, and
evidently discover his Misinformation; and that, which he is willing to take
for a certain Truth, (for Quod volumus, facile credimus,) would prove a mere
Calumny, and Imposture.

But still, from the wicked Errors of some of that Council, he infers a
possibility, that all might unanimously have erred so: For, says he, This
possibility of Error (even in so high a Degree,) we shall find in the Nature,
and very Elements of a Council. For if any one Member of it may be a Heathen,
or Atheist in Opinion (as the Lives (he says) of many Popes, and the Speeches
of some declare, that they themselves have been,) why not Two, not Three, not
more, not the Maijor Part, that is, The whole Council?

Though this ( I Confess) be out of my Element, yet I think the inconsequence
of it may be Demonstrated by this Syllogism. That which may happen to any one
egg in the Parish may happen to all. But it may happen to any one egg in the
Parish to go into a Man's Mouth at once; therefore it may happen to all the
Eggs in the Parish, to go into a man's mouth at once: Now, Who sees not the
Aequivocation of his Logic, which Distinguishes not between a Divisive, and
Collective sense.

Who those Persons were (which he mentions with so much Veneration) of such
Excellent Abilities, and worthy Spirits, to examine by the Rules of their own
Reason, those Follies, and dangerous Errors in Religion, I know not, but am
certain those that Converted the Idolatrous Nations of the World to
Christianity, were of that very sort of Men, who, he is pleased to say, are
first taught to think, and then to speak they know not what, I mean the Sons of
the Church of Rome, so that he who charges these with Superstition and
Idolatry, because they beg the intercession of the Saints, and use pious
Representations; his Reason indeed teaches him first to think, and then to say,
he knows not what: For would it not be wonderful Wisdom in any man to tell
another, that if he has a mind to preserve the memory of a very dear Friend, he
must by no means look upon his Picture, (for that would infallibly take his
thoughts quite off from him,) but if he stares upon the bare Wall, he will
there certainly find a very lively and perfect Idea of him. Qui vult decipi,
decipiatur. Undoubtedly the Picture of our Blessed Savior upon the Cross, is
so far from making us think of any Strange, or False Gods, that it gathers our
vain, and scattered thoughts together, and makes us more Vigorously, and
Attentively think of Him, to whom we address our Prayers.

What hurt or danger can there be in any thing, which occasions one to think of
our Savior Christ, (as a Picture of his Passion very Effectually does)? or
what Idolatry, when (excited thereby to a Contemplation of our Saviors
Crucifixion,) one Bows toward (not to) the Picture? Do Men worship, or adore,
any Minister pronouncing the word JESUS, because they do (or should) Bow at
that sacred Name? Certainly no; methinks the very Light of Nature should
decide this Controversy without more ado. No Man bows at those Five Letters,
I. E. S. U. S. but because Conjoined, they spell the Holy Name of JESUS. So, no
Man Bows at the Substance, or Colors of a Picture of the Passion, but because
being disposed, and shaddow'd by the Painter's Pencil, they represent our
Redeemer dying upon the Cross: A Picture then is a Word to the Eye, as a word
is a Picture to the Ear; and if it be not Idolatry to bow at the Name, (which
is but a sound,) I shall never be convinced, that it is any to bow at the
Picture of JESUS, which is but a Shadow, unless it could be proved, that all
things are strictly forbidden, which are not expressly commanded. But to our
Author.

Men ought (he says) to put their Confidence, rather in the Traditions of the
former, than the Commands of the present Church: This indeed wants nothing at
all but proving; but, supposing it true, what better means can he possibly
propose to himself to know the Truth of former Traditions, than the Sufferage
of this present Church? But he would have no man build his Belief upon the
Authority of past, or present Ages; (a strange Caution from a single person.)
For, says he, If they look upon all the Consequences of that Opinion, (it seems
then all our Forefathers were stupidly blind) they are in much greater danger
of being drawn from the Christian Faith, than those, who remit the Judgment of
these things to their own Reason: For God's sake, why so? That certainly now is
the true Rule of Faith, which was the Essential means of planting, and
conserving it first; but Orall, and Apostolical Tradition, not written Books,
nor any Man's private Spirit, or Reason, was the Essential means of Planting,
and Conserving it at first; therefore Orall, and Apostolical Tradition, not
Written Books, etc. is still the true, and certain Rule of Faith: And
Consequently this Author's Human Reason, much more likely to draw him from the
Christian Faith than such a Rule.

I am glad his Reason has at last compelled him to Believe, that,
Infallibility (let him define it how he will) must necessarily be annexed to our
Guide in Spiritual Matters.

And I should with all my Soul, rejoice to hear of any means, That might
restore the Greatest Part of Man kind (as he says) into a hopeful. and
comfortable Condition, and that so many Millions might not Eternally perish:
But that Dreadful Sentence, Extra Ecclesiam nulla est Salus, turns my hope into
fear, and trembling; for though ignorance perhaps may very much Extenuate, or
excuse; yet if an Error be Fundamental, that ignorance (though never so
invincible,) cannot after it is Nature, or quality; nor acquit the Professor
from all Guilt, and Penalty; for he, that unawares drops into the Water, (if he
be Overwhelmed,) is as certainly drowned, as he that wilfully plunges himself
in, over Head and Ears. And I fear, the reward of invincible Ignorance, may be
rather an Abatement of Punishment, than a Fruition of Bliss.

Errors in Faith, (at least Fundamental,) I conceive to be of a more
pernicious Consequence, than (at present) a vitiou, Life; for no Rational Man
(I think) questions but that it is better for a Man to Loyter, or Stumble, nay
to fall and hurt himself in a right Path; than to walk Uprightly (I mean with
Moral Honesty) in a wrong. As there is more hopes certainly of the Salvation of
a sinful Christian, than a Religious Jew; the former being still in the Road
possibly to recover, and persevere Penitently, and Prosperously; the latter
being totally incapacitated through the Eccentrical Crookedness of his way to
make a good, or happy Period of his ill begun Progress.

There may be several ways to the same Faith, but certainly Not several Faiths
(as this Author imagines) to the same GOD, who is an Indivisible, and Immutable
Essence; and therefore, Going-vigorously-forward, signifies nothing, unless we
go right: He that wills the End, must necessarily use the means. So that this
Author can never win me to his Opinion, that all Men (though never so
Discrepant in their Faith, following in all Particulars the Dictates of their
own private Reason,) will infallibly in the end arrive at Security, and
Happiness; till he has proved, that the Way, which leads a Man directly to
Berwick (if he that travels in it confidently believes he is right,) will
certainly bring him to Dover. Creed quod habes, et habes.

He had rather think (he says) with Origin, that the Devils themselves by the
excessive kindness of their Judge, shall at last be exempted from Damnation,
than that he himself, shall be damned for that Opinion.

Undoubtedly, this shows the Author to be a very Compassionate, and good
Natured Man; but certainly that cannot be true Charity, which 'thwarts the
irrevocable Decree of Heaven; and truly I do not see, why he may not (with as
much Reason) doubt that the Glorified Bodies may fall from their Beatitude, as
think, that the Devils themselves shall at last be released from their
Damnation: but as, certainly, the former are past all hopes of Relaxation: from
their Torments, so the latter are past all fear of being deprived of their
Felicity and Eternal Jubilee. For that which truly makes Heaven and Hell, is
not so much the excessive Greatness, as Infinity of their Joys, and Torments.

He thinks, He may very well believe, that there are Secret and Wonderful
ways, by which GOD may be pleased to apply his Merits to Mankind besides, those
direct, open and ordinary ones of Baptism, and Confession. This I must confess
is very secret, wonderful, and dark Divinity, because Diametrically opposite to
the Divine Writ, where JESUS answering Nicodemus his Question, said positively;
Amen, Amen, I say to thee, Unless a Man be born again of Water and the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD.

And therefore why this Author should advance a Beliet so palpably
Antichristian; I cannot imagine, unless he supposes (which is Blasphemy to
think) that our Blessed Savior did not then fully understand his own mind. The
Text clearly confutes the Extravagancy, and impiety of such an imagination, and
discovern this Authors Human Reason to be in this, (as in many other
particulars,) but a fallacious Dream, from which if he would rouse, and
thoroughly awake himself, he would quickly perceive it to vanish into nothing,
and prove a mere Illusion; For I leave any Prudent Christian to judge, whether
he thinks it not only absolutely necessary to walk toward Heaven, by those
Direct, Open, and Ordinary ways of Baptism, etc. but also absolutely
impossible, (unless in case of Martyrdom, which is still Baptism in Blood), to
cross over upon such a slight, and slippery Bridge as this, because the Author
think's (without proving) that there may be other secret, and wonderful ways of
gerting thither: And he may (if he please) go one Step farther, and believe,
that there may be no other secret, and wonderful ways for a man to live,
besides Breathing: Corruption optimi pessima. And certainly that must need's be
an impious excess of Charity, which not only shakes the Foundation, but
frustrates the whole Fabric, and Designs of Christianity. GOD deliver all good
Christians from such gentle, and Good-natured Doctrine.

Our Blessed Savior (that best knew) foretold, there must be Heresies, which
most Divines agree to be those Gates of Hell mentioned in Scripture, and
consequently in-lets to Damnation: Contrary to which this Author contends, that
scarce any Heresy (if at all discoverable) can be Damnable, and maintains such
a Facility to avoid all dangerous Errors, that no Men of ordinary Sense, and
Reason can possibly fall into them.

Haereticum hominem post unam, and secundam correptionem (the Scripture says)
devita. But how can he be shunned, that is not knowable? And therefore, I must
entreat this Author to correct Saint Paul's Admonition, or his own Human Reason
(which, he thinks fit,) for one of them certainly is very much in fault.

To obey in matters of Belief without being able to believe the thing
commanded, is no less (he says), and seems more a Contradiction, than simply to
obey without knowledge of a Command. Certainly this Author thinks every Man's
Reason has a secret, Magnetic Power to attract, or draw down the high
Mysteries of Faith within view of his Understanding, which is impossible: But
if Men's Reasons are (as beyond Debate they may be) satisfied, that those who
guide them, neither will, nor can deceive; what should make them start, or fly
back? Their incapacity to understand can be no good, or sufficient Reason for
them to disbelieve, and a much worse Argument to prove any thing (de fide)
false, which they propose, who do truly, and Naturally conveigh to us, the
Will, and Pleasure of GOD; they are his Voice, (Qui vos audit me audit,) or at
least the very Echo of it The Church never Doctrinally (but when, and what
CHRIST) speaks, and if he, that hears one, hears both (which our Savior
himself says) Human Reason (which thus far ought to proceed, and we to follow)
tells us, Our business, and duty then is to obey, and not dispute. Besides, if
that saying be true, Fides est Argumentum non-apparentium, I do not see why
Faith, and Obedience, should stand still, because Reason cannot go forward.

He says, The Unity of the Christian Church is broken, not so much by them who
differ in Opinions, as by them, who will not allow of such a Difference.

Cu^us contrarium verum est: By this I see, Reason has her Antipodes too; for,
Can any thing be more directly against it, than to call him the greatest
Wrangler, who would prevent others from quarrelling? And to say, he that would
reconcile Differences, and hinder Men from going together by the Ears, was the
occasion of their falling out? Certainly it is as Rational to say, There can be
no Order, where there is no Confusion, as to say, There can be no Unity, without
Difference: It Is a Solecisme, and Paradox much above the reach of my Reason;
but if be understands it, it is well enough.

Who knows (says he) whether that GOD, who liked best that no Men's Bodies
should have the same complexion, no Men's Faces the same Figures, no Hares the
same Lines, no Voices the same Sounds; nay, not so much but their Motions, and
Gestures should be Distinguishable; has not likewise best pleased himself with
no less Variety in the parts of Men, that are Immaterial, and even in the most
Immaterial Actions of those parts, which is the Worship, and Adoration of a
Deity.

This (though it look prettily upon Paper) is a mere Quick-Sand, and easily
answered with asking another Question, Who knows whether GOD is best pleased
with such Variety in the Faith, as in the Faces of Men? That which fortifies
me, indubitably to believe the contrary, are those express Words of Scripture,
One GOD, one Faith, one Baptism, which evidently infer, that besides that
General Impediment ( viz. the Sinfulness, and Frailty of our Natures, (men, if
swayed solely by their own reason) easily may, and too frequently do, miscarry,
for want of a Right Path.

Does GOD (says he) gain any thing by our Devotions? does he receive Hurt from
one kind of Worship, and Advantage by another?

No surely, (say I) for he is an Unutterable Plenitude of Bliss, and
Delectation to Himself; but it is as certainly true, that he may be pleased with
one kind of Worship, and abominate an other; unless Jeroboam (who, the Holy
Scripture more than once says, made Israel to sin) committed no Crime, nor
consequently offended GOD, in setting up the Calves in Dan and Bethel.

Without doubt (says he, but that is no proof) He who gave Rules, which might
accept of several Interpretations, when he might have made them as plain to all
in one Sense, as they seem now to every man in his own, is likewise well
contented, that they shall be Interpreted severally.

Truly, if our Blessed Savior had not Constituted Select Judges, and
Expositors of his Divine Laws (which no Laws ever were without) I might perhaps
be of his mind too; but since (GOD be thanked) it is evidently otherwise;
without doubt this Author is egregiously mistaken. Certainly GOD Almighty (if
he had intended Reason to be absolute Lord Paramount, independently to Rule,
and Instruct in every particular Emergency, and Ambiguity), must have given all
Men the same measure to compass the same end. For, as a Ship, though it lies in
the Water, if it has not enough to make it Float, can no more move forward,
than if it lay upon dry Land: So it can never sink into my Understanding, How
he, that has less Reason, should as safely, and effectually proceed, as he that
has more, unless this Author could prove a part of any thing to be as much as
the whole, or demonstrate Reason to be of the Miraculous Nature of the Manna,
among the Israelites, whereof he who gathered much had nothing over, and he who
gathered little, had no lack.

Were this seriously considered, I am confident upon second Thoughts, (and they
are best), this Author would be convinced, that a Man's Reason alone can never
do the Work, I mean steer him securely (over that deep Ocean of Scripture), to
the Port of Eternal Happiness, without Embarking in that Ecclesiastical Ship,
the Church; in which (if they Conform to her Doctrine), the Poor are as safe as
the Richest, and the Weakest as the Wise: and in this Reliance we do no more
desert our own Reason, than a Man does his Corporal Strength, in taking a
Staff to help, and support him in a dangerous, and slippery Passage: And
whatever Arguments are advanced to enervate the solidity of this Ground, (let
them never so briskly sally out,) they can be no better, than mere empty
Ebullitions or Bubblings of Reason.

As well (says he) the Mud by growing hard, as the Wax by Melting, obeys the
Sun; nor is it less glorified by the one, than by the other.

It is true the same Sun (and I grant it is equally (though variously) obeyed by
both,) softens Wax, and hardens Mud; (their Natures being by Heat to melt, and
grow hard,) but I cannot conceive how the Parity holds exactly between those
Inanimate, material Substances, and our Immortal, and Immaterial Souls: For
certainly the Divine Insuser of Faith, created them with Identical
Capabilities, and fitted them Uniformly for the Reception of their Proper
Objects, viz. the Mysteries of Christianity, which whosoever Obstinately
Dis-believes, or rejects, is deservedly Excommunicated, (because he wilfully
exclude himself) from that Mystical Ark the Church of GOD.

But, by the way (me-thinkes) this Author talks very incongruously of more
than one Religion, the very word bearing witness against him; for the
Substantive Religio, I take to be derived from the Verb Rebigo to Tie or Bind
together; but his Latitudinarian, or Socinian Doctrine, does not only Untie
and Unbind, but Blends, and Shuffles all into a Chaos: Yet Faith with him must
still be Properly one, and the same; though according to the diverse Receptions
(says he) it produces not only divense; but contrary Effects.

This I shall believe, when he has evinced, that, because all things, which
are potable are comprehended under the Denomination of Liquour; therefore,
White-Wines, Rhenish, Canary, Claret, Syder, and Muscadine; are Certainly, that
Man would be censured to have drunk too much of these, that could be brought to
swallow so great a Contradiction: Yet this the Author must say, (if he speaks
consequently to his own Arguments,) is as defensible as his Hyperbole, that the
Diversity of Religious Opinions (because injuriously produced by him under the
Venerable Name of Faith,) are not several, but one and the very self same
belief: which certainly is as far from right Reasoning, as a Confusion of
Fancyes is from purely Divine Faith.

I should have found no fault with His comparing the Unity of God's Church to
Wed-lock; but that he spoils the Similitude in allowing every Particular
Member to believe contrary to one another, nay to themselves: by which he pulls
down again what he built up; and makes that Conjunction-Disjunctive, by a
new-found-Negative, or Counter-Creed.

No body at all questions, but that a Foot when it has the Gout, (as he
says,) or a Hand when it shakes with the Palsy, remain still Parts of the
Body: but if they are Irrecoverably useless, they are no otherwise so, than as
a Dead Bough is a Member of a Living Tree, there may be Continuity, but no
Communication between them; and this Debility, or decay, must needs happen
through some secret Perversity, or Obliquity in the Recipient, not any Defect
or Deficiency in the Radical Aliment. The same I say of those that wilfully
persist in Incredulity, and Error; but yet withal must add this, that they
are never Irrevocably (GOD's Grace being ever busy,) Anathematized by this
Church; which is much more willing, and ready upon Submission, and Recantation
to Re-embrace, than for Obstinacy to Excommunicate any.

There may certainly be (though he thinks otherwise,) a full, and entire
agreement in all Points of Faith, of one Member with an other, either Actually
or Votively, (which to GOD is Aequivalent,) or else the Athanasian Creed
(admitted by most Protestants,) is not to be Credited, which, without
Haesitation; begins thus;

Whosoever will be saved, it is needful before all things that he hold the
Catholic Faith; The which unless each one shall keep whole and Inviolate,
(mark that,) he shall without doubt eternally perish; now, if this be (as
certainly it is) true, he that wilfully disbelieves any one Article, forfeits
his whole Faith, and Consequently the least Defect therein is a total Privation.

Now as for Controversy (at which he briefly touches,) like the Blood (I know)
it incessantly Circulates; but Alas! To no better purpose, that I can perceive,
than to foment the Quarrel, and keep it still alive: For through the
Immoderation, and Unnatural heat of some Polemick Writers, it is so far from
effecting a Reconciliation or Union, (which ought to be the Principal Design
and end of it,) that it does nothing else but breed an Implacable, if not
incurable Itch; the scratching whereof may, perhaps, afford some present
Titillation or Delight; but it is usually performed with so much violence, and
rage, that it does not only not allay, but more inflame, and ferment the
Humor; to cure which, there is no Medicine more Effectual, or Balsome more
Sovereign, than our Mutual, and Cordial Prayers, for one another. But, to
pursue our Author.

As for those Men (says he) who accuse us of Pride, and Vanity, for Attributing
so much to our own Reason, making Presumption. and Self-Flattery, the Fountain
of this Opinion; it is a Scandal so false, and so Ridiculous, that without much
Humility I should disdain to answer it. And truly, in my Opinion, I have not
heard a louder sound of Pride, than in that very Expression. But, letting this
pass, (with his Subsequent, soft Arguments, for the Civility, and Gentleness of
his Religion, which permits every man to have his full Swing, or Career) I am
come to Master Hob's, for whom, though it is not my business, nor design to be
Advocate, nor in the least to diminish this Author's merit; (who, in some parts
of his Discourse against him, and elsewhere, shows great Fertility of Wit, and
Pregnancy of Rhethorick): Yet I cannot but think Master Hobs's Arguments much
more Conducing to Order, and Uniformity, than his Unreasonably-Rational, or
Chimaerical Method; which slighting all Ecclesiastical Tribunals, authoriseth
every Particular Person, in Spirituals to be his own Judge, and Pastor; and
makes the Governors of the Church of CHRIST stand for mere Ciphers, which is
directly against the Institution, Doctrine, and Design of CHRIST himself: But,
that- Humane Reason, which exalts itself above this Divine Jurisdiction, (be it
never so full of Flourishes, and Astonishment) is but a glorious Nothing.

He is very apt to mistake, Concerning the Roman- Church: For although indeed
her Public Liturgy (the Mass) be Universally said in the Latin Tongue, yet
all Preaching, and Catechizing, is performed in the Language of each respective
Country; and all her Members without any restraint, say their Prayers in their
own Native Language.

I am not at all satisfied, With his endeavoring to Distinguish between Right
Reason, and that which is falsty esteemed so; For, if in all matters of Faith,
and Difficulty, every Man's Reason must be his Rule, and every man's Rule must
be his Reason, without adhering or submitting to any other Superior Regulation
or Judge, or Captivating his Understanding (as Scripture requires) in Obsequium
Fidei: If this Rule (I say) can be thought Regular and safe, then I think this
Author needs not to despair of bringing men by Degrees to believe, That nothing
can be in so Rational or Credible, which is not evidently so to whom it is
proposed; especially since he has already affirmed (which is pretty well
toward it) that nothing can be dangerously Erroneous, that a man firmly
believes. But can any thing be more Illogical and distant from Reason? Unless
it be this which (per Consequens) follows; Every Orthodox Divine is a Rational
Man; Ergo, every Rational Man is an Orthodox Divine, and ought not to be
taught, but to teach himself. Contrary to which. Matthew. 28.19, 20. our Blessed
Savior commanded his Disciples to go Preach, Teach, and Baptize all Nations.
But I never read that they sent the Scriptures alone to the Unconverted, that
they might, by the Rules of their own Reason examine, and frame out the True
Religion; but, withal, went themselves, or sent Expositors: Without which, I
never heard of Turk, or Jew that ever changed his Alcoran, or Talmud for the
Christian Bible; which evidently demonstrates against this Author, That Reason
alone can be no Competent means, or security either of becoming, or remaining a
good Christian. All Men therefore are, or should be, instructed: We are Taught,
and they were Ttaught the same, who Teach us; and their Masters had Teachers,
and those Teachers Masters, till we come Gradually to the Supreme, the Original
Guides of the Present Church, which also receives the Traditions of the former;
and so orderly downward till we come to the Apostles; and at last to (our Ne
plus ultra,) our Savior CHRIST himself: So that it is no Contradiction but a
certain Truth, that there is no going to CHRIST, but from CHRIST. a JESV ad
CHRISTVM: That Humane Reason, then, which unlinckes it self from this Divine,
and Infallible Concatenation, flies giddily about, and can no more naturally
settle, or fix, than a Feather in the Wind; and that a man, who stubbornly
steps aside from this Universal, this General Track, will not only lose his
Way, but his Reason, and Himself too. But, now, to another Matter.

Henry the Eighth, did certainly more than seem (as this Author says) to leave
the Pope, because he would not consent to his Libidinous Desires; and assumed
therefore the Supremacy, that he might give himself leave to Marry, or
Repudiate what Wives he fancied, or disliked. But although Abbeys, Monasteries,
and Religious-Houses were thereupon demolished, and the Profits, and Revenues
converted to Secular Uses. I cannot think, he got any great Advantage by the
Bargain, (either to Body, or Soul,) who died with a Perdidimus Omnia in his
Mouth; and found by Woeful Experience, That in the end, there is nothing got by
Reforming. But to leave this Digression.

The Author desires those, who would have his Understanding captivated, to
convince him, First, by theirs, that it ought to be so, and not to think to
enslave his Reason, till they first overcome it; which when they have done,
then they will lose what they contend for; For by our Reason's being Guided,
Conquered, and Enslaved, Their's are become Guides, Conquerours, and Masters;
so that it will appear at last impossible for Human Reason to lose anything in
one place, without gaining as much in some other.

Thus he. To which I answer in the first place, If Scripture be Reason, our
Understandings ought to be captivated to the Obedience of Faith. In the next, I
would not have him think us so unreasonable, as to deprive men Totally of the
Use of their Reason: by no means, but to check, and keep it within it is proper
Sphere, and in this we abridge him of no Liberty, which we allow our selves.

But Humane Reason must have a large Mixture of Divinity in it, to be so
Adorable as this Author seems to make it. I grant it is very precious, and
prizable in being given (though not Magisterially to rule) to guide us to
those, that can Infallibly do it: And thus (I confess) we are Ruled by Reason,
though not in all things by our own; for all the Difficulties, and Obscurities
of Scripture without the Church's Light, are no more Interpretable, or
Discoverable by Private Reason, than our Eyes can see Objects without
Daylight, or a Candle; and yet neither our Reason, nor our Eyes are given us
in vain: But he that, in Spiritual Affairs, which so nearly concern bis Soul,
Assigns no Visible, no External, rule or Standard to measure Reason by, nor any
General Touchstone to try True, from False, Adulterated from Current Coin;
That Man, I say (for all his pretended Light within,) fishes in the Dark with
them, that labored all Night and caught nothing; or builds his Superstructure
before he lays the Foundation. For it is as Irrational as if a Man should say, I
can guess so exactly of the Longitude, Latitude, Altitude, and Profunditie of
any thing by my Eye, that no Demonstration by any Mathematical Instruments can
(or ever shall) Control, or Convince me: And truly what better has this Author
said from the beginning to the Ending of his Treatise than this, That Men's
Reasons, and Judgments (as to the Regulation of their Faith) are so very
Clear, and Demonstrative, that there is no certain way, no possibility to know
whether they be true, or false, right, or wrong: Turn it which way you will,
this is all you shall find in it; which Unreasonable Reasoning verifyes the Old
Proverb, [All is not Gold that Glisters:] And in Truth, if each Man's Reason
(Promisculously) must be Umpire in this Rational Strife, men may Play at this
Sport to Perpetuity and never win nor lose: But certainly our Blessed Savior
has not left the Condition of Mankind in this endless Confusion, but has
miraculously Founded, and Signalized a Church to end all Controversyes, if Men
(that talk so much of Reason,) would but rightly use it; for that Reason, which
(as to Spirituality) does not take the Church for it is Rest, can never aim, or
hit right, but must necessarily fly at Random, and spend it else without
Advantage.

If that Authority (says he) which we Obey, prescribe Truth, we have Good
Fortune in our Obedience, and merely Good Fortune; but, if it draw us into
Errors, we have nothing to say for our Excuse, because we have nothing to
Allege for our Obedience to that Authority.

It seems then, that our Savior's Commands are of no Validity, and, Hearken
to, and Obey the Church mere Fopperies; but certain it is CHRIST our Lord has
most expressly, and Emphatically enjoined this; and therefore we may (nay must)
without any If's, absolutely obey it; and this questionless will be a very
good, and sufficient Plea for our Obedience at the Day of Judgment, How those,
who slight it, would excuse themselves, (were there to be any Pleading at that
Grand-Assize;) cannot imagine, but am certain, if they come off well, they will
have Extraordinary good Fortune indeed.

His following Discourse, Of Men's Blind-folding themselves (as he blindly calls
it,) in obeying Ecclesiastical Superiors; and that those, who commit
themselves to the Guidance of their own Understanding, are as safe on the Left
Hand, as on the Right; (but who can credit this, That knows one Hand from the
other?) As secure of Happiness in their Errors (very strange!) as others, who
are otherwise gilded even in the Truths, which they happen to fall into; is so
extravagantly Frivolous, and proofless, that it carries it is own Confutation
with it. and sic Transeat totum.

God (says he) Commands no more but to search, and yet shall find whether the
Truth or not, (Ipse Dixit) the Reward of Searching. And truly I have
endeavored, and narrowly searched to find Reason in this. But after all my
Diligence, can perceive no Reward of my Searching; which makes me conclude,
That it is much more Rational to believe, that GOD gives Man not only a Will to
search, but Power to find, and Understanding to know the Truth when found; or
else his Commands were vain. But what a Desperate, long Leap does this Author
leave between Searching, and Heaven! If it were as he imagines, I do not see
why a man's Heartily wishing himself there, might not bring him, or waft him
thither, without more ado, and Eternal Happiness be given him as a reward of
wishing. But undoubtedly finding the Truth is the reward of Searching, and
Heaven the reward of finding the Truth; which those, who search where it is
not, shall find nothing but anxiety, and in the end, that they wretchedly
cheated themselves, and others with shippery Sophism's, and Chimaera's etc.

As no men are saved but through Mercy, so none unjustly Perish; for, Truth is
missed, not so much through Difficulty of Finding, as Tepidity, and Negligence
in searching it.

I cannot possibly (says the Author) conceive it agreeable to the Goodness of
the Divine Nature so to have hidden, and involved, and almost disguised the
Truth from us, if he had intended to have censured the missing of it, with so
heavy a Sentence, as that of Eternal Ruin; especially, seeing there is but one
true Way, (I thought, All ways had been alike with him, as to the end) for one
Hundred false ones, and no certain Mark set upon the Entry of that One, to
Distinguish it from the Others.

To which I answer; If GOD Almighty, had left us a Way without any Means or
Marks, (as he strangely imagines) to find it out, it would be great Cruelty
indeed in him, (which is far enough from his Nature,) to punish Men Eternally,
for what is not in their Power possibly to avoid: But since it is most evident,
that he has left both sufficient means to find, and Marks to know it by; his
Discourse upon this Point, is (in my Opinion) only just so many Words to no
purpose. And since those Marks, which are set upon the Entry of this Way, are
most clear, and conspicuous to all Men, that look not Obliquely upon them; if
(after they are entered) they meet with any thing, that Reason may perhaps at
first, Flinch, or Boggle at, the Consideration of it is, Inerrability takes away
all doubt, and bids them confidently persevere.

As in Visible Objects, (says he) we Receive confidently, and rest in the
Report of the Sight, etc. So ought we as entirely, and absolutely, to resign
our Belief, to the Dictates of our own Understanding, in things intelligible,
which are as Properly, and Naturally the Objects thereof, as things visible are
of the Eyesight: and we might as well say, We will trust our Eyes in Green,
White, and Black, but not in Red, or Yellow Colors: as affirm, That our
Reason must Guide us in the Contemplation of Nature, the Search of Arts, the
Government of Public Societies, and the Begulation of Men's Lives, as far as
the Bounds of Morality; but that it is not at all to be Followed, or Obeyed in
Matters that concern Religion.

Here I must confess, the Author has some Color, but I think not much Reason,
for what he says: For if he thinks the Objects of Faith, are as Naturally
Intelligible by our Understanding, as the Colors of the Rainbow, are visible
to our Eyes; he makes no Distinction, or Difference at all, between the
Faculties, Operations, or Effects of Nature, and those of Grace, which
certainly is a Grand Mistake. For although our own Reason or understanding tell
us, There is a God, and He to be Worshipped, and Obeyed by us; yet they cannot
by their own Light, or inward Forces inform us, In what manner, that must be
done by External Agents, by some thing which is without us. And what imaginably
more probable, than the Church of Christ, which can show a Lineal Succession,
from the same Christ, and His Apostles; a Perpetual Visibility, Unity,
Universality, Conversion of Nations, Fulfilling of Prophesies, (which baffles
all Cavils, and strikes all Objections dumb,) a Miraculous Propagation. Now he
who prefers the Dictates of his own Private and naked Reason, and
Understanding, in matters that concern Religion, before the Guidance of a
Church thus Adorned, thus Marked, thus Signalized, deserves not (nor truly has
he) either the one, or the other.

Nothing certainly can be more contrary to Humane Reason, than to think we
ought to believe nothing above it: For there are Truth's Un-intelligible, by
the most Exalted, and Sublimated Souls in Heaven, viz. The Total, and Perfect
Quality of the Divine Essence; which, nothing Created, nothing Inferior to God
himself, can Comprehend. The Saints and Angels, enjoy Eternity without knowing
what it is; the most Towering Wisdom, and Depurated Reason, can no more reach,
or fathom, that Inscrutable Infinity, than Ten Millions of Oceans can be
crowded into the smallest Cockle-Shell: For it drowns, or rather (as a
Bottomless Abyss), swallows up all Philosophy and Learning. It Is the
Philosophers-Stone in Divinity, too hard to be Penetrated, by the Knowledge of
Men or Angels: In fine, We know that such a thing there is, but never shall,
it is full, and perfect Definition, it being no less, than the Eternal Tri-Une
God; whose Deep. brief Character of Himself was, Sum qui Sum. Whence I infer,
That Men are not endued with Understanding, Presumptuously to stretch beyond
it is Strength, and Power, or to use it, as they themselves list: But according
to the Will and Pleasure of the Divine Donor; who certainly gives Man Reason,
not absolutely, but Conditionally; that in Matters of Faith (at least) it
should retribute, and pay Homage to Him, I mean be Regulated by His Beloved
Spouse, the Church. For as that is no true Liberty, which has no Limit, so that
is no true Reason which has no Restriction. Besides, if most Men are allowed,
and granted to have Reason, certainly the Church does not want it, (Vis unita
fortior), but has in it a more Ample, Perfect, and incorrigible manner,
because: more immediately, and perpetually accompanied and Assisted by the Holy
Ghost. And this is true, nay infallibly true, if Scripture be not false. How
those Headless-Members, the Acephalists, would answer here, I cannot tell; but
am certain, that, As that is not true Reason, but Delusion, which flows not
from the right Fountain; So, a Visible Congregation, or Body of Men, without a
Visible Head, or with more than one, is equally Monstrous. But those Spiritual
Privateers, who slight the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, or Convoy, contemn the
Doctrine of the Church; and resolve to believe no more, than their
Understandings can Chew, and their Reason Digest, (there being many things in
Nature, which pose Mortality; as the Flux, and Re-flux of the Sea, the Effects
of the Loud-Stone, etc.) will live Infidels, and dye Atheists. Nor is this
said, To remove the Cognizance of Divine Truths, out of the Court of Reason;
but to quell it is Pride and Arrogance, and bring it to (Submit, and stoop by an
Humble Faith to those Divine Truths; (for certainly a man's Reason, may Rebel
against his Faith, as well as his Passion, against Reason) and this Limitation
or Coaction, does not at all deprive man of his Power, nor abridge him of the
Liberty, and natural privilege of Election, or Choice.

Religion, says he, appears (and what Christian dares deny it?) to be the
Principal End of man's Creation; and therefore as if Horses are made for
Burden, they have a Natural ability given, wherewith to do it; If Birds do
fly, they have Wings given them for that purpose; (because where an end is
Natural, the means are so too:) So if Religion be the End of Man, as he is
Partaker of a Rational Soul, that Reasonable Soul has some Power naturally,
placed in it, for the exercise, judgment, and choice of Religion.

All this is Undeniably true: But yet the Author may please to consider, That
the Horse may be over-loaded, and the Bird fly too high; and so certainly
Reason may soar above it is Natural Pitch, Meridian Altitude, and Consequently
into a Region, where it is a mere Stranger, and cannot subsist without some
stronger Principle, than it is own proper Strength to support it: And so,
granting the Antecedent, I deny the Consequence; That because GOD gives man
Reason (as I have said) to light or introduce him into the right Entrance of
Religion; therefore (being once initiated) he needs not to ask any more
questions, or be guided by others: but let him follow his own Reason, (I might
as well have said his Nose.), and he cannot possibly go astray. Briefly; In the
Search, or Choice of our Way, Reason (I grant) must rule, but that once found,
Obey: For that private Spirit, which is not first quickened, or animated, and
then constantly Actuated, by that of God's Church, (which was Authorized, and
Sanctified by the Divine Breath of JESUS) is a False Conception, no true, or
lawful Issue of the Understanding, but a Spurious, or Abortive Embrion of the
Brain; a Fall Light, a Deceitful Phantasm.

But the Author says, If this Doctrine ( that is for every Man to believe ad
libitum) were Generally planted in the Minds of men, both the Reality, and
Pretense of Fighting for Religion, were utterly Cancelled.

Truly so far I should like his Doctrine, especially if he could warrant men,
that Intellectual or Religious Differences, should never come to Blows: But
Alas! Experience makes me more than doubt, it is but an Airy, or imaginary
Notion: For, as I do not deny, but that those who endeavor an Establishment of
Unity, and Uniformity in Faith, and Religion, may possibly occasion War; So
those (I fear) of contrary Principles, can never long prevent it; But, I hope
that GOD, who rules the unruly Ocean, will.

Thus far I do most willingly agree with him; That I would have none, who
disturb not the public peace, and tranquillity of the Government, be
persecuted upon a purely conscientious score: For, I think it a most
uncharitable, and unreasonable method, (because impossible) to reduce men's
Judgments, ('it is but one remove, from convincing them with Beetles, and
Halters), by taking away their Estates, and Starving their Bodies; But against
those, who are found any way machinating against our true, and lawful
Governors, (especially the Supreme), with all Severity and Rigor, Currat Lex.
But yer, let every man smart, for his proper Fault; and not a whole Community,
or Body of men, be made the very Buttocks of the Nation, to be kick,, lashed,
and slandered, for the Crimes of Particulars; For that certainly is as remote
from Reason, Equity, and Justice, as it would be, To Pistol a man, because his
Nose stands awry, or knock his Brains our, because he Squints; Or indeed,
because the Serpent seduced Eve, and she Adam; whose Original Guilt corrupted,
and depraved their whole Progeny. By the very same Crooked Rule, the Apostles
themselves might be called Traitors, because Judas betrayed his Lord and Master.

Nor can, or shall I ever believe it, either Pious, or Politic, to use any
other Force, but that of Arguments; for the Conviction, and Reduction of
Disputers. One may as well try to tame a Tiger with Rational Arguments, as by
Threats, or Violence; (for a man may be sooner frighted out of his Wits, than
his Opinion); to conquer long-setled Judgments and therefore, as the best
Physic, to cure a Quartane, is, To be kind to it; So if Rational Discourse,
and gentle Persuasions, cannot operate upon the intelect, and mind of man,
rougher Applications (for what is Reason to one, may be Nonsense to another)
shall never work a free, or plenary assent; for those that are perforce
Proselyted, may become Dissembling Hypocrites, but never Real-Converts. What
Wise, or Worthy Spirits therefore would proceed so Irrationally, so Ignobly? or
what advantageous Acquisition, or Glory can there be in such a Conquest? But
this is a point, already most amply discussed, by much abler penns; [Reply to
the Answer of the Catholick-Apology; and Advocate of Conscience-Liberty]: To
them therefore, I refer the Reader, and I Will return to the Author.

Who maintains constantly, that sole Reason, in all Streights, and Exigences
must Guide, and Steer us in our Course to our Haven, Heaven: For, says he, when
I ask, Why you believe any Mystery of Faith, You will answer perhaps, Because
the Present Church Commands you. If I proceed and ask, Why do you believe, what
the Present Church Commands you? You will say, Because the Former Church
Teaches the same: Why do you believe the Former Church? Because GOD Commands
you so to do; Why do you believe, that God Commands it? Because you find it in
the Scripture; Why do you believe the Scriptures to be the Word of GOD? Because
they were confirmed by Miracles; Why do Miracles confirm that? Because they are
Works which can proceed from nothing, but the Absolute, and Immediate Power,
of the Deity: Why so? Because nothing contrary to, or above the Course of
Nature can be done by Natural Agents.

And why should I, or any man else, say any thing against all this? Since he
has so pertinently, and solidly answered all the Why's himself: but I suppose
he imagined, that, Syllogistically sounding the depth of the Catholic method,
or rule of Faith with this chain of Questions, and finding Reason at the bottom
of it (which methinks should make him the sooner embrace it) therefore he had
invincibly fortified his own arguments for an absolute and independent guidance
of private reason in all contingencies: but alas, it is triumphing before the
Victory, because as inconsequent, as if one should say, my Rulers are no more
than rational men, and I being a man of reason too, therefore my obligation
cease to be ruled by them, neither ought any man in reason to command, or
obey others; but is not this cum ratione insanire? A Doctrine which (if
prevalent) would in a short time destroy not only Ecclesiastical, but all
secular Economy, and Jurisdictions! and, in the end, leave nothing but outward
shape to distinguish Men from Beasts, which have no other Superiority, or
Mastership amongst them but what they get Vi and Armis, with their Horns and
Heels. Certainly, this is very prodigious (I had almost said monstrous) Reason;
and so truly, I think, is the greatest part of his discourse, which in effect
teaches, that, Divinity cannot stand unless Philosophy support it; nor St.
Peter and St. Paul instruct, unless Aristotle and Plato comment; consequently
no man can be a good Christian, that is not a good Philosopher, which certainly
is a very false and Antichristian assertion.

Authority and Obedience are Correlatives; there must be both or neither, and
therefore his mysterious discourse of Obedience in Spirituals (which he calls
the most pleasing smell in the Sacrifice) I shall never understand which
totally invalidates all Ecclesiastical Regiment and Power.

St. Augustine (who, I presume, wanted not for Humane Reason) said
peremptorily, Ego vero Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae
commoveret Authoritas. And to the same Authority (leaving the Scepticks to
their Identities, Idities, and Quiddities) will I ever submit both my
understanding, and my reason; for, would it not be very pleasant to hear a man
Catechize or Preach to himself? and a pretty riddle for Master, Scholar,
Preacher, and Auditour to be all in the same man? who, without some external
conveyance, or outward aid can no more properly or safely indoctrinate himself,
than he can possibly put his mouth to his own ear and whisper in it. Witty men
(no doubt) may frame arguments against natural and experimental Demonstrations;
as for example, Oral Loquution, or Local Motion: but certainly none (though few
perhaps can solve every particular objection) will be persuaded, that we can
neither speak nor move: The same I say as to the Church; when men are (as
certainly they may be) indisputably satisfied that it is (and must necessarily
be) infallible in its Conciliar-Definitions; whatsoever rises in opposion,
they consequently know (though perhaps not precisely How) must necessarily be
inconclusive, fictitious, and false, without descending to particular disputes,
which is not only a toilsome but endless labor. For I have often thought, that
since our Revolt from Rome there have been written pro and con-books enough (I
should not exceed, if I said) to fill ten Vaticans, and yet we are in the same,
or a worse condition; the reason is, because Corrosives are applied instead of
Lenitives, Vinegar instead of Oil; wherefore I compare Controversy to
Physic, which as it cures many that would have died, so it kills more that
would have recovered and lived without it.

Whether what I have hitherto said will have the good or ill fortune to be
thought Reason, or not, I am not Prophet enough to know, nor concerned enough
to care, the principal motive being to employ some spare hours; but if it be
esteemed wholly insignificant ( Solamen miseris, etc.) I am not the first by
forty, who have written to no purpose; yet this I Will boldly say is to some,
whatever arguments or engines of Wit are invented and directed to undermine and
subvert the Power and Authority of God's Church will but deceive, and at last
recoile and ruin the Inventor: And all these glittering words and gilded
reasons (which I confess are dressed in graceful language) this Author has
rallied together against it, can be at most but Verisimilities; they may
possibly delight some amuze and puzle others, but solidly and indubitably can
inform none; for I should take it very kindly from him, or any man else, that
would tell me (heartily) what those imperative words ( Feed my Sheep, feed my
Lambs, spoken to St. Peter) signify? if not, that there should constantly be
in God's Church (which is essentially composed of Docentes and discentes)
Pastors, i e. Instructors and Teachers, of others: For Christ our Lord (who
never made, or said any thing in vain) did not speak plurally (as this Author
interprets) Feed ye my Sheep, feed ye my Lambs, even where your selves like
best; but, Pasce oves meas, etc. Feed thou my Sheep, Peter, etc. But if all Men
and Women (as this Author advises) should turn Sheepheards and Sheepheardesses,
(and so become Pastors without Sheep, and Sheep without Pastors, both and
neither, or something and nothing, straggling and feeding upon various tabifick
pastures,) who should, or could feed and keep the whole Flock in order? when
there would be no such thing as a Flock to be kept, if all Men, Women, and
Children of all degrees and qualities were intended by our Blessed Savior to
feed ( i. e, to Instruct and Teach) themselves; and therefore if the Authors
doctrine (as to this particular) be reason, it is of that new sort of reasons,
which for a while may taste sweetly and deliciously to licorish and licentious
Palates, but in the end (I fear) they will find 'twas but a bittersweet, a
pleasant Poison.

In a word, if his discourse (as it has plausibility) had weight enough to
make any deep impression in the minds of Men (though truly I do not think this
was the Author's drift) it would necessarily by degrees introduce Anarchy and
Confusion: for it evidently invades and disannuls all Ecclesiastical Rule and
Power; Annihilates the Pastoral Office, and makes all Clergymen totally
Useless and Superfluous; and how can any Arguments (let them be never so
Learnedly and Rhetorically adorned) have any real or intrinsecal goodness or
solidity in them, which draw such misshapen, and ill favored Consequences
after them? Per effectum Causa.

Finally, I compare his Treatise to a painted Feast, (for Non sunt omnia, quae
videntur) which may whet and increase men's Appetites, but can never satisfy,
their hunger; or rather to a Posie of Nettles and Roses, whereof a man cannot
smell the sweet, without stinging his Nose; for although it be intermixed with a
great deal of Scholarship and Wit, and carrys Reason in the Front, yet
(according to my sentiment) it is so Aenigmatically (if not Implously rapt up,
that, notwithstanding it be but a very small Volum, I cannot but think, There Is
a great deal too much of it; and lest the Reader (if it have any) should think
so of mine, it shall not be long before I make an end.

Two passages upon a Review of his Treatise I thought convenient here to insert
and speak to.

First: Where he says, That ever since the beginning of the Christian Belief,
there has been the Authority of above an hundred to one against it, and this
Authority backed and strengthened with the Universal agreement of more than three
thousand years before it.

This hundred to one, and these three thousand years, makes a very great noise
indeed, but to as little purpose. For, what rational man knows not, that not
the greatness of the number (for so every Rebellion and Usurpation might be
justified) but the legality of the Power and Authority of men is that which
justly exacts and requires (and to which we are in duty obliged to pay) our
submission and obedience.

Secondly: Where he acknowledges that the best and truest Humane Reason could
not have found out of it self that Mystery (by which, I suppose, he means the
Incarnation) of Jesus Christ, but it was necessary first to be revealed, and as
soon as the Spirit had revealed it (which it did by Miracles, etc.) even Humane
Reason was also to behold, and to confess it: not that Grace had altered the
eyesight of Human-Reason, but drawn the object nearer to it; and till the
object was brought so nigh, the Wisdom of man did as safely not discern it, as
it does not now the new state of things which shall be revealed at the second
Coming.

And what news is there in all this? or who-ever questioned the truth of it?
but yet if that not-discerning, or non-credence had been accompanied with an
obstinate resolution to disbelieve or reject every thing but what Reason
happened to find out by its own self-search (which would have been like a Man's
denying to see a thing, though brought and set just before his eyes, because he
did not first seek and spy it out himself); that nescience or non-discerning (I
say) would not then have been safe, but highly culpable, because the things,
which before men might have been innocently ignorant of, after sufficient and
due proposal, become (at least necessitate Praecepti) necessary Credenda.

More than this, I know nothing he has material to be answered to.

These ensuing Verses (which have long lain dormant) I thought not altogether
improper to make the Epilogue of this little work.

Upon his Majesty's Gracious Condescension, to a Toleration in -- 72. A year
which I could wish had always lasted.
-- Regum est.
Parcere subjectis and debellare superbos.
Our Royal Pilot (studying how to Steer,
And please each individual Passenger,
Embarked with him) finds no Rocks nor Shelvs
So formidable to us as our Selves.
For our intestine Feuds and discontent,
Endanger most the Ship of Government.
And what is the Source, from whence this mischief flows,
And in its progress so deformed grows?
But at the Tinder-boxes of our brains,
Striking new lights, and for our frantic pains
Groaping in darkness, this (unhappy Fate!)
Breeds a Confusion both in Church and State.
But as the great King, with a Fiat ma^e
Light out of darkness, and his breath conveyed
Form to the Chaos; so, by this Act of Grace,
Ours, blows foul weather from the cloudy face
Of his Great Britain, timely to prevent
State-pleurisies, which no medicament
Can cure, but letting Blood, and now we see
England a Free State, and a Monarchy;
And may't unanimously be confessed,
The Public Good's our private Interest;
That (not Religion) we shall find to be
The strongest Bond of our Fidelity.
But those that would (like Esops Dog) have all,
Catching at shadows, let the substance fall.
These Peccant humors our Physician strives
T'asswage with soft and gentle Lenitives;
In which Attempt, whether his Wisdom, or
His Clemency exceeds, is dubious, for
The Monster-multitude (like floods confined)
By persecution grow the more combined,
And forcing Vent, or Issues (like the Sea
Rage but with more impetuosity.
But these Religious Struglings finding scope,
By this Indulgence of our English Pope,
Those rapid Zealots may (this being done)
Recurr, and in the proper Channel run.
But if this fails, as in the Stars we see
A Regular Irregularity;
So in our English Sphere (I hope) 'till prove
These various Sects may without clashing move;
And not Create their own Misfortunes still.
In short, we may be happy if we will.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 18. opposed, read opposite. p. 12. l. 22. corporal, r. corporeal.
p. 33. l. 12 after one, r. true. p. 34 l. 2. Canary, Claret, Syder, and
Muscadine, are, r. Canary, Claret, and Syder Muscadine p. 39. l. 24. in so, r.
in se. p. 51. l. 2. by, r. to. p. 51 l. 23. after Prophecyes, add, and. p. 52.
l. 10. by, r. to. p. 53. l. 7. after stretch, add, it. p. 55. l. 1. his r. the.
p. 55. l. 3. after Election, dele, or choice. p. 55. l. 24. after Pitch, add,
and. p. 58. l. 28. Disputers, r. Dissenters.


