AN ENQUIRY AFTER Truth and Righteousness, And after the People whom the Lord
Establishes and will Establish therein, in some Queries on Isa. 58. and also
on Chapter 54.
Query 1. ARe there any people to be found, who exceed that state spoken of
verse. 2. of seeking God daily, and delighting to know his ways, as a Nation
that did Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God? They ask of
me said the Lord the Ordinances of Justice, they take delight in approaching to
God. Are there not many Professions and sorts of Professors at this day, who in
Gods sight fall short of this state, and yet think highly of themselves? yet
these the Prophet of the Lord was not to spare, but to lift up his Voice like a
Trumpet against them, because of their Transgression and Sin which they
committed, notwithstanding their thus daily seeking the Lord.

Quer. 2. What was the Transgression and the Sins which the Prophet was not to
spare them in, but lift up his Voice like a Trumpet against them for? Was it
not (among other things) for their wrong fasting, their wrong afflicting their
Souls, their wrong seeking of God, out of the meek, tender, merciful spirit?
Does God require such fasting or praying of any man? or will the Lord accept
such fasting or praying at any man's hand? Ah how many fast and pray at this
day, who never rightly considered nor truly understood what the fastings and
what the prayers are, which God requires, and which alone he will accept?

Quer. 3. What is the fast which God requires, and will accept in all Ages? Is
not this it, To loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to
let the oppressed go free; to break every yoke etc. ver. 6.7. Who can
understand or learn the fast, but he that is taught of God?

Quer. 4. Are there any, whose light breaks forth as the morning, and whose
health springs forth speedily; and whose righteousness goes before them, and
whom the glory of the Lord gathers up, or is a Rereward to (as is promised to
those who observe this fast) and whom the Lord is ready to hear and answer in
all that they call upon him for, as ver. 8.9? Does not God teach his Children
in the new Covenant to observe this fast? And they who are taught by him to
keep it (and do faithfully keep it) do they not inherit this Promise?

Quer. 5. Are there any now among the Sons of men, whose light has risen in
obscurity, and whose darkness has become as noonday? Whom the Lord guides
continually, and whose Soul he satisfies in Droughts, and makes fat their
bones: And makes them like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose
Waters fail not? Surely if there be any, who are truly taught of the Lord to
observe that which leads hereto, they cannot miss of enjoying these precious
promises: For he is faithful and true who has promised. (verse. 10, 11.)

Quer. 6. Are there any, at this day, whom God honors in building the old
waste Places, in raising up the Foundations of many Generations; in repairing
the breach, and restoring the Paths to dwell in? What are the Paths that are to
be dwelt in? Are they not the same which the Soul is to walk in? Is not the
just man's path and his dweling place all one, even the Light of the Living,
which he is both to walk and abide in? See 1 John 1.7. and Prove. 4.18.

It is said concerning Christ, He that says he abides in him, ought himself
also so to walk, even as he walked 1 John 2.6. How did Christ walk? Did he not
walk in the Light of Gods Spirit? in Subjection to Gods Spirit? Was not the
fullness given him? Was not the Father always with him? And did not he act in
the Father, and the Father in and through him? Now, does not he give forth a
measure of the same Spirit, of the same Anointing, of the same Power to become
Sons unto all his? and are not they to walk according to the measure of Light
and Life they receive from him? And he that walks according to this rule, can
he err in so walking? Is not this the pure Path, the living Path, the Path for
the ransomed in the days of the Gospel, who walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit; not in the oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the
Spirit? O that men could consider this with the true understanding, and know
the way of Life in the true sense and experience thereof! That which enlightens
and gives life to my Soul, is somewhat from Christ, even a measure or
appearance of his pure Spirit; it is no less: and the Law of Life written
inward is more to the Soul then words written outwardly, though all the words
that ever come from Gods holy Spirit are very precious, and greatly useful, to
those, to whom he vouchsafes to give the understanding of them.

Quer. 7. What is the Sabbath spoken of verse. 13? Is it the Law-Sabboth, or the
Gospel-Sabboth? Is it inferior in nature to the Fast before mentioned? What is
Gods Holy Day, which is the Souls delight, the holy of the Lords honorable,
wherein the Souls that enter into the true Rest (by Faith in him who is Life)
honor the Lord, in ceasing from their own ways, pleasures and words? see also
Hebr: 4.3. and 10.

Qu. 8. They that keep Gods holy Sabbath, do they not delight themselves in the
Lord? do they not feel the pleasure of his Day, and of his Appearance in his
day? Are not these of the true Seed of Jacob (who prevail with the Lord for the
blessing?) and does not the Lord feed them with the Heritage of Jacob their
Father, even with the Blessings of the Covenant of Life and Peace for evermore.

Some Queries on Isa 54.
Query 1. IS there such a state to be witnessed, either in the particular, or
in the general, wherein the Womb that was barren shall Travel and bear, and
sing for joy of heart and spirit before the Lord? see verse 1.

Quer. 2 Is there such a state to be witnessed, as of the Maker to become the
Husband? Is not this a glorious state indeed, and a name better then o^ S^ns
and Daughters, signifying nearer intimacy and union, then any other rela^ion,
with the holy One, the Redeemer of Israel? and do not such as come to this
state (even to be married to the Lamb) partake more abundantly of his redeeming
^ower and holy Presence? see verse. 6.

Quer. 3. Are there some so visited and redeemed by the Lord, as that they
shall never be cast off more as that the hoods of Wrath shall never overtake
them more, nor the Covenant of their P^^ce removed? Ah precious state! blessed
are they doubtl^ss* who have been so visited and redeemed by Gods mercy, as to
be mad^ partakes of it.

Quer. 4. Who is this that has been afflict^d, tossed with tempest and not
comforted? Have there been any such in our days, who have been deeply
afflicted, for want of the presence of the Lord God of their Life, who h^ve
been t^ssed up and down with tempest after tempest, and could meet with no
Comforter to speak a word in season to their weary Souls? And has the Lord
appeared to these, visited th^se, built up these, comforted these? Surely then,
the poor whom he has raised out of the dust, and the needy whom he has lifted
off from the dunghill, cannot but praise his Name.

Quer. 5 Who is this, whose stones God lays with fair Colors, and her
Foundations with Saphires? whose Windows God makes of Agates, and her Gates of
Carbuncles, and all her Borders of Pleasant Stones? Was not the Covenant of
Life so adorned in the Apostles days? and is she not so adorned now again?

Quer. 6. Whose children are they, who shall be all taught of the Lord, and
whose peace shall be great, who shall be established in Righteousness, who
shall be far from Oppression; so that they shall not fear, and from terror so
that it shall not come near them? Are there such a Generation of the heavenly
Birth, of the Covenant of Life, brought forth in this our day, who sanctify
the Lord of Hosts himself, and make him their fear and their dread, but are not
terrified with the wicked one, nor with the Snares and Engines of the ungodly?
Surely they who are taught of God, have peace from him and in him, and are
established in the righteous Spirit and life of his Son, they are like mount
Sion, which cannot be shaken or removed, by all the Terrors and oppressing
Devices of the ungodly.

Qu. 7. By whom do they gather together, who gather together against such a
people? Certainly it is not by the Lord nor by any advice or counsel from him;
but by the advice of that spirit which opposes himself against the Power and
Work of the Lord: And that spirit must fall for the s^kes of those, whom God
has raised up by his Power, and undertaketh to defend. How tender was God of
I^rael after the flesh in the day of his delivering them, see 1 ^hron. 16* 19.
etc? and will he not be as tender of his spirit^^l Israel, in the day of his
redeeming and delivering them? Indeed the opposition will be very great, but
confide who shall have the victory, See Rev 17.14. Certainly it is true, and
s^aled by the Spirit of the Lord that Patience, Meekness, Innocence Love*
Right^ousness etc. shall at length overcome all Unrighteousnes, Enmity*
Oppression, Cruelty, Wrath etc, and that spirit from which they proceed: and as
they are overcome, and when they are overcome, the Lamb's Spirit shall reign
and shine in the glory of the Father. O the sweet Sense of this day and further
hope thereof, how does it bear up the suffering Lambs in the midst of all their
Trials and Tribulations!

Quer. 8. Has not God created the Waster to destroy? and has not he power
over him? and does not he limit him in the midst of his destroying work? But
did God create him to destroy his heritage? Or will God suffer him so to do?
they may indeed destroy the buildings which are not of God: But God is the
wise, great, Master Builder, who counted his cost before he began and knew he
was able to maintain his Building, against all the Oppositions and Opposors
which could rise up against it.

Qu. 9. Can any weapon formed against the Covenant of Life and the Children
thereof, who are taught of God and have great peace from him, and who are
established by him in Righteousness; I say, can any weapon formed against these
prosper? Every tongue that rises up in judgment against them, does not the
holy Tongue condemn? Is not this the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, in
this our day? and does not the Lord say (what ever men say to the contrary)
that their Righteousness is of him? Indeed, who ever receives the true
Righteousness, receives it from the hand of the Lord, and knows it to be of
him. And this testimony we have, even from the Spirit of the Lord, who takes
away our Unrighteousness and filthy Garments, and gives us Righteousness from
and in his Son; that the righteousness which he gives us, is his Sons
Righteousness, even the very same wherewith the Son himself was clothed. For as
the Seed is but one, and of one ( Heb. 2.11.) so the righteousness is but one
neither. Be not hasty in spirit but wait to understand it in the Light and
Spirit of the Lord, which is Wisdoms place of giving true understanding to her
Disciples.

It is true, there has been great Darkness, and the true Church has been in
the Wilderness, and the Remnant of her Seed hunted and persecuted up and down
the Earth by the false Church, which has been cried up for the true. But
blessed be the Lord the Darkness is passing away, and the true Light shining
again: which Light discovers and redeems out of all that is false, into that
which is true: so that he that is truth and no lie is again known, and he
speaks truth and no lie, and anointeth with the true and holy Oil of Life
and Salvation, all that are truly living. And now the kingdom of Darkness is
going down, and the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ raising up and exalting;
which is an inward Kingdom, a spiritual Kingdom, a Kingdom of Life, a Kingdom
of Peace, a Kingdom of Righteousness, a Kingdom of holy Power and Dominion over
sin and death in the heart. And this will spread and increase, to the blessing
of Persons, Families and Nations (as they come to be sensible of and subject to
the Holy Light and Power thereof) which the Blessings of Abraham, wherewith all
Families and Nations are to be blessed, as they come to be unleavened from the
serpentine spirit and wisdom, and leavened with the Innocence and Righteousness
of the Lambs Nature and Spirit.

The mighty God carry on his work, by the same mighty Arm of Strength wherewith
he began it; and open the eyes of this Nation that they may see their proper
hope and interest: for indeed the Lord has great love to this Nation, and a
blessing in store for it, (for the Seeds sake which he has sown and caused to
spring up in it,) though many trials and tribulations must first be passed
through, and the spirit of Enmity and Opposition against the appearance of Gods
holy Spirit and Power worn out. O that men could come to that which gives the
eyesight, that thereby they might see a right, and no longer take the rise of
their seeing from that spirit and wisdom which miss-represents things.

Written in Reading-Goal, in the tender love, true innocence and uprightness of
my heart; which the Lord has given me to suffer with for his truths sake;
About the latter end of the 4th Month, 1671. Isaac Penington.

THE END

