Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World?
Has not God made foolish the Wisdom of this World? 1 Cor. 1.20.
THese have always been the Enemies and opposers of Truth, and Setters up of
false Images thereof in all ages, The Wise, the Learned, the great Disputants.
To these Truth has still been mean and contemptible, their Eye has still
overlooked it, and their imaginatious have still outrun it, finding out
somewhat else in the stead thereof, for which they have been still able and
vigorous to contend, and against the Truth it self. And indeed, how can the
Wise Eye see that, how can the learned Eye acknowledge that, which comes quite
out of the way of it is knowledge and learning, even in a path that it is not at
all acquainted with? Wisdom is justified of her Children, Those that are wise
to Salvation, those that are learned in the Spirit, those that can dispute in
the power of the life and demonstration of the Spirit, these know her
habitation, and her out goings, and can own her in every age, and in every
dispensation and coming forth: but the Wise and Learned of this World are shut
out of this wisdom, and in all their searches after Truth, cannot find her; and
if at any time they do find and taste somewhat of her, yet they cannot keep her,
but the Wisdom, and Learning, and Strength of the earthly part in them, soon
betrays and makes a prey of the simplicity that is in Christ, and of his pure
Gospel, which cannot be comprehended nor will take up a dwelling place with
this wisdom, but brings it to nothing, tramples upon it, and keeps it down for
ever, where it abides.

Three sorts of Enemies of the Wise, the Learned, the great Disputants, Truth
has always had. First, Of such as have denied the true form of knowledge and
worship. Secondly, Of such as have owned the form, but withstood the power.
Thirdly, Of such as have had a taste of the power, but afterward erred from it,
and so held that, which once they had a true taste of, in the unrighteous part,
and likewise added to it by their own imaginations,

When Israel was in Egypt (that poor illiterate company of Brickmakers) in
bondage under that wise people; the Egyptians, withal their wisdom, could not
own their God or their worship, but their God was an unknown Being to all that
wisdom ( Exodus 5.2.) and his worship and sacrifice the abomination of their
Eyes, Exodus 8.26. and Jannes and Jambres, with other wise Magitians, withstood
the appearance of God, and Pharaoh and his people with their wisdom thought to
have kept God's Israel from multiplying, Exodus 1.10. and to have held Israel
still under their servitude, after the Lord was risen to stretch out his Arm
for their deliverance, Exodus 5.8, 9 And how did all the wise Nations still watch
to make a prey of God's Jerusalem! How did they count the Towers! How often did
they think to divide the spoil! Judge. 5.28. Isai. 33.18. How did Senacharib and
Rabsh^ka make her their own! And when the Lord did at any time give Jacob for a
spoil, and Israel to the Robbers, how did they think to keep her under for
ever! The wise Assyrian, the Moabite, the Ammonite, the Edomite, the Philistim,
the Amalekite, the wise Babylonian or Chaldean thought to keep her under, as
Pharaoh had done, even till their wisdom and knowledge perverted them also,
Isai. 47.10. and the Prince of Tire, who was wiser then Daniel, Ezekiel. 28.3. he
also could insult over Jerusalem, and rejoice at her downfall and captivity,
chap. 26.2.

But to come closer; Come to Israel it self. That people, by all the wisdom it
could gather from the Law, by all the experiences it had had of God's power, by
all the faith that was wrought in them upon deliverances, yet had not Eyes to
see, nor Ears to hear, nor Hearts to perceive, but were a people that did
always err in their Hearts, and did not understand the way of Truth and Peace.
The Prophets among them were still Fools, yea, the Spiritual man mad, Hos. 9 7.
The Priests were generally ignorant of the Lord (for though they had the Ark of
his presence, his Tabernacle, his Temple, Altar, Sacrifices, Worship, etc. yet
they did not know where he was, nor did inquire after him, but contented
themselves with a form of knowledge and worship.) And they that handled the Law
knew not him who gave the Law, and was the sole true interpreter of the Law,
but the Pastors transgressed against him, and the Prophets prophesied by
another Spirit, Ier. 2.8. They were wise, and did abound in their own meanings,
guestings and gathered knowledge, but they knew not the Truth, no nor of the
Let er according to the Law, and according to that Light, which God sometimes
caused to shine among them from his Prophets. Hence it was that that people,
with their Rulers, their Teachers, their Priests, their Prophets, were
generally enemies to the Prophets whom God raised up, hating, persecuting,
imprisoning, stoning them, etc. The Prophets of God (that spoke his Truth in
his Wisdom, in his Life, in Power, in the demonstration of his Spirit) they
could not away with: these were Fools with them, these were madmen with them,
(2 Kings 9.11. Ier. 29.26.) these were poor illiterate Herdsmen and Plowmen:
they had learned men, that were brought up at the Schools of the Prophets, that
could Prophecy Divine things, sweet things, that could open the Law learnedly;
these Prophets, and these Priests the Rulers cherished, and the people loved,
Ier. 5.31. and 23.26, 27. Ezekiel 13.3, etc.

Yea among that people, such as had had a taste of the Truth, as Corah Dathan
and Abiram might have (for surely it was not a small matter that could so lift
them up, to oppose Moses and Aaron in that manner, and to stand out the contest
with them even in the Lord's presence, Numb. 16.18. but an apprehension of
God's being on their side from some appearance of his to them) and as Balaam
had, whose Eyes were opened to see the beauty of the Tents of Jacob; yet these,
through the prevalency of the fleshly lusts and wisdom, become enemies, and
try always to prevail over Israel, even over the Truth and over the Power. The
Apostle Jude compares such to the Angels that kept not their first Estate. The
Angels that fell, had a place and standing once in truth, but they kept it not
(they abode not in the truth) but fell from it, and so became Devils, enemies
to the truth from which they fell: So those that fall from the truth, from the
power, from the living virtue whereof they once tasted, from the true wisdom,
which once appeared to them and began to season and savor them, in their
fallen wisdom they become the greatest enemies, the greatest accusers, the
greatest opposers, and the stiffest maintainers of a false Image of that Truth,
which they once had some knowledge of, and some unity with. Thus it was in the
Jewish state; Now come to the Apostles days.

First, They had all the Wise men of that age against them, all the Wise
Greeks, all the Wise Jews; the Learned men, the able Disputants of all sorts.
The Greeks could not find wisdom in that knowledge of Christ which they held
forth, nor the Jews could not find power in it, 1 Cor. 1.22. and so the one
accounted it foolishness, the other stumbled at it, v. 23. There were many
sorts and Sects of Wisemen among the Jews, but not one sort could own the
Truth, though they were looking for it, searching the Scriptures about it, and
disputing concerning it. The very thing then in agitation and inquiry among
them was, when the Kingdom of God should come. The King himself direct, them
where it was, that they might know where to expect and wait for it, Luke 17.21.
and in many parables opens it to them, but it was still hid from the Eye of
that wisdom, wherewith they did strive to see, understand and comprehend it. So
that all the several sorts of Wisemen of that age, even those who were
Admirers of the Law and the Prophets, yet were Strangers and Enemies to the
Truth, because they joined to that Wisdom, and to that Learning and
comprehension of the Scriptures, out of the sight whereof it came.

Secondly, For such as did own Christ after the flesh, such as were convinced
by his Miracles, (as Nicodemus and many of the honester sort of the Jews were)
yet Christ did not commit himself to them, Joh. 2.24. He knew this faith and
this owning of him, which was founded upon the Wisdom and Ingenuity of the
creature would fail; and so he would not own it in Nicodemus, but bids him look
after the new birth, ( Joh. 3.2, 3.) nor in such as followed him up and down
upon this or any other fleshly account, but sometimes withdrew and hid himself
from them, ( Luke 5.16 Joh 6.14, 15,) and sometimes preached Doctrines which
stumbled them, and made them withdraw from him, Joh. 6, 66. And so in the
Apostles days, there were many could get the form, and gain advantage thereby
to the fleshly wisdom, to withstand the power, 2 Timothy 3.5. 2 Cor. 11.13.

Thirdly. There were such as had rasted of the heavenly gift, and of the powers
of the World to come, and yet fell away, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. There were such as
denied the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet 2.1. Such as fell from the love of the
Truth, to the love of their vomit, and of the mire of the World again, v. 22. 2 Timothy 4.10. Such as had a standing in the Churches Heaven (like the Angels which
fell) but kept not their habitation, but were swept down from thence to the
earth by the Dragons tail, Rev. 12 4. These are the notablest Champions (in the
earthly wisdom, and for a corrupted estate and false Image) of all the rest.

Now as the Prophets of God among the Jews had these enemies, and as the
Apostles also had these enemies: so all along the Apostasy these enemies have
been rise. The witnesses have had a wise sort of direct opposers among the
Papists, a wise sort of secret underminers among the Protestants, and also
another wise sort of such among themselves, as had some taste of the Truth, but
departed from the power of it into the earthly wisdom, into the earthly
understanding: and this last sort fight more suriously and more vehemently
against the Truth, and are more subtle to assault it and grapple with it, then
the other two. Oh there is no such bitter deadly enemy to Christ and his Truth,
as he who once had some taste of the virtue of it, and is now turned from it
into the Earth, into the wisdom and love of the World, and yet still holds some
of the notion of that Truth (whereof he once left the power) in the earthly
part.

To come yet closer. There is in every man (not thoroughly sanctified) that
Wisdom which is not of God, that wisdom from which God hides his precious
Truths, which wisdom lies ready to catch every discovery and revelation of
truth to him, that it might improve it, grow rich and wise by it. Now this
Wisdom cannot attain to the knowledge of any of the things of God, neither can
this Wisdom keep the true knowledge, but whatever this Wisdom catches, it
presently corrupts. The true Wisdom, the true Light, the true Knowledge of
Christ is like the Manna in the Wilderness; it daily comes down from Heaven,
and must daily be gathered fresh. The true Light springs from the Life, and it
must be held in the Life, in the Vessel which the Life forms, in the new
Bottle, in the new Understanding; not in the fleshly part, nay not in the
natural part: for as the natural man cannot receive the things of the Spirit, 1
Cor. 2.14. So neither can he retain them. The old store house, into which
earthly things were gathered, must be burnt up, and not made a Treasure for the
things of God, but the new understanding, which is given by him that is true,
(1 John 5.20.) which new-forms, and preserves, and is all in the natural. Sink
out of the earthly part and read me, that thou may be able to say within thy
self, and concerning thy self. Where is the Wise? where is the Scribe? where is
the Disputer?

The Wise part, the knowing part, the reaching part in every man will be
putting forth it is hand to gather of the Tree of Life: but what has it ever
been able to gather? I know men may gather notions of any kind, of any Sect, of
any sort of Profession, of any appearance or dispensation: but who is able to
come near the Life, to touch the Power, the Truth, the everlasting Spring, or
any stream or drop of water that issues from it? And he who has a true touch
or taste thereof given him, can his Wisdom add to it? nay can he so much as
retain it? ( David had a true sense and experience of this, who cried out, O
continue thy loving kindness to them that know thee, and thy righteousness to
the upright in heart.) Indeed if he like not to retain the thing it self in his
knowledge, he may improve the notion, and bend that to the temperature and
disposition of the earthy part in himself and others; but this is not truth,
but a dead image, or a dead remembrance of what once was truly living. Oh how
does the Soul that is begotten of the Divine breath, that is born of the living
Power and Virtue, depend upon God for his continual breathings! There is
nothing has so much from God, and yet nothing is so little able to live
without him. If he withdraw from it, it presently hangs down its head: nay if
he do but so much as hide his face, it is troubled; and all the fullness, which
it immediately before had from God is not able to keep up its. Life one moment,
but it pants, and fails, and flags, and withers, until a new supply of
refreshment be administered to it. And he that knows this in any measure, will
not wonder at, the distress and misery of such for want of God's presence, and
at their cryings out after the Spring of their Life (even as the Heart brayeth
after the water brooks) though they should have fullness of all outward things,
yea and also fullness of knowledge in things of Religion, even concerning all
conditions and estates. The thing that I wanted in my great misery, it was not
outward knowledge, it was not experience of God's mercy and goodness: but this
I wanted, the issuings forth of his fresh Life, and livingly to know where to
wait for it, and livingly to know it when it appeared: for it was still near me
all the time of my darkness, and did preserve me and appear unto me, but I
livingly knew it not, but thought I would be wiser then others: For I saw many
deceived, and so I would not own it in such a way as it then appeared in me,
least I also should be deceived like others, but waited for such an appearance
as could not be questioned by the fleshly Wisdom. And be that waits for that,
and so despise the day of small things, cannot but refuse the little seed; and
so, it being not received into his earth, it can never grow up in him into a
great Tree, whereby the Glory of the Kingdom will be hid from him, and be shut
out of it, when others enter into and sit down in it. Therefore, he that will
be Wise, let him become a Fool that be may be Wise; Let him receive that for
his Light, his King, his Guide, which man's wisdom never did nor never will own.
He that ever looks to enjoy the Comforter, let him receive the Reprover, the
Convincer of sin, and wait for his Law of judging him throughout the whole
course of his sinful State and Nature, passing along with him through the whole
condemnation, until he arrive with him at the justification of the Life, which
the fleshly wisdom, nor any of his knowledge of the things of God, (as they are
held in the fleshly part) must ever arrive with him at.

Has not God made foolish the Wisdom of this World?

The Wisdom of this World is precious in the Eye of the World, and the Wisdom
of God in his poor, weak, despised, earthen Vessels is still foolishness with
them: but the Lord so orders it, as he still justifies his despised Wisdom in
his despised Vessels, and makes the Wisdom of the World appear foolish to all
the single and upright-hearted, who thirst after and wait for the Revelation of
his Truth. Now two ways especially the Lord makes the solly of this Worlds
Wisdom appear,

First, In that by all their Wisdom they cannot find out the true knowledge of
God, v. 21. The World by Wisdom knew not God, though there be an exceeding
desire kindled in them to know God, though they take all the ways that heart
can imagine to attain their desires, though they study and meditate never so
hard, though they get never so many Arts and Languages, nay though they read
the very Scriptures never so diligently, though they labor in the very fire,
yet what they get, what they gather, what they understand, what they comprehend
by this Wisdom, it is all but very vanity, Hab. 2.13. it reaches not the
Immortal, it nourishes not the Immortal, it satisfies not the Soul, it
refreshes not the seed, but only feeds and pleases the earthly part, the
earthly understanding, the earthly mind, the earthly desires and affections,
even the man's Part, the man's Spirit, the man's Nature, which though elevated
and raised never so high, is still but earth.

Secondly, In that all their Wisdom cannot reach them to come down to, to
submit to, to come into God's way of having their Wisdom crucified, and that
raised up in them which might receive the Truth. This they can never learn in
the fleshly Wisdom. They may indeed come thus far, even to see that there is no
way of entrance but by death, and so seek death (that they may enter into the
Life) but they cannot find it. The seed of Jacob in his seeking misses not, but
this Seeker never finds, to this Asker it is never given, and to this Knocker
it is never opened: and that is it which makes this Wisdom in every appearance,
in every sort of Profession and Sect of Professors, so rage at the seed of
Jacob, even because it finds it self still shut out of the Life, into which an
entrance is administered to the seed. And how can that which would fain have the
Kingdom, but rage against that which takes the inheritance from it? how can
every sort of Professors but strive to slay the heir, that the inheritance
might be theirs? Were it not for the living Seed, and the living Power and
Virtue, which breaks forth in them and among them, the Religion and Worship of
the first birth might pass for current: but this is it which darkens the Glory
of all Professions and Professors upon the earth, even that living thing which
God has begotten in his people, and his living presence with it, and blessing
upon it: at this, all the zealous Sacrificers, Teachers, and Professors out of
the Life rage and are mad, and would break the cords and bands wherewith this
strives to bind them unto God's Altar.

Now look over all Ages, could the Wise Heathens stoop to God's dispensation to
the Jews? was it not foolishness and abomination to them? or could the Wise
Jews stoop to the Law within, to the Word in the Heart, (although directed
thereto by Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.14.) to learn there to do justly, to love mercy, and
to walk humbly with their God? Mic. 6.8. Could they wait there to have their
Hearts circumcised by that Word of power, and so to be washed and made clean?
Nay were they not drowned in their outward Sacrifices, Temple, Incence,
New Mons and Sabbaths, and such kind of observations, and could not heat the
Truth of the Lord as it was delivered by Moses, nor as it was opened by the
Prophets ( Isa. 1.11.) So that this People seeking to know the Lord from the
Letter by this Wisdom, could never come to the knowledge of him, but the place
of his Light and Wisdom was hid from them.

Again, When Christ came, and the Kingdom was preached, and the everlasting way
of Redemption and Salvation made manifest, could the Wise Eye in the Greeks, or
the Wise Eye in the Jews see it? did not the Greeks shut themselves out by a
Wisdom above the Letter (as they thought) and the Jews by a knowledge and
Wisdom which they had gathered out of the Letter? How wise were they from the
Letter to reason against the King of Life? This man cannot be of God, for he is
a breaker of his Sabbath. He is a Nazarite, and can any good thing come out of
Nazareth? He says the Son of man must be lifted up, but we read that Christ
abides for ever. He is against Gods Temple, against Gods day of Worship, gives
his Disciples such scope and liberty, as neither the Pharisces nor John gave
their Disciples, but reviles our strict and Godly Teachers and Expounders of
the Law, calling them Hipocrites, blind Guides, etc. And mark with what a rough
severe Spirit he reproves them, whereas they call him Master, and speak mildly
and gently to him. O what Jew in that Nature, in that Wisdom, in that Spirit
could but find matter and occasion of stumbling at Christ, even from the Law
and the Prophets!

And as they stumbled at the true Christ, so have all the generations of wise
men since the Apostasy, all the learned men generally (their Councils, Synods,
Convocations and Assemblies) stumbled at the true Church, looking for some such
like building as had been in the Apostles days, and not understanding and
observing how the Lord took down that building (as it had been set up in the
World) and how he prepared a place in the Wilderness for his true Church, unto
which he gave her wings to fly, Revel. 12. and how afterward the false Woman,
or false Church got up in her stead, who with a Golden Cup of fornication
bewitched the Kings and Inhabiters of the Earth, Revel. 17.2. (even Peoples,
Multitudes, Nations and Tongues, ver. 15.) So that they mistook her for the
True Church, and went into her Bed of Whoredoms? Which of all the learned men,
which of all the Councils of the Papists have seen this? nay which of the
Protestant Councils, or Convocations or Assemblies have beheld the State of the
True Church? nay have nor every Sort and Sect of the Protestants endeavored to
build up some image or likeness of the True Church, not so much as suspecting
that she was fled into, and was to abide in the wilderness for a time, times
and half a time? O what darkness has covered the Earth! O how has God
befooled the wisemen of every sort, the wisemen of every age! the wise
Protestants, as well as the wise Papists; the wise Independents and Baptists,
as well as the wise Episcopalians and Presbiterians! and how blind and sottish
are Nations and Peoples, that still they think to find out the Truth by having
a Synod, Assembly or Convocation of the Wisemen gathered together! Indeed they
are fittest to rear upon an Image to please the earthly part of man, and the
earthly Powers and interests with, but Truth never came in by that way, but the
Wise and learned have still been shut out from it, and have proved Enemies to
it. And whosoever comes out of the Apostasy from the Spirit and from the Truth,
to the Spirit and Truth again, shall find nothing so great an Enemy, as the
wisdom in himself, and directions from the wisdom in others: for that which God
leads, is a simple, a weak Babe, a Child to the Wisdom of this World; and he
leads it in a Path, which is wholly out of the line of this worlds Wisdom and
Knowledge of the Scriptures, as the Path God chose in Christ's and the Apostles
days, was out of the line of the Jews knowledge of the Scriptures. Such is the
recovery out of the Apostasy: it is hid from all the fleshly-wise-men of this
age, even as the entrance into the Truths of the Kingdom was hid from all the
fleshly-wise-men of that age. Happy is he who cease from striving after the
knowledge and comprehending of the things of God in this Worlds Spirit and
Wisdom, and waits in the humility and fear of the Lord, first to be made a
Fool, that afterward he may be made Wise unto everlasting Life.

J. P.

The End.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins le Grand, 1660.


