THE BOOKS OPENED.

Being several DISCOURSES on REV. 20.14.

By HENRY PENDLEBURY, A. M. late Minister of the Gospel at Rochdale in
Lancashire; Author of the Plain Representation of Transubstantiation.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Ann Vnsworth of Manchester; and sold by Jonathan
Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1696.

The EPISTLE to the Reader.
Christian Reader;
THere are two things which if firmly believed and duly considered, would have
a great Influence upon Men and Women's Lives, viz. First, That they are mortal.
Secondly, Accountable Creatures. It is the indispensible Statute Law of Heaven
that never will be repealed or dispensed withal, Heb. 9.27. Death is a Debt
which all Men owe, and how soon the great Creditor may exact it, none can tell:
We are all here as Tenants at Will in Cottages of Clay, whose Foundation is in
the Dust. These earthly Tabernacles are continually mouldring down about our
Ears, do what we can by Food and Physic to patch them up for a little while.
There is no Man lives, and shall not see Death. And Death has always Judgment
attending at the very Heels of it. And as the Tree falls, so it lies: As Death
leaves us, Judgment will find us. And as it is with us when we go out of this
World, so it will fare with us for ever. This short uncertain Life we have here
is the only time of Preparation we have for another World. Death sets Men on
the other side the Water, there will be no working there, no praying nor
repenting, and believing, and seeking to get our Sins pardoned, and an Interest
in Christ, and a Right to Heaven: if this Work be to be done then, we shall be
undone to all Eternity. If we once die in a Christless and graceless Condition,
we shall perish for being so to all Eternity. There will be no Time then to
correct former Mistakes. At Death we must all appear before an impartial Judge,
to receive our final conclusive determining Sentence to a fixed eternal
unchangeable State of Misery or Happiness in another World. And things will
then appear quite otherwise than they were stated, and did appear here. Then
all Vizards and Masks will be plucked off, and naked Breasts will be in
fashion: What has been here concealed, will then be made manifest: what has
been spoken in secret, will then be told on the Housetop: Nothing hid but
shall then be made manifest. At this opening Day there will be a Manifestation
of the Sons of God: then all the Sincerity and secret Graces and Holiness of
Believers will be openly declared, and all those Marks and Evidences of the
Truth of Grace, (which here are often clouded and obscured) will evidently
appear: And all the secret Wickedness and Hypocrisy, and False-heartedness of
Unbelievers, will then be discovered and laid open. And the Apostle lets us
know what an Influence (the Belief and Consideration of) this had upon himself,
and other Ministers of the Gospel, to quicken them to Diligence and
Faithfulness in their Ministerial Function: 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. We must all appear;
1st. [All], without Exception, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Young and Old,
Ministers and People; there will be no declining or escaping of it. 2dly.
[All], in our own Persons, without a Proxy; there will be no hiring of another
to appear for us, every one of us must give an Account of himself to God, Romans
14.12.

Now the great Design of the worthy Reverend Author in these ensuing Sermons,
is to quicken and direct Persons to prepare and make ready for this opening
Day. And herein he shows himself a skilful Workman that needs not to be
ashamed, dividing the Word of Truth aright, and giving to every one their
Portion. He does not put the two-edged Sword of the Spirit into a silken
Scabbard, and flourish it in the Air; but dexterously weilds it that it might
reach the Consciences of Men: he speaks plainly but pertinently and
substantially; his Words are not only intelligible, but also penetrating. And
tho these plain Discourses are posthumous, (and want the polishing that he was
able to have given them, had he designed them for the Press) yet they are
genuine, copied from his own Notes: and you have the truest Character of him in
the constant Course of his Preaching amongst his People. Some serious
Christians that were affected with them themselves, have desired to have them
printed, that others might share in the like Benefit with them. And that thy
Heart may be warmed (as others have been upon the reading of them) and thou be
quickened and helped in this Preparation for the great opening Day, as it was
the Design of the Author in preaching of them, so it is of others in the
publishing them, and of none more than of one of the meanest and unworthiest of
Christ's Ministers,

R. S.

THE BOOKS Opened.
REV. xx. 12. And I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God; and the
Books were opened: and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life: and
the Dead were judged out of those things which were written in the Books,
according to their Works.


THE Apostle Paul tells us, that we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his Body according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. Of this Judgment to
come, and which we must all come unto, we have a Description in this part of
Sacred Writ, as it was showed unto John in a Vision; where are set forth,

1. The Person of the Judge, ver. 11. who is described,

(1.) By his Posture, Sitting; the ordinary Posture of Judges in the
Administration of Justice and Judgment, and a Token of Dominion and Authority.

(2.) By the Place where he sat, a great white Throne: Not in a Manger, as at
his first Coming; not on the Ground, as when in Flesh he dwelt amongst us; nor
on a Cross, as at his leaving the World, but on a great white Throne.

He that lay in a Manger, that stood at Man's Bar falsely accused, and wickedly
condemned; he that hung upon the Tree, shall sit supreme Judge; Sedebit Judex
qui stetit sub Judice. What this Throne is, or of what it shall be made, (tho
some say the Angels, others a glorious Rainbow, others a bright Cloud)
Scripture being silent, you must not know of me.

(3.) By his Power and Glory. From whose Face the Earth and the Heaven fled
away, and there was found no Place for them. At his first Appearance Herod
seeking his Life, he is forced to fly, Mat. 2.14. At his second and glorious
Coming, Heaven and Earth shall flee away, not being able to abide his Majesty
and Power.

2. The Persons to be judged; ver. 12. And I saw the Dead, small and great,
stand before God: the Dead of all sorts and degrees. We must here include those
that shall be found alive at this day, who shall pass through a Change that
shall be to them instead of Death.

3. The Form of this Judgment; the manner how the Judge shall proceed, viz. by
Books that shall be opened.

4. Sentence is passed on the Parties brought to Judgment according to what is
found written in the Books when thus opened: And the Dead were judged out of
those things which were written in the Books according to their Works.

5. The Execution of this Sentence; ver. 14, 15. And Death and Hell were cast
into the Lake of Fire: This is the second Death. And whosoever was not found
written in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire.

The Words which are the Subject of the ensuing Discourse, contain in them the
third Particular in this Description, sc. the manner of Process in this great
Work, the Books shall be opened.

The word Book is in Scripture used,

1. Properly, for a Volume wherein something is written, or for the things writ
in that Volume; Isa. 30.8. Luke 4.17. Gal. 3.10.

2. Improperly and metaphorically, for the certain Knowledge and Remembrance
that one has of a Person or Matter, and all the Circumstances thereto
belonging; Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another; and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of Remembrance was
written before him. According to this twofold Acceptance of the Word, God is
said to have a double Book.

(1.) Materialis, i. e. the Bible, which is called the Book of the Lord, Isa.
34.16. Luke 4.17. the Book containing the Mind, and Will, and Ways of God.

(2.) Metaphoricus, which is ascribed to him after the manner of Men, who use
to note those things in Books that they would preserve the Knowledge of. Thus
there is a threefold Book figuratively ascribed to him, viz. 1st. The Book of
Providence, which is the certain Knowledge he has of all Persons, Actions, and
Things, with all their Circumstances, Psalm. 56.8. and 139.16. 2dly. The Book of
Life, Rev. 20.12. This is the certain Knowledge he has of the Elect and
Reprobate. 3dly. The Book of Universal Judgment, Dan. 7.10. We are not to
understand this Phrase literally, as if there should be some material Books
produced and opened at this day. No, the Lord has neither Need nor Use for
them. But it must be interpreted metaphorically, as a Form used for the Help of
our Understanding, spoken,

1. By way of Allusion to Courts of humane Judicature, into which are brought,
and wherein are produced Charges, Accusations, Proofs, Depositions of
Witnesses, Confessions of Parties, and all other Writings that contain Matter
of Fact relating to such Causes as are to be tried.

2. To show that the Judgment will be as accurate and particular in the
Examination and Trial, Durham, p. 743.
and as just in the Determination as if all had been recorded. Nothing shall be
omitted, nor the least Circumstance mistaken, but things shall be so equal in
themselves, and so manifested to others, as if an exact Register had been kept
and then published.

From the Words observe; That in the great Day of Judgment the Books shall be
opened: or, There is a Day a coming when the Books shall be opened. The
Judgment was set, and the Books were opened, Dan. 7.9, 10.

That this Truth may be prepared for Application, it must be enquired, I. What
Books they are that shall be opened? II. What the opening of these Books
implies? III. Who they are these Books are to be opened about? IV. About what
are these Books to be opened?


I. What Books are they that shall be opened? They are of three sorts, viz.

Those wherein, 1. All things have been recorded. 2. All things shall be
discovered. 3. All things shall be judged.


First; Those wherein all things have been recorded, and they are;

1. The Book of Divine Omniscience. Here all things stand on Record, and will
hence be as certainly known as had they been writ in a Book: for there is not
any Creature that is not manifest in his Sight; but all things are naked and
open to the Eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. His Eyes are upon
the Ways of Man, and he sees all his Goings: There Is no Darkness nor Shadow of
Death where the Workers of Iniquity may hide themselves, Job. 34.21, 22. He
knows our Works, Rev. 2.13. There is not a Word in our Tongue, but lo he knows
it, Psalm. 139.4. Here are our Thoughts writ: Thou understandest my Thoughts
afar off, v. 2. No Thought can be withheld from thee, Job 42.2. Here are the
Hearts described: 1 Chronicles. 28.9. The Lord searches all Hearts, and
understands all the Imaginations of the Thoughts. The Lord knows, and
remembers all the Actions, Thoughts and Words of all Men, and shall make it
appear at this day, that he does so as fully and plainly as if he had kept a
Diary from the Beginning of the World to the end thereof, and therein writ in
order every particular Action of every individual Man and Woman. O remember
this, God sees thee round about always, can tell all that thou do; and this
Book wherein all is written shall one day be opened!

2. The Book of Conscience, this carries all our Actions in it; Volumen grande
quo omnia conscribuntur; It is a great Volume in which all we do is writ.
Austin takes that other Book mentioned in the Text to be the Book of
Conscience, which is the Book of each Man's Life, wherein all the Passages
thereof are recorded. Tho this Interpretation agree not with this Place, yet
Conscience is such a Book as he here describes: Quocunque vadis, ubicunque es,
semper Conscientia tua tecum est, etc. Whithersoever thou go, wherever thou
art, thy Conscience is always with thee, carrying in it whatever thou put'st
therein, whether good or bad. Conscience is not always speaking nor always
chiding, (many have silenced it) but it is always writing; when we are at our
Tables, when on our Beds, when we are alone or in Company it keeps an exact
Account: and this Book also shall be opened.

Secondly, The Books shall then be opened, whereby all things shall be clearly
discovered and attested. These are,

1. The Book of Divine Omniscience. As all things are enclosed herein, so this
shall then be opened; and all the things contained in it thereby disclosed. He
will by the opening of this make manifest to all, that which is now hid from
Men and Angels, and only known to himself. God knows all things, and will make
all Men know that he does so, by setting in order before their Eyes all things
at this day; Psalm. 50.21.

2. The Book of Conscience. Herein all things are writ; and by the opening
hereof shall appear: Quod in cujusque Conscientia occultum fuit, id omnibus
manifestum fiet. In this day Conscience shall be enlightened and awakened,
Memories shall be roused and strengthened, all past things shall appear new, and
come in fresh upon the Sons of Men. Then every Thought of thy Heart, every Word
of thy Mouth, every Action of thy Life with the Circumstances thereof; then
every Day of Grace, and how thou have spent it, every Opportunity of doing and
getting Good, and how thou have improved it, shall come in as new as that which
thou did the last Day or Hour. Yea, the things that are now gone from thee,
(as Nebuchadnezzar's Dream from him) and that thou have forgotten what they
were at such a time, in such a Place, among such Company, forty or fifty Years
ago, these shall come in and be as livelily presented to thy view, as when
newly acted. O think on this! It is a common Saying, that Conscience is a
thousand Witnesses: You carry this Witness in your own Bosoms; Nocte dieque
suum gestant in pectore testem; which when the opening Day comes, will proclaim
all as on the Housetop.

3. The Book of Satan's Accusation: He is called the Accuser, Rev. 12.10. This
is one Part of his Business now, but he will especially appear to be so when he
at the Great Day shall come with his Register wherein he now inserts our
Actions.

There is a Relation of a Demon that appeared at Mascon in France in the House
of a godly Minister, who there spoke and acted many things, among which there
are these two remarkable Stories.

One time the Demon speaking profanely, a grave Divine then present religiously
rebuked him; to whom he answered, Minister, you are very holy and serious in
this Company, you were not so when singing such a baudy Song in such a Tavern,
which the Demon rehearsed before the Company. This the Divine confessed he did
in his Youth; yet when he had forgot it, and perhaps that ever he sung it, the
Devil readily remembers it as if but done that Day. The other is of a Lawyer
who came out of Curiosity, and would urge several Questions, which when the
Demon had answered, he further adds, Now Sir I have told you what you demanded,
I must next tell you what you demand not, and then discovered many of his
unequal Dealings, which made him appear to be a dishonest Man. The Devil is a
busy Body, present at our Tables, at our Recreations, with us in the Shop, in
the Market, and Field, with us in solemn Assemblies, with us when engaged in
private and secret Duties, ever spying and listening to see and hear what we do
or say: no Place is so secret, we cannot act so privately but his piercing Eye
will find us out, and he has a sure Memory which will not permit any thing we
do to pass in Oblivion; he will certainly when this opening Day comes, produce
such a Catalogue of the Sinners Works as they little think of; he will bring
his Bill of their Ways, as the Patriarchs brought Joseph's Coat to Jacob,
saying, Is not this the Coat of thy Son? so is not this, Sinners, the Coat of
your Christian Profession which you have here spotted with Oaths, there with
Drunkenness, in another Place with Uncleanness, and all over with variety of
Transgressions?

4. The Book of Human Testification, or Sinners mutual Accusations. Now many
Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, are leading one
another into Temptations: Then they shall accuse and witness against each
other, as our Savior says in another Case, Luke 12.52, 53. The Father shall be
divided against the Son, and the Son against the Father; the Mother against the
Daughter, and the Daughter against the Mother. So at this great Day, A Man's
Foes shall be those of his own Household, Matthew. 10.36. Parents shall rise
against their own Children, Children shall rise against their Parents; then
Masters shall witness against their Servants, and Servants against their
Masters. O the Cries, the Complaints that will be of Husbands, Wives, Children,
Servants of the same House against each other! A young Man going to execution,
desired to speak with his Mother in the Ear, but instead of whispering bit off
her Ear, complaining of her as the promoter of his Death, because she did not
in his Youth chastise him for his Faults, but by her fond Indulgence imboldened
him in his Wickedness. Thus at the opening Day Children will appear against
their Parents; Lord, these Parents were instrumental to bring me into the
World, but they were also my Souls Murderers, training me up in Ignorance,
teaching me by their Example to lie, swear, and steal, and suffering me to be
vile and profane. Parents will at the great Assizes appear against Children;
Lord, this Child was Stubborn, Rebellious, Untractable. Servants shall give
Testimony against Masters, Lord, we were so long in such a Family, but never
saw any thing of Religion in it; we sat down and rose up from our Tables like
Brutes, we never knew what it was to have the Doors shut in the Evening, nor
opened in the Morning with the Key of Prayer, and reading of the Scriptures.
Sic, sic in Domo propria habeo Accusatores, Testes, Judices, and Tortores.
Bern. "Thus, thus, says one, I have in my own House, Accusers, Witnesses,
Judges, and Tormentors! When you are tempted to sin by Relations and
Neighbors, say as the Man to Joab, when reproved for not killing Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.11, 12, 13. There is no Matter hid from the King, and thou thy self
would have set thy self against me. So the King, even the King of Kings, has
commanded that we abstain from Sin and from the appearance of Evil; and if I
should break his Command, it cannot be hid from his omniscient Eye; nay, you
who now tempt, will in the great Day accuse me.

5. The Book of the Creature. It Is said of the wicked Man; Job 20.27. That the
Heavens shall reveal his Iniquity, and the Earth shall rise up against him. All
the Creatures shall by their common Testimony disclose his Wickedness: Ver. 28.
The increase of his House shall depart. The Vulgar renders it, Apertum erit
germen Domus ipsius, the Branch of his House shall be opened. Upon which
Sanctius making these words explicatory of the foregoing Verse, thus glosses,
viz. The Heaven and the Earth shall reveal his Iniquities, by discovering
whence, how, and by what means his Branch has grown, his Increase has come;
by what Frauds, Oaths, and Oppression the Furniture of his House was compassed,
that this came by Lies, and that by wronging others. Thus tho he mistakes the
Text, he gives us a Gloss which is in it self solid. The Prophet tells us, Hab.
2.11. That the Stone shall cry out of the Wall, and the Beam out of the Timber
shall answer it. The very Materials of those stately Palaces, or whatever
Houses are built by Cheating, or possessed by Violence, as they call to Heaven
for Vengeance, being procured by Injustice; so they shall unitedly witness
against their Erectors or Owners; the Stones of such Walls will cry, Lord, we
were laid here by Violence; the Beams shall answer, We were laid here by Fraud.
They are not a few who now live in curious Houses, that will be dreadful
Witnesses against them at this opening Day. Says the Apostle James, Chap. 5.3.
Your Gold and Silver is cankered, and the Rust thereof shall be a Witness
against you, and shall eat your Flesh as it were Fire. This will be brought as
an Evidence of your Covetousness, and will beget in you such stinging
Reflections as shall gnaw upon you with Anguish and Torment. Ver. 4. And behold
the Hire of your Laborers which have reaped down your Fields, which is of you
kept back by Fraud, cries, and the Cries of them which have reaped, are entered
into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath. One observes that the same word in the
Hebrew, signifies both a Wedg of Gold, and a Tongue; and some say that Achan's
Wedg had the shape of a Tongue: Surely Gold, Wealth, Estates ill got, will have
many Tongues, and cry aloud at the great Day of opening the Books. Then the
corrupt Judge will hear of his Bribes and perverting Justice; then the unjust
Lawyers Estate will cry against him; then the Possessions of Oppressing
Landlords will declare that they were got by wracking poor Tenants; then 'twill
be the Language of the full Bags of idle Ministers, that they were filled by
starving immortal Souls; then the Treasures of Covetous Mammonists will
acknowledge themselves to be the Products of Usury, Oppression, etc.

6. The Book of the Talents wherewith Men are entrusted, shall be opened at
this opening Day, and these when opened will bring to light all the Days,
Means, Advantages, and Opportunities of Grace that Men have had; all the
Truths, and Duties that have been preached to, and pressed on them, what Pains
have been taken, and how much done that they might be saved. One observes that
God is very curious in Scripture to record the Time how long his faithful
Servants lived on Earth; and says he, among other Reasons this is not the
least, sc. to convince us that he intends to reckon with those who lived with
them, for every Year, yea, Day and Hour they had them amongst 'em; they shall
know they had a Prophet, a Husband, a Parent, a Master that was Godly, and that
they had them so long, and God will know of them what Use they made of them. [
Gurn. Christ. Arm. Part 2. Page 262.] Another observes, that the Year and
Month, and Day, when the Word of the Lord came to the Prophets, stands upon
record in Sacred Writ, (as Ezekiel. 1.1, 2.) to teach us that all our Betrustments
with all their Circumstances are now recorded, and will at this Day be made
manifest. Then will be declared the Year, the Month, the Day, when such a
Sermon was preached, such a Truth urged, when such a Minister was sent with the
Lord's Message among you. In this opening Day, Ministers will open their
Mouths, We preached so long to you; Sabbaths and Sermons will speak, We were
continued so long to you; Prayers will witness that they were put up for you so
often to the Throne of Grace; Truths, now imprisoned, shall then speak; yea,
the Dust shaken off from the Feet of those Ministers you despise and will not
hear, shall speak against you, Mat. 6.11.

Thirdly, The Books shall then be opened, whereby all things shall be examined,
tried, and judged. As in earthly Courts, when Matters of Fact are opened and
proved, then the Statutes are also produced, and Sentence is past on such
Matters according to the determination of the Law: So at the great Tribunal
when the Books of Record, the Books of Evidence and Proof are opened, then
shall also be opened the Law whereby Matters shall be finally adjudicated, and
this is the Holy Scripture: The Holy Bible being the Law-Book of the great
King, is now the Rule of our Lives, and shall be the Rule of Judgment at the
opening Day. Christ himself, who is the Judge, tells us, John 12.48. The Word
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last Day. This the Apostle
Paul witnesses, Romans 2.16. In the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of Men by
Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel. Who shall judge? God: What shall he judge?
The Secrets of Men; not only their outward Actions which are manifest to all,
but their most hidden Sins, and secret Duties, their inward Purposes, Designs,
and Aims: By whom? By Jesus Christ: By what Rule? According to my Gospel; the
Gospel committed to, and preached by me; Men shall be judged according to their
Works, their Works by this Word: The final Sentence passed at this Day, shall,
be but a more solemn and manifest Declaration of that Judgment which the Lord
has in his Written Law already passed upon Men; that which is now said shall
then be done. Now the word says, He that believes on him, shall have
everlasting Life, John 3.16. Then Believers shall be crowned with a Crown of
Life. Now the word says, That the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 6.9. That the Wicked shall be turned into Hell. Look what Sentence
this Law now passes on thee, the same will Christ pronounce in this Day; for
this is the Book that must be opened, and which he will proceed by in giving
Judgment. Thus you see what Books are to be opened.

II. The next thing to be considered is, what the opening of the Books implies.
and it does denote,

1. A manifestation of Men's Works, that they shall come to Light. While a Book
is shut we are ignorant what is in it, but when it is open every one may see and
know what is therein writ: So many of Men's Works, both Good and Bad, are like a
clasped or sealed Book, secret and unknown; but in this Day they shall be like
a Book open, legible to every one. 1 Cor. 4.5. Therefore judge nothing before
the Time come, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden
things of Darkness, and will manifest the Counsels of the Heart. When the Lord
comes, he will make great Discoveries, and bring to light things that are now
Secret. Some Men's Sins (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.24, 25.) are open before
hand, going before to Judgment; and some Men they follow after. Likewise also
the good Works of some are manifest before hand, and they that are otherwise
cannot be hid. Tho these Verses are taken to have another meaning, yet I may as
some, make this Gloss on them, i. e. Some Men's Sins are open, notorious, appear
to all now in this Life, they show their Sin as Sodom; and some Men's Sins they
are kept secret to the Day of Judgment, there is no noise heard, no notice taken
of them in the World, but these follow after, to be opened at this Day.
Likewise the good Works of some are evident, cannot be denied; and they that
are otherwise cannot be hid, i. e. those good things in the Saints that are not
manifest, but are either concealed by themselves, or mistaken and
misrepresented by, others, shall come to light; secret Duties shall come
abroad, wronged Innocence and Integrity shall be cleared. This is the first
thing this opening imports, sc. a discovery of Men's Doings, a manifestation of
their Works; this shall be done by the opening of the Books of Record.

2. A Testification of the Works manifested, that they shall not only come
abroad, but also be so fully evidenced, and clearly proved, that no Man shall
be able to deny any part thereof. Sometimes in Men's Courts, the Prisoner at the
Bar denies the Matter of Fact that he is charged with, pleads not Guilty, and
stands upon his own Justification; but when Witnesses come in one after
another, and depose plainly, positively, punctually, and directly against him,
bringing undeniable Evidence, then he is forced to confess. Thus now many are
ready to deny their Deeds of Darkness; ay, but so many Witnesses shall come in
at this Day, and with such Evidence as will force Confessions. O Sirs! the
Secrets of Sinners shall be so fully witnessed, attested, and proved, that they
shall confess: and the Saints that have been slandered, aspersed, defamed, and
wronged, shall have their Innocence so fully evidenced that the World shall see
it and be satisfied. This is a second thing this opening implies, viz. That all
Matters shall be found, and fully made out as they are in themselves, with
their several Circumstances, which will be done by the opening of the Books
whereby all things shall be discovered.

3. A Determination or Judgment to be passed on the Works of Men thus
manifested and made out, that there shall be a final determining, and
definitive Sentence passed on them. This is another thing; this opening is an
opening to pass Sentence, as Judges after full Trial open and read the Sentence
out of a Book; an opening to absolve or condemn, therefore it follows
immediately in the Words, the Dead were judged, that is, Sentence was passed on
them.

III. You have seen what Books shall be opened, and what the opening of them
implies; the next Inquiry may be this, About whom must they be opened? To this,
I say, they shall be opened about all Men Universally, the whole Offspring
descending from Adam by ordinary Generation, without Exception. This will
appear,

1. From the Universality of Scripture-Assertions in this present Case. The
Scripture speaking of this, brings in, (1.) All Men. Romans 14.10. We shall all
stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Ver. 11. For it is written, As I
live, says the Lord, every Knee shall bow to me, and every Tongue shall
confess to God. What does the Apostle hence infer? Ver. 12. So then every one
of us shall give account of himself to God. 2 Cor 5.10. (2.) All Nations. Mat.
25.32. Before him shall be gathered all Nations: not a few Persons, but whole
Nations; not a few Nations, but all Nations. (3.) All the World Acts 17.31. He
has appointed a Day at which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by the
Man whom he has ordained. Observe, here is a Day appointed, the End for which
it was appointed, sc. to judge; the Object of this Judgment, the World, the
whole World; whosoever is of the World shall come to this opening Day.

2. From the special Distribution the Scriptures make in this Case,
distributing the Parties that are to come to this opening; (1.) Into Quick and
Dead; therefore Christ is styled Judge of Quick and Dead, Acts 10.42. 2 Timothy
4.1. (2.) Into great and small, Rev. 20.12. the King and the Beggar, the Rich
and the Poor, the Old and the Young; they that have been so high that they have
judged others, and they that have been so low that their Judgment has been
taken away. (3.) Into Good and Bad, Eccles. 3.16, 17. Solomon there reports
what he saw practiced in the Place of Justice and Judgment, sc. he saw their
public Injustice, the Good oppressed, the Bad exalted: Upon which he
communicates his Thoughts, or that which was his Comfort against these unjust,
unequal dealings of Men; and it was this, that God would have a Day of judging
all Men, and all things over again. I said in my Heart, (I comforted my self in
this) God shall judge the Righteous and the Wicked: for there is a Time there,
(where, why, with God before his Tribunal) for every Purpose, and for every
Work, Ver. 17. Thus God shall judge the Righteous with a Judgment of Discussion
and Approbation; the Wicked with a Judgment of Discussion and Condemnation; the
Persons that must come to this opening are thus distinguished: Now all Men come
under one of these Ranks, either they are Great or Small, Good or Bad,
therefore all shall be judged.

IV. Now you have seen about whom; the next thing to be considered is, about
what they are to be opened; what things they are that the Books shall discover,
evidence, and determine when opened? These are the Actions of Men, the Works,
Words, and Thoughts of Men. Take for this but these two Scriptures.

The one is Eccles. 12.14. where the things to be brought to Judgment are
described, (1.) Generally, every Work; none shall escape, be pretermitted, or
passed by, each one shall come in its Place; for there is a Time for every
Work. (2.) Particularly, in regard, (1.) Of their manner, every open Work shall
come in, none of these shall escape, no, not an idle Word, Mat. 12.36. Every
secret Work; the Secrets of Men shall God then judge by Jesus Christ, Romans 2.16.
(2.) Of their Matter; every good Work shall come in, the Feeding of Christ in
his Hungry, the Clothing of him in his Naked, the Harboring him in his
Desolate, the Visiting him in his Sick Members: and every Evil Work, not an
ungodly Word nor hard Speech shall pass, Jude 14, 15.

The other is 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his Body according to
that he has done, whether it be Good or Bad. The things to be brought in, are
the things done in the Body, which is to be understood not exclusively as if
external Actions only should appear, but extensively as including every thing
we do while in the Flesh, whether internal, even the naked Thoughts, or
external, Words and Actions. Omnia omnino opera quae fiunt dum vivimus in
corpore, sive interius nudis cogitationibus, sive exterius verbis and factis
peragantur.

Tho I desire as much as I may to decline Matters of Controversy, yet here
comes in a Query that I cannot well pass over in Silence; it is this, viz.
Whether the Sins of the Saints shall be laid open and manifested at this Day?
or whether the Books when opened shall open the Sins of the People of God, as
well as the Sins of the Wicked? It is a Question agitated among the Learned;
some maintain the Affirmative, and say, they shall be made known: others are
for the Negative, and say, they shall not be manifested. I Will only premise
these three or four things, and with Submission give my Thoughts about it in
short. The Sins of the Godly shall not be opened,

1. To their Condemnation; our Savior himself says, Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily
I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me,
has everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation. There is (says the
Apostle) no Condemnation to those who are in Christ, who walk not after the
Flesh but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. Nor yet,

2. To their Shame and Reproach; they shall not be produced to their Infamy or
Disgrace. Sinners rise to everlasting shame and contempt, but Saints to Glory,
Dan. 12.2. They may lift up their Face, and have boldness in the Day of
Judgment, 1 John 4.17. Nor,

3. To the abatement of their Joy in that Day. The appearance of their Sins in
that Day of the Lord shall no more abate their Joy, than the appearing of the
dead Carcases of the Egyptians on the Seashore did the Joy of the delivered
Israelites. Neither,

4. To the damping or diminishing of their Love to the Lord. If the Woman to
whom many Sins were forgiven loved much, Luke 7.47. then the Saints shall not
love God less, when they see how much has been forgiven them.

Now these things being thus premised, I say, I conceive it is probable that
the Sins of the Saints shall be opened at this opening. I Will give you my
Grounds for it, and leave it to that Day that will fully open this and other
things yet in the dark.

(1.) Because the Expressions concerning the Objects of this opening are
Universal. The personal Objects are thus spoken of, Romans 14.10. We shall all
stand before the Judgment Seat of God. The real Objects are expressed in the
same Terms of Universality, every thing, whether open or secret; every Work,
whether good or evil, Eccles. 12.14. every Man, and every thing of every Man is
to come to this opening Day, 2 Cor. 5.10.

(2.) Because there is such a Mixture of the Sins of many wicked and godly Men,
that the Sins of the Wicked cannot be disclosed with their several
Circumstances, and the Sins of the Godly remain closed, but if the one come
fully out, the other must. Those who are for the Negative, think the Strength
of the former Argument is fully discharged by this Distinction, that the Terms
and Notes of Universality in the Places mentioned are not to be taken
collectively, as asserting that the Sins of the Godly as well as Ungodly shall
be manifested, but distributively, thus, that the good Works only of the Good,
and the evil Works of the Wicked, shall be manifest. But this Key will not (for
ought I see) sit all the Wards of that Lock. Yet they confess, that all the
Works of wicked Men shall be proclaimed: Now many Sins of wicked and godly Men
lie so mingled together, and are so concatenated several ways, that it is not
easy to conceive how the Sins of the Wicked can be laid open, and the other not
come out too. It Is sure a gross Abuse of Scripture, and a great Sin in wicked
Men to justify and harden themselves (as many have done) in Drunkenness, by the
Example of Noah; in their customary Oaths, by the Example of Joseph; in
Uncleanness, by the Example of David: but how can these Sins come out, and the
Sin of Noah, Joseph, and David, not be made known? It was a Sin in the
High Priest to grant Letters of Persecution to Saul, Acts 9.1, 2. yet how can
these Letters be produced but it will appear that Saul was once a Persecutor? I
will suppose thee who art now a Convert to have been, when unregenerate, guilty
of Folly and Lewdness with such a Man or Woman, and the Person with whom thou
committedst it to have died in an impenitent State; how can that Party's Folly
be exposed, and thine with whom it was committed lie hid?

(3.) Because the blotting out of Sin is referred to this opening Day: Acts
3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out
when the Times of refreshing come from the Presence of the Lord. Here you have,
1. A Duty proposed and pressed, Repent. 2. A Motive annexed, taken from the
profitable Consequent, that your Sins may be blotted out. 3. The Time when this
Benefit is to be received and enjoyed, When the Times of refreshing come from
the Presence of the Lord; at this opening Day. The Scriptures speak of a
blotting out of Sins at that Day, not but that the Saints enjoy a real blotting
out of Sin before that Day; not that their Pardon of any Sin is not plenary,
but imperfect, having part of its Guilt remaining then to be done away: but the
Meaning is, that then they shall solemnly, openly and publicly before Men and
Angels be cleared from every Charge of all accusing Adversaries, and their
Absolution proclaimed before the World.

Now this Blotting out implies some Appearance of the Sins from which they
shall then be solemnly acquitted. This may be the Meaning of that, Mat. 12.32.
It shall not be forgiven neither in this World, nor in the World to come; i. e.
An Act of Pardon shall neither now be really passed, nor then solemnly
proclaimed, and by his declaratory Sentence ratified. Sins that have been
blotted out intentionally from Eternity in the Decree of God, and virtually
from the Passion and Resurrection of Christ by his Satisfaction, and formally
or actually in themselves from their Union to Christ, shall in this opening Day
be publicly and solemnly blotted out to all Eternity.

(4.) Because this seems to make much for the Illustration and Exaltation of
the Grace and Glory of Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. to manifest the glorious Effects
of his Passion and Satisfaction: When it appears what Sins, how many, and how
various have been laid at their Door, the Love, Passion and Merits of Christ
will be more elevated, Glory and Honor will redound on Christ; then it shall
appear what Strength was in his Love, what Value in his Blood. I might yet
further urge the opening of the Books; the impartial Manifestation of the Sins
of Saints as well as others in the Holy Scriptures; the dangerous Tendency of
the contrary Tenent; the Aggravation it will be to the Horror and Sting of the
Reprobate, when they see others (that have sinned alike in some things)
admitted to Glory, and themselves for their Unbelief and Impenitence shut out.
But the forementioned are the Arguments that sway most with me in this case.
Now what remains but that we apply this Truth thus explained in those Uses that
it gives us, which are of Information, Reproof, Exhortation?


First; Of Information: Shall the Books be opened? Then we may hence learn;

1. That all our Actions are of a lasting Nature. These die not in the Birth,
but are abiding and for many Days to come. There are many things in this Life
which as to the acting of them are transient and soon over, yet are durable in
regard of their Issue. A Lease is writ over in two or three Hours, yet the
Concernment of it may be for many Years, yea for some Lives. So it is with our
Thoughts, Words and Actions, they do not die as soon as they are past, but are
as Seeds which are sown in Time, and come up in Eternity: Non transeunt opera
sicut transire videntur, sed velut aeternitatis semina jaciuntur. There are
Books of Remembrance, all is put on Record that we do, and is in a sort
eternal. Says one, every Thought we think is eternal, every Word we speak is
eternal, every Work is eternal, none of these but shall live to this opening
Day. O remember this Sirs! your Actions pass not away, all that you do to Day,
all that you shall do to Morrow, will remain till the Day of Judgment. All that
in any Place, on any Account, in any Company, proceeds from you, will tarry
till this Day come.

2. That all our Actions must come to Light: They are not only lasting, but
shall be opened. All those things that have been covered in Darkness, that Men
have acted under a Cloak, that no Eye but that which is all-seeing ever saw,
shall come abroad. I remember a Story of Ottochus King of Bohemia, who refused
to do Homage to the Emperor, till at last chastis'd with War, he was content to
do it privately in a Tent, which Tent was so contrived by the Emperor's
Servants, that by drawing one Cord it was all taken away, and so the King was
presented on his Knees doing Homage to him in the view of three Armies then
present. That which he thought to have kept covered, was manifested before a
great Number of Persons. Thus will God at this Day uncase and lay open Men's
Doings. There are many who care not what they do, so they can but do it
secretly. O but this Cover shall be taken from over them, and they represented
as doing such and such things before Armies, not only of Men, but Angels. There
is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be
known and come abroad, Mat. 10.26. Luke 8.17. Whatsoever ye have spoken in
Darkness, shall be heard in the Light; and that which ye have spoken in the Ear
in Closets, shall be proclaimed upon the House-tops, Luke 12.3. Your most
secret Talk and Communion one with another shall be made public. All the
Hypocrisy of Men shall be brought out; all their Guile and Fraud; all their
Force and Violence they have used in their Dealings shall appear; all their
By-ends they have had in any Action; all their vile and abominable Practices,
of which I may say as the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.12. it is a Shame to mention them;
even these that it is a Shame for Christians to speak of, shall be seen to their
eternal Shame that have done them. As the Lord by Nathan said to David, 2 Samuel
12.12. Thou did it secretly; but I will do this thing before all Israel, and
before the Sun: So may I say, You do this or that secretly, but the Lord will
make it openly known.

3. That we must meet all our Works again. All that ever we do in the Body now,
we shall meet in the Books then. The things that now slip away from us, and we
see them no more, will come again into our Sight when the Books are opened.
Historians tell us of some Rivers which after they have run some space, fall
under Ground and cannot be seen, but after many Miles running in the Bowels of
the Earth, they break up again into a great Stream. Thus the River Ana in Spain
burieth it self, and runs under Ground fifteen Miles, and then comes up
again, whereupon the Spaniards brag they have a Bridge on which ten thousand
Cattle feed daily. So there are many things we do which are no sooner done,
than we forget them, they pass out of our Sight as Waters buried under the
Earth. But every one of these after they have been a long time hid will come up
again. Sirs, all that we do in this will meet us in the World to come. Our
Sabbaths, our Duties, our Works will meet us, yea our Thoughts and Words will
meet us. Art thou a God-fearing Man or Woman? all thy Goodness shall meet thee;
not a Prayer, a Tear, a Sigh shall be missing, nor any thing that thou have
done or suffered for God. Art thou a Person working Iniquity? Thy Works first
and last, thy old and new-done Deeds will meet thee. Perhaps now thy Deeds of
Darkness lie all asleep, and make no Noise in thy Conscience. O, but at this
day of opening, these sleepy Lions will awake and roar upon thee. Thy Oaths,
thy Lies, thy Drunkenness, thy Worldliness, all thy Sins will then stare thee
in the Face as so many Ghosts.

4. That we have need to be circumspect and careful what we do at all times,
and how we carry in our Generation, for there are many Notaries about us
continually. God (as I may say) is ever writing, Conscience is ever writing,
Devils and Creatures are ever writing. Nothing that we do escapes their Books,
they take all at length to the last and least Circumstance of every Action and
Work: what manner of Persons then ought we to be? Chronologists tell us of some
Kings, that tho otherwise they would have taken more Liberty, yet they have
been circumspect in their Actings, because they knew what they did would be
registered and transmitted to Posterity. Did this so influence them? What
Circumspection should it beget in us, when we seriously consider that all we do
will be registered by many Hands, and certainly transmitted to Posterity, and
not only so, but to this great opening Day, where it shall be opened to all
Generations that have gone before, or shall come after us to the end of the
World? O think of it! It Is said of Apelles the famous Painter, that he carried
on his Work very leisurely: and being asked why he was so deliberate and
curious, his Answer was, Diu pingo, quoniam aeternitati pingo; I am long in
painting, because what I paint I paint for Eternity, q. d. I am thus exact
because not only the present, but many Ages to come are to look on and judge my
Work. Thus, Sirs, many Eyes, and many Ages to come are to look on and judge our
daily Works and Ways, and all the Passages of our Lives. O therefore let this
teach us to live for an opening Day; to be careful nothing now be writ but what
we would have read then by the whole World of Angels and Men!

5. That this opening Day will be a great Day. 'Twill be a great thing to see
all Mankind meeting together; all that ever have been, are, or shall be over
the Face of the whole Earth, standing in one Company before the supreme Judge.
O, but will it not be much more to see all the Doings of all Men laid open! the
Secrets that have been hid from Ages, and from Generations, now made manifest!
all the things that have been done in Darkness, and covered with as much
Darkness as that wherein they were committed! O what, what a Day will this be?
and what will many appear to be when the Books are opened, and all the Passages
of their Lives manifested! O what Heaps (as I may say) will there be here of
Oaths, there of Lies, there of idle Words, there of Frauds, Sabbaths profaned,
Sermons slighted, and of numberless Sins of all sorts that Sinners have laid at
their own Doors, and died impenitent in! Yea, what will many be found when the
Books are opened, who have said well, seemed well, done many things, and after
all gone out of this World with the Applause of Men? Surely many who can now
say much, speak of God, and breathe out Good, will then be found others than at
present they are taken to be. Secret Hypocrisy, secret Worldliness, secret
Estrangedness from the Truth and Power of Godliness, will then be found where
now there is little Suspicion of them. O that you would think of this, and see
that you be indeed Nathaniels. There is in the Life of Bruno (Author of the
Carthusian Friars) a Relation of a great Doctor (and his Fellow-Professor) a
Man highly reputed in those times both for Piety and Learning, who being dead,
when they brought him to the Church to be buried, as they were about the
Funeral-Rites, the dead Corpse suddenly sat up upon the Bier, and cried out,
Justo Dei judicio accusatus sum, I am accused by the righteous Judgment of God,
at which the People ran away amazed. The next Day they came again to inter the
Corpse, and as they were about the Service, it rose again and cried with a
lamentable Voice, Justo Dei judicio judicatus sum, I am judged by the righteous
Judgment of God. The third Day almost all the City came together; and again it
rose up and with a doleful Noise cried, Justo Dei judicio condemnatus sum, I am
condemned by the righteous Judgment of God. That this was true I shall not
assert; but certainly when the opening Day comes, many will be found in this
case, many that have died in great Repute for Piety and Holiness, will then
stand accused, judged and condemned. Many a Face of Wickedness will then be
unmasked that has been covered with a Vail of Dissimulation; many an unsound
Heart will come out that has been cloaked under specious Performances; many a
glorious Professor will then be found a gilded Sepulcher. Sirs, look to, and
see that you be altogether Christians, for these Books will open all, and open
that which will exclude many from the Kingdom of Heaven who have been great
Preachers, great Professors, that have known much, done much, gone far, and
been well thought of by all round about them.

6. That it will then be in vain for Men to seek a Cover for their Sins. Our
first Parents had no sooner sinned but they were for hiding it, and this is
natural to us their Poserity; Job 24.15. The Eye of the Adulterer waits for
the Twilight, saying, No Eye shall see me. When David that good Man had fallen
into the foul Sin of Uncleanness, you cannot, if you read the History, (2 Samuel
11.) be ignorant what Means he used to hide it. This is very usual, therefore
says Job, chapter 31.33. If I covered my Transgression as Adam, i. e. say some, as
our first Father did, seeking to cloak his Transgression: or as Adam, i. e. say
others, as Man, as Man uses to do, or after the manner of Men. But alas, this
is a most vain Practice, for Sin cannot be covered from the Eye of God now; For
there is no Darkness, neither Shadow of Death, where the Workers of Iniquity
may hide themselves, Job 34.22. for he sets their Iniquities before him,
their secret Sins in the Light of his Countenance, Psalm. 90.8. Nor shall they
at last be hid from Men and Angels. This will be one special Work and End of
this Opening to bring all Secrets to Light, to manifest the Counsels of the
Heart. Of all Sins these shall not be covered, it is a Day appointed for the
opening of these, therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before
the Time, until the Lord come, who will bring to light the hidden things of
Darkness. Why will God then judge them? The Meaning is not, that God exempts
them from the Punishment of earthly Magistrates, reserving them wholly to his
own Judgment, but it is because such Sins are commonly so secretly committed,
that the Magistrate cannot, or so lightly looked on, that he will not punish
them; therefore God will at that day judge both those things which have now been
wrong judged, and those which have not been judged at all. It Is vain then to
expect your Sins shall be covered, let not Hopes of Secrecy embolden you to
meddle with Iniquity. This opening will open Secrets, and these will bring most
Shame on you, and do most harm to you. There have been many strange Discoveries
of secret Wickedness in the World. It Is storied of one Bessus, that having
killed his Father, he was so pursued with a guilty Conscience, that he thought
the Swallows as they flew about in their chattering said, Bessus has killed
his Father; whereupon he confessed the Fact.

7. That Shame shall come upon Sinners at this day, Dan. 12.2. What the Lord
speaks of Niniveh, that will he do to all the Sons and Daughters of Wickedness
at this day; Nahum 3.5, 6. He will discover their Skirts upon their Face, and
will show the Nations their Nakedness, and the Kingdoms their Shame: he will
cast abominable Filth upon them, and make them vile, and will set them as a
gazing Stock. O think of this Opening, and what Shame it will lay on you who go
on in your Iniquities! Alas, were many of our Doings discovered now to a small
Assembly of People, how could we face them? surely it would make many to look
with Faces like Death. How will it be then in this great Day, when all must be
brought forth not in a Corner before a handful, but in an open Place before a
World!

8. The Terror and Astonishment that shall at this day fall upon Sinners. As
it is said of the Morning, that it is to secret Sinners even as the Shadow of
Death, Job 24.17. So I may say, this Opening will be to them as the Terrors of
the Shadow of Death. They shall not only, as the Thief, be ashamed when he is
found, but they shall be made a very Magormissabib. As the King of Babylon,
when he saw the Handwriting on the Wall, Dan. 5.5, 6. So they, when they shall
see the Books opened, and what they have writtten in them, their Countenances
will be changed, and their Thoughts troubled. O Sirs, it cannot now be
conceived what Horror will then fall on ungodly Men. Have you ever seen poor
Malefactors going with Death in their Faces to the Bar where they knew that
Capital Crimes would be charged on, and undeniably proved against them? The
Sight of these poor pale trembling dispirited Creatures was nothing to that
which shall be seen at this opening of the Books. When poor Sinners are come to
this, to have all laid open, and can neither deny any thing they have done, nor
excuse it, nor appeal to a higher Bar, what a pitiful taking will they be in? O
that this might be thought on now in time e're it be too late!

9. That we had need to take care how we close up our Days and die; for as we
leave the Books at Death, just so we shall find them at this great Day of
Judgment, when they must be opened. In quocunque invenerit suus novissimus
dies, in hoc eum comprehendit mundi novissimus dies, etc. Aug. In what state
our last Day (says he) finds us, in that will the last day of the World find
us, for such as we die in that Day, such we shall be judged in this.
Qualisquisque hinc egreditur, talis in judicio praesentatur, Greog. Such as we
go hence (says he) such we shall be presented before God's Tribunal: He that
goes hence in his Sins shall be found in them. Learn hence therefore to take
heed how you venture on Death, what you leave written in the Books at your
leaving the World. You would not die in Debt, leave Bills and Bonds behind you
that may trouble your Posterity when you are gone: beware of dying Impenitent,
of leaving Sin on the Score; for this will, if so left, trouble you another
Day, and undo you for ever.

10. That it is a blessed Thing to be a pardoned Sinner, to have Sin pardoned.
O this is a choice favor. David marks the Man thus privileged, for the happy
Man; he does not ascribe Blessedness to the Rich, to the Honorable, and Mighty
of this World: It Is not he that has Health, Riches, Honor, and Friends, that
is blessed because he has them; but blessed is the Man whose Transgression is
forgiven, whose Sin is covered, Psalm. 32.1. That this is such a blessed Thing,
such a signal Mercy you may see from this Truth now under Consideration. The
Books must be opened: will it not then be a sweet, a blessed Thing at this
opening to find our Sins blotted out, to see a red Line of Christ's Blood drawn
over them from end to end, so as we may still see the Sum we were indebted in,
but see it cancel d never to be expected? Arrow. Chain. p. 211. Thus it shall
be with true Penitents at this Time; when others shall find all to be answered
for, they shall see their Sins as the poor Man sees his Debts in the Creditors
Book, when either forgiven or paid, viz. crossed out, and never to be charged
on him again; thus they shall see all blotted out. And will not this be a
blessed Privilege? Verily it will. I remember Austin in his Confessions
mentions it as a sweet Mercy that he could look the Sins of his unconverted
State in the Face and not be afraid. Says he, Quid retribuam Domi^^ quod
recolit haec memoria mea, and anima mea non metuit inde? Aug. Conf. l. 2. c. 7.
What shall I render unto the Lord, that my Memory can recollect these, and not
be afraid? Truly, Sirs, it is not now fully known, nor shall before the opening
Day what a great Happiness it will then be to be able to look on our Sins and
not tremble, to look on them and not be at our wits end because of them, as
ungodly Sinners will then be, to whom it will be a greater Terror to meet their
Sins, than now it is to meet so many roaring Lions.

Second Use is of Reproof to those,

1. Who never think of this Day, nor how it shall then be with them. This is
the Case of many secure and careless ones, who drive on in a state and way of
Sin from Day to Day, and take no Thought about this Opening that is coming upon
them. It was once the complaint of a good Man, Alas, what do I mean? I eat, I
drink, I play, I sleep, as if I had gone behind Death, and passed over the Day
of Judgment. It may more sadly be complained of many, that they carry as if
there were no such Day to come, as if there never should be any opening again
of the things done in the Body; they take not this into their Thoughts. Many
readily embrace Solomon's ironical Concession, ( Eccles. 11.9.) but they as
willingly forget his serious Admonition, But know thou that for all these
things God will bring thee into Judgment, this they have no mind to remember.
Art thou of this sort of Persons? do thou never think of this Day? is it a
Matter that has no room in thy present Thoughts? There is such a Day a coming,
the Books shall be opened wherein all that you are doing Day after Day is
recorded, shall be discovered, and tried, and there shall be a Manifestation,
Testification, and Determination of all. You see this, and will you forget it?
what Madness is it, and how sad is it that you should not consider this! Austin
compares such careless Persons to them who awake out of a Lethargy, and fall
into a Phrensy. And truly if you go on at this rate, this Day will overtake you
unawares, and then you are sure to be awaked, awaked out of this Lethargy of
Security, and thence suddenly to pass into a Phrensy of everlasting Horror and
Astonishment. As it was in the Days of Noah, they were secure, and knew not
till the Flood came: Noah had preached it to them, prepared the Ark before
them, yet they took no notice of it; knowing they would not know till
Destruction came suddenly on them: So shall it be in the Day of the Son of Man,
Mat. 24.38, 39. This Opening will come on Sinners when they think not on it;
and how sad will it be to see all this on a sudden, when there will be no way
to escape, nor Time to prepare? O think on this, and let it at last put you on
thinking that there is an opening Day to come!

2. To them who from Day to Day live in Sin and Ungodliness. They are not a few
who are workers of Iniquity, that drive a Trade of Sin; how many may we meet
with in every Place, and among all Ranks of Persons that are plodding on in a
Course of Vice? Open Profaneness is become very common in these Days. O the
Profaneness, the Profaneness, the prevailing Profaneness of our Towns and
Congregations! who can look out with an Eye but half open, and not see Iniquity
abounding? which way can you turn and not behold those Persons who drink in Sin
like Water, Job 15.16. who do Evil with both Hands, Mich. 7.3. and weary
themselves to commit Iniquity? Jer. 9.5. Debauchery is become a piece of
Gallantry, and Intemperance a part of Religion, and open Looseness an ordinary
Practice with very many. Thus there are many every Day filling the Books with
Pride, Oaths, Lies, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Oppression, Profaning of the
Lord's Day, and many strange Abominations. But this Truth brings sad News to
all these if they would open their Ear to hear it; it tells them that there is
an opening Day coming, wherein all these things must be opened again, and
accounted for. Consider it, art thou an intemperate Person, living in Excess,
and following strong Drink? Or a customary Swearer, filling thy Mouth with
Cursing, or Bitterness? Art thou a filthy Adulterer or Fornicator, commiting
Folly, and sinning against thy own Body? Art thou a griping Oppressor, who
inrichest thy self by making a Gain of the Necessity or Simplicity of others,
and bringing the Spoil of the Poor into thy House? Art thou a fraudulent
Person, reaching at all thou can come by, be it by Right or Wrong, never
standing to make use of Oaths and Lies, sinful Subtilties, and secret Tricks in
thy Trade, or sleights in thy Dealings, so that thou may but hook in
something thereby to thy self? Or art thou a Man or Woman living in the
Practice of any other manifest and open, or secret and hidden Sin and
Ungodliness? this Truth comes with astonishing Tidings to thee. Consider it you
that are of this sort of Persons, either you are Atheists, or Mad, wholly
beside your selves: Are you not Atheists? do you indeed believe this, that
there will be an opening of the Books, and that such an opening as will lay all
open? Then surely you are distracted; for how can it otherwise be? How is it
possible that Men believing such a Day as this (if not beside themselves)
should live so profanely, since thereby they prepare themselves to be then
unavoidably and eternally destroyed? Can this be imagined to be the Work of any
but distracted Persons? certainly it cannot. How wise soever you may be in your
own Eyes, or in the Eyes of others like your selves, yet these are the Ways of
Men void of Understanding. Therefore knowing the Terrors of the Lord, how
tremendous this Judgment will be, and what a terrible Time it will be with the
Ungodly; I would earnestly beseech and beg of you to take these things into
your serious Thoughts, that you may think of repenting and turning to God. To
excite you to this, consider,

1. God has revealed his Wrath from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men in his Threatenings, backed with many sad Examples in all
Cases, which are exposed to your view, and left for your Warning. You are
plainly told, that God will by no means clear the Guilty, Exodus 34.7. That the
foolish (i. e. wicked Persons) shall not stand in his sight, Psalm. 5.5. That
destruction is to the Wicked, Job 31.3. That the Wicked shall be turned into
Hell, Psalm. 9.17. That the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6.9. The Angels that kept not their first state, are reserved in
everlasting Chains under Darkness, to the Judgment of the great Day. The old
World did for Sin suffer a Deluge; for this Sodom and Gomorrah were reduced to
Ashes; Israel were overthrown in the Wilderness, and many such sad Instances
there are set forth to those who after should live ungodly, and written for our
Admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come. Sirs, there is no way of
Iniquity but you may find a word of Woe and Wrath revealed from Heaven against
it; you cannot open your Bibles now but you are ready (if you had Eyes to see,
and Ears to hear) to lighten and thunder Terror in your very Faces.

2. That all your Ungodliness and Unrighteousness against which God has
revealed his Wrath from Heaven, is this Day book'd up, and on Record. Have you
now been Drunkards, Fornicators, Oppressors, Worldlings for many Days? The Sins
you have committed as such are in the Books: as you have kept sinning, God and
Conscience have kept writing, not one of all your evil Deeds, tho never so
little or secret, has escaped; but all are writ, and so writ that no Time can
ever wear or wash them out.

3. That you are bound over to an opening Day, and must certainly and
unavoidably come to it. There is a Day appointed in the which God will judge the
World, Acts 1^ 30, 31. At this Day you must appear, there will be no escaping,
2 Cor. 5.10. Kings and Potentates of the Earth, who can now best shift off
Matters, shall then weary themselves with vain Cries to the Rocks for shelter
from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the
Lamb, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. All must appear at this great Audit, and grand Assizes.

4. That you must meet there all your Doings in the Books, and find them fairly
written in this opening Day. And, O Sirs, what a fearful Meeting? what a
lamentable Sight will this be, when all your Abominations of many Days, Weeks,
Months and Years, shall appear all together at once to you? This will be an
appalling sight. It Is said, Genesis 44.12, 13. that when Joseph's Cup was found in
Benjamin's Sack, the Patriarchs rent their Clothes, they were astonished,
amazed, and struck with Confusion. If this did put them into such a Posture, O
what rending of Hearts will there be at this Day among Sinners, when their
Sacks, the Bags where their Transgressions are sealed up, and their Iniquities
sewed, are opened! O Sirs, it will be another thing to meet your Sins than now
it is, they will then appear to you as so many Ghosts. You converse with living
Men without fear, it never once troubles you to meet them in the Way, or in the
Market, or to sit with them in the House. But if a Company of Dead Men should
come out of their Graves, meet you in the Way and pursue you, would not this
affright and put you to a great Consternation? Why the Sins that you now commit
in the Way and Market, at your Bed and Board, will then meet you as so many
dead Men, and be terrible to purpose. O remember this, Sin, Sin will be another
thing when you meet it again in the Books, than now it is in your Eyes: There
will be more difference with respect to it 'tween now and then, than there is
'tween meeting a living Man you are well acquainted and intimate with, and
meeting a Spirit in the likeness of a dead Man. Alas, Soul, all the sweetness
that thou can have in thy Sin, if thou might live in it a thousand Years,
is not able to recompense thee for the Horror that this sight will put thy Soul
into; nay, if thou did but see one Sin now, as thou shall then see all, thou
would not choose to continue in Sin for the gaining of ten thousand Worlds.

5. That you must have all that is in these Books, all your Deeds of Darkness,
and Works of Iniquity laid fully open before God, Angels, and Men: as you
cannot hide your selves, so you cannot hide any of your Sins. I would have you
consider, this Day there will be no hiding of Wickedness. No question but as
Men will be for crying to the Mountains and Rocks to hide themselves, so they
will be seeking where to hide their Sins that they may not come to light. A
cruel Cain will then be for hiding his Brother's Blood; a Covetous Achan for
hiding his Golden Wedg; an Oppressing Ahab for hiding his Naboth's Vineyard; a
Drunken Nabal for hiding his Vomit; the filthy Fornicator for hiding his
Uncleanness. O where, where, will one cry, may I hide my Gain of Oppression?
Where, will another say, may I now hide my Tricks and Sleights that I raised my
Estate by? Where, will a third cry, may I now hide my Lies and Oaths? O where
may I hide my profaned Sabbaths, misspent time of Grace, abused Seasons of
Salvation! Where may I hide this Sermon, and that Ordinance that are ready to
rise up and condemn me? Where may I, who have lived in a Time of great
Gospel Light, hide my Ignorance? O I would give all that I have for some where
to hide these things so as they may never come to light. But all this will be
in vain, there will be no Place to hide either your selves or Sin in.

6. That you must come to an Account and Reckoning for all. As all must out, so
all must be accounted for, to the very last and least idle Word, Matthew. 12.36.
You must be accountable for all the Evil you have committed, of all the Good
you have omitted, of all the Talents you have been betrusted with, as Time,
Health, Wealth, Gospel, Sabbaths, Sermons, and Ordinances; all must be
accounted for.

7. That as you must come to Account, so you can in no wise answer for what you
have done. Alas, Sirs, your Doings, your Lies, your Oaths, your Drunkenness,
will be unanswerable Matters; all your witty Distinctions, Shifts and Excuses
will be of no Use when God shall say, Why have you done so and so? why were you
drunk at such a time, in such a Place? why did you defraud one another? why did
you profane my Day? I say, you will then be silent. The Man who had not on the
Wedding Garment was speechless, Matthew. 22.12. This shows how little you can
answer for Sin, how shiftless and speechless Guilt will make you. O think on
this, and let the Consideration of the Unanswerableness of your Doings put you
to break from your sinful Ways! And that the rather, because as you cannot
answer for them your selves, so,

8. There will be none to answer for you. Job 5.1. To which of the Saints will thou turn? Alas, it will be in vain to turn to any of them. None of them will
answer in thy Behalf, nor can they if they would. Only Christ Jesus can answer
for Souls in this case; but if thou come to this Opening in thy Sins, he will
not then answer for thee: Acts 5.31. God has now indeed exalted him with his
right Hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give Repentance unto Israel,
and Forgiveness of Sins. But when this opening Day comes, it will be the great
Day of his Wrath, and who shall be able to stand? Rev. 6.17. This will be a Day
wherein he will not come to plead for them that are found in their Sins, but to
render Vengeance to them.

9. You are sure to be cast and fall in the Judgment. This will be the Issue,
you will not be able to answer for your selves, Christ will not answer for you,
God will abate you nothing, therefore surely you cannot stand, Psalm. 1.5. There
are but two ways of Standing in the Judgment; either First, by Christ's
Righteousness apprehended by Faith, and they who have this shall stand; For he
that believes on him is not condemned, John 3.18. He (says Christ) that
hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and
shall not come into Condemnation, John 5.24. Or, Secondly, by our own
Righteousness, or the Works of the Law, an absolute and every way perfect
Conformity to the Law; if a Man had this he might stand thereby. But now, Sirs,
the Ungodly can stand neither of these two ways: Not by Christ's Righteousness,
for they are Christless Creatures: Not by their own Righteousness, for they are
Transgressors of that Law that curses for the least Breach thereof, Gal. 3.10.
This way of standing is, and ever has been impossible for all Mankind since
the Fall. Therefore (says the Apostle, Romans 3.20.) by the Deeds of the Law
there shall be no Flesh justified in his Sight. Therefore; wherefore? why, ver.
19. That every Mouth may be stopped, and all the World become guilty before
God. This way the most eminent of Saints cannot stand; Psalm. 130.3. If thou,
Lord, should mark Iniquities; O Lord, who shall stand? David himself says,
Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant: for in thy Sight shall
no Man living be justified. Thus Sinners, you are sure to fall in the Judgment,
you have not Christ's Righteousness, and Man is not justified by the Works of
the Law, Gal. 2.16. And,

10. If once you fall in Judgment, you must fall into Hell, where you must lie
till you have paid the uttermost Farthing, Mat. 5.26. And when will that be?
Why, never, the Punishment there will be everlasting, chapter 25.46. Your Damnation
everlasting Damnation, because you can never make Satisfaction. Well, Sirs,
these are the things I would entreat you to take into your Thoughts, they are
certain Truths: and will you yet continue in your sinful States and ungodly
Ways? Will you, tho you know that the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men? Will you, tho your
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness be on Record? Will you, tho you be bound over
to this opening Day, and must unavoidably come to it? Tho you must there meet
all your Actings fairly writ in the Books? Tho all your Deeds of Darkness and
wicked Works shall be fully displaid before God, Angels, and Men? Will you, tho
you must come to a Reckoning for all; tho you will not be able to answer for your
selves, neither will there be any to answer for you? Will you, tho you are sure
to fall in Judgment, and to be cast into Hell? Will you, I say, notwithstanding
all this, persevere in Sin? Truly if this be your Resolution, it is a sad
Resolution. You are resolved to damn your selves to all Eternity. But, O! if
you knew but what Damnation is, if you had but once seen what is doing in
another World, or but felt that one Hour which the Damned are groaning under,
and have to groan under to Eternity, you would be of another Mind.

3d Use is of Exhortation:

First, General, to all:

Secondly, Particular, 1. To Sinners. 2. To Saints.


First, General, to all. Shall the Books be opened? Then,

1. Remember this Opening, and carry it on your Thoughts every day. This is the
first Word I would leave with you. Think, O think much of this Day, this Day
that never had the like before, nor ever shall again have after it! You have
probably heard of that Saying, Whether I eat or drink, whether I wake or sleep,
methinks I hear that Voice sounding in mine Ears, Arise ye Dead, and come to
Judgment; (Jerome.) Why so, Sirs, wherever you are, whatever you do, let this
Opening be in your Eye, and upon your Thoughts? Think on this when you go to
Prayer: This Prayer, my Preparation for it, my Frame, Carriage, and Ends in it,
must all be opened another day. Think on this when you go to hear, this Sermon,
every Truth and Duty laid before me herein will meet me again at the opening of
the Books. Think on this when you have to do with others, to buy or sell, or
transact any Affairs about this Life with them. These Actions I now do, and all
the Circumstances thereof will be found in the Books at the last Day. Think on
this when Temptations come on you, and are in their Power, if now I yield, I
give place to the Devil, and lay Sin at my door, and it will abide in the Books
till they open, and all come out. And so in all other Cases carry this along
with you in your Thoughts. Pray read, hear, buy, sell, eat and drink, and do
all that ever you do as remembering this. Remember this Opening of the Books,
Christians; and let the Remembrance of it,

(1.) Be a Remedy against Sin, a Preservative against Iniquity in these sinful
sinning times wherein Iniquity abounds. It Is the Remedy that Solomon prescribes
to young Men, Eccles. 11.9. and there is much Weight in it, if Persons would
but lay it to Heart. Remember, Sirs, when you are ready to turn into any Act or
Way of Sin, and let no Secrecy, no hope of hiding it from Neighbors, Friends,
or the whole World encourage you to venture on it; for choose how you may now
cover it, the Books will open it. Let no seeming Littleness of any Sin draw you
to make light of it, for there is none so little but there will be room enough
found for it in the Books. The Tradesman has not only a room in his Books for
Pounds, Shillings and Pence, but also for Halfpence and Farthings, and will
not leave out one, but put it in its place. So be sure God has a room in his
Books for your least Sins, which will cost (says one) either the Blood of
Christ or your own Ruin er'e they be wiped out. O remember that Sin goes out
of your Thoughts, out of your Words, out of your Works and Ways into these
Books that are ready to be opened before all the World. Watch therefore
Temptations, watch carefully against Sin, against the Occasions of Sin, and
Appearance of Evil.

(2.) Let the Remembrance of this Day invite you to Repentance. Paul urges this
as a forcible and pressing Motive to this Duty, and tells us, that upon this
Account God commands Men every where to repent, Acts 17.30, 31. Art thou an
impenitent Sinner, one who have been and art backwards to the Thoughts of
Repentance? be forward in Thoughts of this. O think what thou have in the Books
already, how many things, and foul things are on Record against thee, how many
Oaths that thou have sworn, how many Lies that thou have told, how many vain
and idle Words that thou have spoken, and how many sinful and unlawful Deeds
that thou have done. Take but up these Thoughts, and they will convince thee of
the need of Repentance, they will induce thee to the Practice of it. The Books
must be opened, how sad will it be if they open on thee in an impenitent State!
Art thou one who have laid the Foundation of Repentance from dead Works? May
not this be a mighty Motive to thee to keep on building every day upon that
Foundation? Thou renewest thy Sins every day, is there not then Cause every day
to renew thy Repentance? Surely, Sirs, if you think of this Opening, and how
you are sinning, it may be enough to make you say as Tertullian said of
himself, Nulli rei natus nisi poenitentiae, that he was born for nothing but to
repent. Saints should not put more Sins in God's Book, than they put Tears in
his Bottle.

(3.) Let it put you upon the Mortification of your Corruptions, and traveling
after Deliverance from this Body of Sin. If your Sins be found alive at the
opening of the Books, you must die. If they be not then dead, then your Life
goes for them; for if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die, Romans 8 13. And may
not this put you on this Study? We find that when Nebuchadnezzar had erected a
golden Image with this Commination, That whosoever would not fall down and
worship it, should be cast alive into a fiery Furnace, ( Dan. 3.) that this took
such Impression on all that heard it, that there were none except three or four
which did not presently fall down unto it: the Thoughts of a fiery Furnace made
them do any thing. God has kindled a Fire that shall never be quenched; and
when the Books open, all that have not thrown down their Corruptions, their
Pride, Passions and Worldliness, shall be thrown into it without Exception. And
may not the Thoughts of this be enough to set us upon throwing our Lusts down
before us? It is said of the Roman Cato, that for a long time he never declared
his Opinion about any Matter in the Senate, but he would still close with this
Expression, Methinks Carthage should be destroyed: This sat much on his
Spirits. So truly if we look at this Opening, methinks this should be on our
Hearts, (whatsoever else we think or do) that our Corruptions should be
destroyed, the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts mortified.

(4.) Let it quicken and engage you to Sincerity in your Professions, Actions,
Ends, Aims, and all that you do or say. The Welsh have a Proverb, That it is
hard to know three things, an Oak, a Day, and a Man. An Oak, for the privy Wind
and Shakes that may be within when it seems fair without. A Day for the
Variableness of Weather and Accidents. A Man, for his hollow Hypocrisy. Why,
truly now it is hardly known who is a Hypocrite, and who sincere; who is really
for God and Godliness, and who in Show and Pretense only. One that is a Sheep
without may be a Sow within. But, Sirs, make sure to be what you seem to be, to
do what you seem to do, to do that with your Heart that you do with your Hand.
Let this Opening be an Antidote against Hypocrisy, carnal and corrupt Ends in
Religion and Profession. Harbor not an unsound Heart under fair Pretenses,
corrupt Ends under specious Performances, or a made Religion in the Life
without Truth in the inward Parts. For the very Hearts must be ripp'd up and
laid open at this Day, which will unmask and make naked all the Jehu's and
Judasses in the World, the most close and wily Hypocrites that ever were under
Heaven. In our Lifetime we have been judged by our selves and others with our
Clothes on, then we shall all be judged naked, all Vizards shall be laid aside.
O remember, remember this Opening, and let it quicken you to Sincerity. Luther
tells us of one Arsenius, who made a great Profession, was a Man of eminent
Parts, praying and discoursing to Admiration; when he came to his sick Bed his
Friends that visited him expected to hear some great Matters from him, and told
him, that sure he could not but enjoy much Comfort who had been so eminent for
the Profession and Practice of Godliness. But he answered, that he had not that
Comfort they thought he had, for he found it now with his Soul not according to
what Man judges, but according to the Judgment God passed upon him, and God
(said he) judges righteous Judgment. Thus at this great opening Day it will be
with us, not according to what we have only seemed to be, or what others have
conceived of us, but according to what the great God really finds; and all will
signify nothing if he find not Truth within.

(5.) Let it put you upon serious Endeavors to be entire and perfect in all
Points and Parts of Religion, to fill up your Christian Profession in every
part. O Sirs, be not partial in your Obedience, in with one, out with another
Duty; careful in some things, careless in others! But make Conscience of every
known Duty, indulge not any one known Sin: tho you fail in every part of your
Work, yet neglect not any part of it. Say not of any Duty as Naaman, In this,
Lord, pardon thy Servant, 2 Kings 5.18. Excuse me, Lord, in this Neglect, in
this Omission, in this dispensing with my Duty, in this indulging of my Sin. I
say, omit not any part of Duty, for the Books must be opened; and when these
are open, what has been wanting will appear; where our Profession has not
been filled up, the Gaps and Chasms will be found; such an one was forward to
public Duties, but was a prayerless Person, and had a prayerless Family; such
an one was much for Duties of the first Table, but little for Duties of the
second. The Books will open Omissions as well as Commissions, and God (as one
says) will judge you, and may condemn you for what you have not done. Not doing
is Damning as well as sinful Doing. You find in that solemn Process, Mat.
25.42, 43. that what mention is there made is of Omissions, for not doing. He
does not say you robbed me, you persecuted me, you put me in Prison; but ye
gave me not Meat when I was hungry, ye did not take me in when I was a
Stranger, nor visit me when in Prison. And this their not doing what they
should have done, was their undoing, and brought Damnation on them. Lavater in
his Book of walking Spirits relates a Story concerning Severinus, a renowned
and famous Man in the times he lived in, who appeared when he was dead, and
confessed that he was grievously punished because he had not said over his
Canonical Hours in due time and distinctly, but had hudled them up in haste.
This is but a Fiction, yet certainly, Sirs, there are many now in Hell for
Omissions.

(6.) Let it induce you to Exactness in all your Works and Ways, not only to
make Conscience of every Duty, but to study to be exact therein. This Opening
may excite to pursue Solomon's Counsel, Whatsoever thy Hand finds to do, do
it with thy Might, i. e. to bring all thy Skill, and lay out all thy Strength
in the doing of it. One drawing the Picture of Alexander while there was a Scar
on his Face, drew him with his Finger upon the Scar to cover it. And Apelles
painted another half-faced to cover the want of an Eye. But, Sirs, there are no
such Draughts of Persons or Actions in these Books; there is no drawing of
Persons with Fingers upon Scars to cover them, no drawing of Actions half-faced
to conceal Defects and Obliquities in them. They are all drawn fully as they
are in themselves: thy formal Duties will not be found half-faced to conceal
the Formality of them; thy cold Performances will not be found half-faced, to
cover their Coldness; nor thy uneven walking with Fingers upon the uncomely
Haltings therein, to hide them. O methinks the Thoughts of this should be a
mighty Help against the too common Looseness of Christians in their Spirits and
Conversations, against the careless, cold, remiss and heartless Performance of
Holy Duties!

(7.) Let it be a Spur to Diligence, to Unweariedness in the Way, and abounding
in the Work of the Lord. When Cornelius was praying, an Angel was sent from
Heaven to him with this Message, Thy Prayers and thine Alms are come up for a
Memorial before God, Acts 10.4. So Christians, I am sent with this Message to
you, to tell you that your Prayers and Alms, all your Works of Piety and
Charity go up to Heaven, and are put on Record in the Books that shall be open
at the great Day; and may not this be a great Motive to present Diligence and
Fruitfulness? Consider, you shall meet all your layings out for God in the
Books; your Tears, Prayers, Doings, Sufferings and Reproaches for Christ, shall
be found when these open. There is a Book of Remembrance, Mal. 3.16. Christ
will remember the feeding of him in his Famishing, the clothing of him in his
Naked, the harboring of him in his outcast Members, Mat. 25.34, etc. A Cup of
cold Water shall not be forgotten, Mat. 10.42. You shall at this Opening meet
all your Layings out for Christ, and you shall also then meet the Reward of
them all. It will be an Opening wherein the Judge will give Reward unto his
Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that fear his Name, small
and great, Rev. 11.18. God will render to every one according to their Deeds;
to them who by patient Continuance in Well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor,
and Immortality, Eternal Life, Romans 2.6, 7. Therefore, my beloved Brethren, be
ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, for as much
as you know that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1. Cor. 15.58.

(8.) Above all, let it put you to clear and evidence your Title to, and
Interest in Christ. This was Paul's great Ambition, to win Christ, and to be
found in him, Phil. 3.8, 9. O let it be your endeavor. Bellarmine tells us of
a University where those who were to proceed Doctor had certain hard Questions
given them to resolve, and four and twenty Hours allowed them to study for
their Answer; and according to the Resolution they gave, they were either to
receive their Degree with Honor, or to be sent away with Shame. Sirs, when the
Books are opened, this will be the great Question to be resolved, sc. Whose are
you? To whom do you belong? What Evidences can you show? What Proofs can you
bring of your Title to Christ? And according to the Resolution you give of
this, you must stand or fall for ever. O therefore study this Question now, and
see whether those things you now bring as Demonstrations of your Acquaintance
with Christ, and Evidences of your Interest in him, be such as will serve you
to plead at this opening Day! Do you think that the bearing the Name of
Christians, the bare Profession of Christ, your coming to, and sitting under
Ordinances, or your layings out in the performance of external Duties, are
Evidences sufficient of your Interest in Christ? If so, you are mistaken; for
Christ tells you, Mat. 7.22, 23. That in that Day many will say, Lord, Lord,
have we not prophesi'd in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils, and in thy
Name done many wondrous Works? to whom he will profess, I never knew you.
Nothing short of spiritual Incomes of Grace from him, and Conformity to him,
will be enough to evidence an Interest in him.

2. Must the Books be opened? Then live for an opening Day, as those that look
for, and account that they must come to this Opening. It was the Orator's
advice to his Hearers, Ita vivamus ut rationem nobis reddendam arbitremur.
Cicer. 4. in Verr. Let us so live as those that must give account of all. It Is
the Apostle's Exhortation, James 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as they that
shall be judged by the Law of Liberty, i.e. the Law that spares none, but
deals with all freely without respect of Persons, though higher or richer
than others. So speak ye, and so do ye as those that must come to the opening
of the Books. Live now each Day as those that are living for an opening Day;
Live as you would be found to have lived when this Day comes.

(1.) In passing your precious Time that God puts into your Hand. Sirs, God
takes notice what Time he gives every one of us, what we do with every Hour
thereof, and will require it again at our Hands. O spend your Time as you would
meet it at the last in the Books! Would you meet with empty Time, large shreds
of Time that nothing has been done in? Would you meet with Time that has been
spent in vain Thoughts, wasted with idle Words, consumed about Trifles and
Impertinencies? Would you meet with Days and Hours that have been spent in
sinful Sports and Recreations, as Carding, Dicing, Revelling, Hunting, and the
like Practices? Days and Nights that have been passed in Taverns, Alehouses,
and Whorehouses, in Rioting and Drunkenness, in Chambering and Wantonness?
Would you then meet with Weeks and Years that have been lost on your Lusts, one
while on this Lust, another while on that? Consider this, would you meet Time
thus spent, wasted, lost, consumed, at the opening of the Books? Sure you would
not: but if you do, know of a certain that it will be a very sad Meeting. As
you would not thus meet it, take heed how you now spend it; for if you spend it
after this manner, you must meet it so. But O carry as those who are going to
an opening Day, in placing and bestowing your Time! So pass your Time that you
may be found to have lived long in a short space. It was the saying of Erasmus,
That nothing is more amiable than well to place our Hours. This will certainly
prove so, when the Books begin to open, and Time begins to come out (as it has
been past in secret) before all the World.

(2.) Live for this Opening in improving your Opportunities, your Days, and
means of Grace; improve these as you would meet them in the Books. Will the
Books bring any good News to you at their Opening, if then you be found to have
wasted your Means and Helps that God gave you in order to Salvation, if
Opportunities stand on Record, that you have neglected out of laziness, that
you missed to gratify your Lusts, and that passed while you were passing your
Time at drinking Matches? Would you meet Sabbaths that have been spent in
Recreations, Sermons that you have slept away, Ordinances that you have been
under, but made no use of? O, no, no! Therefore when Opportunities and
Advantages are offered unto you that you have liberty to close with, think thus
in your selves; Would I have it recorded in the Books that I mist this
Opportunity, or that I made it not my Business to profit by it? See that you be
ready to close with, and diligent to improve Days and Means of Grace. Our
Savior came from Nazareth to Bethabara to be baptized of John, Mat. 3.13. John
1.28. which some compute to be fifty six of our English Miles. But O, our
laziness, who will not now go a fourth part of that way to partake of
Ordinances? I have read of a good Man, who when his time for Devotion came,
what Company soever was with him, would take his leave of them, with this fair
Excuse, he had a Friend that staid to speak with him, he meant his God. But,
alas, how little Matters do we suffer to be Avocations and Interruptions? Any
thing will serve many for an excuse to shift off an Ordinance.

(3.) Live for this Day in performing of Duties, as Prayer, Reading and Hearing
the Word; perform these as you would meet them again. Would you meet cold,
heartless, customary, overly Duties, Duties that your Hearts have not been in,
Duties that you have run over without Affection or Intention? It will be but a
poor Comfort to meet a Company of these; and yet what sad Work do many make
this way! There are many (says Dr. Preston) that will not omit Prayer; they
pray from Day to Day, from Time to Time; and yet tho they pray every Day, they
make not a Prayer all their Life, there being nothing of Life or Power in their
Performances, they only do them of Course, or in a cursory Way. O, Christians,
beware of this, beware of Miscarriages in your Duties; when Formality,
Deadness, Sleepiness, Wanderings creep on you, think how you can meet, face, and
own those Duties, those Duties at the opening of the Books: carry these
Thoughts with you as often as you go to any Duty public or private.

(4.) Live for it in the Affairs and Business of your particular Callings;
learn to manage the Business of your several Callings, and go through all your
worldly Employments on such a manner as you would meet them again at this
opening. Think how you would be found then to have gone through all your
Matters, with what Integrity, Plainness, Simplicity, and Faithfulness, and
study now to go through them on such a manner: keep your Hands clean; keep your
Hearts above the World, when your Hands are in it; Buy not under-Foot, sell not
at over-Rates; fetch not your Gain out of others certain and apparent Loss; be
not all for your selves without respect to their Indemnity with whom you have
to do; use not false Weights, Measures, or Lights; take not in any of those
numberless Tricks that all Trades are full of; resolve either to be rich with
Truth, or poor with Content. That passage of King Charles the first, in a
Letter to the late King Charles, viz. Do not think any thing worth obtaining by
foul and unjust Means, was of great Weight with me when I first read it, and is
worthy to be written in Letters of Gold. There is nothing under Heaven worth
obtaining by these means, or that being thus obtained, will bear its cost, or
prove a saving Bargain when the opening and accounting Day comes. O do nothing
in your Callings and Affairs in the World that you would not meet at last! You
would not meet the Tears and Cries of those that you have wronged, the poor
sunken Families that you have oppressed, the Widows, or Fatherless, whose
Landmarks you have removed. O, do no such things as these now; or if any of
you have done, make Restitution, make Restitution, otherwise ye will (as Father
Latimer in his last Sermon before Edward the sixth, said to the Kings Officers)
cough in Hell, that all the Devils there will laugh at your Coughing.

(5.) Live for this great Day, in ordering the whole of your Conversation in
the World; walk so as you would meet your ways again; let your Lives be uniform
and all of one piece. It is Solomon's advice, Prove. 23.17. Be thou in the Fear
of the Lord all the Day long. If you would for an opening Day practice this, be
in the Fear of the Lord all the Day, and every Day; let to morrow be as this
Day, and the next Day as to morrow. There are some, Gurn. Part 2. p. 138.
if you would see their Goodness, and be acquainted with their Godliness, you
must hit the right Time, or else you will find none; like some Flowers that are
seen but some Months in the Year; or like some Physicians that they call
Forenoon Men, they that would speak with them to any purpose must come in the
Morning, because commonly they are drunk in the Afternoon. Thus may be in the
Morning you may take the Hypocrite upon his Knee in the Saints Posture; but
when that fit is over, you shall see little of God in all his Ways, till Night
brings him again of course to the like Duty. Thus, Sirs, too many are of
different and contrary Tempers; changes of Time, of Place and Company, make
strange alterations in their Frames and Carriages. As it is said of the Women
in Italy, that they are Saints in the Church, Goats in the Garden, Devils in
the House, Angels in the Streets: so it is with many, you may see them Praying
at one Time, Cursing, or Swearing, or Lying at another Time; Serious in one
Place, Light and Vain in another; Religious, and for Religious Exercises in one
Company, but Ranting, and Drinking, and Healthing in another; carrying as
Christians in some Things, as Infidels or Atheists in other Things. But such
Carriages as these will not serve for an opening Day; they are sad now, and a
great reproach to Religion; but however any of you make them serve now, they will
never serve the turn when the Books are opened: for our Actions and Carriages
of all Times, Places, and Companies must be put in the Books, one as well as
another; not only what we have done at such a Time, in such a Place, among such
Company when in our better Moods, but also what we have done at another Time,
Place, and Company, when we were in a worse Frame: If thou pray in the Morning,
and drink and live loosely all the Day, and yet come to thy Knees again at
Night, these things shall be pieced and put together just as thou have acted
them; but such Mixtures will make mighty bad work for an opening Day, it will
be dismal to find the Books thus writ over: Here a Bible in the Hand, and next
a pair of Cards or Dice; here on thy Knees in thy Family, next drunk in the
Street or Tavern; here taking a turn in God's way, next walking in Sins way:
Books thus written will open terribly. If you would live for this opening, you
must study an oneness and equality of Carriage, and be Holy in all manner of
Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. not in some turnings of your Life, but in your whole
Course; you must do Righteousness at all Times, Psalm. 106.3. one and another
without Exception. If we Ride, Holiness unto the Lord should be writ on our
Bridles; if we Drink, Holiness unto the Lord of Hosts should be upon our Pots,
Zecha. 14.20, 21.

(6.) Live for this opening, in laying out your Receivings, and employing all
your Talents the right way, whether Spiritual Graces, or Temporal Blessings. We
find in the Parable, Mat. 25.14. -- 30. that the Servants who were entrusted
with Talents were called to a Reckoning at last. This is that you must come to,
the Lord will require from you an account of your Stewardship. Would you live
for an opening, an accounting Day? lay out your Talents in a right manner. Has
God betrusted you with a Talent of Grace, or Gifts, or Wealth, or Authority?
Take heed what use you put them to, endeavor in your Place, and to your Power
to profit others by them; use your Gifts and Graces in Comforting, Exhorting
and Counselling others. Have you Wealth and Estates? think what good you may do
with it. It Is lamentable to see what use many that have useful Estates are
making of them! One has a fair Talent, in this respect, but he laps it up in
his Napkin; the Church has no help, the Poor fare no better, no good Work goes
on faster for him. Another has the like Talent, and he uses it, but how? Why,
as Beasts do their Horns, in acts of Violence and Oppression: through Usury and
pinching Bargains he sucks the Blood, and eats the Flesh of many poor
Neighbors about him, thriving as People on the Seacoasts, by the Wrecks of
Ships. Another sort waste their Estates in Riot and Excess, in Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, in Pleasures and Pastimes. Were these to be painted, (says Baines
on the Ephesians, p. 552.) they must be brought in with Dogs, Hawks, Dice,
Cards, Curtizans, not clothing the Naked, not feeding the Hungry, nor
converting any of their Estate to any good Use. But what will these do when the
opening and reckoning Day comes? O beware of such Practices! And whatever God
betrusts you with, be it more or less, make now the Use of it that you would be
found to have made when the Books are opened. This the second Word, remember
it, and remember to practice it. O, look on your Actions every Day, and think
with your selves, will this and this serve for an opening Day, will this do at
the great Assizes? Would I meet my Time thus spent, my Opportunities thus
entertained, Duties thus performed, Business thus transacted, Conversations
thus ordered, Talents thus employed at the opening Day? Will these Prayers,
these Performances, these Bargains, these Ways do in that Day? Thus commune
with your selves, and live as those that must come to the opening of the Books.

3. Shall there be an opening of the Books? then prepare and get ready for it.
Make it your Work Night and Day to get into a Readiness for a comfortable
meeting of this great opening Day, be persuaded to this whatever you leave
undone. For consider,

(1.) That this Opening will come; you do but hear of it now, but you shall see
it hereafter. As our Savior speaks, Mat. 26.64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son
of Man sitting on the right Hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven;
so may I say, Now you see but his poor Ambassadors that preach his Coming, but
you shall hereafter see him come in a State of Glory to open the Books, to judge
the Quick and Dead in one Day. Sirs, it is not a doubtful, a disputable Point,
not a Matter in Controversy among Christians, but a Principle owned and
acknowledged by all Sides and Persuasions, being as fully and clearly revealed
as any thing in the Scriptures. The Apostle in that one Place, Acts 17.31. does
sufficiently and notably set forth this grand Fundamental, giving us Account,
1st. That a Day is set, He has appointed a Day: and the Counsel of the Lord
stands for ever, Psalm. 33.11. The Decree is gone, the Day is proclaimed, it
cannot be reversed, but must and will most certainly hold. 2dly. Of the End of
this Day appointed, viz. to judge. 3dly. The Object of this Judgment, the World.
4thly. The manner how this Judgment shall be managed, in Righteousness; there
shall be no Corruption in this Administration. 5thly. The Judge, the Man whom he
has ordained, i. e. the Lord Jesus Christ, God-Man. 6thly. The Assurance
hereof given unto all Men, in that he has raised him from the Dead. This is
sufficient Testimony to convince all Men. This may be Inducement to the
proposed Duty of Preparation, there will be an opening Day. If it were a Matter
only probable, if as much might be said against it as for it, then Carelessness
in preparing for it might be somewhat excusable: But this is out of Question,
it is beyond all Dispute, shall we not then make it our Work to prepare?
Consider it, Sirs, God has issued out a Proclamation, and it has been
published again and again in your Hearing, wherein he gives you notice of a Day
appointed for this end, of the Persons that must come to it, and that your
selves are of this Number; shall you not then be most inexcusable if you come
to it unready? What will you say? Will you plead, Lord, had I ever thought of
such a Day as this, I would not have done as I have, I would have watched and
prayed, and lived for it all my Days? Why, alas, thy Mouth will be stopped,
Christ will tell you his Writ was out, and this grand Assizes was many a time
proclaimed in thy Presence; yea, the Books shall openly show the Times, the
Places and Circumstances of its Manifestation to thee. O Sirs, the End is
declared from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet
done, Isa. 46.10. All Generations have had fair warning of it, and we upon whom
the Ends of the World are come want none.

(2.) That the Time of this great Opening is uncertain. The Opening is certain,
but the Time when is unseen. There have some indeed undertaken to foretell the
Time. In the Primitive Days, and while the Apostles were yet alive, there were
some that pretended Revelations or Visions from the Spirit, declaring this Day
to be then near, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. And since many have presumed to foretell the
Year, whose Predictions Time has already confuted. Aventinus shows, that about
the Year 1062. the credulous People were so deluded by such ridiculous
Predictions, that there was a general Expectation of the Great Day of Judgment
as then just upon them. The furious Anabaptists in Germany, in the Year 1530,
were so confident that the Last Day should be within that Year, that some of
them gave their Estates about them to those who would have part, reckoning that
a little would serve them for so short a time; and some of them ran up and
down, crying to the People with a doleful Noise, Repent, repent, the Day of the
Lord is come, the Day of the Lord is come. There are some who told us, that the
Year 1675, others that the Year 1680, others that 1688, others that 1695, and
some tell us that 1700 will put an end to the World, and open the great opening
Day. But our Savior, Mat. 24.36. Mark 13.32. asserts, that it is an unknown
Day, 1st. To all Men, to the greatest, the wisest, the best of Men. No Man
whosoever, whatsoever, can tell when this shall be. 2dly. To all Angels; not
only to us poor Men on Earth, but also to the glorious Angels in Heaven, who
see the Face of God continually. These, tho they must accompany Christ, tho
they must minister to him in that Day, gathering all Nations before him, yet of
this Day they know not. 3dly. To the Son of Man himself, as Man, or according
to his humane Nature; for here he opposes himself as Man, to his Father as God.
Or, the Son of Man knows it not with respect of his Office, tho he knew it with
respect of his Nature, i. e. he was not sent to reveal and make this known to
Man in his Ministry. Thus you see this Great Day is an unknown Day, a Day that
shall come upon Men when they think not of it. Therefore he illustrates it by
the coming of a Thief in the Night, Mat. 24.43. of a Bridegroom coming at
Midnight, chapter 25.6. of a Master returning, Luke 12.36, 37. O this Day will come
unawares upon the World: and does not this call upon you to be serious in your
Preparation for it! May it come this Night, the next Morning, when we are
taking our Rest? May we be awaked with this dreadful Sound, Arise and come to
Judgment? or when we rise and are abroad about our Affairs, may we see Christ
breaking out of Heaven, and coming in the Clouds with Power and great Glory?
Why then we have need to make it our Work to prepare. Our Savior uses this
very Motive to persuade to this Duty, Mat. 24.44. Luke 12.40. In both these
Places you have the Duty I am pressing prescribed, Therefore be ye also ready,
ready to meet the Son of Man, ready to come to this opening Day. Also the
Motive inducing thereto annexed, drawn from the Secrecy and Uncertainty of the
Time; for in such an Hour as you think not, the Son of Man comes. They might
say, Lord, but what need is there of all this, of getting into and keeping in
Readiness? will it not be time enough to do this when we see the Day
approaching? what must we needs do it now? Yes, now be ready.

(3.) That this opening Day will be a great Day. As it will come, and its
Coming is uncertain, so it will be a very great Day when it comes. The Apostle
styles it, the great and notable Day of the Lord, Acts 2.20. Observe, it is the
Day of the Lord: these are our Days in which we eat and drink, marry and give
in Marriage, and go over great Numbers and Varieties of Actions; but this Day
will be the Lord's Day, the Day that has his Mark on it, as a Day whereon he
will do his great Works. And it is the great and notable Day of the Lord: he
has had many Days of particular Rewards and Punishments, but no Day like this,
therefore it is frequently in the Scripture called, That Day, by way of
Excellency, Mat. 7.22. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. 2 Timothy 1.18. and 4.8. that singular Day
that never had any like before, or shall have after it; that wonderful Day;
that last Day; that Day that ends all Days; that that all must come to; that
Day that all should prepare for; that Day that will be glorious to Christ; that
Day that will be joyful to Saints; that Day that will be shameful to Sinners.
Sirs, this Day, this Day of Days, will be a great and notable Day, if we
consider, 1st. The Person that shall then appear, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ:
It Is called the Coming of our Lord, 1 Cor. 1.7. The Revelation of Jesus Christ,
2 Thessalonians. 1.7. The Appearance of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7. He came once humbled
in the Form of a Servant, but he shall then appear and be revealed in Glory,
this will be the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ, Tit. 2.13. who shall come in a bright Cloud, in a glorious Body, Phil.
3.21. in his own Glory, Mat. 25.31. in his Father's Glory, chapter 16.27. in the
Glory of his Angels, Luke 9.26. Thousand Thousands ministering unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand standing before him, Dan. 7.10. O Sirs, the Coming
of Christ at this Day will be a glorious Coming, he will come in Glory and Power
beyond all that e're was seen to this Day, and past all that e're shall be seen
before that Day.

2dly. The Persons that must come to this Opening. Many Thousands, many
Millions, infinite Millions of Persons, of all Ranks and Conditions. All Men,
all Nations, all the World must be convened before him at that Day, Romans 10.14.
Mat. 25.31, 32. Acts 17.31. Not only Men, but Nations of Men; not only Nations,
but all Nations, all the World. O what a Wonder will it be to see all Persons
that ever lived in all Ages of the World, gathered into one Company and Place!

3dly. The things that must then be opened. All things of all Men, things that
have been hid from Ages and Generations, things that were never opened before
to any, shall come out then before all Men. There is nothing so small or
inconsiderable but will be revealed, nothing so secret or hidden but it shall
come abroad when the Lord comes, who both will bring to light the bidden things
of Darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the Heart, 1 Cor. 4.5. And
what a great Opening will this be? It will be such a Sight as never was seen,
to see all Mankind meeting; O but it will be more to see all things that have
been done under the Sun by so many Millions of Men and Women brought and laid
open as they are in themselves, and their several Circumstances!

4thly. The Greatness of the Assembly before whom the Books shall be opened.
This Opening shall not be in the Presence of some few, as of a Family, a
Congregation or Parish, but in the Presence of Angels and Men, before a World.
Alas, many, many would be ashamed to be laid open before a few of their
Neighbors, and to have their secret things of Darkness brought out into Light
among their nearest Friends. O but Sinner, those things at this Opening shall
be opened before the World, that now thou would not have thy own Father to
know, thy Mother that bare thee to see, thy Husband or Wife that lies in thy
Bosom privy to, that Child that came out of thy Loins acquainted with, nor thy
Bosom-Friend a Witness of.

5thly. The things done at this Opening. Now at this Opening of this Grand
Assize there will be a final Determination of all Men's States thence forward to
all Eternity. You have Mat. 25.31, 32. described the Preparatives to this
Opening, viz. the Coming of the Judge, his sitting on the Throne of his Glory,
the Congregating of all Nations, their Separation one from another, the
Collocation of the Sheep on his right, and the Goats on his left Hand; and then
you have the great Work of this Day, which lies mainly in passing a definitive
Sentence upon Persons. There have been many great Trials here among Men, some
have had Trials about Estates and Titles to Inheritance, some have got and some
have lost Estates of Hundreds and Thousands in the Year: many have been upon
Trial for their Lives, some stood, others fallen. But all these, even those of
them that gave occasion to the greatest Noise in the World, are inconsiderable,
and nothing to the Causes to be determined at that Day. Then the Trial will be
what Title Men have, not to such and such Houses and Estates, but to the
Kingdom of Heaven; what they can say, not to preserve a temporal, but what they
can show for eternal Life; and he Determination thereof will not settle them
in, or throw them out of temporal Possessions, but either settle a Kingdom on
them to Eternity, or sink them into a Prison for evermore. Vnicum momentum
aeternam mansionem unicuique assignabit. Ger. Then one Moment will assign an
eternal Mansion to every Person. Thus you see this Opening will be a great and
notable Day, and may not this put you upon preparing for it! Suppose thou were
to have a Trial about thy Estate in the World, or were to be tried for thy Life
the next Term or Assizes, and the Cause were then to be determined with or
against thee, would thou make no Provision for it, take no care about it?
Surely thou would. We see Lawyers are thronged to in such Cases, Friends
improved to the utmost, all Circumstances weighed, and nothing neglected that
may help. Why, thou art sure at this Opening either to get or lose a Kingdom,
either to be made or undone, and that for evermore. O then fall upon this Work,
and that the rather, because,

(4.) This opening Day (wherein such great things are to be done) will find
many unready, and take many unprepared for it. This great Day will meet many
without any thing to meet it with. The Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3, shows, 1st.
How this Day will come upon the World, as a Thief, i. e. suddenly and
unexpectedly; a Thief gives no Warning. 2dly. How it would find the World, viz.
secure, fearless, careless, unready, so unready that Destruction shall come
upon them, and they shall not escape. Our Savior himself ( Luke 17.26-31.)
sets out this Day by comparing it with the Days of Noah's Flood, q. d. there
shall be a great Conformity 'tween those Days and these, 'tween the Men of
those Times and these. How was it in the Days of Noah? they had heard of a
Flood, (as we do of this opening Day) but they eat and drank (as we do) and
never minded it, till it came upon their Heads, and swept them all away. Why,
even thus shall it be in the Day when the Son of Man is revealed. Many had
heard of the Flood, but when it came few were in any Readiness for it, or found
any way of Escape from it: So, many hear of this Day, few will be found in
Readiness for it, and none shall escape it; and may not this awake you to Care
in this Behalf! O many, many, many will be then unready! look to it that you be
not of their Number, and that the rather, because,

(5.) As you are then found, so you are sure to fare for ever. Christ will take
you just as he finds you at that Day. The old World was taken unready, and
there was no Remedy, it was too late to think of preparing Arks. The foolish
Virgins were found unready, and the Door was shut against them. So when Christ
comes, poor Sinners that are found unready shall have no Time to provide in,
he will take them as he finds them, without any Delay. Some shall be found in the
Bed, others in the Mill, others in the Field, Luke 17.34, 35, 36. and as they
are found, so they shall be taken. If two be in one Bed, one a gracious, the
other a graceless Person, they must immediately be sunder'd, the one shall be
taken to receive a Sentence of Absolution, the other left to lie and sink under
a Sentence of Damnation. The main Scope of this Discourse is to show that there
will be no coming off, no mending of Matters, no making of things either better
or worse than they are found at that Day, but all Men shall be dealt with as
they are found, and differently, according to their different States. O Sirs,
when it is come to this, that the Books are opened, there will then be no
further Transaction about Matters of Salvation or Damnation, but the Cause will
be presently and clearly determined either with or against you. Does it not
then concern every one to labor to get into a Readiness for this Day?

(6.) That this Opening will be very dreadful to them that are unready. Many
will be found unready, every one must stand as he is then found, and this Day
will be terrible to those on whom it comes in this Case. We read of three
terrible Openings: One when the Fountains of the great Deep were broken up, and
the Windows of Heaven were opened, Genesis 7.11, 21, 22, 23. These were opened and
never shut till the World was drowned. Another is the opening of the Earth
which closed not again till it had enclosed Korah and those that appertained to
him, with their Houses and Goods in its Womb. The third is the opening of the
Cave at Makkedah, which ushered in a speedy Destruction to those Kings that
were a little before in great Pomp and State, Josh. 10.22, 23. Ay but Sirs,
this is a more dreadful Opening than any of these, and will be more terrible in
it self, and to them that come to it unprepared, than those were. When the
Windows of Heaven were opened, the World was drowned e're they shut again; but
when the Books are opened, the World of ungodly Men shall be damned e're they
shut: When the Earth opened, it shut not again till it had swallowed up Korah
and his wicked Accomplices: When the Books are opened, the Wicked shall sink
into Hell before they be closed again. When the Cave was opened, Joshua took
thence the five Kings, and caused the Captains of his Men of War to tread on
their Necks, and afterward smote them; but when the Books shall be opened, the
Saints shall tread down the Wicked, and they shall be as Ashes under their
Feet. Heb. 10.31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the living
God, so as the Wicked shall fall. Pray think of it, it will be more Terrible
than can now be expressed or imagined, all the Descriptions and Circumstances
of it (with reference to Men in their Sins) are very dreadful. As in a word or
two to instance, this Day will be dreadful unto Sinners if we look,

1. At the Judge, who is described descending from Heaven with a Shout, with the
Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. descending
with his mighty Angels, accompanied with flaming Fire, to take Vengeance, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. Psalm. 50.3. Mal. 4.1. to tear, Psalm. 50.22. to punish, 1 Thessalonians.
1.9. These are tremendous Expressions, and if it be nothing to hear them, it
will be something to see them receiving their accomplishment, to see Christ
descending with a Shout, attended with his mighty Angels, clothed in Flames of
Fire, to tear, take Vengeance, and punish.

2. At the Day, which is set out on the like terrible manner, as a great Day,
Jude 6. as a great Day of Wrath, Rev. 6.17. as the Day of Wrath and Revelation
of the righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.5. as the Day of Judgment and
Perdition of ungodly Men, 2 Pet. 3.7. O what appalling Expressions!

3. It will be a terrible Day, if we look at the poor Sinners who are brought
in weeping and wailing at the first opening of this Day, Mat. 24.30. Rev. 1.7.
O then poor Scoffers, who walking after their own Lusts, (2 Pet. 3.3, 4.) say,
Where is the Promise of his coming? shall have their Tune turned; They will
then turn to their desperate but bootless Shifts. When they see him on the
Throne, they shall cry to the Rocks and Mountains, fall on us, and hide us from
the Face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb,
Rev. 6.16. But this will be a vain Cry; vain, I say, for the Creature cannot
hide when the Creator is in pursuit. But tho this be in vain, they will thus cry,
which shows the Terror that shall then come upon them. And if the seeing of the
Judge make them thus a Magormissabib, what a taking will they be in when the
Books are opening, to open all their doings before the whole World? What a
taking will they be in when the Damnator's Sentence is ringing in their Ears?
when they are sinking together into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone?

4. At the Sentence to be passed on them, which is Tristissima and
Horribilissima, most Sad and Horrible; Depart from me ye Cursed into
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. Every word
carries a Woe, a thousand Woes, a World of Woes in it. O Sirs, to depart, to be
sent away, to depart Cursed under the Load and Weight of Heaven's Curse; to
depart cursed from Christ the Fountain of Light, the Lord of Glory, and the
River of Pleasures; to depart thence into Fire, into everlasting Fire, Fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; this will be a fearful Thing! O when
poor Creatures see that there is no escaping, but now they must go, and go with
a Curse for their Portion; and go from Christ, Angels, Saints, and Heaven; and
go to dwell in everlasting Fire, and have the Devil and his Angels for their
Companions; what Weeping and Wailing will there be among them?

5. If we look at the Consequents of this Opening, these are very dreadful: for
this Opening will be immediately followed,

1st. With an Eternal Opening: (1.) Of Conscience, which will cause restless
and endless Terror, Horror, and Torment: (2.) Of the bottomless Pit, and Lake
of Fire, where they shall be for ever tormented with everlasting Punishment,
Mat. 25.46.

2ly. An everlasting shutting; (1.) Out of the Presence of God, and Kingdom of
Heaven: (2.) In Darkness, and under Damnation.

Now if any say, how may we get into such a readiness for this great Opening of
the Books, as that they may not open to our Shame, Confusion, and Condemnation?
Why, if you would be ready so as that when the Books open, Heaven may not shut,
and Hell open on you to all Eternity, then,

(1.) Be often thinking on this opening Day; spend some time every Day in
serious Thoughts of this great Day. I have before pressed this as a Duty
incumbent upon all, and now urge it as a Direction for those who would be ready
at this Day. Would thou be prepared? then let this Day be ever in thy Eye by
serious Meditation: this will be a good help unto thee in several Respects, as
have been before shown. O therefore carry, carry this Opening ever in thine
Eye! When thou openest a Book to read, or see another open one, let it put
thee in mind of this Opening of the Books: When thou see the Morning opening
after a dark Night, and bring many things to light that lay covered with
Darkness; let it put thee on thinking what an Opening there will be in the
Morning of the Resurrection and final Judgment, how things will then come out.
When thou see the Day shutting, think what a shutting this great Day will
have. When thou art undressing thy self, and putting off thy Clothes, think
what a Day this will be when thou and all the Sons of Men must be stripped and
laid open before the World of Angels and Men. When thou hear of strange
discoveries of Thefts, Murders, and Whoredoms, let it mind thee of this Opening
that will open all the hidden things of Darkness, from the beginning of the
World to the end thereof; let every thing be thus a Remembrancer to thee of
this, and set afoot in thee some Thoughts about it. I have read of one of the
Ancients (noted for his singular Piety, and eminent Holiness) who being asked
what Books he made his Companions, and used most, he answered, that it was his
Practice every Day to read over a Book that had three Leaves, one Red, a second
Black, a third White, Liber cujus tria folia, rubrum, nigrum, and candidum. In
the Red he used to read and meditate on the bloody Passion of Christ; in the
Black, the Darkness and Damnation of Hell; in the White, the Light and Glory of
Heaven, whereby he gained more in the way of practical Godliness, than by any
other study. I would here add a fourth Leaf to this Book, viz. This opening
Day, and commend the reading of it to every one that would be then ready.

(2.) Watch and Pray. This is our Savior's Direction that he prescribes in
this Case, Luke 21.36. In the foregoing Verses you have, (1.) Our Savior's
description of this Day. (2.) His admonition to his Disciples, not to be taken
unawares and unready, ver. 34. (3.) The Reason of this Admonition, For as a
Snare shall it come on them that dwell on the Face of the whole Earth, Ver. 35.
It shall come suddenly and take them unready. And then (4.) In these words you
have his means of prevention prescribed, and they are two, Watch, and Pray.
Would you not be taken unready? Watch, exercise your selves in a universal
Carefulness over your Hearts and Ways, over the Wiles and Ways of Satan, over
the stirrings and motions of Corruptions in your selves, the Occasions and
Advantages of Sin in the World, that you fall not into Snares. And to
Watchfulness join Prayer, that great safeguarding Duty. Watch and Pray, Pray
and Watch, that ye may be accounted worthy: Never think that you can be ready
at this Day, if now in your Day you live at large, if you make no matter what
Company you walk with, what Temptations you run into, what Sins you lay at your
Door; if you will be false with God in your Profession, unjust with Men in your
Dealings; if you will Drink and Swear, and Profane the Lord's Day: no, no, this
work will not do; I tell you, Sirs, it will not do: Woe to you if any of you put
it to this venture, and say, (as, alas, the Practices of too many say aloud)
either this shall do, or I Will be undone, for then you are sure to be undone for
ever. If you would have this Day find you ready, let to day and to morrow, and
the next Day find you Praying and Watching, find you with your Loins girt, and
your Lights burning, as Servants that wait for their Lord. We read of four
Beasts, Rev. 4.6, 8. that were full of Eyes, both before, and behind, and
within. Why thus, as these had not one but many Eyes, so you must be full of
Eyes; there must be Eyes looking forward, observing ever what we have before
us, what we enter on, or put our Hand to; and there must be Eyes looking
backwards, ever reflecting on past Actions, on what we have done, that we may
spy and correct our Errors; and there must be Eyes looking inward, watching
over that cunning deceitful Piece the Heart, and the workings thereof. They
that would be ready at this Day, must Watch and Pray at their Day.

(3.) Make the Word of God the Rule of your Conversation in the World: This
must be the Rule of Judgment then, let it be the Rule of your Life now; you
must be judged by this Book at the great Opening (if you would then stand) live
by it now in your Day. This is another thing I would leave with you by way of
Direction, O take it up! You see there must be a great Opening, Men must be
judged according to their Works, and their Works according to the Word; so that
if you would be ready, live now according to this Book, and learn to walk
according to this Rule, in all your Ways and Actions keep an Eye on this. We
find that the four Beasts, Rev. 4.8. had each of them six Wings about him, and
they were full of Eyes within: Wings are for Motion, Eyes for guidance and
direction in that Motion; so that this Phrase imports that their Motion was not
blind and lawless, but regular and orderly. Why thus we must have Eyes under
our Wings, i. e. our Actions and Motions must be ordered, guided, and directed
by the Light of the Word: says David, Psalm. 119.105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my
Feet, and a Light unto my Path; q. d. I am as one in the dark who dare not
walk, nor stir a step from his Station without a Light to direct him. I dare
not walk without thy Word, turn into any Way and Course but such as this guides
me into, and shines on me in. So he shows that God's Testimonies were his
Counselors, ver. 24. He alludes unto the Customs of Kings who have their
Counselors ever ready to assist them in their great and arduous Affairs, q. d.
As Kings have their Counselors, so have I too; thy Testimonies they are the
Men of my Counsel, in all my Matters I go to them, and consult with them, I
hear what they say, and of them I take Direction. Why thus, Sirs, if you would
be in readiness for an opening Day, let the Word of God be a Lamp to your Feet,
and let his Testimonies be the Men of your Counsel; e're you entertain or take
in Thoughts, before you send out any Words, or set upon any Actions, go to this
Word with them, and hear what it has to say of this Thought, that Word, of
those Works, and let it be your utmost endeavor as far as is possible, to put
nothing into those Books which shall be opened, but what this Book now open
warrants and allows. If such and such an Action, Way, or Practice, will not
stand before the Word, let it not stand in your Lives, this is the Way to see a
comfortable opening at last. Si hunc librum Conscientiae recte vis scribere,
scribe eum secundum exemplar libri vitae; Liber vitae est Christus, etc. If you
will write the Book of Conscience aright, write it according to the Book of
Life; the Book of Life is Christ. Let the profession of your Faith be
conformable to the Rule of his Doctrine, and in your Life imitate the Life of
Christ. Every one that does Evil hates Light, neither comes to the Light,
lest his Deeds should be reproved, John 3.20. They cannot abide to be tried by
Scripture-Rules, they dare not put their Doing to be tried by the Book of God;
but this will make foul work for an opening Day. If your Ways cannot stand
before the Word now, never think that they shall stand before it another Day:
The Word that now condemns Drunkenness, will then condemn it; the Word that
condemns Oaths and Lies now, will condemn them at that Day. The Sentence at
this great Opening shall not be another, or different Sentence, but only a
Manifestation, Confirmation of that which is now passed in the Word upon Men
and their Actions. O if we would but make it our Care to follow this one
Direction, and write nothing in those Books which are to be opened, but what we
take out of the Book which is now open and set before us as our Exemplar and
Copy, putting nothing on record there but what we find allowed here; then what
manner of Persons should we be, and how far otherwise would the Books be found
at this great Opening, than most must find them?

(4.) Reckon often with your selves, call your selves frequently to account, be
much in self-examining, self-judging Exercises. I have read of one who would
ask himself three Questions every Night; (1.) What Evil have thou healed to
Day? (2.) What Corruption have thou stood against to Day? (3.) Wherein, or in
what art thou bettered now this Day is gone? Why on this manner, Sirs, be often
dealing with your selves, lay the Word and your own Hearts, the Word and your
own Ways together at the end of every Day. When you have gone over a Day in the
World, go over it again between the Word and your own Souls, and seriously
renew your Repentance and Self-accusations. You say, Often reckoning keeps long
Friends; O reckon often with God and your own Souls; for if we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged, 1 Cor. 11.31. Our self-accusations would
prevent Satan's Accusations against us: He is the Accuser of the Brethren, and
will have many things to charge us with: but when a Man accuses and humbles
himself, Satan is prevented; tho he come in with this and the other complaint,
God will say (as it were) Why Satan, this Man has accused himself before thou
came; thou art here with this now, but he was here with it and mourned over
it as soon as it was done, the same Day; and he has been often at my Feet about
it with Sorrow in his Heart, and Tears in his Eyes; yea this would not only
prevent Satan's Accusations, but the Judgment of God. Judicio poenitentiali
evacuatur judicium poenale. Amas. If we would judge our selves with a
Penitential, the Penal Judgment would be prevented. Says David, Psalm. 32.5. I
acknowledged my Sin unto thee, and mine Iniquity have I not hid; I said I will
confess my Transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
Sin. The Spouse privy to her own Infirmities, called her self black, Cant. 1.5.
but Christ calls her fair. If we will condemn our selves, God will justify us;
if we put out our Tears that come from a right Spring into his Bottel, he will
not seal up our Iniquities (for which those Tears were shed) in a Bag.

(5.) Make it your great study and care to have and keep Conscience your
Friend: this is now your constant Companion, and goes whither you go; this will
be a thousand Witnesses, yea, and a Judge in your own Bosom at that Day.
Exercise your self as Paul, to have always a Conscience void of Offense toward
God, and toward Men, Acts 24.16. Labor to have such a Conscience as may speak
well of thee when thou come to Judgment. In die judicii plus valebit
Conscientia pura quam marsupla plena. Bern. In the Day of Judgment a good
Conscience will be better than a full Purse; for which many Men wound and
wrong, and waste their own Consciences. This will in that Day be no better than
Mire in the Streets; but to have a good Conscience go with us to the Bar, and
witness for us there, will be something. As you would stand in the Judgment,
look to this in all your Ways, and be often listening to hear what it says to
you, and of you. It Is said of Apelles the famous Painter, that when he had
finished a Draught, he would usually expose it to view, and lie behind it, that
he might hear what others said of it. Why, on this manner bring all your
Actions to the view of Conscience, and hear what this (going by a right Rule,
and rightly informed) says of them; for if our Heart condemn us, God is greater
than our Heart, and knows all things, 1 John 3.20. This is but the
Deputy-Judg, and if this condemn, the great and supreme Judge will not absolve.
Art thou forced now to neglect and disregard, to silence and slight; nay, to
wound and resist thy Conscience? would it stop thee, and thou will not be
stopped? Why, alas, the Day is coming when this Conscience will surely condemn
thee, and God who is greater than Conscience will condemn thee. Sirs, if you
would have Conscience your Friend at that Day, give it Content now; if you
would not have it full of Complaints then, study to keep it void of Offense now.

(6.) Lastly, above all, and without which all is nothing, labor to be found
in Christ at this great opening Day. This was Paul's great Study to win Christ,
and to be found in him, Phil. 3.9. Let it be your great Business to win Christ
against this Day, to be found in him at that Day. I say, to be found in Christ,
i. e. to be washed in his Blood, clothed with his Righteousness, all lies on
this, nothing but this will serve at this Opening. It Is only Christ's Blood
that blots, scores, and crosses out our Sins; it is only Christ's Merits that
satisfy divine Justice for our Iniquities; it is only Christ's Righteousness
that covers all our Unrighteousness, and is our Righteousness; it is only
Christ's Death that sets Matters right between God and Souls interested
therein. Nothing but Christ's Righteousness will serve for Christ's Judgment. O
when he comes with his Garments white as Snow, and Hair of his Head like the
pure Wool, Dan. 7.9. and sits on a white Throne, Rev. 20.11. there will be no
standing for any but such as are arrayed in the white Robes of Christ's
Righteousness. Out of Christ then, and undone for ever; but if then you have
Christ, all shall be well. Luther, in his Commentary on Genesis, prescribes
unto tempted Persons one compendious way to withstand all Temptations
whatsoever: says he, Let Satan come any way, or the World come any way, or the
Flesh move any way, answer all with these two Words, I may not, I must not, for
I am a Christian. Why, as that is a compendious way of answering all
Temptations; so this will be a compendious way of answering all Accusers and
Accusations at the opening Day; and not only compendious, but the one and only
way, viz. I have a Christ. As a Believer may answer all present Temptations, so
may he with this (when all is open before the World, Angels and Men) answer all
Accusations of Justice, Law, Sin, Satan, and all Accusers. It Is called the
Answer of a good Conscience. A good Conscience is a Conscience sprinkled with
the Blood of Jesus, and this Conscience has an Answer to make for the Soul. We
read of the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. Now an Answer
supposes a Question, an Answer toward God supposes a Question from him to
the Creature. Now the Question (says one) that God is supposed to propound to
the poor Creature, Gurn. Chr. Arm. Part 2. p. 334.
may be conceived to be this, What can thou say (who art a Sinner, and stands
by the Curse of my righteous Law, doomed to Death and Damnation) why thou
should not die the Death pronounced against every Sinner? This is the grand
Question. Now, says he, the Soul that has heard of Christ, and hearing of him
has received him by Faith into his Heart, is the Person, and the only Person
that can answer this Question so as to satisfy God or himself. Take the Answer
as it is formed and fitted for, yea put into the Mouth of every Believer by the
Apostle Paul, Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right Hand of God, who also
makes Intercession for us. Who condemns? Here is the confident Interrogatory
of a good Conscience. It is Christ that died, etc. Here Is its comfortable
Answer, an Answer that none can ever object against. Why, my Beloved, as this
is now an Answer beyond Exception, so it will be in that great Day. If you have
but then this Answer of a good Conscience, and can say, I have a Christ who
died for me, you shall need to fear no Accusers, no Condemnation. Even then
when the Heavens and the Earth are flying away from the Face of him that sits
on the Throne, and Multitudes of all Ranks are crying to the Rocks and
Mountains to fall on them and hide them from his Face, this Plea will abide the
Sight of God, and stand before his dreadful Tribunal at the great Day of the
Revelation of his righteous Judgment.

Secondly; Particular Exhortation, To Sinners. To Saints.


1. To Sinners. Shall the Books be opened? Then this speaks to poor secure
Sinners who make nothing of this great Opening, never mind it nor once think
how they shall speed at that Day; but say in their Hearts, If we may escape
till then, then let us do as we can, we hope we shall shift as well as many
more that will be in our own case. It Is to be feared that in these profane
Times there are more than a few of these, who yet (led with Custom) come to and
set up their Faces in our Congregations: If any of you that are come hither
this Day be of this sort of Persons, such as care not for this great Opening,
but keep on in your Sins, filling up the Books every Day with new Abominations,
the Lord has sent me hither this Day to meet you with a Word of Exhortation;
and knowing the Terror of the Lord, (what a terrible time it will be) I
persuade, beseech, entreat you to entertain it. It Is that of the Apostle, Acts
3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out
when the times of refreshing shall come from the Presence of the Lord. This
wrought with many at that time, chapter 4.4. O do no more make light of this Day
and the things thereof, but repent now, and be converted, that your Sins may be
then blotted out. This is the Word that I would leave with you; and pray
consider, that you may not make light of it,

(1.) That Pagans and Heathens have trembled at the Hearing of this Day, Acts
24.25. Mark, Paul was here preaching, and Felix was hearing, and as Paul
reasoned he trembled, he was in a great Consternation, (...), Metu perculsus,
and perterritus: When the Judgment to come was laid before him, his Conscience
began to awake, and put him into a trembling Posture. Now will you be worse
than professed Pagans, more stupid, senseless and fearless than Heathens? Shall
a Man who never heard of a Day of Judgment before, who never was under an
Ordinance before, (as Felix) tremble at the preaching of this Judgment, and you
who have heard hundreds of Sermons, make light of it? O think of this, and what
a dreadful thing it will be to have a Felix rise up in the Judgment against
you; poor Pagans to come in and cry, O if we had been forewarned of such a Day
as these have been, we would never have done as we did! Sirs, you would take it
ill now if one should rank you with Pagans and Heathens: O what, what will it
be to be made speechless by them, to have them crying and coming in against
you; yea, to see the Lord himself bringing them against you, and saying, Lo
here are poor Creatures that would have repented in Dust and Ashes if this Day
might have been preached to them as it has been many a time, and by many of my
Ambassadors to you!

(2.) That the very Devils themselves tremble at the Thoughts of this great
Day. They are reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness unto the Judgment
of the great Day, Jude 6. A Metaphor taken from notorious Malefactors who are
kept in close Prison till the Assize where they are to be tried and have
Judgment: Thus the Devils are reserved to this great Day, and they tremble to
think of it. They believe and tremble, i. e. are under a continual Fear and
Dread of the great God who will come one Day, as they know, to Judgment against
them. This they tremble at: the word signifies an extreme Fear, shaking and
Tumult, as is in the Sea when it works and is tempestuous. Thus the Thoughts of
the Day of Judgment make a Hurry, a Roaring even among the Devils, they are
under dreadful Commotions at the Reflection on this Day, because then the
Fullness of their Torments are to begin. Hence was that Cry, What have we to do
with thee, thou Jesus, thou Son of God? Art thou come hither to torment us
before the time? Mat. 8.29. Austin thinks that when the Devils saw Christ thus
come into the World, they thought the Day of Judgment (which they expected not
so soon) was just upon them, and this Apprehension put them into a mighty
Consternation: Art thou come to torment us before the time? O they were in a
fearful Fit upon this. And Sirs, will you be worse than the Devils, not only
worse than Pagans but than Devils also? Will not that that shakes Hell it self,
shake and awake your Consciences? Shall Devils tremble in Hell at the Thoughts
of this Day, and poor Sinners on Earth (that must be in that Day sorted, and
sink for ever with them) be secure and careless!

(3.) That this Day will make you (that are most secure and confident) to
tremble if it take you in your Sins: Pagans have trembled, Devils do tremble,
and you shall tremble. The Wicked is reserved to the Day of Destruction; they
shall be brought forth to the Day of Wrath, Job 21.30. 2 Pet. 2.9. And O when
this Day is come, and is upon you, there will be Trembling and Shaking amongst
you. The great Executions of Wrath on wicked Men are reserved to that Day.
There have been many terrible Plagues upon the World, but Sirs, the saddest,
the strangest, the most affrighting, have been but as Drops to the Showers of
this Day, Smoakings of God's Wrath to the Fire of this Day. The old World was
drowned with a very terrible Inundation, but there is a more dreadful Doom
abiding for it. Sodom was destroyed with a sudden strange Destruction, but
there is a more strange Destruction to come on those filthy Sodomites: Sodomiti
olim perditi, iterum perdendi. Some of the Ancients have said, that there are
three sorts of Thunderbolts in Heaven; the first to warn, not to hurt; the
second to hurt, but not to destroy; the third to ruin and lay all waste. The
two first sorts (says one) God often in this Life discharges upon wicked Men,
but the third and worst is reserved for this Day, when all the Artilleries of
Heaven shall go off at once, when all the Fountains of God's Wrath shall be
broken up, when the Lord shall rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and a horrible
Tempest upon the Wicked, Ps. 11.6. O Sirs, the Cheer will be turned when you
see Signs in the Sun, when you see the Tribes of the Earth mourn, the Heavens
passing away with a great Noise, the Elements melting with fervent Heat, and
the Earth with the Works that are therein burnt up. I remember I have read of
crook-back'd Richard, that in that Battle wherein he fell, when he saw himself
in a helpless Condition, he cried out vehemently, A Kingdom for a Horse, a
Kingdom for a Horse. Why so, Soul, when thou art under these Circumstances,
thou wilt cry out, Riches for a Christ, Gold and Silver for a Christ, Houses and
Land for a Christ, a Kingdom if I had it for Christ, the World if it were mine
for Christ. Now give me Christ, and Grace, and Pardon, and take all my Riches,
Treasures and Pleasures; give me, give me these now, or I am for ever, for ever
undone; I know not what to do, whither to go: God is against me, Conscience
against me, Satan against me, Fellow-Sinners are against me, Saints against me,
Creatures against me, the Law and Sin against me. Sirs, it will come to this
with you; and when it is once come to this, there will be no escaping.

2. Shall the Books be opened? Then it speaks to the Saints and Servants of
God, who have made it their Business to remember to live for and be in a
Readiness against it, look for and comfort your selves with the Hope of this
great Opening Day. Our Savior speaking of the Tokens of this Day, ( Luke
21.28.) says to his Disciples, Look up, and lift up your Heads, for your
Redemption draws nigh, q. d. it shall be a good Day to you, you shall have no
Cause to be dismayed, but may meet it with Comfort. It Is observable, that this
Promise is the last Promise in the Book of God, the last Message that Christ in
Heaven sends to his Church on Earth before his Coming again; Surely I come
quickly, Rev. 22.20. with which, as good News, he closes all up, and you have
its Welcome, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. O Sirs, the Saints have looked for,
have comforted themselves with the Hopes of this Day. Luther said, he had
rather never have been born than not to be in Expectation of this Day. O it is
a Day to be expected, a Day to be looked and longed for, and a Day to be
rejoiced in! Consider, that you may be quickened to look and long for it, to
encourage and comfort your selves in it,

(1.) That at this great Opening your Sins will be found blotted out. Those
Sins that you have gone mourning under here, that you have been under
disquieting Fears about, that have cost you many Tears and many waking Hours,
will then all appear blotted out, stand fully cancelled, never to be required,
and what a sweet welcome Sight will this be!

(2.) At this great Opening your Names will be found written in the Lamb's Book
of Life. Your Names shall be found written in Heaven, and you shall fully see
that you are the Objects of free, special, differencing and distinguishing
Love, reaching from everlasting to everlasting; and will not this be a blessed
Sight?

(3.) At this Opening, the Face of God and Christ shall open on you, never to
shut in or go under any Cloud again for ever. Here the Saints are absent from
the Lord, and the Lord is absent from them in regard of the Smiles of his Face;
but then they shall be for ever with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

(4.) At this Opening, Heaven shall open as an eternal Mansion for you; Jesus
will open at this Day all his Storehouses; the eternal Kingdom, the eternal
Weight of Glory, and the Fullness of Joy that is in the Presence of God, shall
then open: All the unseen things that are prepared for those that love God,
shall then open.

(5.) At this Day the Righteousness and Holiness of God's Ways toward you will
open before you, and you shall see a most clear and full Commentary on that
Promise, All things shall work together for Good to them that love God, Romans
8.28. All your Tears, Prayers, Sufferings, Patience, Layings out for God from
first to last, shall at this Opening be found owned and crowned. Wherefore
Comfort one another with these Words, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.

FINIS.
Errat. Page 52. Line 5, 6. read but they are.


