REFLECTIONS upon George Keith's late ADVERTISEMENT of a Meeting to be held by
him and his Friends, at Turner's-Hall on the Eleventh of the Fourth Month,
1696. to which he says, William Penn, Thomas Ellwood, George Whitehead, John
Penington, and the Second Days Weekly Meeting at London, called Quakers, are
justly desired to be present, to hear themselves Charged, etc.
ALthough I might here justly except against the Constitution of the Meeting,
the Authority and Warrantableness of his peremptory Summons, the Reasonableness
as well as Seasonableness of the Demand, etc. yet being willing to pursue
Method, though I have no good Example before me, I shall first take Cognizance
of what G. K. Assigns, under several Heads, as the Basis of his Proposed, as
well as Imposed Debate. If they are not of Weight, or Agreeable to the
Structure raised, a Summary at the close may suffice, that I dilate not the
Controversy unnecessarily.

His First Article is, That W Penn has accused him in a public Meeting at
Ratcliff, of being an Apostate, and Impostor, and endeavoring to pluck up the
Testimony of Truth by the Roots. To which I say, Had not his Apostasy been
sufficiently proved, even by himself, in the Scene of his Transactions, both
Private and Public, since his last coming into England; yet inasmuch as those
several Apologetical Tract: (written by Tho. Ellwood, Caleb Pusey and my self,
Entitled, A farther Discovery, Truth Defended, A Modest Account, An Apostate
Exposed, to two of which (viz. those of T. E's) he tells us, in his Postscript
to a late Pamphlet, Styled, Gross Error, It is probable a due Answer may be
given in due time) remain as yet unanswered by him, the Charge lies upon him,
and the Proof at his Door, not to be supplied by a Verbal Conference in a
Corner, as the most public Disputes are, in comparison of the Press. The Name
Impostor, I remember not to have heard made part of the Charge till now, yet if
he will consult his Dictionary, as he once did upon the calling of a Friend
Impudent Rascal, he may find it denotes a Deceiver. But the Name I fear more
offends him than the Nature; yet that, and his endeavoring to pluck up the
Testimony of Truth by the Roots, as they suit with his Actions, so have they
been in Print proved upon him in the above recited and other Treatises.

Nor will his pretense in the succeeding lines, That W. P. promised to answer
him (before many Witnesses) when G. K. told him, he thought to put him to prove
his Charge in the Face of the Nation, stand him in any stead; for that he may
yet do, when G. K. makes the onset. Is he so idle to think a Provocation to
meet him at Turners-Hall, is a putting him to prove his Charge in the Face of
the Nation?

What he adds as a Charge against W. P. out of his Books, I refer till I come
to his Third Head, wherein the objects the same against G. W.

He goes on to a Secondly, Whereas Thomas Ellwood has printed sundry
Defamatory Books against me, I charge him to be guilty of false Accusations,
etc. Then to a Thirdly against G. W. of which more at on; so to a Fourthly
against me, for printing (as he alleges) Defamatory Books against him, and
accusing (he should have added proving too, for that was also done) him to be
an Apostate, etc. and Fifthly, against the Second Days Weekly-Meeting at
London, for approving or countenancing those Books, and another signed by Caleb
Pusey (of which above) and then Declares, if it happen that few or NONE of us
be present at the said Meeting, being conscious (as he says) of the badness of
our Cause, his full intention to be present with his Friends, at the said time
and place, to make good the Charge against us, to which he allows any moderate
and friendly people of other Professions to be present, so far as there is room
without Crowding. And is all this busle, I pray, to answer or evade our Charge?
In what time does he propose to enervate so many Quotations, Arguments,
Deductions, Instances, etc. out of his and others Books, to show the fallacy of
the one, the inconsistency of the other; the Perversions, Forgeries, false
Acusations, etc. when those very Books of T. E's (not to mention the rest)
which he has given some faint Expectation he would Answer, are above Eighteen
Sheets of large Paper, close Printed? Is this Man in Earnest, or does he think
any Judicious Man can take him to be so? Or does not he rather seek to make
some Bravado, some idle Flourish to slip from his Purgation? Indeed the very
Title Page be speaks some such thing, where he proposes, not a clearing
himself, but a recriminating others. He tells us, We are justly desired to be
present, to hear our selves Charged, and proved Guilty of the following things,
and we shall be freely heard, to answer to our several Charges. But stay a
little, all in good time; we are upon the Defensive, he upon the Offensive
part, Defending our Friends and Society from his Repeated, Impetuous Slanders
and Defamations, wherewith he had unjustly loaded them, and laboring to throw
off the Dirt he had endeavored to fling on, even while he would have laid
claim to Membership, yea Eldership. And in the Prosecution hereof, when he
Calumniates, we detect him; when he deviates from his former Pretenses and
Principles, we justly expose him, and declare him to be a Detracter, Apostate,
etc. having first proved it upon him. Now if he (who is the Aggressor) find
himself aggrieved, how can he expect Relief; by falling upon us, for so
charging him, or by evidencing his own Innocence? But his Work is a mere (...),
he begins at the wrong end; instead of discharging himself (which he knows he
can never do) he re-charges us, making it a crime in us to tell him he did
amiss, though we show wherein; for which we must (if we will answer his
Challenge) be convened before him and his, to answer (in a Meeting of his own
picking) to several general Heads, the discussing whereof, even before
Competent Judges, as they would branch forth into many particulars, so perhaps
(were the Auditory a more composed, settled Company, than this is like to be)
would take up instead of a Day, Weeks to debate. And when all is done, the
Controversy hitherto has been Public in the Face of the Nation and Nations,
there it will be in Private, in respect of what comes abroad in Print: Nor is
such an Assembly like to determine the matter without the Press, but to renew a
fresh occasion to Print, yet perhaps with this hoped advantage to the Proposer,
that running off from that Cause he is already hampered with, and uneasy
under, he may wrangle a fresh upon some Out-skirts of the Controversy, and drop
the Main one. And this I take to be the design.

His Thirdly (which I promised even now to take notice of) is levelled against
Geo. Whitehead for joining with a Prevailing Party in that called the Yearly
Meeting, to pass (what he calls) a most Unchristian Censure of Excommunication
against him, without Proof, etc. But why is G. W. here singled out, and not the
whole Prevailing Party, as he terms them, included, except that he have a more
particular Pique at him?

In the same Paragraph he goes on and tells us, I offer to prove the said
George Whitehead, out of some of his printed Books (which it does not appear
that he has retracted or corrected) guilty of most Erroneous and Hurtful
Principles, contrary to the Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Faith and
Religion. The like he had said before of W. Penn, only with this addition, That
W. P. is guilty of gross Contradiction to himself; for he is forward at
Charging; when it comes to Proof, he falls short. Yet may I remind him, that
two Books lie upon his Hands unanswered, which treat of this very Subject; the
one written by T. E. called, Truth Defended; the other by my self, Entitled,
An Apostate Exposed, in Answer to three of his, called, Nameless Bull, True
Copy, and Gross Error. In the one they are cleared from several False
Deductions, Inferences, etc. brought by G. K. to which he pretended he would
give Answer, but never did yet; in the other his Quotations out of those very
Books of theirs, out of which he has since picked Quarrels, are oposed to his
later Sense, not only of the Authors, but of the very Books themselves, to
which also no Answer has been yet given. So that it is not so much his
different Sense (or Opinion) of G. W. and W. P. (as he would insinuate, p. 4.
Of this Advertisement but even of their Books, calling that Orthodox one year,
which he represents as Hetrodox another; that I was drawn to Detect and Expose.
However two things occur to me from the Premises, First, That printed Books
(not Retracted or Corrected) are good Evidence against G. W. and W. P. and are
they not so against G. K. especially seeing he has confessed, True Copy, p.
17. That some of his need some further Explanation, Emendation and Correction,
and promised to do it, though in that he keeps his word with us, as he has
hitherto done with T. E. Secondly, That it is not reasonable for him to expect
his renewed Charge against G. W. and W. P. of the same Nature as the former,
should be Heard and Debated in a Select Assembly of his own, when he is Debtor
to two Tracts, published some Months since, where the matter has been so
handled, that he has not thought fit to Reply. Let him fairly clear his Hands
of what is already depending, and which he has chose to concert in Print, and
then offer new if he has any. Till then he must excuse us, that we cannot
comply with his empty and shifting Subterfuges, whereby to turn the course of
the Controversy out of its due and proper Channel; whither he brought it, into
an indirect one, where he would now lead us, to drown it.

What follows being mostly a catching at a passage or two out of those Books of
T. E's, which he has not attempted to Answer, I touch the lighter on, as
esteeming it an unmanly way of Treating an Opponent, in which I design not to
gratify him. And he is the more inexcusable, in as much as the odds, in his
Eyes, is so great between them, G. K. being a Man, who (as he tells us in his
Serious Appeal, p. 29. Has the Gifts both of Sound Knowledge and Expression,
with manifold other Mercies bestowed upon him: T. E. on the other Hand, is
represented by G. K. p. 3. of this Advertisement, grossly Ignorant of Human
Learning, guilty of Pedantick Trifling and Quibling. But G. K. is not the only
Adversary, who has made up in Vaunt, what he wanted in Argument, or been
forced to sink under the weight of a bad Cause. For Great is the Truth, and it
does and will prevail.

He tells up in p. 3. He has neither time, nor ability of outward Estate, to
print Answers to him or others, that heap Book upon Book against him. What time
he has, or how he employs it. I undertake not to determine; but he should,
like a Wise Builder, have counted the Cost before he began with us, and not
blame us for answering his Books, after he has given the Provocation. Yet time
was, when he took time to Scribble Books very fast, and that at a time when the
Press was in his Parties Hands; but I must confess, from the first time that he
has met with Opponents, and that he has been put upon to prove, as well as
assert Time or Ability has mightily failed him. All evidence whereof he gave
in his first onset, who instead of an answer to T. E. emitted an Epistle,
wherein he labored to persuade Friends to anticipate his Work, by Calling in
T. E's Sheets and disowning them, upon a presumption what a Bugbear he was, and
that he had no less than Fifty Perversions, Forgeries and Fictions, to lay to
his Charge. But when that had not its proposed effect, to Condemn T. E.
unheard, for his Proof was yet to produce, but he was obliged to print his
Answer, such as it was, more Noise than Matter, or forfeit his Credit; a Reply
at length came out under the Title of A Seasonable Information, etc. and T. E.
rejoyned in his, called, A further Discovery, which has lain upon G. K's Hands
ever since, though once he told us, it was probable, that and another of T. E's
called, Truth Defended, might be answered in due time, as has been hinted
already. But now to extricate himself, he would excuse himself from printing,
for want of time and ability of Outward Estate as well as that he insinuates,
p. 4. that W. P's calling him Apostate has that tendency; for he says, His
Wife and Children are affected with it, and that it tends to the exposing of
them to Ruin and want, as if he name among us for Outward Ends. If so, the
disappointment is just. But if he be not a Man alone, one of no People (...),
which he is offended with T. E. for supposing, a Man would think, So
considerable a number of (...), wherein (he would have us believe) his
Testimony is so well received, who have publicly (...) him and his Christian
Testimony, and that in a printed Treatise too, (as he alleges in the same
page) might set to their Shoulders, and help ease him of his Change, if his
printed Testimonies ^^ not less grateful to them, than they are to himself.

Yet one thing more I cannot but observe in p. 3. where finding fault with T.
E's Perversion (as he terms it) upon his plain words, he says, Let the Reader
but read my words in my own Book, and at the first sight he will see the Cheat
and Forgery. That is more than my Eyes can do at second sight; but to return,
here he refers to his own Book, why did he not say, Let him meet me at
Turners-Hall, and I will prove it? By this the ridiculousness of this Meeting
shows it self: for a Man will readily say, Controversy in Print is decided by
Print, an Abuse or Forgery there by comparing Book with Book; and if he thought
his Defensible, I doubt not but he would have done it.

These short Touches I hope will satisfy the Candid and Judicious, that we are
not concerned to follow him in his several Doubles and Twistings, but to hold
him to his Task he has taken upon himself, and that his Demand is alike Idle
as Unreasonable, if we consider either the Person Challenging, one that is gone
off from us; the Place, a Meeting set up in Opp^sion to us and our Meetings,
which he terms in the Title Page, Their USUAL Meeting place, as if it had been
of some considerable Duration, when perhaps two Months ago they had none there;
the Company he calls his Friends, a Separation out of a Separation, that has
defamed and perversely exposed Friends, even when he himself was against them;
the mixed Auditory, such as never were of our Communion, and that they will be
either Moderate or Friendly, we have but his bare word for, who needs a Voucher
for his own Deportment, or that he either can or would keep out the very
Rabble, whom his public Advertisement is most likely to draw in, is a great
Question; the Peremptoriness of the (...) as if we were at his beck to come and
go, when and whether he pleased to appoint us; the Reproach, if any Disorder
happen, for he is none of the most Orderly himself; besides that the
Controversy (...) is already in a more open, free and public Course in Print,
into which he drew us, and till of late has persisted in, though some what
faintly, as well as promised to pursue; and that a Hearing the never so
public, bears no Proportion to the Press, where he began. The which
Considerations, whether of weight with him or ^^, we dare leave with the
Unbyassed, as sufficient whereon to (...) and refuse our Compliance with his
Peremptory Demands.

John Penington.

London, Printed by T. S^wle in White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street, 1696.


