John Penington's COMPLAINT AGAINST William Rogers: Relating to the Abuse and
Injury done to the memory of his worthy Father Isaac ^^nington, in
mis-representing and perverting some of his Writings, in his Book entitled,
The Christian Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, etc.
Whereunto is subjoined Somewhat to manifest his Mother Mary Penington's not
shunning Sufferings for Truth, etc. occasioned by W. R's. suggesting the
contrary.

Evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived:
but continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been assured
of, knowing of whom thou have learned,

2 Timothy 3. 13, 14. Nevertheless the Foundation of God stands sure,

chap 2. v. 19. London: Printed for Benjamin Clark Bookseller in George-Yard in
Lombard Street. 1681.

John Penington's Complaint, etc.
THat men that profess Religion, (yea, which is more gross, the Truth it self)
should employ their Skill, Wit and utmost Endeavors to smite and vilify such
as were and are honorable therein, and that not through Ignorance, but
wilfully and designedly, is truly sad to consider. An instance whereof I shall
here give, in this my Complaint against William Rogers; wherein I wish I could
charge him with only rashness and indiscretion, and not with premeditated and
palpable falsehood, of which he is notoriously guilty. This let not the Reader
take upon my bare word only, (as I doubt, from his seeming fairness too many
have his) but read his Book, and observe the drift thereof, then he will see
whether I had not just cause thus to reflect on him; and by comparing my
Father's Book with his quotations, be able to judge, whether it did not behove
me to vindicate, whom he had thus traduced, and lay the load at his own door.
But that I may not divert him too long from the proof, I hasten to make good my
Charge.

William Rogers, in part 3. page 88. of his Book, (falsely styled, The Christian
Quaker, etc.) says, We think it necessary to cite a Testimony published in
Print by Isaac Penington the younger, in the year 1660. being part of a
Discourse entitled, The Authority and Government which Christ excluded out of
his Church, etc. as it lies all together, word for word, and not taken by parts
and pieces here and there.

Who would have desired fairer dealing than this! But here I charge him with a
downright falsehood, and impious prevarication, who with a Judas-kiss (I mean a
show of candor and integrity, with which he would prepossess and beguile his
unwary and credulous Reader) labors to betray the Truth and its sincere
Professors into the hands of the wicked and ungodly: For notwithstanding he so
solemnly professes to give the Testimony, not by parts and pieces, but as it
lay altogether; and calls it, The Testimony of the said Isaac Penington, as if
it were the whole: yet instead of keeping touch herein, he has leapt over some
leaves at the beginning, explanatory of the rest, and left out an entire
sentence at the close, which he knew would n^^ serve his turn; but if fairly
and impartially set down, would have both rendered his work insignificant, and
detected the falseness of his dealing, as it could not but have manifested to
every considerate Reader, That W. R's. deduction was not genuine but forced,
which I cannot believe him unsensible of, and therefore with design to have
done it. For he could not but see, that what was there laid down did infer a
necessity of Church Government; a thing, he would insinuate, neither my Father
nor Friends in the beginning owned or allowed. And to make this good, indeed
there was no surer way than to let fall what spoke to the contrary; which
course W. R. has taken, and begins his quotation with the latter part of an
Answer to a Question, which he was so unworthy; as well as untrue to his word,
as never to transcribe, nor the first part of the Answer neither. These base
underhand dealings are so far from becoming a pretended Friend, that they are
not like a fair Adversary: and so unsuitable to a Christian Quaker, that they
would be cause of shame to a moral Heathen.

The Question propounded by my Father, was (as may be seen part 1. p. 238. of
his Works.

Quest. But is there to be no Greatness, no Authority among the Disciples of
Jesus, or in the Church of Christ? Is every one to do what he will, to be
subject to his own Fancies and Imaginations, to the Inventions of his own
corrupt heart? What a confused Building will this be? Sure this will not long
remain a Zion, but soon become a Babylon, even an heap of disorder and
confusion.

To which my Father replied as follows:

Answ.

There is to be no such kind of greatness, no such kind of Authority; yet there
is both a Greatness and Authority suitable to the state of Disciples, suitable
to that kind of Kingdom whereof they are. There are Laws, there are
Governments, there are Governors, there is Ruling, and there is Subjection;
but all in the Spirit, all suitable to that which is to be governed: but no
government of, or according to the Flesh. As Christ's Kingdom is not of this
world, so the government of his Church and People is not according to this
world; but as that which gathers is his Spirit, and that which is gathered is
spiritual; so that which is governed is the Spirits of his People, and they are
to be governed by his Spirits, and spiritually, and not after a fleshly manner.

Thus Christ himself, though he ministered to his Disciples, yet he was also
their Lord and Master; and in the Spirit and Life of the Father ruled over
them; and thus the Apostles and other Ministers of Christ had likewise in the
Spirit, the care of the Churches, and Authority in the Lord, by his Spirit, to
govern the Spirits of his People: not to govern after a fleshly manner, by
their own wills; not to prescribe them in a lordly way, either what they should
believe or practice, but in the Light, and in the Power of the Spirit, to make
their way into every ones Conscience in the sight of God, ministering to every
one in the Spirit according to their capacity and growth, and waiting patiently
for God to convey the food and nourishment, and to build their Spirits up in
the Faith thereby.

The Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets. Here is the Government,
here is the Law of rule and subjection in the Life. Every one feeling a measure
of the Spirit in himself, is thereby taught to own and subject to a greater
measure of the same Spirit in another. He that has no measure of the Spirit of
God, he is not of God, he is none of Christ's: and he that has received a
measure of the Spirit, in the same Spirit feels another measure, and owneth it
in its place and service, and knows its moving, and cannot quench it, but
gives way to it with joy and delight. When the Spirit moves in any one to
speak, the same Spirit moves in the other to be subject and give way: and so
every one keeping to his own measure in the Spirit, here can be no disorder,
but true subjection of every Spirit: and where this is wanting, it cannot be
supplied by any outward rule or order set up in the Church by common consent;
for that is fleshly, and lets in the Flesh, and destroys the true Order, Rule
and Subjection.

[ Thus far my Father.]

All this W. R. never so much as mentions, which was the occasion of all that
he quotes, and to which it was relative: but what follows, more immediately
relating to the Government and Authority Christ excluded rather than to what he
allowed, we find him cite at large, till the subject pinched him anew again,
which was a few words conclusive of the whole, and that wound up his sense,
which it seems W. R. was not pleased to give us: And had he not had the
confidence to say, That he had not taken it by parts and pieces, but All
together, I should have the less wondered: But that a man pretending to Truth
should thus prevaricate in the face of the world, I cannot sufficiently admire.
Yet, whither will not men run to propagate an Interest, or defend a blasted
Cause! O that they would consider it! O that they would lay it to heart!

That which W. R. left out at the close, were these words (as may be seen part
1. p. 242. of my Father's Works.)

And the unity being thus kept, all will come into one outwardly also at
length, as the Light grows in every one, and as every one grows into the Light:
but this must be patiently waited for from the hand of God, (who has the right
way of effecting it, and who alone can do it) and not harshly and cruelly
attempted by the rough hand of man.

This would fully have evinced, that my Father did not only point at an inward
Government of God's Spirit in particulars, but also laid down, That as the Life
grew in every one, and every one grew into the Light, it would bring into one
outwardly also at length; which is far from W. R.'s. purpose, and therefore
designedly left out. For the whole drift of that very part of W. R's Book (as
the very Title Page exhibits) is to tie up all to an inward Government of
Christ, exclusive of any outward Form of Government, Order or Discipline. And
he cannot be content to be thus principled himself, but would make it appear as
my Father's sense too, though these his words (with many more omitted by him)
are of a contrary tendency, which he durst not (for all his show of candor,
and promise to take altogether as it lies) trust his Reader with, lest his
untrue inferences should be too conspicuous.

Thus much of his quotations, which being first compared with the Book, are now
attested by Benjamin Clark.

Now I dare appeal to any unbyassed judicious Reader, whether W. R. has not
dealt fallaciously, deceitfully and surreptiously, as well as unrighteously,
thus to insist as if he had been so fair and conscientious in his quotations,
when he has been so egregiously the contrary. And since his scope and design
in printing that part of my Father's Testimony, seems to be that he might
thereby insinuate, as if my Father (at the writing of that Testimony) was in
judgment one with himself, and opposite to, or different from the Government
Established, and now practiced in the Church of Christ among us, (as some of
that Party have traduced him by word of mouth) let the Reader take the
following instances out of that part of the same discourse, which W. R. has
knowingly omitted. And first, at the beginning of the Answer to the Question,
p. 238. par. 1. (transcribed already above) my Father has these words: There
is to be no such kind of greatness, no such kind of authority (meaning, as was
exercised among the Gentiles, p. 236.) yet there is both a greatness and
authority suitable to the state of Disciples, suitable to that kind of
Government, whereof they are. -- Again, There are Laws, there are Governments,
there are Governors, there is ruling, and there is subjection, but all in the
Spirit, all suitable to that which is to be governed: but no Government of, or
according to the Flesh. -- Again, Thus the Apostles, and other Ministers of
Christ, had likewise in the Spirit the care of the Churches, and authority in
the Lord, by his Spirit, to govern the Spirits of his People: not to govern
after a fleshly manner, by their own wills; not to prescribe them in a lordly
way, either what they should believe or practice, but in the Light, and in the
Power of the Spirit, to make their way into every ones conscience in the sight
of God, This very passage answers much of W. R's contest in his Book.
etc. -- Again, Every one feeling a measure of the Spirit in himself, is
thereby taught to own and subject to a greater measure of the same Spirit of
another.

Now let us see, whether even out of that very part W. R. has quoted, there be
not words to the same effect; as where (p. 94. par. 3. of W. R's Book) my
Father says, Care must be had, that nothing govern in the Church of Christ,
but the Spirit of Christ: that nothing else teach, nothing else exhort, nothing
else admonish and reprove, nothing else cut off and cast out. -- Again, Every
Member is to wait in that measure of the Spirit which he has received, to feel
the goings forth of the Spirit in him that teaches and governs; and so to
subject not to man, but to the Lord, to receive from the Lord, to obey the
Lord. -- Whence W. R. might have easily observed, that my Father, though he
placed the Government of the Church in the Spirit of Christ only, as the
Principal and Efficient, yet he acknowledges, the Administration of that
Government is committed both to Ministers and Members as Instuments. But for a
more full and additional satisfaction to any that may desire further
information in this matter, I refer the Reader to a Book entitled, Somewhat
relating to Church Government, wherein the Necessity, See also part 2. page
400. of his works.
Usefulness and blessed Effects of the true Church Government is here and there
hinted at, etc. published since his death, but written by himself, in answer to
some Apostates and Innovators, who probably may account themselves Christian
Quakers as well as W. R.

Indeed I am surprised, not expecting such kind of dealing; nor could have
thought his heart had been so hardened as not to value the justness of a cause,
so he could but promote his tottering Fabric. Will he prostitute Soul,
Reputation and all, in a stiffness against the Lord and his People! The Lord
keep me in a tender sense of, and regard to them, and that living Testimony
they are entrusted withal, that I may not, through prejudice, fight against any
thing that is of him, either in my own particular, or through his Servants,
whom he is blessing and honoring in his Work, having seen the ill effects of
it in this person, who doubtless, had he been told formerly, he should thus
have appeared against the Truth, and them that are in it, would have been ready
enough to have said with Hazael of old, Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do
this thing?

I could also observe, that in this his work of darkness and traducing my
Father, he uses the word [We] and [Our] but knowing none that will own
themselves concerned herein, I shall the less insist thereon.

As for Thomas Crisp, who has put forth a Book called, The Testimony of Isaac
Penington, etc. he confessed to me, in the presence of Philip Ford, That he had
never read or seen that Book of my Fathers, but only gathered it out of William
Roger's Book. Now whether this be fair and equal, to take things thus upon
trust, without once ( Boerean-like) searching his writings, to see whether the
things were so or no; and then to add wide inferences of his own, as of a
liberty in paying Tithes, as a Civil Right, etc. far from my Father's sense and
constant practice; And lastly, to publish them from the sole Authority of a
professed Adversary, who had already mangled the Book, and took things
piecemeal, be not very injurious, and unbecoming a man, much more a Christian,
and which many Turks, Jews and Infidels would have scorned, let the impartial
consider. But what can be expected of men that are departed from the just
Principle in themselves, and are daily doing despite to the Spirit of Grace?
Indeed the very Title is fallacious,. to call it The Testimony of Isaac
Penington, and is an imposing upon his Reader; whereas at best it is but Part
of his Testimony, and that Part so craftily managed, as to speak his sense but
in Part.

By this W. R. also may see what Spirit his Book gratifies, even a loose,
libertine Spirit, without Yoke, that would run back again to Egypt, and weaken
the hands of the faithful Sufferers, even to death, for that oppression of
Tithes, which Friends, in the beginning, and to this day, assert to be a
denying Christ come in the Flesh; which I believe W. R. himself will not seem
to gainsay. But this man ranks it and the use of plain Language (which is the
only true Language, the other being a Lie) amongst Friends Orders and
Traditions; Which (says he) I fear you take more care for the strict
observations of, than the Truth in the heart; as if these things had not been
delivered from the Spirit of Truth, through Instruments it made choice of at
the first breaking forth of Truth, but were taken up and held by Tradition
only, as the beggarly rudiments of the world are; and therefore queries, If one
cannot do so, must he therefore judge his Brother? adding, That may be required
of one, which may not be required of another. (see p. 14 of his Pamphlet) Will
W. R. stand by him herein? Will he thus encourage Tythe-Payers? Will he open
this gap for Libertinism? Will he thus oppose the Truth to the Truth, making it
to require one thing of one, and the contrary of another? to call one to bear a
Testimony against Tithes with jeopardy of Life and Estate, and allow the other
to pay it as a Civil Right? What, will God's Spirit be thus inconsistent with
it self? But if he say Nay, and fall not in with this man's work; yet hence he
may see what it is joins with him, and shelters it self under his wing, even
that which shuns the Cross, and seeks ease in the Flesh.

That which W. R. cites as Edward Borrough's Paper, and which T. C. takes upon
trust, as his Vision, is a Question to several; first, Whether E. B. ever wrote
that, or any such Paper? 2 dly. For satisfaction it is demanded of W. R. and T.
C. to prove that cited by them to be E. B's. own entire Paper, and to acquit
themselves that they have not prevaricated here, as W. R. has done in my
Father's Case, however fair he would seem to be, confessing, page 84. part 5.
That adventuring to add to another man's words, (and I may hope I say, or to
diminish from them either, especially when he avers, he has taken them
altogether as they lay) rendering them as another man's words, materially
altering the sense, is accounted plain Forgery.

J. P.

My Mothers Account is as follows.
IT is very contrary to my judgment, and the frame of my mind, to make any
other appearance in public, than an Innocent and Righteous Conversation; but I
see a necessity to give some account of the cause of my dear Husband ( Isaac
Penington's) Imprisonment in Reading, as also to speak something in reference
to the settling of my Rents, thereby to remove, out of the way of the tender,
the stumbling block that W. R. (in his Book entitled, The Christian Quaker,
etc. par. 5. p. 43, to 47.) may have laid before the upright, to the lessening
of my Testimony to the undefiled Truth, unvailed with covers or pretenses.

As for his charging G. F. with advising me, I never had any advice from him
contrary to my own conscience, nor in the least to lessen Truths Testimony: But
this I say, My honorable and dear Husband suffered five times Imprisonment in
the Gaol of Alisbury in the County of Bucks, for the space of seven years,
being but little at home, but Imprisoned many months at a time; once three
quarters of a year, another time a year and a half; in all which Imprisonments,
I (through the Lord's great kindness to me) never consulted provision or
security in any point, though solicited by my Relations to have done somewhat
to preserve my Estate, all my Husband's being gone upon his Father's account:
But so clearly and fully was I given up to suffer the loss of Estate and spoil
of Goods, in his pure Testimony to Truth, that I never so much as attempted any
securing it or them; and never had, but once so much as an inclining in my mind
to put by any thing, though of value, and not of very necessary use in the
Family; but at that very time, before I could lay hand on any thing for that
purpose, it was said in me, Do not provide; Do not contrive; Leave all with the
Lord; and immediately let the thing fall. And further, when sufferings for
Meetings by Imprisonment, gave way to Proceedings by Fines upon Preachers,
Hearers and Masters of the Houses where Meetings were, the Lord gave me a clear
quiet submitting to it, though I had in my view the ruin and havoc that 40 l.
a week could procure to us, my Husband being engaged in at least two meetings a
week, and having a Testimony for Truth by the Gift bestowed on him to minister
in.

All this I make mention of, to manifest that whilst my dear Husband suffered
purely for Truth's Testimony, I never went about in the least way to shun or
fly the suffering. Now the cause of his suffering in Reading Gaol was not, in
the first place, upon a necessity immediately laid upon him from the Lord for
his Testimony; but he was betrayed for the sake of my Estate, as was confessed
by the person that committed him, to a Woman of Condition, that lived near
Reading; who being earnest with him on my Husband's behalf, and could not allay
him, said, What will ye get by premuniring him? He has no Estate, all being
forfeited to the King, for his Father's being one of the King's Judges: To
which he replied, I know that; but his Wife has a good Jointure. The Jailer
also confessed to me, that he had orders a year before to stop him in the
Prison, when he came thither to visit the Prisoners, and to give notice of it;
which words he said to me, upon my charging him with betraying my Husband: And
I answered to it, What, to be thus dealt with, without an Offense? But he was
silent to that. Nay, his very going to Reading was very accidental; I being
from home, and he intending in my absence to visit three several places, but
was disappointed in them all; upon which, a Friend that was with him said, Go
with me to Reading, and visit Friends in Prison; which he did: And when he had
visited those of the fore-side of the Prison, he crossed the Gaoler's Yard, to
see the Friends on the other side. The Jailer seeing him, asked a Friend, what
that man's name was? who simply told him, Isaac Penington. Immediately he goes,
or sends to one (called a Justice) to acquaint him; who sends an Officer and a
Servant to fetch him before him, and he and another (called a Justice) tendering
him the Oath, upon his refusal committed him. I coming toward home, and being
met with this unpleasant account, was, I confess, greatly sadned, his going
being so accidental, only in an innocent freedom, and not upon a constraint; I
weighing, that this was a great suffering to his person, which threatened ruin
also to me and my Children. Now chiefly looking upon it, as indeed it was, a
trepan for my Estate, I had great freedom in the endeavoring the securing of
it, and preventing the Devourers of their prey: so I did in clearness send to
London, and had the Arrears and Rents, that hereafter should be due (for the
Estate it self they could detain no longer than my Husband lived) made over to
a Friend of mine, for the use of me and my Children. As also, I put out of the
House some Plate and other Goods as was mine when I was a Widow, and made over
to a Kinswoman of mine before marriage; but what was necessary for a Family,
was left to a considerable value; which things were more immediately my
Husband's Goods, who was then in Prison.

And now I have given this true Relation, I sum up all thus, That what I have
here asserted to be done by me, was no shift, or carnal hiding from spoil, in
that that was a Testimony, but a clear acting to disappoint the Betrayer of the
Innocent, who was made a Transgressor for to be preyed upon; and in freedom
from the Lord to secure him, my self and Children from the Treachery and evil
Stratagems of his Prosecutor. I do, in God's fear, say to every one that reads
or hears these lines, That in the tenderest, composedst, rightest frame of
mind, that ever I felt since, I was never condemned for it, nor showed that I
erred in it, but rather acquitted; and am satisfied in it at present, as in
reference to its being no hiding from Sufferings. For I do believe, that if I
had appeared to suffer for Truth, and at that time had secretly secured my
Estate, it had been a very evil thing, and that which I have hitherto been
preserved from; who in the midst of many infirmities and weaknesses have this
to boast of (in the Lord's mercy and strength) that I have suffered without
guile or covering, by secret Contrivances or Provisions for my safety: This the
all-seeing God knows, and to him I commit my Cause, and the Causes of those
innocent Servants of the Lord, aspersed by W. R. in his Book called, The
Christian Quaker, etc.

Mary Penington.

POSTSCRIPT.
NOw upon the whole give me leave to make these remarks. 1st. My Mother was not
the person under prosecution for the Worship of God. 2d. My Mother did not go
to secure her Estate from any prosecution against her upon that account. 3dly.
From my Father's bare going to visit Friends in Prison, they who laid in wait
for the Estate, took an occasion to clap him up, thereby to ruin both him, my
Mother, and us their Children in their Estates and Livelihood, and not for any
Offense alleged against my Father for the breach of any Law relating to
Religious Worship. 4thly. The Estate thus secured, was partly Jointure settled
upon my Mother by a former Husband, partly Land of Inheritance devolved to her
from her Parents; so that what was done, was in order to save the Right of
Possession in my Mothers hands, from any illegal seizure of her real and
personal Estate, which was her sole Property, and not legally seizable for my
Father's supposed Offense; which is no ways parallel to any persons making over
their own proper Estate, for fear of, or to shun suffering, for their own
particular Testimony in meeting to worship God. 5thly. His bringing the names
of G. F. my Father and Mother thus publicly upon the Stage in Print, and yet
not producing his Informers, but only saying to G. F. If thou deny it, I shall
bring Testimony under the hand of a credible Friend in Truth, etc. is an
Addition to his other unfair dealings; for he ought to let us be Judges of
that, and not thus both by Manuscript and Print impose upon us, and never tell
us who this credible Friend is. 6th. and lastly, To which let me add, That W.
R's. so often and so full-mouth'dly giving G. F. the Lie (his assigning the
reason of G. F's. not denying he advised my Mother to secure her Estate, to be
fear of losing his Interest in my Father and her, if he had denied what they
knew to be true, and (with them) in many more, as p. 53, 54. of par. 5.) his
insinuating, that G. F. advised the Rich to secure their Estates, thereby
rendering him partial; his reflecting as if G. F's. not giving him the like
advice, or judging what he did in making over his was, that G.F. never was so
friendly to him as to take so much care of him and his Family; and lastly his
scoffing and upbraiding G. F. as if the reason why he was reproved for his
skulking were, because G. F. had not given him a dispensation so to do, (see
par. 5. p. 43, to 47.) is notoriously wicked and abominable; as if all the
godly concerns to keep up Truth's Testimony in a suffering day, were but a
juggle, in which such as could seek to G. F. for a dispensation (as he
profanely flouts) were patronized, and all others rendered Criminal. Well, I am
satisfied, no care for the prosperity of Sion was the ground of this foul
suggestion. And if Ham was accursed for not covering his Father's nakedness,
what Anathema Maranatha's must they undergo, who under the show of Truth would
raise and foment such false surmizes and slanderous accusations against the
faithful Brethren, and that even among Unbelievers? which, had they been as
true as they are impiously false, a man that were far less than what he
pretends to, would never have thus told it in Gath, nor published it in
Askalon, to make the Uncircumcised rejoice.

J. P.
Let this be dispersed only where W. R 's abusive Book has gone.




