THE FLESH and BLOOD OF CHRIST, BOTH In the Mystery, and in the outward,
briefly, plainly, and uprightly acknowledged and testified to, for the
satisfaction and benefit of the tenderhearted, who desire to experience the
quickening, healing and cleansing virtue of it.

With a Brief Account concerning the People called Quakers, in reference both
to Principle and Doctrine.

Whereunto are added some few other things, which by the blessing of God, may
be experimentally found useful, to the true Pilgrims and faithful Travelers
out of the nature and spirit of this World.

Written in true love, and tenderness of Spirit, by Isaac Penington.

And without Controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness; God was manifest
in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit seen of Angels, Preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into glory,

1 Timothy 3.16. Of whom are the Fathers, and of whom concerning the Flesh, Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen,

Romans 9.5. Printed in the Year, 1675.

THE PREFACE*
HAving been lately at London, upon occasion of a Meeting between some of the
People called Quakers, and some of the People called Anabaptists, and other
Confederates; wherein I was somewhat concerned, being charged or brought in by
Thomas Hicks, in his Second Book of Dialogues, called Continuation, page 4. To
prove that the Quakers account the blood of Christ, no more than a common
thing. And having been at that Meeting, to clear my Innocence in that
particular: but the thing not then coming in question, and I being to return to
my Habitation in the Country (though I staid also a Second Meeting for that
purpose) it was on my heart, in the clearness and Innocence thereof; to give
forth this Testimony, to take of that untruth and calumny of T. H. both from
the People called Quakers, and my self, being both of us greatly therein
injured, as the Lord God of Heaven and Earth knows. I have had experience of
that despised People for many years; and I have often heard them (even the
ancient ones of them) own Christ, both inwardly and outwardly. Yea, I heard one
of the ancients of them thus testify, in a publick-Meeting, many years since,
that if Christ had not come in the Flesh in the fullness of time, to bear our
Sins in his own body on the Tree, and to offer himself up a Sacrifice for
mankind, all mankind had utterly perished. What cause then have we to praise
the Lord God for sending his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for what
his Son did therein! O Professors, do not pervert our words (by reading them
with a prejudiced mind) quite contrary to the drift of Gods Spirit by us. If ye
should thus read the Holy Scriptures, yea, the very words of Christ himself
therein, and give that wisdom of yours, which fights against us, scope to
comment upon them, and pervert them after this manner, what a strange and
hideous appearance of untruth and contradiction, to the very Scriptures of the
old Testament, might ye make of that wonderful appearance of God? For the words
of Christ seemed so foolish and impossible, to the wise men of that Age; that
they freequently contradicted, and sometimes derided him. If we be not of God,
we shall come to naught: nay, we had not stood to this day, if his mighty power
had not upheld us. We could not have stood inwardly, nor could we have stood
outwardly, against the fierce assaults we have met with both ways. And as we
have not had by-ends to move us inwardly: so neither have we had by-ends to
move us outwardly, as our God knows. O T. H. do thou believe the eternal
judgment, at the great day; not outwardly only in notion, but inwardly in
heart? O then consider, how will thou answer it to God, for saying so many
things in the name of a People, as their belief and words, which never were
spoken by any one of them, nor ever came into any of their hearts! Innocence in
me, life in me, truth in me, the Christian Spirit and Nature in me, is a
witness against thee, that thou wrotest thy Dialogues out of the Christian
Nature and Spirit: and thy Brethren, William Kiffin and the rest, who have
stood by thee, to justify thee (or at least seemed so to do) must take notice
of these things, and condemn them in thee, or they will expose themselves (and
their Religion) to the Righteous judgment of God, and of all who love Truth,
and hate Forgery and Deceit. I pity thee: yea, I can truly say, I forgive thee
the injury thou have done me (though indeed it is very great, thus to represent
me publicly, what thou could not have done, if thou had equally considered
the things written in that Book) and I also desire, that thou may be
sensible of what thou have so evilly done, and confess it before God; that he
also might forgive thee. O I would not bear the weight of this Sin at the
Judgment seat of Christ, for Ten thousand Worlds! And that these Books should
be so long public, and thy Brethren take no notice of them, but rather at last
apply themselves to justify thee; O how will they answer this thing, when they
come to answer it for ever! Oh what will ye set up an interest against our Lord
Christ (who is the Truth and teaches Truth) and bend all your strength and
understanding to make lies, falsehoods and forgeries to appear, as if they were
Truth, and not forgeries. If ye will judge your selves and repent of these
things, ye shall not be condemned of the Lord: but if ye will go on, to cover
and hide this great iniquity, ye shall not prosper therein. As for my
particular, I had committed my cause to the Lord, and intended to have been
wholly silent, knowing my Innocence will be cleared by him in this particular,
at the great day, and the love, truth and uprightness, wherein I wrote those
things, owned by him. But in the love of God, and in the stilness and
tenderness of my Spirit, I was moved by him to write what follows. And Oh that
it would please the Lord to make it serviceable, even to T. H. himself, for his
good,

J. P.

The CONTENTS.
1. The Preface, Relating the occasion of what follows page 3 2. The Flesh and
Blood of Christ, both in the Mystery and in the outward, etc. page 1 3. The
Conclusion of the first part p. 19 4. A brief Account concerning the People
called Quakers, in reference both to Principle and Doctrine p. 23 5. A few
words concerning the way of Peace p. 33 6. The Conclusion of the whole p. 37 7.
A Postscript, containing, 1. A few words concerning the doings and sufferings
of this despised People called Quakers p. 41 2. An Exhortation to true
Christianity. p. 49.

THE FLESH and BLOOD OF CHRIST, Both in the Mystery, and in the Outward;
briefly, plainly, and uprightly acknowledged and testified to, etc.
IN the Second part of Thomas Hicks his Dialogues, called Continuation, page 4.
He makes his personated Quaker speak thus. Thou say, we account the blood
of Christ no more than a common thing, yea no more than the blood of a common
Thief: To which he makes his personated Christian answer thus. Isaac Penington
(who I suppose is an approved Quaker) asks this question, can outward blood
cleanse? Therefore says he, we must enquire, whether it was the blood of the
Vail, that is, of the humane nature, or the blood within the Vail, (viz.) Of
that spiritual man consisting of Flesh, Blood and Bones, which took on him the
Vail, or humane Nature; it is not the blood of the Vail, that is but outward,
and can outward blood cleanse?

Now to satisfy any, that desire to understand the Truth as it is, and to know
what the intent of my heart and words (as spoken by me) were; I shall first say
somewhat to his stating the question: and then open my heart nakedly and
plainly, as it then was, and still is in this matter.

First, I answer, these were not my words, which he has set down as mine, but
words of his own patching up, partly out of several queries of mine, and partly
out of his own conceivings upon my queries, as if he intended to make me appear
both ridiculous and wicked at once. For I no where say, or affirm, or did ever
believe, that Christ is a spiritual man consisting of Flesh, Blood and Bones,
which took on him the Vail or humane Nature: Thus he represents me as
ridiculous. It is true, Christ inwardly, or to his inward being, was a Spirit,
or God blessed for ever manifested in Flesh, which (to speak properly) cannot
have Flesh, Blood and Bones, as man has. And then, besides his alterations at
the beginning, putting in only four words of my query, and leaving out that
which next follows (which might have manifested my drift and intent in them) he
puts in an affirmation which was not mine, in these his own words. It Is not the
Blood of the Vail, that is but outward; and then annexeth to this affirmation
of his own, the words of my former query. Can outward Blood cleanse? as if
these words of mine (can outward Blood cleanse?) did necessarily infer, that
the Blood of Christ is but a common thing. Herein he represents me wicked, and
makes me speak by his changing and adding, that which never was in my heart,
and the contrary whereto I have several times affirmed in that very Book, where
those several queries were put (out of which he forms this his own query,
giving it forth in my name.) For in the Tenth page of that Book, beginning at
line 3. I positively affirm thus, that Christ did offer up the Flesh and Blood
of that body (though not only so, for he poured out his Soul, he poured out his
life) a Sacrifice or Offering for sin, a Sacrifice unto the Father, and in it
tasted death for every man; and that it is upon consideration (and through Gods
acceptance of this Sacrifice for sin) that the sins of Believers are pardoned,
that God might be just; and the justifier of him who believes in Jesus, or who
is of the Faith of Jesus. Is this common Flesh and Blood? can this be affirmed
of common Flesh and Blood? ought not he to have considered this, and other
passages in my Book of the same tendency, and not thus have reproached me, and
misrepresented me to the world? Is this a Christian Spirit: or according to the
Law or Prophets, or Christ's Doctrine? Does he herein do, as he would be done
by? O that he had an heart to consider it! I might also except against those
words, Humane Nature (which he twice puts in) being not my words, nor indeed
my sense: for by humane Nature as I judge, is understood more than the body,
whereas I by the word Vail intended no more than the Flesh (or outward body)
which in Scripture is expressly so called, Heb. 10.20. through the Vail, that is
to say, his Flesh.

Secondly, I cannot but take notice of this, That he has not cited the place,
page or pages; nay not so much as named the Book, where those words or sayings
which he attributes to me are written, whereby any persons that were not
willing to take things upon bare Report (especially in so deep charges,
reflecting not only upon one person, but an whole people) might consult the
place, and see whether they were my words or no, and whether the queries I did
put (indeed to the hearts of people) had any such drift or no, and might
compare the words (if they were mine) both with what went before, and also
followed after; and with what was said in several other places of the Book,
which speak of Christ's Flesh and Blood as of no common thing, but as that
which God made use of toward the Redemption of Mankind.

Thirdly, The drift of all those Queries in that Book, was not to vilify the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, by representing it as a common or useless thing: but
to bring people from sticking in the outward, to a sense of the inward mystery,
without which inward sense and feeling, the magnifying and crying up the
outward does not avail. Indeed, at that time, I was in a great exercise
concerning Professors. Love was deeply working in my heart, and I was in a very
tender frame of Spirit toward them, as any may perceive, who in the fear of
God, and in meekness of Spirit shall read that Book (It is Entitled, A
question to the Professors of Christianity, whether they have the true, living,
powerful, saving knowledge of Christ, or no, etc.) And in this tender frame, in
the midst of my crying to God for them, those Queries from a true sense and
understanding sprang up in my heart, even to necessitate them, if possible to
some sense of the mystery, which there is an absolute necessity of, unto true
Christianity and Salvation. This was the very intent of my heart in the several
Queries, which generally speak of one and the same thing, under several
Metaphors and Figures. And that this was my intent, these words following in
the second page of my Preface to that Book, do plainly express, the words are
these. Now to draw men's minds to a sense of truth, to a sense of that which is
the thing, that they might know the Bread indeed, that they might know the
living waters, come to them and drink thereof, and find Christ in them a Well
of water springing up to eternal life; therefore was it in my heart to give
forth this Question and the ensuing Queries, which he that rightly answers,
must know the thing; and he that does not know the thing, by his inability to
answer, may find that he does not, and so may wait upon God, that he may
receive the knowledge of it, and come to it, for the eternal life which it
freely gives And that I did mean the mystery, when I speak of Bread, Water,
the Vine, the live-coal from the Altar, the leaves of the Tree of life, the
putting on Christ, the Flesh and Blood of Christ, etc. is very plain to him
that reads singly. But to make it manifest particularly, concerning the Flesh
and Blood of Christ, I shall recite one Query, it is the 33. Query, page 29.
The Query is thus. Is not the true Church, Flesh of Christ's Flesh, and Bone of
his Bone? Is not the false or Antichristian Church, Flesh of Antichrists Flesh,
and Bone of Antichrists Bone? What is the Flesh of the spiritual Whore, which
is to be stripped naked and burnt with fire? Shall ever the Church which is of
Christ's Flesh, be stripped naked and burnt with fire? Nay, does not his Flesh
make able to abide the devouring fire, and to dwell with the everlasting
burnings? Can this possibly be understood of outward Flesh and Bone? is it not
manifestly intended of Flesh and Bone in the Mystery? yea, that I did relate to
the Mystery in that very Query, out of which he takes the four first words, and
no more, is very manifest by the following words of the same Query. It is the
17. Query, page 25. The Query runs thus, Can outward Blood cleanse the
Conscience? ye that are spiritual consider (can outward water wash the Soul
clean?) ye that have ever felt the Blood of sprinkling from the Lord upon your
Consciences, and your Consciences cleansed thereby? did ye ever feel it to be
outward? It is one thing what a man apprehends (in the way of notion) from the
letter concerning the things of God, and another thing what a man feels in
spirit: Is it not manifest by the express words themselves, that I spoke of the
inward feeling of the Blood in the mystery?

Fourthly, This Query, Can outward Blood cleanse the Conscience, etc. does not
necessarily, nor indeed at all infer, that the Blood of Christ, as to the
outward, was but a common thing, or useless. If I had been to answer this Query
my self, he does not know what my answer would have been. It was put to
Professors to answer, inwardly in their hearts; who, I did believe, upon
serious consideration, could not but confess, in way of answer thereto, that
outward Blood it self (or of it self) could not cleanse and purge away the
filth that was inward; but that must be done by that which is inward, living
and spiritual. Then hereby they had been brought to see the necessity of the
mystery, the spirit, the power, the life of the Son to be inwardly revealed in
them: and then had I obtained my end. Nor was I their enemy in desiring or
aiming at this for them, or in setting Queries before them, which to my eye (as
in the sight of God) seemed proper and conducible in themselves (however they
might fail as to them) toward the obtaining of this end. And if they could
once come to this, to own the Flesh and Blood in the mystery, and so come to
partake of its cleansing and nourishing virtue, and not fix and appropriate
that to the outward, which chiefly belongs to the mystery; I say, if they could
but go thus far with me, in owning the inward life and power, in the sensible
feeling and operation thereof; I could meet them a great way in speaking
glorious things of, and attributing a cleansing or washing virtue to the
outward, in and through, and with the inward. For I do not separate the inward
and outward in my own mind, but the Lord opened my heart, and taught me thus to
distinguish, according to the Scriptures, in love to them, and for their sakes.
For that was not my intent, to deny the outward, or make it appear as a common
or useless thing. There was never such a sense in my heart, nor was ever word
written or spoken by me to that end: which to make more manifest I shall now
plainly open my heart, how it has been, and is still with me, in this respect,
since it pleased the God and Father of mercies, to reveal the mystery of
himself, and of his Son in me.

In the first place, I freely confess, that I do own and acknowledge, as in
Gods sight, Our Lord Jesus Christ, his Flesh and Blood in the mystery. The
Apostle Paul speaks of the mystery of God, and of the Father and of Christ,
Colos. 2.2. The Son was revealed in him, Gal. 1.16. and so he knew the mystery
of Christ, and Preached the mystery of Christ, Colos. 4.3. He was made an able
Minister of the new Covenant; not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, or mystery:
and so he Preached the wisdom of God in the mystery, or Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.7. 2
Cor. 3.6. Colos. 1.25, 26, 27. and he had great conflict to bring people to the
rich knowledge, and acknowledgement of the mystery, Chap. 2.1, 2. He was sent
to turn men from darkness, and from the power of Satan, (which is a mystery,
and works in men's hearts in a mystery) to the light, to the Spirit and power of
God, which is a mystery also: and remission of sins is received in and through
this mystery, Act. 26.18. And I desire every serious and tender heart to
consider, whether this knowledge of Christ in the mystery, was not that which
he called the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ his Lord, Phil. 3.8.
Certain I am, that the knowledge of God and Christ in the mystery, is the most
excellent knowledge, and no less then life eternal, inwardly revealed and felt
from God in the heart. And here no legal righteousness, no self-righteousness
can stand: but the virtue and power of Christ's Death and Resurrection, inwardly
revealed and felt in the mystery, subdues and destroys it all. Indeed
self-righteousness may be given up in way of notion, or seemingly destroyed as
to men's apprehensions, without the revealing or working of the mystery: but it
cannot be destroyed in reallity, but where this is felt. But where the mystery
is known, is received, and thoroughly works: self-righteousness can have no
place there. Now the Apostle, who was acquainted with the mystery of Christ, he
speaks of his Body, Flesh and Bones in the mystery, Ephesians. 5.30. (And if there be
Flesh and Bones in the mystery, is there not also Blood in the mystery?) yea
the Apostle John speaks of Spirit, Water and Blood, 1 John 5.8. Now consider
seriously, are all these of one and the same nature? or are they of a different
nature? the Spirit of one nature, and the Water and Blood of another nature?
Blessed be the Lord, the birth which is born of the Spirit, and is spiritual,
knows the nature of the spirit which begat it, and knows water which is
inward and heavenly, and blood which is not at all of an inferior nature to
it. And Jesus Christ, our Lord and Teacher, speaks of Flesh which came down
from Heaven, which Flesh is the Bread of life, which he that lives, feeds upon;
and none can feed upon, but they that live. And by this it is manifest (to all
to whom God has given understanding in the mystery) that his Flesh and Blood
in the mystery is intended by him, in that he says, He that eats my Flesh,
and drinks my Blood, dwells in me and I in him, John 6.56. This dwelling in
each other, is an effect of the mystery, and is witnessed by none that know not
the mystery. And to this effect Christ himself expressly expounds it, ver. 63.
It is the spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing: the words that I
speak to you, they are spirit, and they are life. As if he had said, I am
speaking of the Souls food, I am speaking of the Heavenly bread, I am speaking
of spirit and life, I am speaking of the mystery, which ye look upon and
understand as outwardly intended by me, and so miss of the mystery, of the
spirit, wherein is the quickening virtue, and look only at the outward Body or
Flesh, which without the spirit profits not, nor ever can profit any man.

Secondly, I confess further, that I have the sense, experience, and knowledge
of this also, that in the mystery is the quickening virtue, the cleansing
virtue, the nourishing virtue unto life eternal. The spirit, the water, the
blood inwardly sprinkled, inwardly poured by God upon the Soul, inwardly felt
and drunk in by the thirsty earth, do cleanse, do feed, do nourish, do refresh.
Does not God promise to sprinkle clean water upon his Israel in the new
Covenant, and they shall be clean? and to pour water on him that is thirsty,
and Floods upon the dry grounds? is it not by the spirit of judgment and
burning, that God washes away the filth of the Daughter of Sion, etc. Esaias
4.4. Does not the live coal from the Altar, purify and take away the iniquity?
Esa. 6. O read inwardly, O wait to be taught of God to read inwardly, that ye
may know what these things mean. Why should ye quarrel at the precious and
tender openings of truth, in love to your Souls.

Thirdly, I have likewise this sense, and have also had this knowledge and
experience, that the outward, without this, cannot avail. A man is not cleansed
by notions or apprehensions concerning the thing: but by the thing it self. Let
a man believe what he can concerning the blood of Christ, and apply to himself
what promises he can, yet this will not do (O how grievously do men mistake
herein!) but he must feel somewhat from God, somewhat of the new Creation in
Christ Jesus, somewhat of his light (shining from him the Son, into the heart)
somewhat of his life, somewhat of his power, working against the darkness and
power of the enemy in him. Now a man being turned to this, joined to this,
gathered to this standard of the Lord, translated in some degree out of himself
into this: here somewhat of the mystery is revealed, and found working in him;
and so far he is of God, and has some true sense, and some true understanding
from him. And here also he has right to Christ's Flesh and Blood in the
outward, and to all the benefits and precious effects that come thereby. For by
owning the mystery, and receiving the mystery, we are not taught of God to deny
any thing of the outward Flesh and Blood, or of his obedience and sufferings in
the Flesh, but rather are taught and enabled there rightly to understand it,
and to reap the benefits and precious fruits of it.

Fourthly, The Lord has shown me this also, very manifestly and clearly, That
in former times (in this Nation, as well as elsewhere) before Professors ran so
into heaps (I mean, into several ways and forms of Church fellowship so
called) they had more inward sense of the Mystery, than now they have; and were
a great deal more tender (both unto the Lord, and one toward another) than now
they are. For then grace in the heart, and the inward feeling was the thing
that was most minded among the stricter sort. They did not mind so much bare
reading, or hearing, or praying, or any outward observation whatsoever, as what
they felt therein. Let men have spoken never so many glorious words concerning
the things of God, yet if they had not been spoken warmly and freshly by him
that spoke them, there was little satisfaction to the Soul that hungered after
that which was living, but rather an inward grief and dissatisfaction felt. So
that in that day there was an inward sense of the mystery (though not a
distinct knowledge of it) which was precious in the eye of God, and very
savoury inwardly in the heart. But now, in so long time, by looking so much
outward, and beating their brains, and disputing about the outward, many have
very much (if not wholly) lost the sense of the inward, and are found
contending for the outward, against the very appearance and manifestation of
the inward, and so are in danger of being hardened and sealed up in that which
is dead and litteral, out of the limits of that which is living and spiritual.
It is a dreadful thing to fight against the living God, and his living
appearance in the hearts of those whom he chooses, in any Age or Generation:
The Lord has been pleased to bring us (a poor despised remnant) back to that
which first gave us life, in the days of our former profession. O that ye were
brought thither also, that that might remove the vail, hardness, darkness, and
deep prejudices from you; which can never be removed, while ye stick in
litteral apprehensions, without the light and teachings of Gods spirit!

Now, as touching the outward, which ye say we deny, because of our testimony
to the inward, I have frequently given a most solemn testimony thereto; and God
knows it to be the truth of my heart, and that the testifying to the inward
(from which the outward came) does not make the outward void, but rather
establish it, in its place and service. God himself, who knew what virtue was
in the inward, yet has pleased to make use of the outward: and who may
contradict or slight his wisdom and Council therein? Glorious was the
appearance and manifestation of his Son in Flesh, precious his subjection and
holy obedience to his Father; his giving himself up to death for sinners, was
of great esteem in his eye It was a spotless Sacrifice of great value, and
effectual for the Remission of sins: and I do acknowledge, humbly unto the
Lord, the Remission of my sins thereby, and bless the Lord for it, even for
giving up his Son to death for us all, and giving all that believe in his name
and power, to partake of Remission through him. And seeing it is thus with me,
seeing the Root of the matter is in me, O how can any man that hopes to be
redeemed by my Lord and Savior, reproach me for speaking of the mystery,
without the least Derogation to the outward, or what was done by him in the
outward! But if I should speak vehemently concerning men's neglecting the
mystery, and setting up that which is outward instead of it, and without it; I
should not be condemned, but justified of the Lord in so doing. Indeed there is
a great and weighty charge from Gods spirit, upon the Professors of this age,
for departing from the inward (I mean that sweet sense, which in some measure
God gave them in former times of the inward) and magnifying and striving to
establish that which they apprehend concerning the outward, without it, and
against it. O that it were otherwise with them, that God may not have this
charge to manage against them, when at the great day they are to appear before
him, and be judged by him: When all that have slighted or spoken contemptuously
of his Sons appearance in Flesh (and have not come to a sense thereof, and
Repentance for it) shall be condemned, and they that have slighted or spoken
contemptuously of his appearance in spirit, shall not be justified: which
appearance is now made manifest in the hearts of many, blessed be the Lord for
it. O what cries have been in my heart many years concerning you! (O ye
Professors of all sorts, who have had any tenderness toward the Lord,) that ye
might see and know the Lords Christ, and confess him in spirit, in the Mystery,
even in his inward appearance in the heart, and might feel his redeeming power
and virtue there, and so be brought into Union and Fellowship with him!

The Conclusion of this Part.
THere is a precious promise of Gods making a Feast of fat things on his holy
Mountain, and of destroying there the face of the covering cast over all
people, and the vail that is spread over all Nations, Esa. 25.6, 7. Now, what
is this Mountain? was there not a Mount-Sion under the Law, which was
figurative? And is there not a Mount Sion under the Gospel, which is the
substance of that figure? And did not the Christians in the Apostles days, who
were called of God and sanctified, come to this Mount-Sion, and to the City of
the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, where they had fellowship with God the
judge of all, and with Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, etc. Heb. 12.22,
24. And was not the vail here done away, in him who was their Lord, their
light, their life, their strength, their Son of Righteousness, their bright and
morning Star? so that with open face they could behold the glory of the Lord,
and were changed thereby into his Heavenly Image, from glory to glory, 2 Cor.
3.18. But alas, how has that life, spirit and power been lost, since the days
of the Apostles! Men have still owned the Apostles words, and formed many
notions and apprehensions out of the Letter: but lost the Apostles spirit, lost
the knowledge of the holy Mountain, where the vail is taken away, and where the
Feast of fat things is made: and so are only dreaming about eating and drinking
spiritually, but know not what it is to feed on the living substance. And so
(being ignorant of that) the vail is over their hearts, while they read the
Prophets words, and Christ's and his Apostles words: and the mystery of life,
and of the redeeming power is hid from their eyes: and that which God intended
to them for a Table, is become their snare (as it was with the Jews) and their
back is so bowed down under the loads and burdens of the Enemy, that they
cannot so much as hope or believe in the power of life for Redemption
therefrom, but conclude it must necessarily be so with them all their days. O
where is the faith that gives victory over the Enemies? Where Is the ability in
the faith so to resist him, as to make him fly? Where Is Satan's falling like
lightning (oh his strength before the power of the Lord is but a flash!) and
the God of peace his treading him under the feet of his Saints? O where is that
truth, or that knowledge of the Son, which makes free from him? ( Joh. 8.32,
36.) Where Is that spirit, wherein liberty from his power and snares is felt, 2
Cor. 3.17. Where Is living in the spirit, and walking in the spirit, and in the
pure light of the Lord, when he cannot come? Where Is reading of the Scriptures
in that which gives to witness them, and which fulfils them in the heart? O the
mystery of godliness, the power of godliness, where the life is revealed, and
the vail taken away, and an understanding given, opened and kept open to read
and understand the Scriptures aright, yea and the hidden glory also! Where it
cannot be said in truth, to those that are there, ye know not the Scriptures,
nor the power of God; but ye have received power to become Sons of God, and ye
are in him that is true, who truly opens the Scriptures in your hearts, and
gives you the enjoyment, inheritance and possession of the precious promises,
whereby ye are made partakers of the Divine nature, and live in him who is the
head and spring of that nature! O that people, that profess Christ, were here!
O that they did know him who begets! and then they would not be so ignorant of
those that are begotten by him: but would come into the true faith, into the
true love, into the true knowledge and obedience of him, whom God has
appointed to guide and govern, and build up the whole living body! The Lord
guide men inwardly thither, where the mystery is revealed, and the fellowship
with God and his Son and Saints held in the Mystery: for our fellowship is not
in a notional knowledge concerning Christ; but in the life it self, which the
Lord God gather his people more and more into, and build them more and more up
in, Amen.

A brief ACCOUNT Concerning the People called QUAKERS, in reference both to
Principle and Doctrine.
We are a People of God's gathering, who (many of us) had long waited for his
appearance, and had undergone great Distress, for want thereof.
Q. But some may say, what appearance of the Great God and Savior did ye want?

Answ. We wanted the presence and power of his spirit, to be inwardly
manifested in our spirits. We had (as I may say) what we could gather from the
Letter, and endeavored to practice what we could read in the Letter: but we
wanted the power from on high, we wanted life, we wanted the presence and
fellowship of our beloved; we wanted the knowledge of the Heavenly Seed and
Kingdom, and an entrance into it, and the holy Dominion and Reign of the Lord
of life over the Flesh, over sin and death in us.

Quest. How did God appear to you?

Answ. The Son of Righteousness did arise in us, the dayspring from on high,
the Morning Star did visit us, insomuch that we did as really see and feel the
light and brightness of the inward day in our spirits, as ever we felt the
darkness of the inward night?

Quest. How did God gather you?

Answ. By the voice of his Son, by the Arm of his Son, by the virtue of his
Sons light and life, inwardly revealed and working in our hearts. This loosed
us inwardly from the darkness, from the bonds of sin and iniquity, from the
power of the Captiver and Destroyer: and turned our minds inwardly toward our
Lord and Savior, to mind his inward appearance, his inward shinings, his
inward quicknings; all which were fresh from God and full of virtue. And as we
came to be sensible of them, join to them, receive and give up to them, we came
to partake of their virtue, and to witness the rescuing and redeeming of our
Souls thereby. So that by hearing the Sons voice and following him, we came to
find him the way to the Father, and to be gathered home by him to the Fathers
house, where is Bread enough, and Mansions of rest and peace for all the
Children of the most High.

Now, as touching the blessed principle of truth, which we have had experience
of, and testify to (for how can we conceal so rich a Treasure, and be faithful
to God, or bear true good will to men!) it is no new thing in it self, though
of late more clearly revealed, and the minds of men more clearly directed, and
guided to it, than in former ages. It is no other then that which Christ
himself abundantly Preached, who Preached the Kingdom, who Preached the truth
which makes free, and that under many Parables and Resemblances: sometimes of a
little Seed, sometimes of a Pearl or hid Treasure, sometimes of a Leaven or
Salt, sometimes of a lost piece of Silver, etc. Now, what is this, and where is
this to be found? What is this, which is like a little Seed, a Pearl, etc. And
where is it to be found? What is the field? is it not the World, and is not the
World set in man's heart? what is the house, which is to be swept and the Candle
lighted in? Is it not that house, or heart, where the many Enemies are? A man's
Enemies, says Christ, are those of his own house. Indeed the testimony
concerning this was precious to us: but the finding and experiencing the thing
testified of, to be according to the testimony, was much more. And this we say,
in perfect truth of heart, and in most tender love to the Souls of people; that
whoever tries, shall find this little thing, this little Seed of the Kingdom,
to be a Kingdom, to be a Pearl, to be Heavenly Treasure, to be the Leaven of
Life, leavening the heart with life, and with the most precious oil and
ointment of Healing and Salvation. So that we testify to no new thing; but to
the truth and grace which was from the beginning: which was always in Jesus
Christ the Lord and Savior, and dispensed by him in all all Ages and
Generations, whereby he quickened, renewed, and changed the heart of the true
believers, in his inward and spiritual appearance in them, thereby destroying
the Enemies of their own house, and saving them from them. For indeed there is
no saving the Creature, without destroying that in the Creature, which brings
spiritual death and destruction upon it. Israel of old was saved by the
destroying of their outward Enemies: and Israel now (the new Israel, the inward
Israel) is saved by the destruction of their inward Enemies. O that people
could come out of their own wisdom and wait for Gods wisdom, that in it they
might come to see the glory, the excellency, the exceeding rich virtue and
Treasures of life, that are wrapped up in this principle or seed of Life; and
so might receive it, give up to it, and come to partake thereof.

And as touching Doctrines, we have no new Doctrine to hold forth. The
Doctrines held forth in the holy Scriptures, are the Doctrines that we believe.
And this does farther seal to us our belief of this principle, because we find
it a Key, by which God opens the Scriptures to us, and gives us the living
sense and evidence of them in our hearts. We see and have felt in it to whom
the curse and wrath belongs, and to whom the love, mercy, peace, blessings and
precious promises belong; and have been led by Gods holy spirit and power,
through the judgments, to the mercy, and to the partaking of the precious
promises. So that, what should we publish any new faith, or any new Doctrines
for? (indeed we have none to publish) but all our aim is to bring men to the
ancient principle of truth, and to the right understanding and practice of the
ancient Apostolic Doctrine and holy Faith once delivered to the Saints.
Head-notions do but cause disputes: but heart-knowledge, heart-experience,
sense of the living power of God inwardly, the evidence and demonstration of
his spirit in the inward parts, puts an end to disputes, and puts men upon the
inward travel and exercise of spirit, by that which is new and living, which
avails with God. Now whereas many are offended at us, because we do not more
Preach Doctrinal points, or the History of Christ, as touching his Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, etc. but our ^eclaration and Testimony is chiefly
concerning a Principle, to direct and guide men's minds thereto.

To give a plain account of This thing, as it pleases the Lord to open my
heart at this time, in love and good will to satisfy and remove Prejudices
where it may be: thus it is in brief.
FIrst, that which God has given us the experience of (after our great loss in
the litteral knowledge of things) and that which he has given us to testify
of, is the mystery, the hidden life, the inward and spiritual appearance of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, revealing his power inwardly, destroying Enemies
inwardly, and working his work inwardly in the Heart. Oh, this was the joyful
sound to our Souls, even the tidings of the arising of that inward life and
power which could do this? Now this spiritual appearance of his, was after his
appearance in flesh, and is the standing and lasting Dispensation of the
Gospel, even the appearance of Christ in his spirit and power inwardly in the
hearts of his. So that in minding this, and being faithful in this respect, we
mind our peculiar work, and are faithful in that which God has peculiarly
called us to, and requires of us.

Secondly, There is not that need of publishing the other, as formerly was. The
Historical Relation concerning Christ, is generally believed, and received by
all sorts, that pretend to Christianity. His death, his miracles, his rising,
his ascending, his intercedeing, etc. is generally believed by all people: but
the mystery they miss of, the hidden life, they are not acquainted with; but
alienated from the life of God, in the midst of their litteral owning and
acknowledging of these things.

Thirdly, The knowledge of these, without the knowledge of the mystery, is not
sufficient to bring them unto God; for many set up that which they gather, and
comprehend from the Relation concerning the thing, instead of the thing it
self; and so never come to a sense of their need of the thing it self; nay, not
so far, as rightly to seek after it. And so, many are builders, and many are
built up very high in Religion, in a way of notion and practice, without
acquaintance with the Rock of Ages, without the true knowledge and
understanding of the foundation and Cornerstone. My meaning is, they have a
notion of Christ to be the Rock, a notion of him to be the foundation-stone:
but never come livingly to feel him the Rock, to feel him the foundation-stone
inwardly laid in their hearts, and themselves made living stones in him, and
built upon him the main and fundamental stone. Where is this to be felt, but
within? And they that feel this within, do they not feel Christ within? And can
any that feel him within, deny him to be within, the strength of life, the hope
of glory? Well, it is true once again (spiritually now, as well as formerly
literally) The stone which the builders refused (Christ within the builders of
this age refuse) is become the head of the Corner, who knits together his
sanctified body, his living body the Church, in this our day, more gloriously
than in former Ages and Generations, blessed be the name of our God.

Fourthly, The mystery, the hidden life, the appearance of Christ in spirit
comprehends the other, and the other is not lost or denied, but found in it,
and there discerned and acknowledged more clearly and abundantly. It was to be
after it, and comprehends that which went before it. Paul did not lose any
thing of the excellent knowledge of Christ, when he said, Hence forth know we
no more after the flesh; yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet
henceforth know we him no more. If he did not know Christ after the flesh, how
did he know him? Why, as the Father inwardly revealed him. He knew him in his
spirit and power. He knew his death inwardly, he knew his Resurrection
inwardly, he knew the spirit, the virtue, the life, the power of it inwardly.
He knew the thing in the mystery in his own heart. O precious knowledge! O the
excellency of this knowledge of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ! what is the
outwardly most exact litteral knowledge without this? But what then! do I now
deny or slight the outward? No, I have it here, and I have the inward feeling
of the spirit of life, how it dwelt in him, how it wrought in him, and of what
wonderful value all his actions and obedience were, in and through the virtue
of this spirit. Was Abraham's offering his Son so precious in Gods eye? O then
what is this! Never was such a body so sanctified, so prepared: never such a
Sacrifice offered. O the infinite worth and value of it! For by the inward life
and teachings of Gods spirit, am I taught and made able to value that glorious
outward appearance, and manifestation of the life and power of God in that
Heavenly flesh (as in my heart, I have often called it) for the life so dwelt
in it, that it was even one with it. Yet still it was a vail, and the mystery
was the thing, and the eye of life looks through the vail into the mystery, and
passes through it, as I may say, as to the outward, that it may behold its
glory in the inward. And here the flesh of Christ, the vail is not lost, but is
found and known in its glory in the inward. Be not offended at me, O tender
hearted Reader, for I write in love, things true, according to the inward
feeling and demonstration of Gods spirit, though not easy perhaps to be
understood at present by thee: but in due time the Lord can make them manifest
to thee, if thou in uprightness and tenderness of heart, and in the silence of
the fleshly part wait upon him.

A few WORDS Concerning the way of PEACE.
The way of Peace they have not known,

Romans 3.17.
THere is a way of Peace, of true Peace with God, who is an Adversary to all
that is unholy and unrighteous. Those who have been unholy and unrighteous, who
have been awakened, troubled, and could find no rest, but the severe and
righteous judgments and wrath of the Lord, lying upon their Spirits night and
day; having at length had their ears opened by him, and being led by him out of
the unholy and unrighteous way, into the holy and righteous way, have felt both
Life and Peace therein.

Now there are two sorts, which the Apostle* here mentions (or two states,
which the Apostle here speaks of) which have not known, nor can know the way of
Peace with God; who is an Adversary to them both, and will one day speak
trouble to them both, when their Souls and Consciences come to be searched and
judged by him.

The one is the Profane or Gentile-state, which is without the sense of God,
not heeding any appearance of his, or any inward voice of his Spirit, or the
writing of his Law upon their heart. These never knew the way, wherein the
heart is inwardly and spiritually circumcised and renewed, sin forgiven, and
Peace obtained.

The other is the professing, or outward Jewes-state, who may study the Letter,
and apply themselves to conform outwardly to the Letter, but never were
acquainted with the inward spirit and power. These greatly differ from the
Gentile or Prophane-state, both in outward appearance, and in their own eye:
but are the same in the ground, with the Gentiles, and know no more of the way
of Peace, than the other do.

Quest. But what is the way of Peace, which neither the Profane, nor any sort
of Professors out of the life and power, ever knew or can know?

Answ. It is an inward way, away for the inward Jews, for the inwardly renewed
and circumcised to walk in. It is an holy or sanctified way, for the sanctified
ones to walk in. It is a living way, which none but the living can find. It is
a new way, which none but those to whom God has given the new eye can see. It
is a way that God prepares and casts up, and leads men's spirits into (who
hearken unto him) and guides the feet of his Saints in* It is a strait and
narrow way, which no lust of the flesh, nor wisdom of the flesh can find out,
or enter into. O how little, how low, how poor, how empty, how naked must he
be, that enters into this way, and walks therein! Many may seek after it, and
may think to find it, and walk in it, but few shall be able, as our Lord Christ
said. Here circumcision outward avails not, here want of that circumcision
hinders not: here bodily exercise profits little. The new Creature is all here,
the cross of Christ is all here, the power of God is all here; and he that
walks according to this rule, Peace is upon him, and the whole Israel of God.
But he that knows not this rule, nor walks according to this rule; Peace is not
upon him, nor is he one of the inward Israel of God, who receive power to
become Sons, who receive the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, which
is the inward rule of the inward Israel.

This was the way of Peace from the beginning; this is the way of Peace still;
and there is not another. To be new Created in Christ Jesus, to be ingraffed
into him, to abide in him, to have the circumcision of the flesh (the body of
the sins of the flesh cut off) by the circumcision of Christ (made inwardly in
the heart without hands) and to walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit
(even in the newness of the Spirit) he is life and Peace, rest and joy for
evermore. The Lord of his tender mercy, give men a sense of it, and lead men
into it more and more, Amen.

The Conclusion of the Whole.
THere is a Birth which is born, not of Bloods, nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man; but of God, John 1.13. And this Birth which is born of
the Spirit, is Spirit, Chap. 3.6. Now this Birth, which is born of the Spirit,
and is Spirit, has a life and way of knowledge, suitable to its nature and
being, which is very far above man. It Is life is in the Spirit, and its walking
in the Spirit, and its knowledge is after the way of the Spirit, very far above
man's way of conceiving or comprehending. The Birth it self is a Mystery to man,
and it is way of knowing, is a way altogether hid from man. It is indeed in the
evidence and demonstration of Gods Spirit, in the shinings of his light in the
heart. In thy light shall we see light. The Birth knows what this means. There
is a wise and prudent part in man, from which God hides the sight of his
Kingdom, and the Heavenly glory thereof: but there is a Babe, to which God
reveals the Mystery thereof. Flesh and Blood cannot reveal: but the Father can
and does to his Children, who is the Teacher of them all, from the least to the
greatest, in the new and living Covenant. There is man's day, and there is Gods
day. There is man's day of gathering knowledge, after his fleshly manner of
comprehending: and there is Gods day of giving knowledge, by the shinings of
the light of his own eternal Spirit. In man's day, how does wise and prudent man
beat his brains, and labor in the fire for very vanity! but in Gods day, how
does the knowledge of the Lord cover the Earth, as the waters cover the Sea!
When the dayspring from on high visits inwardly, when the Lord lights the
Candle inwardly; O how clear is the knowledge of the Lord, and how does it
abound then! O what a difference there is between man's apprehensions and
conceivings concerning Christ, and Gods revealing him inwardly! and between
man's coming to Christ according to his own apprehensions, and his coming to
Christ in the Heavenly drawings and teachings of the Father ( Joh. 6.45.) O
that the begettings of Life and Birth thereof were felt in men's hearts, that in
it men might know the day of God, and the Kingdom of God, and the Treasures of
wisdom which are hid in Christ, and will ever be so, but as Christ is inwardly
revealed and formed in the heart! Many may have notions of Christ's being formed
in them: Ah, but to feel it inwardly! there is the Sweetness, there is the
assurance, there is the life, there is the Peace, there is the Righteousness of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and there is the joy of the true Christian for ever. Come, O
come, all sorts of tender Professors out of your selves into Gods Spirit, into
Gods truth; that ye may know what it is to be in the Spirit, and in the Truth:
and what it is to live there, and to know things there, and to worship there,
and to have fellowship with the Father and Son there. The poor receive the
Gospel, the poor receive the Kingdom, the poor receive the power, the poor
receive the Righteousness and Salvation of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ye are too
rich in your comprehensions and gathered knowledge, from your own litteral
conceivings, to learn to wait aright, to receive of him his Gold, his Raiment,
and his eye salve. What pleasure is it to us to testify against you? Were it
not for obedience to our God, and love to your Souls, we would never do it. We
are content and satisfied to be of the little despised Flock, which the
Shepherd feeds, giving to every one his proportion of daily nourishment, Life,
Peace, Righteousness and Joy. It is our love to you, that we would not have you
lay out your Money for that which is not Bread, and your labor for that which
will not satisfy the truly hungry and awakened Soul, but might come to feed on
substance, on the life it self, on the sweetness and fatness of Gods house,
where nothing that any of the children can need or long after is wanting. O
that ye had the sense of our love! If ye had the true understanding and sense
of Gods love, ye could not but have a sense of our love also: for it comes from
him, and it flows toward you in his will and tender movings. Do ye love God?
are your hearts circumcised to love God? if not, ye do not truly love. And if
ye loved him that begets, ye would love them that are begotten by him. Your
love is to your own notions and apprehensions of God; not to his nature; For if
ye loved his nature (that holy, Heavenly, spiritual nature as it is in him) ye
could not but love it in his Children also. Well, our God is Love, and our God
has given us Love, and taught us to Love, even our Enemies, and to wrestle
with our God for them; that if it be possible, the Lord may remove the Scales
from their eyes, and give them Repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth,
as it is in Jesus, where it is more living and powerful, more effectual and
operative (inwardly purifying, sanctifying, yea and justifying also) then any,
but only those that are born of God, (and kept alive by him), yet ever knew or
can know.

A POSTSCRIPT.
Containing a few Words concerning the doings and sufferings of that despised
People called QUAKERS, which are both mis-understood, and misrepresented by
many; with an Exhortation to true Christianity.
FIrst, their doings are looked upon by many, to be from a natural Principle,
and according to a Covenant of works, and not from the free grace and gift of
Gods Spirit.

Now concerning this, I can speak somewhat faithfully, as having been long
exercised in the Principle, and as having had experience of the grace and
tender mercy of the Lord from my Childhood. And indeed, thus it has been with
me from my Childhood; what ever has been done in me or by me, that was good, I
have felt to be from Gods grace and mercy to me, and have cried grace, grace,
mercy, mercy to the Lord continually therefore. And when I was turned to his
truth in the inward parts, I found it was Gods grace and tender love to me to
turn me to it, and to preserve me being turned; and to cause it to spring in me
day by day, and to give me ability through it. Ah, none knows, but they who
have had experience, how we have been weakened in the natural part; how poor we
have been made, that we might receive the Gospel, and how poor in our selves we
are kept, that we might enjoy the riches and inheritance of the Kingdom. And
this we daily experience, that not by the works of Righteousness which we had
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, and does daily save us, by the
washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the holy Ghost! yea, Gods writing
his Law in our hearts, and placing his fear there, and putting his spirit
within us, to enlighten and quicken and cause us to walk in his ways, and to
keep his statutes and judgments, and do them, and all the mortifying of sin,
and denying of the lusts of the flesh, and performing that which is holy and
acceptable in the eyes of the Lord (as all that proceeds from his own holy
spirit is) all this is of the new Covenant, and performed by the working
thereof, and not by the working of the natural part of it self, but by the
working of the spirit of life in the new Birth, and through the natural part as
his instrument. So let none reproach the works that God brings forth in us, who
has created us a new in Christ Jesus unto good works, lest thereby he reproach
the holy Spirit and power of the living God, in which they are wrought, and by
which they are brought forth, and could never be brought forth without it.

Then, for our sufferings, indeed they are gifts we receive from God: so that
we can truly say, it is given us by the Lord our God, not only to believe in
his Son, but to suffer for his sake: and that it is only in good Conscience to
God, and by the assistance of the Lord, that we suffer: and that the patience
and meekness wherewith we suffer, is not of our selves, but of him. When ever
the Lord permits afflictions or sufferings to come upon us; our eye is to him,
and we enter into them in his fear, knowing our own inability to go through
them, and looking up to him for strength. And when we are in them, while they
continue, we daily look up to him for strength, and have been many times very
weak in our selves, when immediately, or very soon after, we have felt great
strength in the Lord. Also, after our sufferings, when the Lord has been with
us all along, and brought us through our sufferings, in the peace and joy of
his Spirit; we do not look back boastingly, as if we had been any thing, or
done any thing as of our selves; but we bow before the Lord, and bless the
Lord, when we consider how he has been with us, and how he has upheld us by
the right hand of his Righteousness, and what he has done for us, when we were
very poor, weak, afflicted, and often sorely distressed. Therefore let none
Reproach, mis-represent or vilify our sufferings, which our God has helped us
through, and for which we (in humility of heart) give him thanks, and cannot
but do so all our days; because the thankful remembrance and sense of them is
written by the finger of his Spirit upon our hearts. O all sorts of People,
whom we love and travel for, and use our interest in the Lord our God for, that
ye might be truly sensible of your conditions, know the inward appearance and
visits of the Shepherd and Savior of the Soul, turn to him (looking in true
faith unto him) and be saved, I say unto you, in tenderness of Spirit, O, do
not requite us so ill for our love and truth of heart toward you, as to cast
untrue and unjust Reproaches upon us, and to render that truth vile, which God
has made honorable, in sanctifying and redeeming many thereby. Truly our love
is from the God of love. We could not so love you, as we do, if our God had not
taught us: nor so seek after you, as we do, in tenderness of Bowels, if we were
not instruments in the hand of the Shepherd of Israel. And the light we
testify of, which we feel shine in us; it is no less then the true, sure light
of the Sun of Righteousness, which God has caused to shine in our hearts, who
also loves mankind, and causes it to glance into the darkest Corners of the
Earth. And the life we are quickened by, out of Sin and Transgression, and the
power we have received to become Sons of God, it is from him who is the
fountain of life, and has all power in Heaven and Earth. O that ye could
receive the blessed report! O that the Arm of the Lord might be revealed in
you! O that ye could feel and witness the Savior working out your Salvation in
you, binding the strong man in you, casting him out of you, with all his goods
after him, that the place of the wicked one might be found no more in you, nor
none of his lusts or vain thoughts lodge in your hearts any more; but ye might
witness and experience the new heart, the clean heart, the pure heart, in which
God dwells; and the eye that sees him that is invisible. O glory to the Lord
for what he has done in and for a despised People (who were no People, before
the Lord made them one) who has brought them to Sion, his holy Mountain, where
he dwells and reigns, and where he builds up his own house and Temple, which he
establishes over all, where the Sheep of Israel seed, and where the Shepherd
of Israel Reigns and Triumphs in glory, over the enemies of his Kingdom. The
little innocent Babes taste somewhat of his holy Dominion and Power, and of his
Kingdom of Peace and Righteousness: but in his ancients his light shines very
brightly, and before them he reigns gloriously; so that he is praised in the
very heights of Sion, and his name renowned there over all for ever. Glory,
glory to the pure spring of life, from whence the living streams come, which
refresh the Souls of the living. Surely his pure praises shall be sounded in
the hearts of the living for ever and ever, Amen.

AN EXHORTATION To true Christianity.
It is easy to pretend to Christ: but to be a true Christian is very precious,
and many Tribulations and deep Afflictions are to be passed through before it be
attained unto, as those that are made so by the Lord, experience.
NOw everlasting Happiness and Salvation depends upon true Christianity. Not
upon having the name of a Christian only, or professing such or such Christian
Doctrines: but upon having the Nature of Christianity, upon being renewed by
the Spirit of Christ, and receiving the Spirit, and walking in the Spirit, and
bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit. Oh, here is the Christian indeed; and
it should be every ones care, not to fall short of this. Now, because there is
such a contention about Christianity, who is the right Christian; it behooves
every man to take care, as to himself, that he be really such: that he receive
that from God, and be that to God, which none but the right Christian can be,
or can receive. This is the use I would make of these things in my own heart;
even to be sure I be such an one, as God has made, and will accept and own as
a Christian. And having had some experience of this thing, and truly understand
what the Christian-state is, and what does attend it; I shall set down some few
things, which he that inwardly knows (witnesses and enjoys) is without all
controversy, a true Christian, what ever men may account of him.

First, He that is a new Creature, is without doubt a true Christian. He that
is Regenerated, he that is renewed in the Spirit of his mind by Christ Jesus,
he that is New-Created in the Holy and Heavenly Image; he has felt the power of
Gods Spirit begetting him anew, forming him anew, out of the old nature and
Image of the first Adam, into the nature and Image of the second Adam, who is
the quickening Spirit: and that which is begotten and born of him is Spirit.

Secondly, He that is in the new Covenant, is a true Christian. He that has
thirsted after the living waters, and has heard the call to the waters of
life; has heard the voice of him who gives life, and has received life from
him, who gives life to all that come to him, and who makes the new and
everlasting Covenant with all that hear his voice, take up his Cross and follow
him; he is without doubt one of Christ's Sheep, whom the Shepherd owneth and
takes care of.

Thirdly, He that is inwardly circumcised, with the circumcision made without
hands, he is a Jew inward, a Christian inward (in the sight of God) who has
felt the Spirit and power of Christ Jesus, and rejoices in Christ Jesus, and
is one of those Worshippers, whom God has sought out and taught to Worship
him, in the life and spirit of his Son.

Fourthly, He that is inwardly washed with the clean water, with the inward
water; he is the inward Jew, the inward Christian. God promised to pour out
clean water upon his Israel, and they should be clean. He who has the clean
water poured upon him inwardly, which inwardly washes and cleanses, he is
without controversy of Gods inward Israel.

Fifthly, He that feeds on the Bread of life within, and drinks the water of
life out of his own Well or Cistern, he without doubt is living. He that is
invited to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, and comes and Sups with the Lamb,
he is one of the same nature and spirit with him. He with whom Christ Sups, who
has heard Christ knocking at his door, has opened to him and received him in,
to purify his heart and dwell in him, and Sup with him, and to give him to Sup
with himself; so that he eats Bread in the Kingdom, and drinks Wine in the
Kingdom, and partakes of the Feast of fat things, which God makes to his Israel
in his holy Mountain: he is without doubt one of Christ's, and partakes of this
in and through him.

Sixthly, He that lives the Christian life, who walks not after the Flesh, but
after the spirit, who does not fulfill the lusts of the Flesh, but has the law
of God written in his heart, and his fear put within him, and his holy Spirit
given to instruct him, and to guide him to answer the holy law written in his
heart, which the carnal mind is not subject, nor can be subject to; without
doubt he is spiritual, without doubt he is a true Christian.

Seventhly, He that lives by faith, who knows the faith which is the gift of
God, has received it and lives by it, who can do nothing of himself, but only
by faith in that holy power which does all in him: so that he lives, and
believes, and obeys from an holy Root of life, which causes life to spring up
in him, and love to spring up in him, and the Lambs meekness and patience to
spring up in him, and all grace to spring up in him; I say, he that lives thus,
without doubt is engraffed into the true Vine, into the true Olive Tree, and
the Root bears him, and Ministers sap unto him, and he is a true, fresh, green,
living branch of the true Vine of the holy Olive Tree.

Many more things might be mentioned, as they are experimentally known and felt
amongst us who are true Christians, though the Baptists and others have
represented us to the world, as if we were no Christians, but that touches us
not, their saying so, is no more to us than the professing Jews of the same
Spirit, who said Christ had a Devil; but these are to give a Taste. And he that
knows and feels these, may also know and feel the rest: and he that does not
know nor feel these, would not know or feel the rest, if never so many more
should be mentioned. Now the way to feel these, and to become a true Christian
(and to grow up in the Christian life) is to feel the Seed of the Kingdom,
which is the beginning of the Kingdom, the beginning of true Christianity: and
then to feel the Seed abiding (the Seed which is of the Spirit, and which is
Spirit) here is the constant Seal of Christianity in my heart; here are true and
certain evidences, day by day, of the Christian nature and Spirit, manifesting
themselves undeniably inwardly. And now, having the witness in my self, the
Testimony of him that begat life in me, testifying to his own work, and to his
own Birth: of what value are any Testimonies of men without against this?
Christianity is a mystery: and he only can truly see, who is a Christian
indeed, who has the inward eye opened, and with that inward eye, is taught of
God to pierce into that, wherein Christianity consists. There have been many
Christians of men's making: there are also some Christians of God and Christ's
making, which Christians God and Christ will own; but not the other. O let men
have a care, that when God comes to distinguish between Cattle and Cattle
(between Christian and Christian) they be found such as God will make up as his
Jewels, and own as the Sheep of his fold, such as shall be able to bear the
Trial of his searching judgment, and pure impartial eye; and not such as still,
notwithstanding all their profession of Religion and Christianity, are found
workers of iniquity, and so not created anew in Christ Jesus unto good works,
and therefore not truly of him, nor true Christians in his eye.

The End.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. l. 4. read ground, p. 19. l. 21. r. Sun, p 24. l. 2. ibid. p. 20. l.
25. r. Enemy, p 31. l 7. r. man, p. 36. l. 13. r. here, p. 46. l. 11. r. (...).


