SOME PRINCIPLES Of the ELECT People of God In scorn called QUAKERS.

O send forth thy Light and thy Truth, let them lead me, let them bring me to
thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles,

Psalm. 43.3. For the Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, and the
Reproofs of Instruction are the Way of Life.

Printed in the Year, 1671.

The CONTENTS.
Concerning
FIrst, A Brief Account of what we are, and what our Work is in the World: By
I. Pennington. Page 1 Secondly, Grounds and Reasons Why we deny the Worlds
Teachers, Page 5 Some Principles of the Elect People of God Called Quakers, P.
16 Worship. P.20 The Church. Ibid. The Way. Ibid. The Cross. P. 21 True
Communion. P. 22 The Gospel. Ibid. Faith. Ibid. Baptism. P. 23 Persecution.
Ibid. Scriptures. P. 26 Tyths. P. 27 The Higher Power. P. 28 The Kingdom of
Christ, how held up, and how not. P. 29 Teachers, Prophets, Pastors, Bishops,
Presbiters. Ibid. An Exhortation to all Christendom, to mind the Grace of God,
to wit, the Light. P. 30 Perfection. P. 33 Resurrection. P. 34 Election and
Reprobation. Ibid. Fear and Trembling. P. 36 The Body of Death. P. 37 The Word
Thou to a single Person. P. 39 Putting off the Hat, Bowing the Knee, Cringings
and Complements. Ibid. Good Manniers. P. 40 Objections of the World against the
Preaching of Christ, P. 41 Bread, Water and Wine. P. 42 The Sabbath Day. P. 43
Godfathers Godmothers and sprinkling of Infants, Ibid. The Word Trinity,
Ibid. The Ministry. P. 44 Days, Times, Meats and Drinks. Ibid. Marriages.
Ibid. False Prophets and Antichrists. P. 45 A General Objection of People. P.
48 The Jew Inward and Outward. P. 49 Christ the Covenant of God. Ibid. Plots
and Conspiracies. P. 50 Original sin. P. 51 Oaths. P. 52 The Word of God and
Original Sin, What it is. P. 54 Heathen Idolaters naming Days and Month. P.
63 Singing Psalms. P. 65 A Warning to all to keep out of the Fashons of the
World. P. 66 Some Queries given forth to Priests ahd People to Answer if they
can. By G. F. P. 68 The Scriptures. P. 72 Baptism. P. 75 The Lords Supper. P.
76 Prayer. P. 77 Ministry. P. 79 Magistracy and Government. P. 80 Superiority,
Honor, Breeding, Manners, and the Word Thee and Thou to a single Person. P. 84
The Word Thou and Thee. P. 89 Putting off the Hat. P. 90 Perfection. By J.
Parnel. P. 92 Women's speaking in the Church. By W. D. P. 94 The Sum or
Substance of our Religion P. 97 Christ. Coming to the Father by him, etc. P.
103 The Gospel Ministration. P. 107 Christ manifested without, and within, and
how both are owned by them that know the Truth, P. 108 The Principle of Truth,
what it is, and how in may be discerned, and how it may be purchased, and
possessed. P. 111 An Invitation to Professors seriously to Consider, etc. P.
114 A Brief Testimony for Truth: By T. Tailor, etc. P. 119 The Conclusion; By
I. Penington.
A brief account of what we are, and what our work is in the world.
WE are a People whom God has converted to himself; a People in whom God has
raised up the Seed of his own Life, and caused it to reign over the eartly part
in our selves; a People whom God has divorced from the spirit of whordom, and
joined to his own Spirit. We, many of us, sought truly and only after God from
our childhood (our consciences bearing us witness in the sight of God) but the
honesty of our hearts was still betrayed, and we led aside by the Whorish
spirit, and knew not how to turn to that of God in us, which inclined us toward
God. By this means we came to great distress and misery beyond all men, not but
that all men were in as great a want of God (his Life, Power and Presence) as
we; but the sense thereof was not so quickened in others, as in us. Now it
pleased the Lord at length to pity us, and to inform our minds toward
himself, to show us where Life lay, and where Death lay, and how to turn from
the one, and to the other; and he gave us his helping hand to turn us. And by
being turned to him, we have tasted of the Truth, of the true Wisdom, of the
true Power, of the true Life, of the true Righteousness, of the true
Redemption: and by receiving of this from God, and tasting and handling of it;
we come to know that that which the world has set up in the stead of it, is
not the thing it self. Now mark, we are not persons that have shot up out of
the old root into another appearance, as one sect has done out of another till
many are come up one after another, the ground still remaining the same out of
which they all grew: but that ground has been shaken and shaking, destroyed
and destroying, removed and removing in us, and the old root of Jesse has been
made manifest in us, and we have been transplanted by the everlasting power of
Life, and a real change brought forth in us out of that spirit, wherein the
world lives and worships, into another spirit, into which no thing which is of
the World can enter. And hear we have met with the call of God, the Conversion
to God, the Regeneration in God, the Justification, the Sanctification, the
Wisdom, the Redemption, the true Life and Power of God, which the World cannot
so much as bear the name of. And what we are made of God in Christ, we know to
be truth and no lie: and when we testify of this to the World, in the measure
of the life of God in us, we speak truth and no lie; though the World which
knows not the Truth, cannot hear our voice.

Now our work in the World is, to hold forth the virtues of him that has
called us to live like God; not to own any thing in the World which God does
not own: to forget our Country, our Kindred, our Fathers house; and to live
like persons of another Country, of another kindred, of another family: not to
do any thing of our selves, and which is pleasing to the old nature, but all
our words, all our conversation, yea every thought in us to become new.
Whatever comes from us, is to come from the new Principle of Life in us, and to
answer that in others, but we must not please the old nature at all in our
selves, nor in any else. And walking faithfully thus with God, we have a reward
at present, and a crown in the end, which does and will countervaile all the
reproaches and hardships, we do or can meet with in the World.

We are also to be witnesses for God, and to propagate his Life in the World;
to be instruments in his hand, to bring others out of Death and Captivity unto
true Life and Liberty: we are to fight against the powers of darkness every
where, as the Lord calls us forth. And this we are to do in his wisdom,
according to his will, in his power, and in his love, sweetness, and meakness.
We are not to take ways according to our own wisdom (but there must be a
strict watch, set in the Life, least that get up again:) nor must we speak such
words, as man's wisdom would call wise: nor may we go in our own will to seek
any, but the Lord must go before: nor may we make use of our own strength, but
feel his arm in our weakness: nor may we go forth in that love, sweetness, or
meakness which is pleasing to the fleshly mind: but we must be true to God
handling the sword skilfully and faithfully, judging and cutting down the
transgressor in the power and authority of God* and when the meek, the lowly,
the humble thing is reached and raised, then the true love, the sweetness, the
tenderness, the meekness must go forth to that. The Lord God is rough with the
transgressor, and all along the Scripture heweth and judges him: and if we
come forth in the same spirit, we shall find the same leadings, where we meet
with the same thing: for the Lord God will never be tender there; nor can that
which comes from him, lives in him, is lead by him, be tender there where he is
not.

Now the very root of this severity is good, and of God, and has love and
sweetness at the bottom of it: yea in pity, love, and bowels do we use the
sword. It is in pity to the poor captived creature, that that might be cut
down, which keeps it in bonds and captivity. And though we seem enemies to all
sorts of men, for the Lords sake: yet we are not enemies, nor could do the
least hurt to them any way, but are true friends to their souls and bodies
also: and our only controversy is with that which captives and maks them
miserable: for we fight not at all with flesh and blood, but with the
principallity and power which led from God, and rules in it against God, to the
poor creatures ruin and destruction. Yea if we had all the powers of the earth
in our hands, we could not set up our own way, (if, after the manner, of men I
may so call it) or so much as disturb others in their way thereby, but should
wait in patience, till God gave us an entrance by his power.

Now let not men run on in heats against us, but let them seriously consider,
whether we be of God or no: and let them consider; not with the reason and
understanding which is alienated from God, but with the witness which lies hid
in the heart. There is one great palpable argument that we are of God, which,
is this, all the World is against us, the Worldly part every where lights with
us, the Worldly part in every sort and Sect of men opposes us, the rage of man
every where rises up against us; But those that are so hot against us, if at
any time they become but meek and calm, patiently considering our cause, and
consulting there upon with the testimony that they, find in their own hearts
concerning us, they soon become pacified, and see that we are no man's enemies,
against no righteous Law, not against Relations, not against Governments, not
against any thing in the world that is good, but only against that which is
evil and corrupt. And of a truth, the corruption of things God has showed unto
us, and daily calls us forth after an immediate manner to witness against.

Therefore let men be sober, and take heed what they do, least they be found
fighters against God: for the reproaches the scoffs, with other persecutions,
which seem to be cast at us, light on him. It is not as we are men, but as we
are obedient to him, as we stand witnesses for him, that we meet with these
things. Now, as it is not we our selves that do these things, but the life and
power of God in us; so it is not we that are struck at, but the Life and Power:
if it were not for that, we might be as acceptable as other men. It is because
we are not of the World, but God has called us out of the World, that we are
so hated of the world. This is the true cause, though the world will no more
now acknowledge it, then it would in former ages. Yet I do not speak this for
my own sake, to avoid my share in the Cross: for the reproach of Christ is our
riches, yea far greater treasure then is to be found in the palace of Egypt:
Yea the Presence of God, the sweet power of Life makes up all our losses, so
that we have no cause to complain. It is very sweet, pleasant, and profitable
for us to be found Sufferers for God; but we know it will not be profitable for
you to be found Persecutors: and this is told you in true love and good will,
by one who wishes no evil to you, for all the evil that ye have exercised
toward the dear and precious People of God for these many years. O that God
would open your eyes, that ye might see whom ye have opposed, and against whom
ye have hardened and strengthened your selves, that ye might bow to him, and
receive life from him, and not perish in your gainsaying and opposition.

Isaac Penington.

Grounds and Reasons why we deny the worlds Teachers
FIrst, they are such shepherds that seek for their gain from their Quart^rs,
and can never have enough, which the Lord sent Isaiah to cry out against, who
bid all come freely, without money and without price, and, was not hired, but
spoke freely; and these make merchandise and a trade of his words; and therefore
we cry out against them, and deny them, Isa. 56.11. and 54.1.

They are such Shepherds that seek after the Fleece, and cloth with the wool,
and feed on the fat, which the Lord sent Ezekiel to cry woe against; who made a
prey upon us; and the Lord said, he would gather his Sheep from their mouths,
and that we should be a prey to them no longer; and we do witness the promise
of the Lord fulfilled; and therefore we deny them, Ezekiel 54.34.

They are such Priests as bear rule by their means, which was a horrible and
filthy thing committed in the land, which the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry out
against; while we had eyes and did not see, we held up such Priests, but the
Lord has opened our eyes, and we see them now in the same estate that they
were in, which Jeremiah cried out against, who did not bear rule by his means;
and therefore we deny them, Jer. 5.31.

They are such Prophets and Priests that divine for money, and preach for hire,
which the Lord sent Micah to cry against; and whilst we put into their mouths,
they preached peace to us, but now w^ do not put into their mouths, they
prepare war against us; and therefore we deny them, Micah 3.11.

They are such as are called of men Masters, and call men Masters, and have the
chiefest place in the Assemblies, and stand praying in the Synagogues, and lay
heavy burdens upon the people which Jesus Christ cried woe against, and bid his
Disciples not to be so; Be ye not called of men Mast^rs, for one is your
Master, even Christ, and ye are all Brethren; so we do witness Je^us Christ our
Master, and see them to be in the steps of the Pharisees; and therefore we deny
them, Mat. 3.10. Mat. 20.3.

They are such teachers, that with fained words and through covetousness, made
merchandise of us, and do upon the People; who by Oppression maintain
themselves and Wives in pride and idleness, in hoods, veils, and changable
suits of apparel; who go in the way of Cain, to envy, murder, and persecute,
and after the e^ror of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness,
following after gifts and rewards, which the Apostles cried against; and
therfo^e we deny them, 2 Pet. 2. Jude. 11.

They are such Teachers as have told us, the Steeple-house has been the
Church, when as the Scripture says, the Church is in God; and the^fore we deny
them. 1 These. 1.1.

They are such Teachers that have told us, the Letter was the Word, when as the
Letter says, God is the Word; therefore we deny them, Joh. 1.1.

They are such Teachers as have told us, the Letter was the Light, when as the
Letter says, Christ is the Light; therefore we deny them, Joh. 1.1.19. and 8.1^.

They are such Teachers as sp^inkle Infants, calling it an Ordinance of Christ,
and baptizing into the Faith, into the Church, when as the Scripture says no
such thing; and therefore we deny them: but the Baptism by one Spirit, into one
Body we own, 1 Cor. 12.13.

They are such Teachers as tell people of a Sacrament, for which there is not
one Scripture, and so feed the people with their own inventions; and therefore
we deny them; but the Table and Supper of the Lord we own, 1 Cor. 10.

They are such Teachers as tell people, that Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, is
the Gospel, which are but the Letter. The Lamb of God which takes away the Sins
of the world, is glad tidings to poor Captives: glad tidings we^e promised
before the Letter was written, The seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serp^nts
head, and H^ shall be a Light unto the Gentiles: the Letter is a Declaration of
the Gospel, and many have the Letter, but not Christ; but we having received
the Gospel, know them to be no Ministers of it; and therefore we deny them, Genesis
3.15. Luke. 1.1.

They are such Ministers as go to Oxford and Cambridge, and call them the
well-heads of Divinity, and so deny the fountain of living mercies, and there
they study, and read books, and old Authors, and furnish themselves with
Philosophy, and fine words, and other men's matter; and when they come again,
they sell it to poor people; when as the Apostle says, He was not made a
Minister by the will of man, and that the Gospel which he preached was not of
man, nor had he received it from man, neither was he taught it; and denied all
his learning which he had got by the will of man at the feet of Gamaliel; and
so finding them in the will of man, preaching by the will of man; we cannot but
deny them, Gal. 1.

They are such Teachers, that tell people that Hebrew and Greek is the
O^iginal, when as the Apostle spoke in the Hebrew tongue to the Hebrews, who
heard him in their own Language, and yet persecuted him; and the Greeks, who
had the Gospel in their own Tongues, said, The Cross of Christ was foolishn^ss;
these who had the Scripture, in their own Language, were as ignorant of the
Life of them, as our natural Priests, who spend so much time in learning a
natural Language, to find out what those meant that spoke forth the Scripture;
who make poor people believe that to know a natural Tongue is the means to
understand the Original; the Word which is the Original was before all
Languages were, the Word was in the beginning which Word was made manifest in
all the Children of God, who spoke forth the Scriptures; holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Now all ye learned ones, where is your
Original? he^e you and your Original is razed out from the word, which is the
Original which the Apostles preached amongst the Hebrews and Greeks, which was
before Tongues were and your Original, which will break all your Tongues and
Original to pieces. Pilate had your Original of Hebrew Greek, and Latin, who
crucified Christ; he that draws back into many Languages, as into Hebrew, and
Greek, draws back into the naturals, and so draws into confusion; but the
Ministers of God, who preach the Everlasting Gospel which endures for ever draw
up into one Language, and so the Priests, and all that trade in natural
Languages we utterly deny; Act. 22. 1 Cor. 1.13. John. ^9.2^.

They are such Teachers as have told us, that the Steeple-house is the Temple,
when as the Apostle said, Your Bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost; and
Stephen was stoned to death for witnessing against the Temple, who said, God
that made the World dwells not in Temples made with hands; and here finding
them in the Generation that hold up the Figu^es, and deny the Substance, and to
be ignorant of that Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures; we cannot but deny
them, 1 Cor. 6.19. Acts. 7.

They are such Priests that take Tithes, the Tenth of men's Labors and Estates;
and those that will not give them, they sue at Law and hale before Cou^ts and
Sessions, yea even those they call their own People, their own Parishon^rs.
Levy according to the Law receiv^d Tithes, and he had a command to set open his
gates that the St^angers and the Fatherless should come within his Gat^s, and
be satisfied and filled; but we find none more pittiless of the Fatherless and
Widows then they; and the Strangers they complain against to Justices, and
persecute, (though they neither seek to them nor others for any outward thing)
as wanderers; and he^e they walk contrary to the old Law: and the Apostle in
his Epistle to the Hebrews said, The Preisthood being changed, there must of
necessity also be a change of the Law, and we witness both the Priesthood and
the Law changed; but they that take Tithes, and they that pay Tithes, according
to the old Covenant, deny Jesus Christ the everlasting Priest to be come in the
Flesh; and he^e these Priests show themselves to be Antichrist, that are
entered into the World, and opp^ess the Creation, when as Jesus Christ said,
Freely ye have received, freely give; and the Apostle said, was there a wise
man amongst them that went to Law one with another? here they are evil examples
to the people, to sue, w^angle and cont^^d, and walk out of the steps of
Christ, and all the holy men of God; yea they exceed all the false Prophets in
wickedn^^s, for we do not read that ever any of them sued men at the Law; and
therefore we cannot but utterly deny them, Deuteronomy. 14.29. Heb. 7.12.

They ar^ such Priests as beside their Tithe of Corn, Hay, Beast, Sheep, Hens,
Pigs, Geese, Eggs, Cherries, Plumbs; take ten shillings for preaching a Funeral
Sermon, more or less, as they can get it, and ten shillings for the death of a
man; and Money out of Servants Wages, and Money for Smoke passing up the
Chimneys, and Easter reckonings, and Midsummer dues, and Money for Churching of
Women, and thus by every device get Money, (and burden poor people that labor
very hard and can scarce get Food and Raiment,) to maintain them in idleness
and pride: these are they that have hearts exercised with covetousness,
burthening the Truth, and making the free Gospel chargable: if the Apostle was
here, he would be ashamed of them, and so are we, and therefore turn from them,
and deny them, 2 Pet. 2.3.

They are such Priests as not only take Tyths and Money for many other things
of their own Hearers, and sue them at Law for it; but they take money of them
they do no work for; but only rail against them, and say, They that wayt at
the Alter, are pertakers with the Alter, but live of them who are not of the
Alter, and say, The Labourer is worthy of his hire; but take Wages of them that
have not hired them, and if they will not give it them, cast them into Prison,
or take their Goods by Justices Warrants; these are they that Christ cried woe
against, who lay heavy burdens upon the people, who oppress tender
Consciences, that own the Everlasting High Priest; where do they find any of
the Ministers of Christ bargaining for so much a year? here they abide not in
the Doctrine of Christ, but are Hirelings, and therefore we deny them. Mat.
23.2.

They are such Preachers as have told us, They have been gifted men, and we
find in the Scriptures, that the gift of God is free, and not to be bought and
sold for money; and Job said Wisdom is not to be purchased for money nor Gold;
but they will not sell their gift under 200 l. 100 l. 80 l. or 50 l. a year,
more or less, as they can get it, here we find they have not received the Gift
of God, but are like Simon Magus, and therefore we deny them. Acts 8.20. Job 28.

They are Babylons Merchants that make a trade of Scriptures, and the Saints
conditions, which the Prophets and Apostles spoke forth freely, without money,
and without price, and bad all come freely. How many hundred thousand pounds in
England is gained by the Scripture, and humane Authors joined to it? Where is
there a more profitable trade? Here they make Scriptures their Cloak and color
to get Mnoey by, and so make an Idol of it; and if any come to witness it
fulfiled, as it was in them that gave it forth, they cry out to the Magistrates
against them as Blasphemers and Deceivers: And if they answer, He that
administers spiritual things ought to reap carnal, let him consider, the
Apostle wrote not that to the the World, but to those that they had gathered
out of the World, to whom the ends of the World were come; and let them gather
people out of the World, and then they shall not need to bargain with them for
things of the World; but their trading is with the World, and therefore we deny
them, Isa. 55.1.

They are such Teachers as take a Text out of the Saints conditions, and take a
Weeks time to study what they can raise out of it, adding to it their own
wisdom, Inventions, Imaginations, and heathenish Authors, and then on the first
day of the week go amongst the people, having an hour glass to limit themselves
by, and say, Hear the Word of the Lord, and for Money tell people what they
have scraped together.

These are they that speak a divination of their own heart, and not from the
mouth of the Lord, which the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry out against, Jer. 23.

These are they that use their tongues, and say, The Lord says, when as the
Scriptures say so, and the Lord never spoke to them, Jer, 23.30.

These are they of whom the Lord speaks, I am against all such as steal my word
every one from his Neighbor: and so we are against all such as Jeremiah was
sent to cry woe against, the Pastors that now steal the words of the Prophets,
of Christ, and the Apostles; the Lord has shaken his hand at their dishonest
gain, and to them belong the Plagues that are written in the Book they make a
trade on, for adding to it their own inventions, therefore do we come out from
amongst them, and deny them. Jer. 23.31.

These are they of whom the Apostle speaks: That creep into Houses leading
silly women captive, which are led away with diverse lusts, which be ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, though some have
learned 50, 60, or 70 years, covetous, proud, high-minded, self-willed, lovers
of pleasures more then lovers of God, who have gotten a form of godliness, but
deny the power thereof, from which the Apostle bad turn away, and so do we, 2 Timothy 3.6.

They are such Teachers as gave us, and give people, David's conditions in
Meeter, and when we had no understanding we sung after them, as ignorant people
do now, his tremblings, his quakings, his weepings, fastings, prayers,
prophesies; and when we sung we put of our hats, and when they read them, we
kept them on, and so they caused us to worship the works of their own hands;
here they show the spirit of Error, making wicked people to sing, O Lord I am
not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye, I do not exercise my self in things
that are to high, when they are puffed in mind, and have scornful eyes, and do
exercise themselves in things that are to high, and are full of Filth, Pride
and Loftiness, and can scarce look at one another: here they make poor people
to offer a Sacrifice of Lies, and make them Hypocrites, deceiving themselves,
saying what they are not: But the Singing with the Spirit and with
understanding we own, and therefore the Priests that Sing without understanding
we deny, 1 Cor. 14.15.

They are such Teachers as deny the conditions that the Saints witnessed, viz.
trembling and quaking: when as we find the Holy men of God that gave forth the
Scriptures witnessed such things. Moses who was Judge over all Israel, feared,
quaked, and trembled exceedingly: and the Son of man was to eat his bread with
quaking; and Daniel the man of God trembled, and was sore astonished: and
Jeremiah the Prophet of the Lord reeled to and fro like a drunken man, and all
his bones did shake; and David who was a King trembled and quaked; and Ephraim
when he trembled was exalted in Israel; and Habakkuk who was a Prophet
trembled, and his belly shook, his lips quivered: and Isaac in whom the seed
was called, trembled exceedingly; and Paul a Minister of Christ trembled; but
they make a scorn of trembling and quaking, and show themselves ignorant and
strangers to the Life and Power of God, as their Generation ever was, who still
made a scorn and reproach of the holy men of God that trembled and quaked; but
the Seed of God, and the Prophets, and the Servants of the Lord we own, and
their conditions we witness; and therefore all the Priests, and them that deny
the holy men of God, we utterly deny, Heb. 12.21. Ezekiel. 12.18. Dan. 10.10. Jer.
23.9. Psalm. 119.120. Hos. 13.^ Habbak. 3.16. Acts 9.6. Genesis 27.23.

They are such Teachers as tell the people that Christ has not enlightened
every one that comes into the world, when as Christ says; He does enlighten
every one that comes into the World: and hear they go about to make Christ a
liar, and John Baptist a false Prophet, and deny the Scriptures; and they say,
God has not given every one a measure according to his ability when at Christ
says, He has done it, Christ is the light of the World, and by him the World
was made, and he came into the World, and the World received him not; it is so
now, Light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not; and this is
the condemnation, That Light is come into the world, the one he loves the
Light, and brings his deeds to it, that they may be made manifest, and walk in
it, there is no occasion of stumbling in him; the other, he hates the Light
because his deeds are evil, and this is his condemnation; and we witness the
Light wherewith Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the world,
and by obedience to the Light, he is become our Master, our Teacher: and all
who stumble at the Light, and deny it are ignorant of the Foundation Stone, and
know not the first Principle, but are shut out from knowing any thing of God;
and therefore the Priests and all their followers we deny, Joh. 1.9. and 3.19,
20. Mat. 25.15.

They are such Teachers as walk out of the Doctrine of the Apostles, and
practice of all the Churches* Paul says, If any thing be revealed to him that
sits by, let the first hold his peace, for all may prophecy one by one, that
God in all things may be glorified, and you edified: and the spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets: and God is the Author of Peace, and not
of confusion: and this was in all the Churches of the Saints: But now if any
man come among them, while they are speaking, or when they have done, and be
moved to speak any thing, them of their Church, the rude multitude, fall upon
him with Staves, Fists, and Punches and Knocks him down with Stones, showing
themselves to be of that generation that stoned Stephen to death, and the
Priests call to the Officers to take him to the Stocks, and to carry him before
the Magistrate, and from thence he is sent to Prison, and called a disturber of
the Peace: here they show themselves to be no Ministers of Christ, and their
Assembly to be no Church, but in confusion, for that which was order among the
Saints, is disorder amongst them; the Church of Christ was never Fighters, nor
Quarrellers, nor Scorners; such Churches are the fruits of the Ministry of
ENGLAND, who were made by the will of man, and never sent of Christ, and
therefore they do not profit the people at all, but are Persecutors of the
Messengers of Christ, and therefore we deny them, 1 Cor. 14, 32.33. Acts 7.
Ver. 23.32.

They are such Teachers as have told us, we should never be made free from Sin
while we are upon earth; when as the Apostle says, They were made free from
Sin, he thanks God, and had put of the body of Sin; so we find they had told us
lies contrary to the Scripture, and the Apostle says, While we were servants
of sin we were free from righteousness; so in that state we find them; and
therefore we deny them, And they have told us, none shall ever be Sanctified,
nor the body of Sin destroyed, nor cleansed from Sin while they are upon earth,
when as the Apostle said, They were sanctified, and the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses from all Sin; and the Ministers of God said, they reigned as Kings;
and here they deny the Scriptures, and therefore we deny them. And they deny
the begotten Son of God, which Sins not, and calls it blasphemy for any to
witness that born which Sins not, when the Scripture says, He that is born of
God Sins not, neither can he Sin, because he is born of God, and the seed of
God remains in him; and he that commits Sin is of the Devil, and hereby are
the Children of God made manifest, and the Children of the Devil; and as he is,
so are we in this present world, and a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit;
if the root be holy so are the branches, and one Fountain cannot send forth
sweet water, and bitter: he that can receive it, let him; but the chief
Priests, and Elders, and Pharisees, and Sadduces, and Rulers, at this stumbled
then, and so they stumble now at the Light, from whence these words were given
forth, which does enlighten every one that comes into the world, and therefore
we deny them, Romans 6.18. and 6.6. Romans 8.10. 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 John 1.7. 1 John
3.6, 9; 10. 1 John 4.17.

And they a^e such Teachers that have told us, none shall ever be perfect while
they are upon the earth, when as Christ says, be ye perfect as your Father
which is in heaven is perfect; and the Apostle says, By one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified. And the Ministry of Christ is for
the perfecting of the Saints, till they all come to the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ, to a perfect man. Here we find them to deny the
Scriptures, and the everlasting offering, and all such we cannot but deny; and
we witness the everlasting offering, which perfects for ever them that are
sanctified. Praises to the Lord for ever, who has sent forth his Son in the
likeness of Sinful flesh, to condemn Sin in the flesh, that in him we might be
made the righteousness of God; and all that deny perfection and sanctification,
deny this offering, and the gift of God, which is perfect, and the Ministry of
God, which is for perfecting the Body; and such Ministers are not Members of
the Body, nor can present any man perfect in Christ Jesus, and therefore we
deny them, Mar. 5.10. Heb. 10.14. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. 2 Cor. 5.21. James 1.17.

They are such Teachers as deny the everlasting Covenant, and the anointing,
for if any come to witness that they are taught of God, and that he has
written his Law in their hearts, and put his Spirit within them, and that none
need say to them, know the Lord; then they cry out to the Magistrates, and
ignorant people, these are the Deceivers and false Prophets that shall come in
the last times, they deny the means; and when any witness they have received an
unction from the holy one, and need not that any man teach them, but as the
anointing teaches them of all things; then they cry out, these are Seducers
and Seduced: and so here they deny the Covenant of God, and the Promise of God,
and show themselves to be the great Seducers, that draw from the Anointing, and
finding their spirits contrary to the Scriptures, we cannot but deny them, Jer.
31.33. Heb 11.8. 1 John 2, 20, 27.

They are such Teachers, that say, Revelations are ceased, and deny Revelations
and so deny the Son, for, no man knows the Father, but he to whom the Son
reveals him, and no man knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God, and he
to whom the Spirit reveals them: and the Apostle said, It pleased the Father to
reveal his Son in him: and so he that denies Revelations, denies both the
Father, and the Son, and the Spirit; these are the Priests who talk of
Religion, and have gotten a form to trade with, and have received things by
traditon, but are ignorant of God, and of the Spirit, by which all Saints were
ever guided; and therefore we deny them, Mat. 11.27. 1 Cor. 2.11. Gal. 1.16.
Phil. 3.15.

Therefore all people, consider what you do, and hold up, and worship, for the
Worship is but one, and the Word is but one, and the Baptism is but one, and
the Church is but one, and the Way is but one, and the Light is but one, and
the Power is but one; but they that are without have many Teachers, many Ways,
many Opinions and Judgments, and many Sects; but we have but one Priest, which
is over the household of God, and therefore are all of one heart and soul.

Moved of the Lord, written from the Spirit of the Lord for the cleansing of
the Land of all false Teachers, Seducers and Deceivers, and Witches, who
beguile the people, and Inchanters, and Diviners, and Sorcerers, and Hirelings,
and which is for the good of all people, that fear the Lord, and own Jesus
Christ to be their Teacher.

From them whom the world scornfully calls Quakers; but quaking and trembling
we own, else we should deny the Scriptures, and the holy men of God; but the
Scriptures we own, and the holy men of God; Therefore we deny all them who deny
quaking.

If you say these things are frivolous things, which you have taught us, then
we have been taught frivolous things all this while; but we find all these
things frivolous things, wind and air, and therefore we deny them.

All people that read these things, never come ye more at the Steeple-house nor
pay your Priests more Tithes, till they have answered them, for if ye do ye
uphold them in their Sins, and must partake of their plagues,

Some PRINCIPLES of the Elect People of God, scornfully called, QUAKERS.
By G. F.
A Salutation of Salvation to all People throughout the Christian World, that
they may Enter in by the Door which is Christ the Light, by which Every man is
enlightened that comes into the World, by Christ the Light, which is the Way
to God, and the Door by which they must enter into the Father, from the World,
from Darkness and Death, and its Power, into Covenant with God, by Christ the
Door. And this is the Light, by which ye see all the evil Actions which ye have
evilly acted, and all the ungodly works which ye have ungodlyly committed, and
all the ungodly thoughts which ye ungodlyly have thought, and all the hard
speeches and ungodly words which ye have spoken. The Light wherewith Christ
has enlightened you; is that which makes manifest all that is contrary to it.
The same Light makes manifest the Savior, from whence it comes: and it makes
manifest that Christ is the Covenant of Light and Life, by which you come to
have peace with God. The same Light makes manifest to you (if you love it)
that Christ is the Mediator between you and God. The same Light makes manifest
that Christ is the Offering for your Sins, and the Sins of the whole World. The
same Light does manifest that Christ is the way, the truth and the Life, and
the word of God by which all things were made and Created. And the same Light
manifests that Christ is the Wisdom of God, and Power of God, and
Sanctification, and Justification, and Redemption. To Sanctify, Justify and
Redeem from that which the Light manifests to be Evil; and that which lets, and
keeps in the separation from God.

And this Light is within, by which all these things are seen; and you that
love this Light you will se all these things Love mentioned: Christ the
Mediator, Christ the Way, the Life, the Wisdom, the Sanctifier, the Redeemer,
the Offering for your Sins, and the Sins of the whole World. In this Light ye
will have his Testimony; and so he that believes shall have the Testimony and
Witness in himself, and so ye all being enlightened with this Light, receiving
it, you receive Christ, then you do not receive Darkness, nor the Prince of
Darkness. And as many of you as receive Christ, he will give you power to
become Sons of God (mark) ye shall have power by which you shall know Sonship
to stand against sin and evil, and become the Sons of God.

Now if you hate this Light, and go on in sin, and in evil thoughts, and evil
words, works and actions, and do not come to the Light which reproves you, but
love Darkness rather then Light, it will be Your condemnation. And this is the
Light which makes manifest to every one of you what you have done, spoke,
thought and acted amiss, and reproves you for it: and if you love the Light,
you love Christ, and you love your Savior, Redeemer, Sanctifier and Offering
for Sin. And you see him who puts an end to sin, and destroys the Devil who
brought it in, and his Works; he that destroys; and brings in everlasting
Righteousness in you. But (as above mentioned) if you hate this Light, and go
on in sin and evil, it will be your condemnation.

This Light is with you in your Labors, and in your Beds, and when you are
about your Business, Trades and Occupations; showing to you all your words, and
all your thoughts, works and actions. Which Light (if you love it) will lead
you from the Old into the New Life, and from the Alienation and Degeneration
from God, his Life and Image.

And with this Light you will see Christ a King to Govern you, who has all
Power in Heaven and in Earth given to him; And with the Light you will see him
a Prophet to open to you, and a Priest to offer for you to the Father; and in
this Light you will see more Light, the same shining in your hearts, it will
give you The knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Christ Jesus your
Savior: And with the Light you will see the Kingdom of Heaven within, which
never gave consent to Sin and Evil, like to a grain of Mustard Seed, and to a
Leaven which leaveneth into a New Lump.

And with the Light you will see the Field, which is the World, placed in your
hearts, where the Pearl is hid, and with what you must dig to find the Pearl,
the Power of God; and what you must sell for its sake, to purchase the Field,
And waiting in this Light, you will receive the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter,
to to lead you into all Truth, and to bring the Words which Christ has spoken
to your remembrance; and it will show you things to come; and it shall receive
of those which are Christ's, and give it unto you. So loving the Light you love
Christ, and receiving it you receive Christ, the first and the last; For in the
Light Christ is seen and handled, his Voice is heard and he is followed. So in
the Light you will see Christ to be your Teacher, who says, Learn of me, I am
the Way, the Truth and the Life; by whom Life Eternal is given. And you are
brought again to Christ the Shepherd, who draws you out of the Fall to God,
into his Image, where the Green Pastures of Life are known and fed upon. And no
man comes to the Father (says Christ) but by me: who enlighteneth every man
that comes into the World, that by the Light all may believe. And, says
Christ, Believe in the Light whilst ye have the Light, that you may be Children
of the Light. So you being enlightened with the Light, which if you believe in
it, you come to be Children of the Light, and Heirs of Promise, and Mercy, and
of the Power of a Life that has no End. And believing in the Light, you pass
from Death to Life, from Darkness to Light; and you come to know a Translation
from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to the Power of God; and to know
the begotten of God, into his own Image, by his Power, as you have been
degenerated from God, and have lost his Image, by the Prince of Darkness, and
so translated from the Image of God, into the Image of Satan, from the Power of
Christ, into the Power of Darkness; so you must come to the Light, that ye may
have another Conversion, from Satan's Power to God, from Darkness to Light, to
be renewed into the Image of God; and this is felt within, and as you feel this
within, you will know the Word of God within in your hearts, which is the Word
of Faith, which the Apostles preached to the Romans; which they were to hear,
obey, and do: And that is the Word which seperates the precious from the vile;
your precious thoughts, affections, motions and words from your vile: So the
Word is in your Hearts, and Mouths, to obey it, and to do it; And it is quick
and powerful, sharper than a two-edged Sword: And you shall not need to say,
Who shall bring it from Heaven, or who shall fetch it from beneath? But it is
in the Heart and Mouth; and this is the Word of Faith which the Apostles
preached.

And the same Word is called a Hammer, a Sword, and a Fire to beat down, to cut
down, and to burn up whatsoever is contrary to it. So it is the same Word which
sanctifies, and purifieth, and reconcileth to God, as beats down, and cuts
down, that which is contrary to God and which seperates betwixt you and God. So
you may hear, obey and do the Word, for it is with you in all places, and in
all your occasions, dividing good thoughts from bad, good words and motions
from bad: For if all Christendom would hear and obey the Word in their Hearts,
which is pure, and lives, and remains, and endures for ever, by which they
would come to be born again of the Immortal Seed, this Word would keep them
from evil Actions and Words which are spoken and acted by them: And so by the
Word every one should be taught, and should know the engrafted Word, which is
able to save the Soul, which beats down, and cuts down, and burns up that which
wars against it, and keeps the Soul from the enjoyment of God. And so in this
Word they should know the anointing in themselves to teach them, so that they
should not need any man to teach them, but as the same anointing teaches
them, which teaches Truth in all things.

And in this Light and Word, which is in the heart, they should know the New
Covenant of God, the Law written in the heart, and put in their minds, by
which they should not have need to say one to another, Know the Lord; for all
should know him from the least even to the greatest.

And those are true Christians who come to witness this, as thousands in
England do witness it in this his Day; among whom the precious Pearl is found,
and the Field is bought, among whom the Law of the Spirit of Life, sets free
from the Law of Sin and Death: Who witness the Ages to come, of which the
Apostle spoke, In which the kindness and exceeding riches of the Grace of God
should be manifested again, which the Lord in the Primitive Times made manifest
amongst the Apostles, who sat together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. In
which places* thousands are now come to sit; Glory be to him for ever.

I. Concerning WORSHIP.
The Promise of Redemption is from that State in which Adam and Eve, their Sons
and Daughters are in the Fall driven from God, into a State in which they were
before they were driven from God, to the Church in God. Now they that sit down
in a State driven from God, are People far off from the Church in God. Our
Worship is in Spirit and in Truth, in which the Devil abode not, but is out of
it, who is the Author of strife and unrighteousness amongst People, which Truth
makes the Devil to bow, and cringe, yea, and destroys him; and it is the
Spirit that mortifies sin, which makes the Separation from God. Now we say,
that if all Christendom had worshipped God in Spirit and in Truth, they had all
been in Him, out of which the Devil is, and had been in the holy Mountain, and
had felt the Spirit ruling them in their own particulars, and had felt the
Spirit of Truth guiding and teaching them in them, in their own hearts.

II. Concerning the CHURCH.
Our Church is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he Redeems
with his own blood, without spot, or wrinkle, or deformity, or any such thing,
which blood we feel in our Hearts, purging us from all sin; with which blood we
feel our Consciences cleansed from dead works to serve the Living God. So this
blood is witnessed in us, and the excellency thereof, by which we come to know
the price of Redemption.

III. Concerning the WAY.
We say that Christ is Our Way, which is Light, which enlighteneth you and
every man that comes into the World, that with this Light you may see him, the
Way, and may come to walk in the Way of Peace and Life, which is the Way to
God, and which is the New and Living-Way, in which the Apostles were, out of
which Christendom is gone, erring from the Light in their own particulars, into
their own Inventions and Imaginations, which is the cause that there are set up
so many Ways among them, changable Ways, and changable Worships, among them
(I say) who have erred from the New and Living Way. So whosoever comes to the
Light in themselves, they come to Christ, they come to the New and Living Way,
out of the Old and Dead Ways which are in the Fall from God, out of his Image
and Power; So whosoever comes to his Image and Power, they must come to the
Light, wherewith Christ the Way has enlightened them all in their own
particulars, and hear his Voice and Doctrine. So there is not another Way to
the Father but Christ the Light, which enlighteneth every man that comes into
the World, which is the Way, yea, the New and Living Way. So, who love the
Light, they love the Way, and they love Christ; but they who hate the Light,
they hate Christ the Way.

IV. Of the CROSS.
The Cross of Christ is the Power of God, which is contrary to the World; which
Cross of Christ, the Power of God, was among the Apostles, which Crucified them
from all outward Figures, Types, Shadows and Inventions of Men. So they who are
gone from the Power of God, since the days of the Apostles, have set up many
Crosses, who have lost the true Cross, which is the Power of God. The Cross of
Christ, which is the Power of God, Crucifies that state in which Adam and Eve,
and all their Posterity were in, in the degeneration, in which Cross is the
Power of God; by which Cross they come to a state in which they were in before
their Fall. And in this Power of God, the Cross is the Fellowship, which is a
Mystery, which brings to the Beginning, in which is Endless Life; and this
Mystery is in it.

V. Of the True COMMUNION.
The True Communion is in the Gospel, which is among us, as it was among the
Apostles, in the Spirit and Light, by which we have Fellowship with the Father
and with the Son.

VI. Of the GOSPEL.
The Gospel is the Power of God to Salvation; for he that believes receives
Power, receives the Gospel, by which Life and Immortality is brought to Light;
and the Power of God expels that which keeps Life and Immortality from people,
and captivates their souls spirits and minds, and keeps them in Bondage;
which Power of God expells it all and sets them Free, and gives them dominion
over that, which burdens them and gives them to feel and to see before that was
which hides Life and Immortality from them. And by this Power of God, Life and
Immortality comes to Reign, in which is the Saints Fellowship, and
Church Fellowship, in which they come to be Heirs of the Power of God, Heirs
of the Gospel, Heirs of the Fellowship, Membrs of the Church, and Membrs of one
another; in the Power of God, the Gospel which was before the Power of Darkness
was.

And now the Gospel must be preached again to all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues
and People, who dwell upon the Earth; that by this Gospel, Life and
Immortallity may be brought to Light among them, and expel away that which
hides it from them, by which Power, the Gospel, which is Salvation, which frees
the Souls, Spirits, and Consciences from that which burdens them, and to them
this is Glad Tidings.

VII. Of FAITH.
The Faith is one which purifieth the heart, which gives victory, and which
brings to have access to God, and which gives victory over that which
seperates from God; in which Faith was the Unity of the Saints in the Primitive
Times, in which also stands our Unity; which Faith is the Gift of God.

VIII. Of BAPTISM.
There is one Baptism, by one Spirit, into one Body, which plungeth under all
the corruption which got up since Transgression, which has made the Separation
between Man and God; which Spirit leads into one Body from the many Bodies, and
into one Head from the many Heads of those many Bodies, which are in the Fall
from God. So Baptized with one Spirit, into one Body, which plungeth under all
that which makes a separation from God. We are made to drink into one Spirit,
and this Spirit is within, plunging under all the corruptions which are within;
And the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God, is within, crucifying the
mind which did walk in those things which hides from God, and which keeps in
the World, in the lust of the Eyes, the pride of Life, and the lust of the
Flesh which are not of the Father. Now they that mind Earthly things, they go
from the Power of God within, and are Enemies to his Cross, which is the Power
of God (as Paul says) and so, many Heads, many Bodies, many Baptisms, are
among them, who are out of the Power of God, the Cross of Christ, and out of
the One Baptism with the Spirit, into one Body, into one Head, Christ Jesus,
the first and the last, the beginning and the end, and the Head of his Church,
which is his Body, and he is the Savior of it; of which Church we are.

IX. Of PERSECUTION.
Now concerning the diverse Faiths, and diverse Worships, which are in the World,
and the Persecution about them, such Believers and Worshipers are out of the
one Faith which gives victory, and have lost the spiritual weapons and are run
into the carnal, and so are out of the true Worship which is in Spirit and
Truth; out of which (as I said before) the Devil is. And here are all the
carnal weaponed men, fighting for their Worship, and for Trifles.

When as the Spiritual weaponed men, who have the Word of God, and the Sword of
the Spirit, they strive not with flesh and blood, destroy not Creatures by
calling to the Powers of the Earth to help them. When as carnal minded men, who
are out of the Church, which was in the beginning, and its weapon and Spirit:
who deform, kill and slay Creatures about their invented Worships, Faiths,
Baptisms, Churches, Croses, and such like; which were not the Fruits, neither
the Works of the Apostles, nor of the spiritual weaponed men. So all ye that
persecute and kill about Religion, Church and Worship, are not Worshipers of
God in Spirit and Truth: They are not in the fellowship of the Gospel, the
Power of God, Which was before the Power of Satan was, and they are not in the
true faith which gives victory over that which seperates from God, neither are
they in the Cross of Christ, the Power of God, which was before Satan was,
which crucifies the flesh, and the world, and their carnal weapons. So all ye
who Persecute and kill about Religion, you are out of the New and Living way,
Christ Jesus, which says, Love Enemies; and commands to give the check^, back
and hairs to the Smiters: ye are in Cains way who Persecute and Kill your
Brother Christians, as Cain did, and so in this you do not well, neither does
God respect your Sacrifice for if you and Cain had done well, neither you nor
Cain had killd your Brothers about Worship, Church, Sacrifice and Religion, and
then God would have had respect unto you, but you doing not well, sin lies at
your door, as it did at Cains, and its gotten in your House; so that now,
neither his nor your Sacrifice God accepts or regards, neither stand you in an
acceptable state, where now you are, but in a way, in which together with Cain
you walk, which is not the New, nor the Living Way. For Adam neglected to hear
the Voice of God, and Cain neglected to hear the Voice of God, and the Jews
they neglected to hear the Voice of God, and you neglect to hear his Voice, and
the Devil who went from the Truth, lies at the door of such who neglect the
Voice of God, and so sin enters into the House and defiles them, and so their
hearts are hardened, for which cause they turned against their Brethren. So they
neither do well, neither does God accept their Sacrifice, for they go from the
path and the way where God respects and accepts People, and so becomes
Fugitives and Vagabonds in the Earth, and has not an habitation in God, and in
this Fugitive State, those Baptized Nations are worse than the Nations not
Baptized; and many of them are much more Children of the Devil than before,
like the Jews Proselites, killing and persecuting, doing the Devils work, who
is out of the Truth. For both Christ, his Ministers and Apostles came to save
men's Lives; but the Devils policy was to cloth his Ministers, Apostles and
Messengers with the Sheeps clothing, and keeps People always under them, that
they may always pay them, but destroys and persecutes such as refuse. And this
is not according to Christ the Way, who destroys the Devil and his works, who
led Man from God, and makes Man unclean; and Christ, who destroys the Devil,
makes Man clean again, and brings Man to God, who is the Justifier,
Sanctifier, Redeemer, and the Captain of their Salvation; and Persecution is
always blind. So every Religion, Church, Worship, Ministry, Maintenance, which
is set up by Carnal Weapons, Clubs and Swords is from Cain and Judas, and from
the Jews, and from Antichrist, and is Anti-christianism, and not from Christ,
neither in the Way which is the Way to Life. For he is the Life which saves
Men's Lives, but he is of the Prince of Death that destroys Men's Lives, and of
the Prince of Darkness, out of the Light, and out of Christ the Way, who was
before he was, and his works, and who lives and remains when he is gone (to
wit, the Devil) and all his Instruments and Works: Let the Glory be to God
alone for ever.

And all the vain Jangles and Contentions, and Disputes concerning the
Scriptures of Truth, with the diverse Meanings and Interpretations thereof, from
whence they arise, because they are not in the Power and Spirit in which they
were that gave them forth; So they are not in Fellowship with God, from whence
they came, neither with the Spirits of Just Men, who gave them forth, neither
are in Unity one with another, for they are out of the Spirit, in which Spirit
we are, by which Spirit we know God, we know the Spirits of Just Men, we know
the Scriptures, with which we have Unity one with another, and the Spirit of
the Prophets is subject to the Prophets; and this is witnessed amongst us which
God said, viz. That he would pour out of his Spirit upon all flesh, and Sons
and Daughters should Prophecy. And now both Sons and Daughters do Prophecy in
our Age, as formerly among the Apostles.

And now there are Women-helpers and Laborers in the Gospel, and such who for
its sake can lay down their Lives.

X. Of the SCRIPTURES.
Now concerning the Scriptures we say, That they were not given for this end
that Men should make a Trade of them for a Maintenance, neither to keep People
always learning, and always teaching of them to get their Money, this
proceeds from the Earthly Wisdom, Knowledge and Understanding, which shall
perish, and be confounded, and brought to nothing; and not in that Wisdom which
comes down from above, which is pure and peaceable; but in that Wisdom which
is from beneath, which is Earthly, sensual and Devilish, which will destroy
them who are not of their Opinions and Judgments; such are not in the Spiritual
understanding, which gives Dominion over sin, and which gives a discerning by
which they can discern one thing from another, and are out of that Knowledge by
which God is known, which is Life Eternal.

So they who make a Trade of the Scriptures, and serve themselves by them, they
are such as are out of the Life, neither can they bring People to it, and so
they keep people learning all their Life time; and this is the State of the
Merchants of Babylon, who are building up and plucking down.

Now this is the end and right use of Scripture, viz. for all to read them, and
believe them, and to wait in the Light, to feel the Power and Spirit which was
in them, who gave them forth, by which they may know them, and have the
Revelation of them in themselves, and so feel Christ who is the Voice and the
Cornerstone, by which they are fulfilled, and so to receive him, and live in
him, who fulfills them, who is the end of the Prophets, and of all Types,
Figures and Shadows.

So (I say) the Scriptures of Truth were given forth to be believed, read,
fulfilled, performed, and that People might enjoy that of which they spoke, to
wit, Christ Jesus the Substance.

The Scriptures of Truth are the Words of God, which comes from God the Father
of Truth, and cannot be broken, but must be fulfilled, and he who fulfills them
is Christ, by whom all things were made and created; who is called, the Word of
God.

XI. Concerning TITHES.
Tithes have been held up among Christians (so called) by Force and Violence
since the days of the Apostles, and Christ's Incarnation, by whom not any
Example was given about Tithes, for among them all things were done freely in
Charity and Love.

Tithes before the Law, by Abraham, and Tithes, etc. Offerings, etc. under the
Law, were for the Priests, Widows, Fatherless, and the Poor; which Law of God
commanded Tithes by reason of the increase to be offered for his Service, but
Christ in Gospel Times, redeems from the Ninths, and puts an end to the Law
that gave the Tenths, and to the Priesthood that took them, and to the
Commandment that gave them, and puts an end to the Offerings.

And although Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedeck in time of War, those were
only Tithes of the Spoil, and not by a Command; And Christ was according to the
Order of Melchisedeck, who puts an end to War, and destroys the Devil its
Author, and redeems out of the Earth. And although we are many thousands, yet
there is not a Beggar among us, neither do we read there were any Beggars in
the Primitive-Times, which Church denied Tithes, and said, The Priesthood was
changed that took them, together with the Law by which they were set up, and
also the Commandment which gave them. So they who take Tithes, and they who pay
them, are both Antichrists, and deny Christ to be come in the Flesh.

XII. Of the HIGHER POWER.
Moses, who had the Law, saw over all Transgression, and before it was; he saw
the state which Adam had in the Garden before he Fell, he saw his state in the
Fall, and how Death reigned from Adam to Moses, who received the Law, which Law
passed over all Transgression; which Law did answer to the Witness of God in
all, which was a Command to people that they might not sin, and that they might
be kept from sin, and so from Death, which raigns from Adam to Moses, which Law
passes over both sin and Death. And this was the Higher Power (higher than the
Transgression) which answers to the Witness of God against the Rebellions,
which Witness is true, holy, righteous, and equal, which Law is just, holy, and
good; a true Measure, and just Weight; this is called the Higher Power; this
was added until the Seed came, which is Christ; and this Law they were to
hear, even Moses: To whom Wisdom was given to make the Pattern, and to set
forth Figures and Shaddows under the Law till Christ should come. Of which
Moses said, The Lord will raise up a Prophet like unto me, him shall ye hear in
all things.

And when Christ himself came, he put an end to all those Types, Figures, and
Shaddows, and changable things; for in him there is no Shadow, who is called
Gods Righteousness. So the Law was in use until the Seed came; and Moses who
had it said, God shall raise up a Prophet like unto him, and now he is come,
which we hear, (to wit, the Seed) who is the end of all the Prophets, who
Prophesied of him; and so He is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every
one that believe. So Believers are Members of the true Church, of which Christ
is the Head. So Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one
that believes. Which Christ purges his Floor, and burns up the Chafe,
comes with his Fan, Baptizeth with his holy Spirit and Fire, and brings his
Wheat into his Garner. And Christ is the end of all Oaths which were under the
Law, and which was before the Law, viz. of Oaths which put an end to strife
among Men.

XIII. Of the KINGDOM of CHRIST, how it is held up, and how not.
The Kingdom of Christ is not held up by Carnal Weapons, for says Christ, My
Kingdom is not of this World, therefore his Servants fight not. Now all you
that profess your selves to be Christians, and bringers of glad Tidings, yet ye
are Fighthers with Clubs and Swords about Religion, you are not the Servants of
Christ, who are fighting for an Earthly Kingdom; for in Christ's Kingdom we must
fight with Spiritual Weapons in Patience and Long-suffering; And Christ said to
his Disciples, (who would have had fire to come down from Heaven to consume
those that were contrary to them, as it was in the days of the Prophet Elias)
That they knew not what spirit they were of. So they who destroy Men's Lives,
and does not save them, they are not according to the mind of Christ, nor the
way of Christ, but are under the Condemnation of it, neither do they know what
Spirit they are of. And so they who are Spiritually wise cannot commit their
Souls, Bodies nor Spirits into the hands of such.

XIV. Concerning Teachers, Prophets, Pastors, Bishops, Presbyters, etc.
Teachers, Prophets, Pastors, Presbyters and Bishops, ought not to be such as
are given to filthy lucre, nor covetous, nor given to wine, nor strikers, nor
brawlers, nor covetous of earthly things, nor to teach for filthy lucre, nor to
contend about words and fables, and vain Philosophy, and beggarly Rudiments,
and Traditions and Doctrines of men, nor their Commandments, neither ought
they to compel People to observe Days, Meats, and Drinks, nor such like
things, nor to bear Rule by their Means, nor they ought not to be such who seek
their gain from their quarter, such were forbidden; and such as teach for money
and handfulls of Barley, and pieces of Bread, and such as teach for lucre, were
forbidden and opposed by the true Prophets, Teachers and Apostles, and such as
wore long Robes, and were called of Men Master, and followed and loved
Salutations in Mark^ts, and the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and such like, all
such are out of Christ, and against such Christ himself cried, Woe, woe, who
said, Ye have one Master, even Christ, and ye are all Brethren: And that it
should not be so among them, as it was among the Gentiles.

And so all they who have the Scriptures of Christ, of the Apostles and
Prophets, and not in the Power and Spirit that gave them forth, and do not obey
it, which reproves them that they may come into it, but stop their Ears, and
shut their Eyes against it, such are like the Pharisees, these cannot worship
God in the Spirit, neither can they pray in the Spirit, nor sing in the Spirit,
but quench it, and burden it, and vex it. These are out of the Fellowship of
the Spirit, and out of the Fellowship of God the Father of Spirits. Those err,
not knowing the Scriptures nor the Power of God. And such go hither and thither
to change their Way, and go from the Spirit of God in their hearts, which would
lead them to Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life. So all such who have the
Form of Godliness, and are not in the Power and Spirit in which they were in
who gave forth the words; such are to be denied. And the true Praying is in the
Spirit, and the true Worship, true Praising, and true Singing must be in the
Spirit: So they who grieve and vex the Spirit, and quench it, they cannot
Worship God in the Spirit.

XV. An Exhortation to all Christendom, to mind the Grace of God, to wit, the
Light.
All ye People in that part of the World which is called Christendom, come to
the Light wherewith Christ has enlightened you, that with it you may see your
Salvation, and may know Christ you Teacher, the Captain of your Salvation, and
the Grace which comes by him, which brings your Salvation; which Grace teaches
us, which Grace is sufficient in weakness and temptations, which brings the
Salvation, and by it we are saved. And this Grace teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly and righteously; and this is
our Teacher that brings Salvation. So you may have all the loins of your mind
girded up, to wait for the Grace which is to be brought to you at the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, according to Peter's Exhortation.

Now they who turn from the Grace, and walks despightfully against the Spirit
of God, they set up Teachers according to their own hearts lusts, and such
makes Merchandise of them, always learning of them, but never able to come to
the knowledge of the Truth, but still remains in earthly mindedness,
covetousness, and temptations, and weaknesses, where is mournings and
complaints, and where there are very many mourners and complainers, among such
as turn from the Grace of God into wantonness, and set up Teachers (as
aforementioned) according to their own hearts lusts, etc.

Therefore come ye to the Grace of God, and it will give you to see your
ungodliness, your unrighteousness, and your worldly lusts and intemperance.
This Grace is your Teacher continually, who brings Salvation; if you take heed,
and have regard to it, and love it, but if you turn it into wantonness, the
sudden judgment of God will come upon you.

So take heed to the Grace of God, your constant Teacher, which brings
Salvation, by which Grace you will see your Salvation brought in; For, The
mighty Day of the Lord is coming upon all unrighteousness of men. The Son of
the Lord God will appear against you, he who has all Power in Heaven and in
Earth given to him, who is King of kings, and Lord of lords. So take heed to
the Light and receive it, wherewith he has enlightened, so you receive the Lord
himself. Open ye your Gates, that the King of Glory may enter in, who stands at
the door and knocks, turn ye to the Light, and then you open the door where
the coming in of the King of Glory is discerned. And come from all the barren
Mountains, who are in the Fall, alienated from the Image of God, Life and
Power. Come from all those Wells without Water, and Clouds without Rain, who
are as Vagabonds tossed up and down like a Tempest.

Come to the Light, and receive the Light, that in the Light ye may receive
Christ, and be his Children, that by the same you may see the Day Star
appearing, where the Sons of God sing together. For, Woe is to the World that
lies in iniquity, for the Lord is coming to judge it, and to render to every
one according to their works, whether they be good or evil. And with the Light
every one of you knows whether your works are good or evil, for what is to be
known of God is manifest in you, (for God has manifested it to you) when you
do any thing that is naught, or unjust, or worthy of Death, by that which is of
God in you, you know it.

And when you go from this, which is of God in you, you do not glorify God as
God, but are alienated from his Life, and Strangers from the Covenant of Life
and Peace which is in Christ, and so your foolish hearts are darkened, and
filled with unrighteousness, and upon such comes the judgments and displeasure
of God.

Now they who are delivered from the wrath to come, they come to that which is
of God in themselves ( viz.) to the Light, and so they see Christ the Covenant
of God; so Man is brought into peace with God, and saved from the wrath to
come, and from all false Ways, false Doctrines, false Worships, and false
Churches, Commandments, Traditions, Rudimenus, Will-worships, Inventions, and
from Hand-Worship, and Lip-Service. So come to the Light and Spirit of God in
your selves that by it you may be converted to God, and may Worship him in
Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, in Christ Jesus, who was before sin was.

For since Man fell from God, from his Power and Image, all the false Ways,
false Worships, false Churches, have been set up; and by that Spirit, and
Power, and Wisdom which is out of Truth, from below, which leads men to kill
one another about them.

So the Light is the Way by which Life is to be found, and this is the Light
which enlighteneth you. So come to the Light and you come to the Way, which was
before the power of Death was. And Christ is called the Way, and he is called
the Light, and who are out of the Light they are out of Him, the Way, in the
ways of Death, and Darkness, and Bondage. For as the Jews outward were in
Bondage and Captivity under Pharaoh in Egypt, so the Jews inward in the Spirit,
are captivated in Spiritual Sodom and Egypt. They who do not take to the
directions of the Spirit, and hears what it says, for every man ought to
hearken and hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, and not to mind nor
hear any visible thing. And in it, (viz. the Spirit) they Edify, build, and
gather together, and meet together in Unity and Fellowship.

XVI. Of PERFECTION.
He who leads man into Imperfection is the Devil, and his work who leads from
God, for Man was Perfect before he fell, for all his works were perfect; So
Christ who d^stroyeth the Devil and his works, makes Man perfect again
(destroying him who made him imperfect) which the Law could not do; so by his
blood he cleanses from all sin, and by the One Offering he perfecteth for ever
them that are sanctified. And they who do not believe in the Light which comes
from Christ (by which they see the Offering, and receive the Blood) they are in
unbeliefs concernig it.

And the Apostles who were in the Light, Christ Jesus, who destroys the Devil
and his works, they spoke wisdom among them that were perfect, although they
could not do it among them that were carnal. And their work was to perfect the
Saints (and for this end they had their Ministry given them) until they all
came to the knowledge of the Son of God, who destroys the Devil and all his
works, and who put an end to the Prophets, and to the first Covenant, Types,
Figures and Saddows. And the Apostles work was to bring people to the Unity of
the Faith, which purified their hearts, which gave them Victory over that which
seperates them from God, in which they have access to God, by which Faith they
please him, by which they are justified, and so at last they come to a PERFECT
MAN, to the measure of the Statrue of the fullness of CHRIST. And so the Apostle
says, We preach Christ in you, the hope of Glory; Warning every man, that we
may present Every Man Perfect in CHRIST JESUS.

XVII. Of the RESURRECTION.
We say that Christ is the Resurrection and the Life, to raise up that which
Adam lost, (who has all Power in Heaven and in Earth given to him) and to
destroy him who deceived him ( viz. Adam) So Christ is the Resurrestion unto
Life, of Body, Soul, and Spirit, and so renews Man into the Image of God, and
brings Man into an higher condition than that in which Adam stood before the
Fall, even to himself, who never changed, and never fell, nor never will fall.
And so they who forget God and do wickedly, they are to be turned into Hell;
For they who forget God and do wickedly, they go from the Life and Power of
God, into the Separation from him, and out of his acceptance; for in the Life
is the acceptance; and so the Power, Light and Life, goes over them, who go
into sin and iniquity, which leads from God, who was before Transgression was.

XVIII. Concerning ELECTION and REPROBATION.
Reprobation is an Alienation from the Life, and from that which is of God
within, and from his Voice and Command, as Adam and the Jews did; and such who
despise that which is of God within, they despise their Birthright; Such are
concluded to be out of true Understanding, and true Knowledge, and the Witness
of God within is grieved, and such are dead in their senses from the Life and
Covenant of Peace with God, and from the Seed which is called the Elect, in
which the Elect, and the Election is known, in the Seed Christ, before the
Foundation of the World, which World slew him, and they who slew him, and now
slayes him, they were and are Reprobated from the Life, who go from the Command
of God, and they have lost his Image, they have lost his Power, which keeps
over, and above, and out of the Reprobation. And so they who come into the
Election, the Seed, they come out of the State in which Adam was, in the Fall,
into the state in which he was in before he Fell, and into an higher state than
that, into Christ, the Seed, the Elect. And so they in the Seed, in the Elect,
in Christ, the Wisdom of God, they comprehend and see the state of Election
before the World was laid, and the State of Adam before the Fall, and the State
of Adam in the Fall, in the Reprobation, and the state of Adam restored again
out of the Fall, and a State which is higher than that in which Adam was in
before he Fell, into the Election (which is a thing beyond that) and the state
of the beloved of God is seen in the Seed, the Wisdom of God.

Cain was the first Birth, Esau was the first Birth, Ishmael was the first
Birth; Cain killed his Brother about Religion, Ishmael was a Scoffer, Esau bore
the Sword, he despised his Birthright, he fought against his Brother Jacob. So
Christendom, read your Reprobation, the first Birth, which is born of the
Elesh, for the first Birth will persecute him who is born of the Spirit; So the
most part of Christians are seen to be of the first Birth, and to remain in the
Reprobation from God. Cain departed from the Voice of God, and Esau from his
Birthright, and Ishmael in his scoffing nature, they went from the Good, and
so from faithful Abraham, who was in the Election. And so they who are in
Cains, Ishmaels and Esaus nature, are in the first Birth, which is not Elected.

Now as to the Love of God toward one, and his Hatred to another, before
either had done good or evil, all this consists in the first Birth, who
despised his Birthright, which God foresaw, which was not the Seed, unto which
the Love of God is to for ever. Therefore know thy self ( O Christendom) and
thy Birth, that that which hates the Principle of God and his Voice, is
reprobated, he that rebels against Gods command and his Voice, God turns
against such, neither does he hear such who hates the Election, and are in the
Reprobation from the Seed, yea, even from the Law it self, for the Law keeps a
man from sin; But the Law it self does not say that it destroys the Devil, but
the Seed, viz. Christ, who is higher than the Law, who is the Election, and
destroys the Devil.

So who knows the Election, they must know the Seed, they must know the Birth
born of the Spirit. Now if all Christendom, know the Election, they must know
the Birth born of the Spirit, which will not Persecute. For the nature of Cain,
Ishmael, and Esau, is one (of which the Apostle spoke in the Primitive times)
which we now also say is one, and the Election is one which stands in the
Seed, which was before the Foundation of the wicked world was. And the
Reprobation is one, which stands in the unjust world, out of the Truth and
the Life in disobedience to the Command of God. Therefore know the one
Reprobation, and the one Election, then ye shall know the Seed, in which is the
Wisdom of God, and ye shall know that which goes from his Voice, Power and
Command, out of the Wisdom of God; so whom God loves, he loves for ever: Know
Jacob, and know Esau. Esau, Cain and Ishmael were the firstborn; and is not
Christendom of the first-birth, who Persecutes, who departs from the good, and
despises the pure, and persecutes the Birth born of the Spirit, which God
hates. And such act out of his Life in the Reprobation, out of his Power and
Wisdom, and out of the Election, Christ, the Seed, the second Birth, who was
before the Carnal Birth was, and remains when he will be gone, unto which the
Love of God is for ever, and unto whom is the Promise, which goes over the
outward Birth, and destroys the Devil and his works, who went from Truth, and
led man from God, by which the Curse, Wrath and Woe came upon Man, which Christ
the Seed, brings the Blessing, and gives man to see the blessed state of all
things, how they were in the beginning, and how they were blessed in the
beginning; and through Christ, Man comes up into the power, which is his
Throne, where there is Blessing and no Curse at all.

XIX. Concerning FEAR and TREMBLING.
The strong Man has kept the House long, and his Goods have been at Peace, but
now He is come who is stronger than he, Christ Jesus the Stronger, who does
dis-inherit and cast him out, and spoil his Goods, and makes Man the Temple of
God; that ^e himself may dwell in him, an holy Temple, and an Habitation for
himself to dwell in; who makes the Keepers of the House to Tremble; by which
power of Christ the Salvation is wrought out with fear and Trembling. And so we
can say, That it is God that worke^h in us both to will and to do, according to
his will and good pleasure. In the days of the Prophets, the Prophet he
trembled and staggered like a Drunkard, for the Iniquity of the Times, and
because of the holiness of the Word of the Lord; He trembled when he heard his
Voice, and when the Lord spoke to him he feared grea^ly. This is the Man whom
God regards (says the Prophet Isayas) who is of a broken and contr^ie spirit,
and trembles at his word: Who have been cast out by their Brethren, who said,
let the Lord be glorified: Who will appear for those that tremble at his Word,
and for those that are of a contrite heart; who were for Signs and Wonders to
both the Houses of Israel, when they shall be confounded, ashamed and
astonished. And before you know sin rooted out, and wasted out of your flesh,
and the Earth shaken and removed out of its place, and ye brought into that
state which Man was in before he Fell, you must know the trembling and shaking
of that which is to be shaken, and the removing of that which is to be removed,
before Christ the Seed will appear, who is the foundation of many Generations,
and the Rock of Ages, who is the First and the Last; Who cannot be shaken,
neither can be changed. So that the whole unjust wicked World has much to
suffer before they come to this, they must know the Devils to tremble, the
Heavens to be shaken, and the Earth also, before he who cannot be shaken will
appear; by whom the World was made.

XX. Concerning the BODY of DEATH.
Its evident that they who plead for a body of Death and Sin, about which the
world so earnestly jangle, and which they plead for as long as they live upon
the earth, that they also plead for its Author, viz: the Devil, and this is not
to plead for Christ who destroys him who is the Author of sin, and the Body of
it.

Object. Now if you Object, that John has said, If we say that we have no sin
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us*


Answ. John says, If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar: (mark) but
if we confess and forsake our sins, the blood of Jesus Christ, the son of God,
cleanses us from all sin.

Further he says, He that is born of God sins not, neither can he: because
the Seed of God remains in him. Because of which Seed he cannot sin, for that
Seed keeps the Holy; so that the Evil one cannot touch him: In this the
children of God and the children of the Devil are manifest: Whose children of
both kinds contends and pleads for his own; so there is a time in which men may
say that they have sinned, and have sin, and a time to confess and to forsake
sin; and then a time to know the blood which cleanses from all sin; and then
the Birth born, which does not commit sin; and the Seed which remains in him;
so that he cannot sin, for, (as I said before) it keeps the Holy that the Evil
cannot touch him.

And though Paul cried out of a Body of Death, and of a Warfare, yet afterward
he gave thanks to God, that he had gotten Victory, through Jesus Christ, over
the Body of Death, and that the Law of the Spirit of Life, had freed him from
the Law of Sin and Death. And afterward the Apostle never complained of a Body
of Death, but he thanked God, that he had obtained Victory through Christ, who
destroys the Devil the Author of it, who destroys Death and its Body, and said
that he was freed, and that there was no condemnation to them who were in
Christ Jesus: and that the Life that he now lived, was by the Faith of the Son
of God; which Faith gives Victory over Sin, Death and the Devil; which sin
separates from God, by which man has displeased him, by which Faith man is
purified, and has victory, and pleases God, and has access to him, and is
justified and saved, Amen.


XXI. Concerning the word THOU to a Single Person.
It is the manner among us to use the word [ Thou] to a single person, and [
You] to more than one, as in the Primitive times among the Saints, according to
Scripture and the Principle of God placed in every man, which distinguishes
many from one, and has the proper word both to singular and plural; to wit,
the singular word to a single person, and the plural word to more than one,
according to the true understanding and Spirit of God in every man, and the
Testimony of all the Prophets. But they are degenerated from the Spirit of God,
they are degenerated from the Scriptures, and from their own Translations,
calling this manner of speaking ( Thou, to one, and You, to many) nonsense, and
improper; when they themselves are gone from the true understanding, which
whosoever are in it, comprehends them who are degenerated from it.

XXII. Concerning putting of the HAT, and Bowing the KNEE, and Cringings, and
Complements.
To put off Hatts, bowing Knees, Cringing and Complements, are from below, and
Customs and Manners of the World, which shall pass away, and never came from
God, neither is that honor wherewith men ought to honor one another; for if
all men had honored and esteemed one another, they had been of an higher
Spirit than the Spirit of the World, and of a more noble and generous Spirit:
Then neither Man nor Woman throughout all Christendom had received wrong or
injury if they had esteemed and honored one another; for he that honors men,
will in no wise hurt them, in this consists Breeding and Civillity. And every
Knee shall bow to me (says the Lord.) For this is the cry, Worship God, and
Fear him, and Reverence him.

And if you Object, That some in times past bowed themthemselves to an Angel,
but in the time of the Gospel, which is the Power of God, which was before the
Fall, in the state of Reformation and Restoration, John was forbidden to bow
to the Angel, and the Apostels reproved them that bowed to them. And although
Jacob bowed for a time to his Brother Esau; yet it is not said, that he bowed
to him all his Life time. For it is written, The Elder shall serve the Younger;
So the Elder shall bow among the Cringers and Knee-bowers, one to another, who
will kill and envy one another; and to them this is a Mystery.

XXIII. Concerning GOOD MANNERS.
Evil Words, and Evil Communications corrupts Good Manners; And if Christendom
would learn good Manners, they must all come to the Light of Christ Jesus, to
the Spirit of God in themselves, and to the Word of God in their hearts and
months which will teach them to leave off Evil Words, and will lead them from
them, and to deny them, and this is the way to come to Good Manners; But they
who live in high Expressions and Complements, and full of Evil Words, and
Flatteries, and Dissimulations, and call such Good Manners; their Words and
Works testify and manifest that they are Evil and Corrupt, and such whose
Manners are evil and corrupt, they quench, grieve and vex the Spirit of God in
themselves, and hate the Light, and will not come to it, because it reproves
them of their evil words. Such do love envy, wrath, vanity, pride, rashness,
hastiness, and yet they are found in flattering Expressions, and bowings one to
another; and they call it Good Manners, and Honor, when all such things are
altogether out of that Honor that comes from above; and are those things which
the Witness of God in themselves testifies against, and testified in the Name
of the Lord, that he will bring such honor in the dust, and that which he will
condemn as unjust.

The Apostle says, That Women ought not to adorn themselves, with gould,
silver, pearls, costly attire, platting of the hair, but to be adorned with a
meek and a quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price; and the
hidden man of the heart, etc. And if Christendom had minded this, it had been
more virtuous, and more sober, and less envious toward one about their Manners.

XXIV. Concerning Objections of the World against the Preaching of CHRIST.
Object. The World Objests, and says, That some Preach Christ of Envy, and
some of Good Will, and some of Strife and Contention; And that Christ commanded
to hear the Pharisees: So we may hear (say they) our Teachers although they be
wicked.


Answ. He that has the Form of Godliness and denies the Power, from such turn
away. The Apostle bid turn away from Envious men, and Contentious men, and men
of Strife: Although there was a time when the Name of Christ was first spread
abroad, in which time he permitted Envious men to spread his Name abroad. But
when his Name was spread abroad, then he forbad such Envious and Contentious
men to Preach, and exhorted Timothy to withdraw from, and avoid such, for they
could not bring People into the Power. For Envious and Contentious men may
Preach the Form, and have it, but they cannot bring People into the Power. And
so there came a time (before the decease of the Apostles) to turn away from
such. Now as to the hearing of the Pharisees, this was before Christ was
Offered up, and before the fulfilling of the Law; for they were Ministers of
the Law; and so people ought to do as they said, but not as they did, but when
Christ was offered up, he commanded them to Preach the Gospel, and not to hear
the Pharisees, and it was the work of the Apostles to bring People to the end
of the Law, to the Seed, into Gospel-fellowship, into the Power of God, which
was before the Power of darkness was.


XXV. Concerning BREAD, WATER and WINE.
Bread, Water, and Wine are earthly and perishing things; for the Bread and
Wine which Christ gave at Supper in the Evening, which the World takes at Noon,
those things Christ and the Apostle gave for a showing forth and a remembrance
of his death until he should come. And after some of the Disciples had received
it, they doubted, Whether he was the Christ or not. And after the Apostle had
given the Supper to the Corinthians, in his first Epistle, he bad then Examine
themselves, and so to eat in the remembrance of Christ. But in the second
Epistle he bad them examine themselves, and try themselves, whether Christ
[except they were Reprobates] were in them or not. Now they may be Reprobates,
who have taken the Bread and Wine, and have had the Water; They were Reprobates
if Christ was not in them; For Bread and Wine is not the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, which came down from Heaven, which flesh, whosoever eats, lives for
ever. For People may eat of Bread made of Grain, and may drink Wine make of
Grapes, and yet may dye Reprobates.

Now they were to take it in remembrance of his Death, this was one State, and
than they were to come to dye with him and this was a nearer state than the
taking of Bread and Wine in remembrance of his Death, and then they were to
arise with him, and then to seek those things which were above where Christ
sits at the right hand of God, but Bread Water and Wine are all earthly
things, and they are not Christ, and they who have him, they are not
Reprobates, neither do they need outward things to put them in mind of his
Death; whenas they are dead with him, and risen with him, to live with him. But
they who will not dye, and suffer with him, such live in the Old Nature, and
desire to have outward things, continually to put them in mind of his Death,
and such live in Strife and Contention about outward things and shaddows and do
not come to Christ the Substance, who was before the world was made in whom
there is no strife at all, but only Life and Peace.

XXVI. Of the SABBATH DAY.
The Jews they kept the Sabbath Day, a Type and Sign of Rest, that both the
Manservant, and Maidservant, and Strangers, and all Cattle should rest within
their Gates; a sign of Christ, who destroys the Devil the Author of Oppression,
and gives rest to Man and Beast, and to the whole Creation, and brings it again
into that blessed condition which it was in in the beginning before the Fall.
Now as to the Saints Meeting together on the first Day of the Week, this
practice is not denied, but owned by us, for who are come to the First Day, as
they Jews on the Last Day. But there is more in the Word.

XXVII. Concerning Godfathers, and Godmothers and SPRINKLING of INFANTS.
Concerning Godfathers, and Godmothers, and Sprinkling of Infants, and such
like things, the Scriptures make no mention, yet the Scripture says, Repent,
Teach and Baptize.

XXVIII. Concerning the Word TRINITY.
Of this word [ Trinitas] there is no mention made in Scripture; yet the
Scripture speaks of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and of Water, Blood and
Spirit, and all these are, one among us, as in the Primitive time among the
Apostles, who gave no such outward Names to them as Trinity, as the World now
does.

XXIX. Concerning the MINISTRY.
They that receive from Christ, they receive freely, and they give freely, they
pray freely, and preach freely; and the Ministry is the gift of God, and is to
be exercised freely; and of a free People of their earthly things it is to be
Administered freely. Heavenly men and bringers of glad Tidings of a Kingdom of
which they are Heirs, must Minister to the Eternal condition of People. And
this is the highest Love in the Life.

XXX. Concerning Days, and Times, and Meats and Drinks.
The Kingdom of God consists not in Days, Times, Meats and Drinks, and such
like things, but in Power, Righteousness Faith and Joy in the holy Ghost; and
People ought not contend and Persecute one another about such things, for the
Apostles gave not any Commandment or Example that any should do so, but on the
contrary reproved them who did so, and keep People in such things.

XXXI. Concerning MARRIAGES.
Whom God has joined together let no man put asunder; and those which he
joins he joins with his Power, even by his Immortal Power, with a Band over
and above the State which is in the Fall, where Men join and put asunder, about
outward and earthly things, and jangle and fight about them, but this is all in
the defiled Bed, out of the honorable state which was in the beginning, where
there was no hardness of heart. And Marriage in it self is not condemned but
owned, and among all them who are in the Power, I say it is honorable.

So forsake and come out of all vain Words, and all vain Customs, and all
unprofitable and idle Communications and Talkings, for which you are judged and
condemned with the Light, viz. the Light in your Consciences which reproves
you, and come into the the new Life, in which God is served, that your words
may be seasoned with grace, that by it your hearts may be established, that no
corrupt communication may proceed out of your mouths, for whatsoever is
corrupt is contrary to the Witness of God in your Consciences, to Christ the
Light which reproves you.

Therefore away with all the Customs and Fashions of the World which grieve
and quench the Spirit of God, and repent while ye have time, and spend not your
time like a Tale; come to the Light, and sleep not in sin, in darkness, in
separation from God; but prize the time while you have it, lest in the end ye
come to say, we have had time but now it is past; but so mind the Power of God,
the Light of Christ Jesus, by which you may redeem it.

XXXII. Concerning False Prophets and Antichrists.
False Prophets and Antichrists are much condemned in this part of the World
called Christendom, and they bring the 7th, Chapter, and the 24th Chapter of
Matthew, and say, that they are but now come.

To which I Answer, that Christ said, They should come, viz. Antichrists, and
False Apostles; he said to his Disciples, that they shall come, i. e. to his
Disciples, and he gave them marks how they should know them; A corrupt tree
cannot bring forth good fruit: nor a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.
-- And if it were possible they should deceive the very Elect, for they have
the Sheeps-cloathing. And he commanded his Disciples that they should not
follow them, for they were inwardly ravening Wolves, having the Sheeps
clothing. And those were Antichrists and False Prophets, false Christ's and
Deceivers who were inwardly ravend from the Light, and so from the Seed, viz.
the true Christ. And Christ told his Disciples those should come, and before
the decease of his Disciples they came; as we may read in the first Epistle of
John, the second Chapter, and fourth Chapters, he says, Little Children, ye
have heard that Antichrist should come, and even now there are many
Antichrists, and false Prophets come into the World. So Christ had spoken
before that they should come, and his Disciples said that they were already
come; who went out from them, inwardly ravend from the Spirit; and this was
above sixteen hundred years since. And John who saw them already come, he
directed the Saints to this anointing in themselves, and said to them, that
they had not need that any one should teach them, but as this anointing taught
them, they should abide in the Father and in the Son. And so those
Antichrists, false Prophets, Wolves, false Christ's, inwardly ravend, they bear
Pryars, Thorns and Thistles, which Christ said, shall come, and his Disciples
said they were come, and who went out from them into the World. And in the
Revelations it is said, The whole World went after them. So they went out from
the Church, Fellowship, Gospel; they went out from the Fellowship of the Spirit
within, being ravend from it; they went from the anointing within, which
should teach them; they went from the Law in the heart, to wit, from the New
Covenant; and they went from the Kingdom within, and they went from the Word
which is in the the heart to obey it, and to do it; they went out from the
Light in the heart, which gives the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, and so they lost the Pearl hid in the Field, viz. the World in their
hearts. And so the false Prophets went out from the Disciples, and, as was said
before in the Revelations, its said, the whole World went after them. So John
wrote to the seven Churches which erred, by permitting Jezabel to teach, and to
set up Idols, and such who said they were Jews, and were not, but were the
Synagogues of Satan. So he goes on in the Revelation till he comes to the
eleventh Chapter, where the Witnesses are slain; the two Olives which carried
the oil to the anointing of the Nations, the two Candlesticks which holds the
Light. And in the 12th Chapter, the Woman, viz. the true Church, fled into the
Wilderness, prepared for her of God, that there she should be nourished, for a
time, times, and half a time. And in the 13th Chapter, The Dragon gives his
Power to the Beast, and the Beast with the Dragons power makes war against the
Saints* and killed them who were l^ft of that Seed who kept the Testimony of
Jesus, the Spirit of Prophecy; who were in him, from whom the ravening Wolves
had departed. Then all that dwelt upon the Earth worshipped the Beast, and
worshipped the Dragon, and both caused and compelled all, both small and great
to fall down and worship. And from hence arose this compelling power to
Worship: Then the false Prophet and the Whore, through the Dragons Power, got
upon the Beast, and caused all Nations to drink of her Cup. So thus the whore
arose, which went from the Apostles, and from their Life, Power and Spirit, and
committed Fornication; before the Nations were married to Christ, they took the
Cup of Fornication of this Whore. And she drank the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs, who were not inwardly ravend, and who could not drink of her Cup. Yea,
she drank the blood of the Saints and Prophets who kept the Testimony of Jesus,
who were not inwardly ravend. And so such doings and works they have set up for
the space of fifteen hundred years, viz. Killing and murdering; and they have
dispersed themselves into all Nations, as the Apostles they were to go into all
Nations. And such works the Wolves have wrought in the Sheeps clothing, yea
those who are inwardly ravend from the Spirit of God, whose fruits are
Brambles, Briars and Thorns, and such like works those Raveners have done since
the days of the Apostles, being ravend from their Life and Power; having the
Words of the Sheep, the Scriptures, but not in the Power and Life which gave
them forth; therefore Briars and Thorns appear: who devour and kill the Lambs,
and compels them to worship and use violence upon them and their outward things
about Religion, which was not the work of the Apostles.

And so John says, Again the Beast and the Dragon, and the False Prophets
(which has deceived the Nations which Christ said should come, and John said
was come; who went out from them; from which time the World has gone after
them, for the space of fifteen hundred years) is to be taken: Which Beast and
false Prophet shall be taken and cast into the Lake of fire, and the Nations
shall be deceived no more, and the Whore the great Whore, which has compelled
the Nations to drink the Blood of the Saints, is to be taken, and her flesh
burnt with fire, and Babylon shall be confounded, and all Merchants which have
Merchandized with her, shall howl, and lament, and cry, Alas, alas, How is
this great City fallen! For there has been a merchandising in this great City,
which must be thrown down; and all the Merchants of this great City, have been
those that inwardly ravend from the Spirit of God, who have built up and
plucked down.

So unto this from which they have Apostatized, you must all come before the
Sheeps Life be known, and so the Witnesses are raised, and shall be raised, who
hold the Light, and carries the Oil to enlighten the Nations, and to anoint
them; yea, the Spirit, and Power, and Fellowship, and Worship in which the
Apostles were formerly in. And the Cry is begun, Fear God and give glory to
him. -- Come out of her, my People, lest you be pertaker of her Plagues. -- And
the Mourners shall go forth, and the Prophets prophecy. Who witness the Spirit
of God fallen upon them, as formerly among the Apostles. And the Everlasting
Gospel shall be preached to all Nations, Kindreds and People.

XXXIII. Concerning an OBJECTION of PEOPLE.
Objection. But many people speak after this manner. Have not we had the Gospel
all this time till now?


Answer. We say, No, You have had the Sheeps-cloathing, while you are alienated
from the Spirit, and so not living in the Power, which is the Gospel; And the
Bride, the Lambs Wife, is coming out of the Wilderness, which has been
nourished of God for a time, and times, and dividing of times, preparing for
her Husband; and the Man-Child is risen to rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron.
And the Lamb and the Saints shall have the Victory, (Glory to the Highest) and
people shall come into Gospel-Fellowship, and to the Church of God, and
Church Fellowship in the Gospel, the Power of God, which was before the Power
of Satan was; which Gospel was among the Apostles, in which their Fellowship
was, and this is Gospel-Fellowship; and in the Power of God they are over all
false Prophets, false Worshippers, over the Dragon, over the false Church and
his Worship, (which are begotten betwixt us and the Apostles) and are gotten
beyond them, and see their rise, who are inwardly ravend from the Spirit, and
are gone from the Truth, as the Devil and the Whore heretofore, who set
themselves against them who are in the Truth, But here is the Faith and
Patience of the Saints, who sees the destruction of the Whore, the Beast, the
Dragon, and the false Prophet, by the hand and power of God, who know the Seed
of God to reign over all, viz. he who is the First and the Last.


XXXIV. Of the JEW Inward and Outward, and of a CHRISTIAN in the Power and out
of the Power.
The Uncircumcised Gentiles, which have not the Law, and yet do those things
contained in the Law, are better than the Circumcised Jews which have the Law,
and are more Sober and Moderate; and so the Jew within in the Spirit, is more
Excellent than the Jew without in the Flesh. And so a Christan in the Light,
and Power, and Seed of God, is more excellent than a Christan in the Form of
Godliness, and yet out of the Power; and more Moderate and Patient.

XXXV. Concerning CHRIST the COVENANT of GOD.
Christ, the Covenant of God, was foretold by the Prophet, who said, I will
give him for a Light and for a Covenant to the Gentiles, and he shall be my
Salvation to the ends of the Earth: yea, the New Covenant to the House of
Israel, and to the house of Judah. So this Covenant is made to all People, to
them who were called the People of God, and to the Gentiles also. And this is
that Covenant of Light unto which John came to bear Witness, which
enlighteneth every one that comes into the World; which gives Power to all,
who receive it, to become the Sons of God, from him who has all power in
Heaven and Earth given to him, And this is the Light in which people must
believe, by which they become Children of God, and this is the Light which
shines in Darkness, and out of the Darkness, which is in the heart which
gives the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus, from
whence it comes; and this is that Light, which they who love darkness hate, and
will not come to it, because it reproves them. And by this Covenant of Light to
the Gentiles, which is Salvation to the ends of the Earth. Now we who are
Gentiles, are become Christians, and we obtain Salvation, and by Faith in this
Covenant we become Children of the Light, and by receiving it, we receive Power
to become the Sons of God: But they who hate this Light and love Darkness
rather than the Light, and do not come to it because it condemns them, even
this Light is their Condemnation.

XXXVI. Concerning Plots and Conspiracies.
Plots, Conspiracies, Insurrections, Tumultuous Meetings, we utterly abhor,
who live peaceably, and seek the peace and good of all People upon earth.

There were about thirty of the fifth Monarchy men who made an Insurrection in
England, which Insurrection was wickedly laid to the charge of the People of
God called Quakers, from which Insurrection, the Monarchy men themselves
declared when they were to dye, That we were Innocent; yet nevertheless, the
Diurnals and News-Books have joined us together with the Monarchy men, in that
Plot and Insurrection, and have published us to the Nations as Plotters, though
we are Innocent. And we say, The Lord forgive them for wronging of us.

The lying Priests and Professors say, That we deny the Scriptures, and that we
deny the Resurrestion, and Christ and his Body, and that we foame at the mouth,
and that we bewitch men, and bind Ribband about their Armos; which are
altogether false and lies, and from their Father the Devil, the Author of them,
who is out of the Truth, in which Truth we are however scandalized by them, who
are of the Father of Lies. And what evil soever they may bring against us, yet
we are in the Truth, and can rejoice; Praised be the Lord, who lives for ever.

XXXVII. Concerning Original Sin.
The Devil is the Original of Sin, which Christ destroys; God is the Original
of Righteousness, and Christ is Gods Righteousness, which endures for ever; but
the Worlds Original is the many Languages (whose Original is Babel) which makes
Divines (as they call them) with many Languages set a top of Christ: And the
Whore sits upon the Waters, (as its spoken in the Revelation) And John says,
The Waters are Nations, Multitudes, People and Tongues: which Tongues they call
their Original. To which Waters the Gospel must be preached before they can be
established.

And ye are to be redeemed from Tongues, and Tongues shall cease, (says the
Apostle) and so from this Worlds Original, the beginning of which is Babel, and
which keeps in Babylon, the Saints are redeemed. And this has been set up as
an Original among them who are alienated from the Spirit of God, in Babel,
where the Original of Tongues was in the days of Nimrod, that Heretic, who
began to build Babel.

So Tongues do not make any man a Divine, neither a Minister of Christ, for
that which makes a man Divine (as they say) is the Word (which redeems out of
Tongues) which was before Babel was, and in the beginning before the Fall,
which knocks down all that which corrupts man's Nature, and renews again into
the Divine Nature.

And whosoever are Ministers of the Word, and Preachers of the Gospel, they are
in the Power and in the Word which was before Tongues were; This Word brings
into the Church-Felowship, which is in God, into which they are not brought by
the Worlds Original, which they call the Tongues, which shall cease, and out of
whom we are redeemed; neither do they bring into Fellowship with God, neither
into his Worship, nor further than Babel, where the Tongues stop.

But who comes to the Word of God and the Gospel, they come to that which was
before many Tongues were, and shall remain when they shall all pass away.

XXXVIII. Concerning OATHS.
The Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of the Apostles, of the Martyrs is risen
again, which gives Testimony against Swearing and Oaths.

There were no Oaths at all imposed upon Man before the Fall, but only since
the Fall, for under the Law after the Fall; and among the Jews; Oaths and
Commandments were given. To which Christ (by whom the World was made, which was
before the Fall, which is the Oath of God, which Oaths in the Fall were Types)
who put an end to strife, and brings into quietness and peace, and binds to
God without Oaths, which Christ put an end to.

And, Christ himself, the Oath of God, puts an end to all Oaths, and brings
into the Land of quietness and rest, the Spiritaul Canaan, and puts and end to
strife, and destroys the Devil the Author of strife, he who is the Rest, the
Way, Truth and the Life, who brings again to God, and is the Covenant of God in
man, has peace with God, which destroys that which led from God and from
Christ; and he himself said, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by the
Earth, nor by any other Oath. He who restores man into that state in which he
was in the beginning before the Fall, who restores into the Image of God. And
so in the Restoration there are no Oaths to be used, nor Swearing, according
to his own Doctrine; But Yea, yea, nay, nay, was to be used among men in all
their Communications, and what is more then this, is evil; So that Swearing now
is evil. And this is the Doctrine of him who restores People into that state in
which man was in in the beginning; who is the Substance, who put an end to
Figures. And his Disciple Jeams in the 5th Chapter of his Epistle, who followed
his Counsel (who is an Everlasting Counselor) says, Above all things, my
brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath,
lest you fall into Condemnation: but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, be
nay. And this was the manner among them who followed the Doctrine and Command
of Christ in the Restoration, who were built upon the true Foundation, which
was first laid in the Primitive times among the true Brethren; and was
publicly held forth which Manner and Custom, Doctrine and Command of Christ
Jesus and the Apostles in the Primitive times, many of the Martyrs followed,
held forth, and practiced among those who were Degenerated and Apostatized from
the Life and Power of Christ and the Apostles, although they profess the Words.
And now the Spirit of Christ is risen again, and of the Apostles, and Saints as
in the Primitive times, and the Spirit of the Martyrs, who bear witness against
all Oaths and all sort of Swearing whatsoevever, that were used among the
Heathens, Jews, and Apostatized Christians, both privately and publicly, and
binds to yea, and nay, in all manner of Communication, as Christ and the
Apostles taught, and and the Saints and Martyrs practiced, knowing, that
whatsoever is more than yea, and nay, is evil; and such who Swear, are
condemned according to Christ and the Apostles Doctrine.

So we say again, That the Spirit of Christ, the Apostles, and Martyrs is risen
again, who has been dead, and is dead, in and among the Apostates, who have
the Form, but deny the Power, from whom we have turned away. But now its ri^en
again, and lives amongst us: Glory and Honor be given to God through Jesus
Christ, who has restored to the beginning, into the Image of God in which Man
was in before he fell, before Oaths were.

For Example.
Read the Book of Genesis, and there you may see that there was no Command
given to Adam and Eve before the Fall, concerning Swearing, neither from
Christ, who Restores Man again, and who puts an END to OATHS, before the Law,
and under the Law, and Prophets both, whom the Angels (which swear) worship,
for Christ says, Swear not at all, who is Lord and Master, so it is better to
obey him than man, and in all your Communication let your yea, be yea, and your
nay, be nay; for whatsoever is more than this comes of Evil, says he who
restores, even Christ.

And in the second Example, consider the Apostles, who did according to the
Command and Doctrine of Christ, who said, Above all things, my Brethren, Swear
not at all, lest ye fall into condemnation, Jam. 5. But let your yea, be yea,
and your nay, nay, in all your Communication.

And although there was Swearing among the Jews, and other Nations and
Heathens, before the Apostatized Christians used to Swear, nevertheless the
Apostles and the Brethren obeyed, and they must obey the Doctrine and the
Command of Christ, for if Christ command one thing, and Man another, It is
better to obey the Lord Jesus Christ, the Life, who is the Restorer, Savior,
and Redeemer, than men.

This is the WORD of the LORD GOD to you all.

Concerning the WORD of GOD, and the Original, what it is.
BLessed are all those whose minds are staid upon the Lord, for they shall be
kept in perfect peace; so where the mind is staid upon the Lord, there is a
perfect peace, for it is a whole peace which cannot be broken: So here is not
only a perfect peace, but a blessing; a perfect peace which comes from the God
of all peace, that bruiseth the Serpents head under your feet, (the troubler)
and the blessings which comes from the blessed God. So all imperfect peace may
be broken, that is when the mind is staid upon any Creature, or in any Creature
(and not upon the Creator) or in any outward things. Goods, Houses, Lands or
Inventions of the Vanities, in the foolish vain Fashions, which the Lust of the
Eye, and the Pride of Life go into, which will defile it and corrupt it, when
any of these things fail, and are not according to your mind, it being in them,
then your peace is broken, and you are cross, and brickle, and envy gets up; so
this is not a perfect peace, but is a broken peace, and then you have the
trouble and not the blessing; and the reason is, because your minds are in the
Creatures, and the outward things, and are not staid upon the Creator, where
the perfect peace is, and the blessing, where nothing can get betwixt you and
the Lord. And this is below Job to have the mind in the Creatures, and visible
things, for when you are tried, and Creatures fail you, you are crossed, and
troubled, that shows an imperfect state; for God said, that Job was a perfect
man: and when that the Lord suffered him to be tried, and when that his Goods
and Houses were thrown down, and driven a way, and servents killed, he said,
Blessed be the name of the Lord, for the Lord gave and the Lord takes; here
his mind was stayed upon the Lord, and he retained his peace. And when that his
Children were destroyed, and his wife said to him, what, do thou continue in
thy Integrity still? Curse God and dye; he rebukes her, and calls her, A
foolish woman: and said unto her, Shall I receive good of the Lord and not
evil? Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked I must return again. Here
Job kept his integrity still, and did not all this while offend with his Lips.
Now many of you who think your selves high, and above Job, if that your Goods
and Children should be after the same manner taken away (whose mind is in them)
you would be found in a troubled brickle state, far below Job. And when that
Jobs Friends came to reason with him, who kept his integrity, and would no way
yield to them, they called him an Hypocrite, and said, he denied Prayer, and
filled his Belly with East Wind, and said, what shall mortal man be more pure
than his Maker? Shall man that is born of a woman be Just? God charge his
Angls with folly, and the Heavens are not clear in his sight. And these are the
Scriptures the Priests use to bring against Friends (who keep there Integrity)
as Jobs Friends did against him; but at the last the Lord commanded Job to
offer a Sacrifice for his Friends, because they had sinned, and spoken not
right, as Job had, who was perfect and kept his Integrity. And the Apostle said
to the Saints, That he had learned in all conditions to be content. Mark, in
all conditions, but this was when he was Paul, not when he was Saul, running up
and down with his packet of Letters, halling the Saints before the Rulers like
a Paritor; then he was not content, neither with his own condition, nor others:
But when he came to learn of Christ, which destroys the Devil and his works,
which teaches to know all things, then in all things he learned to be content;
so that you know that there is learning, learneth, and learned; as a Child when
he is learning, learneth, and learned is three stats; so Paul he had learned in
all conditions to be content; and who was his Schoolmaster but Christ, by whom
all things were made, not of man, nor by man (out of the Truth;) so while he
learned of men, and by men, he was not content, neither are any others.

Therefore all are to learn of Christ the Light, the Life, and the Truth, that
you may come to that condition, to have learned in all conditions to be
content, and not to trust in uncertain Riches, for they have wings and will
flee away; and so he is never counted a wise man that will put any confidence
in that which will flee away from him: for those are the Heirs of the Earth and
the World that l^ad themselves with thick clay, that they may set their nests
on high; but they that be Heirs of Christ, and of the Power of an Endless Life,
trust in the Living God, and come to possess an Everlasting Inheritance of the
Power of an Endless Life, and come to increse in the Riches of the Everlasting
Inheritance, and there lay up Riches that are Everlasting, which will abide for
ever. And so therefore mind every one Gods word in your Hearts, and in your
Mouths, and obey it and do it; and be not of them that are saying in their
hearts, Who shall ascend or descend to fetch him from above? Keep down that
sayer under reproof, and then your ears will be open to that which the
righteousness of Faith says, The Word is nigh thee, in thy heart, and in thy
mouth, so thou need not to say, who shall ascend or descend, and that was
the Word which the Messengers of God preached, and do preach, and rebuke the
Gainsayer.

And so all people seeing the Devil has made the World like a Wilderness, and
there is so many ways in it, that they do not know which way to come out, nor
which to follow: Therefore this is my Answer to you all, Take David's Lanthorn
and Candle; you may say, What is that, and where is it? I say it is within you,
the Word of God: you may say, People do not use to carry Lanthorns and Candles
in the day time, but in the night.

I say, you be in the Night of Darkness, and therefore the Word is called a
Lanthorn and Candle to you, by which you may see the Way of the Lord which is
perfect, from all men's ways which are imperfect; by which ye may see the path
of the just to be a shining Light, from all the unjust paths that be in the
Darkness; for by this Word did David come to outstrip his Teachers, who was
made wiser then them all, so it will you, if you obey it; for by this Word he
saw Christ, and called him Lord: therefore he loved the Word and hid it in his
heart; for by it he spoke so many glorious expressions, which the World since
has turned into Meeter, and made Songs or Ballads of them; and this was the
Word that came to Abraham, which made him forsake his National Religion and
Worship, and Obey the Lord; and this was the Word that came to Jacob the
Shepherd; by which he saw Christ, and Prophesied of him to his Sons on his
Deathbed, when he said to Judah, The Law should not depart from betwixt his
feet till Shilo came, (meaning Christ) and the gathering of all Nations should
be to him, as it is at this day, the gathering is to Christ, and this was the
Word that came to Moses the Shepherd, when he was keeping sheep, which he
Obeyed, and went to Egypt, and brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt; by
which Word he was made a Minister; and when the Children of Israel were come
out of Egypt into the Wilderness, told them, They need not go for the Word
beyond the Seas, etc. for it was nigh them, in their hearts and mouths, to obey
it and do it. And this was, the Word that made Moses a Prophet, who prephesied
of Christ, and said, Like unto him God would raise up a Prophet, him should
they hear in all things: mark, (in all things) we are to be ordered both inward
and outward, for hearing Christ, by whom all things were made; And every one
that would not hear this Prophet (Christ) should be cut off; for how should
they continue or reign?

And this was the Word that came to Samuel, and made him a Prophet, who spoke
to Ely the Priest, and reproved his Sons, and the Children of Israel: and this
was the Word that made Saul to Prophecy, and Balaam, though they erred from
it: And this was the Word that made all the Prophets to prophecy, and to
reprove the kings of Israel, and their Priests, of their Superstition and
Idolatrous ways, in seting up Groves, and Images in High places; and reproved
all their Monthly Prognostications, who spoke and acted from them, and not from
the Lord.

And this was the Word that came to Isaiah, by which he Prophesied of Christ,
and of his Preaching, and of his Sufferings, and by which Word he reproved the
Shepherds, which were as greedy dumb Dogs, could never have enough, seeking
their gain from their Quarter: and by this Word he saw, that all the Children
of God should be taught of God, and established in Righteousness and Peace; and
though many tongues should rise up in Judgment against them, yet those that
were taught of God should condemn them all, this power should be given to his
children. And many weapons formed against them should not prosper, God would
restrain them: And also he saw them that were cast out, that trembled at Gods
Word, to whom God would appear to their Glory, and to the shame and to the
confounding of them that cast them out for his Names sake, as it is at this day.

And this was the Word of God that made Jeremiah a Prophet, by which he saw the
New Covenant, by which Word he was said to reprove the People and Princes, of
the filthy and horrible thing committed in the Land, that the Priests Preached
for Hire, and the Prophets prophesied falsely: and for reproving them for their
Superstition and Idollatry, they struck him, and put him in the Stocks, and
Prison, and persecuted him in the Dungeon, till his Persecutors were carried
into Captivity. And by the Word Jeremiah saw the number of Seventy years of
his Persecutors being in Babylons Captivity.

Elijah by the Word was made a Prophet, and by the Word reproved Ahab and
Jezebel for their Idolatry, and worshipping of Images. For which Words sake they
persecuted him, and the rest of the Prophets; and was not he fed of the Ravens
by the River; And did not they seek to take away his Life; and did not he think
all the Lords Prophets had been killed, and he left alone? yet did not the Lord
say to him, he had reserved so many Thousands that had not bowed the knee to
Baal? And Elisha the Plowman by the Word was made a Prophet, and forsook his
Plough; and by the Word reproved the Idollatry in his Age of Priests and People.

And by the Word was Ezekiel made a Prophet, by which Word he reproved the
Shepherds of Israel, that made a prey upon the people, and taught them for the
Fleece; and by the Word he saw that God would bring the people from them, that
they should be made a pray upon no longer; and would gather them from their
Mouths, and set one Shepherd over them, Christ, which is witnessed; and by the
Word he reproved false Prophets, that taught for handfuls of Barley, and pieces
of Bread, and daubed with untempered Mortar, and sewed Pillows under the
Armholes; and by the Word he saw the Pattern of the Temple, and the return of
the Jews.

And by the Word Daniel was made a Prophet, and saw Christ and his Kingdom, and
how the Saints should take his Kingdom; and by the Word he saw such that should
rise up against the People of God; and by the Word he numbered the years of
Christ to his time 499 years, and of his, Death and how he should end the
Sacrifices; and how that Christ should bring up Everlasting Righteousness, and
put an end to Sin and end the Prophets, and Seal up their Visions.

And by the Word Micah was made a Prophet, by which he cried against the
Priests that preached for Hire, and the Prophets that prophesied for Money, and
the Judges that judged for Rewards, and such as preached Peace to the people,
that put in their mouths, (like the Priests in these times) and when they did
not, they prepared war against them, and chopped their flesh and, gnawed their
Bones, (as the Priests in this day and time have done) but Micah saw by the
Word that the Sun was gone down upon such Prophets and Priests, and they should
have no Vision nor Answer from God; therefore such are against Revelations and
Visions, on whom the Sun is set, and gone down upon, and then the Night comes
upon them.

And by the Word was Amos the Herdsman made a Prophet, who was a gatherer of
Fruits, and likewise all the rest of the Prophets, who spoke forth Divine
things and reproved the Superstition and Idolatry in their time and day. And by
the Word did all the Prophets speak forth Divine things, which Word brought
them into the Divine Nature and Mind, which Word Hammered and Cut down that
which corrupted their natures; and this was the Word that made so many
Fishermen Preachers of the Gospel, which is the Power of God.

And this was the Word which made Matthew the Toll-gatherer, Luke the
Physician, and Paul the Tent-maker, Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel and
Power of God. And this was the Word which made Peter to see Joels Prophecy,
how that God would power out his Spirit upon all Flesh, and Sons and Daughters
should Prophecy, and Young men should see Visions, and Old men Dream Dreams,
and the powering forth of the Spirit upon Servants and Handmaids, that every
one should have something to speak to the Glory of God. And now the Priests and
proud Prelates, and Bishops, and Popes, though you have made a trade of the
Saints words, and the Apostles and Prophets words, and gotten a deal of money
by them, (which were fishermen and shepherds words, from the Word) Yet
nevertheless if a company of Shepherds, Herdsmen, Fishermen, Tent-makers, and
Toll-gatherers should come amongst you to Preach, you would say, Away with
these Mechanic Fellows, they have not served seven years Apprentiship at the
Colleges, which we have set up to make Ministers; therefore they are not to
set up, because they have not served their Apprentiships.

What say the Shepherds, Tentmakers, Physicians and Tolegatheres? Do you make a
Trade of our Friends words, who were of our Occupation, that never served
Apprentiships in Colleges, before they spoke forth the words you make a Trade
of? what, will you make a Trade of our Friends words, who were of our
Occupation! Away with you to Work, and away with your Colleges: for our
Brother Paul the Tentmaker said, If you will not work you must not eat. For,
would you own Christ if he had come in your day? who was called, A Carpenters
Son. You Popes with your Triple Crowns, and you Lord Bishops with your Coaches
and fat Horses, and gorgeous Aparrel, with your Black Coats, and white Coats,
and Girdles; Are you like to entertain him who is called, A Carpenters Son? or
to cast him and his mother into the Manger in your Stables?

This was the Word by which John the Evangelist saw Christ, which did enlighten
every man that came into the world, and saw how he became flesh, and came to
his own, and his own did not receive him: but to as many as received Christ the
Light, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God; which all they that are
Ministers of the Letter, made by the seven years Colleges, and not the Word,
hate the Light.

And by this Word, the Minister of the Word preaches Christ's Word, Life, Death
and Resurrection: And therefore as John says in his Epistle, That which our
Eyes have seen, our Hands have handled, and our Ears have heard of the Word of
Life, do we preach unto you; that which was from the beginning, in the
beginning was the Word, though since the beginning were the words and letters:
for the Scriptures of Truth are the words of God, and the words of Christ; and
he that adds to these words (says John in the Revelations) God shall add unto
him the plagues, that are written in this book.

So the Word was in the beginning, and Christ's Name is called, The Word of God,
but Christ is neither called Scriptures nor Writings, for Scriptures signify
Writings. So, In the beginning was the Word, since the beginning were Writings
and Scriptures. In the beginning was the Word, since the beginning were all
false Ways, false Churches, false Teachers; and in the Word ye comprehend them
all. The Priest says, That Hebrew, Greek and Latin were the Original, the
many Languages, and the many Languages began at Babel, which Nimrod the Hunter
before the Lord, (began to build) after God had destroyed the Old World with
water: then would he go build a Tower which should reach to Heaven; then God
came down and confounded them into many Languages: so he hunted before the
Lord, but the Lord followed him, and confounded him in all his work, as he will
do all the Builders that run before him; and so all the Priest that have gotten
the many Languages, which began at Babel, they tell simple ignorant people,
that they have the Original, and are the Orthodox men, and get in a different
habit from them, and say the Quakers are a simple people, and despise the
Learned Orthodox men who have the Original.

Give ear O people, if these Languages which came up at the confounding of
Babel are the Priests Original that makes them Orthodox and Divine, then Pilate
that crucified Christ was as good an Orthodox Divine as they: for when he
crucified Christ he writ a Paper in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and set a top of
him, he was as ignorant of Scripture and of Orthodox and Divine matters as you,
and you as he; and the Apostle says, That Tongues must cease, then that which
makes Orthodox men and Divine, as you say, must cease, according to the
Apostles Doctrine; and so then Tongues neither are the Original, nor make
Orthodox nor Divine: and John that gave forth the Revelations says, That the
Whore and the Beast are set upon Tongues, and the Everlasting Gospel must be
preached again to all Kindreds and Tongues; which were before Babel was, who
was the first beginner of Tongues.

Now it is clear that the Gospel must be preached to all Nations and Tongues,
and that Tongues are not the Original, neither do they make Divines or Orthodox
men; but it is clear that it is the Word which was in the beginning which makes
Divines; yea, Tradesmen, which are base and contemptible in the eyes of the
proud, and them that have gotten Babels Tongues, who are confounded by the
ministers of the Word, which was in the beginning before Babel was; for all the
Earth was of one Language and Speech before Babel. And you that call your
selves Orthodox men made by Tongues, and say that is your Original, who are so
blind and cannot see that there was an Original before Babel was; for did not
Enoch the Prophet, the seventh from Adam, who prophesied in the Old World
before it was destroyed, and long before Babel was, concerning the coming of
Christ in Ten thousand of his Saints, as in Jude; and Lamech prophesied in the
Old World concerning Noah, and Adam and others might be instanced, before your
Tongues which you call your Original were: and so we say that the Word of God
is the Original, which does fulfill the Scriptures, and the Word is it which
makes Divines, which is called a Hammer, but it is a living Hammer, and a Sword
and Fire, but a living Sword and a Fire, to hammer, cut, and burn up that which
separated and kept man from God, by which Word man is reconciled again to God,
which is called The word of Reconciliation; by this word are men and women
sanctified and made clean, and this is the Word that makes both men and woman
Divines, and brings them into the Divine Nature, which hammers and cuts down
that which corrupted their nature; and by this Word a^e they brought into a
Divine Wisdom, Understanding, Knowledge, Spirit and Power. And this is the Word
that lives, and abides, and endures for ever, by which the Saints are born
again of the Immortal Seed and Word of God, who feed upon the Milk of the Word,
up into a Divine Life, Wisdom and Understanding, and Divine Nature; and by this
Word they do see all Flesh to be as Grass, and as the Flower of the Field that
fades; and the Word of God that lives, and abides, and endures for ever, which
is Christ, whose Name is called, the Word of God.

And so to Keep the Word of Patience, which is over all the impatient Spirits,
and then you will know the Word of Life, the Word of Patience and Word of
Wisdom is Everlasting, and abides and endures for ever; which all they that be
in the Letter, out of the Life and Word, have neither Patience to themselves
nor others; for the Word of patience, and the Word of Life, which is to be kept
in all Tribulations was before Death and impatient Spirits were.

Concerning the Heathen Idolaters naming their Days and Months.
THE old Pagan- Saxons in their Idolatry, Were the first that brought in the
names of the Days, which those called Christians, have retained to this day;
for they adored Idols, and unto them offered Sacrifices, and Worshipped the
Planets. See Vestigans Antiq. and Cambdens Brit.

As touching the Idols which these Saxons adored they were diverse; and though
they had many, yet seven among the rest, they especially appropriated unto the
seven days of the week.

That day which is the first day of the week, they worshipped the Idol of the
Sun, which was placed in a Temple, and there Sacrificed unto, and to the
special adoration of which Idol they gave the name of Sunday.

The second day of the week, they dedicated to the Idol of the Moon, and from
whence, these called Christians retain the name of Monday instead of Moonday.

The next was the Idol of the Planets, was the Idol of Tuisco, who was the
first and chiefest man of Name among the Germans, unto whom the name of Tuesday
was especially dedicated.

The next was the Idol Woden, whom the Saxons honored for their God of Battle;
And after this Idol, these called Christians do yet call the fourth day of the
week. Wednesday, instead of Woddensday,

The next was the Idol Thor, from whence the name Thursday, is retained,
instead of the fifth day of the week.

The next Idol was the Goddess Friga, to which Idol they dedicated the sixth
day of the week, and called it Friday; which is retained to this day.

The last was the Idol Seater, from whence is called the seventh day, Satureay.

And as these called Christians, have followed the Heathens Examples in naming
their Days, so they follow them in nameing their Months; for the Heathen they
called Mars the God of Battle, and from thence they called the first Month
March. And Venus they called the Goddess of Love and Beauty, and from thence
they called the second Month April. And Maja a Heathen Goddess called Flora and
Cloris, were called the Goddesses of Flowers, unto Maja the Heathen Idolaters
used to sacifice; from thence was the third Month called May: And upon the
first day of the same Month, they used to keep Floralia Feasts to the two
Goddesses of Flowers (viz.) Flora and Cloris; and Flora was a Strumpet in Rome,
that used on the first day of that Month, to set up a May Pole before her door
to entice her Lovers; from whence came May-poles and May Day to be since
observed, by these called Christians.

And Juno whom the Heathen called the Gooddess of Kingdoms and Wealth, from
this Juno, the forth Month was called June.

And Julius Caesar a Roman Emperor, in honor to him, was the fifth Month called
July.

And in honor to Augustus Caesar, an Emperor, was the sixth Month called August.

And four of the other Months are called after the Latin Names, as September
for the seventh Month, October for the eighth, November for the ninth, December
for the tenth.

And one Janus a King of Italy, was for his wisdom pictured with two faces,
whom they honored as God; and from this name Janus, was the elventh Month
called January.

And Saturnus, Pluto, Februs, were called the Gods of Hell, who the Heathen
said, had the Rule of evil Spirits there; and from Pluto Februs, was the
twelfth Month called February. And by all these Idolatrous Names, do these
called Christians, call their Days and Months, to this day, which is contrary
to the Scriptures, the Prophets and the Apostles.

The Saxons also had a Goddess, (whom they sacrificed to in the Month of April)
called Eoster; hence they called April, Eoster Month, and hence in process of
time came Easter. Page 135. Camb. Brit.

Concerning Singing of Psalms.
PSalms began to be sung about three hundred eighty three years after Christ,
brought in by Damasins Bishop, though not turned into Meeter.

Benedistus an Abbot of the Monastery of Peter and Paul at Wirr, brought with
him from Rome one John the Arch-Chanter, who first taught in England how to
sing in the Quire, after the manner of Rome. Act. and Mon. vol. 1. page 164.
Anno, 724.

Laws made by the Saxon Kings in England, concerning singing Psalms.

In the year seven hundred forty seven, at the beginning of King Edgberts
Reign, the Synod of Bishops disputed the profit of singing of Psalms in the
Church, and made a Decree, that with a modest voice, they should sing in the
Church so called.

In the year nine hundred twenty four, King Ethelston, alias, Atelston, made a
Law that fifty Psalms should be daily sung in the Church, as he called it, for
the King.

Beza being much diverted with Poetry, made his pastime to become a part of the
vulgar devotion; hence they have been styled by some Geneva-Jigs. These are the
express words of the Injunction, given to the Clergy and Laity by Queen
Elizabeth.

Item, Because in diverse Collegiate, and also some Parish-Churches heretofore,
there has been Livings appointed for the maintenance of men and children, to
use singing in the Church, by means whereof, the Laudable Science of Music
has been had in estimation, and preserved in knowledge; the Queen wills and
commands, that first no alteration be made of such assignments of Living, as
heretofore has been appointed to the use of Singing or Music in the Church,
but that the same so remain, and that there be a modest and distinct Song so
used in all parts of the Common prayer in the Church, that the same may be as
plainly understood, as if it were read without singing: And yet nevertheless,
for the comforting of such as delight in Music, it may be permitted that in
the beginning or end of Common Prayers, either at Morning or Evening, there may
be sung an Hymn, or such like Song, to the praise of Almighty God, in the best
sort of Melody or Music, that may be conveniently devised. A Warning to all to
keep out of the Fashions of the World, which lead them below the serious Life;
and not to fashion themselves according to the World.
FRiends keep out of the Fashions of the World, let not your eyes, and minds,
and spirits run after every fashion (in Apparel of the Nations) for that will
lead you from the solid life, into a full stomach, with that Spirit that leads
to follow the Fashions of the Nations, every Fashions of Apparel that gets up;
but mind that which is sober and modest, and keep your Fashions; therein you
may judge the World, whose minds and eyes are in that, what they shall put on,
and what they shall eat; and Friends that see the World so often alter their
Fashions, and follow them, and run into them, in that they cannot judge the
World, but the World, will rather judge them: Therefore keep all in the modesty,
and plainness, and fervency, and sincerity, and be circumspect; for they that
follow those things the Worlds spirit invents daily, cannot be solid; and many
Fashions might be instanced, both of Hats and Clothes of men and women, that
daily are invented, which they that run into them, are near unto the Worlds
Spirit, and their eyes are gazing after them, when they should be upon the
Lord, from whom they should receive judgment: Therefore all keep down that
Spirit of the World that runs into so many Fashions to please the lust of the
Eye, the lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life: And Fashion not your selves
according to your former Lust of Ignorance; and let the time past be
sufficient, which you have lived according to the Lusts of men and the course
of the World, that the rest of your time you may live to the will of God,
taking no though what you shall eat, what you shall drink or what you shall put
on; therein your lives may judge the Heathens and that you may be as the
Lillies; for nothing you brought into the World, neither any thing shall you
take out: and therefore, while the Eye is gazing after every new Fashion, and
the mind and desire is thirsting to get it, when it has it, it lifts up its
mind, and so brings himself under the judgment of them that be in the sober
Life, and of the World also, and to be like one of them: Therefore take heed of
the Worlds Fashions, lest ye be molded up into their Spirit, and that will
bring you to slight Truth, and lift up the wrong Eye, and wrong Mind, and wrong
Spirit, and hurt and blind the pure Eye, and pure mind, and quench the Holy
Spirit; and through such foolish Toys, and Fashions, and fading things, you
may lose your conditions: And therefore take heed of the World, and trust not
in uncertain Riches, neither covet the Riches of this World, but Seek the
Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof and all outward things will
follow; and let your minds be above the costly and vain Fashions of attire, but
mind the hidden man of the heart, which is a meek and quiet Spirit, which is of
great price with the Lord, and keep to Justice and Truth in all your dealings,
and tradings; at a word, and the form of sound words, in the Power of the Lord,
and Equity in Yea and Nay in all your dealings, that your Lives and
Conversations may be in Heaven, and above the Earth, that they may preach to
all that you have to deal withal; so that you may be as a City set on a Hill
that cannot be hid, and as Lights of the World, answering the equal Principle
in all, that God in all things may be glorified; So that you may pass your time
here with fear, as Pilgrims and Strangers, and Sojourners, as having an eye
over all things that be uncertain, as Cities, Houses, Lands, Goods, so, as
things below, they that possess, as if they did not; and they tha^ marry* as if
they did not; yet as having a City whose Maker and Builder is God, and a
Possession of an Inheritance that will never fade away, in which you have
Riches that will abide with you Eternally.

Some QUERIES given forth to the Priests or People to Answer if they can.
1. HAve any of you the same Spirit and Power as the Prophets and Apostles had?

2. Or have you the same Revelation and Inspiration, and Spirit of Prophecy,
and pouring forth of the Holy Ghost; or do you own the pouring forth of the
Spirit upon Sons and Daughters, and is not this the last time in which it
should be poured out, and the Sons and Daughters should Prophecy, and Old men
dream Dreams, and Young men see Visions?

3. Or have you heard Gods voice, and Christ's voice immediately from Heaven, or
are you some of them the Lord never sent, nor spoke unto? Answer me these
Queries.

4. Do you own that Christ that died at Jerusalem to be the Light that
enlighteneth every man that comes into the world; and are not all enlightened
by him either to their Salvation or Condemnation?

5. What and where is that which must give the knowledge of God, is it within
People or without them? Answer me according to plain Scripture.

6. Do you teach or preach, that whilst a man is upon the Earth, he may be
freed from sin, and the body of death, and imperfection, and shall be perfect
whilst he be upon Earth; or do you keep People in the state of your Father Adam
and Mother Eve in the Fall, or do you bring them to the state before they fell,
and so to Christ that shall never fall, which of these states do you bring them
to, and keep your flock in, in Adam and Eve in the fall, or Adam and Eve before
they fell, or in Christ that shall never fall; you must keep your flock in one
of these three states, and which of them is it? Have you brought any of your
flock whom you have driven to that condition and state, they need no man to
teach them, that is to the anointing in them, the Law in their hearts, whereby
they need not say one to another, know the Lord, that is to the Light of Christ
that shines in their hearts to give them the Light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, and how many have you brought hither?

7. What is the Mother of Harlots, and what is the Beast she rides upon, and
what are the People, Nations, and Multitudes, and Tongues the Whore sits upon,
and what is Mystery Babylon, and what is the Woman that went into the
Wilderness, what was her time she was to be there, and what is the Beast and
Dragons Worship, and what is a Will Worship, and what is it to worship Angels,
and what is that which leads Nature into its Course, and so to the glory of the
first Body, and what is the glory of the second Body, and what is that which
leads Nature out of its Course, and so sets the whole Course of Nature on Fire?

8. What is the ground of that which keeps in good manners, and what is that
which corrupts them, and what is the Righteousness the World is reproved off,
and what are the Judgments, and what is that which leads the Saints into all
Truth, and has every one the Spirit of God; and whether bowing, bending,
dossing hats, scraping, cringing, saying you to one, be the honor that comes
from above, or what is it, and whence comes it, and whether this before
mentioned do not stand in that Nature, part and principle, which is on fire, if
it has not these things, and therefore whether or no these things do proceed
from that which leads Nature into its Course, or out of its Course, and what is
it that defaces the glory of the first body?

9. Whether or no you own Trembling and Quaking at the Word of God?

10. Seeing you look upon your selves to differ from many, and to be above
them, let us see wherein, and in what it is manifest?

11. What is self-Righteousness, and what is Man's Righteousness, and the
Righteousness that is as filthy Rags, distinguish these one from another, or
whether they be all one, for our Righteousness is that which was before Adam
was, whom ye in scorn calls Quakers?

12. Whether ever any came to see so far as Balaams Ass, who saw the Angel of
the Lord?

13. What are the Graves, and the Tombs, and the Sepulchers, and the Fowls of
the Air, and the Nests they sit in, which Christ spoke of? Answer.

14. Whether or no to pay Tithes or receive Tithes, is not to deny Christ Jesus
to be come in the flesh, and to deny Christ to be offered up, the offering once
for all; and was not theirs of the Tithes a heave offering, and was not that
Offering to be ended by Christ offering up himself, and had not the Priests a
Commandment to take Tithes of the People, of their Brethren, and do not you
transgress the Law of God which take them of those you do not call brethren;
and was not the Widows, Fatherless, and Strangers to have a part of the Tithes,
and was every Priest and Levite, and them that was to have a part of them, to
have a particular Tythe-Barn, and was Tithes to be sold, and was there any
Impropriators, and whether they do not hold up the Priests of the Jews, and
their Law and Commandments, that take Tithes and give Tithes, and so denies
Christ the Priest, in holding up the Jews Priests.

15. And whether or no MELCHISEDECK did ta^e Tithes of all other Nations that
were under him, or any other Spoil, but once of ABRAHAM, and whether he had a
Command for doing it, or whether it was an Example?

16. And whether the Jews did take Tithes of the Canaanites, or any of those
Nations that lived among them, or of any People where ever they came, that they
had the power over, that was not of them?

17. You that speak so much of Christ's Reigning, whether or no Your Swords are
beat into Plowshares, and your Spears into Pruning Hooks, that you do not learn
War any more; that Nation shall not lift up a Sword against Nation; And whether
or no this Ministration should be amongst Christians, seeing that it was
Christ's Doctrine, That they should love one another, and love Enemies; And he
bad Peter put up his Sword: And the Apostle said, Their Weapons were Spiritual.

Secondly, Does not Peter say, That the Heavens must receive Christ Jesus until
the time of Restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of
his Prophets since the World began, Act. 3. Now do you look at restoring of
things, then by what does Christ restore, whether by his Light and Power within
People or without them, seeing the sin is within them, and whether or no Christ
does not remain in the Heavens until all things be restored; and whether or no
Christ does not now Reign; and whether or no he is not restoring; and then by
what (as I said before) does he restore seeing he is in the Heavens, and must
remain in the Heavens until all things be restored, and whether or no some was
not restored, when they sat in the Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.
And whether or no he that remains in the Heavens, be not also manifest in man,
that is restored and lives, and walks, and reigns in him?

Answer this you that talk of a Personal Reign.

18. What is that Voice of Christ which his Sheep hears and knows from all
false Voices, and all that hear cannot endure any more to hear the Voice of a
Stranger, Hireling or Thief?

19. What or where is the Word that People shall hear behind them, saying, This
is the Way, Walk in it, when they turn to the right hand or the left; or what
the Word of Faith that none needs to say, Who shall ascend to Heaven, or into
the depth to seek Christ from above or below, but was nigh in their hearts; and
Is not the same now?

Answer in Writing the thing Queried.

G. F.

CONCERNING THE SCRIPTURES.
WE Witness the Life thereof, and by the same do we witness the Scriptures to
be Truth, and serviceable in its place, and was written for our admonition upon
whom the ends of the World is come, 1 Cor. 10.11. And to us it is given to
know, but to the World in Parables, Luke 8.10. And he that would go about to
unfold the Parables to the dark minds, by the Serpentine Wit and Imagination,
he must be kept out of the Scripture, and he who takes the Scriptures and makes
a Trade of them, professing to interpret them, and so gets a living by them,
which was spoken forth freely, he is a deceiver and must be shut out of the
Scripture; and who reads or takes the Scripture to talk or d^sco^rse of, and is
ignorant of the Life, must be kept out of the Scripture; for all those runs in
with their Scripture Wit and Imaginations, wresting them for their own ends,
adding and diminishing to their own destruction, and so he must be shut out of
the Scripture; for hence arises all these Sects and Opinions in the World,
running into the Scripture, with their Wit, Imaginations, and dark minds, one
imagining one way, and another, another way, and one of this opinion, and
another of that opinion, but opinion, are no assurance, but are fallible, and
every one out of the way, because they want the Life which is the Mystery; and
this is the difference between all Sects and Opinions, and the infallible
Truth; and so they come not in by the door but are climbing up another way, and
so are shut out of the Kingdom; but the same which gave them forth, the same
can open them, and to it they are no Mystery nor Parable; nor needs any
meaning; John 10.1.
for they are of no private interpretation, nor came they in the old time by
the will of Man, but holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, neither can the will of man open them, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
but the same which spoke them forth, the same can open them, and speak them
forth freely, so let him that has a dream tell a dream, and he that has my
Word, let him speak my Word faithfully.

What is the Chafe to the Wheat says the Lord? So he that has the Letter,
let him speak the Letter, and he that has the Life, let him speak the Life:
What is the Husk to the Kernel? Jer. 23.28. John 1.1.
And what should Swine do with Pearls, whose Life is in Husks, and there they
feed? He that can receive, let him; the same which gave it forth, the same can
open it: And he who says the Letter is the Word, is a deceiver, and erres, not
knowing the Scripture; for the Scripture says, In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was God, John 1.1. And the Word of the Lord came to the Prophets,
and they spoke from the Word of the Lord, Jer. 2.1. And the Word became flesh,
and dwelt among the Apostles, and they saw the glory thereof, as the glory of
the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth: And the Word is
quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged Sword; Jer. 2.4, 8. Ezekiel. 1.3.
John 1.14. Rev. 19.13. Heb. 4.12, 13
and the Word is immortal, and this, the Apostles, in whom the Word dwelt, bore
witness of, and has left it upon record and we witness the same the Word is
the same which was, is, and is to be for ever, and who puts the Letter for
the Word is blind, and puts the Shadow for the Substance, and must be shut
out of the Scripture. And he who says the Letter is the Light, is in darkness,
and erres, not knowing the Scripture, which declares of the Light, which John
came to bear witness off, who was not the Light, but testified of the Light,
Which was the true Light which enlighteneth every one that comes into the
World. He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew
him not, nor knows him not; and he came unto his own, and his own received him
not, but as many as received him, to them he gives power to become the Sons of
God, John 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And this we witness, and by the same Light
do we discern and testify against him to be in darkness and blindness, and is
a deceiver, who puts the Letter for the Light, and so draws Peoples minds
off from the Light within them, to the Letter without them, seeking the living
among the dead, thinking to find Life in the Letter without them, as the
Pharisees did, and will not come unto Christ that they might have Life, John
5.39, 40. and so they must be shut out of the Scripture as the Pharisees were;
and he also that says the Letter is the Rule and Guide of the People of God,
Luke 1.73, and 19.15. John 16.13. Romans 18.14.
is without, feeding upon the husk, and is ignorant of the true Light which was
before the Letter was, which all the Children of God were and are guided by,
and spoke and speaks the Letter from, which was before the Letter was, and
with this the Letter witnesses; and who is guided by this cannot walk contrary
to the Letter, nor deny it, but they know how to use it in its place, and see
in what condition it was spoken, and it witnesses with them both in words and
actions, and they that have this, have and need the mystery within, though they
cannot read the Letter without, nor ever learned, as it was with Christ, which
confounded the Scribes and Pharisees; and they who are never so learned
without, Mat. 11.15. Mat. 13.11.
and can read and understand all Tongues and Languages without, and does not
read the Scripture within, only feed upon the Husk, and are ignorant of the
Life which is the Mystery, which is hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed
unto the ignorant, as it was from the Scribes and Pharisees, and high Priests,
and was revealed to those whom they counted ignorant, and cursed, and knew not
the Law, John 7.48, 49*

And they who take the Letter to be their Rule, cannot walk according to it,
because they are ignorant of the Light, which opens and leads into the Life
which they who spoke them forth lived in, but drunkards, and swearers, and
proud, and wantonness, and covetoues lustful enveons ones, and all manner of
unrighteous persons will take the Letter to talk of and say it is their Rule
and Guide, but are out of the Life thereof, and so by it are condemned; and
those are the Swine that are feeding upon the husk without, Luke 15.15, 16. and
have gotten the form but are out of the Life and Power, and put the shadow for
the substance, and so lives in darkness, and knows not whether he goes, but
they that read with the single-eye may understand, for the Scripture is within,
and was read within before it was read without. Now, silence all the Study and
Wisdom of Man.

Concerning BAPTISM.
The Baptism we own, which is the Baptism of Christ, with the Holy Ghost and
with fire, but we deny all other, for there is but one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, and they who would have one Baptism
outward, and another inward, would have two Baptisms, when the Scripture says
the Baptism is but one, Mat. 3.11. Ephesians. 4.5, 6.
and whosoever has the Baptism outward, are the same they were before; but the
Baptism of Christ makes a new Creature, and this I witness, for I received
water upon my face, as my Parents told me, which they called Baptism, Romans 6.3.
but I grew up an Heathen, as all other Children do, and no New Creature,
though my Parents were counted Believers among the World and their Priests; but
now I wittess the Baptism of Christ, by one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. 2 Cor. 5, 17.
into on^ Body; and now I witness a New Creature, Old things are past away, and
all things become New. And now I see the other to be formal imitation, and the
Invention of Man, and so a mere delusion, and all are Heathens and no
Christians who cannot witness this Baptism; Mat. 15.4. who can witness this
denies all other; for the Scripture says, the Baptism is but one, and who can
witness this are Believers, but who cannot witness this are no Believers and
so it is that water or no water avails nothing but a New Creature; for all by
nature are the children of wrath, and except they be born again they cannot
enter; and as for the Baptism of water which the Apostles used it being a
figure for its time, the power went along with it, and the Disciples received
the Holy Ghost when they were Baptized, but none can witness this, who sets
themselves of acting or imitating the Apostles, and so takes it up by
imitation, and their ground is the Letter, and are not guided to it by the same
Spirit which guided the Apostles, and so they are the same after water as
before, and so now wa^er or no water avails any thing, but a New Cereature;
for Water was but for its time, though many in darkness have now got the Form,
and are groping in it for Life, but wants the Life and Power, and so from such
turn away.

Concerning the LORDS SUPPER.
The Supper of the Lord we own, which is the Body and Blood of Christ, John
6.54, 55, 56, 57. Acts 4.32. 1 Cor. 10.16.
which the Saints fed upon, and this is Eternal Food and Life, and here they
all feed upon one and are of one heart and one mind; and here is pure and
Eternal Union and Communion, and this is not Carnal but Spiritual for Saints
are Spiritual, and their Communion is Spiritual and Eternal; and this we
witness, who are of one heart and one mind, who are in the new Covenant, and
herein we discern the Lords Body, and here all drunkards are shut out, and all
liars, adulterers, proud, covetous, lustful, and envious ones, and all
back-biters, revilers, extortioners, and all deceitful and unrighteous persons
are shut out of the New Covenant, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. and are without feeding upon
the husk and shadow, which is carnal, for the br^ad which the world breaks is
carnal and natural, and only feeds the outward carnal body, and goes into
the belly, and so passes out into the dunghill; and so likewise the Cup which
they drink, and so the Communion and Fellowship of the World passes away; but
this is no nourishment to the Soul, but still the Soul lies in death, and here
is no Communion, but natural, outward and carnal, of several minds and hearts,
full of filthiness, and uncleanness, which is the Table of Devils, eating and
drinking their own damnation, not discerning the Lords Body, which is
Spiritual, which the natural man discerns not. And here stands the Worlds
Communion and Fellowship, 1 Cor. 10 21. 1 Cor. 11.29. 1 Cor. 2.14.
which is carnal; and cross but their carnal wills, and it is turned into envy,
and for earthly triflles they will go to Law, and cozen and cheat, and defraud
one another for earthly trifles, and like People like Priest; but if they lie
in wait for revenge of one another, then they will not take their Sacrament, as
they call it: 1 John 3.17.
And here the Devil has a great hold, for he that envies is a murderer; and
here is the difference betwixt the Worlds Communion, and the Saints Communion;
Life and Death. For to be Carnally minded is Death, Romans 8.6.
but to be Spiritually minded is Life.

And here they are without, feeding upon the Husk and Shadow without, and would
destroy the Life and Substance, where it appears, both Priest, People and
Rulers, and so have a Form of Godliness, and denies the Life and Power, From
such turn away; For it is mere delusion, 2 Timothy 3.5.
to take the Shadow for the Substance.

Concerning PRAYER.
The Prayers of the wicked we deny, and God denies, for it is abominable, Prove.
15.8, for Cain the wicked one, who was out of the comands of God, Gen 4.3, 4,
5. who was the first-birth, he offered up a Sacrifice of the earth, but God had
no respect to it; 1 Pet. 3.12. Jam. 5.5, 6. Pro. 15.8, 29.
but Abel the second-birth, who was the Righteous, his Sacrifice God had
respect to; so the Prayers of the Faithful and Righteous God does accept, and
they avail; and what comes from his own, which is the second-birth, his own is
pure, and what comes from it is pure, Ex. 40.12, 13. Luke 1.3. Hab. 1.13. Mat.
12.34 Job 14.4. Genesis 3.15. 2 Samuel 2.22.
and God who is pure, does receive that which is pure, but he receives nothing
which is polluted or unclean, for he is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity.
For his Sacrifice must be without spot and blemish, and that which comes from
an unclean heart is spotted and defiled and unclean, for nothing that is pure
can come forth of an unclean Vessel; but who can witness the second-birth, and
that the Seed of the Woman has bruised the Serpents head, which is the first
Promise, and faith which purifieth the heart, then that which comes out is
pure, proceeding from a pure single heart, and this prayer God receives, and he
has respect to it, and this we own and witness and this comes from the
second birth, which is pure, for the first birth is unclean, and out of the
Command of God in the fall, in the wrath, in the peevishness, and
perverseness, Cain-like, and the seed of the Serpent is first in every one,
and rules the head, but the Promise is, The seed of the Woman shall bruise the
Serpents head, so you who are not come to this are still in the fall, and are
not come to the first Promise; so all your self-acting and imitating, thinking
to merit with your prayers and praises, singings, and duties, and worships, and
traditions, which are all in vain and you are sacrificing to an unknown God, a
Sacrifice of the earth from the first nature, which God has no respect to, and
the flaming Sword is set against that to keep from the Tree of Life, for both
drunkards, and swearers, liars, proud, covetous, and all manner of unrighteous
persons are offering up sacrifices, 1 Samuel 5.22. Isa. 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
and are in their formal Worships and Duties, thinking that is sufficient to
pascifie for their sins, and yet does not repent, but says the Lord, Bring no
more vain Oblations, away with your New Moons and Sabbaths, they are an
abomination, and my soul loathes them. When you spread forth your hands I will
hide mine eyes from you, yea when you make many Prayers, I will not hearken;
your hands are full of blood: Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil learn to do well. So it is
the heart the Lord requires, Prove. 23.16. Jer. 29.12, 13. And, Where your
treasure is, there your heart will be also, Mat. 6.21. And says the Apostle,
We know not how to pray as we ought, but as the Spirit makes intercession with
sighs and groans, Romans 8.26. And this is more acceptable to God from an honest
single heart, than the long Prayer of the Pharisees.

Concerning the MINISTRY.
The true Ministry of Christ we own and witness, and the Ministers and
Messengers of Christ we own and witness, but those who have gotten the Letter
and Form to Trade with, which was spoken forth freely, and denies the Life and
Power, those we deny, their Ministry, and all those who go to get humane
Learning, and are certain years as it were serving a Prentiship, pretending to
study Divinity, and when their time is expired, they go among ignorant blind
People, and gets a certain place, and certain wages, and so sells that which
they studied and got into the brain, and those which receive it, gets it into
the brain, and ^o they live upon dust which is the Serpents meat, feeding upon
the Tree of Knowledge both Priest and People, Mic. 3.10. death feeding death,
and with the notion begets into the notion, and feeding the carnal mind with
the carnal letter; and this is the cause why drunkards, swearers, liars, proud,
covetous, envious, wrathful and contentious ones, and all unrighteous persons,
has gotten the Letter to talk of, or discourse of, though in the Alehouse, or
Tipling-house; but this Ministry works no Reformation, only has the Form, and
leads into the Form, and denies the Life and Power, which is neither to be
bought nor sold for money; so from such we turn away, who come by the will of
Man, are approved by the will of Man, and are upheld by the will of Man, and
not by the will of God: And their Call and Ministry we deny, which is mediate,
and formal imitation, and the invention of Man, and so mere delusion, and this
is the cause why the Land so overflowes with iniquity, and all manner of
ungodliness, and no better Reformation wrought amongst them, their Ministry is
so dark, and dead, and cold, and yet the Land full of Teachers, and yet the
People lost for want of Teaching, Jer. 23.29, 30, 31, 32. and so they spend
their money for that which is not bread, and their labor for that which
profits not, Isa. 35.2.

But who can witness an immediate Call by God, from their outward Callings and
Countries, Lands, Livings and Possessions, into several Countries, to preach
the free Gospel as they had received it, Mark 16.25. Amos 3 7, 8. Am 7.14, 15.
Gal. 1.11, 12. 1 Cor. 1.17, 18, 19, etc. Chap. 2. 2 Pet. 1.21. Act. 2.4. etc.
by the immediate inspiration of the Spirit, and speaks it forth as they are
moved by the holy Ghost, and as the Spirit gives them utterance freely, as they
have received it freely, by which Ministry many are convinced, and as they
abide in it are converted, as many in the Nation can witness to the honor and
glory of God, who are now New Creatures; and this Call we own and witness, and
this Ministry we own and witness, which is immediate, and stands in the Will of
God, and such covets no man's silver nor gold, neither could be hired to a
certain place, but travels from place to place, and has no certain dwelling
place; and such are the true Ministers of Jesus Christ, who make the Gospel
free and without charge; and this we own and witness, and for the testimony of
this true Ministry, Acts 20.33. 1 These. 9.6. as in Act.
some of us are imprisoned, some stoned, some stocked, whipped and shamefully
entreated, as Vagabonds, and Deluders, and Wanderers, and raisers of Sedition,
and pestilent Fellows, and esteemed not worthy to live in the Nation, both by
Priest, and People, and Rulers, who are out of the Commands of God, and are
Vagabonds and Fugitives from God, who go in the way of Cain, to envy and murder
the Innocent; and because we declare against all who come not in by the door,
but see^s to climb up another way, Act. 24 5.6. Act. 22.22. Witness the Town of
Cambridge, the Wel-head.
by their study, inventions, and Serpentine Wisdom and Knowledge, and so are
Thieves and Robbers; and those are they which are now so set up and extolled in
England, with great Augmentations and Benefices, by the arm and will of flesh,
now heads of England, and such Ministers and their Ministry we deny, for the
hand of the Lord is against such, John 10.1. But this which we own is no new
Call, nor new Ministry, but the same which was with the Prophets and Apostles:
And all who God sent witnessed, and here is the difference of the Ministers of
the World and the Ministers of Christ, the one comes by the will of Man, the
other by the will of God; and the one is upheld by the will of Man, the other
by the will of God, contrary to the will of Man; and the one of the Letter, the
other of the Spirit; the one has the Form and Shadow, and the other the Life
and Substance; and the effects and fruits of their Ministry makes them
manifest; but from such turn away, 2 Timothy 3.5. who have the Form, but not the
Life and Power, for they are mere deceivers, and witches, bewitch people from
the Truth, holding forth the Shadow instead of the Substance; and what is the
Shadow to the Substance? or what is the Chafe to the Wheat? He that has an
ear to hear, let him hear and understand.

Concerning MAGISTRACY and GOVERNMENT.
Magistracy and Government we own in its Place, for while there is
Transgression there must be a Law, 1 John 3.4. and while the Devil has power
over man, there will be Transgression, so the Law was added, because of
Transgression, Gal. 3.29. and the Devil was the cause of it; so there must be a
Law without, to keep those who are without the Fear of God in subjection, else
they would destroy one another, and Cain would destroy Abel, for this is the
Devils work; and so for this end was the Law given forth, to curb evil doers,
and to preserve and encourage them that do well, 1 Pet. 2.14. And it was
according to that in the Conscience, just, holy, and good, according to the
Will of God, and serviceable in its place. And true Government, Romans 7.14. Romans
4.15. Romans 8.1. Gal. 5.23. Romans 8.8. 2 Samuel 23.3. Pro. 28.15, 16. Pro. 25.28.
Pro. 29.10. Isa. 14.15. James 2.9.
according to the Law of God, is serviceable in its place: And all Magistrates
who fear God, and hate covetousness, and are guided by the Light of God in the
Conscience, and executes the Law in its place, place, without partiallity or
respect of persons, and such are serviceable in their place, and this we own,
and honor, and are subject to for Conscience sake; but the righteous are from
under the outward Law, for they are a Law unto themselves, neither is there
need of any Law amongst them who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit; for against such there is no Law: but he that walks after the flesh
cannot please God, neither know how to Rule nor Govern, who cannot witness his
own Will, subjected by the Law of God in the heart, but is guided by his own
will, and stands in his own will, and such wink at deceit, and rule with
partiality and respect of persons, and so transgresses the Law of God, which
respects no man's person, and also gives forth Laws in his own will, which
takes hold of the righteous, persecutes the righteous, and countenances and
encourages the Heathen, Hos. 4.18.
who know not God, so Cain slayes Abel within them, and they suffer Cain to
slay Abel without them; and the wicked and ungodly have more Liberty in the
Nation than the righteous, and so the Land abounds with iniquity, oppression
and treachery, because such corrupt Magistrates wink at deceits for carnal
ends, and upholds iniquity and oppression, and tread Truth under foot; and this
is the cause why the Land so abounds with all manner of ungodliness, and
deceit, falsehood, tyranny, oppression and persecution, and yet full of
Magistrates and Officers; and corrupt Magistrates put corrupt Magistrates in
Office, and so they bear with, and wink at one another, and feeds and nourishes
up deceit amongst them, unless they cross one another will, and then they are
as much in deceit on the other side, seeking and perverting the Law for
revenge, and such as these upholds these corrupt Ministers, and false Prophets
which the Nation swarms of; and they can have a Law to maintain their deceit,
and uphold them in oppression, and so the Beast upholds the false Prophet, and
they combine together against the simple; Hester 3. Dan. 1.3. Isa. 23. Isa.
5.27, 28. Psalm. 82.1, 3.
and so the Law is made a stalking-horse to deceive the simple, and they will
pervert and wrest the Law out of its place, and act contrary to their own Law
against the righteous; and such Magistrates and such Government we honor not,
but deny, and testify against it as the prophet of God always did, for by
such Magistrates and Government did the Righteous ever suffer, and for the same
testimony of a pure Conscience, I have and do suffer by such corrupt
Magistrates, and hundreds more in the Nation, who are redeemed out of
Transgression, who walk not after the flesh, Zeph. 3.3. Hos. 4.18.
but after the Spirit: And Haman who stood in the corrupt will, would have
destroyed Mordecay, because he crossed his will, and could not bow to him; and
also Pharaoh and Nebuchadonozer, and Herod who headed John who stood in their
own wills, but the hands of the Lord they did not escape. Mar. 6.17, etc Hest.
3.8.
And so corrupt Magistrates say we deny all Magistracy and Government, as Haman
did, but Christ comes to fulfill and end all outward Laws and Government of
Man, and he himself will Reign; for as Truth and Righteousness grows, the Law
is fulfilled, and passes away, and the Lion and the Lamb lie down together,
and this is the cause why corrupt Magistrates beat down the Truth as much as
they can, and so to uphold themselves; but God will deliver his own, and
Pharaoh will he plague and confound; but such Magistrates as are guided by the
Light of God in the Conscience, and Rules and Governs by it without partiality,
or respect of persons, in singleness of heart, discharging their Consciences
before the Lord, and executing the Law in its place, and such Magistrates, and
such Government, Romans 13.3, 4.
we own and honor in our hearts, for such are a terror to evildoers, and for
the praise and encouragement of those that do well: and such bear not the Sword
in vain, but stand in the Will of God, which is cross to their own wills, and
they Rule for God and not for themselves; and this Government is of God and not
of Man, nor after the will of Man, neither takes hold of any tender Conscience,
nor oppresses it, but stands in the place where it is set; and some such
Magistrates there has been in the Northern parts of this Nation, who witness
the Law of God set up in their hearts, and feared God and hated covetousness,
and testified against those who did not; and so corrupt Magistrates sought to
put them out, so let all who are single-hearted judge who are destructive to
true Magistracy and Government.

Concerning SUPERIORITY, and HONOR, BREEDING and MANNERS, also of the Word
THOU to any single Person.
In the beginning when God made, Man, he made him to be Lord over all
creatures, Genesis 1.26, 27, 28. but not man to be Lord over man: Yet he was to be
servant of God, and when he had disobeyed the command of God, God, spoke to
Adam, and Adam spoke to him, and God thoued Adam and Adam thoued him, and here
was the plain language betwixt God and Adam. And when God appeared to Moses in
the Bush, God thoued Moses, and Moses thoued him; and this was the plain
language which ever passed betwixt God and his people in all Ages: and thou
that disdains to be thoued, would exalt thy self above God, Exodus 4.10, 11, 12,
13. Acts 9.5, 6.
who thous God in thy formal prayers, and scorns to take it thy self;
therefore thou must come down as Lucifer did: but it is Lucifer in thee that is
exalted, who must not be honored, but must be cast down into the pit, and it
is he who is head in man, who would be honored, and would be superior, 2 These.
2.4.
and would be above God, and calls this Manners and Breeding to bow to him and
honor him, and he has vented ways whereby he is honored and exalted and
worshipped, and he calls this Manners and Breeding, and who can honor him the
most, and exalt him the highest, those he says is the best bred, and of the
best breeding, and those he calls Noblemen and Gentilmen, and the other he
calls Yeomen and common People, and Inferio^rs, though they all honor him, but
they observe it not so much as the other; but their minds is more set upon the
Earth and Ear^hly things, to get wealth and riches, and those he calls
providen^ careful people; but he that seeks preferment in the world, and would
be exalted and set up, seek to get his breeding in as excellent manner as he
can that so he may get in favor with Lucifer that sits in the Courts and high
Places; and so long as he pleases Lucifer he will set him up, but both he and
Lucifer must be cast down into the pit together Obad. 3, 4. and here is the
ground of the worlds Superiority, Nobility, Gentility, Honor, Breeding and
Manners; and here they Lord over one another by their corrupt wills; and here
is the ground of all Tyranny and Oppression, Rackings and Taxings, and Wars,
and Imprisonments, and Envy, Jam. 4.1, 2, 3.
and Murder, and the Persecutions of the righteous; all arises from proud
Lucifer, the Lust in man, who would be honored; and all this is in the Fall
and under the Curse; but Mordechai could not bow to him in Haman, and therefore
he sought to destroy him, and informed the King against him, and all the Jews
in the Nation, and said they were a scattered people, and their Laws were
diverse from all people, neither did they observe the Law of the King; then he
set up a pair of Gallows for Mordechai, Esth. 6.1, 2. but Haman was hanged on
his own Gallows, and is cast down to nothing, and Mordechai is exalted in his
stead: so there is a time that Mordechai is despised and Haman exalted; and
there is a time that Haman is cast down and Mordehcai exalted: and there is a
time that Esau reigns over Jacob; and there is a time that the Elder serves
the Younger: Gen 25.3. and there is a time that Pharaoh rules and oppresses the
Israelites; but there is a time of Isreal's deliverance, and Pharaoh drowned in
the Sea, Exodus 11.9. So there is a time that Antichrist sits in the Temple of
God as God and says he is God, 2 These. 2.4. and Christ lies low in the
Manger: but there is a time that he must be cast into the Pit, Rev. 19. and
Christ alone exalted. He that can receive it let him. But in all Ages the
children of God could not bow to Lucifer nor his Image; and this was the cause
why Shadrach, Mesech, and Abednego, was cast into the fiery Furnace; Dan. 6.
and this was the cause why Daniel was cast into the Lions den, but by the hand
of his God, whom he alone worshipped and honored, he was delivered and
exalted, and his Adversaries cast down in his place: and this was the cause why
the Prophets were always persecuted and imprisoned, and the Apostles, Acts 7.
verse. 6. who came to turn the World upside down; And this is the cause now why
the Ministers and Messengers of Jesus Christ are imprisoned, stoned, stocked,
whipped, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17.
and shamefully entreated, whom the Lord is pleased immediately to call from
their outward Callings, and Countries, and sends them abroad into seve^al
Countries to preach his Name, no more after the flesh, but after the Spirit;
and who knows him, must know him no more after the flesh, but after the Spirit:
And those come to turn the World upside down, Gal. 6.14.
being crucified to the World, and the World to them; and these cannot honor
Lucifer, nor bow to Lucifer, nor worship his Image, though there was a time
when they did, but that was done in Egypt, when they knew not God, but now
Lucifer and his Image is cast down, and Christ alone exalted, and the pure and
perfect Law is witnessed, which respects no man's person, but God alone honored
and exalted, and this we witness: For amongst us there are no Superiors after
the flesh, but Christ is the Head, Col. 1.18. Mat. 20.25, 26, 27.
and all the rest fellow servants: And he that would be the greatest should be
the least, and he that respects persons commits sin: And the Angel would not
suffer John to bow to him, but said, he was his fellow servants; and this we
witness, who are redeemed out of the Kingdom of the Devil, from amongst the
Children of this World into the Kingdom of the Son, who are crucified to the
world, and the world to us, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Acts 4.32. Romans 6.4, 5.
by the Spiritual Cross of Christ in which we joy and glory, amongst whom there
is no partiallity, nor respect of persons, but all in union in one, though ten
thousand; and here God alone is King, and he alone is honored, exalted, and
worshipped, no more after the flesh, but after the Spirit; for we have no other
God in whom our hearts delight; and here proud Lucifer, and his Image is cast
out, and here all his honor is thrown down, and his breeding, and manners, and
fashions, and customs, and words, and ways, and worships, which are after the
flesh, and not after the Spirit, whereby he sets up himself, and causes his
Image to be worshipped; and this is the cause he rages in his Kingdom,
wheresoever we come, and says we are destructive to all Superiority, and
Magistracy, and Ministry, and Honor, and Breeding, and Manners, and turn the
world upside down; Rev. 19
for he knows where Christ comes, he comes to take his Kingdom from him, and
cast him down into the pit, and there he must be tormented quick, and all who
bears his Image or his Mark; and these are some of his marks, which he calls
Nobility, Gentility Honor, Breeding, Manners, and Civility.

But true Nobility we own, the Seed of God is noble wheresoever it is born up,
and who can witness to the head of the Serpent bruised, and the Seed of God
born up to reign and rule, there is true Nobility, there is true Gentillity, no
more after the flesh, but after the Spirit: and this is to be honored, for
honor is due to this both in Magistrate or Minister, Fisherman or Plowman,
Heards-man or Shepherd, Romans 13.7.
wheresoever it rules without respect of persons, and hear fear to whom fear,
and honor to whom honor; and this is no more after the flesh but after the
Spirit: And here all the true Prophets of God were Noblemen, and Gentlemen,
sprung of the Noble Seed, 1 Kings 19.9. Am. 7.24, 25 Deuteronomy. 32.3. Deuteronomy. 37.5.
though of the Nobles and Great ones of the Earth, they were disdaind and
reproached, because according to the world, they were of lower degree, some of
them Plow-men, some Heards-men, some Shepherds, and therefore they persecuted
them, and destroyed them, yet they were gentile and bore all. Christ was Noble,
sprang of the Noble Seed, though of the Great ones and Nobles of the Earth he
was disdained, reproached, and scorned to be the King of the Jews, because,
according to the World, he was of low degree, and supposed to be a Carpenters
Son, so they spit upon him and disdained him, and crucified him, Mat. 13.55,
56, 57.
yet he was gentile and bore all. The Apostles were Noble, sprung of the Noble
Seed, though of the Nobles and Great ones of the Earth they were despised, and
disdained, and reproached, because, according to the World, they were of low
degree, some of them Fishermen, and the like, and came to turn the World
upside down, so they were despised p^asecuted, and killed, yet they were
gentile and bore all: But those were all noble, sprung of the noble seed, and
so is all now who are of the same seed: and those were all gentile, sprung of
the gentile seed, and those have the nature but not the name, and to those
belong the true honor, not after the flesh but after the Spirit: Acts 7 for
they denied the honor of the World; and therefore Christ said, I receive not
honor from men; and said to his Apostles, Be ye not called Masters, neither
call any Master upon the earth; and though the Princes of this world exercise
dominion one over another, yet it shall not be so amongst you, but he that
would be the greatest amongst you, let him be your servant; Mat. 23.8, 9, 10,
11. and said he, How can ye believe which receive honor one of another and
seek not the honor that comes from God only? John 5.44. and here the true
honor is no more after the flesh but after the Spirit: and here you who are
giving and receiving outside earthly honor, you are in the unbelief, out of
the doctrine of Christ, cringing, and bowing, and honoring, and exalting the
Devil, and worshipping the Beast and his Image, which all the world wonders
after and worships, Rev. 13.

And as for Manners and Breeding, Courtesy and Civility, Learn to do us you
would have all to do to you, and speak every one truth to his neighbor: And
let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but such us is good for
the use of edifying: for evil communication corrupts good manners, but let your
yea be yea, and nay be nay, for whatsoever is more is evil: Mat. 7.12. Ezekiel.
8.16. and breed your Children so, and here is good Manners and Breeding,
Courtesy and Civility: and who are of the right noble Seed, has this Manners
and this Breeding, but the Nobles and Great ones of the Earth want this Manners
and this Breeding, and both Priest and People of all sorts according to the
World: And here is the ground of all true Nobility Gentility, Majesty, Honor,
Breeding, Manners, Courtesy, and Civility, no more after the flesh but after
the Spirit; for the natural man minds natural things, and the spiritual man,
spiritual things; but the natural man receives not the things of God: and this
we own and witness, and the time is coming, and now is, that before this Seed
every knee shall bow, Romans 8.5. Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Psalm. 149.8.
and every tongue confess, and the Kings and Nobles of the Earth shall be bound
in chains, and fetters of Iron: and here is also the ground of the Nobility,
Gentility, Superiority, Honor, Breeding and Manners of the world, which is
after the flesh but not after the Spirit, sprung from proud Lucifer, the lust
that reigns in man, and are not yea and nay, but calls it manners to say nay
and take it, or do it: and so they have the name, but not the nature, and so
are Bastards and no Sons, who are not sprung from the noble gentile seed; and
to those Honor is not due, neither can we bow unto them, for if we should, we
should set the Devil in the room of God, and give unto him that which is due to
God, which when we were in blindness through ignorance we did, and so worship
the Beast and his Image, which all the world worships and wonders after; Rev.
13. Rev. 14, 5.
for they that are proud and lofty, which is the Image of the Devil, for the
Devil is the Father of Pride, and in gay attire, those the world worships and
wonders after, and extols and exalts into high places: but since the Lord has
opened our eyes, this we cannot do, Rev. 18.6.
but testifies against it wheresoever we come both in words and actions, and so
we are destructive to the worlds Superiority, Nobility, Gentility, Honor,
Breeding and Manners, which is after the flesh, and not after the Spirit,
therefore the Devil hates us in the Nobles and great ones of the world, but we
give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar and unto God that which is Gods;
Mat. 22.21. but we cannot give unto Caesar that which is Gods, but fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor is due: He that has an ear to hear, let him hear
and understand: For, says the Lord, if I be a Master, where is my fear? If I
be a Father, where is my honor? Mal. 1.6

Concerning the Word THOU or THEE.
First, concerning the word thou or thee, which all those which are their
Priests and Teachers knows, that thou is the proper word to one particular
person, and is so all along the Scripture throughout to any one, without
respect of persons; yea to God himself: and the word you is the proper word to
more then one, but not to one; and it so is all along the Scriptures
throughout. As for example, at all times when the Apostles spoke to Christ they
used the word thou or thee unto him, and when he spoke to more then one of
them, he used the word you or ye; but if he spoke but to one, he used the word
thou or thee, as in Mat. 16.14, 15, 16, 17. verses: And also Paul thoued King
Agrippa, and King Agrippa thoued him, as in Acts 26.27, 28. verses, and so all
along the Scripture: And so it is plain, that now it is an invention of proud
Lucifer in man to exalt himself, as it will plainly appear; for amongst the
great and rich ones of the Earth, they will either thou or you one another if
they be eqall in degree, as they call it; but if a man of low degree in the
Earth come to speak to any of them, then he must you the rich man, but the rich
man will thou him; Nay you shall find it so betwixt Priest and People, If a
poor laboring man come before one that you call a Minister, though he be one
of his hearers, and one who helps to maintain him according to his ability,
yet he must you the Priest, and the Priest thou him; And here the Heathen Lord
over one another by their corrupt wills: but this is contrary to the Apostles
and Ministers of Christ, Mat. 20.25. Prove. 22.7. 1 Cor. 9.19.
who made themselves servants to all, and yet those will call themselves the
Ministers of Christ; And the word Minister signifies a servant, and they are
Masters, and so they have gotten the Name but not the Nature, and so are
bastards and no heirs, who are not sprung from the gentle seed and yet they
are hired as servants of men, and yet bears rule by their means as Masters over
those that maintains them, so that he that has an eye to see let him see the
deceits of the professed Ministers of England, Jer. 5.30, 31.

Concerning putting off the HAT.
This is another invention of proud Lucifer, whereby he is honored and
worshipped, and exalted in man; but the Scripture does not speak of any such
fashon used in any age, but man has found out many inventions since the
Scripture was recorded: and now it is so, that it is a fashon throughout the
Land, whereby one man is exalted above another; for if a poor man come before a
rich man, it may be the rich man will move his hat, that is called courtesy
and humility; but the poor man must stand with his hat off before him, and that
is called honor and manners and due respect unto him; but if the rich man do
bid him put it on, it is counted a great courtesy, and he gets honor to
himself, Prove. 1.23. Prove. 16.4.
there to be counted a courteous man. But this difference or respect of persons
was never ordained by God but by the Devil, whereby he exalts himself in man;
but James the Apostle of Jesus Christ witnessed against it; as in James. 2.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. and so on, and said, He that respects persons committs sin, for
there is no respest of persons with God: Acts. 10.3, 4, and therefore says
James, Howl ye rich men: and here your professed Ministers abide not in the
doctrine of Christ, and so has not God but the Devil, and his Ministers they
are whom they exalt, 2 John 5. And now you shall see the partiality of the
names in this your breeding and manners.

First, from a poor man to a rich man it is called honor, and due respect, and
manners; from a rich man to a poor man it is called courtesy and humility; but
amongst the rich and nobles of the Earth it is called Court-like breeding, but
of those of the lower degree it is called Country breeding, and amongst the
lower sort of the world it is called neighborhood and civil respect one to
another: and so the Devil has covers for all his deceit, and so he is honored
and exalted both in Court and Country, but the highest in the Court, and
therefore they have the highest title: But woe unto them that hides their sin,
and covers with a covering, and not of the spirit of the Lord: Isa. 30.1, But
this is the riches of the world, and the Devil that makes so many degrees, as
between Dives and Lazarus, and Haman and Mordecai, Luke. 16 10 20. Acts. 17.25.
for the Lord has made all the Nations of the Earth of one mold and one blood,
but we who are redeemed out of his Kingdom, he calls us clowns and fools, and
says our Religon is built upon such small and frivilous things, and stumble at
strawes, and leaps over blocks, this says his wisdom, but it is even death
to him to b^ar these strawes, especially where he is the highest exalted; for
it pulls down all his honor, and therefore do rich men and great ones of the
Earth, and Rulers, and Priests, and Pharisees, persecute and oppress us, and
draw us before Judgment Seats, and would root us out of the Nation, as Haman
would have done by Mordecai and the rest of the scattered Jews, James. 2.6.
Esth. 3.
because they cannot bear those strawes: but I say, whatsoever it is that comes
to be forbidd^n in the conscience, it becomes a weight and a burden, though it
be never so small a thing in the eye of a Pharisee, so let none despise the day
of small things, Ezekiel. 4.10. but some will call it stubbornness, obstinacy,
pride, and presumption, but the same nature would have called it so in
Mordechai, who could not bow to Haman as the rest did that sat by; and so let
every one take heed of speaking evil of that you know not, least you call good
evil and evil good; for the woe is pronounced against such, but they that
were after the Flesh, always, in all Ages persecuted them that were after the
Spirit; 2 Pet. 2.12. Jude. 10.
And so it is, not many mighty, nor many noble, nor many wise after the flesh
are called, but God has chosen the foolish things of this world to confound
the wise, and the weak to confound those that are mighty, that no flesh should
glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 29.

Concerning Perfection.
Man was perfect without sin before the Fall, or else he could not have been
the Image of God; for God is pure and perfect, and he made man after his own
Image pure and perfect without sin, Genesis 1.27. Genesis 5.24.
but when he sinned he defaced his Image, and lost his pure estate, and was
drove out of Paradise, and became the Image of the Devil, for sin is the Image
of the Devil, and here all sin is in the Fall, and who are in the Fall are in
the Devils kingdom, which is impure and impefect, and unclean; but God
promised the seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. and
Christ the seed said, he was come to preach deliverance to the captive, and to
heal the broken hearted, Lvke. 4.18. Mat. 10.11.
and to seek that which was lost, and to bring again that which was driven
away, and this was his work* to redeem to man that which man had lost. Now
consider what man has lost, and I shall leave this as Querie with all both
Priests and People, who deny perfection from sin here, whether Christ is but a
part of Redeemer, or a perfect and full Redeemer, and which is the place
betwixt Heaven and Earth, where man shall be made free or cleansed from sin, if
not upon the Earth, seeing that no unholy, nor unclean thing can enter the
Kingdom of God? But who can witness this, has passed through death, and that
has none who plead for sin, neither can they witness Christ come; Rev. 21.27.
1 Cor. 15.5.
but for some simple ones sake I shall speak more clearly of this for it is a
great delusion of the Devil, to keep people in sin to tell them, they shall
never be made free from sin so long as they are upon the Earth, and brings this
Scripture to maintain it, He that says he has no sin deceives himself, and
is a liar; but he tells them Christ dyed for all, and if they can but lay hold
on him by Faith, he will not impute their sins unto them, though they sin
daily; for the righteous man sins seven times a day, and all the holy men of
God sinned; and so he takes Scripture to maintain his kingdom, and this he
delivers by the mouth of his Ministers, which he sends abroad to deceive the
Nations, leading people in blindness, full of sin and corruption, ever
learning, and never comes to the knowledge of the Truth, nor never shall do
for them, and here he carries them on an easy delight some way to the flesh,
but the end is death, and so heals them up in their sin with a feigned formed
faith which perishes; and here they settle upon the Lees, and set up a rest in
the Devils kingdom, which is sin; and here many are merely blinded and hardened
and all tenderness of conscience is done away: John. 8.13.
But you shall find that he that sooths you up in this Faith is the greatest
enemy of your souls and whosoever witnesses Christ their Redeemer, shall
witness that he is come to destroy the works of the Devil, which is sin, and
to redeem out of the fall, out of sin, and out of the Devils kingdom, which is
sin, and all sins in the Devils Kingdom, which is in the fall; but for this
end Christ is manifested, to destroy the works of the Devil, and to redeem out
of the fall, out of the Devils Kingdom into his own Kingdom, and no unclean
thing can enter therein, Rev. 21.27. but none can witness this Redemption but
through the death, and through the Cross which Paul rejoiced in, by which he
was crucified to the World and the World to him, Romans 6.6. and had put off the
body of sin, and was mad^ free from the Law of sin, which once warred against
his mind, which once he complained of, which Scripture the unlearned, which are
strangers from his conditions, who reads them with the carnal eye, now wrest
them to their own destruction.

J. Parnel.

Concerning Women's Speaking in the Church.
WHat Woman is it that is not permitted to Speak in in the Church? Is it she
that is come to have Christ Head in her? or is it she that is not come that
length, but is learning, and so is to learn in silence? Or, may not Christ
speak through the Woman, when he is Head over all? if not, then why did Paul
(that said, I suffer not a Woman to speak in the Church) allow of Women as his
Fellow Laborers and Helpers in the Gospel? it appears that she was on her
travel and he commended her to the Church. What did they travel about, or help
him in? what was that labor and help? Romans 16.1, 2.3.

Why did Paul suffer Phillips Daughters to Prophecy? were not they
Prophetesses? and had not they the Spirit of Prophecy? And wherefore is the
Spirit of Prophecy given but to edefie the Church? It is commended by Paul
above many other gifts, see 1 Cor. 14.1. Follow after Charity, and desire after
Spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may Prophecy. And see the 3d. verse, But
he that Prophesies, speaks unto men to Edification, to Exhortation and
Comfort. Now seeing he that Prophesies has the Spirit of Prophecy, and
seeing it is through the Spirit of Prophecy that he speaks to Man to
Edification, Exhortation and Comfort; Why may not the same Spirit of Prophecy,
being head in the Woman, as in Philips Daughters, seeing Women are made
Prophetesses thereby; I say, why may not the same Spirit of Prophecy put forth
the Female to speak to Men to Edification, Exhortation and Comfort? Or else
were not the gift received in vain, if it were not to be used? and if it be to
be used, Then must it not be for the service of the Church, for Edification,
Exhortation and Comfort?

Is not the Widow without an Husband? was not Israel that went from her
Spiritual Husband, called an Harlot, or a Whorish Woman? And were not there
many Males and Females to make up this Woman that had forsaken her Husband? Is
not Christ the Husband? Is not his Church the Spouse of Christ? Is not he as
well the Husband of the Males as of the Females, and of the Females as of the
Males? And are not the Priests and Bishops of that Whorish Woman, that is gon^
from the Husband Christ, who are to be silent? And also the Woman that is in
the Church, which may be said to be in the Church, and yet but in learning, and
is not learned; she is not fit to teach, but is to be silent, and learn in
silence until she be learned; and then Christ the Husband, in the Male and
Female, the Head in the Male and Female, is one; and it is he the One in all,
both in the Male and Female, that speaks; and the Male as well as the Female,
is that Woman that is not to speak, who has not learned Christ, and is not
made subject to him; but such who have learned him, whether Male or Female, he
may speak in them; and then it is not the Woman, but CHRIST the Man that
speaks in the Male and in the Female. And whosoever denies this, disprove it if
he can.

And what will ye do with that in Joel 2.28? If you will not suffer Christ to
speak in the Females, then you will contradict Joel's Prophecy, and so will
judge him a lying Prophet, who spoke in the Name of the Lord, saying, I will
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh? yea, it is said that Daughters shall
Prophecy as well as Sons, no distinction made: Upon the Handmaids in those
days will I pour out my Spirit. and when was this fulfilled, if it was not
among the Apostles? If Paul had stopped Women and Maids that had learned Christ,
would not that have been against Joel's Prophecy? but Paul did not so; for he
cites the Law and says, as also says the Law. But the Priests are blind, and
cannot see what the Woman is that was not permitted under the Law, nor under
the Gospel to speak. For, the Law did not forbid Miriam, and those Women that
Prophesied and were Prophetesses, Judge. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. Luke 2.36.

And was it not a Woman that was sent by Christ that first did preach his
Resurrection to his Disciples? they that would stop Christ from sending Women
now, who are witnesses of his Resurrection, they be of another spirit; and also
they are of another spirit then Moses was of, who said, he would that all the
Lord's People were Prophets; and were all the Lords People Men and no Women
amongst them? it appears that Moses would not stop any, either Male or Female,
among the Lords People: but the Priests and many more are of another mind: but
that mind is not the mind of Christ, and therefore we matter it not what it
either leads to say or affirm, seeing they will be wilful. And seeing it is
written in the first Language of Greek (out of which the English was
translated) (...), which word signifies both Man and Woman; and in Latin, hic
and haec homo, which does signify both man and Woman: and in John 1.1, 9.
where it is said, The Word which was with God, was the true Light, which
lights every man that comes into the world; which word Man signifies both
Man and Woman and as it makes no difference in the enlightening, neither does
it in their speaking. But that the simple may not be deceived by them, many
things have been and are written for their sakes, more then for the sakes of
such opposers, who go after their own deceived heart, and will not be warned,
and so the Lord lets many of them alone, to whose righteous Judgments I leave
them, who will plead with them for what they have done against him, who by
their Sophistry and subtle Insinuations have turned aside the simple out of the
way of Truth.

W. D.

CONCERNING The SUM or SUBSTANCE OF OUR RELIGION, Who are called QUAKERS, And
the Exercise and Travels of our Spirits therein.
THIS is the Sum or Substance of our Religion, to wit, to feel and discern the
two Seeds: the Seed of Enmity, the Seed of Love; the Seed of the Flesh, the
Seed of the Spirit: the Seed of Hagar, the Seed of Sarah; the Seed of the
Egyptian womb, the holy Seed of Israel: and to feel the Judgments of God
administered to the one of these, till it be brought into bondage and death; and
the other raised up in the Love and mercy of the Lord to live in us, and our
Souls gathered into it, to live to God in it.

Now when the Light of Gods holy Spirit breaks in upon man, and his quickening
virtue is felt; then life enters into that which was slain, and there is a
desire begotten in the heart to travel out of the Egyptian state, into the good
Land; that the Soul which came from God, might return back again to him (out of
the sinful, wandering, miserable, lost estate) and might live and walk with
him, in the purity, virtue and power of his own Life and Spirit.

But then the other birth strives for its life, and Pharoaoh (the King of
Egypt) takes part with his Egyptians against Israel; and there is no help to
the poor soul, but as God pours out his Judgments upon that hard nature and
spirit in man, which is of the Birth of the Flesh, and receives the influences
and strength of its father, which harden it against the true Seed. And now what
a condition is this poor Soul in! the Light of Gods Spirit gives it the sense
of its state, and the quicknings of Life make it sensible of its bondage, there
are also some desires and longings after deliverance: but this does but provoke
the Enemy, and the Soul being yet in his Territories, and under his power, he
deals the more hardly with it, increasing its burdens and oppressions daly.
And O the outcries of the Soul in this state! how is its spirit pained,
anguished and vexed within it, so that it could almost many times choose rather
to lie still in Egypt then undergo the heavy burdens, oppressions, fears and
dangers, that it daily meets with in this state.

Yet there is a Secret hope, springing up in the heart from the true Seed,
which often encourages it to trust him, and wait upon him who has visited, in
his pure ministration of Judgment. For this is felt many times (as the Soul is
made truly sensible by the Lord) that the Judgment is not to the Seed, not to
Israel; but to Pharaoh and his Egyptians: and by every stroke of Gods wrath
upon them, the Seed is eased, and its deliverance working out.

And so at last when the Judment is finished in the Land of Egypt, the strength
of Pharaoh and his Egyptians broken, their firstborn slain, out comes Israel,
out of the Dark Land, out of the House of Bondage, to travel toward its
resting place. Then the Paschal Lamb is known and fed on; yea it is because of
the Blood of the Lamb, sprinkled upon the Door-posts, that Israel is passed
over and saved, in the day of Egypts visitation. O who can read this truly,
that has not felt and been a living witness thereof!

But now, when the seed is come out of Egypt, there is not the end, but rather
the beginning of its Travels. Pharaoh and his Egyptians (with their Horses and
Chariots) may pursue again and even overtake; and there may seem no way of
escape or help to the Soul but only to stand still, hope in the lord, and wait
to see his Salvation. Then shall the Sea be divided, which stopped Isreal's
course, and Pharaoh with his Egyptians, the Enemies of the soul in this
appearance of dreadful opprssieng power be destroyed and seen no more. Yet in
the willdernes in the passage through the entangelements to the holy Land,
there are many straits, trials and sore Enemies to be met with, who will strive
by open force and also with enchantements to betray Israel: ye^ there is a part
yet unbrought down, yet unwrought out, at which they will be striving to enter
the mind. And as Israel forgets his God, walking out of his Counsel, harkening
to that which his ear should be shut against, and so joining to the contrary
Seed; the Plagues, the Judgments, the Indignation and woe will be felt by him,
and many Carkases may fall there.

So that there may be a great outcry in the heart, Who can stand before this
holy Lord God? shall we be consuming with dying? yes there is somewhat must be
consumed with dying. Yea, if a man came so far, as to witness dominion and
victory over his Souls Enemies, the evil Seed brought into death in him, and a
possession and inheritance in the pure rest of Life: yet if that part be not
kept in the death, if there be not a praying and watching to the Preserver of
Israel (in the pure fear and humility) the Enemy will be sowing to the Flesh
again; he will be getting some of his corrupt Seed into the heart again (if the
Soul do but sleep and become negligent) and so corruption will take root again,
and the contrary Birth grow up again, and the Foxes break into the Vineyard and
spoil the tender grapes.

So that this is our Religion, to witness the two Seeds, with the Power of the
Lord bringing down the one, and bringing up the other: and then to witness and
experience daily the same Power, keeping the one in Death and the other in
Life, by the holy ministration of Gods pure living Covenant. And so, to know
God in this Covenant (in this Covenant which lives, gives Life and Keeps in
Life) and to walk with God and worship and serve him therein, even in his Son,
in the Light of his Son, in the Life of his Son, in the virtue and ability
which flows from his Son into our Spirits, this is our Religion, which the Lord
our God in his tender mercy has bestowed upon us: And indeed we find this to
be a pure, living and undefiled Religion before God, daily witnessing his
acceptance of it in and through his Son, whose Name is here known and
confessed, worshipped and honored, according to the very heart of the Father.

This may be further illustrated, and perhaps made more manifest to some, by a
Scripture or two.

The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and
these are contrary one to the other, says the Apostle, Gal. 5.17.

Here are the two Seeds (the Seed of the Serpent, the Seed of the woman) whose
striving and fight is in man, when God awakens the Soul, the one whereof has a
nature, a desire or lust contrary to the other. Now as the one of these
prevails in any heart; so the other goes down. As the one gains Life and Power:
so the other is brought into Death and Captivity: so that this is it every one
is to wait for, after they once come to the sensible knowledge and experience
of these two, to feel the Flesh brought down, the lusts of it denied, the
Judgments of the Lord administered to it; that so the other may come up to live,
thrive and prevail in the Soul, and so the Soul witness Salvation and
Redemption under its shadow. Thus Sion is Redeemed with Judgment, and her
Converts with Righteousness. Isa. 1.27. What is Sion? Is it not the holy Hill
of God, whereon his Son is set King to reign, whereon the holy City is to be
built, and God to be worshipped in Spirit. What condition is Sion in, when God
visits her to redeem her? Is she not laid wast, desolate, lying in the dust:
(as Psalm. 102.13, 14.) Well: how will God redeem her? Zion shall be redeemed
with Judgment and her Converts with Righteousness. By bringing Judgments upon
that which keeps her under, upon her Enemies the contrary Seed, God redeems
her: and by bringing forth Righteousness, (the righteous Life and Spirit of his
own Son) in those whose minds are turned to her, whose faces are set Sion-ward,
thus God redeems her Converts. Yes, yes, it is truly felt and witnessed. The
living Righteousness of Christ revealed in the heart, and having power there,
sets free from all unrighteousness which was there before. And then, when the
unrighteous one is cast out, and the righteous one is revealed, and the Soul
united to him, and receives virtue and power from him; then he becomes a
Servant of Righteousness, and does not commit sin, but does righteousness; And
he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous, 1 John. 3.7.
For how can it be otherwise, when the righteous Life is revealed and brought up
into dominion in him? How can the same righteous Spirit and Life (revealed in
the members, as was in the head) but live and act after the same manner in the
members, as it did in the head? (O that men were turned to that, which would
give them the certain knowledge and sensible experience of this!) Now this is
exceeding comfortable and precious to them that are in the true travel toward
it: much more to them that enjoy it.

This is the sum of all, even to know and experience what is to be brought down
into death, and kept in death, what to be brought up out of the grave, to live
to God and reign in his dominion, and what to be kept in subjection and
obedience to him who is to reign. Now to experience it thus done in the heart;
the Flesh brought down, the Seed of Life raised, and the Soul subject to the
pure heavenly Power, whose right it is to reign in the heart in and by the
Seed, this is a blessed state indeed, for here the work is done: here the
Throne of God is exalted, and his King reigns in righteousness and peace, and
all his Enemies are under his feet; and this Soul, this true Israelite this
redeemed one may wear the white Robe, and serve God in righteousness and
holiness without fear of his Enemies (keeping in and to the Covenant, which
ministers Life and Power abundantly) all the days of his life. For that was to
be the outward state of the outward Israel, keeping to God in the outward
Covenant and it is to be the inward state of the inward Israel, keeping to God
in the inward Covenant, which is a pure Covenant of life and Peace, of all
inward and spiritual blessings and mercies in Christ, wherewith the Souls are
blessed that are obedient to God, and walk humbly with him in this Covenant.
And I beseech you to consider (O tender people, who are grieved because of sin
and corruption in your hearts, and would fain witness victory and dominion over
it, in the Name and Strength of the Lord Jesus Christ) whom did that prophecy
of Zachary (Luke 1.71, 72, 74, 75.) concern? what was that holy Covenant? who
were to be so redeemed? who were the Israel that was to inherit this promise?

All the Promises are yea and amen in Christ to the Israel of God. Why should
not the Israel of God hope to enjoy this? even so to be acquainted with Gods
holy Spirit, and to wait upon him, that they may witness it granted to them,
that they being delivered out of the hands of their Enemies, might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him (whose eyes are
piercing, and behold no iniquity) all the days of their lives? Surely they who
witness that promise (mentioned Isa. 35.8.) fulfilled to them, cannot fall
short of this. And truly, the Children of the New Covenant can never come
thoroughly to live to God, till they witness the inward Circumcision of the
Heart, so as to love the Lord with all the Heart and Soul, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Now,
where it is so, the Devil or Lust can find no place of entrance: and how then
should they be able to sow their Seed and bring forth sin? Out of the evil
heart proceeds all evil: but out of that heart which is thoroughly Circumcised,
to love the Lord God wholly, evil cannot proceed.

If Lust be not conceived, it cannot bring forth Sin: and where the Womb, which
conceived it, is kept dry and barren, it cannot conceive again.

And is not this the Promise of the Gospel, That the Womb which was once
barren, shall be very fruitful and bear abundantly; but the other grow feeble,
and be able to bear no more? Oh that People had experience of Gods Power, and
did believe therein! what should stand in the way of it?

It was Isreal's sin of old, when they looked at their Enemies, and saw their
footing and strength in the Land, which God had promised to Abraham's Seed for
an Inheritance, they could not believe that they should be overcome.

O take heed of the same unbelief now.

Concerning CHRIST, Coming to the FATHER by him, Receiving him, walking in him
(not in the oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the Spirit) and
concerning reading the Scriptures aright.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: No man comes unto the Father but by
me, says Christ,

John 14.6.
MAN in the corrupt degenerate estate is fallen from God, has lost his Image
(the holy, heavenly Image of the Father of Spirits) is driven out from his
presence, dwells in the Land of darkness and confusion, under the Government of
the Prince of the Power of the Air, who rules in, and has power over, all the
Children of Disobedience.

Now this should be man's work, even to return to the Father: to come back out
of the prodigal lost state, to the Fathers house, where there is sufficiency
and fullness of true Bread and Water of Life, to satisfy every hungry and
thirsty Soul.

The Way whereby a man must come, the Truth wherein he must be renewed, and the
Life wherewith a man must be quickened, is Christ, the Son of the Living God:
and he must know him as the Son of the Living God, and feel him revealed in
him, and received by him, and so walk in him the Way, in him the Truth, in him
the Life, if ever he come to the Father. He must not rest in the description of
things; but feel and know, receive and walk in the Thing, which by the Spirit
of the Lord has been often formerly, and is still described, in what words,
and by what means the Spirit pleases But to receive all the descriptions of
him that were formerly given forth, or all the descriptions that are now given
forth, that will not do; but the Soul that will live by him, must receive him
and feel the ingrafting into him, the holy Root, the living Word of Gods
eternal Power, and must feel this Word ingrafted into his heart, so that there
be a real becoming one in nature and Spirit with him. And then he is truly in
the Vine, in the Olive Tree, and partakes of the virtue and sap thereof, he
abiding therein and walking in the Spirit, Life and power thereof.

Now hear a man walks not, nor cannot walk in the oldness of the Letter; but in
the newness of the Spirit only, Paul, notwithstanding all his knowledge of the
Scriptures, walked but in the oldness of the Letter, before Christ was revealed
in him. And those in the Apostles days, who had got the form of godliness, but
turned from and denied the power, they walked but in the oldness of the Letter.
Yea, the Church of Sardis (for the most part) and the Church of Laodicea, who
had received the right order and ordinances, and the true descriptions of
things, and though they were full and rich and wanted nothing, they walked but
according to the oldness of the Letter, and not in the newness and power of the
Spirit of Life, But alas, how far are many (who pretend to Christ in this day)
from this state! who never came so far as to walk in the oldness of the Letter,
from a true understanding thereof; but have only learned and continued to walk
in the oldness of their own apprehensions and conceivings upon the Letter.

Can these, in this state, possibly understand Truth, or know the inward
spiritual, precious appearances thereof, either in their own hearts or others?
Surely no. Why so? Why this is the reason; because the measure the appearances
of Truth (either in themselves or others) by their own old apprehension and
conceivings upon Scriptures concerning Truth, which is not the proper measure
of it. Now all such are yet in darkness, let them pretend what they will, and
grow never so high in knowlerg, exercises and experiences after this manner:
and so the best, zealousest and most knowing of them in this state, are but
blind leaders of the blind, and (thus going on) shall most certainly fall into
the Ditch of perdition. O that men could feel that which makes rightly
sensible, and might lay it to heart! For no man can confess Christ (how then
can he receive him and walk in him?) but by the holy Spirit.

And he that knows not the Spirit rightly, knows not Christ rightly: and he
that does not know him rightly, does not confess him rightly: and none can know
him rightly, but by the revelation of the Father inwardly. The mystery must be
opened within, or there is no true knowing. The mystery of deceit is discovered
within; and the mystery of Life is discovered within also. And though the heart
of man (in the unregenerate estate) is deceitful above all things, and
despeartely wicked, and no man of himself can search or know it: yet that is
not the state of the true Jsraelites whom God has cleansed, and taught to deny
themselves daily; but they have boldness before that God who has searched
them, and removed from them the iniquities which he found therein. Yea, whoever
witnesses Christ revealed within, shall find him revealed within for this very
end, to destroy the works of the Devil there: and he is a powerful Savior of
the Soul from sin, and a powerful Destroyer of the works of the Devil within.

Now concerning reading the Scriptures, mind this. It is said of the Jews, that
when they read Moses (or in reading the Old Testament) the vail was upon their
heart, which vail is done away in Christ, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15. O consider
seriously, is the vail done away from thee? Do thou read the Scriptures with
the unvailed eye? do thou read in the Anointing, in Christ's Spirit, in the
pure heavenly Wisdom of the divine Birth? It was promised of old, that God
would take away the face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail
spread over all Nations. Do thou witness this Promise fulfilled to thee? do
thou know the difference between reading the Scriptures with the vail on thee,
and with the vail off? Are the Scriptures opened and unlocked to thee by the
key of David, so that thou read and understandest them in the Light and
Demonstration of Gods holy Spirit; or is thy own understanding and will at work
of it self, in searching into the Scriptures? If the wrong birth, the wrong
wisdom, the wrong understanding be at work; it can gather but that which will
feed and strengthen it self: and if thou be not in Christ, and do not read
in Christ, the vail is not taken away from thee: (for the vail is only done
away in him:) but thou read and walk in the oldness of thy apprehensions
upon the Letter, and not in the newness of the Spirit; and so know neither
the Scriptures nor the Power of God, what ever thou professest to men, or
dreamest concernning thy self. For it is no other indeed: Thy knowledge, thy
apprehensions, thy faith, thy hope, thy peace, thy joy (being out of the
compass of the pure living Truth, in which the Substance, the virtue, the
kernel of all is comprised and comprehended for ever) are but as so many dreams.

O that men that are any whit tender, and have any sincere desires in them
toward the Lord, could read that one Scripture ( Psalm. 43.3, 4.) sensible and
experimentally. O send out thy Light and thy Truth; let them lead me, let them
bring me unto thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles. (what, did not David know
how to go to the Hi^l and Tabernacles of God, without a particular sending
forth of Light and Truth from God to lead him thither?) Then may men go unto
the Altar of God unto God their exceeding joy, and witness his Hill and House
their dewlling place, when God by his Light and Truth, sent forth from him into
them, leads them thither.

The Scriptures are words, whose chief end drift, and service is, to bring men
to the Word from which the Scriptures came. And when men are there; then they
are in the Life of the Scriptures, and witness the fulfilling of the
Scriptures, even the executing of the righteous judgments of God upon that
spirit, mind and nature in them, which is contrary to his image; and the
fulfilling of the Promises and sure Mercies, which belong to Christ the Seed,
and to them who are gathered into, and abide in Christ the Seed. Here Is the
Covenant, the new Covenant, That which is said, or those things which are said
concerning the Covenant in the Scriptures, are but descriptions of the new
Covenant: but Christ within, the Hope of glory, the Spirit within, the Fear
within, the Power of Life within, breaking down and reigning over the power of
sin and death (so that the Lord is served in the dominion and power of his own
Life, in righteousness and holiness before him, out of the fear of sin and
death, all the days of our lives; so that captivity can lead captive nor break
the Souls peace no more, nay not so much as make afraid those, that keep their
Habitation on Gods holy Mountain) here is the Covenant indeed: the strength and
virtue whereof is witnessed in the Soul, as the Soul feels the power of Life
revealed in it, and is made subject by the power to Christ who reigns in
righteousness, love, mercy and Peace, in the hearts of those whom he redeems
out of the earthly nature and spirit, up to the Mind and Spirit of his Father.
And here the Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs, the pure Songs, (the Song of
Moses, the Song of the Lamb) are sung to the Father of Spirits, to the Redeemer
of Israel, which never were sung, nor can be sung in any part of Babylon: but
all those Songs are but Dreams of the night, which will be turned into howling
and bitter lamentation, when the whore (that which has whored from God, and is
not in the wisdom of his Spirit, what ever she may pretend) is stripped, and
the nakedness of her Profession and Religion (with all her Duties and
Ordinances, as she calls them) made manifest.

Concerning the GOSPEL MINISTRATION.
IF the Gospel be not a Ministration of Words or Letters: but of the Spirit,
Life and Power; and if it was the intent of God, that men should not stick in
Word, or Testimonies concerning the things, but come to the thing it self, and
live in the Sons Life and Power, and feel the Son living in them: Then they are
greatly mistaken, who think to gather a Rule to themselves out of the
Testimonies and Declarations of things in the Scriptures, and do not wait upon
the Lord to receive the Spirit it self to become their Rule, Guide and Way. For
these are all one; The Truth is the Way, The Truth, which lives and abides in
the heart (where it is received and entertained) is the Way: the Rule is the
Guide. For God is one. There are many names, but the thing is one. The Life,
the Power, the Wisdom in the Father, Son and Spirit, is all one: yea they
themselves are one, Perfectly one, not at all divided or separated but where
the Father is, the Son is; and where the Son is, the Spirit is; and where the
Spirit is, there is both the Father and the Son, who tabernacle in man in the
day of the Gospel. And where these are, there that is which is to be preferred
before all words, which was before them, and is in Nature, Spirit and Glory
above them. He that has the Son, has Life, even the Life Eternal, which the
words testify of. He that has the Son, has him which is true: and he that is
in the Son, is in him that is true; and abiding there, cannot be deceived: but
he that is not there, is deceived, let him apprehend and gather out of the
Scriptures what he can. O how is God glorified, and how is Redemption and real
Salvation of the Soul witnessed in this despised Dispensation of Truth, which
God has held forth in these latter days! Blessed be the Name of the Lord, who
has hid this pure dispensation of Life from the eye of the prudent, worldly
wise part in every man, revealing it only to the babish simplicity which is of
his Son, and which lives in him and by him.

Concerning Christ's being manifested without, and His being also manifested
within, and how both are owned by them that know the Truth.
IT is objected against us, who are called Quakers, That we deny Christ (and
look not to be saved by him) as he was manifested without us, but look only to
be saved by Christ in us. To which this is in my heart to answer to such as
singly desire satisfaction therein.

We do indeed expect to be saved (yea and not only so, but do already in our
several measures witness Salvation) by the revelation and operation of the Life
of Christ, within us; yet not without relation to what he did without us. For
all that he did in that Body of Flesh, was of the Father, and had its place and
service in the Will and according to the Counsel of the Father. But the
knowledge and belief of that, since the days of the Apostles, has been very
much held in the unrighteousness, and in the separation from the inward work of
the Power and Life of Christ in the heart: which, as so held, cannot save any.
But whoever feels the Light and Life of Christ revealed in him, and comes into
union with God there-through; he feels the work of Regeneration, of
Sanctification, of Justification, of Life and Redemption; and so comes to reap
benefit inwardly, and to partake of the blessed fruits of all that Christ did
outwardly. Yea, he that is thus one with Christ in the Spirit, cannot exclude
himself, nor is excluded by God from the advantage of any thing, nor every
thing Christ did in that body of Flesh.

This indeed is the main thing, to witness Salvation wrought out in the heart:
to witness the eternal Power and Arm of the Lord, laying hold on the Soul to
save it; and not only laying hold on it to save it, but to witness the working
out and the effecting of the Salvation, as really in the Substance, as Israel
of old did in the shadow. For as they witnessed Moses and Joshua outwardly: so
the true Israelite (the inward Israelite, the spiritual Israelite) is to
witness that which is the Substance of these, even the Son of God revealed
inwardly. Now they were not saved outwardly by a ba^e outward believing, that
Moses and Joshua were sent of God to save them: but by following them, in faith
and obedience to what from God they required. So to the inward Israel Christ is
given for a Leader and Commander, who appears to the distressed, embondaged
Soul in Egypt, brings out of Egypt, and so leads on toward the good Land and
into it. Now, as the Soul follows; as the Soul believes in his Appearances,
and obeys his voice in the holy pure Covenant of Life; so he works out the
Redemption thereof. But as unbelief and disobedience gets up, and the heart is
heardened at any time against his Voice and Counsel, and the ear open to the
temtaptions of the Enemy; the Redemption thereby goes backward, and the
distress and captivity returns again. This is witnessed, known and experienced
by ever, true Traveller toward Sion. Therefore the main thing requisite is to
abide in the sense of the Redeemers Power, as also in waiting for his motions
and apperances, and in the Faith and Obedince thereof. For sin gathers strength
and is brought forth by letting in and giving way to the motions thereof: and
so also Holiness and Righteousness is brought forth and gets ground in the
mind, by harkening and giving up to the stirrings and movings of Gods holy
Spirit. Therefore it is of great necessity to every true Traveller, to come to
a right understanding and distinguishing of these: and then that the heart be
kept with all diligence, because out of it are the issues both of life and and
death. And most happy is he, who knows the issues of death stopped and the
issues of Life opened, and whose spirit is naked and open before the Lord, for
Life to spring up in him and issue forth through him at its pleasure. O it is a
precious state to witness Captivity led Captive by Life, and the power of Life
reigning over it. And truly, there is as real deliverance witnessed inwardly,
by those that wait upon the Lord and are faithful to the leadings of his holy
Spirit, as ever there was by the Jews outwardly, in their faithful following
Moses and Joshua: and Christ is as truly an Healer of his People, in this
ministration of Life to them by his holy Spirit, as ever he was an Healer of
Persons out wardly in the days of his Fesh. That (with the other Miracles
which he wrought then) was but a shadow of what he would work and perform
inwardly in the day of his Spirit and holy Power: and shall he or can he (to
those that faithfully wait upon him) fall short in the one, of what he shadowed
out in the other? Nay surely, it was the intent of his heart, and he will not
fail to perform it, to save to the very utmost all that come to God by him and
abide in his holy, pure, righteous, living Covenant. Here is the skill of
Christianity, to abide in him: and here the living Virtue and pure Power is
felt, which overcomes all, but nothing can overcome it; but Victory, Dominion,
Glory, Majesty and Power is sung unto him, who is King of Saints, who reigns in
righteousness, and who establishes Peace and Truth within his Borders.

A few words concerning the the Principle of Truth, What it is, How it may be
discerned, and how it may be purchased and possessed.
QUest. 1. What is the Principle of Truth?

Answ. It is the Light which reproves and makes sin manifest. Whatsoever does
make manifest is Light: Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, arise
from the dead, etc. Ephesians. 5.13.14. There is no other way of awaking out of sleep
and arising from the the dead, but by the Light which makes sin manifest. And,
O how precious is that Light!

Quest. 2. How may the Principle of Truth be discerned?

Answ. By its piercing, quickening nature, which discovers it self in its
appearances and operations. For it appears and works, not like man's reason, or
like motions of his mind which he takes into his understanding part: but it
appears and works livingly, powerfully and effectually in the heart.

Man's reason is corrupt, dark, impure since the fall; and in the hand and under
the power of the wicked one. Its nature is to hide and cover sin, not to
discover it. Now the Light of the Law which discovers sin, arises not hence.
Who can bring the clean pure light of the Law, out of the unclean, impure
Reason of man? The Light indeed may shine in the Darkness; but it is no part of
it, but of another nature and descent. It is from Gods Spirit, and given to man
in his love unto him, to lead him out of his dark ways and spirit, into the
pure Spirit and way of Holiness. For the Light which discovers sin, is all holy
and pure, like the Fountain from whence it comes. Now a man that is acquainted
both with Reason and with this Light, he can distenguish the Nature and
operations of both. For there is a great difference between TRUTH held in the
Reasoning part, and TRUTH held in its own Principle. It is very powerful in the
one: it effects little in the other. In the pure quickenings of Life this
distinction is perceived and also held. Therefore our advice is to all men, to
retire from all mortality, that they may come to feel the Spring of Life in
themselves (and something springing therefrom into them to quicken them) and to
wait to have their understandings opened and kept open by that; that so they
may receive, retain, and not again lose the capacity of understanding the
things of Gods Kingdom.

Quest. 3 How may this Principle (Seed or Pearl) be purchased and possessed?

Answ. By dying to a man's own wisdom and will. There is not another way. For
the Light is wholly contrary to man, as he stands, in the alienation from God.
It crosses his spirit, his thoughts, his desires, his knowledge, his reason,
his understanding; even all that is of himself. He must therefore con^ult with
none of these, but prefer the little, pure Demonstration of the Light of
Christ's Spirit above all these, and stand in the parting with and loss of them
all for ever. O this is an hard saying, who can bear it? Surely none but those
that are taught and learn of the Father, can thus come to give up to and follow
the Light of the Son.

The Law of the Lord is perfest, converting (or restoring) the Soul (Psalm.
19.7.) What Law was this, or what Law is this? Was it the Law of works in the
hand of Moses? or is it the Law of Faith in the hand of Christ? Does not Christ
enlighten every man that comes into the World? Would not God have all men to
be saved? and does he not give to all, a proportion of the true Light whereby
they may be saved? And it is not the property of this Light to convert to God?
Can any man receive this and be united to this, and it not change his nature:
so that he must needs have a new nature, and from that new nature do that
naturally, which the Jews by all their endeavors without this, could never do?

Can any thing convert fallen man to God, but Christ? has any thing power to
convert to God, but his pure Law of Life? Can Christ and his Light be seprated?
Can any man receive his Light and be united thereto, and not receive him? O
that men's hearts and understandings were opened by the Spirit and Power of the
Lord! For this is a direct riddle to all men, who have not Gods Heifer to Plow
with, to understand it by. And so for want of a true understanding, it is
despised and rejected among the Builders: but with us it is elect and precious,
chosen of God, and precious in the eye of our Souls.

Now this does not exclude or make void any thing, that Christ did in his Body
of Flesh here on Earth, or that he does in Heaven for his: but this brings unto
a Right, and into a Possession and Enjoyment of his Purchase. For all that are
in the Darkness, and walk in the Darkness, have nothing to do with Christ in
truth and reallity, what ever they may profess, and what hopes soever they may
feed themselves with: but all that are in any measure of his Light, and walk
therein, they are so far of him, and have a right to and share in all that he
did in and from the same Light and Spirit.

And this I dare positively hold forth as a standing Truth, which has been
sealed unto me by constant experience: that no man can fall in with, and obey
the Light wherewith he is enlightened, but he must deny himself, and take up a
Cross to his own wisdom and will, which Cross is the Cross of Christ, which is
the Power of God to the Salvation of the Soul. And he that takes it up daily
and waits upon the Lord therein, shall witness the power of the Lord Jesus
Christ to the redemption of his Soul: ye then he shall be able in true
understanding to say, This is Light indeed, Life indeed, Power indeed. That
powerful Arm which has saved me from Sin, and breaks the Snares, Devices and
Strength of the Enemy before me (delivering me daily when none else can, and
when my own strength and wisdom is as nothing) I cannot but call Christ, the
living Power and Wisdom of God revealed in me, who will not give his glory to
another. For he is the Lord God of pure Power and Life for evermore; and beside
him there is no such Savior. Yea, blessed be the Name of the Lord for ever,
the days of mourning after Salvation are over with many, and the days of
reaping and enjoying Salvation are come, which shall endure with the Israel of
God for evermore, Amen.

Isaac Penington.

An Incitation to Professors seriously to consider, Whether they or we fail, in
the true acknowledgment and owning of the Christ which died at Jerusalem.
WE, who are commonly called Quakers, being a People whom the Lord has
gathered (out of the wanderings, out of the many Professions, out of the several
scattered estates and conditions, wherein his Eye pitied us, and his love
found us out) into a measure of the eternal rest; where we have found that
Life, that Power, that Manifestation of the Eternal Spirits and that redeeming
Virtue, which we never were before distinctly acquainted with; I say, having
tasted of this, having known this, having felt this, and come to a real
enjoyment of it, in some degree, in our several measures; we could not possibly
conceal this Treasure, but in bowels of love (and in the movings of the Life
and Power of the Spirit) have been drawn to testify of it to them who were
left behind, grovelling under the burden of corruption, and crying out because
of the sin and bondage from the powers of darkness, who has in a mist withheld
their eyes from beholding that living Virtue, which is able to save (and does
save, blessed be his Name) therefrom.

Now this we have often found That this our Testimony has not been received in
the same Spirit and Love, wherein it has gone forth; but the Enemy (by his
subtilty) has raised up jealosies concerning us, and prejudices against us, as
if we denied the Scriptures and Ordinances of God, and that Christ that died at
Jerusalem, professing him only in words (to win upon others by) but denying him
in reallity and substance.

To clear this latter, (for my heart is only at this present drawn out
concerning that) we have solemnly professed in the sight of the Lord God (who
has given us the knowledge of his ^on in Life and Power) these two things.

First, That we do really in our hearts own that Christ, who came in the
fullness of time, in that prepared Body to do the Fathers Will (his coming into
the World, Doctrine, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, etc.) in
plainness and simplicity of heart, according as it is expressed in the Letter
of the Scriptures.

Secondly, That we own no other Christ then that, nor hold forth no other-thing
for Christ, but him who then appeared and was made manifest in flesh.

Now it would be nakedly inquired into by Professors, What is the reason that
their jealousies still remain concerning us, and why they are still so ready to
cast this upon us? Certainly if they did know and own the same thing with us,
(in the Spirit, and in the Power, in the Life, and in the Love which is of the
Truth) this prejudice, and these hard thoughts could not remain. But if they
themselves do not know Christ in the Spirit (but only according to a relation
of the Letter) no marvel though they miss both of the Spirit, and of the true
intent and meaning of the Letter, and Likewise be liable to clash against the
Truth, as it is made manifest in others.

And indeed the Lord has shown me in Spirit several times, that they
themselves are guilty of that very charge (and that he will so implead them at
his Judgment Seat) which they cast upon us, even of denying that Christ which
died at Jerusalem, to be the Christ. For he that owneth the words of Scripture,
as he apprehends or conceives them in the reasonings of his mind, and does not
wait to have them revealed in the Spirit, keeping out of his own reasonings and
conceivings, and waiting patiently till the Lord open the thing in the Spirit;
he sets up his own conceivings, or an Image in his mind of the mind of the
Spirit, but misseth of the thing it self, which alone is known in the Spirit,
by them who wait upon the Spirit there to receive it, and are not hasty to set
up their own reasonings and imaginations concerning the thing in the mean time.

No man can in Truth call Jesus the Lord, but by the Spirit. But any man, that
is any thing serious, and weighs the Scriptures in the natural part, may so
learn to acknowledge his coming into the World, and that he is Lord and King,
etc. and may thus call him Lord, yea, and kindle a great heat in his affections
toward him; but all this (out of the Life, out of the Spirit) is but man's
Image, which he forms in his mind, in his reading the Scriptures, and observing
things therefrom. But the true calling Jesus Lord, is from the feeling of his
eternal Virtue in the Spirit, and finding the Scriptures opened to him by the
Spirit, in a Principle which is above the Reason, comprehends the Reason, and
confounds and brings it to nothing.

Again, There is no true Knowledge of Christ, no living Knowledge, no saving
Knowledge which has the eternal Virtue in it; but that which is received and
retained in a measure of Light given by God to the Creature, in the Faith which
is the Gift, in the Grace which is supernatural and spiritual, whereas the
resoning part is but Natural. And such as have received the Spiritual
understanding, know it to be distinct from the Natural; and we experimentally
find a very clear distincttion, between Scriptures searched out by the
reasonings of the mind, (and so practices drawn therefrom) and Scriptures
opened by the Spirit, and felt in the Life.

Now that Professors generally have not received their knowledge of Christ from
the Spirit, or from Scriptures opened it the Spirit (and so know not the thing,
but only such a relation of the thing, as man's reasoning part may drink in from
the Letter of the Scriptures) is manifest by this, In that they are not able in
Spirit and Understandind to distinguish the thing it self, from the Garment
wherewith it was clothed, though the Scriptures be very express therein. Speak
of Christ according to a Relation of the Letter, there they can say somewhat:
but come to the Substance, come to the Spirit of the thing, come to the thing
it self; there they stutter and stammer, and show plainly that they know not
what it is.

Now the Scriptures do expressly distinguish between Christ and the Garment
which he wore; between him that came, and the Body in which he came; between
the Substance which was veiled, and the Vail which veiled it. Lo I come; a body
have thou prepared me. There is plainly He, and the Body in which he came.
There was the outward Vessel, and the inward Life. This we certainly know, and
can never call the bodily Garment Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt in
the Body. Now if ye indeed know the Christ of God, tell us plainly what that is
which appeared in the Body? whether that was not the Christ before it took up
the Body, after it took up the Body, and for ever?

And then their confining of Christ to that Body, plainly manifests that they
want the knowledge of him in Spirit. For Christ is the Son of the Father, he is
the infinite eternal Being, one with the Father, and with the Spirit, and
cannot be divided from either; cannot be any where, where they are not; nor can
be excluded from any place where they are. He may take up a Body and appear in
it, but cannot be confined to be no where else but there, no not at the very
time while he is there. Christ, while he was here on Earth, yet was not
excluded from being in Heaven with the Father at the very same time, as he
himself said concerning himself, The Son of Man which is in Heaven, John 3.13.
Nor was the Father excluded from being with him in the Body, but the Father was
in him, and he in the Father, whereupon he said to Philip, He that has seen
me, has seen the Father. What, did every one that saw that Body, see the
Father also? Nay not so, but he that saw Christ the Son of the living God, whom
flesh and blood revealed not, but the Father only ( Mat, 16.16, 17.) he saw the
Father also.

O Frinds, look to your knowledge of Christ, and to your Faith and Knowledge of
the Scriptures, and to your Prayers also; for it is easy missing of the living
substance in all these, and meeting with a shadow, which may please and make a
great show in the earthly part, in the natural understanding and affections,
but satisfies not the Soul, or that which is born after the Spirit, but still
the cry there goes out (where the Soul is awakned) after Truth, Substance,
Life, Virtue, from Gods Spirit in the Spirit, which it alone can feed upon.

These four things following, I am certain of, which he that comes into the
true Light, shall infallibly experience them there.

First. That nothing can save but the knowledge of Christ, even of that very
Christ and no other, who took upon him the prepared Body, and offered it up at
Jerusalem.

Secondly, That no Knowledge of Christ can save, but the living Knowledge, Not
a knowledge of him after, the Letter, (which the carnal part may get much of,
and value it self much by) but a knowledge of him in the Spirit; which is only
given to that which is begotten and born of the Spirit, and only retained by
that which abides and remains in the Spirit, and runs not out into the fleshly
reasonings, imaginings and concevings, about the things mentioned in the
Scriptures.

Thirdly, That that man who knows not Christ in Spirit, nor keeps close to
him in Spirit; but (through darkness and misguidance of the spirit of deceit)
called the shinings of his Light (his reproofs, his checks for that which is
evil, and his secret motions to that which is good) natural; This man, though
he seem to own Christ never so much according to the Letter, yet in Truth
denies him.

Fourthly, He that denies Christ, (in his knockings and visitations of him in
his own heart, and before men in the Truths which he holds forth by his
Servants and Ministers of his Spirit him will he deny before his Father in
Heaven.

O, I beseech you, do not trifle about these things (for they are exceeding
weighty) lest ye perish from the way; for missing of the Savior, ye must needs
also miss of the Salvation. O that ye knew your state, as God knows it to be,
and as it is certainly known and felt in the measure of his Life and holy
Spirit, by those whom God has gathered together, and whose eyes he has
opened, and preserves open there, Glory be to his Name therefore: Yea, Glory,
Glory, Glory, and everlasting Praises be sung to him throughout all the holy
Land, ye in the very heights of Sion, by the Souls of the Redeemed, from
henceforth, and for evermore, Amen: whose Mercy, Love, Grace, Wisdom, Power and
rich Goodness remains and endures for ever; by and in which the Redeemed
live to his Praise, who have overcome by the Blood of the Lamb, whose Blood
they know what it is; and none else knows it, but they who feel the
sprinkling and virtue of it. Lo this is our God, we have waited for him; and
how can we but be glad, and rejoice in his Salvation! O let all that live by
the breath of thy Power, and drink of thy Streams, sing praise unto Thee, and
exalt thy great and wonderful Name for ever and ever.

A brief Testimony for Truth,
by Tho. Tailor.
I Shall add somewhat of the Testimony which is written in my heart, by the
finger of Gods Spirit, concerning the People called Quakers.

Indeed they have met with many reproaches, and sore oppositions many ways,
since they were a People: but notwithstanding all, their Bow abides in
strength, and the hands of their arms have been made strong against the wicked
one, with all his devices in his several kinds of instruments: and their Light
is still the same and their God the same, who blesses them from day to day,
even in the midst of all the revilings, slanders, persecutions and curses,
which they have met with from men without, and in the midst of all the
temptations, inward trials and afflictions also, which are often met with
inwardly. Yea we know him to be our God and cannot but trust him, having found
him to be faithful to us hitherto, and knowing his nature to be such, that he
cannot but continue his loving kindness and faithfulness, to all who are
gathered by him in to his holy, inward, spiritual Covenant of Life and Peace,
and who dwells with him therein. And truly we are fully satisfied and at rest
in him, and cannot desire another, then he who has redeemed our Souls from
death, given us Life, brought us out of the Pit wherein was no water, into a
large place, set our feet upon a rock (a rock indeed) and establishes our
goings in the path of holiness, working all our works in us and for us, by his
Spirit and Power. Yea, we have the Witness in our hearts, even the Witness
which never erred nor can deceive, which testifies to and with our spirits,
our Sonship: so that we do not imagine our selves sons from apprehensions upon
Scriptures, but we feel our selves sons in the true sensibleness, and know who
David is, and reap and inherit the sure mercies of David daily, O blessed be
our Father, O blessed for ever be the Father of Life, who feeds, who nourishes,
who waters, Who refreshes (with the Bread of Life and with the pure living
water) his Lambs, his Babes, his plants, his tender ones, of whom he is daily
tender, and who are daily tender of his Name and Honor. And if any man preach
another God, then he who creates anew in the true Light, and therein puts forth
his arm of Salvation; Death, and Destruction and the Curse, are his portion
from the hand of the Lord.

THE Conclusion.
GLorious was the Estate of the Church, before the Apostasy, for Purity of
Doctrine, for holy Order and Discipline, for Love to God, one to another, and
to all men (even of Enemies) for Faith in God, for the Presence and Power of
his Spirit among them (insomuch as the unbeliever coming among them, might find
his heart and state reached to, and be forced to confess and report that God
was in them of a truth) for singleness and uprightness of Heart, meekness and
innocence of Spirit and Conversation, for zeal for God and his Truth, suffering
the spoiling of their Goods, Imprisonments, Stripes, and many other ways, both
from the Heathen, and also from the professing Jews, who had been the Church
once. O what shall I say concerning the beauty and loveliness of that State! Ye
that would know it, O wait to feel it in that, which gives the true sense of
it.

But over this glorious State, came a dark, thick, corrupt night, wherein the
Kernel was lost, and the Shell defaced; wherein the House, which had been swept
and garnished, became again recovered and possessed by the wicked spirit. And
how great has this darkness been! O what a kind of Church has appeared in the
World, wherein the spirit of Enmity has dwelt and acted in men, under the Name
of Christianity! So that instead of loving and seeking the good of Enemies,
they are ready to rend and tear one another for every little difference, and
will be Lords over men's Faith, requiring men to Practice things in Religeon,
before the Spirit of the Lord teaches them so to do, which the Apostles did
not. For though they had from God the express knowledge of what was Truth, and
could certainly instruct and build men up therein; yet they were not Lords over
men's Faith; but if men were otherwise minded then according to what they knew
and taught, they could wait and bear with them, bidding them walk so far as
they had attained, and God in his due time would reveal the rest also. O that
men were come to this Spirit again! Then they would be Christians indeed, and
then they might be known to be Christ's Disciples, by their loving the Brethren
and fellow-Disciples. But without this love, men's Religion is but as a tinkling
Cimbal, making a noise and sound of somewhat, but not having the true Nature or
Virtue of Religion in it.

Now will it not be a glorious Day, when the Spirit of the Lord cleanses away
this thick darkness, and causes the Light of his pure Truth to arise and
appear again? Why there is such a Day to be, wherein the true Church (which was
reproached and driven into the Wilderness) is to come out of the Wilderness
again, and her Witnesses stand on their feet again, and her Seed to spring up
in the Power of Life, following the Lamb, who marches on fighting with the
Sword of the Spirit (the words of his mouth) conquering and to conqeur thereby
the corrupted Antichristian World, even as he did at first the corrupt
Heathenish World. The Lord will purify his Temple, and cleanse the World, by
the Plagues of his Angels which he has prepared, making way for the beauty of
his Truth, and the Church of his gathering; wherein he will bring forth his
Righteousness, wherein his Power shall appear, wherein his Presence shall be
made manifest, wherein that which shined before in the Primitive Church, shall
shine again in this new-reared Building of his, insomuch as men shall be forced
to say, This is the Church of Christ indeed, God is here of a truth; This is
the Gosple-Jerusalem indeed, which is built upon the holy Hill of Sion, in
which Innocence, Righteousness, Truth, Love, Sweetness, Peaceablenesse, and
the gentle Nature and Spirit of the Lamb lives and reigns; and the Lord bless
thee, O Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness.

Now of a truth this Work is begun. The times of refreshment are come from the
Presence of the Lord. The Lord has heard from Heaven, pitiying the cries of
his Seed, and has visited their Souls, causing the Light of Life (even the
pure Light of the everlasting Covenant) to shine upon their Tabernacles. But
whoever would know these things, and partake of them, must come in at the Door,
by the Guidance of the Spirit, through the Light which is with him. And he that
would enjoy the full Light (even the shinings forth of the Sun at noon day)
must begin with its glimmerings, even that in the heart, which discovers and
draws out of the corrupt state of the World, toward the Father. O hear and
live. Do not dispute about it, but wait to feel it; upon the feeling of it,
despising the shame, and taking up, and enduring the Cross, and so bearing the
reproach and sufferings of Christ in thy Age and Generation. And as thou
obeyest, thou shall know of its Doctrine; but out of the pure Faith and
Obedience, there is no true, sound, deep-rooted knowledge; but all of that kind
must be parted with, for the knowledge which is of the Faith, and which is made
manifest and increased in the Obedience; which knowledge is of a far more
excellent Kind and Nature. Then that which thou art to part with for it. The
Lord guide thy Mind, and stretch forth his Hand to help thee, who from the
least touch of a true Nature and Spirit, desire after the pure Truth and Way
of eternal Life. Amen.

This Testimony (here held forth) is faithful and true, and (I know) the
Witness of God in many hearts will answer to it; and happy is he that makes a
right use of it. For, so doing, his Soul will not fall short of the pure living
Truth, nor set up any thing else for Truth which is not.

Isaac Penington.

THE END.

