A PLAIN REPRESENTATION OF Transubstantiation, As it is received in the Church
of Rome: WITH The Sandy FOUNDATIONS it is built upon, and the ARGUMENTS that do
clearly evert and overturn it.

By a Country Divine.

Transubstantiation (or the Change of the Substance of Bread and Wine in the
Supper of the Lord) cannot be proved by Holy Writ: But it is repugnant to the
plain Words of Scripture, overthrows the Nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many Superstitions.

Articles of the Church of England, Art. 28. Nullum hic errori velum, nullus
ignorantiae pratextus, neque enim vel vereum Dei praeit, vel ratio, vel sensus,
and errori ac ignorantiae tum demum aliquid datur, ubi obscuritas reperitur
sive ex. part objecti, sive ex part medii, aut modi illud cognoscendi, non
veto ubi vitium in subjecto tantum, idque voluntarium ac affectatum. Spanhem.
^ub. Evang. Part. 2. Dub. 50. p. 450. --.

London, Printed for J. Johnson, 1687.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
It Is an odd Story that some tell us concerning the Py'd Piper of Halberstadt,
who being denied the Reward he was promised, for drowning those Rats wherewith
they were much troubled; Tuned his Pipes a second Time, and draw all the
Children in the Town after him till he had brought them to a Hill, which
opening it self to receive them, presently closed upon them again. Many of the
Romish Communion have of late been blowing their Pipes in our Streets, and it is
not much to be admired at, that some Vermin, Men of flagitious Lives, and some
Children in Understanding have been tripping and dancing after them, to the
mighty danger, if not to the eternal ruin, of their Souls.

Our Enemies have been busily sowing their Tares, and no doubt had the good Men
but slept, they would have reaped a much larger Harvest. But the Orthodox and
Learned Clergy of our City have stood upon their Watch, have behaved themselves
faithfully toward God and the Souls of Men; have so convincingly answered and
confuted every Book that has crawled out against our Religion, that if Men can
but read and understand, they have sufficient Antidotes against this Poison
laid before them.

The Truth of it is, all the Arguments our Adversaries have produced, are but
like the Gibeonites old Shoes, only they have new vampt them up again: The same
Soldiers that have been so often beaten out of the Field, only they have new
Clothed 'em. What Success Dragooning has had in our Neighboring Kingdom, is
well known; but certainly by their arguing their Priests are like to prevail
but little among Us. Indeed it is an extravagant and most unaccountable thing,
that they should undertake to persuade any to go over to their Communion. For
they cannot offer at this without pretending to give Men some good Reason for
so doing. And yet no Man can forsake our Church, and enter into theirs, but he
must renounce his Reason in order to it. For what can be more contradictory to
the Reason, as well as the Senses of all Mankind, than that monstrous Doctrine
of Transubstantiation; the Subject of this following Discourse.

It Is an Argument indeed that has been frequently treated upon both formerly
and of late, in our own Language as well as in others, to very good Purpose.
This Dagon, which some are so zealously setting up again, has been often
beaten down; I hope it will not be thought a needless thing to give it a Few
Blows more, utterly to dash the Stump of this Idol in pieces. That is the end
of publishing the following Treatise; the Author whereof I need not tell thee
is a Learned Man; the Work it self, if thou peruse it, will prove that. All
that I shall say concerning him is this, that his Modesty is proportionable to
his Learning, he lives retired far from the Noise of the World; and that he
cannot be a greater Stranger to thee, than he is to this present publishing of
his Writings on this Subject. The Manuscript was put into my Hands by a Friend
of his, and upon the perusal of it, judging it to be an excellent Piece, I was
resolved that it should not continue in the same Retiredness and Obscurity as
its Author does. And in a time of common Danger, when we are invaded by a
formidable Enemy, I see no reason why Books as well as Men should not be
pressed and forced into the Field. I thought it also very hard that our learned
Clergy here in the City should always be upon Duty, and not he a little
relieved by some Forces drawn out of the Country: However I was not willing to
go on my own Head, but communicated these Papers to a very learned Person in
this City, who encouraged me to pursue my Design by his high Approbation of it.

And indeed tho so many have bater'd this most absurd Article of the Romish
Faith, yet it can hardly be too ill used. It Is a Point that has cost many
thousand Lives, and therefore it deserves no Mercy nor Pity, seeing it has
been the occasion of so much Bloodshed and Cruelty. Nay not only have
Multitudes suffered a Temporal Death, because they could not swallow this
extravagant Doctrine; but Holy Church has also sentenced them to Eternal
Damnation for it. And yet as much pains as they take to cram it down our
Throats, and to impose the Belief of it upon us with such severe Methods, and
such terrible Threatenings, I am persuaded they would be glad to be fairly rid
of it themselves, if they did but know how* (But this Brat they cannot drop,
because of their pretense to Infallibility) For there is no one Doctrine of
their whole Faith equally absurd and ridiculous with this in the Apprehensions
of all Men, none which they are so hard put to to defend, and none that more
exposes them to the Scorn and Contempt of the Infidel Nations, as well as that
of the Reformed Churches. The severe Censure of Avertoes, Perr. de l' Euch. l.
3. c. 29.

Sr. Ed. Sands Europae Specul. p. 230. Edit. 1629.

Orat. 3. c. 25. p. 18, 19. cited by Daill^ against. Adam and Cottiby. pt. 1.
p. 116.


related by Cardinal Perron himself on the Credit of Sarga a Jesuit, is well
known, that he never found a worse or a more sottish Sect than that of the
Christians, who eat the God whom they worship. This is a thing that is matter
of great Scandal to the Jews. A thing (as one says that had reason enough to
know) which they can at no hand digest. And Joseph Albon a Spanish Jew, in his
Book entitled, Ikkarim, sets forth the many Absurdities of it, and in the
close of all says, they are things as can neither be comprehended by the Mind,
nor expressed with the Tongue, nor endured by the Ear; they are contrary to the
Understanding and Sense, and consequently cannot be believed, nor have any room
among the Articles of Faith.

Nor do the Mahometans come behind the Jews in this matter: of which we have a
famous Instance in Monsieur de la Boulaye le Goux in the Account of his
Voyages, pt. 1. c. 10. p. 21.
that the Mohammedan Soldiers quarrelling with some of his Retinue, among other
reproachful Words, they called them GOD-EATERS.

And the Truth of it is, it is so easy to lay this in the Dish of those that
bold this Tenet, that the Silence of all the ancient Enemies of the Christian
Religion, Celsus, Porphyry, Lucian etc. who never upbraided the Christians with
it, is a plain Demonstration that Transubstantiation was not believed by any in
their days. Rigalt. Not. ad Tertull. l. 2. ad uxor. p. 189. Not. 7.
And therefore Rigaltius is astonished as it (and well he might) that among so
many Villainies, and so many Injuries, with which the Christians were loaded,
even so far as to accuse them of Impiety, under this pretense that they had no
Altars, and offered no Sacrifices; and among so many Apostacles of those that
revolted from their Religion, there was not any one Man that accused them of
eating the Flesh and drinking the Blood of their God.

And indeed it is impossible but that those sharp Wits, that did so
industriously carp at any thing that seemed strange and odd to them in the
Christian Religion, and the Professors of it, and either invented or spread
most malicous Calumnies against them; I say it is impossible but that they
should have flung this in their Teeth, if any such thing had been believed by
them. For this is a more extravagant Folly than any with which the Fathers did,
or could upbraid the most sottish among all the Heathens. De Not. Deorum l. 3.
Can you think any Man to be so mad, said Cicero, as to believe that which he
eats to be God? No, the very Egyptians themselves, tho the grossest of
Idolaters in ancient Times, were not so destitute of all Sense or Reason. They
were so sottish indeed is to worship Sheep, Oxen, yea and Onions; but we never
read that they did eat those things they adored. This is a singular thing
peculiar to those that style themselves Roman Catholics.

And as this Doctrine is matter of Sport to those that are without, so it is of
no small Torture and Vexation to them that are within the Roman Church. It not
only hinders Men from entering into their Communion, but shakes and staggers
many that from their very Infancy have been trained up in it, notwithstanding
the mighty Prejudices of their Education. This was a means of opening the Eyes
of our Contry-Man Gage, who was formerly a Popish Priest. Gage's Survey of West
Indies. the two last Pages.
The Story, as he himself has told it, in the First Edition of his Survey of
the West Indies (for it is left out in the Second) is to this Purpose. Being at
a certain time Officiating at the Altar, he chanced to espy a bold and profane
Mouse, that it seems had sallied out and seized on the little God Almighty,
which he carried off before his Face; for he ran away with this Savior of
theirs in his Mouth, as once their pretended St. Christopher lugged him on his
Back. The sight of this made him very thoughtful, and uneasy in his Mind; and
indeed well he might, to think he had worshipped a God that was not strong
enough to secure himself from a little Mouse. In short, hereupon he began to
question the Truth of that Faith he had been trained up in, and so long
professed, and could have no Peace in his own Mind till he had renounced
Popery, and embraced the Protestant Religion. And I am persuaded there are not
a few, who tho they do not come over to us as he did, but still continue in the
external Communion of the Roman Church, yet in their Hearts they do not, and
for their Lives they cannot believe Transubstantiation. I know indeed it is hard
to determine what Extravagancies, both in Opinion and Practice, Men may proceed
to, that are once abandoned and given up by God to believe strong Delusions.
When God has blinded Men, they swallow not only Flies but Camels too. And
Education and Temporal Advantages have a mighty influence on Men's
Understandings. And therefore I doubt not but many Papists do really believe
this Doctrine. Yet however many in that Communion, tho they wink hard, cannot
choose but see the Nakedness of it so as to be ashamed. Answer to Walker's
Adoration of the Euch. Pref. p. 11.
A late Author not only asserts, but proves that Cardinal Perron himself, a
little before his Death, freely confessed to some of his Friends, That he
thought the Doctrine to be MONSTROUS; that he had done his endeavor to COLOR
it OVER the best he could in his Books, but that in short he had undertaken an
ILL CAUSE, and which was not TO BE MAINTAINED.

Remarkable also is the Story which the same Author tells us, That the Learned
Archbishop Usher, Page 26.
having been so happy as to convert several Roman Priests from their Errors;
and enquiring diligently of them, what they who said Mass every Day, and were
not obliged to confess Venial Sins, could have to trouble their Confessors so
continually withal? ingenuously acknowledged to him, that the chiefest part of
their constant Confession was their Infidelity as to the Point of
Transubstantiation, and for which, as was most fit, they mutually quitted and
absolved one another.

To this I shall add one thing more, which I do not find that any one of late
has taken notice of; and it is out of the same Reverend and most Learned
Archbishop Usher, in his Sermon Preached before the King's Majesty, Anno 1624.
of the Universality of the Church of Christ, and lately Reprinted at the end
of his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. In that Sermon says he, Page 19.
I can testify that when I have dealt with some of the Common People, that
would be accounted Members of the Roman Church, and demanded of them what they
thought of that which I knew to be the common Tenet of their Doctors in this
Point; they not only REJECTED IT WITH INDIGNATION, but wondered also that I
should imagine any of their side to be so FOOLISH as to give Credit to such a
SENSELESS THING.

But yet tho there are so many Infidels among them, Multitude being a Note of
the true Church, it seems they are resolved that they will not want for
Company: and therefore they would persuade us that the Brutes themselves are
many of them turned good Roman Catholics. Of this we have a good Account in a
small Book entitled the School of the Eucharist, a Book not printed a long
time since in a dark and ignorant Age, but so lately as the Year 1672, and
newly translated into English, wherein are contained many mavelous Stories of
the mighty Devotions of Beasts, Birds, Insects, Bees, Spiders, Horses, Dogs,
Asses, etc. toward the holy Sacrament of the Altar. Several famous
Philosophers indeed have thought that Reason was not peculiar to Men, but that
the Brutes have had a competent share of it: And therefore they have maintained
that 'twas Religion that made the Difference between us and them, of which they
never perceived the least Footsteps in them. But if these rare Stories may be
believed, that Opinion of theirs is utterly overthrown. And the Truth of it is,
I could heartily wish that the Popish Missionaries would give over their
Attempts on us, and lay out their pains on the Conversion of these Creatures,
and endeavor to propagate their Faith among them. An Employment which they
need not disdain, seeing so many of their Betters have submitted to it. St.
Anthony among others, preaching to little or no purpose to some stubborn
Heretics, that would not receive his Message, turns away from them, Specul.
Exem. Did. 7. Ex. 34.
and by Divine Inspiration goes to the Seaside, and calls to the Fishes, Ye
Fish of the Sea and River, hear the Word of the Lord, since the Heretics
despise it. And 'twas a very serious Sermon that he preached to them; and to
very good Purpose, for some of these Fishes his Auditors opened their Mouths
and spoke, and the rest of them bowed their Heads. Indeed such Creatures as
these are the only ones for them to exercise their Talent upon. For it is hardly
to be conceived that they should have any reasonable Grounds to hope they shall
ever make Rational Creatures Proselytes to such a Bundle of Nonsensical
Doctrines as their Church has embraced; and among the rest this of
Transubstantiation, which contains many Monsters in the Belly of it, which is
ripped up, and they sufficiently exposed to the Reader's view in the following
Discourse. Wherein if any Critical Eye should chance to espy some small
Mistakes (tho I do not know of any in it) yet it being published without the
Author's Consent, it is possible a few have crept in, I hope the Reader will
easily pardon such Venial Faults; and kindly entertain this Stranger that comes
out of the Country, and appears publicly on no other Design but that of
promoting the Common Good.

MATTHEW. xxvi. 26. This is my Body.
THE Church of Rome has brought in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and
made it an Article of the Christian Faith, that all Persons in her Communion
are required to give their Assent unto, and receive as necessary to Salvation.
Yea it is an Article of the Romish Faith that they are most hot in, and have
now for some Centuries contended for with Fire and Sword, to the disturbing of
the Peace of Christendom, and shedding of Rivers of Christian Blood;
Anathematizing, Cursing, Damning, and (where their Arms are long enough)
Murdering and Butchering all, without difference, that refuse to give their
Assent unto it. And the owning of it (together with the Sacrifice of the Mass,
that is bottomed on it, and rises out of it) is the Mark of the Papal
Religion, and (...), or (...), i. e. Mark or Note of Distinction betwixt a
Papist and a Protestant. And therefore this was the particular and main Point,
that most of our Blessed Martyrs, in the Days of Queen Mary, were first called
to answer unto, and declare their Judgment about, and then burned at Stakes all
over the Nation, for denying of it, and bearing witness against it. And I wish,
that if ever the Romanists gain another like Opportunity, they do not take the
same Measures, proceed in the same Method, and make use of their old Argument,
Fire and Faggot, against whosoever shall not admit and embrace this Doctrine.
It is therefore the great Concern of all Protestants, who would not make
Shipwreck of their Faith, when it comes to a Fiery Trial, to make it their
Business to have their Minds rightly informed, and Judgments established in
this Matter, that so they may stand fast in the Faith.

Now these Words of our Savior, are the Foundation upon which they would build
this monstrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Of which they say,

1. That before the Act of Consecration, the Elements are true and proper Bread
and Wine.

2. That after the Consecration there remains no Substance of Bread, or Wine,
or any other Substance, but the Substance of Christ, God and Man: Or the very
Flesh and Blood of Christ, as he was born of the Virgin Mary, and did hang upon
the Cross. The Substance of the Bread (by the Strength and Efficacy of Christ's
mighty Word, spoken by the Priest) being converted into the Natural Body, and
the Substance of the Wine into the Natural Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,
under the Terms of Bread and Wine.

3. This Transmutation, Conversion, or turning of the Bread and Wine into the
Body and Blood of Christ, is that which they call Transubstantiation.

4. This Transubstantiation is made by the Priest pronouncing (with an
intention to consecrate) these five Words over the Bread, viz. Hoc est enim
Corpus meum, For this is my Body: Hereby this strange Change is made, yet so,
as the most Learned of them are not agreed among themselves about the Manner of
it; that is, whether the Substance of the Bread be turned into the Substance of
Christ's Body productive, so as the Body of Christ is made ex materia panis, as
one thing is made of another; or whether it be adductive, by a Recession of the
Substance of the Bread, and an Adduction or Succession of the Body of Christ
into the room of it, as one thing succeeds in the place of another, the first
being voided. Thomas is for the former, par. 3. p. 75. Art. 3. and Suarez and
Bellarmine are for this latter: which indeed is no Transubstantiation, but a
mere Succession. But leaving them to wrangle this out among themselves, (tho I
believe it is a Matter wherein they will never accord together) we shall
proceed to take a view of this new and amusing, or amazing Paradox.

Now that Transubstantiation is a most prodigious and monstrous Opinion, or
Fiction, will be very evident from these Three Particulars.

I. The Original and Rise of it. II. The Nature or Constitution of it. III. The
Products, Consequences, and Fruits of it.
I. Consider the Original and Rise of Transubstantiation, from what Root or
Fountain it is derived. And if Enquiry be made after the Birth and first
appearing of it in the World, it will appear that this monstrous Opinion crept
in, and came up by degrees in an Age of universal Darkness and Debauchery,
wherein an easy Entrance and Admittance was given not only to this, but also
unto a Deluge of many other corrupt Doctrines and Practices. It is confessed by
all that the 9th, 10th, and 11th Centuries were overspread with Ignorance and
Profaneness, insomuch that Baronius, Platina, Genebrard, Bellarmine and other
approved Writers of the Romish Church (Men we may be sure that would not say
the worst) make very sad Exclamations and Complaints. Baronius (ad An. 900)
has these Words, In the nine hundredth year of Christ, the third Indiction, a
new Age begins, which by reason of its Asperity and Barrenness of Good, is wont
to be called the Iron Age; from the Deformity of abounding Wickedness, the
Leaden; and from the Scarcity of Writers, the obscure Age. And ( ad An. 974) he
says, That the whole World was overspread with Darkness, as thick as that in
Egypt; and again ( ad An. 992) that at that time (as it was reported) there
were scarce any Learned Men at Rome. And abundance more to the same Purpose.
Platina calls the Popes of those days monstra and portenta hominum. Genebrard
(in Chron. of the 9th Century) calls it the unhappy Age, being barren of
ingenions and learned Men: and complains that the Popes were altogether fallen
from the Virtue of their Predecessors, and were rather Apostates than
Apostles. Bellarmine cries out, vide Seculum infelix! Behold the unhappy Age,
in which were not to be found any famous Writers, or Councils. Pope Sergius was
a Slave to all Vices, and a most wicked Man. Baronius ad An. 908. Several
succeeding Popes were of the Breed of this Sergius, and his famous Strumpet
Murazia, who had a great Hand in making and unmaking of Popes. John the 13th,
one of Murozia's Brats, made Deacons in his Stable among his Horses, and Boys
Bishops, drank a Health to the Devil, and was given to Sacrilege, Perjury and
Adultery; as Baleus, from Sylvester the 2d, An. 999, to Hildebrand or Gregory
the 7th inclusively ( An. 1075.) The Popes (says Benno) were all Negromancers.
This Gregory (or Lurva Diaboli, as Luther styled him) poisoned 6 or 7 Popes
before he could obtain the Chair: he threw the Sacrament into the Fire; and was
at last deposed for his intolerable Enormities. It were easy to prosecute this
to a great Length, and produce Multitudes of Instances out of their own
Authors, of the lamentable Ignorance and Wickedness both of Clergy and Laity in
those Ages. Now in this time when Darkness and Profaneness were grown over the
Face of the Church, and Churchmen minded nothing but the Advancement of their
Lusts and secular Interests, this deformed and misshapen Monster first appeared.
And Disputes arose about the real Presence, which some begun then to assert,
but were opposed by Bertram, Erigena, Rabanus, and others in the 9th Century,
and by Berengarius in the 11th. About the year 1170, Lombard begun to assert
that the Substance of the Bread was turned into the Body, and the Substance of
the Wine into the Blood of Christ. Sent. L. 4. did. 10. Lit. D. yet Distinct.
11 Lit. A. He confesses, that he was not able to define the Manner of it: But
having reckoned up several Opinions, he concludes, that there is no Substance
left but the Body and Blood of Christ; and therefore, Distinct, 12. Lit. A.
determines that the Accidents of the Bread and Wine exist sine Subjecto. After
Lombard this Subject became the great Apple of Contention among the Schoolmen,
who ventilated it to and fro by many Disputations, whereby it was kept alive,
till at last in the fourth Council of Lateran, under Innocent the 3d, An. 1215.
It was established as a Decree of the Sacred Council, and Point of Faith, That
the Body and Blood of Christ were truly contained under the kinds of Bread and
Wine, the Bread being transubstantiated into the Body, and the Wine into the
Blood of Christ. This Decree the Council of Trent, Sess. 13. Can. 2 has
confirmed with an Anathema, thundered out against all that deny
Transubstantiation.

And thus this Monster was brought forth, and came out in the Midnight of the
Church, when (upon the Matter) all Men were fast asleep.

II. The monstrousness of this Opinion will appear from the Consideration of
the Constitution and Nature of Transubstantiation. Look upon it in this
respect, and it will be found to be the most prodigious Monster that ever was
brought forth. A Monster that is constituted and compounded of many.

1. Gross and inextricable Absurdities. 2. Manifest Impossibilities and
Contradictions. 3. Open and abominable Impieties. 4. Horrible Blasphemies.
There is such a Colluvies, Cloaca, or Sink of all these meeting in
Transubstantiation, as never met together in any of the most absurd Opinions
that the Pagan World has been given up unto.

First, It is compounded of many gross Absurdities. Absurdities against Sense,
Reason, Faith, Scripture.

1. It goes against Sense. Sense when duly disposed, or rightly
circumstantiated (that is, when the Organ is sound and right, the Medium or
Mean fitly qualified, and the Object duly proportionated) is a competent Judge
of things that are the proper Objects of Sense. St. Luke therefore brings this
as the great Evidence and Proof of the Truth and Certainty of those things
which he communicated by Writing, unto the World, concerning our Savior's
Person, Doctrine and Miracles, Luke. 1.1, 2, 3. And St. John uses the same
Argument, 1 John 1.2, 3. Yea our Lord Jesus Christ himself, when he would
convince the Apostles (who thought he had been a Spirit, at his appearing to
them after his Resurrection) that it was he himself, sends them for Conviction
and Satisfaction to their own Senses, Luke 24.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Behold my
Hands and my Feet, that it is I my self: handle me, and see, for a Spirit has
not Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have. And Joh. 20.27. he uses the same
Argument to doubting Thomas. Reach hither thy Finger, and behold my Hands; and
reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side, and be not faithless, but
believing. Thus Sense is a competent Judge of matters of Sense. But now if we
receive Transubstantiation, we must renounce and go against, or clean cross to
all our Senses. For if we make our Senses (when best disposed) Judges in this
Case, and bring a Popish Host, or Wafer to this Bar, they will all, with one
accord, conclude that it is Bread, and not Flesh; Bread and nothing else. The
Eye, the Touch, the Taste, the Smell will all agree in this. Yea if Indians, or
Americans (who are perfectly unconcerned in these Matters, and know nothing of
our Differences) be called in to give their Vote in this Controversy, they will
without all Controversy forthwith determine against Transubstantiation: For it
is plainly contrary to the common Sense of all Mankind. He must have something
more than his five Wits about him, nay go quite out of all his Senses, that
finds another Substance and Body, than that of Bread, in a consecrated Wafer.
If it be said, But our Senses may be deceived, and represent things to us
otherwise than they are. I say, true, it may be so, when there is some
indisposition of the Organ, or Medium, or Object. But then if
Transubstantiation be true, and there be a deception in this Case, it must be
granted that the Senses of all Men are deceived; and that the Senses of all Men
are deceived not for once, or at some times, but constantly Day after Day, and
Year after Year. And that they are thus deceived when, and while they are in
every respect best disposed and fitted for performance of their proper Acts.
And further, that they are deceived after this manner, about a most sensible
Object, and in a matter wherein it is as hard to think how they should be thus
universally deceived, as in any one thing whatsoever, that is, the Object of
Sense. And now if this be once granted, it takes away and quite overthrows all
certainty of Sense, and consequently all certainty of Faith and Belief in the
main Points of Religion; as of our Savior's Person, Doctrine, Miracles,
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension: And so undermines the very Foundation, and
shakes the chief Pillars of Christianity.

2. It is against Reason. Reason goes beyond Sense, but this Transubstantiation
goes beyond Reason; and not only beyond Reason, but against Reason: And is
contrary to the broadest Light of Reason. For Transubstantiation.

(1.) Makes the Body of Christ to be in Heaven, on the Earth, and in Millions
of places of the Earth at one and the self-same Time. Non potest unum corpus
esse localiter in duobus locis, quia ita idem a seipso divideretur. Thom. part.
4. did. 44. q. 2. Art. 2.
Now this is against Reason. Reason dictates this, that all corporal Substances
or Bodies, are in loco circumscriptive circumscribed in a certain Place, and
cannot be in more than one, at one time. It is wholly inconsistent with Reason
to say, that the same Man is at London and at Rome, sitting in his House and
walking in his Fields, at the same time: And is it not as absurd to say, that
the Body of Christ is locally in Heaven, and yet at the same time really,
substantially and locally in a thousand thousand different and distinct places
of the Earth?

(2.) Gives a nutritive virtue unto mere Accidents. That the Elements received
in the Sacrament do nourish the Bodies of the Communicants, cannot be denied.
Now according to their Doctrine, there remains no Substance of Bread and Wine,
but the Accidents only, as length, breadth, thickness, whiteness, redness: And
therefore it must be these that refresh and nourish. But what can be more
absurd and irrational than such a Fancy? Can a Body receive nourishment from
Length, and Color, and other bare Accidents? This is above Reason Yet if
Transubstantiation be true, this (whatever Reason may suggest to the contrary)
is most true. The Monk Amonius (lib. 5. de gestu Franc. cap. 29.) reports that
Ludovicus Pius received nothing but the Eucharist for 40 Days together. And
other Authors among them have reported, that they have had some Holy Men who
would feed upon nothing but the Eucharist; and so (according to their Opinion)
lived on mere Accidents: And thus all the Romanists may live on bare Accidents.
For (as Tolet de instruct. Sacerd. l. 2. c. 25.) a Priest may transubstantiate
at once a whole Pantrey of Bread, and a whole Cellar of Wine.

(3.) Sets up the Accidents of Bread, as Color, Figure, Smell, Taste, without
any Subject or Body in which they subsist. They affirm that the Substance of
the Bread and Wine is totally avoided, yet confess that the Accidents of the
Bread and Wine remain, such as Whiteness, Redness, Moisture. Now where, or in
what Subject do these Accidents subsist? In the Elements: This cannot be, for
the Elements are quite annihilated, or voided at least. Do they exist in the
Body of Christ? By no means, this they all deny: Where then? Why, certainly no
where. Here is color, and nihil coloratum, sapor, and nihil saporatum,
quantitus, and nihil quantum, qualitas, and nihil quale. Whiteness, and nothing
white, Savor, and nothing that savoureth, Length, and nothing long, Breadth,
and nothing broad. Now this is such Divinity as crosses Reason, and offers
violence to Nature. For accidens est ens in alio. Accedentis esse, est in esse,
i. e. esse in subjecto. The very Being of an Accident consists in its
existing in a Substance or Subject; and it can be no longer than its Subject is
in being.

(4.) Makes that which is plain Bread to be no Bread. This again puts Reason to
a Nonplus, to conceive how a Wafer, that has the form of Bread, the quantity
of Bread, the whiteness of Bread, the smell of Bread, and the taste of Bread,
should yet be no Bread; but very Flesh, and a whole Human Body. This amuseth
Reason, and is so contrary to it, that every Christian who will but make use of
his Reason must say, as Thomas Spurdance the Martyr, when the Chancellor of
Norwich asked him, Do thou not believe that after the Words of Consecration
in the Sacrament of the Altar, there is the same Body of Christ as was born of
the Virgin Mary? No, said Spurdance, for that Body consisted of Flesh, Blood,
and Bones; and here is no such thing.

Thus Transubstantiation is against Reason, and brings in such things to be
received, as no Man can receive without doing open violence to his Reason.

3. It is against Faith. As Reason goes beyond Sense, so Faith goes beyond
Reason, and sees farther than Reason can reach when most elevated. But
Transubstantiation outgoes them all, Sense cannot reach it, Reason cannot
overtake it, Faith cannot fathom it. It imposes things upon the Belief of Men,
that are not only very hard to be believed, but things that are wholly
incredible, past Credit or Belief. It is altogether incredible,

(1.) That a Priest can make a Body that was made and existent long before he
himself had any Being. Can make the Body of Christ now in a Wafer, which was
made more than sixteen hundred Years ago in the Womb of the Virgin. Can a
Father beget a Son that is already begotten and born? Can a Man that was born
at London 40, 50, or 60, Years since, be born to Day or to Morrow at Lancaster?
Who can believe this? For as one says, factum facere, and factum intectum
facere, are equally both incredible and impossible.

(2.) That our Savior had two Bodies, two contrary Bodies, and both these at
one and the same Time. Is not this incredible? Yet whosoever will believe
Transubstantiation, must believe this. Believe that when he instituted, and
celebrated his last Supper with the Disciples he had two Bodies.

1. One speaking, moving, acting in blessing, breaking, and giving the Bread;
another without motion or action.

2. One visible and palpable, another altogether invisible, and hidden under
the forms of Bread and Wine.

3. One mortal, weak, and ready to be crucified, another impassible, and
obnoxious to no Suffering.

4. One sitting at the Table among the Disciples, another at the same time in
the Mouths and Stomachs of the Disciples.

5. One Body breaking another Body, and dividing it among them; or rather one
giving another whole and entire Body to every one of them. Are not all these
hard things? Is it not past Belief, that Christ, whole Christ, should be eaten
by every one of them, and yet sit among them? That he should at the same
instant sit whole at the Table, and be in each of their Stomachs, and whole in
every one of them, whole in Peter, whole in John, whole in James, and so in the
rest? What may they not believe that can believe these things? Verily he must
first resolve to believe any thing, things past belief, who resolves to be a
Papist.

4. It is against Scripture, as well as Sense, Reason, and Faith. The Word of
God ((...)) is clearly against it, and affirms the Elements to be Bread and
Wine both before and after the Consecration. In the Institution it is expressly
said, that Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the
Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body; Mat. 26.26. Here that which he
took was Bread, that which he blessed was Bread, that which he brake was Bread,
that which he gave was Bread, and that he spoke of when he said, This is my
Body, was Bread; for by this he meant that which he then held in his Hands, and
when he spoke these Words, he held nothing but Bread in his Hands. And
therefore by this he meant that Bread, and consequently by This is my Body, he
meant this Bread is my Body; that is, a Sign of my Body. So also in the
Institution of the Cup, that which he calls his Blood, v. 28. he calls the
Fruit of the Vine, v. 29. Plainly declaring that it was not his proper Blood,
but Wine, as a Sign of his Blood, that he gave. The Apostle Paul repeating the
Institution, as he had received it of the Lord, calls it Bread four times
over, 1 Cor. 11.23, 26, 27, 28. and 1 Cor. 10.16. The Bread which we break, is
it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? and v. 17. We are all partakers of
that one Bread. So Acts 2.46. The Disciples brake Bread from House to House.
And Acts 20.7. The Disciples came together to break Bread. Now this, as
themselves confess, is meant of the Eucharist.

Moreover, that Transubstantiation is repugnant to the Scripture, is plain: for
if it were admitted, then it would follow, either, 1. That Christ is not
ascended to Heaven. Or, 2. That he descends daily from Heaven. Now both these
are contrary to express Articles of the Christian Faith, and plain Testimony of
the Scripture.

(1.) If we say, he ascended not; It is contrary to Mark 16.19. Luke 24.51.
Acts 1.9, 10. Acts 2.33. Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10. Col. 3.1. 1. Tim. 3.16. Heb. 4.14.
Heb. 8.1. Heb. 9.24. etc. And to his own express Declaration, John 16.28. I
leave the World, and go to the Father.

(2.) If we say, that he descends daily from Heaven; it is no less repugnant
to the Testimony of the Angels, Acts 1.10, 11. This same Jesus which is taken
up from you into Heaven, shall so come, in like manner as ye have seen him go
into Heaven, i. e. clearly, visibly, gloriously, as Mat. 24.30. and 25.31. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. And to the Testimony of the Apostle Peter, Acts 3.19, 20, 21. and
of our Savior himself, Mat. 26.11. Joh. 12.8. Me ye have not always. Upon
which Words, Augustine (Tract. in Joan. 50. Loquitur de presentia corporis. Nam
secundum Majestatem suam, secundum Providentiam, secundum ineffabilem and in
Visibilem Gratiam, impletur quod ab eo dictum est, Ecce, ego vobiscum sum usque
ad consummationem seculi. Secundum carnem vero quam verbum assumpsit, secundum
quod de virgin natus est, secundum id quod a Judaeis comprehensus est, quod
ligno crucifixus, quod de cruce depositus, quod Linteis involutus, quod in
Sepulchro conditus, quod in Resurrectione manifestatus: non semper habebitis me
vobiscum.
) has these Words, He speaks of his Corporal Presence. For in respect of his
Majesty, Providence, ineffable and invisible Grace, that which he said is
fulfilled. Lo I am with you always even unto the end of the World. But according
to the Flesh which was assumed by the Word, according to that which was born of
the Virgin, according to that which was apprehended by the Jews, which was
Crucified, which was taken down from the Cross, which was wrapped in Linen,
which was laid in the Sepulcher, which was showed in the Resurrection: Ye have
not me always with you. When Jeffrey Hurst of Shakerley, in Lancashire, was
brought before Justice Leland, he caused a Mass to be Sung, and bad Jeffrey
first go and see his Maker, and then he would talk with him. Jeffrey answered,
Sir, my Maker is in Heaven. Christians, the Body of Christ is in Heaven,
Transubstantiation, in contradiction to the Scripture, places it in the Earth.

This is the first; Transubstantiation is made up of many Absurdities, against
Sense, Reason, Faith, and Scripture.

Secondly, It is compounded of many manifest Impossibilities and
Contradictions. Transubstantiation is an impossible Paradox. It is impossible
that there should be any such thing.

1. It is impossible that one and the same Body should simul and semel all at
once, or at one time be both visible and invisible, divisible and indivisible,
one and many, in Heaven and upon the Earth, all here and all in a thousand
other places. All these are plain Impossibles; yet Transubstantiation carries
them all in its Womb.

2. It is impossible that Christ should eat Himself, his own Body. Now the
Papists confess that he ate and drank with the Disciples in the Sacrament,
whence it necessarily follows, granting Transubstantiation, that Christ did
eat Himself, and was all at once whole at the Table, whole in his own Hands,
whole in his own Mouth; whole within Himself, whole without Himself, devoured
by Himself and untouched. All these are apparent Contradictions, and of such a
nature, as nothing can be said that is more monstrous, or liker to expose
Christianity to more open Obliquy and Reproach. Yet I say, by this Doctrine
Christ ate Himself, sat at the Table, and was in his own Mouth, and in his own
Stomach. Oh Prodigious! The Body of Christ was in the Body of Christ. Others
have told us of Men-eaters, but never any but Papists of any Self-eaters, who
at once eat his whole Self.

3. It is impossible that the Body of Christ should be eaten overnight by the
Disciples, and yet be crucified the next Day. What! Could it be both eaten, and
not eaten? It brings to mind the Story of Alice Driver (Acts and Mon. Vol. 3.
p. 887.) She conferring with Dr. Gascoign, asked him, whether it was Christ's
Body that the Disciples did eat overnight? He answered, Yea. What Body was it
then (said she) that was Crucified the next Day? He replied, Christ's Body. How
could that be (said she) when his Disciples had eaten him over night? Except he
had two Bodies, as by your Argument he had, one they did eat overnight, and
another was Crucified the next Day. Such a Doctor, such Doctrine. This put her
Examiners to that Shame, that one looked on another, and had not another Word
to speak.

Thirdly, It is compounded of many abominable Impieties, even such as deserve
to be had in utter Detestation and Abomination among all them that name the
Name of Christ. It is execrable Impiety to say,

1. That the Son of God, and Savior of Man, and the Devil, both entered into
Judas together.

2. That the Body and Blood of Christ may kill and destroy the Bodies of Men.
Yet this supposed, viz. that Transubstantiation is true, it may be, yea has
been so: the Emperor Henry the 7th, was poisoned in the Host, and Pope Victor
the 3d was poisoned in the Chalice. Now they must grant that the Poison which
killed them, was either, 1. In the Elements, or in the bare Accidents, or in
the Body and Blood of Christ. The first they must flatly deny, if they will be
constant to their own Hypothesis; the second is grossly absurd; and therefore
they must grant the third, and that is horribly impious.

3. It is execrable Impiety to say, that the Body of Christ, 1. May be enclosed
in a Wafer. 2. May be devoured and eaten by wicked Men. 3. May be gnawed and
torn with the Teeth of Men. 4. May be mangled and cut in pieces with Swords or
Knives. 5. May be eaten by Mice and Rats, and other Vermin. 6. May grow moldy
and rot away. 7. May breed Worms and Maggots. 8. May be stolen, as Laban's
Gods, Genesis 31.30. and never found again. 9. May be thrown into the Mire, and
trodden under the Feet of Men and Beasts. 10. May be cast out into the Draught
or Jakes. 11. May be swept to the stinking Dunghill. All these are horrible to
be once named, yet, granting Transubstantiation, they may be done, are done,
and many of them cannot but be done almost every Day. If Transubstantiation be
true, then the Body of Christ is enclosed in a Wafer, eaten by wicked Men, may
be torn with Teeth, mangled with Swords, gnawed by Vermin etc. Whatsoever
enters in at the Mouth, goes into the Belly, and is cast out into the
Draught, Mat. 15.17. I shall shut up this with the Saying of Margery Baxter, to
one who told her that she believed, that the Sacrament of the Altar, after
Consecration was the very Body of Christ in form of Bread. Margery answered,
your Belief is naught: for if every such Sacrament were God, and the very Body
of Christ, there should be an infinite Number of Gods. Because that a thousand
Priests and more, do make a thousand such Gods, and afterward eat them every
day, and void them out again by their hinder parts, filthily stinking under the
Hedges, where you may find a great many such Gods, if you will seek for them.
Act. and Mon. 610.

Fourthly, It is compounded of many horrible Blasphemies. Transubstantiation is
a name and thing that is full of Blasphemy. For,

1. It overthrows the Humanity of Christ. Jesus Christ has not a true human
Body, if it want a human Shape, the Figure, Quantity, and essential Properties
of a Body. Now a Body that is invisible, impalpable, without Extention or
Quantity, Parts or Members situated apart in their places, due distance of
Parts, just Dimensions, Place or Room taken up by it, wants the Figure and
essential Properties of a Body, and is (...). And such a Body is Christ's Body
made by Transubstantiation. It is true, they are not agreed in what manner the
Body of Christ is in the Host. Some will have it to be there absque
magnitudine, without quantity. Others will have it to be there in quantity, but
without Figure, Extension, or Distinction of Parts. See Bellar. de Euchar. l.
3. c. 5. We have a remarkable instance of this, in the dissension betwixt Dr.
Kenall, and Dr. Chadsey, as they were examining one Thomas Wood. Kenall having
asked Wood this question, Do thou not believe that after the Priest has
spoken these Words, This is my Body, that there remains no more Bread and Wine,
but the very Flesh and Blood of Christ, as he was born of the Virgin, and did
hang upon the Cross? Wood answered, I pray you, Master Chancellor, give me
leave to ask you another: When God commanded Ezekiel to shave off his Hair, and
to burn a third part in the Fire, and this, Ezekiel. 5.5.
says he, is Jerusalem; I pray you, was it Hair that was burnt, or Jerusalem?
Kenall answered, It did signify Jerusalem. Even so these Words of Christ are to
be understood, said Wood. Upon this Chadsey replied, I will prove that Christ
is here present under the Form of Bread and Wine, but not in quantity and
quality. Yes, says Kenall, he is here present in quantity and quality. Chadsey
returned, he is here present under a Form, but not in quantity and quality. And
thus the one said Yes, the other said No: Till the Contention grew so hot, that
they foamed again, and Kenall departed in a great Rage. Whereupon Wood said,
Behold, good People, they would have us to believe that which they do not
believe themselves, nor can agree upon. Yet tho they cannot agree in what
Manner the Body of Christ is present in the Sacrament, they are thus far at
one, viz. That the Body of Christ is enclosed in the Wafer, and not only so,
but that the Body of Christ is whole and entire in every Crum and Point of the
Wafer, and Drop of the Wine: And whole and entire, as many times as there are
Crumbs and Drops in the Bread and Wine. Now this must necessarily destroy his
Humanity. For a Body in all Points, like unto ours (Sin only excepted) as our
Savior's was. ( Heb 2.17.) I say, a Body of such Dimensions cannot be in so
small a room as a little thin Wafer, and so often over also, as there are
smallest Points in that Wafer: But it must be without Figure, distinct Parts,
Extension, etc. A Body without bigness, long without length, broad without
breadth, thick without thickness. A Body with two Eyes, two Hands, two Feet,
all in one self-same Point.

2. It turns the Body of Christ into a Monster or misshapen Thing; into the
Figure and Form of a round Cake, that has neither Shape nor any Part of a
human Body. If a Woman should bring forth a round Cake of Bread, when she is in
Travail, instead of a Manchild of right Shape, all the Country would presently
ring of it, as a very strange and monstrous Birth: and is it not much more
monstrous to hear this of the Body of our blessed Lord? What Christian Ear can
endure such Blasphemy?

3. It investeth Man with a Power to make God, and the Creature with a Power to
create his Creator. This every silly and filthy massing Priest pretends to do
each day, viz. make Jesus Christ. Hence proceeds their Manner of speaking. He
that created me, has given me Power to create him; and he that created me
without my Help, is created by me. And so of lifting up God, when the Priest
lifts up the Host, and going to see their Creator when they go to Mass, and to
receive their Creator, when they are to receive at Easter, and so also the
Priest carries it to the Sick with these Words, Behold, my Friend, God thy
Creator, whom I have brought unto thee. Thus they ascribe a Power to Man to
make God. And Biel sets every Priest, in this respect, Virgo Maria, and si
in gratiae plenitudinae creaturas supergrediatur universas, Hierarchis tamen
cedit Ecclesiae in commissi mysterii executione. Illa nempe prolatis octo
verbulis, Ecce Ancilla Domini, fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum, semel concepit
Dei filium and Mundi Redemptorem. Isti a Domino consecrati quinque verbis
contextam consecrationis formam, cum debita intention proferentes eundem Dei
Virginisque filium invocant quotidie corporaliter in sacrificium and criminum
purgationem. Biel Lect. 4. in Can. Missae.
above the Blessed Virgin. She conceived and bare Christ but once, but a Priest
can make him as often as he will. But let those Wretches go on in their
God-making as long as they will, let us say of this breaden God, as Katharine
Hut, Martyr, to Bonner, I deny it to be God, because it is a dumb God, and made
with Men's Hands.

4. It carries this Blasphemy also in it; that as a Priest can make God, so he
can make God of a Piece of Bread; of that, which was but a little before
growing in the Field, cut by the Reapers, threshed out with a threshing
Instrument, ground in the Mill, kneaded and made by the Baker, and baken in the
Oven. Fit Cibus, ex Pane Caro, Deus ex Elemento. What can be more monstrous
than this? The Athemans sentenced Anaxagoras to Death, for affirming, that the
Sun was nothing else but a fiery Stone: those Idolaters counting it a great
Blasphemy, to make their God a Stone: and shall we consent to them, who would
make our God a Piece of Bread? I shall say to you, as the holy Martyr, John
Noyes, to the People, when he was at the Stake, Good People, they tell you,
that they can make a God of a piece of Bread, but believe them not. When the
Chancellor of Norwich asked Cicely Ormes, what it was that the Priest held up
over his Head, she said, Bread: and if you would make it any better, it is
worse.

I mention the Sayings of our English Martyrs, and I do profess that I mention
them with great Content, and esteem them worthy to be graven with an Iron Pen
and Lead, in the Rock for ever. Being the Sayings of those (more than
Conquerours) who sealed the Truth with their dearest Blood; and by it, they
being dead, yet speak; every drop of their Blood preaching this Truth to us,
which they sacrificed it in the Defense of, dying not only with invincible
Courage and Constancy, but also with an Exuberancy of Joy and Comfort;
professing that if they had a hundred Lives, they should all go in this Cause.

5. Yet it is big with another Blasphemy, which is worse, if there can be a
worse. And that is, that Man may eat his Maker, the Creature his Creator, and a
People may devour their God. This is their constant Practice, first they lift
up the Host, next they adore it as God, and then forthwith eat it up. But
Cicero could say, Quem tam amentem esse putas, who do thou think is so mad
and beside himself, as to believe that to be a God that he eats? Surely it is
no less than amazing Madness in any to believe that that they eat, can be a
God: but it is something worse than Folly and Madness, for any to eat that
which they believe is their God. When Pharaoh, King of Egypt, gave way that the
Hebrews should sacrifice to their God in the Land, Moses returned this Answer,
It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the Abomination of the
Egyptians to the Lord our God; Lo, shall we sacrifice the Abomination of the
Egytians before their Eyes, and will they not stone us? Exodus 8.26. that is to
say, if we should sacrifice those Beasts to the Lord our God before the Eyes of
the Egyptians, which they do worship, and give Divine Honor unto; (animalia
quae abominando cultu colunt, and quae abominantur occidi) they would be so
enraged with this Fact, as they would certainly stone us: Will they not stone
us? doubtless they will. They will never abide to see their Gods sacrificed.
But tho the Egyptians would not have born this, yet the Papists can, yea
instead of stoning others, they daily sacrifice their God with their own Hands,
eat him when they have done, and sacrifice those in Flames, that will not do as
they do.

6. Once more; it is a Doctrine that puts God into the Power, and makes him
subject to the Will and Pleasure of every sorry Priest. Who can, 1. Make God
when he will. 2. Carry him whither he will, 3. Keep him where he will, in his
Pocket, or Purse, or Trunk, or Chest, or Box, or any where else. 4. Do with him
what he will, tread him under foot, cast him to Dogs or Hogs to be devoured by
them, throw him into Fire or Water, as Pope Gregory the 7th, who cast the
Sacrament, or Host, into the Fire, because it answered not his Demands
concerning his Success against the Emperor. Yea, he may pawn him for Security
of Debts: As Lewis the 9th of France, who being conquered and taken Captive by
the Turks in Egypt, was restored on Condition that he should pay a great
Ransom: Lewis for Security of the Money, pawned to the Turk his The Pyx is a Box
wherein the Host or Consecrated Wafer is put, and preserved.
Pyx and Host, and he was four Years before he could get his Ransom and redeem
his God, by which time, we may suppose, it was in a very pitiful Pickle.
Fuller's holy War ad An. 1249.

Thus Transubstantiation is a Doctrine that carries Blasphemies in Capital
Letters upon its Forehead.

We have now finished the second Particular, and from what is said may see,
that Transubstantiation is constituted of many Absurdities, Impossibilities,
Impieties, and Blasphemies.

III. The Abominableness of this Doctrine will appear from the Consideration of
the Consequents, Products, and Fruits of it. And certainly nothing but what is
monstrous, can come out of the Womb of such a Monster. It is the Mother of
Abominations, that has brought forth and bred up (among many others) these
Seven Monsters of Abomination and Impiety.

First, The real Presence in the Sacrament; or the Carnal and Corporal Presence
of Christ's Body and Blood as born of the Virgin: The Efficacy of his Body and
Blood is not all that is here presented to be received, as is confessed by the
true Protestant Churches of our Confession: But first and principally Christ
himself -- for there is a Participation, says the Apostle, of the Body and
Blood of Christ, who is exhibited, as really and truly present, not opposing
real to spiritual, but to chimerical or fantastical; nor intending his
presence in the Elements, as contained in them, but to the Faith of the
Receiver, who has Union with him, etc. Vines on the Sacrament, p. 118. We hold
that the Body and Blood of Christ is really, that is, truly exhibited and
present to the Faith of the Receiver; and we might express the real Presence,
as real is opposed to imaginary or chimerical, were it not for Caption and
Misunderstanding. None of ours deny the Body of Christ to be really, the
spiritually eaten by a Believer, etc. Id. 125.
We do positively and constantly assert and believe, that the Body and Blood of
Christ are present in the Sacrament in the following Sense, that is, that
Christ is present, not only in regard of,

1. His Divinity, or Divine Nature, which is in all Places, and indistantly
present with every Being.

2. His Spirit, by whose Operation the Benefits of Christ are applied to
Believers.

3. Our Commemoration of him, and showing forth of his Death in this Action: As
things that are past and absent, are made in a sort present to us by a Solemn
Commemoration.

4. Our Meditations and Contemplations of him in this Action: As Contemplation
brings the Object of it before the Eyes of the Mind, and presents it to them.

5. Our Affections that are (or should be) here fixed upon him. The Heart and
Affections fixing upon an Object, make it present, bring it to have a kind of
Being with them. The Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.7. tells the Philippians, that he
had them in his Heart: Tho in regard of his Personal Presence, he was at a
great distance from them, yet in regard of his dear Affection unto them, they
were in his very Heart. And so in this Ordinance Jesus Christ and the
Affections of true Christians do meet. I add, that,

6. The Body and Blood of Christ are present, yet not,

1st. Locally, per indistantium; as included in, or affixed to the Elements, as
the Wine is in the Cup. In this Sense they are as far distant from the
Elements, as the place where the Sacrament is celebrated is distant from
Heaven. Nor,

2dly. Substantially or Corporally. This follows on the former. The Signs are
with us, but the Substance is in Heaven.

But they are thus truly and really present.

(1.) Sacramentally and Symbolically, in the sacred Signs and Symbols of them.
His real Body is in Heaven, but we have his representative Body present with us
in the Sacrament. Here the corporal Signs of it are corporally present.

(2.) Vertually; in their Virtue and Efficacy, or by a Vertual Presence and an
Efficacious Influence; as the Body of the Sun is present not only upon the
Surface, but in the Bowels of the Earth, Deuteronomy. 33.14. Thus there is a true and
real Virtue, Power, and Efficacy of his Body and Blood really present: Yea the
Virtue and Efficacy of his Body and Blood (the benefits of his Passion) are no
less present, and communicated to Believers, than if he were locally present.

In action Coenae praesens est Dominus, non in Signo, nec pani participato,
sed cordi participantis, non exhibitione carnis vel animae suae, sed
exhibitione spiritus and gratiae, quae non ore excipiantur, sed fide, cujus est
id sibi praesens reddere quod apprehendit, ut oculus quod videt. Spanh. Dub.
Evang. part, 3. Dub. 143. p. 839. The Presence with or under the Elements is
one thing, and the presence to the Soul and Faith of a Believer is another.
Vines 125.
(3.) Spiritually; that is, not in respect of their Essence, but of our
perceiving and receiving of them, and their Virtue and Efficacy in nourishing
us. The Spirits or Souls of Believers by Faith only do receive them, and by
them, through the Efficacy of the Holy Spirit, are truly and really nourished
to Spiritual and Eternal Life. Thus the Body and Blood of Christ are really
present. Non pani and ori, sed fidei and cordi credentium. As August. Nos
Christum in Coelis sedentem manu contrecture non possumus, sed Christum fide
contingere possumus. Et haec praesentiae spiritualis corporis Christi est
verissima and realissima. Wend. Theol. 516.

And thus we assert and believe that the Body of Christ is truly and really
present in this threefold Sense; but we do utterly disown and detest this real
or corporal Presence of the Papists in or under the Signs, which is the
Daughter of Transubstantiation, a Daughter like her Mother, i. e. a very
Monster, repugnant to the nature of a Sacrament, the end of the Lord's Supper,
to the nature of a true Human Body, to the state of Christ's glorious Body, to
the Ascension of Christ to Heaven, and, as is before showed, to the express
Testimony of the Scriptures. And this is the Firstborn of Transubstantiation;
and I may say of it as the Martyr Elizabeth Folks said, who when asked, Whether
she believed the Presence of Christ's Body to be in the Sacrament substantially
and really or no? answered, That she believed it was a substantial Lie, and a
real Lie. Or, as Thomas Watts, Martyr, who being examined by Bishop Bonner
about the Sacrament of the Altar, told him, That he believed Christ's Body to
be in Heaven, and no where else; and that he would never believe that it was in
the Sacrament: And that the Mass was abominable Idolatry.

Secondly, The Multipresence, or manifold Presence of Christ's Body.

This is another Birth of Transubstantiation, and it is fruitful this way to a
Wonder, yea to a Miracle. It is recorded in Story as a thing that was very
monstrous and miraculous, that Margaret of Holland, Countess of Hausburg,
brought forth 364 Children at one Birth. Belg. Com. Wealth, p. 127. But this
was a sorry thing to be stranged at: Behold here Transubstantiation bringing
forth ten times so many Christ's on a Day, and Day after Day, without any
intermission for one Day, in a whole Year. By this miraculous power of
Transubstantiation, and the wonderful fecundity of her Womb, it comes to pass,

1. That Christ is not only in Heaven, but upon the Earth at the same time.

2. That he is not only both in Heaven and Earth, but also in many parts and
places of the Earth at the same time: In England, France, Spain, Italy,
America, and no Body knows in how many places at once. Yea,

3. That he is in several Parts and Corners of the same Church at once, in one
Man's Hand, in another Man's Mouth, in a third Man's Pyx and Pocket, etc. And
in their private Masses which are celebrated in several Corners of the same
Church, and the Body of Christ created in six or seven Corners at once. Nay,

4. That he is in several parts of the same Host at once. For they tell us in
plain English, and without any Circumlocution, that he is whole in every Crumb
and Point of the Host, and in every Drop of the Wine. And if so, who can tell,
how may Christ's there may be in the compass of one Host, or in the Wine of one
Flaggon?

This is the second, it produces a Multipresence, makes Christ to be Carnally,
Substantially and Corporally present in a thousand thousand places at one and
the same time.

Thirdly, The Oral, Carnal, Corporal, or Bodily eating of the Body of Christ,
whereby it enters in at the Mouth, and goes into the Belly. This is another
Monster like its Fellows that comes out of the Womb of Transubstantiation (...)
they that believe Transubstantiation, believe that they eat Christ's real Body,
Flesh, Blood, and Bones orally in the Sacrament of the Altar.

In this Sacrament,

1. We eat the Body of Christ Sacramentally, when we receive the sacred Sign of
his Body. This is manducatio signi. Et manducatio corporalis and oralis. This
may be done by Unbelievers and Wicked, who eat the Bread of the Lord.

2. We eat the Body of Christ Sacramentally and Spiritually, when we do not
only receive the sacred Sign by the Hand into our Mouths, but Christ also by
Faith into our Hearts. Thus true Believers eat him in this Sacrament, receiving
not only the Bread of the Lord orally, but the Bread which is the Lord
spiritually.

3. Besides that Sacramental eating only, proper to Unbelievers, and this
Sacramental and Spiritual eating, simul and conjunctim, jointly and together,
proper to Believers: There is a spiritual eating only out of the use of the
Sacrament. This is done as often as a Christian by Faith applies Christ, and
derives Spiritual Nourishment from him. Of this our Savior treats John 6. and
of this Augustine speaks, when he says, Vt quid puras dentem and ventrem? Creed,
and manducasti: credere enim in cum, hoc est panem vivum manducare.

But this Carnal, Corporal, Oral eating, introduced by the Papists, and growing
out of Transubstantiation, is,

(1.) Horribly impious and abominable. Turning Christians into Canibals,
Man-eaters, Savages, that for this are justly loathed and abhorred by Mankind.

(2.) Utterly impossible. How is it possible that Christ's glorious Body now
immortal and impassible in Heaven, should be eaten by poor sinful Mortals upon
Earth?

(3.) Wholly unprofitable. If it were possible, yet I would ask what profit or
benefit should we obtain by a Carnal and Capernaitical eating of his Flesh in
the Sacrament? The Papists confess, that it is a Spiritual Feast, a Feast for
the Soul, not for the Body. Con. Triden. Sess. 13. cap. 2. Now how can the Food
of the Soul be received by the Mouth of the Body? Or how can that which enters
by the Mouth, into my Stomach and Belly, nourish my Soul? This is a great
Mystery.

(4.) Grossly absurd. For, on this it will follow, that Christ did orally eat
his own Flesh and drink his own Blood, and died twice, once in the
Administration of the Supper, and again upon the Cross.

(5.) Plainly inconsistent with the Spiritual Manducation or eating of his Body
in the Sacrament. And,

(6.) Manifestly repugnant to the Scriptures.

Fourthly, The Sacrifice of the Mass, or Missal Oblation of a piece of Bread
(which they believe to be the true and proper Body of Christ, under the kind or
form of Bread) unto God the Father as a propitiatory and expiatory Sacrifice
both for the quick and dead. This is another Birth of the same Belly, or
Product of Transubstantiation. A blasphemous Sacrifice.

1. Directly contrary to the Scripture, Heb. 9.26, 28. and Chap. 10.10, 12, 14.

2. Highly opprobrious to the Person, Priesthood, and Sacrifice of Christ:
Evacuating the Sacrifice of his Death, overthrowing his perpetual Priesthood,
and putting his Person under a lower degree of Humiliation, than the lowest
that he condescended unto in his state of Humiliation. Then he took upon him
the forth of a Servant, was made in the likeness of Men, and was found in
fashion as a Man, Phil. 2^ 7, 8. But now he is put into the form of a Wafer,
the likeness of a piece of Bread, and is found every where, (upon their Altars,
in the Priests Hands, and Peoples Pockets) in fashion as a bit of Bread.

3. Intolerably injurious to Christians. As taking away the Lord's Table, or
driving the Lord's Supper out of the Church. For the Sacrifice of the Mass and
the Lord's Supper are diametrically opposite one to the other in many respects:
Ego medicus, tu aegrotus, ille minister, gratia Antidotum, vas Sacramentum.
So hereby Christian Congregations are quite deprived of this last and great
Ordinance of their dying Lord, which is a Mirror of the ineffable Love of God
and Christ, a visible Word, preaching Christ to the Eye, an Epitome of the
Gospel, the Seal of Christ's Testament; and as a sacred Dish, wherein the
Father exhibits Christ with all his Fullness unto Believers.

Fifthly, The Superstitious Reservation of the Host or Wafer; after
Consecration, omitting the distribution, receiving, and eating in remembrance
of Christ, Nihil habet rationem Sacramenti exrra usum divinitus insticutum.
it is reposited and kept to be carried about, and accommodated to other Uses,
contrary to the institution of Christ, example of the Apostles, practice of the
Primitive Church, and nature of the Sacrament. For a Sacrament out of the use
appointed by God, has not the nature of a Sacrament. This is another practice
of the same Descent and Race, and confirmed by the Council of Trent, Sess. 13.
Cap. 6.

Sixthly, The Theatrical Circumgestation, or carrying of the Host in
Procession: This came in at the same Door. Transubstantiation is the Mother of
Popish Processions, wherein the Host is carried about with great Solemnity, for
staying of Fires, laying of Tempests, driving away Devils, etc. Yea they have a
stated Annual Feast, Corporis Christi, i. e. Sacramenti Corporis Jesu Christi,
of the Body, or Sacrament of the Body of Jesus Christ, kept for the Honor of
the Sacrament. This Feast was instituted by Urban the 4th about the Year 1264,
to be observed the 5th Day after the Octaves of Whitsunday, upon the pretended
Revelation of one Eva (then an Anchoress, or rather the Bawd of Urban, as Baley
confesses) as is evident from the Bull of Urban to this Eva, whereby he
ordains this new Festivity to be observed devota Turba fidelium throughout the
World: It is celebrated with great Pomp and Ceremony. The Body of Christ (as
they call it) being placed in a rich Coffer, upon a costly Cushion, is carried
on a white Horse gorgeously attired and trapped, etc. through the Streets,
Lanes, and Highways to be beheld and adored by all People. Thomas Aquinas made
the Office for this Day, for which the Pope gave him a Silver Dove, whence it
is, that he is pictured with a Dove at his left Shoulder.

Seventhly, The Idolatrous Adoration of the Host. Transubstantiation has
brought an Idol into the Church: As the blessed Martyr Ann Askew said, The
Mass, as it is now used in our Days, I do say and believe it to be the most
abominable Idol that is in the World. And certainly it is so, for in the Mass a
God is set up to be adored,

1. That is made by a Creature, a filthy Priest. 2. That is made by a Creature
of a Creature, a piece of Bread. 3. That is made by a Creature of a Creature,
by a kind of magical muttering over of five Words.
This God made of Bread, and rising out of Transubstantiation, is the Idol set
up in the Mass, and the great Idol that is worshipped by Papists, with bowing
of Heads, bending of Knees, elevating of Hands, knocking Breasts, prostrating
of Bodies, burning of Tapers, ringing of Bells, playing on Instruments, etc.
And it is the most absurd, horrible, abominable, and monstrous Idol that is, or
ever was in the World. An Idol that makes the Christian Religion to become a
Scorn and Derision, a matter of greatest Detestation and Execration both to
Jews and Pagans. This, I say, is the great Scandal and Stumbling Block to both,
That Christians worship a God made of Bread, and eat their God. A Jew
conferring with Mr. Wiseheart, gave him three Reasons why the Jews could not be
persuaded to turn Christians. 1. The Uncharitableness of Christians toward the
Poor. 2. The Multitude of Images in the Temples of Christians. And, 3. The
Sacrament of the Altar. A piece of Bread (says he) baken on the Ashes, ye adore
and worship, and say, that it is your God. Acts and Mon. 1156. The Turks are no
less scandalized by it, who use to call the Roman Pope, Rex Morionum, the King
of Idiots, for this reason. And Averroes the Arabian Mohammedan cried out,
Quandoquidem Christiani manducant Deum quem adorant, sit Anima mea cum
Philosophis. Let my Lot be among the Philosophers rather than the Christians,
who eat that God which they adore. And upon the Fact of Lewis the 9th
(mentioned before) who pawned his Pyx and Host, the Egyptians wrought a Wafer
Cake and a Box in the Borders of their Tapestry, which may yet be seen in the
Tapestry which is brought out of Egypt. And this was done in perpetual Memory
of this thing, viz. Ridente Turca, nec dolente Judaeo.
That they had the Christian God in Pawn, and to make Christianity a
Deridiculum, a matter to be derided and laughed at all over the World. And so I
may allude to Hosea 7.16. This shall be, or is their dirision in the Land of
Egypt.

These are some of the Births that Transubstantiation has blessed the World
with.

And we have viewed it now in its Rise and Original, Nature and Constitution,
Fruits and Consequents. From which we may see, that it is not only a most
stupid and absurd Fiction, but also a most gross and monstrous Abomination.

In the next place we shall consider the chief Foundations that the Romanists
would build this Doctrine upon, or the principal Arguments they go about to
prove it by.

Now they endeavor to set it up and maintain it four Ways, I. By the
Scriptures. II. By the Fathers. III. By Councils, and IV. By Reasons.


First, The first sort of Arguments are taken from the Holy Scriptures. And so
they argue,

1. From these Words of our Savior, This is my Body. On these Words they
bottom Transubstantiation, and their chief strength lies in them. And the
whole strength of the Argument taken from them rests on this Basis or Bottom,
viz. That Christ said, This is my Body. Hence Bellarmine (lib. 3. de Euchar.
cap. 19.) argues thus, These Words, This is my Body, do necessarily infer,
either, a real mutation of the Bread, as Catholics hold: or a metaphorical, as
Calvenists: but can in no wise admit the Lutheran Sense. For our Lord took
Bread into his Hands, and blessed it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said of
it, This is my Body: Therefore he took Bread, he blessed Bread, he gave Bread,
and of Bread he said, This is my Body, either therefore by blessing he changed
it into his Body truly and properly, or improperly and figuratively, by adding
a new Signification; or he made no Change of it: if he changed it properly,
then he gave changed Bread, and of Bread truly changed, he said most truly,
This is my Body, that is, that which is contained under the form of Bread, is
not Bread now, but my Body? And this (says he) is that which the Catholics
hold, to prove that this is the true and genuine Sense of the Word: They say,

(1.) That our Savior spoke plainly, clearly, and properly, so as the
Disciples might understand him, and not figuratively, darkly, and obscurely.

(2.) That we must keep to the literal Sense, and proper signification of our
Savior's Words, and he said expressly, This is my Body.

In answer to this Argument I would say,

1st. That many of the Romanists themselves acknowledge that Transubstantiation
cannot be proved from these Words, both Cardinals and famous Schoolmen, as
Cardinal Cajetan, in 3 Thom. q. 75. Art. 1. Petrus de Aliaco. Card.
Cameracensis in 4 Sent. did. 11. q. 6. Art. 1. Card. Roffensis, or Fisher of
Rochester, contra Capt. Bab. Lutheri c. 10. and Perron the great Cardinal of
France professes, That he believed Transubstantiation not by virtue of any
necessary Consequence, or Reason, brought by their Doctors, but by the Words of
Christ as they are expounded by Tradition. And Schoolmen, as Biel Lec. 40. in
Can. Missae. Occam. lib. 4. sent. did. 11. q. 6. Vasquez Tom. 3. in 3. did.
180. Canus, loc. Commun. l. 3. c. 3. Cassand. in Consult. de Trans. p. 66.
Tannerus in compend. relat. Colloq. Ratisbon. par. 2. c. 6. p. 37. reckons up
Transubstantiation among the Points, Non est improbabile, non extare locum in
Scriptura tam expressum, ut sine Ecclesiae declaratione evidenter cogat
Transubstantiationem admittere.
quae in scriptura sola non continentur, nec ea sola evidentur deducuntur. Yea
Bellarmine after that he had wearied himself on this Argument, concludes it
with these Words, Albeit there were some obscurity or ambiguity in the Words of
our Lord, yet that is taken away by many Councils, and the Consent of the
Fathers. A Tacit Confession. But afterward, Chap. 23. he is more express, when
he says, It is not improbable that there is not any place extant in the
Scripture so express, as may, without the declaration of the Church, evidently
enforce the admission of Transubstantiation.

Thus their own greatest Divines have not been satisfied that this Scripture,
nor yet any other, does afford a Foundation for Transubstantiation.

2. The Popish Sense is not true. Our Savior by these Words, This is my Body,
did not change the Bread into his real Body.

(1.) The order of our Savior's Words does evince and evidence this, For he
took Bread, and had them Take and Eat, before he pronounced these Words, This
is my Body, which does plainly imply and import, that the Bread was his Body,
before the pronouncing of these Words, and not made or transubstantiated into
his Body, by the pronunciation of them.

(2.) The manner of our Savior's expressing himself in this matter does also
prove it. For that he directed his Speech to the Disciples and spoke these
Words to them of the Bread, is past all dispute: But common Sense will tell us,
That if our Savior had intended any such thing, as a Popish Consecration and
Transubstantiation by them, he would have directed his Speech to God the
Father, in this or the like Form, Let this Bread be my Body, or to the Bread,
saying, Be thou my Body, and not to the Disciples.

3. The Words of our Savior, This is my Body, are Words of Signification, not
of Transubstantiation, assertive and declarative, not operative and conversive
Words. I say, they are declarative Words of that which is, signifying what the
Bread is, before the Words be pronounced, and not imperative and effective of
that which is not, but shall be after they are pronounced, that is, they
signify, that the Bread is his Body before, and not only after they are
pronounced. The Romanists being pluched with this, do some of them (as is
showed by Du^and. Rut. l. 4. r. 41. n. 15. and Thom. par. 3. q. 78. Art. 1.)
make this Evasion, That Christ in the institution of this Sacrament used these
Words twice, first secretly to consecrare the Communion, and then openly to
instruct the Communicants, in this order, 1. He took the Bread, 2. He blessed
it, by saying, This is my Body, and then, 3. He brake it and gave it, saying,
Take, eat, This is my Body: first he used it to Consecrate, and then the second
time to show his Apostles the form of Consecration. This they say, but if we
will not be so kind as to take their bare word, they can never prove it.

4. There is as good ground to infer and conclude, that our Savior is really
and substantially changed into a Door, a Vine, a Rock, a Foundation, a Lamb, a
Lion, a Rose, a Star, a Sun, etc. from Joh. 10.7. Joh. 15.1. 1 Cor. 10.4. Isa.
28.16. Joh. 1.29. Revel. 5.5. Cant. 2.1. Rev. 22.16. Mal. 4.2. as there is to
infer Transubstantiation from these words.

5. If it were true (as it is not) that our Lord Jesus Christ did convert the
Bread into his Body, by pronouncing these words over it, yet how does it
follow, That the massing Priest does the same, by saying over the same words?
Till they can prove that their Priests have this Power from Christ lodged in
them, it may more rationally be inferred, that as often as they read these
words, Let there be Light, they make Light by reading of them, because God did
make it by them.

6. The true meaning of the words, This is my Body, is not then as the
Romanists say, this that was Bread, is now transubstantiated into my Body: For
when he said, This is my Body, by [This] he meant and understood that which he
then held in his Hands, now when he pronounced the word [This] he held nothing
but Bread in his Hands; and therefore by [This] he meant the Bread that he had
in his Hands; and gave and commanded them to eat, as before.

But the meaning is, This Bread I have taken, blessed, broken, and give you to
take and eat, is my Body, that is, a sacred Sign of my Body, my Body
Sacramentally and Symbolically, as much as to say, a Representation and
Memorial of my Body.

The Change is in Signification, not of Substance, in regard of Use and Office,
not of Nature and Being. It remains to be Bread as it was before, in Nature and
Substance, and is the Body of Christ in Signification and Representation, which
it was not before. Yet this is not a bare Significative Form, as this, The
Field is the World, Mat. 13.38. i. e. signifies the World: Or, as that Rev.
1.20. The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, and the seven
Candlesticks are the seven Churches; i. e. do signify the seven Angels and
Churches; and many such like. But it is a Sacramental Form, wherein together
with the Representation and Signification there, is a real Exhibition of the
Thing signified. The Bread is his Body, a representing, exhibiting and
conveying Sign of his Body, at once both representing and exhibiting, and
conveying Christ crucified, with the Benefits of his Cross and Passion, to the
Faith of a true Christian or Believer.

We come to the Reasons alleged for the Popish Sense.

First; They say, Christ spoke clearly and plainly, so as the Disciples might
easily understand his meaning.

1. And I say so also. It is not to be called once into question, whether our
Lord spoke plainly and apertly, so as the Disciples might understand him or no.

2. I say moreover, that it is as unquestionable, that the Disciples did both
readily and well understand our Lord's words, and also in the Sense that we
understand them, Cum istis verbis non sint turbati, planum est intellexisse ea
metonymice ex more Scripturae, praesertim cum paulo ante comedissent Agnum, qui
eodem sensu, Pascha, id est, transitus appellatur. Exodus 12.27. Bucan. Loc.
Com. Loc. 48. q. 50.
this can be no more doubted of by any that are not prepossessed with their own
Sense, than the other: For they were both acquainted with the Language of the
Scripture, wherein our Sense of these Words of our Savior is very ordinary and
frequent in many Propositions and Expressions; and they were also acquainted
with their own Language, that has not (as is observed) any proper word for
[signify] but makes use of [is] instead thereof, whence this Style and Sense
was usual and common among them, an ordinary form of Speech. Besides all this,
the Disciples never questioned their Lord and Master about the meaning of this
Proposition, whereas we find them often asking him of the meaning of Speeches
that he used, which were incomparably more easy for them to understand, than
the meaning of these words, if they had apprehended, or suspected them to carry
any thing of such a meaning in them, as the Papists put upon them. And
therefore I say again,

3. That this Reason they bring for their Sense of them, does quite destroy and
overthrow their Sense of them; if he spoke plainly, and so as the Disciples
might well understand his meaning, when he said, This is my Body, as they say
he did, then certainly he did not mean, that the Bread he had in his Hand was
transubstantiated and converted into his real Body, and that his very Body was
contained under that Form of Bread in his Hand: For verily this is a Sense not
easy to be understood, but must without all question have startled, amused,
and posed them all exceedingly to conceive or understand, how he could fit at
the Table with them, as they saw he did; and at the same time give to every one
of them his whole Body to be eaten, and his Blood to be drunk; yea to eat his
own Body, and drink his own Blood before their very Faces; this would have been
hard indeed to understand, yea, a matter passing all Understanding, that could
never have been beaten into their Brains.

Secondly; They say, the literal Sense, and proper Signification of our
Savior's Words must be kept, and he says of that he gave, This is my Body,
this is the (...), the very plain Letter of the Words, and from this literal
Sense we must not depart in this matter.

Answer.

2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21.
1. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God; and holy Men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost; inspiring not only the Matter, but the Words
and Phrases delivered by them; which Words and Phrases do always signify and
express his Mind unto us about the Matter so delivered in them.

2. When the proper and literal Signification of Words and Phrases in the holy
Scripture, does contain and carry in it manifest Absurdities, Contradictions,
or Impossibilities, that cannot be the Sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost in
those Words and Phrases; but they must necessarily be taken in an improper and
figmative Sense. Hence,

3. In interpreting of many Scripture-Words and Forms of Speech, we must depart
from the Letter of the Words, if we will understand and take them according to
the true and proper sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost in them. (And the Sense
of the Scripture is the Scripture). Thus we must understand Genesis 40.12. The
three Branches, are three Days. And Verse. 18. The three Baskets are three Days.
Genesis 41.26. The seven Kine are seven Years; and the seven Ears are seven Years.
Ezekiel. 37.11. These Bones are the whole House of Israel. Dan. 7.17. The four
Beasts are four Kings. Mat. 11.14. This is Elias. Mat. 13.38. The Field is the
World. John 10.9. I am the Door. Joh. 15.1. I am the true Vine. Rev. 1.20. The
seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches. Rev. 17. The seven Heads are seven
Mountains, etc. In all which we must depart from the literal Sense, and by the
Signs figuratively signifying, understand the Things signified and represented.
And so we must go from the literal Signification in all those places which
speak of God, as having a Mouth, Eyes, Ears, Hands, and other Parts of a Human
Body, etc.

4. In Sacramental Propositions, nothing is more frequent and familiar, than
improper and figurative Forms of Expression (qua signo tribuitur nomen rei
significata) wherein the Sign is called by the Name of the Thing signified;
this we may see in the Sacraments of both Testaments, in the Institution
whereof the Lord used improper Expressions. The Rock that followed the
Israelites, is called Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4.
now it was but a Figure of Christ.

In the Institution of Circumcision, Circumcision is called the Covenant, Genesis
17.10. which properly was but a Seal or Sign of the Covenant, Ver. 11. In the
Passover, the Lamb is called the Passover, Exodus 12.11. which properly was
only the Sign of the Lord's passing over the Houses of the Israelites. And so
in the Institution of this Sacrament, there are (as the Papists cannot deny)
several improper and figurative Terms; as when the Cup is put for the Wine in
the Cup, 1 Cor. 11.25. Drinking of the Cup, for drinking of the Wine, Mat.
26.27. The Cup which is the Seal of the New Testament, is called the New
Testament, Luke 22.20.

And so here, when he says of the Bread, This is my Body, he speaks of it not
in a proper and literal, but in a sacramental and figurative Sense, calling the
Sign by the Name of the Thing signified thereby, viz. his Body; and this is the
true Sense of the Words, this Bread is the Sign of my Body; which Sense
whosoever gainsays and rejects, to take the Popish Sense, brings all the
forenamed Absurdities, Contradictions, Impieties, and Blasphemies into our
Savior's Words: But certainly this could never be the meaning of our Lord in
them.

5. The Papists, who contend thus earnestly for the literal Signification, do
not keep (...), the plain Letter of our Lord's Words, for he says (...)
expressly, This is my Body; but they understand it as spoken of that which is
contained under the Accidents of Bread, and resolve this Proposition, This is
my Body, thus; This that is contained under the form of Bread, is my Body: Or
thus, Hoc complexum Accidentium Panis and Corporis mei, est Corpus meum; this
Compound of the Accidents of Bread and my Body, is my Body; a plain departure
from the Letter. Moreover, Christ meant his own true and natural Body,
signified by the Bread; they understand an invisible Body, without human Shape,
just Dimensions, distance of Parts, etc. hid under the Accidents of Bread.

6. The Words of our Savior are against Transubstantiation, and being taken in
their own Sense, do overturn it. For they say, 1. That they must be taken in
their proper Sense, uti sonant. 2. That thus taken, they do infer
Transubstantiation. But now take them so, and (according to their Principles)
they neither infer Transubstantiation, nor can there be any Transubstantiation:
For if there be any such a thing, it must be either,

1st, Before the Words are pronounced. Or,

2dly, Not until the Words are fully pronounced. Or,

3dly, Together with the Pronunciation, and while the Words are in pronouncing.
Or,

4thly, In an instant and uncertain moment of Time.

But it can be in none of these, and therefore there can be no
Transubstantiation. Scharp. Curs. Theol. de Coena, p. 1482.

Transubstantiation cannot be,

1st, Before the Pronunciation of the Words, This is my Body. For tho they
disagree (not a little) among themselves about the Form of Consecration, yet
they are most generally of this mind, That it is done by the Virtue of these
Words canted over the Bread; and that before they are used, it is very Bread.

2dly, Nor not until the Words are fully pronounced: For if so, this
Proposition would be false, This is my Body; and instead of saying, This is my
Body, it should be said, This shall be my Body: For est [is] in its proper
Sense signifies a thing then in being, and presupposes that to be whereof it
is spoken. So that if the Bread be not transubstantiated before the Priest have
said over these Words, then he lies every time he says them, in calling that
which is very Bread and nothing else, the very Body of Christ.

3dly, During the Pronunciation of the Words, or while they are in pronouncing:
For then it should not be in an instant, but successively, pedetentim, by
little and little, as the words are successively pronounced by Letters,
Syllables, and Words one after another: but this they all deny.

4thly, In an instant; this they are for. Bellarmin determines that it is done
simul, in the time of the pronunciation of the words of Consecration, but not
in the whole time that the Pronunciation takes up, but in an instant or moment
of that Time. To this it may be said,

1. Then the Priest lies in saying, This is, and should say, This shall be my
Body.

2. Then the great operative and conversive Virtue of these mighty Words lies
in the last Syllable [um]: this seems to be the Opinion of Thomas. Conversio
Panis in Corpus Christi fit in termino prolationis horum verborum. Tunc enim
completur significatio hujus locutionis; in 1 Cor. 11.24.

3. Then as the Body of Christ is created in an instant, so the Bread is
annihilated, or cease to be in an instant.

4. Then it is either at one and the same instant, that the Bread vanishes,
and the Body of Christ succeeds in the room, or another instant: but it is
neither of these.

(1.) Not the same instant: For then the Bread and Body of Christ should be
both together, and at the same time under the same Accidents: But this the
Papists will not hear of, but affirm constantly, That first the Bread only, and
secondly, the Body of Christ alone is under the Accidents one after the other,
but never together.

(2.) Not another instant: For then in the interspace, the Accidents should
subsist without either the Substance of the Bread, or Body of Christ under
them; but they say it is never thus, but either the Bread or Body of Christ is
contained under the Accidents; and to say otherwise would be most absurd.

And thus if they will be constant to their own Sentiments, tho we should grant
them their own Sense of our Savior's Words, they will not serve their turn,
nor be a Foundation to build Transubstantiation upon, but contrary-wise, will
quite subvert this Dagon.

For there can be no Transubstantiation, 1. Before the Words are pronounced. 2.
After they are pronounced. 3. In the time of Pronunciation. 4. In any other
instant; and therefore there can be none at all.


We have done with their first Argument.

Secondly; They argue from the Sermon which our Savior preached unto the
Capernaits, John 6. wherein they say, he opens the great Meat and Mystery of
the blessed Sacrament of the Altar: In which his true Body and Blood, or
Himself is eaten and drunken under the forms of Bread and Wine, which does
necessarily infer a Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into his very Body
and Blood. The places urged for this are Verse. 41. unto Verse. 59. but they
insist especially on Verse. 51, 53, 55. here, say they, our Savior expressly
affirms;

1. That his Flesh is Bread. Verse. 51. I am the living Bread, which came down
from Heaven. If any Man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: and the
Bread that I will give, is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the
World.

2. When the Jews contended about this Saying, as absurd, or impossible, Verse.
52. How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? he again with an ingeminated
asseveration affirms, That what he had asserted was not only true (and no way
absurd nor impossible) but also, that this eating of his Flesh, and drinking of
his Blood, was most necessary and beneficial; Verse. 53, 54. Verily, verily I
say unto you, except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood,
ye have no Life in you. Whose eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has
eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

3. That his Flesh is Meat, and his Blood is Drink indeed (...), vere, Verse.
55. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed, i. e. true Meat
and Drink, or truly Meat and Drink, or very Meat and Drink; so that (say they)
it is plain, that here he does not speak improperly, but most properly of his
Body as proper Meat, and of his Blood as proper Drink, and of the proper and
bodily eating and drinking of his very Body and Blood with the Mouth in the
Eucharist. And this does undeniably prove Transubstantiation, that the Bread is
turned into his real Body, and the Wine into his Blood.

This is the Argument for Transubstantiation, drawn form this Sermon of our
Savior preached at Capernaum. Our Savior having miraculously fed five
thousand with five Loaves and two Fishes, a great Multitude flocked after him,
whereupon he took an occasion to preach to them of Spiritual Meat under a
Metaphor taken from the present matter, as in Chap. 4. he had taken occasion
from the Water of Jacob's Well, to preach to the Samaritan Woman of the Water
whereof whosoever drinks, shall never thirst. And in this Sermon he shows them,

1. That there was a kind of Meat which would endure to everlasting Life, which
they should seek for rather than the Meat which perishes.

2. Who it is that gives this Meat.

3. What this Meat is, viz. his Flesh and Blood.

4. That this is a more excellent Meat, than that Corporal Food which they had
been fed with, and followed him for; and than the Manna which their Fathers had
eaten in the Wilderness, as it was Corporal Food only, and received by the
Mouth into the Belly, and so he here speaks of it, and not as it was a
Temporary Sacrament to their Fathers.

But to come to the Matter lying before us; In order to a clear and
satisfactory Answer to the Argument drawn hence, which they place great
Confidence in, I shall endeavor to show,

1. our Savior's Sense in this Sermon.

2. The Popish Sense that is put upon it.

3. That our Savior, in this Sermon, is not treating of the Sacrament, and
Sacramental eating and drinking of his Body and Blood.

But, 4. That our Savior is here treating of the Spiritual eating and drinking
of his Body and Blood, out of, or without the Sacrament.

And so Transubstantiation will fall to the Ground, if they have no better
Foundation to fix it upon.

First, Our Savior's Sense in this Sermon, and how we must understand him if
we will understand him in the Sense intended by him. And here are four Things
to be enquired into.

1. What kind of Meat this is which our Savior discourses of to the Capernaits
in this Sermon. And it is not Corporeal Meat, but Spiritual Meat. Even as Chap.
4. He speaks to the Samaritan Woman of a Water, whereof whosoever shall
drink, shall never thirst; which is not meant of a Material Water, but
Spiritual Grace, as the Papists do confess. Yea this they do freely grant here.
For tho they will have it to be Material Food, and to be eaten Orally and
Corporally, yet they confess that it is Spiritual Meat, Meat for the Soul, not
for the Belly. Mentis, non ventris; animae, non corporis.

2. What this Spiritual Meat properly is. Now this is Christ himself with all
the Benefits and Fruits of his Cross and Passion. This Meat is made up of, and
consists in the saving Benefits, prepared for us by the Body and Blood of
Christ crucified, and rising out of his Passion. This is the Food, Meat, Bread
which he here speaks of, that gives Life to the World, and whereof he that
eats, shall live for ever. If it be said this cannot be his Meaning, for he
delivered this Sermon before his Passion, yet speaks of an eating and drinking
that was a present Duty, so that he could not have this Meaning. I say, it is
true, Passion Christi profuit, antequam fuit. Beneficia Christi valent tam
antrorsum quam retrorsum.

Ex eo tempore valet ad servandum genus humanum, ex quo in Adam est vitiatum.
Aug.


both that Christ spoke this before his Passion, and the eating he speaks of
was a present Duty. But what then? distinguish between the Time of his Death,
and the Merit of his Death, and the Difficulty is solved. He is the Lamb slain
from the Foundation of the World. Rev. 13.8. i. e. In regard of the Merit,
Fruits and Efficacy of his Death, and the Faith of Believers. Not only before
his Passion, but before his Incarnation; the Fathers did all eat the same
Spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same Spiritual Drink. For they drank of
that Spiritual Rock that followed them: And that Rock was Christ. 1. Cor. 10.3,
4. Abraham saw his Day. Joh. 8.56. And the Apostle gives this Account of him,
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8.

3. In what Respect he here calls them by the Names of Bread, Meat, and Drink.

(1.) Not in regard of their Nature and Substance: As if the very Flesh and
Blood of Christ were (according to the bare sound of the Words) very Meat and
Drink, such as our Corporeal Food is, But,

(2.) In regard of their Effect: the saving Benefits of his Flesh and Blood, or
Passion, nourish the Souls of the Faithful, and preserve them unto Eternal
Life; even as Corporal Meat that we eat does minister Aliment to our Bodies,
and preserve our Natural Lives. And thus as it is the Property of Meat and
Drink to maintain the Lives of them that eat and drink thereof, and as
whatsoever being eaten and drunk does maintain Life, is therefore called Meat
and drink: So it is the proper Nature of the Fruits and Effects of his Body and
Blood to nourish the Souls of them that partake thereof to Eternal Life. And
therefore for their performing that to Souls, which Meat and Drink do to
Bodies, he calls them by the Names of Meat and Drink.

4. What kind of eating and drinking this is that he speaks of: Or, what our
Savior means by eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his Blood? What this
Manducation of this Spiritual Meat is? Per manducationem nihil aliud intelligit
quam actum fidei, qui consistit in apprehensione and applicatione beneficiorum
Christi.
And this is only Spiritual eating by Faith, extra Sacramentum, without the use
of the Sacramental Signs. The Romanists confess that he speaks of this kind of
eating in this Chapter from the 32d to the 50th verse; but then from ver. 50.
to 59. of eating Orally and Corporally. But we say he speaks only of
Spiritual Manducation in this Chapter; which does consist in a partataking by
Faith of the Merit, and Virtue of his Death, the Fruits and Effects of his
Passion for us. And thus a true Believer eats the Flesh and drinks the Blood of
Christ Spiritually, when he,

(1.) Believes that Christ's Body was Crucified, and his Blood shed for him for
the Remission of Sins. And,

(2.) Believes that by this Passion Jesus Christ has obtained Remission of
Sins, and Eternal Life, for them that do unfeignedly believe in him. And when

(3.) By this true and lively Faith he does embrace and close with Jesus
Christ, apply him to himself, and from him thus received or manducated
receives a daily Confirmation and Increase of Spiritual Life and Growth.

Thus then, 1. The Meat our Lord speaks of, is Spiritual Meat. 2. This
Spiritual Meat is the saving Good prepared for us, by the Body and Blood of
Christ crucified for us. 3. He calls these Fruits of his Passion, his Body and
Blood; because they are obtained by, and rise out of his Flesh and Blood
sacrificed on the Cross. 4. This eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his Blood
(which he calls by the Names of Bread, Meat, and Drink) is a Spiritual
manducating or eating by Faith.

This is our Savior's Sense, which is embraced by the true Protestants, or
Calvinists, as Bellarmine calls them.

Secondly, The Popish Sense of this Sermon. This is hinted before. And in short,

1. They confess that the kind of Meat he speaks of, is Spiritual Meat. But
then they affirm,

(1.) That this Meat is truly and properly the true and proper Flesh and Blood
of Jesus Christ. And,

(2.) That this eating, is an Oral and Corporal eating of his true and proper
Flesh and Blood. A Manducation that is performed by Mouth.

(3.) That the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ is thus eaten orally and
corporally by the Communicants in the Eucharist. This is their constant Tenet,
that in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, under the Forms of Bread and Wine,
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ are received orally and corporally, and that
is eaten, this is drunk.

(4.) That this Bodily eating and drinking in the Sacrament, is the eating and
drinking that is properly and primarily meant by our Lord in this Sermon. Et de
qua agitur.

This is the Mind of the Romanists. Now in the next Place I am to show,

Thirdly, That our Lord Jesus Christ in this Sermon, is not treating properly
of the Sacrament, and Sacramental eating and drinking of his Flesh and Blood;
much less is he here teaching the Popish Doctrine of Oral and Bodily eating and
drinking his true and proper Flesh and Blood in the Sacrament.

In this Point we have the Consent of the Lutherans; Hoc caput non proprie and
per se ad doctrictrinam de Coena pertinet. Chemn. Harm. p. 1134. De spirituali
comestione Dominus ait, nisi manducaveritis carnem filii hominis, and biberitis
ejus sanguineni, non habebitis vitam in vobis. De Mist. Missae. l. 4. c. 14.
yea we have the Suffrage of diverse learned Papists who quit this Argument, and
positively affirm, That our Savior in this Chapter does not treat of the
Sacrament. As Biel in Can. Missae. Card. Cajetan in Thom. par. 3. q. 80. Art.
8. Card Cusan Ep. 7. ad Bohemos, and many others. Insomuch that Maldonatus on
John 6.53. complains sadly, that some Catholics chose to think and speak in
this Controversy, as Heretics, rather than as the Orthodox; and tho he forbear
to name them, yet he gives their Character in these Words, Scio Catholicos,
scio Doctos, scio Religiosos ac Probos Viros esse. So that by the Jesuits own
Confession, we have Catholics, and Catholics that are Learned, and Religious,
and Honest good Men on our side. Yet if this be nothing, we have not only
learned Men, but an Infallible Pope voting for us, and expounding our Lord's
Words as we do, viz. Innocent the 3d. (under whom Transubstantiation was first
decreed) who speaking of our Savior's Words John 6.53. has these Words. The
Lord speaks of Spiritual eating, saying, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son
of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you.

Now that our Lord Jesus Christ is not here speaking of the Participation of
the Sacrament, or eating of his Body and Blood in the Sacrament, will be
evident from these:

1. The Sacrament of the Eucharist was not then instituted; nor, as some think,
of two years after this; or, as others (who make the Passover, ( v. 4.) the
third Passover after his Baptism) not until more than a full year after: And
therefore he could not speak of an eating of his Flesh and drinking of his
Blood in the Sacrament, that was not then in being nor of so long a time after.

If it be said, True indeed, it was not then in being, but yet he spoke with
reference to it, and to instruct them beforehand in the Mystery of this Meat
which was to be prepared for them in the Eucharist. To this I say,

(1.) How could they to whom he spoke possibly understand any thing of his
meaning, when speaking with relation to a thing that was not, nor whereof they
had either then, or before, any intimation, or least insinuation that such a
thing should be? They say elsewhere, that he spoke plainly and intelligibly,
and it may very reasonably be supposed that now he spoke to be understood, and
of a matter that might be understood by them, but it can hardly be imagined how
they could understand this Discourse to be meant of a Sacrament, a Sacrament
neither before, nor then once mentioned, nor instituted and in being of a Year
or two after.

(2.) Jesus Christ was the Bread of Life at that very time when he preached
this Sermon, v. 35. I am the Bread of Life; v. 48. I am the Bread of Life. And
again, v. 50. Thus he speaks of that which then was, before the Sacrament of
his Supper was instituted.

(3.) Our Savior proposes and presses the eating of his Flesh and drinking
of his Blood, as a present and necessary Duty: A Duty that all those that were
present and heard him, were then obliged unto. And therefore it must
necessarily be granted, that this Meat was then in being, and might be eaten by
the Faithful, but they could not then eat it in the Sacrament, which had no
being, nor was instituted.

This is the first thing, that plainly proves, that our Lord and Savior is not
here treating of Sacramental eating and drinking; the Sacrament was not
instituted.

2. The eating and drinking which he here speaks of, are necessary to
Salvation; Acts that he makes so necessary Conditions of Life, as no Man can be
saved without them. V. 53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink
his Blood, ye have no Life in you. It is an eating and drinking without which
none can have Life: So that if our Savior mean it of Sacramental eating and
drinking, no Man can be saved that has not received the Sacrament. And from
hence it was that the Fathers, who took this Sermon to be meant of the
Sacrament, being moved by these Words, ordered the Eucharist to be given, and
gave it to Infants as soon as they were baptized, as necessary to their
Salvation: And indeed this does necessarily follow this Exposition of our
Savior's Words. But from this very thing it is evident that our Savior's
Words cannot be meant of Sacramental eating; because that Sacramental eating is
not absolutely necessary to Salvation, so as no Man can be saved except he
have, once at least, taken the Sacrament: For many, who never ate his Flesh nor
drank his Blood in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, are certainly saved. All the
Faithful that lived and dyed before the Incarnation of Christ, ate the same
Spiritual Meat, and drank the same Spiritual Drink, and are saved, as our
Adversaries will not deny; yet none of them did ever once eat it in the
Eucharist. The penitent Thief went from the Cross to Paradise immediately, yet
had never eaten the Sacrament. Many thousand Infants and Children of Christian
Parents dye one Generation after another before they have once tasted of the
Sacrament. Are all these Damned? There have been, and are, abstemious Persons
who cannot brook the least sup or drop of Wine; Must all these (who are
suspended from Drinking, by a natural and sinless Infirmity, or Antipathy to
Wine) be given up for Lost?

They think to evade the Force of this Argument, that falls so convincingly
upon them, by this sorry shift, viz. That our Savior here speaks of them only
who have Means and Opportunities of receiving his Flesh and Blood in the
Eucharist, which those here instanced in, never had.

But I answer, That the Words of Christ are true, simply, and absolutely
without Exception or Limitation. And no one can have Life, or be saved without
a real and actual participation of the saving Benefits prepared for Souls by
the Body and Blood of Christ Crucified: And this Participation is the only
manducation or eating that is meant in this place.

3. The eating and drinking of his Flesh and Blood, which he here speaks of, is
always accompanied with Life and Salvation to all those who so eat his Flesh
and drink his Blood. See v. 50, 51, 54, 58. A Man may eat thereof and not dye.
If any Man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: And whosoever eats has
Eternal Life. Mark, this is an eating whereby all Men whosoever, have Life, and
are certainly saved: And therefore this eating is not Sacramental eating with
the Mouth, nor does stand in partaking of the Eucharist. For many eat and drink
in the Sacrament who have no Life, nor are saved. It is believed by many that
Judas did partake in the Sacrament, as well as the other eleven, yet was the
Son of Perdition. And it is plain in the case of Hypocrites and Wicked Men, who
receive the Sacrament again and again, may be a hundred times over, yet have no
Life, nor dying so (as we may fear not a few do, after many a Sacrament) are
saved. But if our Savior had indeed meant this of Sacramental eating, then it
would follow, that the worst of Men, by participating (if but once in all their
Lives) of the Sacrament, should thereby have their Salvation infallibly secured.

Yet here again the Papists would creep out by the help of a pretended
Implication in our Savior's Words; viz. That eating and drinking worthily is
employed, and to be understood as necessary to the sense of the Words: And so
when our Savior expresses himself in those Terms used, v. 50, 51, 54, 58. he
means all, and only, of them who eat and drink his Flesh and Blood worthily.
But,

(1.) This [worthily] is their own Addition to our Savior's Words. For our
Savior neither has it, nor any thing that implies it in these Verses, or in
this whole Sermon on this Subject.

(2.) As it is their Addition, so it is built upon a false Supposition, viz.
That Men may eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of Christ (in his Sense)
unworthily. Whereas he is here speaking of such eating and drinking of his
Flesh and Blood as must certainly and necessarily be worthily done, and cannot
be done otherwise. A Man may take the Signs of his Body and Blood unworthily.
And therefore the Apostle speaks of eating the Bread and drinking the Cup of
the Lord unworthily in the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.27. But no Man can either in,
or out of the Sacrament, receive the thing signified unworthily, viz. Christ
and his Benefits, or truly believe in, and apply Christ to himself unworthily.
If this be done at all, it is done worthily, and cannot be otherwise.

4. The eating and drinking he here speaks of, is ever followed with his
dwelling in them, and they in him, who so eat his Flesh and drink his Blood; v.
56 He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in
him. He in me, and I in him. As much as to say, as there is a near and
inseparable Union betwixt us, he is united to me, and I am united to him; as
there is a Union of the Body and Food. And this again makes it plain, that he
speaks not of the Sacramental eating with the Mouth, or of receiving the
Eucharist. For then when wicked Men, who are Enemies to the Cross of Christ,
have once received the Sacrament, they should thenceforth dwell in him, and he
in them, have a Spiritual Union to, and Communion with him: Yet it is certain
there is no such a thing, as he will one Day make them all to know; Mat. 7.23.

These four plainly prove this, viz. That our Savior is not here speaking of
the participation of the Sacrament, or of Sacramental eating and drinking, and
much less of the Popish Oral and Corporal eating and drinking of his true and
proper Flesh and Blood in the Sacrament, under the forms of Bread and Wine. I
may add farther,

5. That our Lord Jesus Christ plainly obviates and prevents this gross and
carnal Sense of his Words; v. 63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh
profits nothing: the Words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they
are Life. Here, I say, he expounds his meaning in this Discourse.

It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing; Deitas in
Christo, seu vis illa Deitatis in Christo, est causa proprie, cur caro sit vere
cibus, and vivificet.

Ille Jesus Christi solus, qui est totius Christi, and utriusque naturae, valet
ad vitam, is autem non corporalis, sed spiritualis est per fidem. Nec audent
dicere se una cum humana Christi natura devorare quoque Deitatem ipsam. Rolloc.
in loc. Caro quidem Coeterorum omnium quicquam vere non prodest. Caro autem
Christi, quia in ipse unigenitus Dei filius habitat sola vivificare potest.
Cyril. l. 4. in Joh. c. 23. See Bucan. loc. 48. qu. 112.


i. e. the Humanity profits nothing without the Divinity. The Flesh or Human
Nature, of it self and alone, has no quickening Efficacy, but in conjunction
with the Spirit, or Divine Nature, from which it receives this quickening Power
and Efficacy. The Divinity is the Fountain from which this Virtue flows, the
Humanity is the Chanel by which it is derived unto us.

The Words that I speak unto you, i. e. of eating my Flesh, Verba quae locutus
sum ad vos, spiritus and vita sunt, intellexistis spiritualiter? Spiritus and
vita sunt. Intellexistis carnaliter? etiam. sic illa spititus and vita sunt,
sed tibi non sunt spiritus est vita, qui non spiritualiter non intelligis. Ib.
ex Augustino.
and drinking my Blood, they are Spirit, and they are Life: 1. They are to be
understood, not after a gross and carnal manner, but in a spiritual Sense, and
so they are Life, or confer Life. To this the Decretal of the Romish Church
agrees, in the 2d. distinction of Consecration, in the Canon prima quidem:
where we have these Words. Understand that which I say spiritually. You shall
not eat that Body which you see, nor drink the Blood which those that crucify
me will shed; I have recommended a sacred Sign to you, which being understood
spiritually, will quicken you.

6. If we should grant them thus much, that our Savior here speaks of the
Bodily eating of his real Body, yet this would not serve their turn. For they
will have the Bread to be transubstantiated into the Body of Christ; but this
Discourse would prove the quite contrary, and that (if there be any
Transubstantiation) it is not the Bread that is transubstantiated into the Body
of Christ, but the Body of Christ that is transubstantiated into Bread. For our
Savior here expressly calls himself Bread ten times over. v. 32, 33, 35, 48,
50, 51, 58. So that there is far more ground to believe, that the Body of
Christ should be turned into Bread, than, that Bread should be turned into the
Body of Christ.

7. When they are driven from all their other Artifices whereby they would make
this Sermon of our Lord to speak for them, they betake themselves to their last
Refuge, and that is, that we must believe the naked Words of Christ without any
Disputation or Question about them. Thus the Romanist, when at a pinch, says,
This one Word of Christ is enough to me, when he calls his Flesh Meat indeed: I
will not deny, doubt, dispute. This was the great Sin of the Capernaits here,
v. 52. How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? It came not to their Mind
(say the Rhemists on the Words) that nothing was impossible to God, that
wickedly said, How can this Man give us his Flesh? But we may make great Profit
of their Sin, believing the Mysteries, and taking a Lesson, never to say, or
once think, How? For it is a Jewish Word, and worthy of all Punishment. To this
I say, the Sin of the Jews here was,

1. That they denied the Matter of Christ's Words, viz. that there could be any
such thing as the eating and drinking of his Flesh and Blood. Their How, was a
How of denying the Truth of his Words.

2. That they understood not, but grossly mistook the true meaning of his Words,
when he had before plainly enough showed them, that this eating (he was
speaking to them of) stood in believing* and had promiscuously used the Phrases
of eating, coming, believing, for the same thing.

But it was not their Sin,

(1.) To deny that Oral Manducation (whereof they took him to speak) as a thing
grossly absurd and monstrous. Nor,

(2.) To enquire humbly and modestly after the true meaning of our Savior's
Words, and manner of eating and drinking his Flesh and Blood. And so we,
believing Christ Words to be true, may and ought to inquire in what Sense they
are true, and after what manner Corporally or Spiritually his Flesh is to be
eaten, and his Blood drunk. And it is a vain pretense of Humility that leads
Men to swallow down the most gross Absurdities under a pretense of believing.

But in the mean time the Papists sin most inexcusably.

1st. In their wilful understanding of our Savior (as the Capernaits did) to
speak of his Material Flesh and Blood, and of a Bodily manner of eating and
drinking thereof.

2dly. In their violent defending and maintaining of this that the Capernaits
denied and condemned.

We have done with the third thing that was proposed, namely, That our Savior
in this Sermon is not treating of the Sacrament, etc.

Fourthly; We shall add a word of the fourth, That our Savior is here treating
of the spiritual eating and drinking of his Body and Blood extra Sacramentum,
without the Sacrament. And this will be evident, if we consider that the
Manducation here spoken of, is an eating,

1. That was before the Sacrament was instituted; and true Believers did eat
his Flesh and drink his Blood, when there was no Eucharist to eat and drink
them in.

2. That is to everlasting Life unto all that so eat, Verse. 54.

3. That is absolutely necessary to Life and Salvation, Verse. 53.

4. That unites the Soul unto Christ, and Christ unto the Soul, Verse. 56. These
have been brought before, to prove that he is not speaking of bodily eating,
and would come in again here to confirm this.

5. The Flesh of Christ is eaten only as it is Meat: Now it is not Meat for our
Body and Corporal Nourishment, but Meat of our Souls and Spiritual Nourishment,
and only eaten of the Soul spiritually by Faith. In short, such as our Hunger
is, that makes us desire this Meat; such as this Meat is, that we desire; and
such as the Life is, that is maintained by it; such also is our eating of it.
But the Hunger that makes us desire this Meat is spiritual, and the Meat we
feed on here is spiritual, and the Life that is nourished by it is spiritual;
and therefore our eating is only spiritual, not corporal.

6. Our Savior does put the matter out of question by expounding his meaning
to them, and declaring that this eating stands in believing. Thus what he calls
eating, Hic edere Christum est credere in eum, atque applicare eum magis
magisque ad animos nostros.

Audita devorandus est: intellectu ruminandus: and fide digerendus. Tertul. de
Resur. Carnis. Haec quoties agimus, non dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed fide
sincere panem sanctum frangimus and partimur. Cyprian.


that he plainly expounds to be nothing else but believing; and uses without
difference the terms of Eating, Coming, Believing as synonimous, or Words of
the same Signification, V. 35. here he uses Coming for Eating, Believing for
Drinking. And the proper and natural Consequents of these words, I am the Bread
of Life, are, He that eats me, shall never hunger; and he that drinks me,
shall never thirst. But he says, He that comes to me, shall never hunger; and
he that believes on me, shall never thirst; to teach us that he speaks of an
eating and drinking which is by Faith. So Verse. 47, 48. he shows to eat (in
this Mystery) is nothing else but to believe.

Now I have done with this Argument, and from what is said, I hope it may be
plain and evident to us, that our Savior in this Sermon is not treating of the
Sacrament, and a sacramental eating and drinking of his Flesh and Blood, but of
a spiritual eating and drinking without the Sacrament; and so here can be no
color of a Foundation for Transubstantiation.

Yet before I leave this, I must add a word to prevent the mistaking of my
meaning in what is here said, as if I had denied that Believers in the
participation of the Sacrament, do spiritually eat and drink the Body and Blood
of Christ. This I have not said, but that which I have asserted is, That our
Savior in this Chapter is not treating of the Sacrament, nor of eating and
drinking his Flesh and Blood in the Sacrament. Yet (tho he does not here speak
of it) Believers in the due use of the Sacrament do that which he here speaks
of, i. e. really and truly eat his Flesh and drink his Blood in the Sense here
intended, i. e. spiritually by Faith. There is a threefold eating, as has been
hinted.

1. Sacramentally only.

2. Spiritually only.

Corpus Christi accipitur non Sacramentaliter tantum quod solum Symbolum, sed
simul spiritualiter quoad rem significatam.
3. Sacramentally and Spiritually together. And thus the Sacramental eating and
drinking of the sacred Symbols, when performed in a due manner by true
Believers, is ever accompanied with this spiritual eating. And so, tho in this
whole Sermon he treats not of the Sacrament, yet whatsoever he speaks in it of
eating and drinking, etc. may be accommodated and applied to the Sacrament;
wherein, I say, this that our Lord presses on the Jews, is performed by all
true Christians, and without which the Sacrament is but an empty Ceremony.

Thirdly; They argue from the words of our Savior, Mat. 19.26. With Men this
is impossible, but with God all things are possible. From hence they say, although
Transubstantiation be hard for Human Reason to understand, yet it is not hard
for Divine Omnipotence to effect: And Christ made the Bread his Body by the
same Omnipotent Power, whereby the World was made, and the Word was incarnate
and made Flesh in the Womb of the Virgin. Thus they argue from the Divine
Omnipotence, and oppose Omnipotence to all the Absurdities, Contradictions, and
Impossibilities that Transubstantiation is clogged with, and exclaim against
us, as setting our natural Reason in opposition to the Omnipotence of Jesus
Christ; and even denying his Omnipotence, because we deny their
Transubstantiation.

This is their last Argument from the Scripture: The Argument wherewith they do
most delude simple People, and draw them into a blind Belief of
Transubstantiation, and consequently to the Belief and Practice of all the
Abominations and abominable Idolatries that are daily practiced in the Mass.
Now in Answer to it, I say,

1st. That we do not deny, or once doubt of Christ's Omnipotence, but
constantly believe and openly profess according to the Scripture, that,
Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and in Earth; Psalm. 135.6.
Ephesians. 3.20.
in the Seas, and all deep places: And that he is able to do exceeding
abundantly above that we ask or think. But then,

2dly. A potentia ad actum seu a posse ad esse non valet consequentia.
We deny that it is warrantable to argue from the Power of Christ to the Act,
or being of a thing, without sufficient Indications, Significations, and
Evidences of his Will to perform such an Act, or effect such a thing. Or, that
because he can by his absolute Power do such and such things, they are
therefore done. The Psalmist says, He has done whatsoever he pleased, not
whatsoever he could. He can do whatsoever he will, but he will not do
whatsoever he can. Ps. 115.3. Omnia quae voluit non quae potuit. Omnia quae
vult, potest, non vero quae potest, vult. Potest enim perdere mundum, sed non
vult. Damas.

Omnipotens est Deus ad facienda majora and minora. Omnipotens est ad Coelestia
and Terrestria. Omnipotens est ad mortalia and immortalia. Omnipotens est ad
facienda spiritualia and corporalia, visibilia and invisibilia. Omnipotens est
ad facienda omnia quae voluerit. Alias aliqua non potest, non potest mori, non
potest peccare, non potest mentiri, non potest falli. Aug. Sermon. 119, de Temp.


We may at this rate fancy any thing of God, as if he had done it, because it
was in his Power to do it. He could have made Men with Wings to fly as Birds,
and as Angels are painted; or with Horns, as some Beasts, and as Moses is
pictured, does it follow that he has? He could have made the Horse, or the Ox
to go upright as Man: it does not follow that he has. He is able of Stones to
raise up Children unto Abraham, Mat. 3.9. but we do not find that he ever has
turned, or will turn Stones into Children. By this way of arguing, the Alcaran,
and all that is contained in it, may be maintained; yea, this is the
compendious and sure way to prove any thing that the wildest Heads in the World
can invent. God is omnipotent.

3dly. We affirm that Arguments may not be drawn from the Omnipotence of Christ
to confirm Doctrines that are,

(1.) Contrary to the Scriptures. Or,

(2.) Carry in them manifest Contradictions, or plain Impossibilities.

(1.) Contrary to the Scriptures: For Christ is not Yea and Nay, 2 Cor. 1.19.
nor can he deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. and therefore to set that up by the Power
of Christ, which is contrary to the Word of Christ; is to set his Omnipotence
in opposition to his Veracity, and by his Power to destroy his Truth, and make
him a Liar. And this is the Fraud whereby the Papists seek to delude the
simple. What Is not Christ Omnipotent? Will you question the Omnipotent Power
of Christ's Word? Look, look at the many and mighty Miracles that were done by
it, and be not faithless, but believing. What say you (said Bonner to Mr.
Philpot) to the Omnipotency of God? Act. and Mon. 3 vol. p. 555.
Is not he able to perform that which he spoke? This is my Body. I tell thee
that God by his Omnipotency, may make himself to be this Carpet, if he will.
But hold a little:

That our Lord Jesus Christ is Omnipotent we no way doubt; but we are as sure
that he is also most true, and cannot lie or deceive? And therefore must
(notwithstanding his Omnipotence) peremptorily deny your Transubstantiation,
because it is inconsistent with the Truth, and contrary to the express Word of
Christ, which plainly declares (as is showed before) that he is ascended into
Heaven, and that the Heavens must receive him; so as he shall descend no more,
before that great Day when he shall descend from Heaven with a Shout, with the
Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God.

Thus Transubstantiation is contrary to the Word of Christ. And therefore, till
they have proved that Christ will act in Contradiction to his own Word, and
(like unto us sinful Men) say one thing, and then do quite and clean contrary;
let them tell us no more what Christ can do by his Omnipotence in this case.
Divine Omnipotence is to be called in for a Confirmation of the
Scripture-Revelations, and Articles of Faith grounded on the Scriptures, and
not for the overthrowing of them, which would be the readiest way to overthrow
all Christianity.

2. Carry in them manifest Contradictions, or plain Impossibilities. We may not
thus make Divine Omnipotence an Argument to prove and establish things that
imply plain Contradictions; or argue from the Divine Power to the Being of
Impossibles. Now things are impossible in a threefold respect.

(1.) Simpliciter, simply and absolutely; that is, such things as are contrary
unto, and inconsistent with the Nature and infinite Perfection of God: As for
God to die, lie, sin, deceive. These are simply impossible, Magna in Deo
potentia est non posse mentiri. Aug. l. 1. de Symbol. c. 1.
and to say, That because God is Omnipotent, he may therefore die, lie, etc. is
no less than Blasphemy: Nor does this derogate any thing from his Omnipotence,
because they are things that suppose and argue Impotence and Imperfection. And
this Impossibility is not from Impotency, but immense Perfection in God.

(2.) Ex Hypothesi seu Presupposito, upon a Pre-supposition: That is, such
things as are contrary unto, and inconsistent with his immutable Counsel and
Will revealed in his Word. Thus it is not a thing simply impossible with God to
annihilate the Devils, or to save the Damned. Yet this is impossible ex
supposito, upon this Supposition, that God has decreed and revealed the
contrary, viz. That he will never annihilate the one, or save the other. Thus,
I say, this is impossible in regard of his constant and immutable Truth.

(3.) Ex natura rerum, in regard of the Nature of the Things themselves: that
is, such things as imply a Contradiction. These are not only impossible,
Naturae, to Nature, and the Power of Secondary Causes: But they are impossible,
Natura, in Nature, or in the Nature of the things themselves: And so impossible
with God, Arrows. Chain. 247, 248.
yet it is not through defect of Power in God, that such things cannot be done;
but through want of Capacity in the things which are simply impossible. The
Popish Schoolmen confess, Thom. 1. q. 25. Art. 3 and 4.
that things which imply Contradiction fall not under the Divine Power, and
grant that God cannot make Contradictories to be true, together; quia
Contradictio ponit esse, Qui diceret idem simul esse and non esse posse, nemo
omnium post homines natos unquam repertus fuit. Quodlibet est vel non est.
(...). 3. Metaph. 3. affirmatio and negatio, (ut homo non homo, ens non ens)
non sunt simul verae. Contradictoria nec simul vera, nec simul falsa esse
possunt, prima sunt ista principia, and mentibus hominum naturaliter insita.
and non esse and simul. It makes a thing to be, and not to be, and to be, and
not to be at the very same time; a thing that is impossible: For every thing
is, or is not: Nothing can both be, and not be at the same time. It is
impossible that the same Body should be in many places, or in more than one
place at one time: That a Man should be both alive and dead at once: That a
Child should be before, and beget his own Father, etc.

We may not argue from the Divine Power to the Being of Things that are
impossible any of these ways. But Transubstantiation is impossible all these
ways.

1. Simply. It is a thing contrary unto, Potenter non potest efficere, ut
corpus Christi fit simul actu corpus and non corpus, simul actu circumscriptum,
and non circumscriptum, quia sunt ista contradictoria. Aug.
and inconsistent with the Nature of God, who cannot lie.

2. From a supposition of his Will manifested in his Word. So it is a thing
most contrary unto, and inconsistent with his immutable Truth.

3. As implying a Contradiction, and not only so, but big with many
Contradictions, and those as gross, obvious, and notorious as can be imagined,
as has been showed. When Bonner had affirmed to Philpot, That God by his
Omnipotence may make himself a Carpet. Philpot answered, God is able to do
whatsoever he wills, but he wills nothing which is not agreeable to his
Word: Non potest Deus facere quae sunt naturae suae contraria. It is contrary
to the Nature of God to be a Carpet, for the Creator to be a Creature.

4thly. We say, Arguments taken from the Omnipotent Power of God to prove the
being of a thing, are only conclusive, and cogent, or valid, when we have a
Signification of his Will to do such a thing. In this case they conclude. For
whatsoever he will do, that he can do; and what he has signified that he will
do, we may firmly build upon it, that it shall be done whatsoever Difficulties
or Impediments may lie in the way. Omnipotence can easily level the highest
Mountains, roll away the greatest Stones, dry up deepest Seas. It was
Tertullian's saying, Credo quia impossible, I believe because it is
impossible; a strange Expression, as one would think, Yet thus must we (says
Dr. Stillingfleet) taking Impossibility as relating to Second Causes; when the
thing exceeds all probabilities and possibilities of Second Causes, and the
ground of Faith, to be some Divine Prediction. Orig. Sacr. p. 184.

But where we want this Evidence of his Will, we shall but unwarrantably, and
without ground, expect the Effect in respect of his Power: For he can do many
things that he will not do. He could have made many Worlds at once, when this
was made; he could have made many Suns as well as one, he could have prevented
the Fall of Man, recovered the lapsed Angels; but he has done none of these,
nor of Miriads of other things easy to have been done in regard of his Power.
He can maintain our Lives without the use of Meat or Drink, give us Bread-corn
without sowing and reaping, and make our Bodies immortal, never to see Death;
but he does none of these: And that Man would be thought to reason very weakly
and absurdly, who should argue on this manner. God is Omnipotent, therefore I
shall live without eating, or reap without sowing, or be immortal, and live for
ever.

Arguments from the Power of God, only conclude the Being of those things,
which he has declared it to be his Will to give a Being unto. But here in this
matter of Transubstantiation, we do not only want the Evidence of his Will for
it, but have most evident Indications and Manifestations of his Will against
it. I add,

5thly. That if we would grant this to them, that must never be granted, that
is, That Transubstantiation is no way impossible, nor does imply any
Contradiction; yet it would rest on them to prove, that Jesus Christ does exert
and put forth his Almighty and Infinite Power in changing a bit of Bread into
his very Body, Blood, and Bones, as born of the Virgin: For we can in no wise,
on no fashion see it. Bernard was wont to say, that there are tria mirabilia
mirabilissima.

1. Deus and homo.

2. Virgo and Matter.

3. Fides and Cor Hominis. This (if true) might well be added as a fourth,
being as great, and far greater than any of the three.


If there be such a Transmutation, we must say, that it is a very strange
Change, nay a miraculous Change: A Miracle, a great Miracle, as great, if not
much greater than his Incarnation. That God should become Man was a great
wonder, as all confess: and we cannot but think it a greater wonder, and more
strange, that a piece of Bread should become God; that that which was Bread in
the Baker's Hand half an hour before, is now very God, our Creator, Redeemer,
and Savior in the Priest's hand. But we cannot for our Hearts believe this,
that there is any such a wonderful and miraculous Transmutation. For,

1. It is contrary to the nature of all Miracles that ever were known to be
done. It was never known, that any Miracle did at once destroy and take away
the Substance, or natural Properties of the Subject whereupon it was wrought,
and also leave them remaining. When Moses's Rod was turned into a Serpent, it
was not both a Rod and a Serpent at once, assuming the form of a Serpent, yet
keeping the perfect form of a Rod. When the Water was turned into Wine, it was
not both Wine and Water, or Wine under the Accidents of Water. But this new
Miracle both destroys the whole Substance of the Bread, and at the same time
preserves and continues in their former place all the Properties and Accidents
of Bread, without the least change one way or other.

2. In true and real Miracles, where a Change is made from one thing to
another, the Change is obvious to the Eye, and manifest to the other Senses,
striking Men ordinarily with great wonder and amazement. The Miracles of our
Lord Jesus Christ were very visible and conspicuous; as when he raised the
Dead, dispossessed the Devils, cleansed the Lepers, stopped the Flux, healed
the Palsy, restored Sight to the Blind, Hearing to the Deaf, Speech to the
Dumb, Legs to the Lame, etc. they were all very conspicuous, evident and plain
to be seen. Both they upon whom the Miracles of healing were wrought, and
others, who were Spectators, saw them, and were taken with great wonder at the
beholding of them. Mat. 15.30, 31. Great Multitudes came unto him, having with
them those that were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them
down at Jesus feet, and he healed them: Insomuch that the Multitude wondered,
when they saw the dumb to speak, the mained to be whole, the lame to walk, and
the blind to see: and they glorified the God of Israel. John 6.2. A great
Multitude followed him, because they saw his Miracles which he did on them that
were diseased. When he wrought that Miracle on the Fig Tree, the Disciples saw
it, and marvelled, Mat 21.19, 20. Yea, his Miracles were so open and evident,
that his greatest Adversaries could not deny them. John 11.47. the Council that
was called against him, gave in this Testimony, This Man does many Miracles.

But now here forsooth is a Miracle of Christ, a great Miracle, a greater
Miracle than any that he did, and greater than all that he did in the days of
his Flesh, viz. A bit of Bread changed in a moment into Flesh, Blood, and
Bones. A sorry Creature (that a little Mouse may carry away and eat at once)
turned into the Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth: and yet all this done
without the least indication or appearance of any Change at all. For when this
bit of Bread is thus changed, if we look upon it as fixedly, intently,
earnestly as ever we can, we can see no Change; if we handle it, it is the
same, the very same that it was; if we smell it, why! the Smell is the same; if
we taste it, it has no other taste; and if we break and crumble it as small as
we can devise, still neither Flesh, Blood, nor Bone is to be found nor the
least appearance of any other Substance than the Substance of Bread.

3. When our Lord Jesus Christ took a Human Nature and became Man, he plainly
showed himself to be God, by such real Miracles as were convincing Arguments of
his Deity. But now when a piece of Bread, or a Wafer, is become God, this Wafer
manifests no Deity for the Conviction of the World. Nay, instead of doing
Miracles that might convince us of a Deity, it is still liable to those things
that do prove and proclaim it to be no God. For when a Wafer is made a God, by
Transubstantiation, we may still eat it, throw it to the Ground, cast it into
Fire or Water, unto Dogs or Hogs, no less than when it was but a Wafer, or bit
of Bread; and it can no more resist or hinder us, than it could while it was
but a piece of Bread. And are these things Marks and Indications of a Deity?

This may suffice to be said to this Argument taken from divine Omnipotence.
And I have also done with their Scripture Proof, or Arguments drawn from the
Scripture.

L. 3. de Euchar. c. 20.
II. They argue from the Fathers: From the Testimony and Authority of the
Fathers. Here Bellarmine brings in 17 Fathers for it.

I shall not enter into this Debate between them and us, having cleared the
Holy Scriptures of it, it may suffice to say, as to the Fathers,

Ephesians. 2.20.
1. That our Faith must be grounded upon the Word of God, not upon the Sayings
or Writings of Men: The Opinion of the Fathers without the Word of God is not
sufficient for us to build our Faith upon.

2. That tho the Fathers were Learned and Holy Men (which we readily grant) yet
they were but Men, Men subject to Errors and Mistakes; yea and Men (as none
will deny) that had their Errors and Mistakes.

3. That no Authority of Man ought to prevail in matters of Faith, unless it
have the Authority of God to back it. It is not their Judgment, or Authority,
that must sway us, but the ground of their Judgment; i. e. if they have
Scripture-Warrant for what they say. We gladly hear the Fathers, when they
speak the Language of our heavenly Father: But in whatsoever they depart from
this, we must depart from them. Si quis de antecessoribus vel ignoranter vel
simpliciter non hoc observavit, quod nos Dominus facere exemplo and magisterio
suo docuit, potest simplicitati ejus de indulgentia Domini venia concedi, nobis
vero non poterit ignosci, qui nunc a Domino admoniti and instructi sumus, ut
ubique lex Evangelica and traditio Dominica servetur, and ab eo quod Christus
and docuit and fecit, non recedatur. Cypr. L. 2. Ep. 3. Sine divina Literatura
nullius momenti est antiquitas. Tertul. Apol. c. 47.
When the Donatists urged Augustine with the Writings and Authority of Cyprian,
he replied, Whatsoever in them agrees with the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, I receive it with his Praise; but whatsoever agrees not, I refuse
it with his Leave. And so must we. For (as one) tho Antiquity be for a Thing,
yet if Scripture be against it, the Cause is as good as ought to be wished,
Antiquity it self sitting Judge. Omnes Patres and tota Schola (as another) are
not the Old and New Testament.

4. But in this Controversy about Transubstantiation, and the real Presence,
the Fathers are most express, plain, and full against them. It is true indeed
that they bestowed all their Eloquence on this Subject of the Eucharist, and
spoke many things very Rhetorically and Hyperbolically, both to procure more
reverence to the Ordinance, and raise the Affections of the Communicants: which
Hyperbolles and high Expressions (as in other Matters) must have their grains
of Allowance: But when they come down from these high and lofty Strains of
Rhetorical Florishes, they deliver themselves as positively, plainly, and
fully, against Transubstantiation as can be: Calling the Elements Bread and
Wine, Commemorations, Types, Figures, Symbols, Signs, etc. of Christ's Body and
Blood. For this I might refer to many who have fully handled this Subject: As
Dr. Crackenthorp, Defense c. 73. against Marcus Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop
of Spalato, who came into England, An. 1616. And here asserted, that all the
Fathers are against the real Presence, but after his last revolt revoked this,
and affirmed the contrary. And Dr. Burnet's Discourse, annexed to the Relation
of a Conference, held at London, April 3, 1676. by Dr. Stillingfleet and Dr.
Burnet with some of the Church of Rome, etc.

L. 3. de Euchar. cap. 21. Una apex verbi ratione valentior omni est. Milleque
decretis conciliisque prior.
III. They argue from Councils; from the Authority, Definitions, and Decrees of
Councils. Bellarmine makes this another Argument, and tells us that for 500
Years before that time, the truth of Transubstantiation was defined, sub
Anathemate, in six Councils one after another. But this is of least weight, for
Bellarmine's six Councils were of the Pope's making, and such as decreed more
Errors than this.

IV. In the last place Bellarmine argues for it, from its agreeableness to
Reason. But in Articles of Faith we must draw our Conclusions, not from the
Dictates of Reason, but, from the Rule of the Scripture: Yet his Reasons are
very frivolous and ludicrous. It is (says he) most Consentaneous to Reason to
admit it:

1. Because otherwise the simple will be exposed to the danger of Idolatry in
adoring the Bread.

2. Because it seems not very agreeable to Reason, that the same Sacrament
should be both Corporal and Spiritual Food; Meat, both mentis and ventris.

3. Because otherwise a Christian taking the Sacrament (on a Fasting-Day sure)
should break his Fast.

This Stuff needs no answer. Only instead of bringing in Transubstantiation, to
prevent the Adoration of Bread by the Ignorant, he might have done better, to
have put them in a way of avoiding the peril of Idolatry, as often as they
worship the Host: For if there be no real Presence, they confess that it is
abominable Idolatry. Costerus says, that the Bread-worship was the greatest
Idolatry that ever was in the World, if the Bread be not turned into the true
and natural Body of Christ. Now Biel, Lec. 49. in Can. says, That there can be
no evident certainty of the Conversion of the Bread into the Body of Christ, by
reason of some Defects that may happen. Thus (says he) neither the Priest that
celebrates, nor the People that join can be certain.

1. Not the Priest, because he cannot certainly know that he was truly
Baptized, or lawfully Ordained; and if not, he is no Priest, nor can
Transubstantiate.

2. Nor the People that Join; because they cannot certainly know that the
Priest has an intention to Consecrate; or if he have, that he commits not some
Error in omitting something necessary to Consecration in Matter or Form. And
from hence he concludes, that Adoration ought to be performed always under an
express or tacit Condition, that we adore only, if all things have been
observed that were necessary to Consecration.

I have now done with the Arguments brought by the Romanists for
Transubstantiation.

I shall in the next place offer a few Arguments against it.

1. If the Bread, by Transubstantiation, be turned into the real Body of
Christ, then its no longer Bread, but both the Evangelists and the Apostle
Paul, call it Bread expressly in this action of the Supper, and this both before
and after Consecration; but none of them once call it (as the Papists will
have) Flesh, Blood, and Bones, or a bare Form, and the naked Accidents of
Bread. We may see this if we cast our Eyes upon,

Matthew. 26.26. Jesus took Bread, etc.

Mark 14.22. Jesus took Bread, etc.

Luke 22.19. He took Bread, etc.

1 Cor. 11.23. Took Bread. V. 26. As often as ye eat this Bread. V. 27.
Whosoever shall eat this Bread. V. 28. So let him eat of that Bread.

1 Cor. 10.16. The Bread which we break. V. 17. We are all partakers of that
one Bread. And so the whole Celebration of this Ordinance is called breaking of
Bread. Acts 2.42. and 20.7. Thus it is still styled Bread. But if by
Consecration it were turned into the Body of Christ as born of the Virgin, then
it should not be Bread, nor could be called by the Name of Bread any more.

Now here Bellarmine and other Papists seek out several Evasions whereby they
think to enervate, and take away the force of this plain and cogent Argument,
giving diverse Reasons, why after its essential mutation, it keeps its former
Name of Bread. And they say, it is called Bread;

First, Because it is made of Bread, or was Bread before its Transubstantiation
into the Body of Christ, and keeps its old Name, or takes its Name from what it
was. And they give us sundry Examples of such Forms of Speech in Scripture; as
Adam called his Wife Bone, because made of a Bone; Genesis 2.23. Moses calls the
Rods that were turned into Serpents, Rods; Exodus 7.12. Matthew calls the Blind,
Lame, Dumb, etc. who were healed, Blind, Lame, Dumb, etc. after that they saw,
and walked, and talked, because they had been blind, etc. Mat. 15.31. To this I
say,

(1.) Bellarmine himself confesses, That this Solution does not seem to be
very solid; for the Adversaries may object against it, That because sometimes a
thing is called by the Name of that whereof it is made; therefore Words are
every where to be taken in that Sense. And I may add that well we may; for if
there be two or three places in the Scripture, wherein things are for once
named from what they were, yet there are scores and hundreds that call things
that which they are, for one that calls them that which they have been, but now
are not, nor ever shall be again.

(2.) Tho things are sometimes denominated from what they have been; yet it
cannot be so here, for Christ's Body never was Bread. And in this respect the
Examples produced by them are wholly impertinent. For the Woman who is called a
Bone, once was so; the Serpents that are called Rods, had been Rods, and were
presently Rods again: And the Seeing, who are called Blind, had been so, really
Blind. But that which is properly and really the Body of Christ, never was,
never shall be Bread. Nay, this is their First and Fundamental Error in this
matter, viz. That Christ's Body is made of Bread; and here they run into the
Error that Logicians call petitio principii. Hoc est ejus quod in principio
quaesitum fuit, or into a plain begging (instead of solid proving) of that that
is the main Question; and taking that for granted, which we must for ever deny.
Let the Papists but once prove, that the true and real Body of Christ, was once
Bread, and is made of Bread, by as fair Evidence as we will prove that the
Woman was made of a Bone, and the Serpents of Rods, and the Seeing of them that
had been Blind: And then they do something, and we shall yield, that this
Solution, Answer, or Interpretation of theirs may be allowable, but yet not
certain, by Bellarmine's own Confession. But that they can never do; and
therefore we cannot grant, that the Body of Christ that never was Bread, nor
ever shall be Bread, is called Bread; because sometimes things are called what
they were, not what they are. We may observe by the way, that tho every new
Vicar of Christ must have a new Name; yet by this new Divinity the old Name
(tho very mean and contemptible) is good enough for the Body of Christ. Bread
it was, and Bread it is at Rome.

Secondly; Because it retains the external Figure and Form of Bread, and the
Scriptures call things often as they appear, and seem to be. Here again they
give us Examples of this in the Brazen Serpent, Numb. 21.8, 9. Emerods and
Mice, 1 Samuel 6.4, 5. Solomon's Cherubims, 1 Kings 6.23. Solomon's Lions, 1
King. 10.20. This is their second Solution. Now to this I say,

1. That the Scripture often speaks of things, not as they are, but as they
seem and appear to us, and gives the Names of the things themselves to those
things that are only the Similitudes and Resemblances of them. As in the
Examples given, etc. But then,

2. This Rule does not hold in this case, nor are the Examples brought to
purpose. For,

(1.) All those were true and proper Images and Representations of the things
whose Names they bare. But the Bread in the Eucharist is not an external Form,
Image, or Shadow of Bread, but very Bread it self. The Brazen Serpent was not a
Serpent, but the likeness of a Serpent; the carved Cherubims were not
Cherubims, but the likeness of Cherubims, etc. But the Bread is true and proper
Bread, and not the likeness of Bread.

(2.) The Scripture no where hinteth this, that it is called Bread, not because
it was Bread, but because it has the Form and Likeness of Bread; as it is
evident that the Serpent, etc. are so called, because they had the Form and
Fashion of a Serpent, etc. Nor,

(3.) Does the Scripture any where teach us to call the bare Accidents of Bread
by the Name of Bread. And Accidents are all that the Papists here allow.

(4.) The Body of Christ never was in the Form of Bread, or had the Likeness of
Bread. I say moreover,

(5.) In saying that the Body of Christ is called Bread, because being made of
Bread, it does still retain and keep the Form of Bread, they with their own
Hands throw down this Structure of Transubstantiation, which they would rear
up. For if the Bread were really turned into the Body of Christ, it would in
this Transmutation lose the external Form and Accident of Bread, and take the
Form and Accident of a true human Body. Thus in all the Transmutations and
Transformations that we read of in Scripture, the things transformed lost their
former Form, Shape, and Accident, and took new ones. The Rib, out of which Eve
was formed, lost its own Shape and Form when turned into Woman. When Lot's Wife
was turned into a Pillar, she lost the Form of a Woman. Moses's Rod lost the
Form of a Rod, when it took the Form of a Serpent. And the Water turned into
Wine lost its former Color, Savor, Taste. In all these there was a real and
visible Mutation, that changed the external Form, Fashion, and Accidents. And
so whatsoever is transubstantiated, does thereby lose its former Form. And so
it would be here, if there were any such a Transubstantiation as the Romanists
would obtrude upon us. But this Key whereby they would loose themselves out of
the Chains of this Argument, instead of loosing them, locks them closer and
faster up. But they have more Keys for this Lock that may fit better. As,

Divino miraculo fieri, ut accidentia panis nutriant, ita tamen ut in magna
copia sumantur. De Euch. c. 23.
Thirdly, Because it has the Properties and Effects of Bread. But what are
these? Bellarmine only names one, viz. Nutrition, it does nourish our Bodies as
Bread. But if it be not Bread, how comes it to minister Nourishment? Why, he
tells us that, by a Divine Miracle, Accidents may nourish, when taken in a
great Quantity. Mark here,

1. Accidents of Bread nourish Men's Bodies.

2. Yet it is by a Divine Miracle, and this also. Only,

3. When they take a full Dose of them. He might have done well to have
prescribed a just Quantity, how many Grains, Scruples, Drams, Ounces, Pounds or
Quarts of Accidents must be taken at once to make the Receipt work. But this is
left to the Baker's Discretion, who may (for any thing I know) put in more or
less at his own Pleasure.

But in answer to this Reason produced by them, to prove that it may be called
Bread, I shall say two things,

1. That this Reason plainly proves it to be Bread. For,

(1.) That which has the Effects and Properties of Bread in nourishing our
Bodies, is a Substance. Bare Accidents, as Length, Breadth, Color, etc. cannot
nourish. And therefore if the whole Substance of the Bread be gone, and nothing
of Bread (as they say) remain but the bare Accidents, there can come no
Nourishment to our Bodies from them, but they say (and it is true) that they do
nourish: And from thence I say it must follow that not only the Accidents, but
the Substance of Bread remains. For mere Accidents do not nourish. It is
confessed that Odours may and do minister some refreshing, and Examples may be
given of those that have been refreshed by the Smell of Meats and Odours. But
the Reason of this is, that Smells and Savours issue with the Emission of some
Corporeal Substance from the Bodies they issue from. Therefore an Odor,
according to Aristotle, is fumida quaedam Evaporatio; according to Galen,
Effluxus quidam Corporum. But this cannot bestead the Papists in this Case, for
according to their Hypothesis, there is no Substance of Bread in the Host,
Omnes Theologi and Philosophi communi sensu docent, quod alimentum in rei
nutritae substantiam vere convertatur. 1 De Genar. and Corr. c. 5. q. 11. Art.
2.
and therefore there can be no Emission of any Material Savor or Substance
from it, that can afford the least Degree of Nourishment.

(2.) That which does nourish our Bodies, is converted into the Substance of
our Bodies. The College of Conimbre tells us, that both all Divines and
Philosophers with one Consent agree in this, that Food is truly converted into
the Substance of the Body that is nourished by it. But bare Accidents cannot be
turned into Substance, and therefore cannot nourish; if there be Nourishment,
then there must be the Substance of Bread.

But Bellarmine has a Reserve here, that it may be done by a Miracle: and so
indeed it must, if it be done.

But why should we devise and feign Miracles, when and where there is no need
of them, nor occasion for them?

1. It is not once doubted, but God can, by a Miracle, nourish our Bodies
without any Meat at all, when there is need, and he sees it meet. But then,

2. What need is there of a Miracle to nourish our Bodies by bare Acdents,
Length, Breadth, Quantity, Color, etc. when we have our Tables furnished and
stored with all Plenty and Variety? Does the Lord use to work Miracles, where
there is no want of ordinary means, and this ordinarily?

3. I would fain know of them, for what end this Miracle is done. Is it to
confirm the Doctrine of Transubstantiation? or to declare and manifest the
Deity of Christ? Then certainly this ought to be visible and conspicuous, or
openly displayed, that it is not any Substance of Bread, but only Accidents of
Bread; that we are thus miraculously fed and nourished by. But this is not in
the least apparent, nor to be any way discerned by our selves or others.

4. But the Limitation or Condition which Bellarmine puts in, does in my
Opinion quite mar this pretended Miracle, viz. That the Accidents may by a
Divine Miracle nourish us upon this Condition, that they be taken in magna
copia, or a great Quantity. What means this Proviso? Why must they be taken in
magna copia, to make the Miracle take? Is there Restraint upon the Divine
Omnipotence, so that he can feed us with many Accidents of Bread, but not with
a few? Is this the Cardinal's Divinity? Strange! Here is in his Words a feigned
Miracle, but a real Blasphemy, in limiting the most High, and tying up the
Hands of Omnipotence. And I may, with some Variation, inform the Jesuit in the
Words of Jonathan to his Armor-bearer, there is no Restraint to the Lord, to
save by many, or by few; 1 Samuel 14.6. So I say, there is no Restraint to the
Lord, to feed by many Accidents or by few, if he can by many, he can also by
few, and with the same Facility.

This is the first Answer.

2. This Reason plainly everts Transubstantiation. For if a Consecrated Wafer
do retain the Properties and Effects of Bread, then it cannot be
transubstantiated, because the Properties of Bread are founded in the Substance
of Bread, and the Effects of Bread rise from the very Nature of Bread. So that
if the Bread did, by Consecration, lose its Substance, it should therewith also
lose both its Properties and Effects.

They have yet one shift more, and say, it is called Bread.

Fourthly, By a Hebraism, because phrasi hebraica, in the Hebrew Idiom or Form
of Speech, all Meat is called Bread. This is Bellarmin's last Reason, and that
which he likes best. It may, says he, be called Bread, and meo judicio optime,
quia phrasi hebraica nomine panis intelligitur generatim omnis Cibus. But,

1. Till Bellarmine have proved that our Savior and his Apostles called this
Sacramental Element by the name of Bread, for this reason, or more hebraico, he
does but beg the question, and if we list to grant it him, upon his begging we
may; but if not, he has not, nor any of the Tribe of Cardinals or Jesuits can
ever prove it.

2. The Apostle does not only call it Bread, but (...), panem hunc, (...), this
Bread, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27. plainly showing that he had not respect to that
general Signification, but spoke of it in its most proper sense, as it was Food
made of Corn, or proper Bread, as Bread is distinguished and differenced from
all other kinds of Meat: As in the same place he speaks of Wine as it was the
proper Fruit of the Vine, by way of distinction from all other sorts of
Liquors. Thus the Apostle calls it Bread, not in the general Signification of
the Word, but from its own particular Nature and Kind among all other sorts and
kinds of Meat; that is, proper Bread, and not any other, Fish, or Flesh, etc.

We have now the Reasons of Bellarmine, and other Papists, whereby they do go
about to elude and evade this clear and full Argument against
Transubstantiation.

And you may yet further take notice of these four things in general. That
these Reasons (assigned by them) why the Bread after its essential Mutation is
still called Bread,

1. Are diverse one from another, wherein they fluctuate at great uncertainty,
Vel quia ex pane conficitur, and accidentia panis retinet, etc. Vel alio aliquo
modo, qui a Doctoribus comprehendi potest, a nobis non potest.
as not knowing where, or upon what to fix. One while they will have it called
Bread, because it was Bread; another while because it has the Form and Figure
of Bread; then, because it has the Effects of Bread. Next not so, but by a
Hebraism. And thus they rove about at uncertainty, now say one thing, then
another. It is called Bread in this sense, or in that sense, or as one of them
(if not more knowing, yet more modest than the rest) having reckoned up several
Opinions about it, concludes, or some other way, which the Doctors may
understand, but we do not.

2. Are not only diverse one from another, but adverse and contrary one to
another; insomuch as they cannot consist and stand one with another, but do
mutually destroy one another. For if it be called Bread,

(1.) Tropically and Figuratively, according to the First and Second, then not
because of its nutritive Property, according to the Third.

(2.) Because of its nutritive Virtue; then not Figuratively, as the First and
Second.

(3.) If by a Hebraism; then none of the other three ways. And

(4.) If any of the other ways, then not more hebraico.

3. Are all Figurative and improper. And so they (who insist so much on, and
contend so hotly for the literal Signification of our Savior's Words, This is
my Body, and exclaim on us for departing from it) do themselves depart from the
literal Signification of this Word, Panis, Bread, and bring in a tropical,
figurative and improper sense of it. For if it be called Bread, only because it
is made of Bread, or has the Form of Bread, or the Properties and Effects of
Bread, or from the Idiotism of the Hebrews, then it is Bread only in an
improper Sense. And so I say, they that will not admit of a Figure in this
Proposition, This is my Body, (tho it be necessary, and ordinary and constant
in the Scripture in this Subject of Sacraments) are forced (for the Support of
their Transubstantiation, and literal Signification of this Proposition, This
is my Body) to forge a Figure in this Term, Bread, and not one, but four, one
on the back of another, if they will have their Reasons to signify any thing.
Besides that, by Bread here, they will have us to understand Flesh, Blood, and
Bones by some new and uncouth Figure which I understand not.

4. The Romanists at this Day cannot endure this form of Speech, or to hear the
consecrated Wafer called Bread. Should a Priest in the Popish Countries, who is
going to sing Mass, but say, I go to break Bread, it might come to cost him his
Life.

2. Arg. If the Bread be converted into the real Body of Christ, the Wine is
also converted into the real Blood of Christ. But the Wine is not
transubstantiated into his Blood: Therefore neither is the Bread
transubstantiated into his Body. For the Confirmation of this Argument, this
only is to be proved, That there is no Transubstantiation of the Cup, or Wine.
For they grant that if both be not, neither of them is transubstantiated.

Now in order to a clearing of this, That there is no Transubstantiation of the
Wine, I shall, I. Lay the Words of Institution together, as they are recorded
by three Evangelists, and the Apostle Paul. II. Show how the Papists would
prove Transubstantiation from them. III. Show that there is no such
Transubstantiation.


I. The Words of Institution,

Mat. 26.28. This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for
the Remission of Sins.

Mark 14.24. This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many.

Luke 22.20. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you.

1 Cor. 11.25. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood.

II. From this Institution they argue for the Transubstantiation of the Cup.

1. In General on this Principle, that we must keep unto the literal
Signification of the Words, and take them as they sound. Two things they say
necessitate this,

(1.) The Nature of a Sacrament. And,

(2.) The quality of a Testament. The Eucharist is both a Sacrament, and a
Testament: and nothing ought to be expressed in more plain and naked Terms than
these, that all Obscurity and Ambiguity may be prevented. For if Sacramental,
or Testamentary Terms be improper and figurative, then their Signification is
uncertain; and consequently the Sacrament, or Testament; delivered in such
Terms is vain and uncertain.

This is the Foundation that they lay, and upon this Foundation they would
build Transubstantiation, from these three Terms or Expressions, in the Words
of Institution, which prove that the Cup, or that which is contained in the
Cup, is the true and proper Blood of Jesus Christ.

1. It is expressly called his Blood. This is my Blood.

2. It is expressly called the New Testament in his Blood. But Wine cannot be
the New Testament in his Blood.

3. It is expressly said to be shed for them for the Remission of Sins. Now it
was not Wine, but his true and proper Blood that was shed for them for the
Remission of Sins.

Answ. 1. That the Foundation here laid, is not only precarious, weak, and
sandy; but false and erroneous. For,

1. Nothing is more frequent and familiar than improper and figurative Terms in
the Institution of Sacraments. This we have seen before in the Institutions of
both Testaments. And were not their Brows of Brass, they could never have the
Face to deny it, and to contradict themselves (as we shall see) in denying of
it. But nothing is more frequent with them than this, to say, and unsay, to
affirm, and deny, maintain, or disclaim any Position, as may make most for the
advantage of the Cause that they defend.

2. Terms and Phrases may be improper and figurative, and yet plain and easy to
be understood. A figurative, and an obscure or ambiguous Term are not all one.
The Papists themselves do confess that there are several tropical Terms (as I
shall show) in the Institution of the Cup, and yet affirm, That they have the
certain and true Interpretation of them: And therefore (by their own
Confession) the certain Signification of figurative Phrases and Forms of Speech
may be known. But in this they do not only contradict and condemn themselves,
but reflect on, and accuse the God of Heaven, as delivering his Mind to Men, in
matters of eternal Concernment, in terms of an ambiguous, uncertain, and
unintelligible Signification.

3. Testamentary Dispositions ought to be plain, and may be so, tho there be
some improper Terms in them. Jacob's Testament was full of Figures, Genesis 49.
yet without doubt well understood by his Sons and their Posterity.

4. The Eucharist is not the Testament of Christ, but a Sign and Seal of his
Testament. The new Testament was in being before the Institution of the Supper;
and Baptism, which is a Sacrament and Seal of the New Testament, was then
already instituted. And therefore the Instance of a Testator, here brought by
them, is impertinent and to no purpose, viz. The Words of a Testator, wherein
he says to his Legatee, I bequeath a House to thee, may not be interpreted, I
leave the Sign of an House to thee, no more may the Words of Christ's
Testament, viz. This Cup is the New Testament, be expounded, This Cup is the
Sign of the New Testament. This, I say, is impertinent: For there is a manifest
Dissimilitude in the Examples. That of the Testator is a proper Testament, this
of our Savior is but a Seal of his Testament. Now if a Testator, who has in
his Testament given a House to his Heir, should give this Testament with the
Seal annexed unto it, into the hand of his Heir, saying, This is the House
which I give unto thee; It would be evident and easy enough for any to
understand, that the thing so put into his Hand, is not the House it self, but
the Assurances and Confirmations of it. And it is no more difficult to
understand the meaning of our Lord in these Words, This Cup is the New
Testament, i. e. I have in my Testament bequeathed all my Goods unto you, and
this Cup is instituted to be a visible Seal of this my Testament unto you.

5. The Papists forsake their own Foundation, or depart from the proper
Signification of the Words in several things. As,

(1.) When it is said, That he took the Cup after Supper, Luke 22.20. They say,
and truly, the Cup is put for, and signifies the Wine in the Cup.

(2.) When it is said, That he took the Cup, etc. saying, This Cup is the New
Testament, Luke. 22.20. here they say, the Cup is put for, and signifies his
Blood in the Cup.

(3.) When he says of that in the Cup, This is my Blood, they say, it is meant
of that which is hidden under the Form and Accidents of Wine; and resolve this
Proposition thus, This compound of my Blood and the Accidents of Wine, is my
Blood. Again,

(4.) When he calls that which he drank, the Fruit of the Vine, Mat. 26.29.
They say, That by the Fruit of the Vine, we must understand his Blood.

This is their keeping to the Letter of the Words.

6. The proper and literal Sense of the Words of Institution cannot be the true
and proper Meaning of our Savior in them; because if they be so taken, they
carry in their very Face the grossest Absurdities that can be imagined, and
such as make our Savior's Words to contain and hold forth a ridiculous and
monstrous Sense. If we take them properly, uti sonant. Then,

(1.) The Cup (whether it be of Gold, Silver, Wood, Stone, etc.) is truly and
properly the Blood of Christ, for he says expressly, This is my Blood.

(2.) The Blood of Christ is the New Testament. Now a Testament is made up, and
consists of Letters, Syllables, Words and Sentences written in Paper, or
Parchment: Is the Blood of Christ Letters, Words, Lines, etc.? Besides this,
both Matthew and Mark call it the Blood of the New Testament, therefore it is
not the New Testament, for how can it be both the Testament, and the Blood of
the Testament?

(3.) The Blood of Christ is the New Testament in the Blood of Christ: As if he
should have said, This Blood is the New Testament in my Blood. But this is not
easy to understand, viz. how the Blood of Christ is in the Blood of Christ, the
Blood of the Cup in the Blood of the Cross, or the Blood of the Cross in the
Blood of the Cup, unless Christ have two kinds and sorts of Blood.

(4.) The New Testament is shed for in for the Remission of Sins.

Thus if we take the Words as they sound, they come to this Sense, viz. That,
1. The Cup, whether Gold, Silver, Wood or Stone, is Blood, And 2. This Blood is
the Blood of Christ, And 3. This Blood of Christ is the New Testament, And 4.
This New Testament is shed for the Remission of Sins: And so in short, a Cup
that is made of Gold, etc. is at once, 1. Blood. 2. The Blood of Christ. 3. The
New Testament. 4. Shed for us. And what can be more gross and absurd?


If yet we allow them a Trope here, and that by the Cup is meant that which is
in the Cup, the Contents of the Cup (which is most true in our Savior's sense)
yet still the proper sense will be most absurd and dissonant: For the express
Words of Christ concerning the Cup are, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood, which is shed for you: Take these properly, and then 1. The New
Testament is the Contents of the Cup. and 2. The New Testament is shed for us.
And could this be? Can it be said without monstrous Absurdity, that the New
Testament was shed for us? Or that it was Letters, Words, Syllables, Lines that
were shed for us for the Remission of Sins?

Thus which way soever they turn them, the literal Sense is absurd, and makes
our Savior's Words ridiculous.

And this may be enough to show the Sandiness and Unsoundness of the Foundation
whereon they bottom this Doctrine. Now the Foundation being overturned, the
Super-structures fall therewith of themselves. To wit, that that which is in
the Cup, is real Blood, or Wine turned into the very Blood of Jesus Christ:
because, 1. He calls it his Blood. 2. He calls it the New Testament in his
Blood. And, 3. Says of it, that it is shed.


I say, this Interpretation falls with the Foundation that it is built on, and
needs no Answer. Yet I shall say a Word,

1. In general; that all these Forms of Speech are Sacramental Terms, and must
not be taken in a literal and proper Sense, but in a Sacramental and improper
Signification, whereby the Names of the things signified are given to the Signs
that do signify them.

2. In particular.

(1.) When he says of that in the Cup, This is my Blood, the meaning is, this
is that which signifies or represents my Blood; the Sign of my Blood.

(2.) When he says, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; the meaning is,
the Wine in this Cup is the Sign and Seal of the New Testament established in
my Blood shed upon the Cross; or the Sign of my Blood whereby the New Testament
is confirmed.

(3.) When he says, it is shed, the meaning is, it is the Sign of the shedding
of my Blood. The Effusion made in the Sacrament, was a Sign or Representation
of the Effusion which was to be made the next day upon the Cross.

I have now done with the Plea they make for the Transubstantiation of the Wine
from the Words of the Institution.

III. We shall now come to the 3d in a word, to show that the Wine is not
transubstantiated into the Blood of Christ.

And this may be evinced,

First, From the Absurdities, Contradictions and Blasphemies that it carries
in it. These are too many to be enumerated here, besides those even now named,
(arising out of the literal Construction of the Words) and those mentioned
before, that attend the Transubstantiation of the Bread, (which come in again
here.) It labors with these four great) Absurdities. Grant but
Transubstantiation, and then, according to their own Principles, 1. The Wine is
transubstantiated into the Cup. 2. The Cup is transubstantiated into the Blood
of Christ. 3. The Blood of Christ is transubstantiated into a Testament. 4. The
Testament is shed for the Remission of Sins.


All these are absurd enough.

Secondly, From its plain Contrariety unto, and Inconsistency with the great
End and Fruit of Christ's Death. Nothing is more plain in Scripture than these
two, 1. That Christ died, or shed his Blood on the Cross to merit and obtain
for us Remission of Sins; 1 Cor. 15.3. Gal. 1.4. Ephesians. 5.2. Romans 4.25. Isa.
53.10. etc. And 2. That by his Death and Bloodshed on the Cross, Remission was
obtained: Colos. 1.20. and 1.14. Ephesians. 1.7. Revel. 1.5. But if (as
Transubstantiation supposes) the Wine in the Cup was turned into the Blood of
Christ, and this Blood of Christ was shed in the Sacrament for the Remission of
the Sins of the World, then the Passion, Death, and Bloodshed of Christ upon
the Cross was both needless and fruitless. He attained not his End in dying,
his Death profited nothing; for that which he died for, was obtained, before he
died to obtain it. So that, as the Apostle said of Justification by works, Gal.
2.21. If Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain; so I may
say, if Remission of Sins come by the Blood shed in the Sacrament, then Christ
is dead in vain. Thus it takes away the End and Fruit of Christ's Death, the
Love of God in giving him to die for our Sins, the Love of Christ in laying
down his Life for us, and makes him die in vain.

Thirdly, From the express Words of Christ: Matt. 26.29. Mark 14.25. Verily I
say unto you, I will drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine, until the day that
I drink it new in the Kingdom of God. These are our Lord's own Words, after he
had instituted and celebrated this Sacrament, and they put the Matter out of
question, for he could not more plainly and clearly have said, that it was Wine
which he had drunk, and not Blood.

3. Arg. If in the Eucharist the Elements be transubstantiated into the proper
Body and Blood of Christ, then the Church of the Jews in the Old Testament did
not eat the same Meat, and drink the same Drink in their Sacrament, that the
Christian Church now in the New Testament eats and drinks in her Sacrament. But
the Church of the Jews did eat the same Meat, and drink the same Drink, that
the Christian Church now does. And therefore there is no Transubstantiation.

Here are two things to be proved;

1. That if there be any such a Transubstantiation as the Papists maintain,
then the Church of the Jews did not eat the same Meat, and drink the same Drink
that Christians now do in the Sacrament.

And this is plain and evident, for (granting Transubstantiation) the Christian
Church now eats the Body, and drinks the Blood of Christ, as he was born of the
Virgin Mary. But so did not the Church of the Jews, nor could, for Christ was
not then Incarnate, nor had either Body or Blood.

2. That the Church of the Jews did eat the same Meat, and drink the same Drink
that the Christian Church now does.

And this is as plain and evident from the express Words of the Apostle; 1 Cor.
10.3, 4. And did all eat the same Spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same
Spiritual Drink: For they drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them, and
that Rock was Christ. Observe,

1st. They did eat the same Meat, and drink the same Drink. That is, Eandem
escam and potum non tantum inter se, sed and nobiscum habuerunt. Quid est
eandem, nisi quia eam quam etiam nos? Eandem ergo cibum and eandem potum, sed
intelligentibus and credentibus, non intelligentibus autem Manna sola and Aqua:
Credentibus autem idem qui nunc. Tunc enim Christus venturus, modo Christus
venit: venturus and venit, diversa verba sunt, idem autem Christus. Aug. Tract.
26. in Joh.


(1.) Not in regard of the external and visible Symbols, or Signs. For they ate
Manna, and drank Water. We eat Bread, and drink Wine.

(2.) But in regard of Signification, or resignificata, the Manna and Rock were
the same to them, that the Bread and Cup are to us, to wit, Sacramental Symbols
of the same Things, differing only signis and modo significandi.

2. This same Meat which they did eat, and Drink which they did drink, was
Spiritual Meat and Drink, i. e. not in Nature or Substance, but in
Signification and Representation. Ob spiritualem significationem.

3. This same Spiritual Meat and Drink was Christ.

(1.) Not Corporally, Substantially, and Essentially.

(2.) But Symbolically. Symbolum erat Christi, representing and exhibiting the
same Christ, and Grace of Christ to them, that the Supper does to us.

4. They ate this same Spiritual Meat, and drank this same Spiritual Drink.
That is, (1.) All of them ate this same Meat Sacramentally, Ore. (2.) Some of
them ( i. e. Believers) ate it Spiritually also, Fide.


Thus the Church of the Jews ate the same Spiritual Meat that we do. And this
does evidently prove the Popish Transubstantiation to be a mere Fiction.

4. Arg. If the Bread be converted into the Body of Christ; then not only
wicked Men, but Dogs and Hogs, Rats and Mice may eat the real Body of Christ,
and consequently (according to their Principles) have Eternal Life. That they
may eat the true Body of Christ, is plain, for they may eat that that remains
after the Consecration, and after this there remains nothing, but (1.) The
Accidents of the Bread; these cannot be eaten. (2.) The Body of Christ; this
therefore must be eaten by them. What say they to this?


1. None of them deny but the Consecrated Host may be eaten by any of these, or
other Vermin. As is evident from the Cauteles of the Mass, wherein they do not
deny these gross Absurdities, or (as they call them) Inconveniences; but
appoint certain Rules to be observed about them, and go about to salve them.

2. But yet they are miserably divided and confounded among themselves. Some
say that the Mice, Rats, etc. do not eat the Body of Christ; others say they
do: Some that the Body of Christ vanishes as soon as 'ere the Teeth of the
Mouse touch the Host; some that the Substance of the Bread returns: Others,
that a new Substance is created which the Mouse eats; and others, God only
knows quid mus sumat, vel quid manducet, what the Mouse eats, and what becomes
of the Body of Christ when the Mouse eats the Host. Thus they are driven to
monstrous Shifts. And as ill are they set with the Worms and Vermin that breed
in the Host, when it is overlong kept, which are generated either of the Air
about the Host, or the Accidents of the Bread, or of the Substance of the Bread
returned, or of Matter then created, or introduced from some other Body, or
they know not how. Portentu Opinionum.

5. If there be any Transubstantiation: Then the Body of Christ is daily
created: Either, 1. Out of the Substance of the Virgin. Or, 2. Out of the
Substance of the Bread. Or, 3. Out of nothing. But they will not tell us of
which.


6. If the Bread be turned into the Body of Christ; then, as often as they
Communicate, the Body of Christ is, 1. Turned into the Substance of their
Bodies. Or, 2. Totally annihilated. Or, 3. Flies away to Heaven. Or, 4. Unknown
what becomes of it. But, (1.) Not the First, for then they should be
Hypostatically united to the Divine Nature. (2.) Nor the Second, as some of
them grant. (3.) Not the Third, for then who can tell how many Millions of
Christ's are this Day in Heaven.



Therefore no Body knows what becomes of it.

I have now given as plain a Representation of Transubstantiation as I could,
as it is received in the Church of Rome, with the Sandy Foundations it is built
upon; and a few (of the many) Arguments that do clearly evert and overturn it.

I shall now shut up all in a few Words. If it be asked, What need was there of
this, or what use may it be of unto us? I say, this strange Monster,
Transubstantiation sets before us matter,

First, Of Information; and may inform us,

1. Of the amazing Apostasy of the Church of Rome, and those that are devoted
to her Communion. Here was once a famous and flourishing Church, a Church
honored by the Apostle with this high Testimony, that her Faith was spoken of
throughout the whole World, Romans 1.8. i. e. in all the Churches through the
World. And that her Obedience was come abroad unto all Men, Romans 16.19. Thus
she was once famous all the Christian World over, for her exemplary Faith and
Obedience. Who could have thought that ever such a Monster as this should have
had its Conception in, and been born of her Womb; and being born, have been
owned by her, taken into her Belief, and made one of the most important
Articles of her Faith? Yet alas! so it is. Oh how is the Gold become dim? How
is the most fine Gold changed? How is she that was once a pure Virgin, and the
chaste Spouse of Christ, become the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the
Earth, Rev. 17.5.

2. Of the Genius and Nature of Popery, or Rome's Religion at this Day. It
would be a tedious work to describe it, in the several Parts and Members of it.
But we may know a Lion by his Paw; and so what Popery is (a Religion more after
Homer than after the Scripture: As Mr. Broughton) by this one piece or part of
it, or from this Monster that is maintained in it. This alone (if what is said
be considered and weighed impartially) may give any Man enough of Popery. Be a
sufficient Disswasive from Popery. For if all were well to this, and nothing
but Transubstantiation with its Appendices lying in the way, yet
Transubstantiation alone is such a foul, misshapen, terrible, and dreadful
Spectrum, Hagg, or Night-Ghost, as is sufficient to fright all that are not
either stark blind, or stark mad and out of their wits already, from a thought
of looking that way.

3. How sadly the Common People are misled, and what strange Absurdities and
Contradictions they do ignorantly receive, and implicitly believe in the thick
Darkness they are brought into, and kept in. What can be more ridiculously
absurd than this Fiction? Yet through their own wonderful Ignorance, and the
thin Sophistry of their Leaders, it is received without any hesitation by them
as a great Mystery; and so indeed it is, but of Iniquity.

4. What strange and strong Delusions Men, and Men of Parts and Learning, may
be given up unto. It is not to be denied, that many of the Romanists have been
Men of vast Parts, and Learning; nor to be doubted but many of them are so: Yet
they (not receiving the Truth, but minding their Secular Advantages, and making
Religion to serve a corrupt, carnal, worldly Interest) have been given up to
such a strong Delusion, as to believe this grand Cheat, and impose it upon the
Faith of others. Oh! to what a height of Delusion Men may be left, to believe a
Lie, a Lie that has scarce any Vail to cover it, a Lie that has no Sense or
Reason in it, a Lie that bears upon its Forehead monstrous Absurdities, and
portentous Contradictions. Verily in this (according as was foretold 2 Thessalonians.
2.11.) we have a visible and tremendous Instance of one of the greatest depths
of the Judgment of God upon them. Let it warn to beware, to watch and pray,
that we enter not into Temptation. Some are confident enough, and think they
can never so far lose themselves, as to take up the Doctrines and Practices of
Rome: But Sirs, we have need to shake off Carnal Security, to maintain a holy
Fear and watchful Care, and live in a continual dependence on God for
preventing and preserving Grace and Help, in an hour of Temptation, and day of
Trial: For if once we begin to warp but a little, to leave God, his Truth and
Way, and God leave us, I know no Delusions so strange and monstrous, but we may
be given up to believe them, even to this that is made up of nothing but
portentous Absurdities, etc.

5. How just a Cause our blessed Martyrs in the Marian Days were engaged in,
and suffered for. Some Protestant Pens and Tongues in our Days have made
unhandsome and sinister Reflections upon that noble Army of Martyrs, of whom
the World was not worthy: But a Reflection upon this monstrous Fiction, that
most of them went to the Stake, and sacrificed themselves in Flames in
opposition to, is enough to clear their Innocence, and justify them in their
Sufferings, in the Consciences of all that are not given over to a Reprobate
Mind.

Secondly, Transubstantiation sets before us matter of just Admiration. And we
may wonder and stand amazed,

1. At the monstrous Impudency of the first Founders of it. That ever Men
bearing the Name of Christians, should arrive at such a height of Impudence, as
to obtrude upon the Christian World, the Entertainment and Belief of a Tale and
feigned Devise so portentous and prodigious even beyond all the Poetical
Fictions of the Pagans. I may without any Breach of Charity pass the Censure on
Transubstantiation, that Ludovicus Vives passed on the Golden Legend, viz. That
it was written by a Man, ferrei oris and plumbei cordis, who was lost to all
Shame, and whom nothing could dash out of Countenance. So I say,
Transubstantiation was minted by Men to be wondered at for their Confidence and
Impudence.

2. At the lamentable Simplicity and Credulity of the first Receivers and
Believers of it. As it is a matter to be wondered at, that any Men could be so
impudent to invent it, so it is no less wonderful that any Men should have been
so very sottish and simple as to receive such a putid Trump into their Belief.
It is unimaginable how this could be possible if Men had been waking when it
came upon them.

3. At the horrible Induration of the present Supporters and Maintainers of it.
This is yet the greatest and most amazing Wonder of all, that now after the
breaking out of the clear Light of the Gospel, and the frequent exposing of
this Monster by such a number of learned Men of the Reformed Churches, there
should still any appear in the patronizing, defense, and supportation of it.
Here is infinite Cause to wonder, and we might wonder our selves into an
inextricable maze, if the Holy Ghost had not given us a Clew to lead us out, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.

Thirdly, Transubstantiation presents unto us matter of Commiseration. Matter
that calls loud on us for Bowels of Pity and Compassion toward Myriads of
Souls in the Papacy.

1. That have such grievous Impositions laid upon them, and have no other
choice left them, but either to swallow down such Contradictions and monstrous
Doctrines as this, or to be sacrificed in merciless Flames.

2. That are compassed about with such a thick Mist of Popish Darkness, that
they do not in the least see or discern this and other Mysteries of Iniquity
that fill the Synagogues of Antichrist. This is a most deplorable Case, and God
knows, it is the Case of Multitudes at this day in the midst of the Papacy.

3. That are running such infinite hazards of their Souls and eternal Estates
from one Generation to another. It is far from me to think of using that
Uncharitableness toward them, which they with one Consent practice against us,
viz. To pronounce all that are in that Communion, to be in a State of
Damnation. This is a Piece of Cruelty that does no way become Christians. There
is a Distinction to be made of Persons, Times, Places and Practices. See the
excellent Discourse of Mr. Durham on Revel. 14. Lect. 3, about the Salvation of
Papists. But this I say, they run an extreme Hazard (on many accounts) that
live and dye in this Communion, tho they do not give an explicit Assent to the
complex Body of her Doctrine and Worship. Even the Adoration of a piece of
Bread, (rising out of Transubstantiation) as very God, is the grossest Idolatry
that can be used.

Now in all these Respects, the common Multitude are the Object of our
Compassion, and the Consideration of their hard and hazardous Condition should
move our Pity. Oh Christians! Pity them, and pray, pray that God would open
their Eyes, reveal this great Mystery of Iniquity unto them, and bring them out
of Babylon, where they are running such an Adventure. Pray down the
Antichristian State, and pray home the poor lost Sheep into Christ's Fold, that
are in the Pope's Pinfold, and Tents of Antichrist.

Fourthly, Transubstantiation brings matter of great Gratitude and Thankfulness
unto all our Doors. Sirs, when we think of this, how can we be enough thankful
unto our God for his Goodness!

1. That we were brought forth from under the Clouds and Darkness of Popery,
and in the days of the glorious breakings out of the Gospel. Diis gratias agere
debeo, non quia natus est mihi filius, sed quod tuis temporibus ipsum nasci
contingit.
When Alexander was born, his Father Philip blessed the Gods, not so much that
he had a Son, as that he had him in Aristotle's Days. But how should we bless
God for bringing us forth in Gospel Times? This is the Privilege which that
eminent German Divine Abraham Buchol^zer was so affected with, that he always
accounted it his great Happiness, that he was born after the Light of the
Gospel break forth, and bred up under Melancthon. And Chytreus acknowledged it
as a singular Mercy, that God had made him a Man, a Christian, and that he had
his Education under those excellent Lights of the Church, Luther and
Melancthon. Let this be thy Song, O Christian, and say with the Psalmist, I
will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, Psalm. 104.33.
I will sing Praise unto my God, while I have my Being, who has brought me
forth, not in days covered with the dismal Darkness of Popery, but crowned with
a clear Discovery of the Gospel.

2. That we have enjoyed a Freedom from these Popish Impositions, while other
poor Protestants have had bitter and bloody Storms falling on them. If we look
back to the last hundredth of Years now past, who can reckon up a thousand Part
of those Sufferings that have fallen heavily upon the French, German, Bohemian,
Hungarian, Netherland, Polish and Irish Protestants, for refusing to admit of,
and submit to these things. Oh! Transubstantiation, and other Romish
Abominations, have cost Millions of Lives, and Rivers of Blood, while we have
sat in a Calm, and not once tasted of the Popish Fury and Cruelty.

3. That to this day we are delivered from this, and the many other grievous
Impositions of Rome. O what a Complication of Mercies, have we in this one
great Mercy, that after all the Contrivances and Attempts of the Papists for
this hundred years, we may at this day set up our Stone, and call it Eben-ezer,
saying, 1 Samuel 7.12.
Hitherto has the Lord helped us.

Fifthly, Transubstantiation does moreover suggest unto us matter of daily
Supplication, and calls us to our Knees, to beg with Eyes, Hands and Hearts
lifted up to Heaven, for Protection, Preservation and Deliverance from the
return and re-enterance of the Religion of this degenerated and Apostate
Church, that brings this Monster in its Womb, which, if embraced, will destroy
and damn our Souls; and if rejected, will destroy and burn our Bodies to Ashes;
and cost us no less than our Souls or our Lives. I find that there was in the
Liturgy of Edward the sixth a Prayer to be delivered from the Usurpation,
Tyranny, and Enormities of the Bishop of Rome, which was afterward taken out,
to take away (as is said) the Offense that it gave unto the Papists: but
verily, how much soever it may offend them, we have much need to put it into
our daily Litanies or humble Supplications, and to pray without ceasing, that
we may never fall back into that most woeful, lamentable, and forlorn Estate
that a Return of Popery will quickly plunge and sink us into. The Pope solemnly
curses us upon Good Friday; whereupon one prayed, that he may so curse us
still, and never bless us more, as he blessed us in Queen Marie's Time. To this
Prayer let all, that have any Love for their Religion, any Detestation of the
worst of Errors and Idolatries, any Concernment for their Souls, any Care of
their Estates, Lives, and Posterities, and would not run unspeakable Hazards
for both Worlds, say*

AMEN.
FINIS.

