A Weighty Question, Proposed to the KING, And both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT:
Together, with some QUERIES ABOUT RELIGION, For the good of men's Souls, that
they may seek after, and be established in that which gives Life.

By ISAAC PENINGTON.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wilson, 1663.

A weighty Question, proposed to the KING, and both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
The Question is this which follows:

QUEST.

Whether Laws made by Man, in Equity, ought to extend any further, than there
is power in man to obey? Is it not cruel to require obedience in such cases,
wherein the party has not a capacity in him of obeying?

Now in things concerning the Worship of God, wherein a man is limited by God,
both what Worship he shall perform, and what Worship he shall abstain from,
here he is not left at liberty to obey what Laws shall be made by man contrary
hereunto.

The New Testament Worship is to be in Spirit and Truth, which is a principle
above man's reason, and cannot righteously be limited by a lower principle; but
the lower principle in every man should be subjected to the higher, both in
himself and others.

These things I write, not in pride or conceitedness, but with an humble heart
and in love, that God may have his due, Caesar his, and all men theirs, and that
Wrath from God may not break forth upon this Nation: for surely it cannot but
greatly provoke him, to see his People so deeply suffer, for their obedience to
him in what he requires of them.

I am a lover of Peace, Truth and Righteousness, and an hearty desirer of the
Welfare and Prosperity of this Nation, and that it may no more be broken up in
the Wrath and Indignation of the Lord; but that the peaceable and righteous
Seed, which he has sown in the hearts of many, may be quietly suffered to grow
up, to the praise of the Lord, and to the good of mankind.

This is from one, who was a Mourner over You in your affliction, and is now
also a Mourner over those whom ye afflict. I. P.

Some Queries about Religion.
Query 1. What is true Religion? Is it a gift from God, bestowed on those whom
he begets by the power of his Life? Or, is it a profession or worship of the
nature of this world, which a man by natural parts and industry may attain to,
as well as to other things?

Query 2. What is the sum and substance of the true Religion? Is it not Love
from a principle of Life? Is it not a travel out of the Enmity of the creature,
into the Love of God? Does not the Light of Life spring in the Love, and gather
into the Love? Does not Christ revealed in the heart, and leavening the heart
with the savor of his Life, teach love to Enemies; to bear with them in love,
to seek them in love, to forgive them in love, to pray for them in love, to
wish good to them, and wrestle with God for mercy toward them, even while they
are hating and persecuting?

Quer. 3. Are the Papists, or Protestants, or any other sort of religious
persons, found in this Love? Do they manifest by it their Discipleship to
Christ, and the Power of Christ in them? or rather, do they not set up their
several Forms, and maintain them in wrath and enmity against each other? Nay,
would they not destroy each other, if they could? Surely this spirit is in too
many of them. And does not this give a strong evidence against their Religion,
that it has but a Form, and not the true Power in it, and that in heart they
are not the Disciples of Christ? for if they were such, they would of him learn
the Love.

Quer. 4. Whether any Form of Religion (if not held in the Power, and subjected
to the Power) does not fight against the Power, keeping up an outside show
without the substance, and thereby crushing the substance? What form of
Religion, at this day in the world, can suffer the Love to grow, and the Life
to lead and rule in the Love, and the Lord of Life to exercise his Authority in
the hearts and consciences of men? And this is for want of Power within, and
because of Forms forcibly set up without: for the Religion of the Gospel began
in Spirit and in Power, and it never can be restored and preserved, but by the
same Spirit and Power. The renting of the Protestants from the Papists was no
further good, than it was in the power of the Life: and the renting of others
from the Protestants is no further good, than it is begun and held in the same
Power: Nay; any Party, though beginning never so uprightly, and by never so
true and clear a leading of the Spirit of God; yet so soon as it begins to
invent and turn aside to a Form of its own choosing, and is upheld by the
reasonings and understanding of man, it presently corrupts.

Quer. 5. Whether the power of Religion (and the true Love) if it were raised
up and restored again, would not make the world happy, and set every thing in
its proper place, both inwardly and outwardly? Is not Sense an excellent thing
in man, if it be guided by Reason? And is not Reason a much more excellent
thing, if it be guided by an inward Principle of Life? But Sense left to it
self, without the guidance of Reason, how brutish is it? and Reason left to it
self, without the guidance of a Principle of Life, falls below Sense. How
cruel, how blind, how selfish, how unrighteous is man, that follows the
dictates of his own corrupt reason, without knowing and becoming subject to
that which should enlighten it, and give him the right use thereof!

Quer. 6. Whether God will restore Religion again in the Power? whether he has
such a work to do in the world? and whether the time be near, that God is about
such a work? and whether he has already begun it, and made any progress in it?
Is there such a thing as the Power of Religion sought after? Do men grow weary
of their Forms of Worship, and find them empty, and unsatisfactory to the
hungry soul, that pants after life? Nay, have there not been some touches and
appearances of Life and Power, and of the true Love in some poor, weak,
despised ones? O that men knew the times and seasons, and then perhaps they
would see, that this is not a day for setting up of Forms, but of longing and
crying out after Life and Power.

Quer. 7. When God restores Religion and raises it up in power, whether then
Forms and Ways of Worship without the Power, must not needs wither and decay?
When the Power first appeared in the dispensation of the Gospel, did not all
the shadows of Moses's Ceremonies fly away and vanish before it? And when it
appears again, shall not all the shadows and inventions of man, which have
sprung up since in the time of the Night, vanish before the brightness of the
Light of the Day? Where the Power arises in any heart, what becomes of the man
there, with all that springs from him? where is his wisdom? where is his former
Worship? what becomes of all his Forms of Religion? do they not all moulder and
come to nothing, and he become as a little child, to be formed again in the
Power of Life, and born of the Spirit of Life, that he may enter into God's
Kingdom? Do not all the old things pass away, and new things spring up from the
Seed of Life, which God sows and preserves in the hearts of his by his Power?

Now, who is wise to understand these things? who has the Key to open the
Mysteries of Life? who knows the times and the seasons? (the times and
seasons of Forms, and the times and seasons of Life and Power?) Who sees what
God is about to do in the world, and prepares his heart for his
administrations on the earth? Who is a friend to God, and to mankind, and
willing to travel in spirit out of this dark, corrupt, earthly state of things,
into the heavenly nature and being, where man was at first, from whence he
came, out of which he departed, and can never be happy till he return thither
again; and can never return thither by his own strength and reason, but only by
the power and leadings of God, revealed in him in an inward Principle of Life?
And he that will follow this, must first feel it in his heart, and then turn
his back upon the earthly nature and wisdom, and war against his own corrupt
reasonings, in and with the Light of the Principle of Life, as it arises and
is further and further made manifest in his heart, through the Grace and Mercy
of God, which thereby offers its help to miserable lost man, to redeem him
out of his misery and undone estate.

Man has a time to hear allotted him by God: and when that time is over, it is
determined concerning him. He is a Seeds-man in this world; and what he sows
here, he must reap hereafter. He sows either to the flesh or to the Spirit;
either to his own will or to Gods will. He follows either the ways of his own
heart, or of Gods spirit. He either feels the power of Religion, and is renewed
thereby and fitted for God, or contents himself with a form without the Power,
and in effect remains what he was.

He that is renewed, he that is changed in heart and life, he that sows to
the will and nature of God, shall inherit life with God. He that lives in a
form of Religion without the power, and follows the vanities of his own mind
(going out of this world unrenewed and unfitted for God) shall be cut off from
God, and lie down in sorrow and anguish of soul, where he will bitterly bewail
his misspent time, and the losing of his souls life and happiness, for the
enjoying of a few earthly lusts and pleasures, suitable only to the earthly
nature and spirit, in its corrupt and degenerated estate.

O man, whoever thou art, that art drowned in the lusts and pleasures of this
world, which answer only to the sensual and corrupt part; O remember that thou
have also a precious soul, which wants redemption, by the power of God, to make
thee happy. And one day this soul will be awakened in thee, and when it is
awakened it will feel its want of God. This is the day of Gods stretching out
his Arm to thee, O slip it not out, for if thou do, Terrible will the day of
thy awaking be, and thy misery unavoidable and intolerable. And if now the
pains of thy body be so dreadful to thee, what will the tearings of thy soul be
by the wrath of the Almighty? Lay it to heart and retire inwardly, seeking to
feel somewhat of God gathering and guiding thy soul, out of thine own worldly
nature and spirit, into the nature and life of his Spirit, that thy soul (at
present separated from God and drowned in the earth) may return to and be happy
in the center of life, from whence it came. For there is a center of souls as
well as of the earthly nature: and the spirit of man returns to God that gave
it, as well as the body to the earth. And then the Lord appoints it to its
proper place, which is according to the nature it is found in. If it be Wheat,
if it be of the renewed nature, if it has taken up the Cross and followed
Christ in the Regeneration, then he gathers it into his Garner. If it be of
the chaffie nature, of the earthly spirit, the mind remaining unrenewed and
unreconciled to the Nature of God, then to the unquenchable fire (even to the
fire which will burn and scorch unquenchably) and to the worm which dies not,
but gnaweth perpetually, and brings to mind all the former vanity and
nis-spent time, to increase the heat and flames of the fire. O where is the
soul, that if it were not wholly bewitched and lulled into a dead sleep, by the
stupifying spirit of this world, would run so great a hazard, for the enjoying
of a few momentary pleasures in the sensual part, and lose thereby the inward
enjoyment of Peace and Reconciliation with God here, and of the pleasures of
his Kingdom of true Glory afterward.

Now for a close, let me say one word (in the upright love and true good will
of my heart) to this present generation, that they may consider and take heed
(if possibly, if possibly) it is this.

Even as a Father after the flesh, is tender of the Children he begets
according to his nature, and would not suffer them to be wronged or destroyed,
if he could help it: So is the Lord tender of those whom he begets in the
Nature of his Life, and in his due season will appear for them as surely as he
is God, and as surely as he has begotten them out of the worldly nature unto
himself, by the Spirit and Power of his Life. Therefore, O touch not any whom
the Lord has in the least measure anointed with his holy oil: For what is done
unto the least of these poor, naked, sick, imprisoned ones, etc. he looks
upon as done unto himself; Because he is one with them in the sufferings of
their flesh, whom he has made one with himself in Spirit.

THE END.

