THE Fig-leaf Covering Discovered: OR, Geo. Keith's Explications and
Retractations OF Diverse Passages out of his former Books, Proved Insincere,
Defective and Evasive.

By JOHN PENINGTON.

Thou art weighed in the Balances, and found wanting,

Dan. 5.27. Out of thine own Mouth, will I judge thee,

Luke 19.22. Qui alterum incusat probri, ipsum se intueri oportet. LONDON,
Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in White-Hart-Court in
Grace Church Street; and at the Bible in Leaden-hall-street near the Market,
1697.

The Fig-leaf Covering discovered, etc.
THE share I have had in this Controversy, depending between G. K. and his
quondam Brethren, the People called Quakers, has not been so much
Argumentative (that I found ready done to my hands) as to turn his own Weapon
upon himself, and detect the Inconstancy and Contradiction of the Man, who
while pretending to give a List of others gross and vile Errors (as in his True
Copy, p. 17.) and reflecting on several of our Friends by name (without
excepting any) as holding gross and vile Errors, opposite to some of the
fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, and yet so Hypocritical, as not to own
and retract in public their Errors exposed in public, even lest such
Retraction and Correction should lessen their Honor and Esteem among their too
credulous Followers and Admirers (see Preface to Gross Errors, p. 2.) yet had
not then essayed to correct his own, which by his own confession ( True Copy,
p. 17.) Needed both further Explanation, and in some part (as he mincingly
worded it) an Emendation and Correction. This gave me occasion, after having
inspected his Books, wherein I found many Contradictions both doctrinal and
personal, as well as Absurdities, to be engaged in laying them before himself
and others (the which I exhibited in three Tracts, the one entitled Apostate
Exposed, the other People called Quakers Cleared, and the third Keith against
Keith, the first and last of which he is still Debtor to) who have more than
once called upon him for them (they having been promised in the third Month
1695) and at length told him, upon the great Joy and Peace he pretended to have
in his publishing a lame Retraction of his former Exposition of two Scriptures
(which yet fell abundantly short of what had been proposed by him) That
perhaps, had I not forced him to it, by exposing of him, he had stayed yet
another Twelvemonth, before he had given them, as in my Keith against Keith,
p. 90, 91.

Now, after long Importunity (like the Widow to the unjust Judge) he emits
something which he entitules, Explications and Retractations of diverse Passages
contained in his former Books, which that it may not want for noise, and
perhaps to stave off the work he is already clogged with, he gives out may at
present suffice for a Reply to T. E 's and my late and former Books, Five of
which now stick upon his hands. Yet lest he should seem wholly to fore-close
himself from a larger Answer, he tells us, p. 42. he hopes to do it, E'RE VERY
LONG.

This naturally leads me to call to mind, how he has served T. E. with respect
to two of his, which he told us, in his Postscript to his Gross Errors, printed
Anno 1695, it was PROBABLE a due answer might be given to in due time, which
due time is not yet come with him, but he has labored to shift it by more
Artifices than one. For seeing what just ground I may have (at least) to
suspect him the Composer of those seven Queries proposed by the Bishop of
London's Chaplain to our Yearly Meeting Anno 1695, and made public by himself,
which he improved to cut himself out new work, while the old lay on his hands
(as if it had been therefore designed) it is manifest from his Summoning us to
meet him at Turners-Hall, alleging want of Time and ability of Estate to print
answers to us, and his since telling us (in his Book Antichrists and Sadducees,
p. 21.) that he has offered to answer Viva voce, that there is no end of
answering in print, few will be at the pains to compare book with book, and the
Charge is too great for him, that he would fain have shifted that free and open
way of answering by the Press, which he had drawn us into, and where we had
pursued him, by appointing, without our consent, a day to Arraign us at his
Bar, wherein had we complied, he might (as I once told him) have run off from
the Cause he was hampered with and uneasy under, and by wrangling a-fresh upon
some out-skirts of the Controversy, have dropped the main one. Now this Project
failing, What does he do? Betake himself to answer T. E. in Print? Nothing
less: But then he tries, whether he can set the Church of England and the
Protestant Dissenters upon our Backs, informs them, Vile Errors are boldly
and avowedly promoted among a sort or Gang of Quakers, as are not only as bad
as any Popery, but MVCH WORSE than the WORST of Popery, in diverse respects,
animates them to suppress our Books and disturb our Meetings, else Papists will
outdo them in Zeal, etc. Ant. and Sadd. p. 40, 41. It is after all this, when
none of these ways would take, that the poor Man is fain to pretend he has
answered them all at once, in the Book before me.

To which he prefixeth a Preface, wherein he excuses his delay, as having
found diverse more Passages that needed an Explanation, and some of them a
Correction, above what he had discovered, when he published his purpose. So
that it is to be hoped, it is now effectually done, in his own Judgment. But it
seems our great Brags, telling of great matter of Contradictions and other
Absurdities, found in his Books, justly occasioned a longer delay. Which I
think should rather have forwarded him. I will assure him, had he collected
those Passages out of his Books, ready to my hands, which I was fain to tumble
over his Books for, it had eased me, and facilitated my work. As to his telling
his Reader, We ^ave an Itch to Scribble, repeating the same things over, ^gain
and again, that we manifestly pervert his words, pal^ably bewraying our
Ignorance and Folly, seeing he pre^ends, if God permit, he may hereafter
discover it in diverse ^articulars. I shall only say thus much, that were he ^ot
one of those, he once spoke of, that are more ready falsely to Accuse, than
justly to Prove, he might have suspended his Brag, till he had brought his
Proof along with him.

Thus much to excuse his Delay; now for beginning with us, before he had swept
his own House; he alleges four things: 1. That his free Acknowledgment might
excuse him from beginning with his own Books, till he had brought us to an
equal Acknowledgment, or upon our stubborn and pertinacious Conceit of our
Books, he might the more justly expose us, as guilty not only of Errors, but of
holding them pertinaciously. All which, with respect to us, is merely
precarious, a begging of the question, who himself had once acquitted us, and
that even from the Errors he would now fasten upon us, yea and out of some of
the same Books he then cited in our Vindication, and we still continue to
defend as unjustly imputed to us, whereas his own (let him call them Errors, or
some more diminutive name, if he please) he has assigned as needing both
Explication, Emendation and Correction. His second, Assigning his own to be
Motes, ours Beams, is too idle for me to take notice of, as thinking his
Testimony on his own behalf not valid. His Thirdly, alleging our
Excommunicating him, is as shallow: For had not that drawn him to be
Vindictive, it would rather have stirred him up, by a free and open Retraction,
to have approved himself, to have exceeded us in Confessing and Forsaking. And
his lastly is all of a piece with his second, That what he has retracted or
renounced, was never judged by him an Article of Faith, and that we have not
proved him contradicting in his latter Books, any Article of Faith asserted in
his former Books. To which I reply, Had he not done his work by halves, he
would have found cause to have retracted his doctrinal Errors, Errors which
every body else, that knows what Errors are, will acknowledge to relate to
Articles of Faith, and which as suc^ we have exhibited and argued upon, which
must be left to the indifferent Reader's Judgment, who has read his and our
Books. In the mean time I enter upon examining those before me, which he has
here pretended to explain or correct, which I also submit to the Judicious,
whether they relate not to Articles of Faith, and also whether G. K. has at
length done his Work Well, Sincerely and Conscientiously, or on the contrary.

Sect. I.
Containing, as he says, diverse Explanations and Emendations of Passages out
of his Book of Immediate Revelation not ceased, Printed Anno 1668, and
reprinted with an Appendix Anno 1676, in his. 1. he says, Some (but who, he
says not) are offended at the Term Immediate Revelation, and mis-construe it
to a wrong Sense, never intended by him, as if he thereby did signify such a
Revelation, as did give us the Doctrinal Knowledge and Faith of Christian
Religion, and Principles thereof, without the Holy Scriptures, or other outward
means of Instruction. To which I answer, The People called Quakers are not
concerned in this Charge, at least with respect to the Term Immediate
Revelation, for they allow the thing, and dispute not against the Term. And
what himself has said, on behalf of the Necessity and Usefulness of Immediate
Revelation, the Book it self will plainly evidence. Yet lest this Reference may
seem too general (a way I dislike in my Antagonist) let the Reader consult the
Preface, and he will find G. K. there represents this Doctrine of Immediate
Revelation, a great and weighty Matter, which it has been in his Heart, once
and again from the Lord, to write of [saying, that] It REMAINS and is of
necessary continuance in the true Church -- Not only for the Preservation,
Safety and comfortable Walking of the Saints with God, but also in order to Men
and Women's becoming Saints. [And that] there is no Immediate Revelation
nowadays, as the common Privilege of the Saints. [he accounts] such a
Fundamental Error in Men, that the greatest part of their other Errors are
built on it, as 1. That the Scriptures outward Testimony is most necessary, and
that no true and saving Knowledge of God is to be attained, but by the
Scriptures being read or heard. See Preface, p. 1, 2. Now hence I argue, If it
be an Error (according to G. K.) to assert that the Scriptures outward
Testimony is most necessary, and that no true and saving Knowledge of God is to
be attained, but by the Scriptures being read or heard: Then it is G. K. his
Sense, and not a Mis-construction thereof, that a Saving Knowledge of God may
be attained, by Immediate Revelation, without the help of the Scriptures, and
that the Scriptures outward Testimony, is not most necessary, in his Judgment.
And this Saving Knowledge must be a Knowledge of the Christian Religion, except
he be prepared to retract his Retraction.

But to obviate this Offense and Mistake (as he terms it) he recommends the
Reader to what he has said, from p. 38. to p. 42. of that Book (but cites no
passage out of it) where I distinguish, says he, of means intermitting and
transmitting, and show that it is the intermitting means, that hinders the
Revelation to be Immediate, but not the transmitting. Answ. Here he Shuffles,
the Debate here is not whether Revelation be Immediate or no, when transmitted
through organized Instruments, either the Holy Scriptures or Men divinely
inspired, but whether he has asserted, such an Immediate Revelation is not
ceased, as is received with either the one or the other. That the Reader may
inform himself of, even in p. 40, within the compass of G. K. his Reference,
for he there says, We find that he sometimes uses outward means, and
sometimes he uses them not, but conveigheth unto us, from and through his own
Seed and Birth in us, the living Manifestations and Communications of his Life,
Will and Council, many, yea MOST TIMES without all Means, or Instruments from
without, for most times we are left alone as to Instruments or Means without
us. I would advise him therefore, in his next, either to retract this Passage,
which is within the Pages he has so lately recommended to us, or his referring
us thereto to obviate the pretended Mistake and Offense; for this Passage will
hamper him else.

Now let us see whether he mends the matter by his other Book, called, Divine
Immediate Revelation, for he tells us that in p. 44. thereof as an instance, He
did own the Holy Scriptures to be a necessary means to give us the true
Knowledge and Faith of Christian Doctrines and Principles: But that his own
Citation says not, but only that all other Doctrine and Heads of the Christian
Religion (which he calls special, the other general Religion) are made known to
us by the Scripture means, the Holy Spirit inwardly inlightning and inspiring,
etc. Which does not prove that they are a necessary means, a sine qua non, that
without which the Knowledge cannot be conveyed, but that they are profitable
and useful means, when attended with Divine Illumination and Inspiration, and
therefore not ad rem. What he would have noted, that twelve Years ago he
distinguished between Gentile and Christian Religion (says he, between special
and general Religion, say I) though some call this a new Doctrine in him so to
distinguish, I think has little of weight in it, except he had told us who his
Accusers were. For my part, I do not account it a New Doctrine in him, to
distinguish between special and general Religion, yet I do esteem it a
Contradiction to say, as in p. 63. of that Book, Cornelius received the Spirit
immediately, and yet obtained it further by means of Peter's Preaching. [And
again to assert,] It is an Error to say, Cornelius had the Holy Ghost in his
Gentile State, but the Holy Ghost was promised PARTICULARLY to Believers in
him, to such ONLY who believe in Christ crucified and raised again, etc. Truth
Advanced, p. 70. neither of which he has yet retracted.

He goes on, Seeing the word Immediate Revelation is no Scripture Term (though
Revelation is) I can freely consent that the word Immediate be not pressed, or
imposed on any. Answ. This is idle all over. We are not entering into a Strife
of words with him, but will he retract the things? will he say, Revelation is
not Immediate, now a days? which in two former Books he has asserted that it
is, and entitled one of them, Immediate Revelation not ceased, the other,
Divine Immediate Revelation continued in the True Church; and told us the ill
Consequences of denying it, assigning it as such a Fundamental Error, that the
greatest part of their other Errors are built on it, and indeed the whole
Superstructure of their Church and Ministry, as to its outward Constitution,
(see Preface to Imm. Rev. p. 1.) This were he sincere, he would either retract
or fairly maintain, but instead of that, he plays upon words, and acts the
Sophister, to his great Shame, were he not past it. For whereas, even in p. 42.
of Imm. Rev. a Page he recommends us to even now, he could then say, These who
minister not immediately from the immediate Communications of Life, in their
own Hearts can do us no good, for they cannot Minister and transmit the
Communications of Life, who have it not in themselves; such are Wells without
Water, and Clouds without Rain, said he then. Now such Ministers, who he knows
still oppose Immediate Revelation, and deny an immediate Call, are by him
reputed Pious, which is far from being Wells without Water and Clouds without
Rain (for to such was reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever, Jude 12.13.)
and perhaps given with a design to lick their Fingers, as well as that he has
labored to irritate them against us, for to suppress our Books and disturb our
Meetings, that he might be eased of that Task he is so uneasy under, and has
hitherto so unsuccessfully wearied himself with.

Preface to Imm. Rev. viz. His blaming them who say the Scriptures are a
filled-up Canon, etc. And p. 4. of the Book it self, Though no new Essentials
are to be added, yet a new and fuller and clearer Testimony may be added
concerning the same old Essentials. This last passage he clips egregiously, for
he there said, Now though we say, That the Scriptures are a full and perfect
Testimony of all the Essentials of the Christian Religion, yet we believe (
contrary to these of the National way) that they are not a Canon so filled up,
as no more is to be added unto them, from the same immediate Inspiration of the
Spirit of God through his Servants, of the SAME AUTHORITY with them, for though
no new Essentials are to be added, yet a new and fuller and clearer Testimony
may be added, concerning the same old-Essentials. Now, as it is not his present
Interest to give his Belief contrary to those of the National way, for he
craves their help against us; so instead of being so sincere as to retract it,
he slips it over in silence. And that his Belief now, and his Belief then, may
not seem to interfere, he puts a Trick upon his Reader, concealing those words,
where he had said [the Scriptures are not a Canon so filled up as no more is to
be added to] and from the conclusiv^ words, drawn from the Premises, he bids us
note the words [may be added] as importing the Possibility of such^ thing, as
if he had delivered nothing positive, had no^ asserted, they were not a Canon
so filled up, as no more is to be added to, but had been only proposing an
Addition, as a thing not impossible. A plain downrigh^ Retraction, even of an
Error, had been more to hi^ Credit, than this false and deceitful Subterfuge,
whereby the Man shows he rather labors to put a false Gloss upon his Cause,
than ingeniously to Recant, what now he is unwilling to defend. To this he
adds, Whether God shall be pleased to add to the Books of the Holy Scripture,
other Books of the same Authority, in any time to come before the end of the
World, I judge it not safe for me to determine, either in the Affirmative or
the Negative. Answ. If he had not (by with holding that part of the Citation I
have given, and a perusing the Sense of that which he has given, which he
could never have done (unespied) had he cited the whole, as he ought) cast a
Mist before his Readers Eyes, it would have been obvious that G. K. formerly
was so far from not judging it safe for him to determine the Matter Negatively
or Affirmatively, that he has given his own Sense in the Affirmative, that
Books of the same Authority with the Scriptures may be added. Who, were he now
otherwise minded, and of an honest Mind not to mis-guide and abuse his Reader,
would rather have retracted, and given this as the Fruit of his second
Thoughts, than to have offered this, as his then Sentiments, which were not so,
and would have been evident not to have been so, had the Citation been fairly
given. I am persuaded, that as the Learned among the Church of England will
readily see, so the Pious will abhor his palpable Deceit and Prevarication.

his blaming them, who deny that there is an Infallible way, whereby to discern
the True Ministers and Members of Christ's Church from the False (he had added
in that Preface to Imm. Rev. [Whence proceeds that promiscuous mixed Number of
Teachers and People, whereof their Church is composed, who are GENERALLY void
of any Experience of a gracious Work, in their Hearts] but this he slily drops,
as not ingenious enough to retract it, nor daring, to defend it) by telling us,
Though such a discerning was given at times to the Prophets and Apostles, and
others extraordinarily endued, whereby to know Men's inward States, without
regard had to their Fruits, yet the general way that Christ has given, whereby
to know Men, is by their Fruits of Words and Works, whether Good or Evil. Answ.
Surely he makes mere Babies of Men of other Persuasions, if they may not be
supposed to know as well as himself, that at times extraordinary Men have been
extraordinarily qualified. Nor was it in debate then between him and his
Antagonists, whether the Prophets and Apostles had the Gift of discerning the
True Ministers and Members from the False, but whether it be a remaining Gift
to this day: So that his varying the Terms from the present time to the time
past, is a mere Sophistical Shift, who when he gives his former words, has it
[is] when he makes his Inference, has it [was.] Whose Sense formerly relating
thereto is given Imm. Rev. p. 179 to 183. and p. 188 to 191. which T. E. has
laid before him in his Truth Defended, p. 47 to 50. and G. K. has not yet
retracted. He in p. 179. thus has it, Whereas they say, The Tree may be known
by its Fruits, and it is so, but by what are the Fruits known? Two Men may be
found doing the same outward Work, which has the same outward Appearance, and
yet the one a mere Hypocri^e, the other a sincere Christian; Then by what can
their Works and Fruits be known? -- These Wor^ which carry in them an
appearance to be Good, an^ yet are not Good, but dead Works, empty, without
Life, though they have a fair show, yet are they ro^^tenness within. And p.
180. The Works having b^ the Appearance, they are also seen and discerned (...)
be such, and being Evil they cast an evil Savor, b^ which in the Light, which
begets the discerning, the^ are felt, and he can have no Union with them, n^^
with the Tree, on which they grow; and this Man discerns in the Manifestation
of the Light, both h^^ own and his Neighbor's Works, of what Nature the^ are;
by the tasting and smelling of the Fruit the Tre^ is known. And a little lower
he adds, Hereto I giv^ my Testimony, that there is such a thing, and I D^
WITNESS IT in my measure, etc. This sho^ touch is enough to show what the Man
held formerl^ and pretended to witness in his measure, though no^ being gone
from the Light in which the discerning (...) received, and from that measure he
then witnessed, (...) now wrangleth against it, for he says,

Whatever inward Sense or Discerning any may pretend (...) have of another
Man's Spirit being bad, yet we find no wa^^rant from Scripture to receive an
Accusation against an^ far less a positive Judgment, without plain evidence of
Ma^^ter of Fact against them, by credible Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.1^ Answ.
Accusation implies an Accuser, and this respec^ outward Conversation: But what
is this to the Instanc^ of a Man's Spirit being bad, or to those outwar^ Works,
which he said in the Citation above, had the same outward Appearance, and yet
the one might be mere Hypocrite, the other a sincere Christian? As he the^
queried, By what can their Works and Fruits be known? S^ may I, By what
Evidence from without can they be co^^victed, when the Charge relates only to
the Man's Sp^^rit being bad, even when his Conversation is not ac^cused? For
where Matter of Fact, as without, is objected; the Evidence must be
correspondent; but where the Fruit and Taste is inward, the Evidence and
Demonstration is also inward. But G. K. upon these false Premises, labors to
detect the ill Consequences of Men's being judged to be of a wrong Spirit, only
by the pretended discerning of Spirits. Answ. If it be only pretended, not
real, this does not destroy the Doctrine, or render it unsound, because abused
by ill Men, any more than pretending the Spirit is the Rule, is an unsound
Principle in it self, because some pretend thereto, and act contrary. Again,
How came none of all this to be foreseen and fenced against by himself
formerly, when he gave Testimony, and that even from his own Experience, to
such a Taste, Savor and discerning of the Works that had the same outward
Appearance, yet the one good, the other rotten within? Why did he not thus,
even then, distinguish between the Pretense, and what was Real, to make void
the Judgment, which is the Product of that Relish, of that Disunion, if he
thought Men with whom we can have no Union, (they are his own words above)
ought not to be judged, to be of a bad Spirit, or that we may not declare, we
have no Union with them?

He adds at the close, And even to know Men by their Fruits is a Gift of the
Spirit, and proceeds from a true Spiritual discerning, that is given in some
measure Universally to all the Faithful, though they have not always such due
use of it, but they may be and are at times mistaken. Answ. If these Fruits be
outward Fruits, visibly evil or good Fruits, that the very Wicked have a
discerning of: But if the Fruits be inward, perceptible by the inward Senses,
the most extraordinary Endowments judges not without them. By their Fruits ye
shall know them (even them who come in Sheeps clothing, but are inwardly
ravening Wolves) said Christ to the very Apostles, Matt. 7.15, 16. i. e. Ye
shall taste them, ye shall savou^ them, ye shall see through the Sheeps
clothing, the outward Appearance, to the inward ravening wolfish Nature: That
being the way by which alone the most experienced discern the inward State of
any. As well a^ to assert formerly an infallible way of discerning the true
Ministers and Members from the false is given* and now, that there is not
enough of it given to all the Faithful to keep them out of Mistakes, shows how
confused the Man is in his present Shiftings and Shufflings.

Imm. Rev. p. 12. This Seed grows up into a perfect substantial Birth, which
is Christ formed within, the Body of Christ, his Flesh and Blood which comes
down from Heaven, and gives Life unto Man which eats it. -- And it is called
the Body and Flesh and Blood of Christ, because his eternal Life and Spirit
dwells in it immediately. He here bids us Note, By this perfect substantial
Birth he did not mean (as he now does not) any Substance NEWLY PRODVCED -- but
only a vital Union of Substantial Principles formerly existing. Answ. A
Substance then he allows it to be, but not newly produced. Was that the Matter
in debate then, Whether the Substance was newly produced, or no? or Whether it
was a Substance or no? Or is not this rather an empty Shift, that he might seem
to reconcile his former with his latter Writings, without retracting either?
Had another committed such a Blunder, he had like enough to have been one of
the first that would have reflected on him. But he now seems to forget what
himself said Ex. Narr. p. 24. when he undeservedly taunted at W. P. who had
administered no occasion, crying, This is rare Logic; and added, You know there
should be no term or thing of Importance in the Conclusion of any Syllogism or
Argument, but what should be in the Premises. Let him therefore keep to his own
Rule better, or never pretend to correct others Logic: For as is the Man's
Cause, so is his way of defending it.

In p. 4. he adds, Whereas I did call that inward substantial Birth, the Flesh
and Blood of Christ, I did so call it only by a Metaphor or Allegory, for with
such Metaphors, Allegories and figurative Speeches, the Scripture abounds in
treating of the Spiritual and Divine Refreshments and Enjoyments of the Saints,
as when they are called Bread, Wine, Milk, etc. Answ. To this himself shall
reply out of p. 14, 15. of the same Book, where having proved from several
Scriptures adduced, that the Spiritual discerning is held forth under the names
of all the five Senses (of Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, Smelling, Feeling or
Handling) he adds, But says the Natural Man [such an one as G. K. is now
become, say I] These are only but Metaphors and Figures [and then replies]
Albeit these names be so, yet that hinders not, but the Spiritual Mysteries
represented under them, are real and SUBSTANTIAL things, as really affecting
the Spiritual Senses, as the outward Things affect the Natural -- And indeed
these Outward Things are but Figures of the Inward and Spiritual, which as far
exceed and transcend them in Life, Glory, Beauty and Excellency, as a living
Body does the Shadow; so that this whole visible World -- is but a Shadow in
respect of the Spiritual and Inward. Thus far G. K. formerly, whereby it
appears, that he then ascribed the Shadow, the Metaphor to the Outward, the
thing shadowed forth to the Inward: Now he assigns, on ^he contrary, the
Metaphor, Allegory or Figure to the ^nward, and the thing shadowed forth to the
Outward; and yet he is not so Ingenuous, as to own a Change in his Judgment,
but would render his meaning now and formerly the same. Nor has he here only
asserted* That the Seed was a Substance, but also in his Way cast up, p. 60. (a
Book printed Anno 1678, and as yet unretracted) has ranked the contrary
Opinion among the great and woeful Mistakes and Misconceptions of the Professors
of Christianity, who in his seventh Argument, p. 64. thus has it, The Saints
feel it in them as really to be a part or Particle of the very Substance of
Heaven, viz. Of that Spiritual and Invisible Heavens where the Saints live, as
they do feel the Body of their Outward Man to be a Part or Particle of the
Substance of this Outward World. And having described this Divine Birth to be,
not only a Substance, but a composed Substance of Body and Spirit, he plainly
affirms, p. 65. The Spirit is a measure of the Spirit or Soul of Christ the
Heavenly Man. But if he will not believe what himself said formerly, nor yet
retract his manifold Contradictions and Absurdities, it is to be hoped, the
unbyassed and considerate will see him in his proper Colors, and that his
Covering is but a Fig-leaf Garment.

But this Allegorical and Figurative Sense (as he terms it) of Christ's Flesh
and Blood, he says, ought not to divert our Minds, nor take off our Faith from
Christ's Flesh without us, etc. Answ. I readily grant it: For the advantage of
that Faith (as Paul said of Circumcision of old to the Jews) is much every way,
Romans 3.1, 2. Yet this excludes not the Heathen, to whom the History has not
been revealed, and who are the Uncircumcision that keeps the Righteousness of
the Law, Chap. 2. v. 26. from any Benefit thereby, though not an equal. This
himself seemed sensible of, when in his Light of Truth Triumphing (printed Anno
1670, and not yet retracted) he said, As many have suffered Hurt through the
Disobedience of the First Man, to wit, Adam, who have not known expressly, that
ever such a Man was, o^ the manner of his Disobedience, so why may not EVEN
MANY, receive Benefit through the Obe^dience of Christ in the outward, who have
not expressly known his outward Coming and Sufferings, otherwise Adam's
Disobedience were more effectual for Man's Destruction, than the Obedience of
Christ were for his Salvation.

His following Assertion ( that to believe in Christ, as he gave his Body of
Flesh outwardly to be broken for us, and his Blood outwardly to be shed for the
Remission of our Sins, is the eating of his Flesh and drinking of his Blood, as
well as the inward Enjoyment of his Life in us, and that this is clear from
John 6.29, 35, 40, 47, 48.) I must a little compare with what he has said
elsewhere. In his Book entitled Rector Corrected, Printed Anno 1680 (a passage
not yet retracted) he blames his Adversary p. 19. for saying, He would prove
that the Flesh and Blood spoken of, John 6. are not a spiritual, invisible
Substance, retorting thus, Then what must we infer from this Interpretation of
thine, but that we must eat visible Flesh and drink visible Blood? But hear him
further, ibid. When the Capernaanites understood it of visible Flesh and Blood,
he told them, He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells in me,
and I in him, to signify that it was an inward and invisible Eating, of an
inward invisible Substance, whereof he did speak: For proof of which he then
quoted John 61, 62, 63. at large. Again P. 21. he says, Christ's giving his
Flesh for the Life of the World, is more than to offer up his visible Flesh
upon the Cross, for he gives his Flesh to eat, and his Blood to drink, whereas
many that believe Historically, that his visible Flesh was offered upon the
Cross, do not eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, for they have not Life in
them, etc. So that with G. K. one while eating his Flesh and drinking his
Blood, is an inward and invisible eating of an inward and invisible Substance,
and it is proved to be so out of John 6. and his Adversary branded with
Capernaanitism for denying the Flesh and Blood there spoken of, to be a
spiritual, invisible Substance: Anon, Christ spoke there of a Belief in him, as
his Body of Flesh and Blood was broken and shed outwardly (it is not
Capernaanitism in him, it seems, so to assert, though it was in the Rector) and
that very Scripture is referred to for proof, that he did so, and yet G. K. no
Changeling the mean while, if ye will believe him; who not only acknowledges (
That the Flesh which he said they were to eat, and his Blood they were to
drink, was that which he had before he descended, Imm. Rev. p. 228.) but also
in the foregoing Page has it, That they did eat his Flesh and drink his Blood
as TRULY and REALLY in measure before he came in that Body of Flesh which was
born of the Virgin Mary, as the Saints have done since. Again p. 258. This Body
of Christ, of which we partake, is NOT THAT which he took up when he came in
the Flesh outwardly, but that which he had from the beginning, etc. See also
Way cast up, p. 95. And thus referring my Reader to what may further occurr
upon this subject when I come to my Sect. 3.. 1. I betake my self to his next
Paragraph.

Imm. Rev. p. 36, 37. relating to Infallibility, that As it relates to the
Seed, Birth and Spirit of God, it is Absolute, but as it relates to us, is
limited and conditional, and is rather a Possibility of not being deceived,
than an Impossibility of being deceived: He takes occasion to Query, Why he or
any of us should be ashamed to correct any unsound and unjustifiable words,
which have dropped from our Mouths or Pens, by Human Weakness or Inadvertency, or
why should any be upbraided and reviled, as Apostates and Changelings, for so
doing? To begin then with the last Clause, touching being upbraided and reviled
as Apostates, etc. I answer, Whether our Charge (which he terms Vpbraiding and
Reviling) against him of Apostasy leans upon so weak a Foundation as he here
assigns it, and whether we have not proved him so to be, I dare commit to the
Impartial and Judicious, who have read our Books and his, and there leave it.
As to the rest I say, our Principle concerning Infallibility, which he has so
often vindicated, though of late he has Scoffed at us for it, is no other than
what himself has asserted in the Citation above: Therefore has he no need to
quarrel with us upon that account, nor yet to upbraid and revile us (they are
his own Terms) as he has done therefore, were he (with us) a sincere Professor
of the infallible Guidance and Leadings of the Spirit into all Truth. One
instance of his taunting at us, I shall give out of his Antichrists and
Sadducees, p. 31. whereupon G. W. his giving relation of a Matter of Fact,
transacted (as himself confesses) about twelve Years ago, and using the words
[if I mistake not] he floutingly reflects, saying, Is this like infallible
George Whitehead? Did G. W. then pretend to an infallible Memory? If not, Can
he pretend still to believe, that the Spirit and infallible Guidance thereof is
a standing Gospel-Privilege, and yet will he make a Feast to them that are
otherwise minded, and whose contrary Principles he has so severely censured,
of the Doctrine himself maintains, like those Vain People that make a Mock of
the Spirit's moving? O Shameless Man! But what yet adds to his Ephah, and
augments his Evil, himself at the same time was guilty of, having ascribed
Arguments (in his Book of Universal Grace) to the Evidence and Demonstration of
the Spirit of Truth, which now p. 15, 16. he acknowledges his Sin and Error
in, trusting (as he there says) in the Mercy of God for Christ's sake, for the
Pardon of that and of all his other sins. So that had any among us taken the
Name of the Lord in vain, and fathered upon his Spirit what was the product of
our own, G. K. of all Men (especially if he still believe the Principle, and be
offended only at the abuse of it) was most unfit to throw the first stone,
while he had not retracted his, which yet he has done to the gratifying of the
Loose and Profane: Which Work will be his Burden, except he unfeignedly repent.

Imm. Rev. p. 54. thus, And though I cite Scriptures, and make use of them in
Arguing this Point, yet I can truly say, I have not my Knowledge from them; who
had said but a Line or two above (which he gives not here) I have not fetched
them from my own Wisdom, neither has it taught me them. Now he bids us Note,
He says from them, as being the Efficient Cause, but he did not deny, that he
had his Knowledge by them, Instrumentally, to wit, the Doctrinal Knowledge and
Faith he had of Gospel Truths, and Principles of Christianity, for that is
abundantly Acknowledged in MANY PLACES (says he, but he names not one) in that
Book. Answ. Were I to Argue the Point with him Doctrinally, and not rather
evincing the Man's False Allegations and Pretexts, I might query, whether the
Belief that the Scriptures are true, was Communicated to him by themselves, or
Revealed by the Spirit Immediately: But of this, a touch is enough. Now in
order to show what he meant by the word [From] which he harps upon, I recur to
what he said a little above, with Respect to his own Wisdom, that he had not
fetched his Arguments from them, so neither from the Scriptures. Did he mean
that his own Wisdom was not the Efficient, but the Instrumental Cause, from
which he fetched his Knowledge and Faith? Nay, that he did not: For in p. 55.
he says, God Dwells in the Light inaccessible, the Mortal or Natural
Understanding cannot Approach unto him -- when it stretches it self to know
him, it is Confounded and Dashed, more than if the Bodily Eye would set it self
to look upon the Sun, etc. Again in p. 56. he uses the word [From] in the same
manner, when he tells us, Words spoken from without, though the best of Words
uttered from Christ in the Days of his Flesh, or from any of the Apostles or
Prophets, and yet recorded in the Scriptures, cannot reveal the Father nor the
Son neither, they point only at that which Reveals, etc. Where the Intelligent
may perceive, he (in like manner) uses from for by, for the words were uttered
by Christ and his Apostles, and so he must intend, or as great a Grammarian as
he is, he must have writ Nonsense: As well as that speaking of the
Scripture-Record, he says, They point only at that which reveals. They did not
then, it seems (according to him) give the Knowledge, give the Revelation, but
point only or direct to that which gave it. Also in p. 57. after having denied
that the Words of Moses, the Prophets, David, Isaiah, etc. could reveal God
(who had a little before cited that Scripture, Matt. 11.27. No Man knows the
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him) he Queries concerning
Christ himself, Did his words reveal him, or his Father unto them? Did they not
mistake him for all this (and I query, Were not those Gospel Truths which our
Lord preached?) -- For their Eyes were held, were blinded, etc. Thus far out of
G. K. formerly, even out of the immediately succeeding Pages, wherein I do not
widely refer to MANY PLACES, I leave the Reader to search the whole Book for it
(and perhaps all labor lost at last) as he does; but give both Page and
Passage. And now I leave it to the Reader, from whence he pretended to have his
Knowledge and Faith formerly, and whether rather than retract what he then
delivered, he has not put a false Gloss upon his words, by an evasive
Interpretation contrary to his Sense then.

Imm. Rev. p. 57. [Jesus Christ himself, who spoke to them in the days of his
Flesh Face to Face, did his words reveal him or his Father unto them] That he
then as well as now believes there is need of the Internal Revelation to give
the Knowledge of Christ, and that that Knowledge was needful to all Men's
Salvation (either explicitly or implicitly) else why should he say, That it was
needful to be revealed by the Spirits. Answ: I find no words there of the
Knowledge of Christ, as he came in the Flesh, but only of Christ as God, that
God fills all things, but is apprehended by nothing, but that which comes
from himself, is begotten by himself, etc. p. 55. Adding toward the close of
the Page, It [the Carnal Mind] cannot by searching find out God, he dwells in
another Principle, etc. And in p. 56. he tells us, how he is known, and
revealed, viz. by the Son, for which he quotes Matt. 11.27. And to manifest
that no outward, mediate Revelation can do it (they are his following words) he
in that and p. 57. instanceth, that the words uttered from Christ (as he has
it) in the days of his Flesh, or from any of the Prophets or Apostles, cannot
reveal the Father. Who in his Gradation descends to this Query, saying, To come
to Jesus Christ himself, who spoke to them in the days of his Flesh, Did his
words reveal him, or his Father unto them? But what is this to prove, that the
Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh, was needful to all Men's Salvation, either
explicitly or implicitly, when as that was no subject of the Argument, but only
of Scripture words spoken by himself in the days of his Flesh, or by others
before and since? Who (when he comes to sum all that is said in this Argument
(they are his own words, p. 70.) himself gives it thus, The Knowledge of God
[he does not of Christ according to the Flesh] being that which is
indispensibly necessary to every Believer and true Christian, and seeing this
comes only by the Revelation of the Son immediately in the Heart, and by
receiving it from the Mouth of God himself, and from the Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, etc.) has not one Syllable of the Necessity of the Knowledge of
Christ after the Flesh, but only of the internal immediate Revelation: So
hardly is the Man put to it, neatly to varnish over his Cause, and impose an
untrue Explication, instead of a true one, upon his Reader.

Imm. Rev. p. 60. his having said, Seeing the Knowledge of Christ after the
Flesh was not sufficient, nor to be rested in, but they were to look for a
better, etc.) he tells us, It will appear from the foregoing and following
words in that Book, that by the Knowledge of him after the Flesh, he did not
mean that Knowledge of him as he came in the Flesh, but that Knowledge that the
Disciples and Apostles had of him by their outward sight and hearing of him, or
by what they could know of him, by the mere actings of the Mind, without
Internal Revelation. Answ. Outward sight and hearing by the mere actings of the
Mind, are foisted in now, not mentioned there, nor deduceable from thence. Yet
I observe how he varies in treating upon one and the same Argumen^: When he
speaks of Jesus Christ's speaking Face to Face in the days of his Flesh, he
applies it to the Knowledge of him, as he came in the Flesh; but when he uses
the words [Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh] he did not mean the Knowledge
of him, as he came in the Flesh, but by outward seeing, hearing and the mere
Actings of the Mind, etc. Yet all will not help him. For having showed, p. 59.
That if Christ's Bodily Presence was not sufficient of it self to minister --
but a MORE GLORIOUS they were to expect -- then far less the outward
Administration of any other Man. He in p. 60. adds, For if Christ be no more to
be known after the Flesh, much less any other Man, but they were to look for a
BETTER, a more clear and full Manifestation in themselves [to wit] a Spiritual,
Heavenly, Mysterious Manifestation in themselves, even such a way as the World
cannot know him or receive him, which made Judas (not Iscariot) to wonder and
question him, saying, How is it that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not
unto the World? By all which it will appear G. K. was not showing that the
Knowledge of Christ, as he came in the Flesh, was needful to Salvation to all
(as he alleged. 7.) nor yet here treating of the Knowledge received by the
mere Actings of the Mind without Internal Revelation, but was preferring the
inward Manifestation of Christ in Spirit, to his bodily Presence in the Flesh;
representing the outward Coming as no^ sufficient of it self, the other as more
Glorious, Heavenly, full and clear, such as the World could not receive* So
that instead of extolling the outward Coming, and setting off the Benefits
thereof, he was rather magnifying the inward, and lessening the other.

Whereas he adds, The true saving Knowledge of Christ is a spiritual Knowledge
of him, as he came in the Flesh and died for us, so as by the inward Revelation
of the Spirit (...) God, the Mystery of his Death and Sufferings is opened to
us I answer, We deny not the unvailing of any Mystery to be a Spiritual
Knowledge, nor yet that great Blessing and Benefits were purchased by his Death
and Suffer^ings; but that such who have not had the opportunity and means of
the knowledge of what Christ did outwardly, and have died without it, either
are not saved, or receive the Knowledge thereof in order to Salvation when
dead, is what we have detected him, as contra^ictory to his former Writings in.

Imm. Rev. p. 63. The glorious Gospel is not the words, the best of Scripture
words, (there he stops, referring from p. 55 to 71.) he takes occasion. 9. to
declare, His sense was, that the ^ords of Scripture are not principally and
chiefly the Gospel, ^ot the principal thing of the Gospel, but that p. 69. he
calls ^he Light the principal thing -- But as the Scripture words without the
inward Life, etc. is not the Gospel, so nor is the Spirit and Light, barely and
abstractly considered, without ^he Words and Doctrine, the Gospel, in the full
and adequate sense of the word Gospel. Answ. I shall first confront him ^ut of
what he has more fully delivered in p. 63. than ^e has here given, and then
consider his References. ^n the first place, he there says, of the Gospel, It
is that which the words declare of, but not the words themselves, which may be
read, heard and known by the Unbeliever [of whom he saith] but the Gospel he
knows not, it is hid from him [and his reason is] for it is the Power of God
unto Salvation, it is the Preaching of the glad Tidings of Salvation by Jesus
Christ himself IMMEDIATELY in the Heart, it is Christ's saying in Man, by the
powerful Breath of his Spirit, Awake thou that sleep -- He is the great
Preacher of this great and glorious Gospel himself. Now Reader what Consistency
is there between his say^ng formerly, the Gospel is NOT the Words, the
Unbeliever has that, but the Gospel he knows not, it is ^id from him, Christ
himself is the great Preacher of that; and his now saying, that neither the
Scriptures, nor the Spirit and Light, is the Gospel, barely and abstractly
considered. He then said Christ preached it immediately, he now tells us (a
little below) It cannot be conceived without some Form of Words and
Propositions, that consist of words inwardly conceived, and cannot be outwardly
preached, without some Form of Words outwardly expressed* whereby he confounds
a Declaration of or concerning the Gospel, with the Gospel it self, quite
beside his Sentiments formerly, That it was spoken in Man by Christ* by the
powerful Breath of his Spirit, which surely may be without a Form of words, as
outwardly. The one the Unbelievers may read, hear and know, and yet no^ know
the Gospel: But will he say the Gospel was never communicated by the Divine
Breath, without a Form of Words, seeing he now makes the outward Preaching* and
the thing preached so inseparable to the Gospel, that neither of them are
Gospel in the abstract? And whereas he tells, Imm. Rev. p. 213. The Gospel was
preached unto Abraham, Abel, Enoch, Noah, and to all Believers who lived before
Scripture was writ in a Book* and that it was spoken into their Hearts by the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, etc. Will he now maintain that they had both the
Scripture Words and the Spirit and Light, in order to make it Gospel? Could not
Christ in speaking into their Hearts be conceived without some Form of Words,
or was it not Gospel till so conceived?

Nor will his Allegations from p. 55 to 71. and p. 69 stand him in any stead.
For the first Reference is wide, no passage assigned, and though I cannot find
any thing there to help him off, yet I find in p. 56. what makes against him,
viz. The best of words uttered from Christ himself in the days of his Flesh, or
from any o^ the Apostles or Prophets, and yet recorded in Scripture, cannot
reveal the Father, nor the Son neither, they point only at that which reveals,
and were spoken and writ for that end, that People might come to the Principle
of true Knowledge in themselves (see also p. 59.) Whence I Query, Cannot the
Gospel (which is the Power of God unto Salvation) reveal the Father, or does
that Gospel point only at that which reveal? Or is that which reveals the
Father, (which he says the best of words cannot do) as it is opened in Man by
the Son, no Gospel, till outwardly preached or written? Thus for want of
Sincerity to retract, and by laboring to defend as Congruous what is so
Contradictory, is the Man entangled, and the more he toils, the more he is
perplexed. His second Reference, instead of doing him any good, further lays him
open. For though he does there assert the Light, as the Principal thing, yet
not in ordine ad idem, not with relation to the Gospel, for which end he here
adduceth it, for there was no Dissertation thereof there. His words are these,
One takes himself to read Commentators to furnish him for the Ministry, another
to read Hypocrates and Galen to become a Physician, while their hands are out
from the Light of Christ, which gives true Knowledge and Ability to Minister
either to the Soul or Body, and is the principal thing. Mark he does not say it
is the principal thing of the Gospel, he was not defining Gospel here, but what
was the principal thing ^o make a good Minister or Physician; nor did he say,
^eading of Hypocrates or Galen was Gospel in the ab^tract, but the Light was
the principal thing, or that ^hey and the Light together make up the Gospel in
the ^ull and adequate Sense thereof. This I urge to show ^he Man's Falsehood and
Deceit, who offers so remote ^n Instance, and wide from the subject we are
treating ^f, to prove that to which it had no coherence, and all ^o cover
himself, that the Shame of his Nakedness ^ight not appear, which now is so much
the more vi^ble, by this fresh Demonstration thereof.

From hence he sallieth to a Discourse about the Scrip^ures being called the
Word of God. That he may ratify our Adversaries, he represents it an
unprofitable, ^rtful and groundless Contention on our parts, especially ^r
Friend B. Cool, having in a late Book of his said, That as they declare the
Mind of God with respect to us* and are his Commands to us, they may in that
respect b^ called the Word or Command of God to us: And so, sait^ G. K. all
other Professions in Christendom own them, and n^ otherwise. Answ. Till he be
more steady to what him^self owns, I deem him no fit Voucher for others, much
less for all other Professions in Christendom: Yet for the sake of such, to
whom he labors to traduce us, (...) reply, We contend not merely about Words,
but a^ some Men have erred in denying the immediate Interna^ Revelation is a
continuing Gospel-Privilege, so have they also in mis-applying what has been
said in the Scriptures, concerning the Word of God, whence i^ has come to
pass, that as the Jews of Old thought i^ them to have Eternal Life, while not
coming to Christ John 5.39. so these not attending to nor coming t^ Christ, as
inwardly revealed, have set up the Scripture as their Rule, in opposition to an
inward Guidance by the Spirit of God in these days, assigning to them, wha^ was
spoken of the Divine Inshining Words. Now t^ undeceive these, and direct them
to an inward Prin^ciple in themselves, our Friends have been led to thi^
Distinction, not in Derogation to the Holy Scriptures nor through an Itch of
Contention, but as a necessar^ Medium to six Men's Minds upon that Word, which
i^ able to save the Soul, and enlighten the Eye, which the best of Words could
not do without it. Yet very unf^ was G. K. to fling this stone, who himself
has bot^ used and defended this very Distinction in his Help i^ time of Need,
p. 65. (a passage not yet retracted) for there he not only tells us, Though the
Holy Scrip^tures declare of this Word, yet they are not tha^ Word more than a
Map or Description of Rome o^ London, is Rome or London, or the Image of Caesar
i^ Caesar, or Bread and Wine is the Body and Blood o^ Christ, etc. But also
allows, They may borro^ the Name, and sometimes be so called, as the words or
Prophecy of Isaiah, is called by himself his Vision, etc. He should therefore
have first retracted his own unprofitable, hurtful and groundless Contention
(as he calls it in others) before he had bestowed his Censures upon us. But the
Man's Malice has run him a-ground, who needed not, by this repeated instance,
to have given fresh Evidence of his Instability (we having enough to load him
with besides, and more than he can fairly get from under) were he not
judiciously infatuated, in his envious Undertakings, as a just Recompense from
the Just God for his Bitterness and Apostasy.

viz. [those Prophets] for [that Prophet] and so obvious to any intelligent
Reader, as well as that it was never objected against him, that I know of, that
I am persuaded, he having slid over so many more considerable ones, which were
his own not the Printers, he would never have touched upon this, but to usher
in a Slander. For after having told us, Diverse Typographical Errors are to be
found in many or most of his former Books, which yet are obvious enough to the
Judicious and Vnprejudiced (Why then did he not give an account of them, as
well as of this, when his hand was in, say I?) he charge his Adversaries with
making that a Typographical Error in some of their own Books, which is plainly
obvious to be no such thing. But what proof does he bring? What is that Error?
And in what Book is it to be found? Must the Reader take all upon trust from
him, both that his are obvious to be Typographical Errors, and that ours are
not so, upon his single Evidence, on his own behalf and against us? And at the
very same time that he was bespeaking his Reader to believe him, will he tell
him, he must not believe us, and show no Reason, but a Malicious Charge? Such
Readers indeed his bad Cause stands in need of, but they will not help him.
However this Outcry I take to be levelled particularly against T. E. for I know
of none other assigned in any our Books, who in Truth Defended, p. 108. gave
notice of a Typographical Error in a Book of G. W's, viz. [to] instead of [for]
which he found Corrected by a Pen ready to his Hand, and also showed by the
sense that the mistake must needs be in the Printer. Yet has G. K. been ever
and anon harping at it, that it was the Author's, calling it, Postscript to
Gross Errors, a dull, silly Juggle, and in his Ex. Narr. p. 27. a Trick of T.
E's, so sordidly would he impose what there is no ground to suppose, were not
an Error more acceptable to him than a Correction. But this being again replied
to by T. E. in his Answer to G. K. his Narr. p. 112. I refer thither.

Imm. Rev. p. 74. Now the Bowels of the Father's Love stirred in Compassion to
the Work of his Hands, that of the pure Creation in Man, which tho shut up in
Death, yet it remained and perished not as to its Being -- and this is the lost
which God sent his Son into the World to save, etc. Now in. 11. he explains
himself to have meant thereby, the Soul of Man, that is a Created Being, and
that he called it that of the pure Creation, not that it had not been defiled
by sin, but by reason of its great worth, in respect of its Original and
Primitive State, and its near capacity to be cleansed and purified. Answ. I
might here show that this is Doctrinally unsound, that Man's Body was Created
pure as well as his Soul, that sin defiled both the whole Creation (not the
Souls only) groaning and travailing in pain together, that the Creature it self
also shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption into the Glorious
Liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21, 22. So that as Man's Sin destroys both
Soul and Body, Matt. 10.28. the Restoration affects both, but I choose, after
this transient Touch, to oppose G. K. to G. K. and show what he then meant by
the Lost, and that he did not intend the Soul of Man, as he here suggests. For
in p. 71. he says, When God created Man, he created him in his own Image, he
put his Image, Christ the express Image of himself in Man, and he breathed in
him the Breath or Spirit of Life, then did Man live indeed, he was a living
Soul. By which it appears he did not then mean by living Soul, that which he
now calls a created Being, but the Soul of that Soul, Christ, God's Image put
in Men, who there adds, And the Light of Men was his Life, lived in him, etc.
Again p. 75. after having declared what is not to be saved, viz. The Old Adam,
the Birth of the Serpent's begetting, he says, That which Christ came to save
is that of God, which proceeded from him, the Seed of God in Man, whereof
Abraham's old decayed Body and Sarah's barren Womb was a Type. So that here is
no mention of Bodies nor of Souls, but of the Birth of the Serpent and the Seed
of God: And as what was spoken of the Birth of the Serpents begetting is not
applicable to the Body, so neither is what was said of the Seed of God in Man,
applicable to the Soul of Man, although in his next. he would fain persuade us
to be so imposed upon.

He calls the Elected Souls of Men, the Seed of God (upon which I Query, Were
the elected Souls of Men the Seed of Abraham, for it was of the Seed of Abraham
he was speaking, but he goes on) The Hebrew has it, Seed of God, see the
Margin, and that I call it the Seed of Abraham, is only by an Allegorical
Allusion, to the spiritual and divine Birth in the Faithful* Answ. He should
rather have termed it an Allegorical Delusion, or delusive Allegory, or evasive
Shift rather: For it is plain he was speaking of the two Seeds or Births, that
of the Serpent and the spiritual and divine Birth, even of that Seed of
Abraham, whereof Abraham and Sarah were a Figure, of that Seed which in the
same Page he tells us, Christ causes to fructify and bring forth Isaac, the
Seed of Promise. So that he was not speaking of the Soul of Man, nor of Isaac
the Begotten, but of the Seed, the Begetter, the Fructifier, which he terms,
ibid. The Pure Principle of the Life of the Lamb, which died not, could not die
as to its self, but Man died from it, and it ceased to live in him -- somewhat
of a Divine Extraction in Man, whose Center is not the Earthly Principle, but
the Heavenly and Divine, etc. And in p. 76. The Body of Sin is a Burden to it,
and so the Light shines forth in the Darkness, to visit the Seed shut up
therein. By all which it is obvious what he intended by the Lost God sent
Christ to save, viz. That Seed Man had lost, Man had slain as to himself, and
that by the Pure Creation in Man, which though shut up in Death, yet remained
and perished not, he meant somewhat of a more noble Extraction in Man, to which
the Body of Sin is a Burden, and not the Soul to whom it is no Burden, while it
is shut up in Death. So foully has he prevaricated in wresting his words to
what they will not bear, nor were not designed to bear, when given.

He goes on, This was never intended by me to l^ssen or obscure that great
Truth of the Gospel, That the Man Christ is the Promised Seed of Abraham, in
the true literal Sense and without all Allegory, as he was born of the Blessed
Virgin -- and that Promised Seed of the Woman that should bruise the Serpents
head. Answ. What he intended is best interpreted by what he said, except he
would persuade us that he said one thing, meant another. I shall not therefore
think much to transcribe a Passage or two already given in our former Books,
and not yet retracted by him. In his Way cast up, p. 99. he says, Though the
outward Coming of the Man Christ was deferred, according to his outward Birth
in the Flesh for many Ages, yet from the Beginning this Heavenly Man, the
PROMISED SEED, did inwardly come into the Hearts of those that believed in him,
and bruised the Head of the Serpent, and destroyed him that had the Power of
Death, that is, the Devil. And in Way to the City of God, p. 125. Even from the
Beginning, yea upon Man's Fall, God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself, and Christ was manifest in the HOLY SEED inwardly, and stood in the
way to ward off the Wrath of God from the Sinners and Unholy, that it might not
come upon them to the uttermost, during the day of their Visitation. For even
at Man's Fall the Seed of the Woman was given, not only to bruise the Serpent's
Head, but also to be a Lamb or Sacrifice to atone and pacify the Wrath of God
toward Men. And also p. 128. he Queries, Why might not Christ suffer in Men
before his outward Coming, as he does now suffer in them long after it? Again,
The Seed has been the SAME in all Ages, and has had its Sufferings under, by
and for the Sins of Men, in them all, for the removing and ABOLISHING of them.
This I bring, not to entertain a strife about words, but seeing he absolutely
told us what he ever intended, I demand the Intent hereof, whether he did not
then acknowledge Christ's Appearance as a Seed, and the Effects thereof, both
to reconcile atone and pacify the Wrath of God toward Men, and also to
bruise the Head of the Serpent, was previous to that of his being born of the
Blessed Virgin, the which he knows to be that which we have all along pinched
him with, out of his former Writings, and which to this day he has neither
retracted nor defended.

Imm. Rev. p. 87. 'The Soul speaks to God in the Son, -- Through him not at a
distance but near: He now. 13. says, His Sense was, not at a discontinued
distance, but both near and afar off* Answ. This idle Shift will not help him,
he is positive, he is not a distance, but near, and adds, Where his living
Drawings are felt, his eternal Power is felt, making way for the Soul unto God,
breaking through all the Powers of Darkness, etc. And is that Presence, wherein
the livings Drawings are felt, etc. at a distance, absent, not near, even
within, say I? Yea Christ is near as Mediator, He is Man's Advocate unto God,
and there is none to intervene or come betwixt God and the Soul, but Christ the
alone Mediator, to whom God speaks in his Son, said G. K. but a little above,
and in p. 88. speaks of the Appearance of Jesus to mediate in Men, which could
not be spoke of the Body received of the Virgin and now glorified in Heaven,
for that is at a distance, not near; but of that Presence which is not at a
distance, but near; even of him who is the high and holy one that inhabits
Eternity, with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, Isa. 57.15.
Nor will his Notion of a discontinued distance help him, but rather show he is
a mere Shuffler. First, for that it is no Scripture Phrase, Yet expressly
delivered in the Scriptures, in plain express Scripture-terms [therefore by his
own Rule, Truths Defense, p. 170, 171.] should not be required by one sort from
another, as an Article of Faith, or Doctrine, or Principle of the Christian
Religion. 2ly, However it may hold in the Mathematical Science, with respect to
a direct Line, which extends from the place near to another remote and afar
off; yet here, Vbiquity being an Attribute not only of the Deity, but even of
the Man Christ (according to his own Assertion, Way Cast up, p. 130, 131. and
not yet retracted) so that God and Christ are every where, not confined or
circumscribed to a remoteness, as in a direct Line, where one part is near, the
other afar off, this distinction will not hold. 3ly, What he alleges out of
Acts 17.27. where Men are bid to seek the Lord, if happily they may feel after
him and find him, reaches not his purpose, viz. That he is not at a
discontinued distance: It being spoken of the Unfaithful, and even to them God
was not afar off; however they might be far from him, so as to feel and find
him: For that which may be inwardly felt and found, is not far off.

But hear him again, I did not intend in the least, says he, by asserting the
Mediation and Intercession of the Mediatory Spirit of Christ in the Saints, to
deny or derogate from Christ's Mediation and Intercession without us in Heaven.
Answ. Neither do we. But what does he retract then, if it be still good
Doctrine that Christ is Mediator in his inward Appearance in Man, as well as in
Heaven? What has he been hitherto contending with us about, in his several
envious Pamphlets? Will he give up the Cause at last, and cry Peccavi, for his
fierce opposing and slandering us as denying Christ's Mediatorship, upon this
very foot, rather than retract this Passage? Or will he do neither, but twist
and twine and wriggle in constant Inconstancy, and neither plainly renounce nor
plainly defend what he has so plainly asserted formerly?

Imm. Rev. p. 99. [Jesus Christ revealed in Man is the Foundation of the true
Church] He did not mean only and alone the Light Within, but that the true
Knowledge and Faith of Christ, as he is both God and Man, and who as Man died,
rose and ascended, etc. is grounded upon him as inwardly revealed, etc. Answ.
He was not speaking of Jesus Christ revealed TO Man, but of his being revealed
IN Man, which is the Scope of his Argument from p. 99 to 129. Who in p. 101.
says, Christ must be revealed by the Father, before he became a Foundation,
this is that which builds, which edifieth the effectual Working in every
part, the Revelation of the Arm of the Lord IN Man's Heart. And p. 103. having
told us that Whatsoever Church is not builded on this Foundation (Christ Jesus
immediately revealed both in the whole Body and every Member thereof) is not
the true Church, but a Synagogue of Satan, a vile Harlot, Mystery Babylon, the
Mother of Fornicators, for the true Church is one in all Ages, and has ever
had one Foundation Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.
[Note this must relate to his inward Appearance only, for he had not taken
Flesh of the Virgin from everlasting.] He proceeds to Query, What was this
Foundation of the Church of God, before ever Scripture was writ, etc.? [Was not
that before his outward Appearance in Flesh, say I?] Was it not Jesus Christ
the Word, which was in the Beginning, etc.? To which he answers, It was even
the Word which came from God himself, and taught them immediately. Again p.
105. to prove that Moses testifies to this Foundation (Christ revealed in Man)
he quotes Deuteronomy. 30. v. 11 to 16. which treats of the word nigh in the Mouth and
Heart. And p. 107. The Jews and People of Israel who lived in Moses's time, and
were SAVED [he saith] it was through Faith in this Word, in this Prophet raised
up IN them, in their Hearts, not AT A DISTANCE, but nigh. And this [he calls]
Christ in them, the Hope of Glory, the Mystery hid from Ages and Generations,
but was EVER made manifest in the Saints. Again p. 112. he shows, that under
the Name of Wisdom, Solomon manifestly points at this Principle and Foundation,
Jesus Christ the Wisdom and Power of God: Then asks p. 116. Where is this
Wisdom to be found? How are Men bewitched from the true Path, where it appears,
and how were we bewitched by them, seeking her without us? And now I leave it
to the Reader to judge what G. K. meant by saying, Jesus Christ revealed in Man
is the Foundation of the true Church, and whether he has not falsified his
Sense formerly, rather than he would retract what yet he dares not defend, who
has done it premeditatedly, most of these Quotations having been more than
once laid before him in Print already, and argued upon, to which he gives the
Go-by while he obtrudes such an Interpretation of his words formerly, as these
passages do directly oppugn, and takes no notice of what we have alleged out
of them.

What he next offers out of p. 243 to 247. he pretends as a proof that he did
then own the Man Christ without us in Heaven, as our Head and Foundation, and
object of our Faith. Answ. He speaks indeed there of the Man Christ, who
suffered in the Flesh at Jerusalem, his being the Spring, out of which all the
living Streams flow into our Souls, p. 245. and that he is to be prayed to, p.
247. which none of us deny. But the question being about the object of Faith,
and this Quotation therefore adduced by him, to prove the Man Christ without us
in Heaven, is the Object of our Faith (though that is not treated of in the
Citation given) I shall show what G. K. spoke of the Man Christ even as
inwardly revealed. Who p. 244. l. last, calls him The hidden Man of the Heart,
whom Paul witnessed that he lived in him, this he understood of Christ as Man,
says G. K. Which shows he there spoke of him, as a Spiritual Man, but the Body
which the Jews Crucified he p. 245. calls That Temple in which the Fullness and
Center of Life did dwell. And in his Way cast up (a Book not yet retracted) p.
102. he is yet more positive, that It is not the outward Flesh and Blood that
is the Man -- but the Soul or inward Man that dwells in the outward Flesh --
such as Christ was, even from the beginning. So that by this Position, when he
speaks of the Man Christ, he must mean not the outward Flesh and Blood, but the
Soul or inward Man, which was from the Beginning, and in time suffered in
Flesh, whom Paul and the Saints witnessed in them, as Man, which he seemed to
foresee, when he tells us here, Lest any should surmise, that by Christ Jesus
in all this large Citation, I did mean the Light Within only, and not the Man
Christ Jesus without us, I expressly mention the Man Christ Jesus without us, p.
246. who is ascended, etc. Answ. He then said, even in behalf of us, whom he
has since traduced, as well as himself, that We own Christ Jesus, not only as
God, but as Man, and that both inwardly and outwardly. [But] the immediate
Fellowship and Union with the Man Christ Jesus without us, who is ascended,
etc. -- We have [saith he there] through the measure of the Life of Jesus
Christ, as Man made manifest in us. Thus he tells us the effect of the Faith
wrought, viz. Immediate Union of the Man Christ without us, who is ascended, is
by the inward Manifestation of the Man Christ: Then surely that Manifestation
must be the Object of our Faith, say I, viz. That which being presented before
us gives the Fellowship, gives the Union within as ascended.

Yet so much Flourish does he make upon this Quotation, that he angrily
suggests, p. 10. It is abundantly sufficient to discover the Impudence of his
late Adversaries, who by perverting his words assert, That he made the Light
the alone Object of Faith, which (he says) he never did. Answ. What we have
charged, yea and proved upon him, on this head, he is neither so fair as to
give, nor sincere as to retract; therefore I shall (for the Readers
Information) repeat some of them. For he not only says ( Help in time of Need,
p. 66. The Object or thing which is ministered is Christ the living and eternal
Word, nigh in the Heart, etc. Again Imm. Rev. p. 132. agreeing with both
Papists and Pro^estants, that God speaking in Men is the formal Object of
Faith; he p. 151. represents the hidden Manna, white stone, and new name, as
the Object of his Knowledge that overcomes, and [saith] none knows this Object
but he. [Doth none know that Jesus is ascended, but he that overcomes, seeing
none knows this Object but he? But he goes on] What is the Object but Jesus
Christ himself, not only revealing, but revealed in the Soul, etc?) But also in
his Book of Vni. Grace, p. 80. (a Passage not yet retracted) from what was said
Romans 10.14. and Psalm. 62.7, 8.65.2. he infers, If the Lord has required them
[the Heathen and Kingdoms of the World] to believe, then (Christ, the Name of
God) the Object of Faith, the (...), has been in some measure manifested and
held forth unto them. Whence I Query, Whether he did not then make the Light
Within (the inward Manifestation of the Man Christ) the ALONE Object to the
Gentiles? Or could that be the Object of theirs or of the Jews Faith, which our
Lord had not yet received of the Virgin, which was not Conceived, nor Born,
much less ascended? And yet they had Faith, and that Faith had its Object, yea
and it was a saving Faith too. The Jews and People of Israel, who lived in
Moses's time, and were SAVED, it was through Faith in this Word, said G. K.
Imm. Rev. p. 107. forecited. Let him then reconcile these Passages to his late
No^ion, that, Faith in Christ, as he died for us and rose again, is
indispensibly necessary to all; Further Discovery, p. 16. or never pretend that
we pervert his words, when we show he once asserted the inward Manifestation as
the Object of SAVING Faith, even where the outward has not been revealed: And
there it is the only one.

Luke 15.8, 9. concerning the lost piece of Money, he freely confesses. 15. is
one of those places of Scripture, he has, through weakness of Understanding,
misunderstood, and unduly applied to prove a Truth* Answ. Here is no retracting
this (which is the first show of Retractation I have hitherto met with) as
unsound as untrue; No it was only misunderstood by him, an^ unduly applied, but
it was to prove a Truth, he pretends* Let us hear then what he has next to say
for himself* Why it seems in construing the lost piece of Money men^tioned in
this place to be the Light Within, he was too much swayed by the Quakers
Authority. But what Man of Se^^ was he to be so imposed upon in the mean while,
say I* However now he is sufficiently convinced (he says) Chri^ did not mean
the Light Within, but the lost Souls of Men* and he plainly now understands,
that by the lost Sheep, (...) piece of Money and the lost Son, is understood
men, or t^ souls of men. Answ. He plainly understands amiss, bo^ in confounding
those three Parables together (for t^^ lost Sheep was lost out of the
Wilderness, Luke 15.^ the lost Son came back of his own accord, v. 18. an^ the
lost piece of Money was found in the same Ho^ where it was lost, v. 8.) and
also in understanding (...) the lost piece of Money, the Souls of Men. Yet ^
enforce it, he adds, They who expound the lost piece ^ money to be the Light
Within, will find difficulty to she what the nine pieces are which are not
lost, whereas to unde^^stand it of the Souls of men, there is no difficulty in
(...) Answ. As Similies seldom go on all four, so neith^^ must Parables be
pursued too far, yet hence I ta^ occasion to demand of him, Whether there be no
difficulty to find, who the Woman is that had ten Souls, kept nine and lost
one; or has the same Woman lighted the Candle, swept the House, sought and
found one of her Souls in the House, and what that House was, where she found
the Soul she had lost? Surely Absurdities will grow upon him thick and
threefold (as the Saying is) if we come to examine him throughout. However he
endeavors to prove his Assertion, That by the lost piece of Money is meant the
Souls of Men, not the Light Within, from the Woman's lighting the Candle to seek
the lost piece of money, which plainly signifies (says he) that the way that
the Lord uses to find the lost Soul, is by lighting a Candle in it, and
inwardly enlightening it, to see its lost Condition. Answ. First, The Lord can
find the Soul without lighting a Candle in it, but he lights a Candle in it,
that by the Light thereof it may find him, in and through that Gift of his
Light, Spirit or Grace, which he had put into it, and which it, by departing
therefrom, is said to have left. Which if the Creature had totally lost, so
that its day of Visitation were over, there had been no remaining spark in the
Soul to seek it, nor had it received that degree of renewed Light, whereby to
light the Candle, and both seek and find the lost piece. Secondly, The very
design of the Parable, was to set forth, not what God had lost, but what Man
had lost, the Candle being used by Man, who needed it, not by God and Christ,
who needed it not. Man was the loser, he was to sweep his own House, in order
to find what he had lost, which was primarily the Divine Gift which God had
given him and his Soul (or rather the Life of his Soul) but consequently of
that. And indeed G. K. himself more nearly hits the Scope of the Parable, in
the Explication he here gives of what he had said Imm. Rev. p. 125. the which
he tells us, T. Hicks imposed a perverse Gloss upon, viz. That God had not lost
himself, nor Christ had not lost Christ, but men had lost both by their Sins.
So little does he mend the matter by his present Exposition of the Parable. Yet
to that degree is the Man infatuated, that what most deserved notice, viz. His
many flat Doctrinal Contradictions, he can glibly slide over; this which
himself said above, was a misunderstanding, an undue application of Scripture,
and yet to prove a Truth, comes very frankly from him, as if he longed to
expose his Folly and Unsoundness, which he had given but too great
Demonstration of before.

Cor. 2.2. where our Translation has it [among you] he had rendered [in you]
Imm. Rev. p. 126. Now he tells us, Though the Greek words (...) can be
grammatically translated in you, yet they will not ALWAYS admit of the
Translation, otherwise in many places, the Sense would be marred, as 1 Cor.
2.2. and that that place and Col. 3.1. (He should have said Gal. 3.1.) are to
be understood of Christ, a^ outwardly Crucifi^d, and that the true Sense of
Paul 's word^ related to the outward, which included his inward appearance
consequentially. Answ. As I am not entering into a Debate with him of
Doctrinals, but only to manifest^ his Incoherence and Instability, I apply my
self wholly thereto, and Query, If Paul preached Christ's inward Appearance
only by Consequence, inclusively, why did he but a few Lines back, Imm. Rev. p.
125. from Col. 1*26, 27, 28. infer (which here he has not retracted) that Paul
preached Christ in them, pointed them to him in them, him Crucified in them,
etc? (Was he i^ them by Consequence only?) And why did he say* alluding to the
Mystery in the Gentiles (for so it is in the Greek, said G. K. then, and is he
now better skilled in the Greek than then, say I?) This Mystery is Christ the
Mystery in them, hid in them, the Treasure hid, and till it be found, it is not
the Hope in them, but in them in whom it was manifested, it is the Hope of
Glory? Will he say otherwise now? And will he pretend to demonstrate it? For
till then this passage (unretracted) is Evidence against him.

In what follows he gives out, That he freely acknowledges his Weakness in
Understanding, in straining these and some other places of Scripture (which he
names not) to prove what they did not directly and properly prove, the which
undue Application of both these places 1 Cor. 2.2. and Gal. 3.1. both here and
wherever they may be found in any other of his Books, particularly Uni. Gr.
p. 42. he retracts and corrects as abovementioned. Answ. Though he speaks of
some other places of Scripture, yet I perceive he retracts and corrects but
two, so that of Col. 1.26, etc. lies still, as a bar in his way. And this
Retractation being bounded by the word [above-mentioned] must relate to the
rendering (...), in you, and Christ's being Crucified in Men, which is the whole
of what is there alleged. So that it should seem it is not Doctrines, but
Explications of a Scripture or two, that he pretends to retract or correct. Nay
he adds in general terms (as if he designed to hide himself from his Reader,
and play fast and loose) that he remains in the same Testimony, AS TO THE
MAIN, as to Christ's inward Appearance, and in all other parts of it relating
to Essentials of Christianity and spiritual Experiences, etc. But what those
Essentials are, and in what branch or lesser matter, he relinquisheth his
former Testimony, the Reader may guess if he pleases, for Information he gives
none. The Poor Man has an ill Cause to defend, and the least said the soonest
amended, which I take to be the reason he shuns descending into particulars.
Yet when he writes again, I would gladly know from his own Pen, 1st, Whether he
now dare assert, that (...) can no where (throughout the New Testament) be,
with good Sense, as well as grammatically rendered, in you; and if any where, in
what place, and how long he will stand to that Exposition? 2ly, Whether Paul
did not preach Christ Crucified in Men, even when he could not be supposed to
mean his outward Crucifixion, as when he says, Romans 6.6. Our old Man is
crucified with him, and Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ, again Heb. 6.6.
They crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh? 3ly, What other places of
Scripture has he strained beyond what they directly and properly prove? For
according to my measure of Understanding, he has took time enough, since he
first gave out his purpose of explaining and amending his Books to have made
these more Complete and Intelligible, had he designed it, or were he a sincere
Convert, where h^ now hovers for Protection, and perhaps Promotion.

As dark is he in what follows, for he remains in the same Testimony (if ye
will believe him) as to all opening^ of Truth at any time given him of the
Lord, and delivere^ in this or any other of his Books, therefore let none judg^
amiss (says he) of my free and Christian Acknowledgmen^ in this, or any other
Mistakes, that upon a further Discovery I am made free to acknowledge, retract
or correct Answ. What he accounts Openings given him of the Lord, and how long
he will so account them, he i^ wise that can tell: For as he gives us no
Catalogue o^ them, nay seems to expect, as I find from a passage p. 42 l. last
of these, the Reader should cull them out for him and he will retract them, if
he see cause, so what he for^merly gave as Divine Openings, he now denies to b^
such, as particularly the Arguments drawn in his Boo^ of Vni. Gr. he then
ascribed to the Evidence and Demon^stration of the Spirit of Truth, he now p.
16. confesses h^^ Sin and Error in so doing. Thus in him is verified the
Saying of the Apostle James, Chap. 1. v. 8. A Double-minded Man is unstable in
all his ways.

Imm. Rev. p. 137. thus, Then they would turn their Backs upon them, and their
Colleges would become like Abbacies at this day. Upon which he bids us Note,
The great Rudeness and Vnman^erliness he saw in many of the Collegiants, and
other Vn^hristian Behavior in our Meetings, and elsewhere, drew ^his passage
from him. Answ. Were this true (as it is not) it is a very rash Censure, from
the Misdemeanor although) of many Collegiants, to propose the laying wast of
Colleges indefinitely, especially if he then ^hought the Constitution was
good, and the Fault only ^n the irregular Lives of the Scholars. But that this
is not true, but a false Pretense trumped up of late to ^helter himself under,
I shall appeal to the very Book ^t self. He had said, p. 136. That upon this
Foundation of denying Immediate Revelation, depends their Church, Ministry and
their WHOLE Clergy, and their so called Theology, and Philosophy, Schools and
Colleges. Then he goes on, For if once People were persuaded and convinced,
that God did teach and would teach them, who wait on him -- then they would
turn their Backs upon them, and their Colleges would be like the Abbacies at
this day (which lodged that Profane Rabble of Papist-Monks and Friars, who
pretended as great Spirituality, as the National Priests do) an Habitation for
Owls and ravenous Beasts, see p. 136, 137. What Deceit was it ^hen in G. K. to
assign the Scholars Rudeness and Unmannerliness, as withdrew this passage from
him, when that it was not it, but he had assigned another, viz. The ^enying
Immediate Revelation, or the Teachings of God's Spirit? If G. K. can read this
without Shame, I am persuaded the considerate Reader cannot without
Detestation, that the Man should obtrude so gross an Untruth upon him. And in
so much as he adds, That he neither then was, nor now is, against Schools of
good Learning, either of Divine or Natural things, but the abuse and
Irregularity of them. I ask what he now calls Schools of good Learning of
Divine things, whether those Schools which he once would have had become an
Habitation for Owls and ravenous Beasts, those Theology and Philosophy Schools
and Colleges which depend upon the denying Immediate Revelation? Are they now
become Schools of good Learning with him? Or ought they now to be Suppressed?
For that is the Matter in Debate, Whether these Schools be good, in order to
make Men Ministers of Christ, 'Whither (he says Help in Time of Need, p. 35.)
Fathers and Relations send them to learn the Calling, as ever the Shoemaker,
or other Tradesman past his Apprenticeship, and then becomes Free to use the
Trade? This let him fairly retract or defend, it being the main hinge of the
Controversy, which he has not dared hither to cope with, perhaps for the same
reason, that the Chief Priests and Elders refused to answer Christ, whether the
Baptism of John were from Heaven, or of Men: For the Man is in a Dilemma, he
must please his Flock at Turners-hall at present (who perhaps do not yet think
such Schools to be good, to make Men Ministers) till he can settle better to
his Advantage, yet he must not displease the Clergy, except he was sure he
should never stand in need of them.

That many called University Men, have had (among whom he reckons Wickliff,
Luther, Cranmer, etc.) and may now have a good measure of true Spiritual
Knowledge, he pretends, he dares not be so Uncharitable as to deny. Answ. What
his Sentiments may have been or yet are of particular Men, I do not enquire,
what they have been of the Order, of the Degree, is manifest out of the same p.
137. where he goes on thus, Then down should all the proud, lording, lofty
Clergy, with their many Degrees of Doctorships, Lordships and Masterships pass,
who being Strangers to the true Knowledge, are vainly puffed up in their
Fleshly Minds, by the Form of Knowledge in the Letter, etc. This is it which I
laid before him once before in my Keith against Keith, p. 143. and which he
has not yet retracted, nay nor took notice of here, though he gave us a
Passage even now out of the same Page, which shows the Man had rather slide
over it, than either defend it, and so displease the Clergy he would now fawn
on, or renounce and disclaim it, as an Error in him formerly, and so be reputed
a Man changed in his Judgment by those few who hold with him, and would still
be reputed Quakers, viz. His Flock at Turners-hall, which yet recommends him
not as sincere to either. Nor will an excepting some out of a general Rule,
while this Handwriting is upon the Wall against him, satisfy any Men of
Judgment, that are of that Order and Degree he has thus reflected on, and who
are not willing to be imposed upon, that this is a reasonable and adequate
Compensation, for those Epithets so lavishly bestowed upon them, both in the
place above, and elsewhere.

did understand by the Historical Knowledge and Faith, viz. That Knowledge and
Faith that respects the History of Christ's Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, etc. with all the Circumstances of Times, Places and Names of
Persons, etc. as related by the four Evangelists, which elsewhere (but he does
not say where) he has called the express or explicit Knowledge and Faith,
which many of the Faithful never had. But the Doctrine of Christ simply
considered (he says) is one thing, and the History or Historical Revelation of
the many Circumstances of Times, Places and Persons, etc. ^d^lating to that
Doctrine, is another thing Answ. That this is a mere Shift, the Objection
raised Imm. Rev. p. 228. which he gives not, and his answer will fully declare
and evince. The Objection was, That G. K. did not mention any thing of the
History or Historical Parts of Christ's Birth, Life, Miracles, etc. (mark, he
did not say of the Circumstance of Time, Place or Persons, but of the History,
etc.) as being any Essential part of this new Revelation, whereupon his
Adversary brands him with Familism. G. K. answers, p 229. by distinguishing the
parts of Religion into those necessary to the Being of it, and those not
necessary to the Being of it, which he thus summeth up, The Knowledge and
Belief of the History of Christ, his outward Coming, Birth, Life, etc. and of
the other Historical parts o^ the Scriptures -- are such parts of our Religion
and Faith, as are to make up the Intiredness or Fullness of it -- But that the
Historical Knowledge and Faith is not an essential part of true Religion [he
instanceth in] Cornelius, whose Prayers God heard, and yet he knew not the
History of Christ, nor of his Death and Sufferings, till it was preached unto
him by Peter* p. 230. By all which it appears what he then mean^ by Historical
Knowledge and Faith, viz. Not the Circumstances of Times, Places and Persons
only; but that Relation which Cornelius wanted, and for want whereo^ he denies
(in his late Book styled Truth Advanced, p. 45 and 70.) him to have received
the Holy Ghost in his Gentile State. Who sure must be very uncharitable to
Cornelius, and the many Faithful who never knew al^ the Circumstances of Times,
Places and Persons, etc. (as alleged even now) if they having the Essentials
o^ Religion, and being destitute only of the Circumstance^ of the History, not
of the History it self, must thereupon miss of having the Holy Ghost, which is
the natural Consequence of this new Interpretation of Historica^ Knowledge and
Faith. Yet to make it yet more fully appear, hear him further p. 232. where he
says, In them who have not the Scriptures, the Spirit and Light sufficiently
teaches them the parts of Religion absolutely necessary, without the
Scripture, to which parts the History of the Scripture does not belong. What
parts are those, say I? For the Spirit does not teach the Knowledge of Christ's
Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. without the Scripture,
(omitting Circumstances of Time, Place, etc.) therefore he could not formerly
mean, as he now says, but his saying so now, is a false Pretense. See also p.
243. where he says, True Religion and Christianity may subsist without the
Knowledge of Christ in the Letter, to wit, In the Mystery of the Life of Christ
in the Spirit, and yet even here, where the History is wanting [he does not say
the Circumstance of Time, Place, etc.] the Mystery or inside of Christianity
is not without its skin or outside, namely an outward Confession unto God,
etc. This I doubt not but he would now account Deism in us; but I observe, he
did not then oppose Mystery to Mystery, but Letter to Mystery, outside to
inside, yea that he admitted of an outside, viz. an outward Confession unto
God, which might subsist without the Knowledge of Christ in the Letter (which
is more than bare Circumstances of Time, Place or Persons) even where the
History is wanting: And that in the Mystery of the Life of Christ in the
Spirit. So that then true Religion and Christianity (with him) might subsist in
the Mystery without the History: Nor was it the Debate between him and his
Antagonist whether all the Circumstances were Essential to true Religion, but
whether the literal and historical Knowledge was so, which G. K. denied, as
has been already instanced.

Now upon his thus Expounding Explicit and Implicit Knowledge, he tells us, He
knows not any thing to be found in all his former Writings, to the contrary,
notwithstanding the Attempts of his Ignorant Adversaries, who affirm it, and
whom he has sufficiently Answered (as he pretends) in diverse of his late
Books, particularly that called Ant. and Sadd. detected. Answ. This is a very
nimble way of Purgation, to say he does not know it is to be found in his
Books, yet confesses we have affirmed it, (but where he says not) and
alleges he has sufficiently Answered us, but for that he names but one of
his Books particularly, and in that assigns neither Page nor Passage, that the
Reader might be forced to take all upon Trust, without Examination: And yet
pretends in the Title Page hereof, that these may at present suffice for a
Reply to T. E's and my former and latter Books. At this rate it is easy
Answering whole Volumes. However if the Reader be disposed to see what I have
affirmed out of him, upon this Subject, he may find it in My People called
Quakers cleared, p. 17, to 22. and Keith against Keith, p. 69, to 71. I
Answered what he then had offered in Ant. and Sadd. with relation to his
distinction of Explicit and Implicit, though he having now vamped a new one
upon it, I have touched upon none but that here, and for the old ones refer as
above. But he adds, upon Supposition, that any such thing can be found in my
Books, I retract and renounce it, which is Childish all over. Can a Man retract
or renounce a Passage, upon Supposition, and not know what the Passage is? Or
can we suppose him sincere, and that he would renounce or retract it, if he
knew it, when he takes so overtly notice of (and conceals from his Reader) the
Passages from whence we have deduced his former Sense with respect to the
Knowledge of the History and of the Mystery? Again, if it be sufficient to say,
upon Supposition any such thing can be found, I retract and renounce it,
without assigning the Citations given, methinks he need not have been these 18
Months, poring at it; but a few Lines by way of Advertisement, with respect to
the many Contradictions and Absurdities objected against him out of his Books,
That upon Supposition they are to be found, he retracts and renounceth them
might have served: For this is the length and breadth of G. K. his Retractation
here.

Imm. Rev. has led him to invert the number of his Paragraphs. I shall
therefore, following the due order of the Pages, begin with his. 20. G. K. had
said p. 253, 254. When the Vital Energy and Influence of the Life of Christ is
suspended upon the Soul of a Man, and cease to act or operate, so as to give
any sensible refreshment or enjoyment of it self unto the Soul, this is as
proper a Death, as when a Man dies, for when a Man dies, his Soul dies not
in it self, but unto that Fellowship it had with the Body. This I have given
more largely than G. K. has done in these, who began only from the words [This
is as proper a Death] after having acknowledged (not that the passage is
unsound, for when did he ever say so? But) that it is unsafely worded, he
retracts it, he says, and instead of that now averrs, the unio^ betwixt Body
and Soul being broken, is more properly a Death, the other he takes to be
understood rather figuratively than proper. And his Reason is, the Soul does
wholly cease to act in that Body while it is dead, but Christ cease not
oft-times to act in a dead Soul, by sharp Reproof, Conviction for Sin and fresh
Visitations, in order to quicken and renew it. Answ. Were I to Argue the Point
with him, I might tell him what he brings is not in ordine ad idem. The Soul's
dying as to its Fellowship with the Body, are the terms of a Position, whence
it is said to be dead; so in like manner its Fellowship with the Life of Christ
being broken, is that which denominates it spiritually dead: But what is this
to Christ his acting in it (who is not dead, whatever the Soul be) by Reproof,
Conviction or renewed Visitations, which yet may be (for ought that he has
offered to the contrary) by even renewed Vivifications or Enlivenings. This
shows he states not the Matter fair: However as an Evidence of the Man's
Mutability and Self-inconsistency, and present Darkness, I observe, that he who
so lately unjustly Charged G. W. with Allegorizing away the Birth, Death and
Sufferings of Christ in the outward, would do the like to the inward, rendering
the breaking of the Union betwixt Soul and Body, to be more properly a Death
than the other, which he now takes to be understood rather figuratively than
proper. Whereas himself in the instance I gave above,. 4. out of Imm. Rev. p.
15, 16. to the natural Man (as he there calls him) his objecting that these
(the outward Senses of Seeing, Hearing, etc.) are only but Figures and
Metaphors, asserts, That the outward things are but Figures of the inward and
spiritual, which as far exceed and transcend them in Life, Glory, Beauty and
Excellency, as a living Body does a shadow [and concludeth] that this whole
Visible World, with all the Glory in it, is but a shadow in respect of the
spiritual and inward. And will he now say the Name, the Denomination is more
properly applicable to the Shadow, than to the Substance, to the Figure than to
the thing figured? Which yet is the natural tendency of his late halting
Retractation, so bewildred is the Man in his Undertakings, and driven to his
shifts to patch up his late Notions, without an effectual disclaiming of his
former Writings.

Imm. Rev. p. 256. where he had said, [Christ, according to his Spiritual Birth
in the Saints, is the Seed of the Woman] which yet of late he will not allow us
to say, he betakes himself to this silly shift, that he did understand it but
Allegorically, and by way of Allusion, and never intended that Christ was not
the Seed of the Woman, in the true and proper sense of the words, without all
Allegory, as he was Made of a Woman, and Born of the Virgin Mary, etc. Answ.
But what then will become of his saying, Way Cast up, p. 99. Jesus Christ is
the same Yesterday, to Day, and for Ever: Was he so only Allegorically, by way
of Allusion, and not really and properly so? Or was he Born of the Virgin Mary
from the beginning? He told us then, Yesterday is from the Beginning; to Day at
present; and for Ever, in all Ages to come; [and added] This is the promised
Seed, which God promised to our Parents after the Fall, and actually gave unto
them, even the Seed of the Woman, that should bruise the Head of the Serpent.
And therefore though the outward coming of the Man of Christ was deferred
according to his outward Birth in the Flesh, for many Ages, yet from the
beginning this Heavenly Man, the Promised Seed, did inwardly come into the
Hearts of those that believed in him, etc. And must all this be turned off as
only Allegorical, and by way of Allusion? Were not himself under a Delusion, he
would say otherwise.

Having told us his present and former Belief, that by Genesis 3.14. Christ's
Birth after the Flesh was really intended (which we question not, for one
Scripture may have a Literal, and Mystical Sense, both real, both proper, as
this has) he adds, But this Allegorical Allusion of Christ's Birth in the
Saints I did not ground on Genesis 3.15. but on Mat. 12.50. and Rev. 12.1, 5.
Answ. The term [Seed of the Woman] he must borrow from Genesis not from Mat.
12.50. and Rev. 12.1, 5. and also that this Seed should bruise the Serpents
Head, in the instance above. As well as that when he said, Way to City of God,
p. 125. Even at Man's Fall the Seed of the Woman was given, not only to bruise
the Ser^pent's Head, but also, etc. he must refer to the Promise made, Genesis
3.15. This he called Imm. Rev. p* 12. (as alleged above in (...). 4 and there
Cited by him, and observed ^y me* to which I refer as himself does to what
himself said in that which ^ there Answered) a perfect, substantial Birth of an
Heavenly and incorruptible Nature, the Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ [and in
his Way Cast up, p. 96. saith] the Saints in all Ages did feed on it. And
seeing Christ had Flesh and Blood from the beginning [he afforteth that] he was
Man from the beginning, for as God simply he cannot have Flesh and Blood, for
God is ^ Spirit, therefore it is the Flesh and Blood of Christ, as he is Man,
or the Son of Man [for which he Ci^es Christ's words] unless ye eat the Flesh
of the Son of Man, etc. Again in his Way to the City of God, p. 133. he calls
it the Heavenly or Divine Substance or Essence of which the Divine Birth was
both Conceived in Mary, and is INWARDLY Conceived in the Saints. And must all
this be now turned off as an Allegorical Allusion, as imp^oper, etc? O the
inconsistency! O the variable^ess and unsoundness of this wavering, fickle Man!
Who having lost his Guide, is perplexed and entangled in Fetters of his own
making, while insincerely alleging and adducing false pretexts, to cover
himself with, which are too narrow and too short.

Thus having gone through his first Section, and touched the most material
passages, not designedly overlooking any, although he has omitted several, of
which I may chance to put him in mind of at the close, I come to his second
Section, containing his Explanations and Emend^tions (as he calls them) of
passages in his Book of Universal Free Grace, Printed Anno 1671. which how
Effectually done, I now purpose to Examine.

Sect. II.
remain in the same Testimony against that absurd Doctrine of absolute
Reprobation, rendering Salvation impossible to the greatest part, or indeed to
any part of Mankind, and adds, yet an Election even of Persons, as well as of
the Divine Seed, I have owned, etc. I shall therefore examine whether what he
now owns be correspondent to what he then owned, seeing he here pretends not to
retract any thing. Beginning then with p. 107. of Un. Gr. (which he widely
refers to, without giving any Citation thence) I observe, that to Men's
objecting from that Scripture [ I will have Mercy, on whom I will have Mercy]
that God has not Mercy upon all, but upon ^ome only, he Answers, These words
relate not to Men's first coming into the World, but unto a time after, when
they had despised the much Long-suffering of God, extended unto them, that
after a time of Gracious Visitation, though never so small, he may have Mercy
upon some, to give them a longer time, and yet not have Mercy upon others, to
give it them. ^he which rather makes against a Personal Election ^an for it,
say I: For if God have Mercy upon all, ^ot upon some only, it is in order that
Election, the ^uit of his Mercy, should extend to all (not to this or ^at
Person only, or as Persons, but) as adhering to ^d found in that Divine Seed,
wherein the Election ^ands: So that this makes not for him, but against ^n. And
whereas he now tells us, that in p. 108. he ^ows the Common Translation of
those words, Acts ^. 48. [And as many as were ordained unto Eternal ^fe
believed] the Reader will find, if he consult the place, that he did not allow
it, for he rendered it [who, ever believed, were ordained unto Eternal Life, or
ordered or placed into Eternal Life] which is both a Transposition and varies
the Sense, i. e. they were not ordained to believe, but the Believers were
ordained or ordered into Eternal Life. Whereto he there adds, Although the
Common Translation should be admitted [he does not say, he does admit it, but
although he should] it proves not what they intend. And thereupon he grants
indeed, that as whoever believ^ are ordained to Eternal Life, so whoever are
ordaine^ unto Eternal Life, do believe [and so far G. K. give^ in these, but
what himself thence inferred he gives not viz.] which hinders not but that
others may have had a Day of Visitation, wherein it was possible for them to
have believed, but God did fore know the^ would not believe, and so he did not
predestina^ them to Life. Which again spoils his late Notion (...) Election of
Persons, as well as the Divine Seed (for which end perhaps it was omitted by
him) seeing the Electi^ was not Personal, but in the Divine Seed: All other
having had (as he says) a Day of Visitation, where^ it was possible for them
to have believed (then sure (...) was possible for them to have been Elected,
and t^ Election was not limited to Persons, say I). To the he adds a third
Reference out of p. 109. The obj^^ction (which he gives not here) was this,
that fr^ John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall co^ some would infer
that none but the Elect, who are given Christ, can come unto him, and they all
shall. To wh^ he Answers. There is a more general giving and a m^ special
giving, which is only applicable to the Saint who are his Children, and cannot
but come unto h^ But what is this to prove an Election of Persons, to (...) the
more special giving is only applicable to the Saint* Are Saints and Persons
Synonymous terms? Or is ^ Saints rather a Qualification? Such cannot but come
unto him; but is that predicable of Persons indefinitely? Or only of Persons
found in the Divine Seed, wherein the Election stands? So little does he help
himself out in his vain Essays to Reconcile his late with his former
Sentiments: The inconsistency whereof I shall further make appear in an
instance or two out of his Book of Truth Advanced compared with a passage or
two out of Un. Grace.

Who in p. 105. of Un. Grace (having in p. 104. Asigned his Understanding
thereof, to be given of the Lord, by his Spirit) thus delivers himself, There
are two Seeds, one Elect and of God, the other Reprobate and of the Devil --
Who so now cleave to this Elect Seed in the true Faith, and persevere so to do,
are chosen of him before the Foundation of the World, as fore-knowing and
foreseeing them in Unity with this Seed, which is Christ, in whom they are
therefore said to be chosen, Ephesians. 1.4. The Reprobate Seed is that Seed of
Darkness and Unrighteousness of Men, which is of the Devil. They now which
cleave thereunto, and continue in Unity therewith, until the Day of their
Visitation from the Lord Expire, they are the Reprobates [and concludeth] Thus
though the decree of Election and Reprobation be from Everlasting, yet it
Respects Men NOT SIMPLY AS MEN, but as finally adhereing and cleaving ^o the
Elect or Reprobate Seed. Thus far G. K. for^erly, which how Reconcilable the
Understanding (he ^en said) was given him of the Lord, by his Spirit, is (...)
his late Understanding, will be further Obvious up^ comparing it with his
Assertion in Truth Advanced Printed Anno, 1694.) p. 12. He there Assigns it as
an ^ror to say, That the Elect Seed is only Christ, and ^he Reprobate Seed is
only the Serpent or the Devil, and when any come into Christ by Faith, they
come into the Election, and may be said to be Elected, b^ not before, but when
they depart from him, or an^ not come to him, they may be said to be
Reprobate^* And again, ibid. He reckons it Absurd, and contrar^ to Scripture to
say, A Man may pass from Election (...) Reprobation, as if God's Election were
a variable thi^ [saith he, then adds, that] The Scriptures declar^ the Gifts
and Callings of God are without Repentanc^* Thus one while this variable Man
declares, as accor^^ing to the Understanding given him of the Lord by his
Sp^^rit, that the Election and Reprobation are in the t^ Seeds, the decree of
Election and Reprobation respe^ not Men, Simply as Men, but as finally adhering
a^ cleaving to one of the two Seeds: Another while, it^ an Error to Asse^t, the
Elect Seed is only Christ, a^ the Reprobate Seed is only the Devil, and that M^
may come into, or depart from the Election. (...) there is now no passing from
Election to Reprobati^ with him, without Fal^ifying the Text; and all (...)
from the same Pen, from a Man not Erring in Fun^^^mentals (if ye will believe
him) but steady and sted^ in his Testimony ( viz. as any Weathercock.)

Yet this is not all, for as I had in my People called Q^^kel's Cleared, p. 42.
referred from p. 9. to 15. of* Truth Advanced, compared with his Book of V^ Gr.
from p. 73, to 79. and p. 105. to the end, a^ Indication of G. K. his
Instability while treating^ this Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, which he
(...) took no notice of here, either to Retract or Defen^ shall give an
Instance or two of what he has said, b^ Formerly and Lately concerning
Conditional Election, so leave this Head. In that Book of Vni. Gr. p. ^ having
said [God wills not all to be saved Absolut^ but Conditionally ( part
Objecti) upon their b^^ving] and its being Objected [ either God wills the^
believe Absolutely or Conditionally] he answers [we CONDITIONALLY] Aagain in
Truths Defense, p. 193. To J. A. his urging [That Christ Died for those that
perish, Absolutely or Conditionally] G. K. answers [partly both] Again to J. A.
his Objecting [That seeing the Condition it self, to wit Faith, is the Gift of
God, he either bestows it upon them Absolutely or Conditionally] G. K. Replies
to p. 194. God is willing to bestow it upon them and work it in them, not upon
the Condition of their first Believing, before he give them to believe -- but
the Condition is, if they do not finally resist his Spirit of Grace, etc. Thus
far for Conditional Election: Now hear what he says against it, in Truth
Advanced, p. 11. As for that Conditional Election, ( says he) as it is not a
Scripture Phrase, so it does not agree with Scripture, but is contradictory
unto it; for if such a Conditional Election were, it would be General or
Universal, and comprehend all Mankind; for why are one part more than another,
seeing Eternal Life and Salvation are held forth Conditionally to all? And from
Christ's ^eaching, That many are called, few chosen, he infers, This cannot be
a Conditional Election, for it would not be good Sense to say, Few or some are
Conditionally-Elected, says G. K. All which I now leave with him, seeing he
has hitherto over-passed it, to reconcile if he can, and to inform his Reader,
whether to say (Election is Conditional, and that the Condition ^s, if they do
not finally resist the Spirit of Grace; and ^gain to say, That Conditional
Election is not a Scripture Phrase, but Contradictory to Scripture, it would
^ot be good Sense to say, Few or some are Conditionally Elected) are both true,
and no Contradiction? Till then, though I could load him with more upon his
Subject, these may suffice.

the Spirit of Life from God, its being entered into the Two slain Witnesses, he
would turn off, as said only by an Allegorical and Metaphorical Allusion. But
in this he is not plain, whether the Expression it self be Allegorical and
Metaphorical, or his ascertaining that time, as already begun, only be so. For
I remember the Testimony he has given in this Book of Vni. Gr. p. 5. and
elsewhere with respect to this and the Church being now com^ and coming out of
the Wilderness, he has Contradicted in Truth Advanced p. 157, 158. of which
more an^ in my Sect. III.. 9.

Vni. Gr. p. 6 he bids us note, That diverse of his Adversaries among the Sect
of Quakers, with whom he has had a great Cont^ of late, have from this passage
sought to infer his Agre^^ment with them, so as to hold that the Light within
was suf^ficient to Salvation, without any thing else, and thereby (...) only
excluding all outward Helps and Means of Salvation but even the Man Christ
Jesus, and his Death, and Suffer^ings and Sacrifice of himself, from being
necessarily concern^ed in our Salvation. Answ. As this is a Slander upon us so
also has he not attempted to prove it, offering (...) Evidence, no
Demonstration out of any of our Book^ to make it out. 2dly, I cannot find that
any of us have so much as brought the Citation in p. 6. against him For my
part, I (who have been more particular i^ Confronting him out of that Book,
than any of them have it not; and it cannot be a Typographical Error, se^ing
the passage given is in the Page assigned. Yet (...) busy is he at Fighting as
with the Man of Straw he ha^ set up, that he bestows above a Page upon it,
which the Foundation being wrong ( for we deny the Charge) de^serves not my
notice.

Nor have we blamed (as he also alleges p. 18. upon his single Credit without
referring to any Book of ours) his distinction between first and second, Legal
and Evangelical Covenant, given to both Jews and Gentiles: But his late saying,
That even the Law within, both in Jew and Gentile, made nothing perfect, until
the Faith of Christ the One Offering come to be revealed, by which One Offering
he has for Ever perfected them that are sanctified (as in Truth Advanced p.
71.) I have opposed to his saying ( Way to City of God p. 125.) that through
the coming of Jesus Christ in the inward, even before he was outwardly come or
manifest, many were saved, and attained unto PERFECT Peace and Reconciliation
with God in their Souls. And to what he alleged in Vni. Gr. p. 8. etc. that
the Gospel lay hid within the Law, as within the Vail -- that Christ Jesus was
in the Law and under it -- that universally in ALL Men, both Jews and Gentiles,
there has been both Moses and the Prophets in Spirit, and also Christ. See my
Keith against Keith p. 4, 12, 13, etc.

Nor yet have we blamed his saying, None were justified by the Law, or first
Ministration of the Spirit or Light within, or their Obedience thereunto, but
through Faith in Christ (which yet are not delivered, as deduced by us out of
him) but showed what he meant by Faith in Christ then, viz. a believing in the
Light, nor is the outward Name that which saves, but the inward Nature Virtue
and Power which was made manifest in them, said he, Vni. Gr. p. 30. who had
said p. 29. That in diverse of these Gentiles the Seed was raised, which is
that Divine Nature or Birth, by which they did the things contained in the Law,
and SO were JUSTIFIED by him. Also in his Postscript to G. W. ^is Nature of
Christianity, p. 65, and 70. (Cited by me Keith against Keith p. 11. and not
yet retracted) God was in Christ, reconciling Men to himself ever since the
Fall in all Ages, both before and since Christ suffered in the outward, having
given them or put in them, the Word of Reconciliation, by which they who became
renewed thereby were reconciled and justified in all Ages [blaming R. G. his
Doctrine, that] no Men were justified nor reconciled, until Christ suffered
Death in the outward, because then, and not till then [his Adversary had said]
was Reconciliation and Justification wrought etc. to whom also he assigns as an
Error, the asserting, That Obedience to the Light within in the Conscience, is
bu^ the work of the first Covenant, and Righteousnes^ thereof, and that no Man
is justified thereby. By a^ which the Reader may perceive G. K. has not fairl^
stated what we objected to him out of his Books, as we^ as that he had no cause
to say (as he does here p. 19.^ That upon a diligent search into his Books, and
an imparti^ examination of all the places Cited by us to prove it, he ca^ find
no such thing, as that he had formerly asserted, M^ might be justified and
saved, without all Knowledge a^ Faith of Christ without us, as he was Crucified
etc. For what I have here laid before him (of which I have Treated more at
large in my People called Quakers clea^ed p. 26, to 31. out of his Book of Vni.
Gr. p. 28, 29, 3^ 34, 35, 36, 56, 57, 58, 115, 117, and 120.) are sufficie^^ to
show both what he formerly called Faith in Christ and what Faith justified even
the Gentiles before Chri^ was Crucified, even a belief in the inward
Manifestatio^ in the Word nigh in the Mouth and Heart, as Vni. G^* p. 34, 35.
and abundantly elsewhere.

However there is a blunder of his behind (p. 18 which having slipped over, I now
return to, where (...) says no Justification is by that Law, whether it be
underst^ of Moses his outward Ministration, or the same Ministr^^tion of Moses
in Spirit, where the Law is writ but in Tab^ of Stone, till the Seed be raised
etc. Upon which I Q^ry, Whether the Ministration of Moses in Spirit was writ in
Tables of Stone, or the fleshy Tables of the Heart? If upon the former, where
were these Tables to be found? Who had the keeping of them? And who wrote them
there! He had need have recourse to his Metaphorical Allusion again, and even
that will not help him: But it is just with God, that such as Fight against his
Wrath, and are Bladder-blown with their own Learning, should expose themselves,
that others may see (if they will not) that Pride goes before Destruction, and
a haughty Look before a Fall, Prove. 16.18. Yet in as much as in the Citation
above out of Vni. Gr. p. 29. I have showed that he then allowed that in diverse
of the Gentiles the Seed was raised, and they were justified by Christ: In as
much also as he here recurrs to his late distinction of Express and Implicit
Knowledge and Faith (for which he widely referrs to his Book of Anti. and Sadd.
Detected without either assign^ng Page or Passage, or observing that I have
Answered him even with respect to that very distinction, ^n my Keith against
Keith p. 62, to 71. which seems to be the (...), or Universal Heal-all of G.
K's Languishing Cause, brought in at every turn to stop a gap with, whether
applicable or no) I shall tell him, He that affirms must prove, and if he
will affirm those Gentiles had an Implicit Faith and Knowledge, that Christ was
outwardly to be Born, Suffer, Die and Rise again, ^n order to their
Justification, he must not barely al^edge, but demonstrate that they had it,
either explicitly or implicitly; which I have more than once put him upon, and
he has not yet attempted to do, as well ^s that I have showed, that even then,
several of the Citations given out of him (while unretracted) block ^p his way:
Which I again press upon him, to do; whatever comes short hereof, being mere
Trifling.

G. K. having so severely as well as unjustly reflected upon G. W. (Ex. Narr.
p. 39, 40.) as having Allegorized away Christ's Birth, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension and coming to Judgment, it might reasonably have been expected
himself should not have exceeded therein, or at least, that he would have
corrected and retracted his own, before he found fault with another. Yet when
his own Allegories (or Metaphorical Allusions, as he now terms them) lay at
his Door unretracted, has he been casting the first Stone at another, so
unjust is he. The instance before me (and which a^ length G. K. endeavors here
to palliate in his. 4.) is in Vni. Gr. p. 9. where alluding to Moses his
putting a Vail before his Face, he says, The Word became Flesh, and dwelt in
us, said John. And this inward Appearance of Christ in Flesh, is his Appearance
i^ Weakness, as Natural and yet Spiritual, the Mystery hid within the Vail of
Flesh, or Natural Spirit* Again, This is the Body of Christ that is indeed
Spiritual, but for our Cause, descends into a Natural Form or Appearance --
Thus it is sown Natural, but is raised Spiritual, and thus also we become
changed thereby, both in the Soul and Body, so as being sow^ Natural we come to
be raised Spiritual. And indeed there was no other way, that we could be made
Spiritual, who were Natural, but that Christ Jesus, who was and is Spiritual,
should become (so to speak) Natural. Hence he is called the (...), i. e* the
Word Innaturalized, etc. This I have given more largely than G. K. has done in
this. and leave it to the Reader to judge, whether the Allegory be not
stretched upon the Tenters. Yet hence he bids u^ note, Though he deny not the
Flesh of Christ in the inward in an Allegorical and Metaphorical Sense (but he
once owned it to be a perfect, substantial Birth, Imm. Rev* p. 12. as I have
observed already) yet he freely acknowledges, he has unduly and improperly
applied that place* John 1.14. and 1 Timothy 3.16. to the Flesh of Christ in the
inward, both here and in Way cast up, p. 133, 134. And that though he might
possibly excuse it, to be only said by way of Allusion, yet even in that
respect, he retracts it; as improper (he will not say unsound, it seems.) Answ.
But does he also remember, that before he had pretended to retract it, that he
had blamed another (though without a cause) for what himself, it seems by this
Concession, was culpable of? Was he then rectus in Curia, fit to impeach
others, if they had deserved it, while himself an Offender in that which he
charged others with. Or is it not hence plain, that he was more quick-sighted
abroad, than at home? Fastening that as a Deduction from others allegorizing of
Scripture ( viz. an allegorizing AWAY Christ's Birth, Death, etc.) which he
would be loath should be imputed to him, as the Consequence of his own? So
injurious a Detracter is he.

Vni. Gr. p. 9. This is sown Natural (to which he adds in a Parenthesis, viz.
the Divine Seed, while he omits what he had said of our being changed thereby,
both in Soul and BODY, so as being sown Natural to be raised Spiritual) but is
raised Spiritual, he bids us Note,. 5. This is but an Allusion, and was no wise
intended in prejudice of the Resurrection of the Body, for in this same Book,
p. 70. I plainly assert the Resurrection of the Body, as a thing not yet
attained by the deceased Saints. Answ. Although he has been so far from
granting it to us, in the like case, but branded us as Atheists, Antichrists
and Sadducees upon this very account; yet I do allow, that as there are
Celestial Bodies, and Bodies Terrestrial, 1 Cor. 15 40. So that the asserting
the raised Bodies to be Spiritual, is not in prejudice of a bodily
Resurrection. Yet I find it is not enough for him to say, in his own behalf,
that because Allusions in many cases are not safe, he wishes he had not used
it in this case, but he must tag a Slander at the end of it, viz. That some
great Preachers among a sort of Quakers, that are turned his Adversaries, do
WHOLLY apply ALL that is said, 1 Cor. 15. of the Resurrection to the inward
rising of the Soul or Seed within. And that one of their Ministers (whom he
names not) could not be persuaded by him, that it was meant of the Resurrection
of the Body after Death. To all which I say, I less question his Malice than
his Veracity, a Story supported only by the Allegation of a professed
Adversary: Therefore if he would be believed, he must both name the Persons and
bring a better Voucher: For I will assure him, he having so often laid to our
Charge, what we never so much as thought of, and that even after our denying
it, and putting him upon the Proof, that I shrewdly suspect he has done no
better by them whom he would fasten this Accusation upon.

Vni. Gr. p. 20. [That by that which may be known of God, Romans 1.19. is meant
the Gospel] he in 6. tells us, he still holds, that in a figurative way of
Synecdoche, it may be called Gospel, or as the word Gospel may be extended to a
more general Signification; than is commonly used in Scripture, he will not
deny. Answ. A figurative way of Synecdoche! Why what way of Synecdoche does he
know that is not Figurative, as much as he pretends to Learning? He would have
paid us off, I trow* if we had committed such a Blunder. Again, he does not
here deny that the word Gospel may not be extended to a more general
Signification, than i^ commonly used in Scripture. So then the Debate i^ not,
it seems, whether by [that which may be know (...) of God] be understood the
Gospel, but whether tha^ Signification be not more than what is commonly (ma^^
he does not say always, but commonly) used in Scripture* And so it is the
common Acceptance only of the word a^ used in Scripture, that this
Legomachist, or Word pecker is contending about, who yet scorns to admit he is
any way doctrinally unsound, but only with respect an undue application of a
Scripture or two, now and then will afford to emit a Retractation or
Correction: And even of them he is very chary.

After the same manner he (in what follows) retracts his undue application of
these places of Scripture (viz. Romans 1.16. Col. 1.23. and 1 Timothy 3.16. for he
names no other here) to the inward Principle, as to what it did or does
discover and reveal universally in all Men, and particularly in such of the
Gentiles to whom the Gospel was not outwardly preached. Which still relates to
and is bounded by the words [ undue application] but whether the Gospel has
not been preached to the Gentiles, who have not been under any outward
Administration of the Gospel, which is a Doctrinal Point, he resolves us not,
as if he designed nothing less than Plainness. Therefore I shall give a touch
of what he has formerly delivered argumentatively upon this subject out of
Vni. Gr. p. 28, 29. and not yet retracted. Who having said it is evident, that
this inward Principle was the very Principle of the Gospel in them, enforces
it thus, If the Gentiles shall be judged according to the Gospel, then the
Gospel behoeved in some measure to be manifest unto them, for no Man shall be
judged according to that which is not made manifest. This is solid Reasoning,
beyond an (...) Application of a Scripture or two* of which more I shall offer
at the close of this.

Now he tells us, Upon a diligent, Search into the Holy Scriptures, he finds
that in all places in the New Testament, where the word Gospel is used, it
signifies the Doctrine of Salvation by the promised Messiah, that was
outwardly TO COME* -- of which the inward Principle is but a part. Answ. Here
he is out again, for the New Testament being written, not when Christ was
outwardly TO COME, but after he was outwardly come, the word [Gospel] there,
when it signifies the Doctrine of Sal^ by the plentiful (...) come, not as
(...) so positive, that in (...) where the word Gospel is used, (...) the
Doctrine of Salvation by the promised (...) in an instance or (...) has over
(...) when Paul speaks, 2 Cor. (...), 8, 9* of them that preach another Gospel,
are (...) some of the places, which upon a diligent Search (...) he finds,
speak of the Doctrine of Salvation by the promised (...) Or will he confess,
that the word Gospel was here used, to signify something else. Also when the
everlasting Gospel was again to be preached^ after the (...) the word, [again]
it had been discontinued to be preached (...) History of Christ's Birth, Death,
etc. had not) does that place R^^. 14.6, 7* mention any thing of the Doctrine
of Salvation by the promised Messiah? There (...) not a word of that (...)
there: but saying with a loud (...) Voice, Fear God will give Glory unto him.
etc. (be in (...) preached with Commission from on high) is called preaching
the everlasting Gosple^. Did G. K. in his diligent Search^ overlook this
(...), how could he say^ IN ALL PLACES in the New Testament, where the word
Gospel is used, it signifies the Doctrine of Salvation by the promised
Messiah? I might also instance in Romans 1.16. (although he refuses to allow it
me now) that the Gospel cannot be said to be the Power of God unto Salvation,
to the Believer, in any other Sense, than a^^ it a powerful, energetical,
inward Principle; for as it is barely Historical, the Ungodly have that Belief
though they went the Power. So that as the Power o^ God, is not a Belief or
Relation concerning the Power* so neither (in a strict, genuin Sense) is the
Gospel, which is the Power of God unto Salvation, either the Relation (...) it
self, or the Historical Belief of what is (...).

(...) he further asserts here, That whatever Doctrine (...) or have at any
that preached, the great subject (...) not the promised Messiah, to wit the
crucified Jesus, of the main Foundation, etc. it is not the Gospel in the
proper, full and adequate Sense and Signification of it, as the Scripture,
uses it, (observe he does not say, it is not the proper, full and adequate
Sense and Signification of the lord, in any wise; but it is not the proper,
etc. Sense and Signification of it, as the Scripture uses it, so loath is he
yea to retract any further, than an undue Application of a Scripture or two) so
he add; that Paul in that place (Col. 1.23.) meant the Doctrine of Salvation
by Christ crucified, and the Grace and Gift of the Holy Spirit given of God to
Men through him, and the other Apostles and Evangelists in that clear and
bright Dispensation then given, etc. Answ. Paul's words were not so restricted,
to that clear and bright Dispensation of the Gospel, as to go no higher. The
Gospel he was speaking of, was preached to (or in) every Creature under Heaven.
This relates to the time past, but in the other Sense it was never so preached
to all Men living (whatever G. K. thinks it may have been to them after they
were dead) therefore it could not be meant of the Doctrine of Salvation by
Christ crucified, with respect to that clear and bright Dispensation the
Apostles were under, but of that Gospel, which had been preached to (or in)
EVERY Creature under Heaven. This Objection G. K. foresaw, therefore adds,
Though it was not (...) that time actually preached to all Men, yet it was
began (...) to be preached, and that after the Prophetical Style, that which
was to be done, is said to be done, Answ. This will not help him, for first
where that Prophetical Phrase i^* or how it is used, he assigns not: 2ly.
Neither did the Apostle speak of it, as what was then begun to be preached, or
of what was to be done; but of what wa^ preached, was done; and that not only
to a few, tho^^ the Primitive Christians preached to, but to (or in^ every
Creature under Heaven. It was an Vniversa^ Gospel, universally preached, Paul
was speaking of, (...) that G. K's Allegations are unsound.

One thing I shall take notice of here out of his p. 23*24. relative to this
subject, which may excuse my han^dling it there, where he takes notice, that
the Gospel o^ the Kingdom shall be preached in all the World, and that the is
not the inward Principle only, but the Doctrine of Christ's Birth, Death, etc.)
instancing those words of Christ* Wherever this Gospel of the Kingdom shall
be preached, (...) also shall be told, what this Woman has done, etc. Answ*
This makes against him, not for him: For Christ did not say, Wherever THE
Gospel of the Kingdom but where ever THIS Gospel of the Kingdom, shall be
preached, etc. So that the Gospel may be preached where this Gospel, giving a
Historical Relation of Christ'^ Birth, Death, etc. may not, even without
contradicting Christ's words. And that the glad Tidings, brought by them
whose-Feet are beautiful upon the Mountains are Gospel in a secondary Sense, we
deny not? Yet so that as the outward and visible things are the Figures o^ the
Inward and Spiritual (as G. K. has asserted, Imm. Rev. p. 15.) so the name
Gospel is more immediately and properly applicable to the Inward.

Yet in as much as G. K. still shelters himself under the terms undue
Application of some Scriptures, and acknowledges no Error in Doctrine, I shall
give a fo^^ Instances of what he delivered formerly Doctrinally upon this
subject, in his Book of Vni. Gr. who to an Objection [that the Gentiles have
not had the Gospel preached to them all this time by-past] thus answers, p. 20.
Though the Gospel came not unto them outwardly, by the Ministry of Man, yet it
came unto them inwardly, by the Ministry of God himself. Again, Whereas our
Adversaries denied [this Manifestation of (...) in the Gentiles is the Gospel,
or any Manifestation, of a Saving Nature] G. K. argues thus, p. 21. If it were
not Evangelical and the VERY GOSPEL IT SELF in an inward Ministration, it would
quite ^ender the words of the Apostle Impertinent -- for Paul is here speaking
what the Gospel was, and what was revealed in it, both to the Just and to the
Unjust. (...) that it was not then delivered as a Figurative way of (...)
does, according to his last Phrase, but the VERY GOSPEL it self, or the
Apostle must speak Imperti^ntly. What! Had he not then made a diligent Search
^^to the Scriptures? Or did they tell him one thing ^hen, another since? But he
adds, p. 22. By this Manifestation they did see the invisible things of God,
and his eternal Power and Godhead, etc. But had ^hey a Revelation of the
Manhood of Christ, so as to ^ave the Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Birth,
Death, etc.) either explicitly or implicitly, seeing it is not the being the
Eternal Power and Godhead, that makes it ^ospel now with him, without the
other. If he will (...) it, he must prove it: If not, Why did he not ^tract
this as a Doctrinal Error, and unfound* Again, ^. ^5. That these Gentiles, who
did call upon the Name of the Lord, and were SAVED were not under any outward
Administration of the Gospel [Sure^ this Gospel then was somewhat inward, under
the in^ard Administration whereof they were, say I] is most evident [he saith]
from the Objection framed by the Apostle, Romans 10.14, 15. and his answer
thereunto. Who p. 36. explains what the hearing and the ^ing heard was. The
hearing that Faith comes [he ^escribes to be] a Hearing by the Word in the
Mouth and Heart [and that which they heard or obeyed, was] not the Law or Light
of Nature, but the Gospel [whence he infers] So that the VERY GOSPEL has been
preached unto ALL, otherwise they shou^^ never have been charged with not
having obeyed (...)* This the Reader may find both more largely cited an^
argued upon in my People called Quakers cleared, p. 27, 2^ and Keith against
Keith, p. 13 to 17. and by this man see that it is not only his Sense of some
particula^ Scriptures, but matter of Principle and Doctrine, where^^ we have
showed his Self-inconsistency, and which it y^^ remains upon him to reconcile
or retract one of them and not think to lurk under some general terms of (...)
undue Application of a Scripture or two, or as t^ word is commonly used in the
New Testament, and te^^ us, as in his Preface, he neither retracts nor
renounce^ any one Assertion, contained in his former Books, that ev^^ was
judged by him as an Article of Faith. For as wh^^ the Gospel is, is an Article
of Faith, so had he retract^^ his former Assertion thereof, he must have made
the Acknowledgment, which rather than do, how does* twist and twine?

Vni. G* p. 43. where he speaks [of the Lord's sending his S^ into the World,
both in the outward and inward (...) that thus the Seed of the Woman does
bruise the Se^^pents head] upon which he bids us Note, I did not pl^ our
Salvation wholly upon Christ's inward Appearance, (...) upon God's sending him,
both in the outward and inward, (...) bruise the Serpents head. Answ. Nor have
we charg^^ him that he did: For it is one thing to place our Salv^^tion upon
God's sending his Son both in the outward and inward; and another thing to fix
it so upon a B^^lief and Persuasion of God's sending him in the ou^^ward, that
a Man cannot be Saved without that Kno^^ledge and Faith, even where the means
of knowing* are not afforded, which is that we have showed his former and
latter Sentiments so contradictory in. Yet one (...) I think to observe here,
viz. That he not only (...) in the same Page, where this Citation is given,
that Christ, even inwardly Crucified, is both the Wis^om of God, and Power of
God, unto them who be^^ve] but a little lower, after having told us, The most
proper and usual Signification of the word i^ to be [in] not [among, or unto]
and that we are always to take the most usual and proper Signification of the
word, where no cogent reason moves to the contrary, (...) none does here ( viz.
2 Cor. 5.19.) he adds, Christ was not Crucified outwardly either among the
Gala^^ians or Corinthians, and the Riches of Christ, that Paul told the
Gentiles of, was not any outward thing, which they were to find outwardly, nor
did he bid them go any where without to find these Riches, but ^reached God and
Christ, and the Kingdom, and the Word near, even in themselves. So that if G.
K. be ^^e credited (who has not yet retracted this) when Paul speaks of God's
being in Christ, reconciling the ^orld unto himself, and putting IN them (as he
then ^^dred it) the Word of Reconciliation, he was (...) them of any outward
thing, or an outward Cru^^^^xion, but of God and Christ's Kingdom and Word,
(...) in themselves. Will G. K. say so still? Or will (...) say the contrary?
Nay, he will do neither, but drop (...) as unwilling to appear open and plain?

He proceeds to tell us, He did not understand, that the ^ging Men simply to
the inward Principle, so as only (...) in the Light, Word or Spirit within, was
a bringing ^n to the Christian Faith, but that it was a proper means
Preparation and Introduction, etc. And a little lower (...) distinguishes
between the Genus and Difference super^^ded, and that the true definition of a
true Christian takes both, which is the Substance of what he here offers. ^sw.
What he once thought of the Gentiles, who had not the Knowledge of Christ, as
he was to (...) in the Flesh, himself shall declare. Omitting then (...) many
Instances we have already brought out of his f^mer Books, I shall transcribe
two, neither of them ^^^tracted. The first I find in Way cast up, p. 44. wh^ he
not only allows, That whoever in any AGE^ Place of the World joined their
Hearts unto (...) Grace, and did believe and obey its Teachings, made them good
and pious Men, but also in the (...) Page corroborates it by a Testimony out of
Justin M^^^tyr, thus, Such was Socrates among the Grecians, wh^^ Justin Martyr
in one of his Apologies, did expre^^ call a Christian, and classeth him with
Abraham, (...)* Again, In his Book of Divine Imm. Rev. among (...) several
Testimonies of the ancient Fathers, which in p. ^ he says, are owned by the
People called in Derision Q^ker^, he gives this as one p. 158, 159. out of
Jus^^^ Martyr, That who lives with or according to (...) Word are Christians
-- as among the Grecians, Socra^ Heraclitus and many others: [and adds] When
Justin Martyr calls them Christians, it is to be ^derstood in part, that
Christ was in part known (...) Socrates, although we find not that Socrates had
(...) Knowledge of Christ, as he was to come in the F^ and suffer Death, etc.
Now hence I ask him. Wh^ is the most distinguishing Character of a Christian,
t^ Genus, the inward Conformity to the Divine Word or the differentis, some
discriminating Token by (...) outward Belief and Conformity, devoid of the
inwa^ Subjection of Spirit? That they who have both, h^ much the Advantage, is
undeniable: But wheth^^ where one is wanting, which is the best, truest a^ most
properly a Christian, he that knows not the Christ is come in the Flesh, has
Suffered, etc. yet li^ according to the Word, or he that has that Kno^^ledge,
and lives not according to the Word, I lea^ (...) every true Christian to
consider: As also, Whether (...) as live according to the Word, have been
reputed (...) G. K. Christians in part, and know not that Christ as to come and
suffer in the outward, either are not ^ved, or must have their. Saving Faith
given them, ^er they are dead, as G. K. has insinuated Pres^. and ^d. Chur. p.
112.

And now I am upon this subject, I shall take a step (...) what he says. 8. p.
24. and consider it under one. ^at many were Saved by Christ, before his coming
in the ^sh, as well among Gentiles as Jews, I nothing question, (...) I never
did, says he. Answ. His former Belief I ^pute not, his latter I have given out
of Presh. and ^d. Chapter p. 112. even now. So that if he believe So^tes and others
were Saved, who had not the Know^^ge of Christ, as he was to come in the Flesh
out^rdly, it is not that that Faith they then had, was ^ving with Eternal
Salvation (as he of late phraseth it) (...) they must either be born again into
the World, to ^ceive it, in some other Revolution, or at least have ^t Faith,
they received not WHEN LIVING, (...) or after their Death, in their passage
through the ^lley of the Shadow of Death, as I have also observed my Kei^h
against Keith, p. 108 and elsewhere. This ^t we have more than once proved upon
him, so that (...) present stating his Belief reaches not the Matter
Controversy, and wherein we have showed the Con^diction between his former and
latter Writings.

Now to return to his p. 22. whence I made this Di^ession, in order to prove
that the bringing Men to (...) inward Principle, had been proposed by him as
In^ductory to the bringing them to the Christian Faith, (...) referrs us to his
fifth Argument in Vni. Gr. p. 88 to (...) and cites a passage out of p. 92. the
Scope whereof ^s, a treating of the true and only Method to bring Peo^^^ to own
the Scriptures, to own Moses, the Prophets and Christ in the Flesh, his
miraculous Birth, Doctrine, (...) This Method, he now says, he very well
approves of (...) for as the Knowledge of Christ the Word Incarnate or (...)
Flesh, presupposes some Knowledge of God, and of his Word, to preach to People
that are ignorant of God, and of his ^^vine Perfections, that there is a God,
and what his Di^ Perfections are, is very proper and necessary. Answ. (...) was
at this once before, Ant. and Sadd. p. 27. and I a^^swered him in my Keith
against Keith, p. 69 to 71. (...) of that he takes no notice here,
notwithstanding he g^ out in his Title Page, this Book of his may at pres^
suffice, as a Reply to T. E. and my late and form Books against him. Who, had
he designed to h^ been as good as his word, he should here have tak^ notice of
my answer, especially in as much as what (...) now offers is in effect the
same, with what he (...) brought before, and I had replied to: But the Man
willing both to cut his Work shor^, and that the P^ should be bigger than the
House, as if he were build^ a second Mindus. That which I objected then (and
(...) do) is that this Method of beginning with the Prea^^ing of the inward,
was not only with respect to the G^^tiles, who were Ignorant that there was a
God, a what his Divine Perfections are, but even with resp^ to the nominal
Christians, therefore it answers not (...) end adduced by him. That it
respected even the P^^fessors of Christianity, I prove first, from the
Objec^^on there raised, That the Quakers have no Method, a^ G. K's answer, That
they have the best and only tr^ Method in their Words and Writings, first to
tu^ People to the Light, etc. Now the Method used (...) us in our Words and
Writings, being with respect (...) the so called Christians, his meaning must
also relate them. And when he adds a little below, It is (...) want of this
true Order in Preaching the Gospel, the Men have had so little Success
hitherto, and that (...) Lord has blessed it to us with wonderful Success etc.
it is plain he was not writing to or of the Preachers that were going to the
Indies, among the Heathen, but to his Countrymen, that dwelt among us, and
disliked our Method, which he said, had been blessed with wonderful Success
(and that was here also) the like he had said Way to City of God p. 156, 157.
wherein he assigns it as a Method, the Lord has taught us to hold forth to
People [to whom I pray, only to Turks, Jews and Pagans?] whereby they attain
unto Holiness, to a being made conformable to the Holy Life of Jesus Christ,
and come to know the true and great End and Use of his outward coming. Now as
the knowing the true and great End of Christ's outward coming presupposes a
Belief, that he was come, (for we are not speaking barely of the witnessing the
inward Effects thereof, but of knowing the Use and End of it) this Method must
needs be intended to relate to both, and not the Gentile only. And therefore G.
K. is the more ^nsincere in alleging he still approves of this Method, as if
his Judgment then and now were the same, as it is not, as well as in
restricting that to the Gentiles, which was not so intended, when given. What
he builds here, upon this false Foundation, falls in Course.

piece of silver, Luke 15.8. for which as ^e referrs to his Sect. I.. 13. so do
I to the same in ^ine. Then he pretends firmly to remain in his Faith of God
his making Salvation possible to all Men, which has ^een considered in. 1. of
this Section: At length he ^cknowledgeth, that diverse of the Arguments (which
is (...) pretty large reference) he has used to prove the Truth (...) that
Principle, are not so proper and demonstrative, nor ^re several places of
Scripture, as Romans 10.7, 8, 9, 10. (...) it. 2.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.7. and that
several Parables but he names none) brought in Arg. 10. p. 60, to 65. so duly
applied to that Effect. Therefore the undue applica^tion of these places of
Scripture, or any other that can be foun^ to that Effect (but who must look
them up for him* Or when will he give them us? in the next 18 Months* Or some
other Revolution?) he freely retracts (he says) which though that necessarily
respect the inward Principle of God's Grace, etc. yet THESE PLACES are n^ to be
understood only and alone of that, but respect that brig^ Gospel Dispensation,
that had then appeared in the World (...) the Apostles Preaching, etc. Answ.
This Retractatio^ terminates, not to an acknowledgment that he wa^ unsound
formerly (for when did he allow that? (...) wonder) but to an undue application
of three Scriptures (the rest the Reader is left to guess at) and the diverse of
his Arguments (of which he particularize^ but one, and out of that Cites no
passage) are not (...) proper and demonstrative, nor duly applied to tha^
Effect, which shows the Man would fain represent ever^ thing, which he is fain
to say something to, as Mot^ while Beams are the terms he liberally bestows
upon us, and that of things he falsely lays to our Charge. Ye^ seeing he now
says, these places of Scripture are to b^ understood not only of the inward,
but of the brig^ Gospel dispensation the Apostles were under, I Quer^ what he
thinks of that place of Scripture 2 Cor. 5.19 (which was brought by him in that
very Page 43. (...) Vni. Gr. out of which he gave us a Citation in this ver^.
and has not retracted, though he could not chu^ but see it) that God was in
Christ reconciling the World (...) himself. Did it relate to the time present
only? (...) [was] the Present Tense with him now? Or to the time past also? And
when himself said ( Way to City (...) God, p. 125.) Even at Man's Fall the Seed
of the Wo^man was given, not only to bruise the Serpent's Head but also to be a
Lamb or Sacrifice to atone or paci^ the Wrath of God toward Men, and this is
the Lamb that was slain from the beginning of the World: Did he intend that
this commenced only from the Age the Apostles lived in? Or will, he, upon
second thoughts, retract and correct this as unsound, which he has never yet
touched upon, though we have often laid it before him? For this is either true
or false Doctrine? If true, then not limited and restricted to the Age of the
Apostles, and downwards only: If false, it is a Doctrinal Error, a Fundamental
one, the faint terms of undue Application will not do here, which I doubt not
but himself foresaw, with respect to this and many other places objected
against him, and therefore designedly to have omitted them. Who, if he ever
intend to be approved a sincere Convert among the People whom he now seeks
shelter under, must mend his Hand at it, or they must receive him upon very
easy terms.

G. K. offers in. 9. finding he words it darkly, as well as uses Deceit in the
repeating of it, I shall state the Doctrine delivered by himself, Vni. Gr. p.
69, to 72. and then Animadvert what he says, upon what himself gives. After an
Acknowledgment p. 67. that [ Adam was at first made with an ability or power,
to know and do the Will of God, which he lost, by his Fall] he tells us in his
3dly, This Loss is descended upon all Adam's Posterity -- yet not imputed to
them, before their own Actual or Personal Transgression. Who Answering several
Objections of our Adversaries relating to Infants being Sinners, as descended
from Adam, asserts p. 69. That there is a Seed of Sin transmitted from Adam
unto all his Posterity in the Natural Birth -- but that this is not Men's Sin,
nor imputed unto them, before Actual Transgression [and p. 70*] that the word
Adam is not understood of that first Person, whose Name was Adam, but of that
sinful and sinning Nature, which being derived from him, bears his Name. And in
p. 72. If God has de novo, or of a new, given unto all Men a sufficient
Principle of Light and Life, to know and do his Will, then he may say, as in
Isaiah -- What could have been done more unto my Vineyard etc? viz. in Point of
Righteousness -- in giving that which was sufficient to enable it to bring
forth good Fruit, and consequently in punishing it for remaining unfruitful?
And toward the close of that Page, he says, Let the Scriptures be searched
throughout, and it shall never be found, that Men are simply condemned, or made
inexcuseable for Adam's Sin, but for their own Sins in the first place, and for
those of their Ancestors but consequentially etc. This last Citation G. K.
gives first, then inferrs from that other Citation [if God has de novo etc.
which he also gives] that he Argued from the Righteousness of God, not simply
considered, but with respect to a new Dispensation after the Fall. To which I
Answer, The new Dispensation is a Fruit of Mercy as well as Justice, extended
to the Vineyard in order to its bringing forth Fruit, his Punishment afterward
is an Effect of his Righteousness; but God's not punishing Infants, who never
sinned is an Effect of Justice, of Righteousness only. Yet that he may put a
Trick upon his Reader, he jumbles these two Quotations together, (which spoke
of different things, the first, of a new Dispensation to Mankind, in order to
bring forth Fruit; the second, of Infants not being condemned, who never
sinned) and that in these words, I did give p. 72. that none are simply
condemned and sent to Hell, for Adam 's Sin, for I cannot agree to that
uncharitable Opinion, that any dying Infants perish, or suffer the Fire of
Hellfire, sim^ly and only for Adam's Sin, what God in strict Justice might do
is one thing, and what he will do, is another. And now I desire the Reader to
observe the Man's Falsehood, while pretending to give his own words, the Sense
of which he has notoriously perverted, fetching in what was written in the
beginning of the Page, which respected God's Righteousness in a renewed
Visitation; and expecting of Fruit, and clapping to the end of the second
Quotation, which spoke of the not condemning Infants, who never had sinned,
those words [what God in strict Justice might do etc.] as if they had
immediately followed in the Quotation, whereas they preceeded half a Page and
more above, and were adduced to a different end. Which is such a degree of
Notorious Prevarication and Falsehood, that is rarely found in the worst of our
Antagonists.

By this time the Reader may give a guess what the Man would be at; which till
I had thus traced him, was very obscure to me. For his pretended
dissatisfaction with the method he had used from p* 67, to 72. in the way of
managing this Argument (which he calls) effectual and solid in the main, as to
the substance of it, yet not with respect to diverse weighty Circumstances in
answering Objections against it (which is all he gives, so much as leaning
toward a Retractation) could give me no light into it: Who as he says not
that his former Arguments were unsound, but that they were effectual and solid
in the main: So wherein any Circumstance is otherwise, he assigns not, but by
his Legerdemain and Foul Play leaves a more open way for us, to track his Sense
here, than in many of the foregoing; which Course is not to his Credit.

In his Quotation out of p. 69. he is not quite so gross. What he had there
said of a Seed of Sin, its being transmuted from Adam into all his Posterity,
he gives at large, with this addition [ I still affirm it] what followed in
that place [that it is not Men's Sin, nor imputed unto them before Actual
Transgression] he takes no notice of, nor does he so much as O'^e it. But to
Excuse himself from Answering all these Objections that are raised (he says)
about the manner of its conveyanoe and being transmitted, and by what chinks
etc. (he confesses) it puzzleth him. And that is a wonder; he will allow any
thing puzzleth him: Nor do I think he would have alleged it, but that he was
loath to go too far in seeming to Contradict what he had delivered formerly. Yet
at length, speaking of Infants, he concludes, they all need that God be
merciful unto them for Christ's sake, and therein I agree with him, but to
different Ends: For I distinguish between Mercy and Justice; the not punishing
Infants who have not sinned, is a Fruit of his Justice, the preserving them
from sinning, by his Divine Seed, is a Fruit of his Mercy. And thus I close
this Section.

Sect. III.
Sect. 3. with a Quotation out of Rector Corrected (Printed Anno 1680.) p. 22.
thus* By Christ his giving his Flesh for the Life of the World, we understand
both the Offering up of his Flesh, as his dying for us upon the Cross, and also
his giving his Flesh to eat, and his Blood to drink etc. Which distinction I
admit, viz. that his giving his Flesh for the Life of the World had a twofold
signification; the one was Propitiatory, a Dying for us upon the Cross, as he
has it; the other, his giving his Flesh to eat, was Spirit and Life, and fed
the Soul. And herein we agree with him. What he adds that he did not place all
our Salvation upon the Light within, excluding the Man Christ without etc. but
that he did lay a great weight upon i^, is not the Matter in Controversy, as
he has been often told. We both lay a great weight upon Christ's outward
coming, and do not place all our Salvation upon the Light within exclusive
thereof: and also have not charged him with what he here seeks to purge himself
from, any otherwise than as argumentum ad hominem, i. e. that we are no
otherwise so than himself, who has with us formerly born Testimony to the
sufficiency of the Light, where the History has not been revealed,
distinguishing, as himself has done, between the necessity that Christ should
come and suffer for all, and of the Revelation of the History thereof, where
the means a^e not afforded, its being indispensibly necessary to Salvation; to
such.

Before I take notice of the Citation he gives out of Rict. Corr. p. 26. I
shall observe what he says to that passage of his ibid. p. 25. that by his
Flesh and Blood, ^ohn 6.50, 51. Christ means ONLY Spirit and Life, which he
holds it needful to retract and correct (as ^e says) yet assigns it, as either
a Typographical Error, (...) an Oversight in him, for want of due
Consideration. That it was neither, but a Judgment upon deliberation, ^d that
he has abtruded a Falsehood upon his Reader, thus demonstrate, first, that the
Matter in Dispute ^tween him and his Adversary, would not be suppo^d to be,
Whether the words spoken by Christ, were Spirit ^d Life, or no. Christ had
expressly affirmed it, and ^e Rector does not deny it; and it were idle to
suppose ^xcept he had been so presumptuous, as to say so in ^idem verbis) the
Rector would allege that when ^rist said, they were Spirit and Life, that he
meant ^y were not Spirit and Life: But whether they were (...) so, might admit
of Dispute 2dly, As Christ had (...), It is the Spirit that quickneth, the
Flesh profits no^g, so G. K. gives us those very words: And to his ^ersaries
objecting Spiritual Flesh cannot be broken, nor ^itual Blood shed, (which
relates to the Spiritual ^h and Blood only, for the other might be broken and
(...)) G. K. alleges the Scripture speaks of a broken ^it, and the Holy
Spirit's being shed: Whereas had not G. K. meant that it was only Spirit and
Life, this instance had been wholly remote; and it had been enough to have
said, it related to both outward and inward Flesh and Blood, and that the
outward might very well be broken and shed.

To drive it yet more home I betake my self to his Citation out of p. 26. which
shall give more fully than he has done, viz. Although the Saints do not eat
the Visible Flesh of Christ [he adds here, to wit, by the Bodily Mouth] and
drink his Visible Blood, yet they partake of the Benefit and Virtue of both his
Flesh and his Blood, and the Substance of both does remain, which is his
glorified Body in Heaven, and the Virtue of which does really extend unto the
Saints, both in Heaven and on Earth, by which they are Spiritually refreshed
and nourished, as with Mea^ and Drink, and thus we do not divide Christ [her^
G. K. stops with an etc. but I go on] nor his Fle^ and Blood, although a
distinction there is betwi^ that Flesh which he had from the beginning (a^
which the Saints fed on in all Ages from the begi^^ing) and that which he took
upon him in the Virgi^ Womb. From this latter, which G. K. would ha^ concealed
from us, I observe he allowed of a distinction betwixt the Flesh and Blood,
Christ had from the b^^ginning, and that which he took upon him in the Vi^^gins
Womb. Let him now tell us therefore, what the Flesh (which Christ had from the
beginning and whi^ the Saints fed on, in all Ages) was, besides Spirit a^ Life?
Again, as he gave us not this part of the Ci^^tion, which he could not stumble
over without so^ hurt to himself; so to what he did give, he foists (...) the
words [so wit, by the Bodily Mouth] and i^ proves it, as an Evidence that the
word ONLY was most an Oversight in him, that he did not intend that Faithful
did not partake of the unspeakable Benefit of Flesh and Blood, that was
outwardly broken and shed, but his sense was, they did not eat it with the
Bodily Mouth, but by Faith, and that the Virtue conveyed may be said to be
Spirit and Life, i. e. had a spiritual sense and signification. A^sw What he
said above, of the Saints feeding, could not be an eating visible Flesh, either
with bodily or spiritual Mouth, seeing it was a feeding common to Saints in
Heaven and on Earth too: Nay the substance of the Flesh and Blood does remain,
even according to him, and what they feed on, is not on the substance even of
Christ's glorified Body in Heaven, but of the Virtue which extends therefrom:
And what is this Virtue? Is it not only Spirit and Life? However seeing he is so
fond of his addition [ viz. by the Bodily Mouth] I desire to be resolved in one
thing, as a Point of Philosophy, Whether if that which be to be eaten be
Bodily, any thing but a Bodily Mouth can eat it, and whether if the Mouth be
not Bodily, the Food can be said to be Bodily, for that a Corporeal Substance
(a Substance, which is not only Spirit and Life, but also Bodily) should be fed
on by an Incorporeal Mouth, is equally as inconceivable by me, as that a
Corporeal Mouth should seed on an incorporeal Substance. If G. K. resolve me
this fairly, erit mihi magnus Apollo.

Explications (for now I trace him by Pages, not by 's) he alleges for his
having brought (Rect. Corr. p. 29.) the words of Hilarious, that it was to
excuse G. F. and not that he did not believe that Christ had the true Nature of
Man, consisting of a true reasonable, created Soul, and a true Body, for that
he aid always believe that he did partake of Mary 's substance etc. Answ. He
has not fairly stated the Matter in Controversy, as well as that he assigns
not, where our Charge is to be found. That he had the true Nature of Man, as we
our selves acknowledge, so have not objected it against G. K. but whether
Christ, who partook of the Nature and Image of Man from the Seed of Mary, did
not partake of a Nature and Image much more Excellent, than that of Man in its
greatest Glory, from God and his Seed, who did really sow a most Divine and
Heavenly Seed in the Virgins Womb, which as it supplied the Males Seed, so it
had much more in it, and brought forth a Birth that as it had the true and
whole Nature of Man, so it had a Perfection above it, not only in accidental
qualities, but even in Substance and Essence [they are his own words in Way to
City of God, p. 131. and not yet retracted] And again whether in as much that
after Death it was not subject to Corruption, the Name Human be not too mean a
Title, whereby to express it, far less that it should be called so now, when it
is glorified, and is altogether. Heavenly and Spiritual, the Scripture no where
giving unto his Body such a Name as Human, but that the first Man is of the
Earth, earthly; the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. Heavenly [as
himself declares Rect. Corr. p. 27.] is that which we have of late laid before
him, in opposition to his late Carnal terms of Human, Humanity, and imposing
them upon us: Who have therefore blamed the Word Human, Humanity and Humane
Nature, as applicable to Christ, because we did believe his Manhood Nature (as
G. K. says) was more Excellent than that of other Men: So that his Judgment
given formerly of G. F. and others, and which he here repeateth, as it was
truly stated then; so is it the same still, although he now charge it without
proof upon diverse Quakers indefinitely (without naming any) that they have used
the terms Humanity and Humane with reference to Christ, which till he be more
particular, who have so done, and where as well as how, whether
Controversially, keeping to their Adversaries terms, or as declara^ive of
their Faith and approving of those terms, de^erves not my further notice.

But he never thought (he pretends) that any of them ^enied him as Man to be a
Creature, or to have been pro^uced by Generation of and from the Properties of
Man in ^^ary, as some of them have, he says, but who these some are, nor where
they have so said, he declares not, but after his wonted manner accuses
without offering proof: A blind way, sure, of Answering of Books, for ^s such
he gives out this Book in his Title Page. Yet that Christ was Born of the
Virgin, and that that Body was Created and consequently a Creature, we deny
not, although that he was produced by Coagulation, or by Generation of and from
the Properties of Man in Mary (a Notion started by R. Cobbet, answered to by
St. Crisp, renewed by G. K. in his True Copy p. 22. and replied to by T. E. in
his Truth Defended p. 134 etc. a Book G. K. is still Debtor to) is what we do
indeed deny, ^s even G. K. has done formerly. Who in Rect. Corr. p. 27.
(besides what have offered even now, with respect to the Word Human) thus has
it, Even the outward visible Flesh which he took of the Virgin, seeing it was
not PRODUCED or formed by HUMAN GENERATION [then not from the Properties of Man
in Mary, say I] but by a Divine Conception, through the over shadowing of the
Holy Ghost, and did far excel the Flesh of all other Men that ever were since
-- the Name Human is but too mean a Title etc. Again p. 29. he quotes Hilarious,
that Jesus Christ was not formed by the Nature of Humane Conception, and that
the Original of his Body (which he affirmed to be an Heavenly Body, yet had of
the Virgins Substance in it) is not of an Human Conception, that both the Soul
and Body of Christ are of a more Excellent Nature, than these of other Men,
although having all that belong to the true Essence of Man, either in Soul or
Body. And says further, Why is the Flesh Conceived of t^^ Holy Ghost judged by
the Nature of an Humane Body* Thus far G. K. out of Hilarious; which how
reconcil^able it is to that Notion, that Christ was produced (...) Generation
of and from the Properties of Man in M^ (which to be sure is Human) I leave to
the Reader t^ judge, in the mean time shall observe what he faith (...) his Way
to the City of God, which also gives Evidence ^^gainst him. He begins p. 131.
thus, Even accordin^ to that Birth he was the Son of God, no less than t^^ Son
of Man, as having God for his Father, as he ha^ the Virgin Mary for his Mother.
Is this an Hum^^ Generation then, a Generation produced of and from the
Properties of Man in Mary, or a Divine one? Th^^ it is not Humane, not produced
by Human Generation or Human Conception, he has told us above, in t^^
Instances there given, and in Way to City of God p. 13^ 133. after having
described this Birth to be a certa^^ middle Nature, Substance or Being, betwixt
the Godhead and Mankind, transcending even the Na^ture of Angels [he calls
it] the Heavenly or Di^vine Substance or Essence, which was both Conceive^ in
Mary, and is inwardly Conceived in the Saints* Are then the Properties of Man
in Mary, and this middle Nature, this Super-Angelical Nature, this Heavenly and
Divine Substance, relatives? Or do they signifi^ the same thing? That what is
predicable of the one, i^ also, of the other? Or is it not rather manifest tha^
G. K. is in Confusion and Darkness, Self-contradictory, and yet not Candid
enough to own it, and as loath to retract it?

He Queries, If Christ's Humanity be not a Creature, o^ Created, what is it?
Answ. Himself has said, Way Cas^ up p. 104. (not yet retracted) Let all the
Scriptures be searched, and it shall not be found that Christ became Man, and
took to himself the Soul of Man, at his Conception in the Womb of the Virgin
Mary, but only that he took Flesh, and was the Son of Mary, David and Abraham
according to the Flesh, but according to his Heavenly Nature, even as Man, he
was the Son of God -- whose Name is Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father and Prince of Peace. Thus much of his Holy Manhood, but that
which was born of the Virgin, he calls, ibid. p. 113, 14. That Vessel and
Temple that Suffered at Jerusalem, in which Christ Jesus was and is, and in
which he is now glorified in the Heavens, that he is the Root and Vine, not
simply as the Word, but as the Word incarnate, and as dwelling in that most
pure and wonderful Vessel that suffered at Jerusalem. So that here he could
distinguish between the Holy Manhood that dwelt in the Vessel, and the Vessel
in which it, dwelt; between that which was in time, and created, and that which
was from the Beginning.

He tells us that T. E. has argued in his late Book (but where he says not)
that if Christ be a Creature, he is not God: Then adds, But all who have the
sound Faith, believe that Christ as Man is a Creature, or created Being, but as
he is the eternal Word, he is God and not a Creature, whereupon he suggests, we
do not own Christ has a Twofold Nature essential to him, the one Uncreated as
God, the other Created as Man. Answ. He slanders us, for as we own a Twofold
Nature in Christ, so we confound them not; that which was created, and that
which was uncreated: For we say (as he himself said in the Citation given even
now) as he is the eternal Word, he is God and not a Creature, but that God was
Born of the Virgin Mary, and died, we read not: So that by distinguishing (as
G. K. once did) between the Holy Temple, which is united to the Godhead, and in
which the Godhead dwells bodily, and the Word which is God, and not
appropriated to that Vessel what is only applic^^ble to the Godhead, we
confound them not together which the asserting the Creature (or what was
create^ to be God would do. Nor does he explain what I means by Christ as Man
his being a Creature. Does (...) mean the outward Flesh and Blood, which ( Way
cast (...) p. 102. he says) is not the Man -- but the Soul or inward Man, such
as Christ was even from the Beginning? Or does he mean what he calls elsewhere
the Vessel or Temple, in which Christ Jesus now is? For the Man does shift and
vary his terms so often, that it is hard to know whereto to hold him: Else
methinks he should not find fault with another's saying, The Creature is not
God.

The next Quarrel is at W. P. whom he cites not fairly, although he says W. P.
expressly says it in his Serious Apology, p. 146. W. P's words are these, He
that laid down his Life, and suffered his Body to be Crucified by the Jews,
without the Gates of Jerusalem, is Christ the only Son of the most High God;
but that the outward Person which suffered was properly the Son of God, we
deny. What G. K. gives is thus and as he says expressly, 'That Man or outward
Person that suffered at Jerusalem, is not properly the Son of God, in which he
is doubly injurious: First in concealing that part, where Testimony was born by
W. P. that he who suffered, was Christ the Son of the most High God; 2ly, In
adding the word [Man] which was not there, but only [outward Person] which,
besides the pretending to give the words expressly, is so much the worse in him,
in as much as he has distinguished between the Man Christ, and the Vessel or
Temple in which the Christ Jesus now is. But these Tricks will do him no good,
but be a means further to detect and expose his Fraudulent dealing.

Rect. Corr. p. 27. Before he enters upon the Explication of his ^wn Sense now,
he vents an old Slander against G. W. not oftener brought by him, than rejected
and refuted ^ such by T. E. of which G. K. takes no notice here,) viz. that he
knew not in the least (for how could he know that was not knowable, but a
malicious and false Charge?) that G. Whitehead had put the Sense upon Heb.
9.28. in ^rejudice to Christ's coming without us, to judge the World (...) his
glorified Person, which since he has found, he says. Yet in p. 28. of these
Explications, after having alleged (...) without proof) that G. W. and other
leading Men among ^he Quakers, have by their printed Books led them into this
^oul Error, he (as if he were conscious to himself of ^ver-charging them) adds,
although now he and some others seem to own it, that Christ will outwardly come
again, though (lest this Grant should seem too favorable, to ^ch to whom he
will not be Just) he insinuates, that if (...) Scrutiny were made among them
one by one, few among them in comparison would be found to own it, in respect
of ^e many that would deny it. Thus, instead of fairly con^ssing his own fault
in traducing us undeservedly, he ^eaps up False Accusations, without proof, and
that ^e the Fruits of Prejudice and Enmity, for which will ^e Bitterness to him
in the end, when Christ shall ^ome to Judge him except he unfeignedly repent.

He has not spent so much time in venting ground^^ss Calumnies at others, but
that he will make amends ^r it (if that will do) in being as short, when he
comes (...) his own part. He is convinced (he says p. 27.) that ^e true Sense
of those words, Heb 9.28. is of Christ's out^ard Coming the second time, in his
glorified Body to judge ^e World, but he shall not enlarge to give his Reasons
at pre^t, why he so understands it, nor to answer LARGELY ^e Reasons he gave in
that Book, for that would take up too ^ch time, and it suffices, that he
retracts that Sense formerly given, which, he thinks, is the more general sense
Christian Expositors. Answ. One would think that from the third Month 1695 to
the tenth Month 1696. (...) which this came out (as I take it) had been time
eno^ to have made his Work more complete; if not, by (...) consent he should
have had eighteen or nineteen Mont^ longer to have done it in. But I guess
there was som^^what else in the Wind, he can better find time to cut o^ new
Work, Summon us to his Court at Turners-H^^ and bespatter us behind our Backs,
than cope w^ those Reasons he offered in that Book, for I am pe^^suaded they
are too Mighty for him, and that he wo^ not have given us this little, if he
could possibly ha^ avoided it with any Credit. However I observe he (...)
modest all of a sudden, that he will not averr all Ch^^^stian Expositors are of
his Mind; nay he does but thi^ it is the more general Sense of them, which is
pre^ fair for a Man that runs on at his rate, and is not ove^ much upon the
guard in his Assertions: And it is (...) he will allow any to be Christian
Expositors, who a^ not of his Mind. Somewhat was the matter sure; th^^ he is no
more Positive nor Uncharitable.

Yet that he may not seem to have nothing to say (...) himself, though he will
not cope with his former Re^^sons, he alleges that whereas it is said, He
will a^^pear the second time without Sin unto Salvation, d^ not infer (being
understood of his Coming without us to Jud^^^ment) that Sin remains in the
deceased Saints until his Co^^ing, but that at his Coming, he will not charge
Sin (...) them, but will solemnly acquit and discharge them of (...) their
Sins, whereas upon all others he will charge their S^ upon them, as is clear
from Matt. 25. Answ. Where (...) Sin remains (as G. K. says it does not in the
deceas^ Saints) there is none to Charge: But where it does r^^main, it seems he
will Charge it, for which he referrs* Matt. 25. and the Reason is plain they
were Goats, i^^penitent Sinners, persisted in Evil to the last: How^ver he goes
on, Though the deceased Saints need no Sal^ation from Sin, yet from some of the
Effects or Conse^^ences of it they do, until the Resurrection, for which he
^uotes Paul's Saying, We are Saved by Hope, etc. and that seeing Death is the
last Enemy that is to be destroyed, ^he Resurrection from the Dead is that
Salvation, etc. Answ. He distinguishes not between Salvation from ^in and the
completing the Glorification: The Ac^uittal, the Discharge, the Salvation is
present; the ^eward, and Fullness of Glory comes after, when Christ ^omes to
Judgment: By Hope we are Saved, says Paul, their Salvation was present, and it
was a Salvation by Hope; their Hope related to the eternal Reward and
Enjoyment, unseen, for Hope that is seen, is not Hope.

I shall also consider what he says of Death not being ^ully and in all
respects swallowed up in Victory, and that ^ull Salvation and Enjoyment
attained, which all true Chri^^ians do yet wait for, which he gives out of
Rect. Corr. ^.42. as a Evidence his Belief then and now was the same. Answ.
That [the Promised did from the Beginning inwardly come into the Hearts of
those that believed, ^uised the Head of the Serpent, and destroyed him that had
the Power of Death, the Devil] himself has ^sserted Way cast up, p. 99. So
that the Deliverance ^as present, the Acquittal and Salvation present, the
^erfection of Triumph, wherein Death should be fully ^d in all Respects (even
Universally and Irrecoverably) ^wallowed up in Victory, was to come, then the
Salva^^on and Enjoyment will be full, which as he links them together, bespeaks
his then Sense was not, that the ^olemn Acquittal was to be postponed to the
last day for what solemn Acquittal or Discharge had the Sheep, Matt. 25. but
rather a Rehearsal of what they had ^one for Christ?) but that the Compleatness
of Glory was then to commence. Nay what himself writ then, I deem a more fit
Expounder of his Sense then, th^^ G. K's present Allegations, which are partial
and designed to strain things, as that he may not seem to b^ the inconstant
Man, he is. He said p. 39. of Rect. Corr. (so little before the Citation which
G. K. gives her^ ( viz. out of p. 42.) His inward Appearance may we^ be called,
his Appearance the second time without Sin unto Salvation, namely to effect
that inward cleansing and Sanctifying unto Perfection. This he there delivered
as the Effect of the inward Appearance. Is it probable then, that G. K. could
then believe the Salvation from Sin, the Acquittal, the Discharge was to be
delayed to the Day of Judgment, when he said it was to be perfected here? Or is
he willing he may be supposed to have clashed against himself formerly, that in
may be the less Surprising, that he does so now?

Baptism and the Supper. With respect to Baptism, he says, p. 28. Whatsoever
is said in his Rect. Corr. Truth Defended, or an^ other of his Books
whatsoever, that Water Baptism was (...) commanded, Matt. 28.19. he fully and
freely retracts* Then he gives us what he had said to the same Effect in his
Ant. and Sadd. p. 34, 35. without taking notic^ of my answer thereto, in my
Keith against Keith, p 8^ to 92. wherein I showed how imperfect that
Retractatio^ was, limited to the Exposition of two Scriptures, viz. Matt.
28.19. relating to Baptism, and 1 Cor. 11.26* relating to the Supper. And seeing
he has extende^ his Retractation no further yet, I shall not only refer^ the
Reader to those I had collected in my People calle^ Quakers Cleared, p. 35,
etc. but also expose some more of his Contradictions upon that subject of
Water-Bap^tism (which are not given as an Exposition upon Mat^ 28.19.) for him
to reconcile or retract in his next.

In his Fresh. and Ind. Chur. p. 184. printed Anno 1691, (...) urges, If
Water Baptism had been a standing Gospel Commission, Paul would never have
said, He was not sent to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel, nor have thanked
God he baptized so few. It were strange to think, that Paul would thank God he
did not so fully obey a Gosel-Precept, said G. K. then. Thus far ^ssertory,
now let us hear him argue the Case. To his Adversaries alleging, that Paul
meant Christ sent him not principally to baptize, G. K. replies, Truths Defense
p. 134. Why does he transgress his own Rule, to go from the proper to the
improper Signification of the word [Note, This is G. K's Rule also Vni. Gr. p
43.]

Why might not Paul and others Baptize without a Commission, to wit by a
Permission, as well as he did Circumcise Timothy? To this Query I will oppose
another Query of G. K's, as I find it in Truth Advanced p. 183. Qu. 4. Whether
Paul's Saying, He thanked God he did Baptize but a few at Corinth, does prove
that Water Baptism was of no more Esteem or Value than Circumcision, seeing a
Faithful Preacher might say concerning a People to whom the Gospel had been
preached -- He thanked God he was not sent to preach to them, but to a People
that were more Worthy? Does this prove that the Preaching of the Gospel is to
be laid aside? says G. K. And now I Query, Did Paul, or does any Faithful
Preacher, preach to a People ^hey are not sent to? He knows who once objected
that against the National Clergy: But not a word of that ^ow, for fear he be
brought upon his Knees for it. But (...) G. K. fit to reprove another of
transgressing his own ^ule, who one while gives wanting a Commission as ^^e
Reason why Paul thanked God he baptized so few: Another while suggests by way
of Query, that was not (...), but the Hearers Unworthiness. If he will
undertake ^o defend both, let him.

In p. 29. he says, It is not proper for me in this place to give any large
account (Why not? Will he do it in ano^ther place? or is he minded wholly to
shift it?) of the reasons why I am otherwise minded, as to the Sense of these
two places of Scripture, Matt. 28.19. 1 Cor. 11.26. Bu^ I think it not improper
for me to give one of his Reasons why he was so minded, out of Presb. and Ind.
Chur. p. 182, 183. who then said, To call that a Command of God, which he has
given them no Command to practice, is to set up the Precepts of Men in the room
of God's Commandments, as the Pharisees did of old, and is a taking of his
Name in vain, for which he will not hold them Guiltless. And they can never
prove [adds he] by all their Art and Skill, that Water Baptism is commanded by
Christ, Matt. 28.18, 19. for all God's Commands and Precepts, especially of
public Institution, relating to the Church, are express, in so many express
words, and are not left to be gathered by uncertain and doubtful Consequences.
This is argumentative and let him get over it, if he can, and detect the
Unsoundness thereof, if h^ dare cope with it. In the mean time let us hear,
whe^ther the Reason he now offers (and which we may sup^pose to be his only
one, and that his talking of Rea^sons is a mere Flourish) will weigh down this.
H^ says, We no where find in all the Scriptures such a Phr^^ or manner of
Speech, that over any Man (but Christ a^o^ who is both God and Man) did Baptize
with the Holy Ghos^ or had Power so to do. Answ. [That God and Christ gave the
Holy Ghost, and did baptize with the Hol^ Ghost, by the Ministry of Faithful
Men, both in Preac^^ing, Prayer and laying on of Hands] himself has
ac^knowledged, Truth Advanced, p. 184. printed but An^^ 1694. Therefore what he
adds here ( That this disti^^ction of the Apostles Baptizing not Principally,
yet Instr^^mentally or Ministerially, is as false and unwarrantable, to say God
created the World principally, yet Angels did it instrumentally; Christ
redeemed the World principally, by his Death and Sufferings, but the Martyrs
redeemed it by their Deaths, instrumentally) will stand him in no stead, except
he could prove on behalf of Angels and Martyrs, that the former created the
World instrumentally, and the other redeemed it instrumentally, as he has
granted that God and Christ have Baptized by the Ministry of Faithful Men. For
although we read the Angels are said to be Ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. yet we no where
read they were instrumental to the Creation (for God created the World not only
principally, but even without Instruments) nor was the World so much as
instrumentally redeemed by the Death of the Martyrs, their Death was not so
much as contributary thereto, but solely and wholly by Christ the Redemer. So
that the Cases are not parallel: And if this be his topping Reason, he may well
talk of keeping the rest behind.

His Reason why the Coming of the Lord mentioned 1 Cor. 11.26. is this outward
Coming, he deducing from the outward Practice of breaking of Bread in the
Supper (which I rather take to be that himself might eat Bredd among them, who
continue the Practice of breaking of Bread) naturally leads me to show the
Defectiveness of his Retractation, even herein. For were he a Sincere not
Belly-convert, why does he not retract and enervate what I have offered in my
People called Quakers Cleared, p. 38 to 41. out of his Rect. Corr. p. 60 to 65
and Tr. Def. p. 9 and 139 to 142. And why not tell us what he thinks of the
Supper as now used, as well as of them who use it. In his Pres. and Ind. Chapter p.
185. he said, That which ye now use is neither substantial Dinner nor Supper,
being only a little Crumb of Bread, scarce so big as a Nut, and a Spoonful of
Wine or two, which has little outward Substance, and NO INWARD AND SPIRITUAL
SIGNIFICATION unto you, as ye use it, while ye altogether deny that the Saints
are Partakers of the Substance of Christ, or that Christ really and
substantially dwells in his Saints, etc. Will he say so still? For he has
not yet retracted this. Or will he now say, Theirs is a Supper, and that Christ
dwells not really and substantially (but by a Metaphor and Allegory) in his
Saints? Or will he rather take a Midway, couching himself under general
Expression, till he sees he can make no longer Friends, but of them who repute
breaking of Bread to be a continuing Divine Ordinance, and of his Flock at
Turners-Hall too? And whereas he said, ibid. p. 184, 185. These who altogether
are for the outward Baptism and Supper, and deny wholly the inward and
Spiritual Baptism and Supper of Christ, which is only known and received by the
Holy Spirits inward Revelation, no Charity can be allowed unto them, to judge
them true Christians in any degree, but altogether for the time Hypocrites and
Formalists. Will he retract or defend this now? Or would not himself be willing
to be one of these Hypocrites, or a worse, provided they would receive him and
maintain him?

He says now p. 30. That it stands well with good reason, that what is
represented to Men's Hearts of our Lord's Sufferings by their Hearing, Sight,
Smell, Tasting and Feeling, in the use of these Signs instituted by himself,
will more effectually affect their Hearts and Souls, than what is done alone by
the Hearing or Reading, etc. Whereupon I Query, of whom he thus speaks, Of
Men, or of Children? If of Men, I must put him in mind that he once spoke of
and pretended to witness a Preaching and Hearing beyond what could affect the
outward Senses, even a taste and discerning begotten of the Lord, which tastes
Words and Works, as the Mouth tastes Meat, Imm. Rev. p. 180. as I have also
observed Sect. I.. 3. If of Children (viz. of such of whom he said, If these
who are so Zealous for Water Baptism, where cordially Zealous for the Inward
and Spiritual Baptism, they might be the more borne with, as Men bear with
Children, that use Liknesses and Figures of things, that suit most with the Age
and State of Children, etc. See Presh and Ind. Chur. p. 184.) then when they
become Men, they must put away Childish things according to that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.11. So that take him either way, while one of them is
unretracted, he runs himself upon the Pikes: Which had he been sincere and true
even to his present Sentiments, he might have obviated by a hearty espousing of
the one Cause, and as heartily renouncing the other: But this Laodicean way of
neither Hot nor Cold, will be Spued out, even of Men, in time.

He alleges indeed (without so much as touching upon what we have offered out
of his former Books) that God has given him of late, since he found many of
the People called Quakers greatly opposed the Faith in Christ Crucified and
raised again, as a necessary thing to our Christianity and Salvation (as he
falsely charge us) a further and clearer sight, and a more deep inward Sense
and Consideration of the great Benefit and Advantage the Practice of these
outward things (when duly practiced) is to the Preserving the Christian Faith
and Doctrine in the World. But in this he is not plain, whether he now reputes
them duly practiced or no. What he believed formerly, has been showed above,
and his not being found in the Practice of those things he pretends God has
given him so clear a fight of the Benefit of, would tempt one to think, that
(if he durst acknowledge it) his Sense is the same still, with respect to its
not being duly practiced, which perhaps he might declare, had he no expectation
of personal Advantage from them who use it. for to suppose there is so much
Benefit and Advantage accruing by the due practice of it, that this sight is
given him of God, and yet that it is no where duly used, is very preposterous:
For sure that which shows the Benefit it is to the preserving the Christian
Faith and Doctrine in the World, would both lead into the due Practice, and
capacitate duly to practice it: But the Man is like himself in every thing, who
adds, That God has given him to see that the spring and Ri^e of that great
Opposition in many against these outward Practices, has been and is a secret
Prejudice against the Doctrine of Christ Crucified, and the mysterious working
of an Antichristian and Diabolical Spirit, designing to draw Men from the name
and thing of Christianity to Paganism and Deism, and at the next step to
Idolatry and Atheism, as p 30, 3^^ Answ. This is a lying Divination and ungodly
malicious Charge which G. K. has taken up, from the Father of Lies, for which
he will not be held guiltless, in the day to come, except he repent. If it were
so with him (when he said of the Means and Ordinances used by the Protestants,
Ye make it a Mediator, and so rob him [Christ] of his Glory, and are ALL GROSS
IDOLATERS, as the Papists, who make the Virgin Mary and other Saints their
Mediators, see Imm. Rev. p. 87.) he should not have entitled others to it,
from his own Guilt. But I believe I hit upon a truer Reason even now, viz. That
he seeks himself in what he does, not others.

His telling us p. 31. The Abuse of things ought not to take away the due use
of them, is as idle. For first, Why is not he then in the due use of them
himself? Is he afraid it will not down at Turners-Hall? 2ly, Why did he, as
confessed by himself, Sect. I.. 17. propose the having Colleges become like
Abbacies, for the Rudeness, Vnmannerliness and other Unchristian Behavior of
many Collegians, if the Abuse ought not to take away the due Use? Will he
undertake now to say, They were not Schools of good Learning? If so, let us
hear him. If not, must ^olleges of good Learning become an Habitation for (...)
and ravenous Beasts (as he proposed Imm. Rev. p. 137.) and the reason assigned
in this Book, be the Abuse, the irregular Lives of the Scholars, and yet will
he defend the Abuse ought not to take away the due Use? Is there no
Contradiction, deserving a Retractation, in all this? Or can it be supposed
that the Pious and Learned among my Sort, will make use of such a Proteus, for
their Sect master, who changes as the Wind, and pretends not to see it?

Rect. Corr. p. 71. he says, These foregoing words, For that Coming of Christ
in his Bodily Appearance at Jerusalem, Antichrist will not, does not deny, I
retract as unsafely worded, etc. Answ. But does he retract them as unsound? For
his Retractions, as they come from him very sparingly, so also as faintly, who
while he is profuse in bestowing hard names upon others undeservedly, saying
theirs are Beams, gross and vile Errors, destructive to the Fundamentals of
Christianity, etc. the few he gives of his own are with him but Mo^es, an undue
Application of a Scripture or two, and that to defend a Truth, unsafely worded,
etc. Then he goes on, Though a sort of Antichrists may not deny, but confess in
Hypocrisy to Christ's outward coming; as also they may confess in Hypocrisy
to his coming in Men's Hearts, etc. (He had best look to it, he have not marked
out himself for an Antichrist) yet I am satisfied (says he, but offers nothing
to satisfy another) the true meaning of these words, 1 John 2.18. compared
with 1 John 4.3. respects principally the Coming of Christ in the Flesh, as he
outwardly Suffered, etc. Answ. Then it does not affect the Papists, at least
principally, whereby the Man has given away the Controversy depending betwixt
the Papists and Protestants (so far as he is able to do it) in the Description
of Antichrist. For if the Apostle described, at least principally, that
Antichrist was to spring from among them that denied Christ's outward coming,
then Antichrist (the principal Antichrist) was not to rise out of the Papacy,
but from among Jew, Turk or Pagan, as the Papists would willingly persuade us.
Does he think this will please any sort of Protestants? Or did he do it, on set
purpose, that if he should be outed of Turners-Hall, and a Prop should fail him
from among the Protestants of several sorts, whom he would fain gain to his
side, to suppress our Books and disturb our Meetings, he might have an Asylum
among the Papists? If so, let them take him, for I am persuaded, all sober
Protestants who know him, will be Sick of him in a while.

As kind as he is to the Papists, he is willing we should ly under his Obloquy,
whom he charge p. 30. (upon no other proof but a referring to diverse of his
own Books in general, and to his Narrative and Antichrists and Sadducees in
particular, without giving any Quotation or Page, or so much as taking notice
of our answers any otherwise than by a renewed Slander, that ours are but
seeming Confessions we give to the Man Christ without, while, as he falsely
alleges, we place Men's whole Salvation upon an inward Principle, etc.) as
denying Christ come in the Flesh in three respects, for after he has branched
the Denial of Christ come in the Flesh into four Particulars, as 1. to deny,
with the Jews, that he who did so come, is the Christ. 2ly, To deny that he is
both God and Man, to be worshipped with Divine Adoration, as the Mahumetans do,
and that the Man Christ is our Salvation, and the Object of Faith and
Adoration. 3ly, To deny the Virtue and Efficacy of his being a Sacrifice, by
his Death, for the Remission of all Men's Sins, who ever shall be Saved from the
beginning to the end of the World. 4ly. To deny that all the Light, Grace and
Divine Influence of his Spirit that any Man ^^th, or ever had, is by Jesus
Christ, who has procured and ^^rchased it by his most holy and perfect
Obedience unto ^^ath, he assigns the three last, to our Charge upon his ^ngle
Evidence, which as a notorious Falsehood and Slan^er we reject. Yet in as much
as he here pretends he ^ill call me to an account e're very long, for my Keith
against Keith, who should have delayed his Charge, till (...) produced his
Proof, I shall tell him, I may chance to ^^ll him to an account hereafter, if
he do not make out ^s Charge, when he emits his Answer to mine.

Rect. Corr. p. 195. (Nor does it follow, that because Confession in the Adult
is necessary, that therefore Baptism with Water is) be thus paraphraseth, viz.
I still adhere to it with all ^^aritable Christians, that Baptism with Water is
not of ^^al Necessity with Faith and Confession, unto Salvation. Answ. But
herein he foully prevaricates, concealing his ^entiments formerly, relating to
Water Baptism, and by the words [still adhere] representing them, not as (...),
Retractation (but rather as a Confirmation) thereof. Or will he now say, as he
did then p. 195. that to affirm Water Baptism is necessary to Salvation is
nothing but a Popish Superstition, which the Protestants generally deny, etc.
and offer to prove (as he did ^hen p 191 to 195.) that Water Baptism was not
commanded by Christ, Matt. 28. and that Paul's Commission, though he was not
sent to Baptize with Water, wa^ ^s universal and full as that of the other
Apostles? If (...), let us hear him? If not, Why does he pretend still ^o
adhere to it, that Water Baptism is not of equal necessity with Faith and
Confession, unto Salvation, and assign the reason here, That many of the
Martyrs did ^^bly confess to Christ, who were put to death before they could be
Baptized, and that the desire of Baptism, in such ^ases, is judged equivalent
to Baptism? Is that it he adhered to then? If not, where is the Man's Honesty,
Where his integrity? Instead of a fair Retractation, (...) labor to render his
Sense then and his Sense now ((...) widely discrepant) as if they both had
needed rather (...) Confirmation, than either of them a Retractation? Bu^ such
shifts become his Cause.

His next Essay is to prove the Necessity to Salvation of Confession in the
Adult, which is managed as unsu^^cessfully. For though he did say, in the
Citation giv^^ Confession of the Truth may well consist without Water Baptism,
namely in a holy Conversation, an^ Profession of Christianity with the Mouth,
as the Apo^stle said With the Mouth Confession is made to Salvation* Yet this
does not prove what he would infer p. 3^. from this Book which he says was
Printed for 16 Yea^ past, viz. that it is no New Doctrine for him to say, It
(...) a Necessary Duty, that every one among the Quakers sh^^ give a Confession
of their Faith to Christ and his Doctrine (...) the Fundamental and Essential
Parts thereof, before they ca^ be owned to be Members of a Christian Communion,
and the (...) they do this, whatever great and high pretenses th^^ make, etc.
they can never be justly esteemed a Church (...) Christ. For that Confession
may well consist in a Hol^ Conversation and Profession of Christianity with the
Mouth, is one thing, and the Confession with the Mouth is not only Necessary to
Salvation, but we mu^^ have Creeds or Articles of Faith composed for us (...)
Subscribe or Answer by Yea or Nay (that which (...) proposed, when he began to
grow quarrelsome in Pen^^silvania) is another. Yet in as much as he has
pretend^ed to have been 33 Years amongst us, and a Preach^ the most part of the
time, I ask him, How came we (...) hear nothing of this from him, till he began
h^ Schism in America? Nay why did not himself gi^^ us his Confession of Faith
in order to his own Inductio^ at least into the Ministry? Or was he never fit
to (...) ^^ned as a Member of a Christian Communion, till of (...), that he
began to set up for himself, in Opposition (...) his quondam Brethren? Or will
he maintain that (...) himself and the Christians of that Age were thus ^ated
themselves* if so, I demand Chapter and ^erse; if not, what does he think of
them, were Paul ^^d they fit to be owned Members of a Christian Com^^nion, or
to be justly esteemed a Church of Christ? ^^d from this Dilemma let him fairly
acquit himself, if (...) can. Whereto I shall add, That a Confession, even ^^th
the Mouth, we both Approve of and Practice, (...) not in Man's time, by Human
Prescription, or ac^ording to the Will of Man, nor in the words which Man's
Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, Cor. 21 13. For Confession
as well as Prayer cannot (...) performed, as we ought, without the help of the
Spi^^^, 1 Cor. 12.3. Romans 8.26.

Truths Defense. He had ^ere ascribed p. 104. that Revelation was Immediate,
and Argued upon it p. 105. that to speak properly all Revelation is Immediate,
even as all Vision is Immediate. This he touches not upon here, though ^e
gives us a Citation out of the same Pages, to prove that he then admitted the
Word Immediate Revelation is not any Scripture Phrase, and that if the thing it
self were granted, that God does inwardly reveal and speak his Mind, etc. as he
did in and to his Saints of Old -- so that the Saints do hear, see, perceive,
taste, savor and feel after God himself, as he reveals himself in his Son by
his Spirit, the Controversy about the Name or Phrase would soon be at an end.
Which we readily grant him, for if Men witnessed the Thing, they would not
contend against the Name or Phrase, but rather allow it, nor should we so much
press the Term, but in order to enfo^^ and evince the Thing. Therefore his
Comment up (...) it, That 16 Years ago he was not for holding up a
Contr^^versie about the Name or Term, Immediate Revelation, (...) no way
deduceable from the Premises, for besides th^^ he did not then say he was for
holding up no Contr^^versie about the Name etc. but that the granting (...)
Thing would soon put an end to the Controversy abo^^ it; so his own Practice,
in those Pages, which was (...) Arguing for and Defending the Term, declares,
(...) then took it to be a necessary Medium, in order ^^gain a Belief of the
Thing, to insist upon, explain a^^ defend the Term. What he adds (without show
(...) proof) against many of us, that we have earnestly a^^ fiercely contended
for that term, and his insinuating wit^ a [ no doubt] will much blame him for
not contending f^^ it now, deserves my notice no further, than a rejecti^^ it,
as a Slander, of which he has store. For we (...) other ways contend for the
Term, than himself did (...) that very time, viz. as a suitable means to
persuade (...) the Thing, and prefer the belief and witnessing the in^ward
Revelation (which would take away all Dispute^ about the Phrase) to any Contest
about the Name.

Upon a Presumption that we blame him now for no^ contending for the Term, he
Queries, Are they become of late more Eagle-sighted to see this and other
thing* they judge to be Errors in my Book, which they did not formerly see, or
at least gave me no notice of? Then why do they blame me, that I have both of
late seen, and noticed divers^^ Errors in their Books, which formerly I had not
seen, for want of due Examination, nor noticed? Answ. He state^ the Case amiss
with respect to us. What we have Collected out of him being not so much to
detect the unsoundness of his Principles, as his late Contradictions to his
former Principles, and is rather a Vindication of them, for the most part, than
the contrary. Yet i^ ^on this view, which he has led, he has drawn and (...)
it were invited us to, by pretending (as in his Se^us (...) Appeal p. 21.) that
he l^^d not Contradicted himself in ANY THING, referring to his own words in
his Printed (...) for proof, we have not only showed he has Con^dicted himself
in MANY THINGS, but have also and, here and there, especially in those Books
bor^ing upon the time of his Schism from us, an un^und passage or two, are we
to be blamed for our ex^sing of them, which perhaps had not occurred to us, ^t
upon the Scrutiny himself occasioned? Whereas ^mself had Read our Books, and in
Year 1692. quo^d them in Print in his Christian Faith and Serious Appeal) (...)
an Evidence of our Soundness in Doctrine, who a lit^e time after quoted some of
the very same Books to love us unsound in those very Doctrines (as I have ^fted
already in my Apostate Exposed, and Keith against Keith p. 57, and 116.) which
shows G. K. is not (...) much Eagle-sighted, as Double-sighted, looking
vari^sly yea contrarily upon one and the same Object, as ^mself is changed from
a Friend to an Enemy.

G. K. after having given a Citation out of Truths Def. ^ 170.171. That if
nothing should be required of one sort from another as an Article of Faith, but
what is expressly delivered in Scriptures, in plain express Scripture Terms, of
how much Advantage it might be to bring to a true Reconcilement etc. says p.
33, 34. ^ome of his late Opponents have brought this place to prove ^m guilty
of a Contradiction, by his late practice of what, ^ey call, his imposing on
them unscriptural Creeds and Terms, as when he told them, They must believe in
Christ without them for Salvation etc. Answ. His stating his Opponents
Allegations, even if he had not so often No^oriously traduced them, deserves no
Credit, except he ^ad brought his Proofs along with him, by whom, where and
when they were so laid down: Yet whether G. ^ may not have so Preached Christ
without, Heaven R^^surrection and Day of Judgment without, in su^ terms as
might minister just occasion to some to ende^^vour to hold him to his own Rule,
of Scripture tear^ and expressions, may deserve our Enquiry. I (...) then that
C. Pusey in his Modest Account p. 56, to 5^ after having given the Citation out
of Truths Dese^ much larger than G. K. has here given it, Queti^ thus ad
hominem, 1. Where are the express wo^^ of Scripture that say, The same Body for
Matter a^ Substance shall rise -- 2. That none but those t^ have the Faith of
Christ Crucified can love Enemies* 3. That the 400 Pieces of Silver that
Abraham P^^chased the Burying-place with, signify 400 Virtue and that those
who have not those 400 Virtues cann^^ have the Privilege to be Buried in that
most Exce^^lent Burying-place -- 4. That Adam and Eve we^ not Naked before the
Fall, and that the Garden G^ placed Man in, was no part of this visible Earth
-- 5. That Men may not have that Holy Ghost, that w^ given to Believers in
Christ Crucified, without t^ Faith of Christ Crucified (whereas G. K. had sai^
Looking-glass for Protestants, p. 28. It is our Faith the the Heathen once had
the Spirit of God, and the Pharaoh, before his Heart was hardened, had the
Sp^^rit of Grace) -- 6. That the Light is not sufficie^ without something else
-- 7. That no Man can ^^tain unto Eternal Life and Happiness without t^
Knowledge of Christ's outward Sufferings, Death Resurrection etc. If this was
it G. K. meant by (...) Charge above, it reaches not his purpose, for (w^^ving
that I might say, would I take G. K. for my E^^ample, C. P. does but Query,
they were simply proposed (...) him as Queries, as G. K. has alleged for
himself (...) Ant. and Sadd. p. 34.) what he does Query is n^ Whether we ( viz.
we, to whom the History has ^en revealed) must believe in Christ without us
for ^alvation (the terms of G. K. his Charge) but whe^^er NO MAN can attain to
Eternal Life and Salvati^n without the Knowledge of Christ's outward Suffer^^gs
etc. which being an Article of G. K. his Faith at ^resent, even contrary to
what he had Asserted former^, who then was for keeping to express Scripture
^ords, C. P. hampers him with it, and is cogent against G. K. but not to the
End assigned by G. K. for ^^at we must believe in Christ for Salvation, is not
que^ioned, but whether no Man can attain to Eternal Life and Salvation, to whom
the History is not revealed, is the Query. Thus much for C. P. now let me
present ^he Reader with the gross Notions I brought out of his Book of Truth
Advanced, relating to the Resurrection. He had said p. 27. That the Coats of
Skins wherewith God clothed Adam and Eve after the Fall, was a clothing them
inwardly with the Righteousness of the Lamb -- and outwardly with the Skin and
Flesh of this Frail, Mortal and Corruptible Body -- that the true Body of Man
lies within the Shell, Oar or Mine of this Gross, Heavy and Corruptible Body,
and that is it which shall be the Resurrection-body, at the Resurrection of the
Dead. (And upon this Notion that Man had not this Grosness and Imperfection
before the Fall, be grounds his Chimera, p. 28. of Man and Woman's being made
Back to Back before the Fall, and afterward split (...) divided into two
halves, in order to their multiplying their Species, which they could not do
without that Separation, as they might have done, if the Fall had not been).
And in p. 113 he says, Within this Brutal Skin of the gross Body that ^otteth
in the Grave, there is lodged the true Body of Man -- that at the Resurrection
of the Dead nothing of the drossy part, that is Brutal, shall Arise, but only
that which is proper to Man as Man, such as Adam had before the Fall. So the
Flesh the is Gross, Mortal and Corruptible, is not that Fles^ that shall be
Raised up Immortal and Incorruptibl^ etc. And p. 115. he tells us, The
Separation (...) made between the pure and noble part and that dro^^ part in
Man's Body in the Mystical and Invisibl^ Machpelah, or Sepulcher in Hebron, in
the Land (...) Israel, Figuratively and Mystically understood, the Ephron
signifies the Dust-Eater and the 400 Pieces (...) Silver, so many Virtues, the
number 400 [as (...) adds p. 116.] being produced of Four answering (...) the
Four Elemental Principles and Qualities of the Body, and the number Ten to the
Ten Commandments, which may be branched forth into other Te^^ And a little
lower, p. 116. that the Graves that sha^ be opened at the Resurrection are not
any visibl^ places on the Globe of this Earth, but certain invisible places to
our Carnal Eyes, where they are lodge^ until the time of the Resurrection. [And
p. 117.] Thus commonly Men have two Graves, the first give^ them by Men till
the Separation be made betwixt the Kernel and the drossy part by Putrefaction
(as suppose after a Year, more or less) the second give^ them by God etc. Now
he having in the close of these thus summed up the Matter, p. 118. viz. But
against the Doctrine of the Resurrection, as HERE delivered and opened by plain
Evidence of Holy Scripture, and in Scripture-words and terms, to which it is
only safe to keep in this and all other things etc. I (in my Keith against
Keith p. 46, 47, and 141.) p^ him upon giving plain Evidence of Scripture, and
i^ Scripture-words and terms for these his Monstrou^ Notions of the
Resurrection. Whereby the Reade^ may perceive, I give better Light into the
Controversy, as well as assign Page and Passage, than G. K. hat^ done, who now
dare leave it with the Judicious, whe^ther G. K. has not administered occasion
to be reflected on, as transgressing his own Rule.

He says p. 34. The word without is easily understood, when we speak of Earth,
Sun, Moon, Stars, Judea, Moses, David, that they were without us, and that
Christ was Born at Bethlehem, and Bethlehem was without us, and adds at the
close, it had been as little needful to have mentioned Christ without us, as
Heaven without us, as Judea without us, had not that wild Notion of many, who
own no Christ without, nor Heaven, Resurrection, nor Day of Judgment without,
occasioned it. Answ. This is to Slander not prove, nay he does not so much as
attempt to prove it, wherefore as a false Charge I reject it. To the rest I
say, whatever Exposition agreeable to the Scriptures, may be allowed to
another, G. K. having precluded himself by that Passage Cited, Truths Defense
p. 170, 171. ought not to Claim it: For his saying, 'Nothing should be required
from one sort to another, as an Article of Faith, etc. but what is expressly
delivered in Scripture, in plain EXPRESS Scripture-tearms, signifies either
something or nothing. If nothing, what was it said for? If something, where is
the boundary? We see how largely he has ranged in what has been given above,
by C. P. and my self? Who while pretending to be of the same Mind still as
formerly, now interprets his meaning to be, not that every word must be
expressed in so many Letters and Syllables, when there is no necessary occasion
for it, but in plain easy terms, as are equivalent to Scripture terms. But who
shall be judge of the occasion, say I, or that the terms are equivalent? For
this brings all into uncertainty again, if G. K. may be his own judge. It is as
much as to say, They must be delivered in plain Scripture-tearms (which are
obvious to every one that can read) or in equivalent terms (of which my self,
not the Reader shall be judge.) And upon this stock, as he has already grafted
his Hydra of Absurdities and Contradictions, enough to nauseate the Sober and
In^telligent, so may he superfoetuate upon them at plea^sure, who had he kept
to Scripture-words and expressions perhaps had found never a Stone to fling at
Friend^ in America.

The substance of what he gives out of Truth Defense p. 191, 192. is that the
Sacrifice of Christ's Death did truly extend for the Remission of Sins past,
from the beginning of the World, that all the Believers that lived under the
Law and Prophets, and before the Law, were saved by Faith in Christ -- and by
Virtue of his Death and Offerings, once for all, all have had, have, or shall
have a Day of Visitation -- and shall be accountable to the Man Christ, on the
score of his Dying for them. Upon this he descants, p. 35. not retracting but
defending it, as proving that he did not place our WHOLE Salvation upon an
inward Principle, excluding the Man Christ Jesus from being jointly concerned
with his Light, Grace and Spirit in Men, as (he falsely says) many called
Quakers do: And that he then held, that all who were saved in any Age of the
World, were saved by Faith in Christ, as well before he came in the Flesh as
since. All which is granted him, as I have often told him, but whether that
Faith was ALWAYS attended with a Revelation that he came and suffered
outwardly, else NOT SAVING, is the Matter in Controversy. For whereas some had
objected, There can be no Justification without Faith in Christ, but these
Gentiles had not Faith in Christ, G. K. answers by denying the second
Proposition, Vni. Gr. p. 30. that they had not Faith in Christ. And how did he
prove that, may some say? Did he offer to prove that they had an Implicit Faith
in Christ (his late distinction) or that they might have the History of what
Christ did and suffered, or was to do and suffer, without Circumstances of
Times, Places or Persons (a new-coined fetch he has in Sect. I.. 18. of these)
nothing less. But as he had said Imm. Rev. p. 243. that true Religion and
Christianity may subsist without the History of Christ in the Letter, to wit in
the Mystery of the Life of Christ in the Spirit, and yet, even here, where the
History is wanting, the Mystery or Inside of Christianity is not without its
Skin or Outside, namely an outward Confession to God etc. So here Vni. Gr. p.
30. he says, If they did cleave unto and believe in the Light, they believed
in Christ, for he is the Light, nor is the outward Name that which saves, but
the inward Nature Virtue and Power signified thereby, which was made manifest
in them etc. So that Faith in the inward Manifestation was Faith in Christ then
with G. K. and also Saving. This he calls ibid, p. 34. the main and principal
Thing, the Word of Faith, the Gentiles did share in with the Jews, that whoever
among the Gentiles did believe and call upon the Name of the Lord, were saved,
no less than the Jews. And ibid p. 56. he calls it, Some Manifestation of him,
in and among the Gentiles, sufficient to Salvation. As well as that he had
said, ibid p. 36. The very Gospel has been preached to ALL, otherwise they
should never have been charged with not having obeyed it. All which I offer
that G. K. may not couch himself under general terms, and thereby cast a Mist
before his Reader's Eyes, as he endeavors to do in what follows, where he says

That by Faith in Christ, I meant the Man Christ (who is both God and Man) who
in the fullness of time came in the Flesh, and shed his Blood, for the Remission
of their Sins, is obvious to any Intelligent Reader. Answ. Then it seems he was
the Man Christ before that fullness of time, that he came in the Flesh and
suffered, viz. that which he calls Way to City of God, p. 133. That Heavenly
and Divine Substance or Essence of which the Divine Birth was both Conceived in
Mary, and is inwardly Conceived in the Saints etc. As such he calls him the
Seed of the Woman that even at Man's Fall was given to bruise the Serpents
Head, and to be a Lamb or Sacrifice to atone and pacify the Wrath of God
toward Men, and that he bore the weight of his outward Sufferings, in great
measure, from the very beginning. See ibid p. 125, 126. Now the Matter in
Debate between G. K. and us, even with respect to what he has formerly
asserted, is whether this Atonement, this Sacrifice, this bearing the weight
of his Sufferings from the beginning, did bruise the Head of the Serpent in
none, atone for none, save none, either before Christ's Offering up of himself
in the outward, or where a Revelation from God, that he should so suffer, was
not given? That without his outward Coming, according to the Decree of God,
Redemption had never been Purchased, so that whoever are saved in any Age of
the World, it is by Virtue thereof, is fully and heartily acknowledged by us:
But whether this Virtue has never saved any, but where the History (I do not
say, the Circumstances of Times, Places etc. but the History) has been
revealed, is that wherein we oppose G. K. formerly to G. K. latterly. Therefore
what he adds, That we are most injurious to him, and false Accusers of him, who
call this a new Doctrine, to affirm that all whoever were saved with Eternal
Salvation, were saved by Faith in the Man Christ, either express or implicit,
even by him that was in the fullness of time Crucified for them, is an unfair
stating of the Controversy. For besides that contrary to his own Rule ( Ex.
Narr. p 24. as has been hinted more than once) the terms [Eternal, Express or
Implicit] are added to the Premises, to make a noise with, that he may seem to
say somewhat to salve up his own Contradictions, which he accounts false Logic
in another; Faith in the Man Christ is not the Matter in De^te, but whether
Faith in the Man Christ implies always a Belief of what the Man Christ was to
do and suf^er in time: For the Man Christ he asserts ( Way cast up, ^. 123.) is
present in and among us, and adds, I do not ^^an his external or outward
Person, for that is ascended in^^ Heaven: Whereas he would now confound the Man
Christ and outward Person together, as if the believing (...) the Man Christ,
as inwardly manifest, and what the ^^an Christ did and suffered outwardly were
equivalent ^^arms. But he has many a passage to Retract, if he ^aw would
render these terms convertible, and sug^^st that what is predicable of one, is
also of the other.

This brings me to what he accounts a Trifling and Nonsensical Objection in us
(but where it is objected, he ^ith not) to argue that they could not believe in
Christ ^rucified, before he was Crucified, for that it was one and (...) same
Christ that was to be Crucified and that was Cruci^^ed, even the same
yesterday, to day and for ever. Answ. We grant it, that he who was to be and
who was Cruci^ed, is the same yesterday, to day and for ever, who ^ough he
received something additional in time, viz. ^^r Flesh, which he had not from
the beginning, yet ^as no less Christ, before he descended into the Womb (...)
the Virgin, than since. Yet to open the occasion of his Objection of mine,
which this Trifler calls Tri^ing and Nonsensical in us, the distinction I
shall show ^as G. K's, not ours, by assigning it, Truth Advanced, ^ 70. as a
dangerous and hurtful Error to say, that Men may have that Holy Ghost that was
given to Believers in Christ Crucified, without all Knowledge and Faith of
Christ Crucified [which to refute, he ^ds] It is not said Cornelius had the
Holy Ghost in his Gentile state -- nor is it any where to be found that any
received that Holy Ghost, which Christ promised PARTICULARLY to Believers in
him, but such only who believed in him, even Christ Crucified and Rais^ed
again, etc. And also p. 71. It is called the Hol^ Spirit or Spirit of Holiness
because it works a peculiar degree and kind of Holiness in all true Believers
in Christ Crucified, above what the most upright Gentiles do witness or
experience in their mere Gentil^ state. Now this Error he pretends to correct
in others is not that Men may have that Holy Ghost (as his term are) and not
believe in Christ (for who held so? (...) pray) but that they may have it, and
not so believe as to have his Crucifixion revealed to them. For he wi^ not
pretend sure, that Cornelius believed not in the Light, believed not in Christ,
when his Prayers a^^ Alms came up as a Memorial before God, though h^ did not
account him a Believer in Christ Crucified. An^ why? Not that Christ within and
Christ without a^ two Christ's? But because that Heavenly Mystery w^ not yet
made known to him. So that the distinction be^ing his, the Trifling is his own,
and the Nonsensicalnes^ if any Bodies, is G. K's, who is the Raiser, the Autho^
of it.

This leads me to take notice what he offers nex^ with respect to the Gentiles
not having that Holy Gho^ which the Believers in Christ Crucified had. I havi^
in my People called Quakers cleared p. 20, to 33. pinch^ him with Contradictory
Passages thereto out of his fo^^mer Books (more I have added since, Keith again
Keith p. 9, to 39.) G. K. in his Ant. and Sadd. p. 2^ varies the terms thus,
viz. He is not said to be t^ Holy Ghost or Holy Spirit in wicked Men, nor in
p^^ous Gentiles -- to wit, by Union. Whom that might drive out of this muse, I
Cited him ( Keith ^^gainst Keith p. 60.) out of his Divine Imm. Rev. p. 4^
saying, 'Plato, Plotin and other Gentile Philosophe^ spoke of a most inward
Union and Communion of (...) Soul with God in a certain Intellectual and
Spirit^ contact or touch, etc. Now to help himself off here, when he had
touched upon my Objection (without so much as naming me, or any Book that he
had it out of, but only in general that, his Adversaries had objected it, (...)
if he designed the Reader should not find it) he Answers p. 35, 36. That Plato
had no Faith in Christ, so much as im^licit, is more than they can prove, and
that diverse Sayings in his Books makes it probable he had. As to Plotin, who
lived above 200 Years after Christ, and wrote against the Christians, he
suggests his Expressions might not be so much from his own Experience, as his
Master Plato 's Writings, or allowing he might have some true Experience of a
Divine Contact or Union, it was in some transient way, like a glance or slash
of Lightning. Answ. If G. K. will allow Plato to have had the Divine Spiritual
Contact, Union, etc. himself must prove beyond probabilities, and may-be's,
that Plato had Faith in Christ, yea even in Christ Crucified and Raised again,
to wit such a degree of Faith, as was accompanied with a Divine Union, such an
Union which in the Quotation given out of Ant. and Sadd, above, he denies to
have been given to the Pious Gentiles or to Cornelius, who had not that Faith.
And if that could be done, and Plato could be proved to be more than a
Speculative Philosopher, is it not pretty fair that G. K. even when denying
that Cornelius (of whom the Holy Scripture give so large a Character, as a
Devout Man, one that feared God, whose Prayer and Alms were come up as a
Memorial before God, Acts 10.24.) had the Holy Ghost in his Gentile state,
should admit Plato might have it, and that by Union? Was Plato a better Man
than Cornelius? Or is not G. K. worse than either? A very Changeling in
Religion? And yet stiff in defending he is not so, Nay Plotinus, himself, a
Writer against Christians shall have so much of G. K's good word (though
Cornelius go without it) as that he will not deny he had not this Union, at
least in a transient way: A sign that they who write against Christians (a Work
himself has lately taken in hand) have more of his Favor than the Pious
Gentiles.

But he has not spun his Thread fine enough yet, so that if the word [Union]
will not fetch him off, but he be hampered there, in p. 36. he will riveit it,
with the words [permanent and lasting, inward residence, abiding] and then he
vaunts, saying, It is great Ignorance in his late Opposers, not to understand
how the Spirit of God, who is holy, may work in the Hearts of the Gentiles, and
Unbelievers (but we were speaking, not of Gentiles and Unbelievers
indefinitely, but of Cornelius and the Pious Gentiles) yet has no inward
residence or abiding Union or Communion with them, but such only who have Faith
in Christ. Answ. The words forecited, viz. MOST INWARD UNION AND COMMUNION cut
the Nerves of this New Exposition; for what can be so, if not that which is a
permanent, lasting, abiding Residence; and that in the Pious Gentiles? But, to
mislead his Reader, as he adds, so also he substracts, at pleasure, yet gives
it as our Inference. For besides the word Pious (which he left out, as if the
Debate had been only of the Unbelieving Gentiles) he here speaks of Faith in
Christ, not of Faith in Christ Crucified, his own terms, when he denied
Cornelius to have had that Holy Ghost (as if there had been two Holy Ghosts)
which was a peculiar Gift, to Believers in Christ Crucified and Raised again,
and not to every Believer in Christ indefinitely, to whom the History thereof
had not been revealed. All which shows the Man is a mere Shuffler, seeking to
reconcile his former with his latter Sentiments (instead of retracting either)
by indirect means, adding to and taking from the Premises, at pleasure, and yet
giving them as if they were, even so stated, what we had alleged to him. A
Work ill becoming a Scholar, to such Illiterate Antagonists, as ^e would render
us: But his Cause and Management are a kin.

Doctrinal Discussing of the Point (for the Matter before me is a Consideration
of the Incongruity and Incoherence of his Contradictory Assertions, and the
Defectiveness of his false Covers) instead of showing wherein the Scriptures
alleged by him, do not answer his purpose, I come to consider the next
trifling Objection (as he also calls it) we have made, but where he says not.
I had in my Keith against Keith, p. 107, 108. quoting him out of Presb. and
Ind. Chur. p. 111, 112. showed this Notion there (that Men who had not the
express Knowledge and Faith of Christ Crucified, WHEN LIVING, might have it at
or after Death, to wit, in their passing through the Valley of shadow of Death)
favored that of Purgatory (as in my People called Quakers Cleared, etc. p. 31
to 33. and else where I proved what he held with respect to that of the
Transmigration of Souls.) Now to obviate both these, he alleges a passage out
of his Pretended Antidote, p. 115, 116. (which Book I know not how to come by)
That all that go to Christ in Heaven after Death, must have an express
Knowledge of Christ in Heaven. Whence he Queries, both whether the Souls now in
Heaven, can be without all Knowledge of Christ, and whether the Souls of Plato,
and Socrates ( whom far be it from him, he says, to suppose they are not in
Heaven) are still without all express Knowledge of Christ? Answ. If the Faith
the Gentiles have, will carry them to Christ in Heaven, they are well enough.
We doubt not but their Knowledge there will be complete; nor do we think when
they are once there, they will be sent back again for want of an express
Knowledge, before they came thither. However I thought, before this great
Philosopher arose, that the Faith and Knowledge that carried me to Christ in
Heaven, was Saving Knowledge, and that if I had not my Saving Faith and
Knowledge here, I should never come thither. Thus to extricate himself from an
Imputation of holding the Notion of a Purgatory, on which he was like to be
stranded, he alleges another as unsound, i. e. They shall have their express
Knowledge of Christ in Heaven, the tendency of which, as it is a
Procrastination, a putting off the day of Salvation, so it contradicts the
Scriptures, which say, TO DAY, if ye will hear his voice, harden not y^^
hearts, Heb. 3.7, 8. NOW is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor 6.2. Thus he shows his
unsoundness, in what follows his Malice, by insinuating if some of his Opposers
(whom he names not) think there is no Christ in Heaven, having any bodily
Existence, it is no wonder they think the Saints in Heaven have no knowledge of
him. In which he is both Injurious and Detractive, as well as Self-inconsistent
in his malicious Charge, once vented by his Brother Apostate, Chr. Lodowick,
who then defended that it was not true, and quoted a Book of G. W's called
Malice of Ind. Agent, p. 17. and another written by some Friends called
Testimony for the Man Christ Jesus, which p. 4. cited W. P. on that behalf,
wherein both G. W. W. P. and those Friends assert the Man Christ's Existence in
his glorified Body in Heaven, see G. K. his Christ. Faith, p. 12, and 13. as he
is also in suggesting, we think the Saints have no knowledge of Christ in
Heaven, which I remember not to have heard from him before, and is equally
false with the former* Thus we see what he wants in Evidence he makes up in
Slander, and all to patch up his own poor Cause, which the more he tacks on, of
such kind of false Allegations, the worse it looks.

Imm. Rev. Rect. Corr. and Truths Defense, which how effectually I have already
observed, what is wholly pretermitted may advise at the close. The next Book he
nibbles at, is Help in Time of Need, printed Anno 1665, of which he says p.
37. All these passages, so far as I did understand them, to respect the People
called Quakers, as a visible Body of People, together with the GENERALITY of
their Ministry, and GENERAL way of Worship and Discipline, etc. I retract, as
being too large and ample a Commendation of them GENERALLY considered -- And I
freely and willingly acknowledge my weakness and short-sightedness in having so
high and great an Esteem of them GENERALLY considered. Answ. Then it may yet be
true with respect to some among the Quakers, but not to the Generality. Let us
hear then what he said then of them in general, and see whether he will now
allow it to be true of some of them, in order whereto I shall give some of his
own words, he has in this Page cited, with my Observations from his general
Retraction, in Crotchets. He then said, Now the Light has shined forth in such
clearness, that we [ i. e. as now interpreted, some of us] have seen to the
bottom of all Babylon's Treasures. And we [to wit, some of the People called
Quakers] do witness this day come and broke up among us in pure perfect
Brightness, every one in their measure, etc. And we [ viz. Not the Generality,
but some of us] have seen the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, the New Jerusalem
descending from above, from God out of Heaven -- And her Light is like unto a
Stone most precious, like a Jasper clear as Crystal, and we [some of us] have
seen the Frame and Proportion of this City, with the Walls and Gates of it,
(within which our [ i. e. some of our] feet have stood) -- And the Lord has
made us [some of us] Citizens of this City, and Stones of this Building -- And
as the Ministry and Worship of the Church or House of God among us, [ viz.
among some of us] is Spiritual, so is the Order, Discipline and Government
among us, [ i. e. some of us] And now what I have declared unto you (and the
Manifestation of the Spirit of Truth will show much more, even the perfect
Pattern of the House of God in the Mount) concerning these things, which are
necessary and expedient in order to a through, cleanly and perfect Reformation,
we [ i. e. some of us] the People of the Lord, called Quakers have fallen upon
them, being taught and directed by the Wisdom of God. Thus far out of G. K. in
which what I have inserted in Crotchets, shows the natural Tendency of this
present Retractation. If this displease such among the Church of England-men
and Protestant Dissenters he now would fawn upon, as too large a Character of
any of us, perhaps for their sakes, in his next, he may retract it yet further.
That he did not do it now, I do not so much impute to any remaining Esteem of
any of us, as that the Man is loath to be thought wavering in his Judgment, and
that therefore it would go easiest off, to make it general, which he may
hereafter restrict as narrow as he pleases. Yet let me add, The Quakers
(neither in the General nor in the Particular) do not any more need his
Testimony for them, who is gone from that which gave it, than Paul did that of
the Pythones Damsel, who said, These, Men are the Servants of the most high
God, etc. Acts 16. v. 16, 17. What I touched upon transiently in my Quakers
Cleared, etc. p. 42. opposing this Book to that of Truth Advanced, being
designed only as an Indication of the Instability of the Man, who would pretend
not to see it, not that we craved his good word.

However to palliate his having said formerly, The Church was come out of the
Wilderness, he alleges, The chief Leaders among the People called Quakers led
him into it. Answ. I presume it was not long since he thought himself a Chief
Leader among them, more fit to lead than to be lead. But why then did he
entitule his Book, Help in the Time of Need, from the God of Help, and not
rather, Help from the Leading Quakers? Again in p. 55. when he entitled that
part, The long-looked for Day of God, broke up among us, the Lord's People
called Quakers -- Writ in the Fear and Will of the Lord, he should rather have
said, Written, Parrot-like, as I was taught* And when he said p. 62. The
Ministry is Spiritual, and so are the Ministers, Men taught of God, he should
have added, As I have been told. But who led him to say, he witnessed his day
come and broke up among us in perfect Brightness, ^s p. 58? Did they lead him
thus to vaunt of his own Condition, beyond what was read? O Shameless, ^onfused
Proteus!

He alleges indeed at the top of p. 38. His Zeal and Fervor did carry him
too far, that he had great in^ard Experience of the Lord's Love and Goodness at
that ^^me (more I doubt not, than he has now) that he is ^nsible and truly
convinced he had too far exceeded in the ^houghts of his Spiritual Seize,
both then and since This since, I question not, to be too true, whatever ^e did
then) and that he freely retracts and revokes, what^ver passages are to be
found, in this or any of his latter Books, that are justly Offensive, on the
account of his going beyond ^he due Bounds of his real Growth, and Spiritual
and inward ^ation in the Truth, so far as any thing of the least mix^re of
Mistake or Untruth is to be found therein. And ^ 39. That he adheres ^o his
Testimony in this, and all other ^s Books, as to Matter and Substance of many
weighty ^ings therein, and the good Advice he gave to his Country^en in that
Book, etc. All which are general Terms, (...) if designed for Deceit to lurk
under, who while pre^^nding to retract every thing wherein he exceeded, or
^here a Mixture of Mistake and Untruth is to be found, and assigning no passage
in particular, retracts nothing in effect, but gives himself Scope to extend or
restrict it, as he pleases, hereafter, which is no Evidence of a sincere and
hearty Sorrow. And what he adheres to, he leaves us as much in the Dark
concerning, as if he chose rather to walk in Disguise, than to be open and
plain. Again, How shall it appear, he had a certain Guidance in any thing, when
even what he is willing we should allow him to have retracted, he has been as
positive in, and laid as high, as what he would yet be thought to adhere to?
Who, if he sti^ account that Advice good, he then gave to his Countrymen, must
still think, That Prelacy is a Limb of Antichrist, that his Countrymen ought
to have kept their Vo^ against it, as in p. 37. and 39. of which I shall give
more in. 13. which if he still dare defend (as he has com^mended his Advice
then given) to be good Counsel sti^ those of the Church of England may consider
what (...) kind of Proselyte he is like to prove, if they shou^ take him in,
and if the Counsel were not good, Wh^ did he not rather revoke, recall and
retract that Advic^ given in that Book, than applaud it as good? B^ the Man
seems willing to keep in with both, if he ca^ not knowing perphaps, whom he may
need a Pro^ from most.

Help, and p. 63. where he had said, Now we need not say, Wh^ will go down into
the Grave, and bring up Christ (...) us, or who will ascend to Heaven, to bring
hi^ down to us, or who will go over the Seas, and bri^ us Tidings of him from
Jerusalem, him (whose Na^ is the Word of God) we of a Truth witness near (...)
even in our Hearts, so that we need not either a^^cend, descend, or go forth,
etc. Upon this he telle^ us what T. E. has brought against him, out of (...)
Book called Truth Defended, p. 110, 111. (for this is the only time he has
cited any Book and Page, of all that he has alleged against us) which I wave
taking notice of, for two Reasons. First, For that G. K. is still Debtor to
that Book of T. E's, and the Answer to G. K. his Narrative, and I design not so
far to gratify him in picking out a single Passage in a Book, while he
overlooks the rest, to which long since he made a show as if he would emit an
Answer. 2ly. As my design is not Controversial, but the detecting the Man's
insincere Explications and Retractations of his former Books, so the doing that
here, and exposing G. K's false Gloss, will of it self, make void what is
alleged by him out of T. E. relating to this Quotation. The Importance then
and signification of his words above, he thus gives p. 40. We need not say who
will go over the Seas, and bring us Tidings of him from Jerusalem, where (...)
suffered in the Flesh, for all sincere Christians are well satisfied with the
Faith they have already of Christ, by the ^^tward Testimony, etc. So that they
neither seek nor need ^y other ground of Confirmation to their Faith, either of
an ^tward Voice from Heaven, or from beyond the Sea, from ^erusalem, etc. Answ.
Ground of Confirmation to their ^aith, were not the Terms mentioned in that
Book, therefore would he have kept to his own Logical Rule, ^ould not have been
added here. Again, as he calls (...) a little below, The word of Faith which
Paul preached, and Moses before him, -- which was able to Save them that turned
their Minds thereto, etc. ^o in Imm. Rev. p. 77. he had said, He reveals the
whole Council of his Will by the word of his Mouth, the Light reveals the whole
Will of God -- he need not go forth to seek a Law without him, or a Teacher
without him, the Word is near -- to which Moses ^pointed the Jews, and Paul the
Romans. Now if ^y both spoke of one word, and both said, Men need not ascend,
descend or go beyond the Sea, to fetch it, and G. K. has cited them both, as
concurring in the one and the same Testimony, then G. K. his Allegation,
whereby he would restrict it to Christians already satisfied, who needed no
Voice from Heaven o^ Jerusalem, as a Confirmation of their Faith, falls to the
Ground in course; seeing it was good Doctrine before seasonable Doctrine before,
and the Cause alleged the holds now, even by G. K. his own Confession, viz.
The the Light reveals the whole Will of God, and w^ able to Save them (even in
Moses's day) who gave (...) to be taught and led thereby. Had he indeed urg^
that the word nigh in Moses his day, and the wo^ nigh in Paul's day was not the
same, and that there w^ need of ascending, descending and going beyond t^ Sea
in Moses's time, which then ceased, when Chri^ was offered up, how Unscriptural
soever this h^ been, yet there had been some color for his prese^ Exposition,
whereas it being the same now as the^ and attainable not by ascending,
descending, etc. (...) an inward witnessing it, then as now, the limiting^ to
satisfied Christians, who seek not a ground of C^^firmation of their Faith, is
both an Abuse of the Te^ and a false Gloss upon G. K. his Sentiments former^
which it had been more to his Credit to have retract^ than thus to have
sophisticated.

G. K. winds up his Citations (...) of his former Books. As for his other
Books, call^ Way to City of God, Way cast up, and Light of Truth, answer to R.
Gordon, or any others of the like Na^ and Importance (which is a pretty wide
Reference, sa^ he alleges he sees no present need to vindicate t^ from our
Perversions and Wrestings (as he calls the and that one not called a Quaker,
but of another Comm^ (whom he names not, perhaps that he might not (...) ^over
the Author of the Snake in the Grass) said to him, that instead of doing him a
Diskindness, they had done him a great Kindness. Again p. 42. That in diverse
printed Treatises of his (whereof he names none but a printed Letter at the end
of G. Croes his general History of the Quakers, and his Anti. and Sadd. without
assigning Page or Passage) he has given diverse Explications of most (he does
not say of all, but of most) of the Quotations brought by us against him. The
which I take to be so idle, shifting and loose a way of Writing, denoting Guilt
and Insincerity, that barely to repeat it, is to answer it, which when he shall
think fit to descend into Particulars, a particular Reply may perhaps be given
to.

The next thing I observe is that he thus bespeaks his friendly and juditious
Reader, If any of my above-given Explications seem to him in any degree
strained beyond what the genuin Sense of the words will bear (though I know not
any one such) I am freely willing, that what he thinks in any degree strained,
he may take it, if not for a genuin and proper Explication (if so be it is in
the least inconsistent with the Truth of the Holy Scripture) to be my plain and
free Retractation: For what I cannot fairly defend by Ex^lication, I am freely
willing to correct and amend by Re^ractation, p. 42. Answ. This is Nonsense all
over. Can the Reader at the same time deem it strained, not (...) genuin and
proper Explication, and yet allow it to ^e a plain and free Retractation? For
if it be an Ex^lication, then not a Retractation, for they are not Syno^imous
Terms, and if strained, not genuin nor pro^er, then not plain and free, much
less fairly defended ^y Explication. Besides that, he that will strain an
^xplication beyond what it will bear, cannot be supposed to be freely willing
to retract it, seeing it was ^is Unwillingness to do that, which drew him to
strain ^is Explication: So that this profound Scholar has run himself a-ground
miserably. Yet surely, had he not been conscious to himself of using strained
Explications, he need not have given this Caution to his friendly and judicious
Reader, for such are not apt to take things at the worst hand, nor so to
conceive without just Cause administered. Had he given it as a Caution to the
Captious and Inimical, not to the Friendly and Judicious, there had been less
ground to suspect, he knew he had deserved such a Censure: And indeed he has
so managed his Work all along (as will be obvious upon the reading of these)
that he could not expect, but it would be excepted against, even by the
Friendly, that do not give away their Judgment.

To mend the matter he now tells us, he freely retracts all Passages in any of
his Books, in so far as they are inconsistent with the Holy Scriptures, and
submits them to the Test thereof. Answ. As this is general, no particular
passage assigned, it is no Retractation at all: For who, even of them that are
least conscious to themselves of having offered what is not perfectly
consistent with Scripture, may not say so, and that the^ submit theirs to the
Test thereof, which may be rather called a Purgation and Vindication than a
Retractation? Again, when at one time he faith the Text says thus in the
Greek, the proper and usual Signification must be kept to, as Vni. Gr. p. 43.
another while re^tracts that, alleges the Sense would be marred, i^ that
Translation were admitted, and all this upon the same Scripture, as has been
instanced above, Sect. ^. 16. and Sect. II.. 7. what must be the Test then* Who
the Interpreter? If G. K. himself? It may be (...) question how long he will
keep of that Mind? (...) another? Who is that other? And what Assuranc^ will G.
K. give that he will stand to his Arbitrament* Yet upon this he gives his
Reader very oily Words tells him how ready he would be to correct them, for
tha^ possibly diverse other particulars may have not been observed, and p. 43.
That he would receive an Information most kindly, as a most friendly Office,
and judge himself greatly obliged to be thankful to him, which I take as an
artificial Cover, that he might not be suspected to have slipped over so many
without the least notice, which he had received Information of. As for ours, he
represents them to be without a right Understanding, from a Spirit of
Prejudice, or a Scoffing, Taunting, Airy, Unchristian Spirit, which as it is no
Encouragement to any Man to take the Pains to be Scavinger to his Books (for
what Security can the Reader have, he shall be better treated?) so it denotes,
not a hearty Desire of Information (for why then did he overlook them he was
informed of?) but a design to hide and cover himself under specious Pretenses,
and excuse himself from engaging, where he cares neither to retract nor defend.
Who says of T. E. C. P. and me, That we have blamed and censured the soundest
Passages for most part in his Books, in relation to Doctrine, though generally
such as most need Correction, we have past without the least Censure. To which
I answer, In as much as he is thus conscious to himself of passages that need
Correction, why did he not clear his hands of what was depending, before he
called upon his Reader for more Work? To the rest I say, It is Contradictions,
not Doctrines that we have mostly alleged out of his Books: And where they
have offered themselves, we have taken them; the censuring his Doctrines, any
otherwise than by comparing the Contradictory Assertions, being the least part
of what we have been engaged in.

He begins p. 44. thus, Finally, with a free and willing Mind I make a general
Retractation of all the hard Names, and uncharitable Censures, I have at any
time past upon any, differing from me in p^int of Judgment -- that have not
deserved them. But who have deserved them, and what Censures such have
deserved, he that knows, can tell: For G. K's part, the Determination he keeps
in his own Breast. Wherefore I appeal to the several sorts of Protestants in
this Nation, Does this satisfy you, whom he thus has censured and given these
hard Names unto? Do ye look upon this as a sincere, hearty Retractation,
springing from deep Regret, as he gives out, or that it is any thing but a mere
Shift? Is this sufficient Compensation to you, the Members of the Church of
England, for his tearming Prelacy a Limb of Antichrist, Help in Time of Need,
p. 37 That filthy thing set up in the Land, p. 38. telling the Presbyterians,
They did well in departing from you, who gave your selves forth to be the
Lord's Ministers and Servants, running and he sent you not, and that your
Covetousness and Ambition, and seeking how to please Men, and not any Zeal for
God, set you on lording it over the People, and that what ye gave forth as his
Ordinances, etc. were the mere Inventions of Men, and Babylon's golden Cup of
Fornication -- for whose Pride, Pomp, Covetousness, Tyranny and Ambition, God's
Wrath was kindled against you, and he poured Contempt and Desolation upon you,
ibid. p. 47, 48. Or to you of the Presbyterian way, for his alleging in the
Title Page, That ye have GENERALLY shrunk from what but of late ye so zealously
asserted and maintained to be the Cause and Work of God [Was not that, your
Covenant against Prelacy? say I] the MOST PART actively complying to the
building up again and healing old Babylon -- like the Dog returning to the
Vomit, and the Sow to the Puddle, after the being once washed) others lying by,
and cowardly bowing under, and giving up themselves to a detestable Neutrality.
And p. 50. That when ye got upon the Walls and Bulworks of your Enemies
building, and levelled it to the Ground, when ye had rooted out Prelacy, and
the many Corruptions and Superstitions that accompanied the same, and dug
down a good part of Babylon's up-setting, that then ye took your selves to
build -- Whose Form of Church Discipline, Order and Government, is nothing upon
the Matter better than the Episcopal, says G. K. p. 52. Or to you Independents
and Bap^ists for linking you with the former, as ALL of you open and declared
Enemies to the Holy Spirit, its inward Revelation and Inspiration, etc. see
Presb. and Ind. Chapter p. 45. For these are not yet retracted by him, and how know
ye but he still esteems you, as DESERVING these Epithets? It is true indeed, he
pretends a little below, He was never so uncharitable as to judge that few or
none were truly Pious, or of a true Christian Spirit, but such as were of the
same Profession with him. So that he was charitable it seems, when he gave this
Character of you in the Lump: And I do not find he clears you yet, except by
such a particular Exception out of a general Rule, which leaves you in the dark
as to the Exemption, to ^he Indemnification, not to the Charge. Whose Sense of
you now, if we may gather from his Judgment upon others, in his Way cast up, p.
35, 36. where acknow^edging that the Lord had some among the Presbyte^ians, who
belonged to his true Church, he says, Far the greatest Number of their
Church Members were of Gross and Scandalous Lives, utterly Inconsistent with
true Piety, is not a very charitable one. And ^re the rest of you sure, he
thinks better of you?

What he widely (and without show of proof) alledg^th against us, as oppugning
the great Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, and of nasty terms and words
used by ^me Preachers among us, worse than Bill insgate, which he ^lso assigns
in general Terms without specifying what ^hey were, and who gave them, while
he applauds himself, as never having that Faculty, deserves not my notice,
except to reject as an unproved Slander. The Man is gauled and fretted, his
Work being too heavy for him, either to clear himself, or make out his Charge
against others, whom if he cannot overturn with Arguments, he would fain
overrun with Noise. But no Weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper,
and every Tongue that shall rise against thee in Judgment, thou shall condemn,
said the Lord of his Heritage of old, Isa. 54.17. who is the same to his, to
day, yesterday and for ever.

G. K. his Explications and Retractations, the Fruit of 18 Months Toil* and
showed what poor, silly, sh^fting, deceitful and evasive Allegations he has
used all along, more like (...) Pedantick Trister and Quibbler (his Charge upon
others) than a Man of sound Knowledge and Expression (his ow^ Character of
himself) and also reflected upon his insincere and mincing Retractation, of
those few he pretend^ to Correct, as if in nothing Doctrinal he had erred, bu^
only in an undue application of a Scripture or two, no^ unsound but unsafely
worded, and that many times delivered in ambiguous terms, I had once thought
to have Collected those Passages he has wholly pretermitted and we have
exposed in ours, to which these are pretended as an Answer. But considering
this would ad^ too much to the Bulk of these, which has alread^ swelled beyond
my desire, and that it will necessaril^ fall in, in course, if ever he reply to
ours, Five where of lie upon his Hands unanswered, I forbear at present waiting
to see whether the next 18 Months will produc^ a more mature Birth, than the
preceding have done* Yet not so, but that I shall direct where they may (...)
found, and what Subjects they Treat of.

I shall then premise, that had he really designed t^ purge himself, satisfy
his Reader and reclaim what h^ could not defend, or wherein his Judgment was
altered, he would have been so far from overlooking whole Books (as he has
done, his Light of Truth, Way Cast up, Way to City of God, Presb. and Ind.
Churches, Christian Faith and Serious Appeal, to which I may add his Postscript
to G. W 's Nature of Christianity) that he would rather have erred on the other
hand, by repeating them over and over, as he insinuates, in his Preface, that
we have done. Nor would he have excused himself by a silly pretense (depending
upon his own Veracity, without Demonstration) that ours needed them not, that
we had perverted and wrested his words, etc. as has been observed already. And
had he been really and conscienciously concerned (or to use his own words, p.
44.) Did he, with deep Regret, acknowledge and blame his too great rashness, in
giving hard Names and passing uncharitable Censures, on such as deserved it
not, he would have descended to a more particular Retractation, and Explanation
what the undeserved Names and Censures were, and who deserved them not; whereas
now, this limitation and reserve opens a way to him to make a Nose of Wax of
his Recantation at pleasure, as they please him, or his future Circumstances
put him in a condition, either to stand in need of them, or the contrary. And
whereas (over-passing his more early Books) he had Vindicated us so lately as
in the Year 1692. even since he began to be litigious in America, as sound with
respect to most of if not all the Doctrines he now pretends we are unsound in,
and that from 28 Years converse, both in public Meetings and private
Discourses, even with the most noted and esteemed among us, as he alleged,
Serious Appeal, p. 7. and that this has been objected to him (both in my
Apostate Exposed, a Book G. K. is still Debtor to, and elsewhere) it is not
sufficient for him now to heap up unproved Accusations against us, without
taking notice of what we have said in our Defense, but to have offered (had he
designed a through Retractation, even thereof) something at least, as an
Evidence that his Opinion then was ill grounded, and now leans upon a surer and
faster bottom, than that of Prejudice or a Personal Pique, which every
Judicious Reader knows, is apt to miss-way the Judgment. Thus far in general:
Now to be more particular, (...) come to recapitulate some of the Quotations,
G. K. has wholly leapt over, wherein what I give out of him in one Book, I
shall not offer again, when brought by us in another, as not designing more
show than substance.

The first I shall observe, is what T. E. has offered in his Truth Defended p.
47, to 50. out of G. K. his Imm. Rev. p. 179, 188, 190. relating to a knowing a
Tree by its Fruits, proceeding from an inward relish, taste and discerning;
which G. K. has not touched upon, to Explain or Correct.

The next, Treating concerning the Man Christ, as being Man from the beginning,
before outwardly Born and Conceived of the Virgin, that as inwardly revealed he
was a Lamb or Sacrifice to atone and pacify God's Wrath to Man, the promised
Seed, the Seed of the Woman that did actually bruise the Serpent's Head ever
since the Fall, had inward Flesh, which the Holy Men fed on, in ALL AGES, and
that more tha^ visible Flesh is the Ransom, out of G. K. his Imm. Rev* p. 226.
Way cast up, p. 93, to 99, and p. 102, 103 104, 111, 141, 142. Way to City of
God, p. 125, and Rect. Corr. p. 20, 21, 27, 28. may be seen in T. E's Truth
Defended, p. 117, 119, 91, 94, 104, 142, 150* and in his Answ. to Narr. p. 36,
46, 86, 87, 100. op^posed there to G. K. his late Sentiments. For wha^ he gives
but even a transient touch at the Page, how little soever he say to the
purpose, those I bring not but these he has entirely overlookt.

What G. K. had asserted of Christ's Bodily Presence, not being sufficient to
the Church, that Christ is Mediator as he is in Men, T. E. has given in his
Answ. to Narr. p. 87, 88, 108. out of G. K. his Imm. Rev. p. 59, 120, 121, 107.
and Way to City of God, p. 127, 139. none of which G. K. takes any notice of.

Of Christ's Resurrection-Body, that it is not Carnal, but Spiritual, T. E.
gives in his Truth Defended, p. 127. and Answ. to Narr. p. 47, 55. out of G.
K. his Rect. Corr. p. 23, 24, 44, 54, 55. also overlookt by G. K.

I shall be very Cautious in what I bring out of my Quakers Cleared, in as much
as G. K. has pretended to Answer it, in his Ant. and Sadd. designing only to
give such Quotations, as he has slipped over both there and here, although G. K.
his Entituling these, as what may at present suffice to the Answering T. E. and
my former and latter Books, I might have been excuseable, had I took him at his
word (which he so seldom keeps to) and brought them nevertheless. Therefore
leaving him to supply that defect, when his E'RE VERY LONG comes, that he emits
a larger Answer to mine, and also over-passing what I have already hinted. 4.
of this Section, touching Baptism and the Supper, that his Retractation of what
he had said in his Truths Defense and Rect. Corr. related only to his
Exposition of two Scriptures, viz. Mat. 28.19. and 1 Cor. 11.26. and out of my
Sect. I.. 18. wherein I gave what he had omitted out of Imm. Rev. p. 228, 232,
and 242. I shall only offer, that what I gave out of Vni. Gr. p. 28, 29, ^0,
34, 35, 36, 56, 57, 58, 115. (concerning an inward saving Illumination, given
to the Gentiles, the Gospel its having been Preached to all, and that the Word
of Faith within was the main and principal thing, in Opposition to his
Sentiments of late) he has ^ice slipped over, both in his Ant. and Sadd. of
which I gave notice in my Keith against Keith, p. 71. and also here, in these.

What I have alleged to him in my Keith against Keith, p. 9, to 36. (as
inconsistent with what he had delivered in his Chr. Faith, p. 6, 7. Truth and
Innocence Defended, p. 19, 20. Further Discovery, p. 17, 18. and Truth
Advanced, p. 70, 71.) out of G. K. his Light of Truth, p. 11, 15. Postscript to
Nature of Christianity p. 65, 70. Universal Grace, p. 8, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26,
36, 52, 53, 54. Looking-glass, p. 28. Imm. Rev. p. 77, 103, 105, 109, 111, 112,
113, 213, 221, 227. Way cast up, p. 44, 45, 95, 99, 100, 103. Rect. Corr. p.
50, 150, 187. Truths Defense, p. 70, 114, 121, 141, 212. Divine Imm. Rev. p.
26, 27, 63, 54, 55, 79, 154, 158. Plain Short Catechism, p. 9. These G. K.
touches not upon, in the least.

To which I shall add what one W. C. (a Churchman) has gleaned out of him, in
Two Small Tracts, the which, whoever presented them before him, he will not
pretend, I suppose, not to have seen. The first was Entitled, Mr. G. Keith at
Turners-Hall Contradicting Mr. G. Keith at the Tolbooth of Aberdeen, who there
opposes to several Passages in G. K's Ex. Narr^ Quotations out of his Imm.
Rev. p. 200, 243, 244, 231, 4. chiefly respecting the Object of Faith, a
Fundamental Principle, as in p. 5, to 10. of that Book. In hi^ Second Letter,
styled, Mr. Keith no Presbyterian no Quaker. etc. from p. 7, to 15. he gives G.
K. hi^ Contradictory Sense relating to Baptism, the Supper Sinless Perfection,
Election and Reprobation, and Com^mon and Saving Illumination, and that out of
G. K. hi^ Quakerism Confirmed (as to be found in the Collectio^ of R. Barclay's
Books) p, 586, 618, 619. and Vni* Grace, p. 105. I wave what was there also
brought, no^ only out of the Pages (fore quoted) by T. E. or m^ but even those
out of Vni. Gr. p. 74, 75, 76. because though those Passages are not touched upon
by G. K. yet something having been brought by him out of those Pages, although
with different Ends and upon a different Occasion, I will rather not insist on
it, than administer a seeming room for Exception.

Without making any further Comment upon these Omissions of G. K. having showed
what we expect from him, I shall only observe, that notwithstanding he could
not but be Conscious to himself of his manifold Pretermissions, and evasive
Shiftings of what he has touched upon, in the close he presumes to say, he
prays to God, we may have a Heart given us of God, if not to follow him as an
Example, yet to follow the Example of other GREAT PENITENTS -- for he that
hides his Sin, will not prosper, etc. Which (besides the taking the Name of
the Lord in vain) shows great Hypocrisy and great Scaredness, as well as
Ostentation, in ranking himself among other great Penitents, forgetting, it
seems, or at least little regarding the Wise Man's Counsel, viz. Let another
Man praise thee, and not thine own Mouth; a Stranger, and not thine own Lips,
Prove. 27.2. Whether the friendly and juditious Reader, he would lately bespeak
on his side, will not think this strained, and undeserving the Applause he
craves, is left to his mature, sedate and impartial Consideration.

Beel-house, 23d of the First Month 1696/7. J. P.

ERRATA.
PAGE 3. Line 14. and l. 32. p. 6. l. 26. p. 8. l. 24. p. 12. l. 9. for Retrac^
read Retractation. p. 4. l. 20. f. s^^ing r. waving. p. 8. l. last r. with p.
9. l. 22. r. Doctrines. l. 28. r. a profitable. p. 10. l. 15. r. thing. l. 29.
r. ^ commended. p. 12. l. 19. f. perusing r. perverting. p. 13. l. 14. r.
given^ p. 15. l. 33. r. Endowment. p. 19. l. 20. r. Capernaumites. l. last and
p. 20. l. ^ r. Capernaumitism. l. 30. f. and r. or. p. 23. l. 30. f. I r. and.
p. 24. l. 8. af^ Christ r. as he came in the ^lesh. l. 11. r. Spirit. l. 28.
after Flesh r. face to fa^ p. 25. l. 2. after not r. say. l. 20. f. that r.
the. p. 28. l. 20. r. Christ's. p. 3^ l. 20. r word. p. 3^. l. 10. r.
judicially. p. 32. l. 6. r. of our. p. 33. l. 7. f. r. after. p. 31. l. 8. f.
Seed r. Heir. l. 14. f. Divine r. more Noble. p. 35. l. ^ after and r. so. l.
28. f. absolutely r. so lately. p. 36. l. 27. f. yet r. not. p. 3^ l. 6. f. and
r. or. p. 38. l. 7. r. become. p. 39. l. r. f. the r. his. p. 40. l. 2^ f. of
r. with. l. 31. f. within r. with him. l. 31. r. light within. p. 41. l. 15.^
the r. this. p. 42. l. 3. f. has r. how. l. 20. f. left r. lost. l. 32. r.
consequentiall^ p. 44. l. 18. f. the r. that. l. 20. r. 1 Cor. 15.12. p. 46. l.
25. f. or r. and. p. 4^ l. 26. f. be r. become. l. 28. after pretended r. to.
l. 32. f. withdrew r. what dre^ p. 50. l. 17. f. are r. serve. p. 52. l. 19. f.
69. r. 62. p. 55. l. 26. f. 14 r. 1^ p. 59. l. 21. f. of r. in. p. 60. l. 8. r.
calling. l. 33. r. all Men. l. 34. r. ex part p. 63. l. 8. f. them r. all. l.
16. r. a vail. p. 65. l. 8. f. Wrath r. Truth. l. 1^ f. they r. he. p. 69. l.
2. r. respect to. p. 74. l. 13. r. tell. p. 81. l. 20. f. 69. ^. 6^ p. 92. l. 1
r. appropriating, p. 93. l. 8. f. the r. that, l* 24. dele for, p. 99. ^^* f.
this r. his, p. 102. l. 1. r. advantage, p. 107. l. 5. r. initiated, l. 20. f.
ascribe^ r. asserted.


