SOME CONSIDERATIONS Propounded to the JEWS, That they may hear and consider,
and their Hearts at length may be Turned toward that which alone is able to
Convert Them to God, that they may once more become his People, and enter into
an Everlasting Covenant with him that may not be broken, that so they may abide
in his Love and Covenant of Life, and remain his People for ever.
Consideration I.
WHat great Love, Mercy and Kindness God showed to that People, above all
Nations and Peoples under Heaven. Of his own free love he set his heart upon
them, choosing them to be a People to himself. He brought them out of Egypt by a
mighty hand and outstretched Arm; he mightily preserved them in, and led them
through the Wilderness. He entered into a Covenant with them to become their
God, and betrothed them unto himself for his own Lot and Inheritance. He gave
them righteous Laws, Judgments, Statutes and Ordinances, both of Worship
toward him, and of an upright Demeanor and Conversation among themselves and
toward all men. He drove out, the Heathen from before them, and gave them a
pleasant Land to possess, even the glory of all Lands, a Land flowing with Milk
and Honey. He built an habitation for himself among them, first a moving
Sanctuary or Tabernacle, afterward a more settled abiding place or Temple
(which Solomon built) wherein was the Ark of his presence, where he was to be
sought unto and enquired of by them, and toward which their Prayers were to be
directed, and there was a Mercy-seat, whereof they had large experience, and he
ever and anon sent Prophets among them, to reprove their errors and
blackslidings, and to set them to rights again. He raised up Judges likewise to
defend them: and although they were weary of his Government, desiring a King
after the manner of the Nations so vehemently, that they even forced a King
from him, yet he took him away from them, and after him chose a man after his
own heart, to feed Jacob his People and Israel his Inheritance, who fed them
according to the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of
his hands. What should I say more? what was wanting of Love, of Care, of
Goodness, of Kindness, of Mercy, of Gentleness, of any thing that a People
could desire of their God? I say, what was wanting of all this on Gods part?
What could he have done more for his Vineyard, than he did do? Nay he emptied
upon them all the Goodness, all the Mercy, Love, Favor, etc. that that
Covenant would hold to the full, yea and more too: for he bare with them more
than that Covenant required him to bear, and redeemed them oftener than that
Covenant engaged him, yea many time turned he his anger away, and did not stir
up all his wrath, as he might often have done according to the tenor of that
Covenant. Yea in all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them: And he was still ready to say in his heart, Surely they
are my People, Children that will not lie, at length they will see their error,
repent and be true to me: insomuch as he was never weary of saviug them, of
trying them again and again, of stirring up his Bowels of Love and Pity to
Redeem them, of sending his Servants and Prophets among them to warn and
reclaim them, even till at last it was manifest that there was no remedy but he
must cast them off, and provoke them to jealousy by a foolish Nation* ( Deuteronomy.
32. 20, 21.) drawing them nigh to him, who had been Worshipping Stocks and
Stones, making them become a People, who had long been no People, and casting
these out of his sight, making them become no People, who had so long been his
chosen peculiar People, in Covenant with him, and nigh unto him above all the
Families of the Earth.

Consid. II. What constant Rebellion and stiffness of Spirit that People all
along expressed toward the Lord, what wild sour Grapes they still brought
forth to him, sour Love, sour Obedience, sour Worship and Sacrifices, such
as the pure palate of the Lord could find no relish nor savor in: but as
Moses had told them, that it was not for their Righteousness God chose them to
give them the good Land to possess, for they were a Rebellious and stiff-necked
People, Deuteronomy. 9. 6, 7. So it was not for their Goodness that God continued his
love to them, for they were all along provoking him, Jer. 44. 4. When God came
to show that great Mercy to them of Redeeming them out of Egypt, and bid them
cast away their Idols, they would not cast away their Idols, Ezekiel. 20. 7, 8.
neither did they regard that Mercy of Redemption from the House of Bondage, and
from the Iron Furnace, but said to Moses it was better for them to stay in
Egypt and to serve the Egyptians, Exodus 14. 12. Again in the Wilderness, how
did they provoke him all that forty years of Mercy, how did they err in their
hearts from his pure fear, and from Love to him, and from Faith and Confidence
in him! how did they murmur against him, and against Moses and Aaron their
Leaders! how did they forget his Works and his Wonders continually! When they
came near the Land, and should have gone in to possess it, then they would not,
but repined and rebelled because of the talness and strength of the Enemy, and
of their Cities: and when they were forbid to go, then they would go and fight
with them. What should I mention the time of the Judges and of the Kings, how
often the Lord made them smart by their Enemies in their own Land, how often he
gave them up to Captivity out of their Land, even till at length that great
Captivity of Babylon befell them, and since that a greater Captivity and
Desolation than that of Babylon?

Consid. III. Whether God, having tried this People even to the utmost, by that
Covenant which he made with them by Moses in Mount Sinai, may ever please to
try them so any more: Or if there yet remain any Mercy or Love from God toward
them, whether it is not to be expected another way, and upon another account?
This is very necessary and profitable for them to consider, that they may not
be looking that way for Mercy and Favor from God, in which it is never to
come, and so have their eyes and hearts diverted from that way according to
which it is to come: for this must needs put them back exceedingly, if their
eyes be looking out one way, and the Love of God has chosen another channel to
run toward them in. This may make them refuse the very Mercy, Love and
Redemption when it comes, suspecting it not to be it, because it comes not in
the way and after the manner that they look for it. Now God has expressly said,
that when he shall be pacified toward them, and shall look again upon them
with an eye of Favor to do them good, it shall not be by their Covenant (which
could never last, but was still broken on their parts) but by his own
everlasting Covenant, which he would establish to them, Ezekiel. 16. 60. etc. It
would therefore diligently be enquired by them, What Covenant it is which is
called their Covenant, verse. 61. And what Covenant it is which is called Gods
Covenant, verse. 62. That they may withdraw their eyes and hopes from the one,
from whence their Redemption, Recovery and Mercy cannot come, toward the other
from whence it is to come? To which Query, for their sakes, it is in my heart
to return this Answer.

Answ. Their Covenant is that which they entered into with God, the Covenant
that their hearts chose to unite with God by: and that was to this effect, That
if God would show them his Will, they would obey it. Go thou near (said they to
Moses) and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou unto us all
that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it and do it,
Deuteronomy. 5. 27. Thus they thought, but the Lord knew otherwise, for O says the
Lord that there were such an heart in them, etc. verse. 29. and Moses knew
otherwise, he knew that they would corrupt themselves, and that evil would
befall them in the latter days, Deuteronomy. 31. 29. But Gods Covenant was the free
Covenant he made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the Covenant of his Grace, the
Covenant of his free Love, whereby he was able to reach them in Egypt, upon the
cry of the Seed in them (in the midst of their Idolatries, and to bring them
out and do them good notwithstanding their stubbornness and stiff-neckedness)
even before the other Covenant was made. This Covenant of Love was Gods
Covenant. This is the Covenant God remembered to them in the days of their
youth, while they were young and tender, and not yet grown up to be a people
under the other Covenant: and this is the Covenant which lasts for ever, which
is not founded upon their obedience, but on God's free Love to them for his own
Name sake, and for their Fathers sake with whom he freely made it.

Quest. What does this Covenant contain?

Answ. putting his Fear in the Heart, writing his Laws in the Mind, pouring of
pure clear Water upon them to wash away the pollutions of their inward parts,
circumcising the filth of the Heart, healing the backsliding Nature by creating
of a right Spirit within, and keeping of the created Spirit right by the
presence of that Spirit which created it: See Jer. 31. 31, 32. Ezekiel. 36. 25,
etc. Hosea 14. 4. This is God's Covenant, this is the new Covenant, which is to
be made with the House of Israel and Judah when God redeems them: and they can
never be redeemed but by this Covenant, but are to remain desolate, until the
Spirit be poured out from on high upon them, Isai. 32. 15. until their Hearts
be circumcised to love the Lord their God, until his fear be placed there, and
they thereby caused to walk in his ways. As therefore they receive the Spirit,
are brought into the fear, have the Law written in their minds and become
subject thereto, so will they taste of this Covenant, be brought into Redemption
by it, and become a glory inwardly, and outwardly also upon the Earth.

Quest. What is the way for them to have the fear of God put in their Hearts,
to have their Hearts circumcised, to receive the Spirit and his Laws into their
minds, and so to come into this Covenant?

Answ. There is no other way but that to which Moses himself directed them,
after God had made the other Covenant with them, and tried them long by it,
together with many Temptations, Signs and Wonders both before and after it; and
seeing by all these they had not had an Heart to perceive, nor Eyes to see, nor
Ears to hear, Moses at length directs them to another Covenant, the Word
whereof would give them Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, and an Heart to
understand. Which Covenant was a Covenant besides the former, Deuteronomy. 29. 1. And
was indeed the Covenant concerning Life or Death eternal, chap. 30. 15. (the
other being but a Covenant of their outward state, made with them after their
coming out of Egypt, upon their deliverance there from, and according to their
choice to become a People to God according to it.) This Word, Moses tells them,
was near them (nearer then that which was spoken by God on the Mount, and
afterward written in Tables of Stone.) The voice of this Word and the
Commandment thereof was nearer, that they need not seek any where abroad for
it, but only listen at home to hear its speech, obey it in the faith, and live
for ever, Deuteronomy. 30. 11, etc. This is the way for them and all Men to come into
this Covenant, and there is no other; There is a Light shining in the Darkness
of Man's heart, which Springs up in him, and casts forth it is rays to discover
and draw him out of the Darkness: Now as this Light is felt, loved, understood
in Spirit, hearkened and cleaved to in the pure Faith, which it begets; that
which cleaves to it, is drawn out of the darkness by it, into the Covenant of
the pure eternal Light, where God is, and whither all they are translated, who
are drawn to him in and by this Covenant, as they are kept, preserved, and
continue in the Faith, Love and Obedience of it. Now I would yet put these few
things more to them.

First, Whether that People of the Jews, as they stood related to God in that
Covenant (given by Moses at Mount Horeb) with the Covenant it self and all
things appertaining thereto, were not a shadow of some inward and Spiritual
thing afterward to appear and be made manifest in its season. Whether they
themselves were not a shadow of a more inward and Spiritual People, to be
gathered to God by the inward and Spiritual Covenant; and whether their outward
Covenant was not a shadow or visible representation of that Covenant, and the
Laws of it a shadow or representation of the inward Laws, which were to be
written in the hearts of that Spiritual People? Was not their Tabernacle, or
Temple, a shadow of the true Tabernacle or Temple, seeing God dwells not in
Temples made with hands, but in a poor, humble, contrite Spirit, and in the
Heart that trembles at his Word, Isai. 57. 15. and chap. 66. 1, 2. So was not
their circumcision a shadow of the circumcision which is to pass upon the
Hearts of God's chosen? Were not their Sacrifices types or representations of
the Sacrifices of praise and of a broken Heart? Psalm. 51. 17. and Psalm. 50. 14.
Was not their Canaan, or Holy Land, a type of the true Holy Spiritual rest
which the faith gives entrance into? Their City Jerusalem a Tipe of the
Jehovahshammah? Their Priests and Levites Tipes of the Spiritual Priesthood,
which was to offer the pure offering and Spiritual Sacrifices among the
Gentiles? Malac. 1. 11. Mark that place, if it did not plainly foretell the
casting off of the Jews, with the rejecting of their Offerings, Priests and
Levites, and God's raising up a seed among the Gentiles, where he would have a
more acceptable People and Worship, even a pure Spiritual People, and a pure
Spiritual Offering.

Secondly, If they were Types, Representations, or Shadows of somewhat Spiritual
to come, then were they not to give place to that which is Spiritual when it
came, and so to be swallowed up in it? Is not the Spiritual Glory, the Glory?
the inward Jew, the Jew indeed? the circumcision of the Heart, the choice
circumcision? the offering up of praise and of a broken Heart, the acceptable
Sacrifice? the Land of Life and Righteousness, the true Land of rest to the
living by Faith? Is not the Spiritual City, House, or Temple which God builds,
the Jerusalem or Temple of the new Covenant? Is not this the choice House to
God? and is not this Spiritual Glory to be expected in the days of the Messiah,
and all the Tipes and shadows of Moses, which pointed at him, to end in him,
when once he comes to set up his true, inward, invisible, substantial Glory
among his inward and Spiritual People? When the day of Messiah dawns, shall not
Moses his shadows fly away? O that your Eyes were opened to behold the inward
Glory of Li^e, the good things of the new Covenant, the great Treasure and
Riches which are revealed and possessed in the Spirit; by the Spirits that are
redeemed unto God, that ye might partake thereof; and then your Eye would not
be so much on that which is outward, which ifye had even to the utmost of your
desires, are not comparable to the inward.

Lastly, Search the Prophets, see if the Messiah is not first to come in a
despiseable way as a man of sorrows, Isai. 53. 2, 3. whose visage in that
appearance was to be more marred then any man's, Isai. 52. 14. and consider
whether he was not to be cut off, though not for himself* Dan. ^. 26. and then
to sit at the right Hand of God, until his Enemies be made his Footstool; Psa.
110.^^ Before he come in that Glory wherein (...). So that if he be not thus
come already, then that coming of his is yet to be expected, and his Hands and
Feet are yet to be pierced by you, and then afterward ye may look upon him
whom you have pierced; Zach. 12. 10. and all the Families of Israel mourn
bitterly apart for it, ver. 12.

When Moses gave the Law, the vail was over his face: your Fathers were not
able to bear the Light wherein the Law was given, nor the Light wherein the
Prophecies of the Prophets were given, and so they still erred from the Law,
were offended at the Prophets while they were alive, and mis-understood their
words after their death. Now do not ye search into Moses and the Prophets, in
the same Spirit of error as your Fathers did, being shut out from the Light of
them, even as they were? If it be thus, if the vail be over your hearts, if ye
be ignorant of the true Light, of the true eternal Power wherein the Scriptures
were given forth, ye must needs mis-understand them, mis-understand Moses,
mis-understand the Prophets, mis-understand the things spoken concerning the
Messiah, and so not be able to see unto the end of those things ministered by
Moses, and of that ministration which was to pass away, nor into the beginning
of the ministration of the Messiah, which was to succeed it. O turn within to
the Word nigh in the Heart, that the true Jew may be begotten and formed in
you, and his Light may arise and overspread you, that in that Light ye may see
the Light of Moses, and the Light of the Prophets, and not gather false
meanings from their words, but understand them a right in the same Holy Spirit,
and enjoy the blessedness they spoke of and directed to, which lies in the
inward raising up of an inward Seed, and not in an outward conformity of the
outward man, while the heart and mind remains unchanged and unrenewed, which
can never be made new by any ministry of the Letter without the Spirit, but
alone by the ministry of the Spirit, whether with or without the Letter, as he
pleases.

J. P.

THE END.

