THE ROOT OF POPERY Struck at, And the True Ancient Apostolic Foundation
DISCOVERED, IN SOME Propositions to the PAPISTS, Concerning FALLIBILITY and
INFALLIBILITY, which cut down the uncertain, and manifest the certain way of
receiving and growing up into the Truth.

Also, Some CONSIDERATIONS concerning the true and false Church and Ministry,
with the state of each since the days of the Apostles.

Held forth in true love and pity to the Souls of the PAPISTS, that they may
hear and consider, and not mistake and stumble at the ROCK of AGES, whereupon
the Prophets, Apostles, and whole Flock of God throughout all Generations have
been built.

There is likewise somewhat added concerning the Ground of Error, and the way
to Truth and Unity, for the sake of such as are more spiritual, and have been
more inwardly exercised in searching after Truth.

By ISAAC PENINGTON the younger.

In vain do they wo^ship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men,

Matt. 15 9. LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill, in Martins L'Grand, 1660.

PREFACE.
THE Mystery of Iniquity (which overspread the Earth under a shape and
appearance of holy Church, and holy Worship) did begin to work in the Apostles
days, 2 These. 2.7. And this was the way whereby the god of this world did
deceive, he Endeavored to blind men's minds, to put out their right Eye, ( 2
Cor. 4.4.) to draw from the Spirit, from the Anointing (1 John 2.26.) to rob
of the Eye Salve wherewith the Eye must be anointed to see the things of God;
Rev. 3.18. And now when he has done this, how easily may his false Ware pass
for true; his Synagogue (built in the likeness of the true Church, Rev. 3.9.)
for the true Church; Antichrist his Son (sitting in the Temple like Christ, 2
These. 2 4.) for the true Christ; his Doctrines for the true Teaching, (Matthew.
15.9.) his feigned, formal, dead, earthly Traditions, for the true Everlasting
Gospel; (Rev. 14.6.) his Gentiles, or Heathens, (who are so in nature, and
Christians only in Name) for the true Christians, Rev. 11.2.?

The Light of the Body is the Eye (says Christ by way of Parable, Mat. 6.22,
23.) Now if the Eye be dark, if the Light which is in thee, be darkness, how
great is that darkness? How shall thou see the Gospel, the Church, the Spirit,
the things of God? But if that Eye be clear, who shall be able to blind thee?
The Devil may come with his Deceits, his false Church, his false Gospel, his
false Power* etc. Yea though his Spirit creep into the very true form of
godliness, thou will be able to discern him there. But if thou see with
another Eye, thou may easily see amiss, mistake Christ, mistake the Church,
and so believe as the false Church believes, and fare as the false Church fares.

Oh who shall redeem the deceived Nations back to the Spirit! Who shall preach
to all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, the everlasting Gospel! Who shall
open the Eye in them which has been so long blinded! Who shall take the Golden
Cup of Fornication from their lips, and loosen their hearts from the Sorceries,
Flatteries, and Enchantments of the false Woman!

The everlasting Bowels of the Lord roll toward his poor captivated Seed, and
toward the poor deceived Nations, and he is now preparing to build the Ruins
of many Generations; he is bringing forth that Power of Truth, that
Demonstration of his Spirit in the spirits of his People, as no Paint shall be
able to stand before. He will rend the Vail of the Covering from off all
Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall be seen by the eye which he opens
and annoints; and that which has, deceived, and destroyed, and led from the
Truth, building up a Mystery of Unrighteousness in the stead of it, even the
Beast and false Prophet (which wrought Miracles, with which he deceived them
that had the mark of the Beast, and them that worshipped his Image) shall be
taken and cast alive into the Lake, Rev. 19.20. Then Captivity shall be led
Captive, and those which have been led captive, shall creep out of their dens,
and out of their holes, into the Light of the Living, and worship the true and
everlasting King, when this King Abaddon is destroyed, Rev. 15.2, 3, 4.

O who shall be accounted worthy to be taught by the Lord where to wait for
this! To whom will the Lord discover the place of Wisdom (the place where
Wisdom is learned, her Voice heard, and her Instructions to life received)
which is hid from the eyes of all living! Job 28.21. Whom shall he teach
knowledge? And whom shall he make to understand Doctrine? They are them that
are weaned from the Milk, and drawn from the Breasts of the false Woman, Isa.
28.9. and chap. 52.15. They that are turned from man, from the fleshly wisdom
in themselves, toward the spring of Life, they may hear the Voice of this
Wisdom which begins in the living Fear and Power, which effectually turns the
heart from death and darkness, toward the living God, to worship him in spirit
and truth, according to the pure living teachings thereof, and not after the
Inventions, Imaginations, and Traditions of men: And he that is once come
hither, as he is true and faithful to the Light of Life, doing the will as it
is made manifest to him, shall know more and more of the Doctrine, (Joh. 7.17.)
and have his feet infallibly guided into, and preserved in the way of Peace.

The Root of Popery struck at; And the true Ancient Apostolic Foundation
discovered, in some PROPOSITIONS to the PAPISTS concerning Fallibility and
Infallibility, etc.
Propos. 1. THat Councils may err* (if I should add, And have erred, it might
not be impossible to prove.)

First, In that they are men not perfected in the knowledge, faith, and
obedience of the truth, it necessarily implies a capacity of error, both in
relation to the knowledge, to the faith, and to the obedience.

2 dly. Their doubtful disputation of things, and long canvasing, implies an
uncertainty and possibility or erring.

3 dly. Their way of determining things at last, which is by a Vote of the
major part, is an uncertain way of determination; for it is not impossible but
the major part may be overswayed by by-ends, and relation to their own
advantage and interests, against the righteousness and equity of the reason of
the lesser part; so that the way of determining things by a Council, is not a
certain way in it self, but because men know not well how to find out a better
and more probable way of deciding Controversies, they judge it necessary to
acquiesce therein: But the Votes and Determinations of men concerning a thing,
do not conclude a thing to be true or false in it self; they only signify
their Opinion, Judgment, and Testimony concerning the thing, the validity
whereof depends upon their knowledge of the thing, which if it be not clear,
full, and certain, their Testimony, Opinion, or Judgment, is of little value;
Truth remains the same in it self, though all the wise men in the world should
testify against it, calling it Error, or Heresy; and Falsehood can never
become Truth, though never so many wise men should testify for it, putting the
fairest habit and appearance of Truth upon it that they can.

Prop. 2. That the Pope himself may err.

The Pope has not greater freedom from fallibility in judgment or doctrine,
then Peter himself had. Now Peter had not only a capacity of error in him, but
he did err in that doctrine which he taught the Gentiles, of living after the
manner of the Jews; for he did not only do the thing himself, Gal. 2.12. but he
compelled the Gentiles to do the same thing, holding it forth as a practice
which ought to be observed by the Gentiles, ver. 14. for which carriage of his
Paul withstood him to the face, and said he was to be blamed, v. 11. And the
Council of Constance deposing Pope John, and advancing the Authority of
Councils above the Pope, did plainly imply that the Pope might err; which
might further be confirmed by what the Council of Basil determined concerning
Pope Eugenius.

Prop. 3. That every man may err in his interpretation of Scriptures, further
then he has a certain and infallible opening of them to his spirit, by that
Spirit which gave them forth. The Spirit knows his own mind in every word
which he has spoken; but no man knows his mind, nor the meaning of his
words, but as he reveals them, 1 Cor. 2.11. So that God is true in all his
sayings in the Scriptures; but man is a liar in all the meanings he gives of
his sayings, according to his own guessings, reasonings and imaginings, without
the Spirits infallible opening of his own words to him. So that the Spirit it
self is the ground and foundation of all true Light and knowledge of the things
of God.

Prop. 4. That if there be any Light to be found any where shining immediately
from God, that Light cannot err; For God is pure, and that which comes
immediately from him, cannot but be pure. All the knowledge which man gathers,
or can gather, into his Vessel, he may pollute: but what issues from the
Spring is pure, and of a perfect nature, James 1.17.

Prop. 5. That there must necessarily be such a Light communicated to all men
since the fall, that they may believe thereby, come to the knowledge of the
truth, and be saved: Which I prove thus.

1. From the Will of God. The Apostle says expressly, that God would have all
men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. Why
then there must necessarily be somewhat dispensed from God to all men,
sufficient to bring them to the knowledge of the Truth, that they may be saved.

2. From what is found in man. There is found in man a Light shining in his
darkness, ( Joh. 1.5.) a Light discovering the darkness, and drawing from it,
somewhat which checks and reproves the sinner, but never consented to the evil
of his heart and ways: This is of God, this is from God, this is pure, this is
spiritual, not of the fleshly, not of the natural; for then it might be drawn
some time or other to consent to some of the corrupt desires of the natural:
but though the conscience be never so much defiled, yet the Light in it can
never be defiled. Indeed a man may set up that for Light in his conscience,
which may be darkness; but Gods Light, Gods witness there, can never be bribed,
but will speak truly (when God at any time awakeneth, or raises it up)
witnessing for him both against the evil of the man, and against the
^earedness, hardness and unfaithfulness of his conscience toward God.

Prop. 6. That this Light being let in, believed in, and obeyed, shines more
and more unto the perfect day, even until it has wholly brought out of the
Error, into the Truth. Every way of it is infallible, and every step of the
creature after it is infallible. Indeed the Creatures reasonings and
consultations about it may be fallible; but the Light is infallible in it self:
And so far as there is a pure, simple, naked thing begotten by it, (for it is
of a begetting nature, Jam. 1.17, 18.) so far there is an acknowledgement of
its certainty in the creature. There are some things that all the men of the
earth certainly know to be evil by means of its shining, and some things also
that they certainly know to be good; and at some times there is a Will begotten
in them toward the good, and against the evil: Now if they did honestly wait
in the singleness of this Will, breathing to the God of Power to have it
brought to victory in them, the Light would shine more and more from his
presence, and in the Light, the Power and saving Arm would arise, which would
effectually lead out of the Death and Captivity, into the fellowship and
freedom of the Life.

Prop. 7. That nothing less can lead to eternal life, than an eternal Light in
man's spirit, where the darkness is, which is to be discovered there, subdued
there, and to be led from. This was the Apostle's Message, (who received and
came with the Message of the Gospel) That God is Light, and in him is no
darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. And this they preached to bring men into
fellowship with this Light, ver. 3. that they might walk with God in it, and
there be cleansed by the blood of Jesus through it, ver. 7* which that they
might obtain, they must first be turned from darkness to it, Act. 26.18. and
from the Power and Kingdom of Satan, to the Seed of the Kingdom of God, Mat.
13.31* which Christ told the Pharisees was within them, Luke 17.21. And the
Apostle Paul told the Hebrews, that the Laws of the Covenant, whereof Christ
was the Minister and Mediator, were by the tenor of the New Covenant, to be
written in the Heart and Mind by the Spirit, and not to be written outwardly,
as that Covenant was which God made with the Jews by Moses, (Heb. 8.6. etc.)
which was not the eternal Covenant it self, but a shadow of it, which made
nothing perfect, but only made way for the hope of a better Covenant, by which
believers draw nigh to God, Heb. 7.19. Yea Moses himself tells the Jews, that
the Commandment of life, the Word Eternal (according to faith wherein, and
obedience whereto, they were to Live or Dye eternally) was within them, Deuteronomy.
30.14, 15. And Paul tells the Church at Rome, that this was the Word of Faith
which they preached, that it was also the covenant of Life and Death under the
Gospel, Rom 10.8. Christ is the Light of the World, Joh. 8.12. or the eternal
Word, Joh. 1.1. which Light or Word speaks within in every man's conscience; he
that believes in it, brings his deeds to it, and obeys it, is justified by it;
but he that hates its reproof, is condemned by it, Joh. 3.20, 21. and not only
shut out of life, but out of the very Way to it; for the reproofs of the
instruction of this Wisdom, are the sole Way or path of life to the sinner,
Prove. 6 23.

Now behold the true certainty of the everlasting Foundation, and behold your
own uncertainty. See the Rock of Ages whereupon the Prophets, Apostles, and all
the Saints have been built. See that which indeed is infallible, and cease from
man, who is vain, and subject to vanity and error. The Church of the Jews did
err, the Churches of the Gentiles also did err even in the Apostles days,
insomuch as their Candlestick wa threatened to be removed, and was soon removed;
yea the Apostle particularly foretold the Saints at Rome concerning the
Gentiles, that their standing was by Faith, and that if they continued not in
Gods goodness, they also should be cut off, as the Jews were, Romans 11.20, 22.
Now there was not a standing in the faith, but a general backsliding and
falling away from the Faith; and then the Man of sin was revealed, and Christ
and his Truth withdrawn, strong delusion, deceit and false appearances of truth
starting up instead thereof, 2 These. 2.3.11. For the Lord God upon the great
defection and apostasy of the Gentiles, seperates the outward Court from his
Temple, Altar and spiritual Worshippers, which Temple was his true Church,
which he reserved for himself, giving the outward Court to the Gentiles, Rev.
11.1.2. And then the true Church fled into the Wilderness, where she had a
place prepared of God for her; and so the Gentile-Christians could build up
their false Churches in the Cities or Places where the true Church had been
built by God, and had appeared before. And these false Churches may easily
become much larger then the true Church ever was; for while the Lord built the
Church by his spirit, he built it only of spiritual Stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. adding
to it such as he first converted, Act. 2 47. For such alone are fit to worship
him in spirit and truth, and such alone he seeks out to make up his Church of,
instead of the Jews whom he had cast off from being a Church and People to him,
John 4.23. But when man comes to build he takes in more largely then God
allows, he may gather in, or force a whole City or Nation to become a Church,
by persuading or compelling them to receive the Doctrine and Traditions which
he prescribes, and by setting up an outward Knowledge, Policy, and Government
according to man, and in the wisdom of man, which the humane part will answer
to, and be satisfied with. To make this a little more manifest to such as in
simplicity of heart desire to know the mind of God (in this respect) and the
true state of the Church since the days of the Apostles, consider these things
following.

First, God in those days sent his true Apostles and Ministers with the
everlasting Gospel, which was the Word of Faith which they preached, to gather
men out of Jerusalem, Judea, and all Nations, into the obedience of the Faith,
( Romans 1.5.) that he might have a spiritual House, a spiritual People to
worship him, instead of those outward Worshippers whom he then cast off, John
4.23.

2. That this gathered people in Judea, at Jerusalem, at Corinth, at Ephesus,
at Coloss, at Philippi, at Rome, etc. were his several Churches or
Congregations, and not the City of Jerusalem not the City of Corinth, Ephesus,
Rome, etc. None of these were Churches, but only a select Remnant gathered out
o^ these.

3. That the Devil after he had stirred up the Jews every where, and the
Heathen as much as he could, to cry out against the Truth, and such as God had
converted to the Faith, for Heresy and a Sect, and to persecute them and it,
yet could not prevail that way; then he tried another way, sending his
Messengers abroad, clothing them as Angels of Light, teaching them also to
preach Christ, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, and so transforming themselves
under this color, secretly to sow the Seeds of Division, Error, and Heresy in
the Church, 2 Cor. 11.13

4. When this would not do, but these were discovered and judged (by the power
and presence of the Light of the Spirit in the Church) for false Jews, false
Apostles, deceitful Workers, Ministers of Satan, etc. Rev. 3.9 and chap. 2.3.
then they separate themselves from the Church, Jude 19. make up a body of the^r
own, go out into the world, preach there, gather a company there, get the
greater number, and then set upon the Church, fight with her, overcome her and
her Ministry, and then get up their own false Church and Ministry: Thus the
Synagogue of Satan and his Ministry, get footing in the world, even in the very
same Cities and Places where the Church had newly had Dominion before. And now,
whereas before there was a Church at Jerusalem, a Church at Rome, a Church at
Ephesus, etc. when the Synagogue of Satan is set up, and has got the Dominion
there, the whole City Jerusalem, or the whole City Rome, etc. can then become a
Church. To make this yet more manifest, observe and weigh these things
following in the Balance of the true Sanctuary.

First, The false Prophets, the false Apostles, which had crept into the
Church, Jude 4. which strived to seduce the Church, 1 John 2 26. these went out
from the Church, ver. 19. and went into the World, 1 Ioh. 4.1.

2 dly. When they went out into the World, their intent was to leaven the World
with their Doctrine, and to gather a people after them. They preached to gather
people to them, and their Doctrine and form of godliness, as the Apostles
preached to gather people to God, and his living Truth.

3 dly. The World heard them, they hearkened to their Doctrine, were willing to
be gathered by them, owning their false Ministry, and their false Church or
Synagogue, even as those that were of God hearkened to the Apostles, and owned
the truth, 1 Ioh. 4.6. So that here was now two distinct Bodies in Cities and
places where the Gospel had come: A Body of the true Saints and true Apostles;
a Body of the false Apostles and Ministers, of the deceitful workers, who
showed Miracles and Wonders, and had all manner of deceivableness, of
unrighteousness on their side, 2 These. 2.9, 10. Thus there was a great division
and breach in the places where the Gospel had been preached, and had reigned in
power; for he that was of God, heard the true Apostles, and kept to the true
Church; but those that were not of God, but of the Worldly Spirit, heard the
false Apostles and false Ministers, and so joined to the Synagogue of Satan, (1
John 4.6.) where Satan had his seat and dwelling, Rev. 2.13. even as Christ
dwells and sits in his Temple the true Church.

4 thly. These false Apostles and Ministers, with the help of the World, which
they had gathered in unto them, joined together against the true Church and her
Seed, (as wherever the two contrary Spirits and Principles appear, they
cannot but contend and fight against each other, the one for the Faith and
Truth of the Gospel, the other against that which is true, and for a
counterfeit of it) so Rev. 12. there is Michael and his Angels, fighting on the
side of the true Church; there is the Dragon and his Angels fighting for the
false Church. Now mark who prevails. The true Church, Michael and his Angels
prevail one way; the the false Church, the Synagogue of Satan, the Dragon and
his Angels prevail another way.

Quest. How does the true Church prevail?

Answ. Thus: She keeps all the spiritual, the invisible, the holy things of
God from the paw of the Dragon, and of all those false Worshippers. The
invisible Jew, the invisible Life and Power, that whereof God had built up his
Church, is preserved by him; and against his Life and Spirit, and his Church
(which he builds by his Spirit, and preserves in it) all the powers of
darkness cannot prevail; but do they all what they can, the Man-child is
caught up to God, and the Church by God's help flies from the face of the
Dragon into the Wilderness, where she is fed 42. Months, or 1260. days, which
is the time of the Dragons prevailing outwardly by his false Church and
Ministry, Rev. 12.

Quest. How does the Dragon and false Church prevail?

Answ. By putting the Man-Child and true Church to flight, by gaining the
Churches ground, setting up his Synagogue (or false representation of the true
Church) where the true Church had stood before. For the Church being fled into
the Wilderness, the Field was left to him, and there he sets up his false
Synagogue in the sight of the World, calling her the true Church, and her Seed
the true Catholics, but casting a Flood of reproach after the Woman, reviling
her (who indeed was the true Church) for a Strumpet, and all her Seed for
Seducers, Schismatics, Heretics, Deceivers, etc. even such as were not fit to
be suffered in the Earth, but to be made war with both by the the Spiritual and
Civil Sword, Rev. 12 15, 17.

Thus then was the victory on each hand: The true Church and Temple (with the
inward power and virtue of life) was preserved by God, who caused it by the
wings of his Spirit to fly out of the sight of all false Worshippers and
Imitators, as far as that is from the sight of men in a City, which flies out
of the City into a Wilderness: And to the other is left the outward Court to
worship in, the Profession, the Attire, the Garments, the visible Observations
and Practices wherein the Church before had appeared, and in which she did once
truly and spiritually worship: For the Church did acceptably worship in the
outward Court, before it was measured and divided from the inward Temple, and
given to the Gentiles, Rev. 11 2.

Quest. Now how long was this false Church to stand?

Answ. Till the Church its coming out of the Wilderness in the same Spirit and
Power wherewith she fled into the Wilderness. When Christ comes with the fiery
breath of his mouth, and with the brightness of his eternal Light, then this
false Image of the Church melts and dissolves away, 2 These 2.8. But till then
she keeps her seat on the Beast, on whom she rides, and by virtue of whom she
sits upon the Waters, even upon Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues, Rev.
17.15.

Obj. But did not Christ say the Gates of Hell should not prevail against his
Church?

Answ. No more they did not: For she had wings of an Eagle given her to fly
into the Wilderness, into the place prepared of God for her; into which she
did fly, and was there fed and preserved, do all the Powers of darkness what
they could: So that the Dragon and his Angels prevailed not against the Woman,
but she was hid from the face of the Serpent, and from all his Spite and Power,
who could not come within the bounds of her Heaven in the Wilderness, but was
cast out into the earth, and his Angels with him, Rev. 12.8, 9. But Christ did
not say that the Gates of Hell should not prevail against her outward Estate,
but the contrary in this very Prophecy of John is here declared, to wit, that
she was so far prevailed against: The true Woman who was clothed with the Sun,
and had the Moon under her feet, and was crowned with a Crown of twelve Stars,
was to fly away and give place, and a false Woman to start up in her stead,
who with her Golden Cup of her Fornications, was to deceive and bewitch all
Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and Languages 42. Months, or 1260. days, which was
the full time the Church was to remain in the Wilderness: But after that time,
the false Church with Antichrist her Husband (who all this while sat in the
Temple) were to be revealed, judged and destroyed, and the true Church return
again out of the Wilderness into her own place.

Quest. Why would God suffer his Church thus to be prevailed against, thus to
be banished and driven out of the Building which his Spirit had reared for her,
into a Wilderness, and a Mystery of Deceit and Falsehood to be set up in her
name and stead?

Answ. First, As a just judgment upon the World (who slighted the day of their
Visitation, and would not come into the Vinyard to work) God brings the Night
upon them, wherein they could not enter into the Vinyard, nor work if they
would never so fain, John 9 4.

2 dly. As a just judgment upon such, who though they could not but own and
acknowledge the truth, yet did not love it in their hearts, but loved their
unrighteousness, their darkness still; therefore God removes the power of his
Truth from their eyes, into the Wilderness, and lets out a power of darkness
and deceit upon them, wherewith they were deluded instead of the Truth it self,
2 These. 2.10, 11.

3 dly. That such as were approved, might be made manifest in the Spirit to be
pure Gold indeed. They that held the living Truth, and could not be drawn aside
with all the pleasures of this World on the one hand, nor with all the dangers
from it on the other hand, no nor yet with all the deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness, these did shine indeed in the Light and Power of the Spirit,
and were a great Honor and Crown upon the Head of their Master.

4 thly. That darkness might have its day, or hour, or season of manifestation
to the full. There has been no Day of any dispensation hitherto, but it has
had a Night coming after it. There was an Antichrist to be revealed in the
power of darkness, as well as Christ (the eternal Light of Life) in the living
Power. Now as long as the true Church stood, and as long as the the Man-child
was found dwelling here with her, in the habitation which God had built up for
them, the man of sin could not be revealed, but the pure Power of Life would
soon discover him. Therefore at length, when the full time and season of his
discovery came, God removed that into the Wilderness which stood in the way,
and then he and his Spouse, the false Church, make a fair show in the World, 2
These. 2.7.

5 thly. That the Lord might make the Name of his Son, with the glory of his
Truth and Power to shine, by overcoming the Dragon and this false Church after
so long a time of thick darkness, and after such an universal prevalency of the
powers and deceits thereof. Was it not a great glory and honor to the Lord, to
overcome the Heathenish world, and Jewish Church and Worship, by the Power of
his Truth shining through a poor despicable company of Fishermen and
Mechanics? And will it not be as great (if not a greater) glory to him to
overcome the Antichristian world (after it has taken so long and so deep root,
and is become so strongly founded) by as poor contemptible instruments as they
were?

Quest. But how was it possible that so great a deceit should get up in the
world so near the Apostles days, or rather in the very days of the Apostles,
as this seems to be?

Answ. The false Apostles and Ministers came with all deceivavableness of
unrighteousness, and with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, 2 These. 2.9,
10. And the power of Miracles in the true Apostles might well cease: For the
end of Miracles was but to testify to the world, to be a sign to the
unbelievers, 1 Cor. 14.22 But now their work toward the world, was well nigh
finished, and Judgment was to come upon them for neglecting and despising the
day of their Visitation. So that the power of deceit was let up in the false
Apostles, and the power of truth did draw inwards in the true Apostles, which
made it very easy for deceit to prevail. Besides, the false Apostles appeared
in an higher appearance than the true Apostles did, with more glorious
discoveries, so that they could hold forth all that the Apostles did (as to the
Form and outward Doctrine) and more too, and could show wonders to confirm what
they held forth further: And now how could they choose but prevail over all that
kept not close to the Anointing, which distinguishes and discerns not by
any outward manifestation or appearance, but by the savor of the Ointment? Yea
so great was the power of Deceit in them, that they drew the third part of the
Stars of Heaven from their place, into this earthly Building, so that they fell
from the true Ministry, and the true Church, unto this false Church and
Ministry, Rev. 12.4. How many then of the inferior and common sort were then
drawn aside?

Quest Has there then been no visible true Church State in the world since
that time?

Answ. It is impossible for any to build a true Church for God, but his own
Spirit: And if God removed the Church which he built into the Wilderness, it
is impossible for all the men of the Earth to build up another true one, all
that season that God appoints his Church to abide in the Wilderness. Several
sorts of men may attempt it, and each may build up their different Images of
the thing, but none can recover the thing it self, till the Lord by his Spirit
(who first built, and then pulled down) pity the dust of Sion, and raise up
the Tabernacle of David again, Psalm. 102.13. Isa. 2.2. Rev. 21.2, 3.

Qu. What is the Wilderness, tell us, that the simple hearted, who long after
the truth may know where to look for, and how to find the true Church?

Answ. It is not an outward place, into which the Bodies of persons might flee,
but a parable to express somewhat inwardly: And it is under the feet of all the
false Worshippers, who are worshipping in their several Buildings in the
outward Court. That which they trample upon, keep down, and despise, is the
Holy City, Rev. 11.2. And the place where the true Church all this while has
been, (and yet in a great part is) is there.

Quest. But if God's Church has not been in a built state, but lain desolate
in the Wilderness ever since Antichrist and the false Church got up, what has
the estate of his people been ever since?

Answ. A state of witnesses, Rev. 11.3. In every Age God has has had two
witnesses (which was a sufficient number to confirm his truth by) to witness to
the power of his truth, against the emptiness and corruptions of the forms
which Antichrist had brought in, instead of the living power: Which witnesses
were clothed with Sackcloth, giving forth their testimony with tears, while
they of the Antichristian party were rejoicing in the Glory, Riches and Beauty
of their false Church, as they could slay, suppress and keep down the
VVitnesses, Rev. 11.10. and chap. 18.7, 9.

Quest. What did the Dragon do after this Victory, after he had got his
Building up in the outward Court, (for after he had prevailed to corrupt it,
the Lord gave it to his worshippers the Gentiles, Rev. 11.2. those that made a
profession of his truth, but were not true Jews, Rev. 3.9. not of the inward
circumcision, Phil. 3.3.) and had got the holy City under the feet of his
worshippers?

Answ. He pursued his Victory against the Woman, and the remnant of her Seed.
As for the woman, he cast a flood of Infamy, of Reproach after her, that she
might never be able to lift up her head again in the power of truth, but what
she causes to spring up, might still be reviled for falsehood and Heresy, and
that nothing might henceforth go for Truth, but what this false woman should
determine to be so. And as touching the remnant of her Seed which still remained
true to God, keeping his Commandments, and having the Testimony of Jesus, he
applies himself now to wage the war against them, Rev. 12.15.17.

Quest. How does he wage the War against them?

Answ. He raises up a Beast out of this Sea of Cofnusion and Wickedness,
(which ensued upon this great Battle and Victory on his side) to whom he gave
his Power, his Seat, and great Authority, Rev. 13.2. He had hitherto kept his
Seat in his Synagogue* where he had been slaying the faithful Martyrs of Jesus,
Rev. 2.13. and had put to death such as loved not their lives unto death, Rev.
12.11. Now he finds it more for his advantage to raise up this Beast, and to
give his Power, Seat and Authority to him. This was the Roman Power, which till
it was thus depraved and enslaved by Satan, was not a Beast, but more noble and
just in Government than the corrupted Jews were, but now it becomes a Beast:
And this Beast he stirs up against the very Name and Form of Godliness, that he
might root out the very appearance of Israel from off the Earth: For he got but
into the Form, to eat out the Power; and now, seeing the Power is removed, it
is for his advantage also to corrupt and destroy the memorial of the true Form.

Quest. Does he effect this, and prevail likewise against the Witnesses?

Answ. Yea, as he effected the other. He overcomes the Witnesses after the
manner that he had overcome the Church, (to wit, by captiving the outward man,
and killing with the Sword; but they overcome him by patience and Faith, in
their Testimony and Sufferings, Rev. 13.10.) and this in all Kinreds, Tongues
and Nations; and so all the public Worship of the Earth is given to him, ver.
7, 8.

Quest. Why would God suffer him to do thus, seeing he has all Power in his
hands, and could have restrained him if he had pleased?

Answ. This was greatly needful to the present estate of his people: For by
this God raised up that which was good and pure in any, and kept life in it,
which otherwise might have perished in the estate of that corrupt Form, which
then had prevailed, and had gotten Dominion outwardly over the true Power.

Quest. But did not this tend to destroy Satan's Kingdom also? For this stroke
going against the very Name of Christianity, and Profession of Godliness, might
light upon his carnal Gospellers likewise.

Answ. They could easily save themselves, turning about to avoid sufferings,
and crying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make war with him? Rev.
13.4. Being already one with him in Spirit and Principle, they would not easily
differ from him, and suffer about a Form, especially seeing their Masters
interest and service ran now another way.

Quest. What became of this Beast?

Answ. The Lord did rend and tear him outwardly by his Plagues, Famines,
Pestilences, Wars, etc. insomuch as one of his Heads was wounded as it were to
death, and inwardly by the innocence and power of his Truth appearing in his
Witnesses, which scorched and tormented the Adversary, so that this Engine of
the Dragon grew faint, and weary, and unfit for this service, as he stood in
this capacity.

Quest. What does the Dragon do then, to carry on his war against the witnesses?

Answ. After this tempestuous Sea was over, he raises up another Beast out of
the Earth, with another kind of Power, even with Horns like a Lamb, Rev. 13.11.
but he spoke as a Dragon, exercising all the Power of the first Beast, ver. 12.
so that he is the Man in Power hence-forward; yet he sets up the first Beast
also, causing the Earth and them that dwell therein, to worship the first
Beast, whose deadly wound was healed. And thus these two join together, to set
up an Image to be worshipped: And all that will not worship this Image (but the
living God alone in his pure Life and Spirit) this latter Beast has power to
cause to be killed, ver. 15. and such must not so much as buy or sell, who will
not receive the Mark of the Beast, or his Name, or at least the Number of his
Name; to which number the highest growth and perfection in Religion and Worship
after the Wisdom of the Flesh, (or man's Wisdom) is to be reckoned, ver. 17.18.

Observe now diligently the place of the true Church, and her estate, and the
estate of her Children all the 42. Months. Her place of Habitation is a
Wilderness, her estate an estate of Widowhood, (a City un-built, trodden under
the feet of the Gentiles) her Seed Witnesses, reproached, persecuted, and slain
by the false Woman and her Seed. Observe likewise the place and estate of the
false Church and her Children; She rears up a glorious Building as to the
outward, she is a City built and richly adorned, she has a Golden Cup of
Doctrine and Discipline, of Ordinances and Worship to hold forth to the Kings
and Inhabiters of the Earth in all Nations, Peoples, Kinreds and Tongues; she
is arrayed in Purple and Scarlet-colour, and decked with Gold and precious
Stone, and Pearls, Rev. 17 4. and all her Daughters, who though they may deny
her, yet partake of her Spirit, and learn to rear up Buildings of Churches like
her) they also flourish in their degree and measure. None is poor but Sion,
none is desolate but God's Jerusalem, but his Church which fled into the
Wilderness, to abide there all the time of his appointment: And her Witnesses
are clothed with Sackcloth, testifying to God's despised and reproached Truth,
with mourning and grief of Spirit, and not with that fleshly joy, wisdom, and
confidence, wherewith Babylon and her Merchants vent their Wares, but only in
the evidence, demonstration, and assurance of the Spirit in their hearts, which
all the wise and confident Builders and Inhabitants of Babylon trample upon,
and despise.

Now it behooves all to consider what this Babylon, what this Woman is, spoken
of Rev. 17. which came in the place of the other Woman spoken of Rev. 12. what
this built City is, which the Wrath of the Lord will make desolate, what this
Beast or false Prophet is which appears like a Lamb, (and shows such Miracles
to deceive the Earth) and yet is fierce and cruel to such as witness for God,
Rev. 13 13, 14, 15 for dreadful are the Plagues, Woes, Vials of Wrath,
Thunders, etc. which God has prepared for her, even the Cup of the Lords
Indignation without mixture, torment with fire and brimstone in the presence of
the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14.10, 11. and chap.
18.8. And who would not fear thee, O thou King of Saints, when thou come with
thy Cup of Fury and Indignation, to empty into the Bowels of this Woman, which
has been so long drunk with the Blood of thy Saints and Martyrs* Rev. 17 6.
Consider these things, O ye Papists, wait on the Lord in his fear and dread,
that he may vouchsafe to make known to you what, and where this City Babylon
is, and that such of you as belong to him may hear his voice calling you out of
her, that ye may escape this bitter Cup, Rev 18.4.

The great Judgment is already begun (this we know, who have tasted of it.) It
has begun at God's House, and is spreading further, yea even over the Nations
which have disowned you, and yet have learned of you to build up a Church and
Worship, after the manner of your Whoredoms. These the Lord will judge first:
He will plead with the Daughters who have disowned their Mother, and yet have
gone on in the Spirit of VVhoredoms, worshipping the works of their own hands,
and admiring and magnifying the beauty of the Churches which themselves have
formed. Now is your time to consider, now is the time for the simple-hearted
among you to flee from Babylon, before the wrath of the Lord besiege her. There
are three things in general (besides many particulars) which the Protestant
Nations and Churches have learned of you, which will cost them dear, ere they
be made willing to part with them.

First, Their taking upon them Authority over men's Consciences, commanding them
what they should believe, which the Apostles never did, but said expressly, they
had not dominion over the Faith of others, but were helpers of their joy, 2
Cor. 1.24. They could not command any to believe their Doctrine, but spoke in
the demonstration of the Spirit, waiting till God opened the heart, 2 Cor 4.2.
and would not have men profess, believe, or practice from their Words, but by a
feeling of the Power, 1 Cor. 2.5. And when men did believe some things, and
came into the unity and fellowship of the Faith, they did not require them to
believe all the that Church taught or held forth as true, but waited till God
pleased to reveal further, Phil. 3.15. Indeed they could command obedience to
the Faith; What Truths the Spirit of the Lord revealed and taught any man, they
could charge him in the Name of the Lord to be faithful to, Romans 1.5. but they
knew it was God alone who could ingraft the Truth into the heart and
conscience, and also give the increase of it: And so from him alone they
expected it, waiting in patience on the stubborn and perverse, till God should
please to work upon them, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. and likewise on those that were
convinced, and had subjected themselves to the Faith, for his increase of it, 1
Cor. 3.6, 7.

2dly. Their abridging men's liberty in things wherein God has left them free,
and pressing an uniformity in things which they themselves confess to be
indifferent. Now the Apostle (who had the care of all the Churches, 2 Cor.
11:28) though he knew certainly how to determine about meats and days, as
himself confesses, Romans 14.14. yet he tells the Church at Rome expressly,
that Christ was the Lord and Master of every Disciple, to whom he must stand or
fall herein, ver. 4. and that every man ought to do is he is fully persuaded in
his own mind, ver. 5. Nay he is so far from pressing a necessity of uniformity
in such Cases, that he presses a necessity of bearing on each hand, ver. 3. So
that in the Apostles judgment, the Church has not Power to lay commands on
the Conscience, but must receive the weakest in the Faith, ver. 1. leaving him
to the liberty of his Conscience and to his subjection to his own Lord and
Master, to whom every Believer must give an account of what he receives, and of
what he obeys and performs, ver. 10. and 12.

3dly. Their setting up a Church-building, Government and Discipline by the
Magistrates Power. This the Apostles no where taught nor practiced. They
converted men by the Power of the Spirit, they cut down Errors, Heresies,
Seducers and Heretics by the same Word, and they found the Weapons of their
Warfare sufficient, 2 Cor. 10.4. they had no need of running to the Magistrate.
But that Church, those Doctrines, that Government and Discipline which is set
up by the Magistrates Sword without and against the Spirit, that has need of a
carnal Sword to defend it against the Spirit, and to cut down God's Witnesses
(whom he raises up to testify against it) for Schismatics and Heretics, or
its nakedness will soon be made manifest, and it is ruin approach.

Now when the Lord has judged all the Daughters of Babylon for these things,
then will he at length begin to plead with their Mother, Babylon the great, who
has gone a whoring from the Spirit, and built up a gaudy Church without the
Spirit, which she has defended by violence and blood, drinking the Blood of
the Saints who have been inspired by the Spirit to testify against her, Rev.
11.7, 8. and has taught all her Daughters to do the same, to wit, to drink the
blood of the Witnesses against them, even as she has drunk the blood of the
Witnesses that have testified against her. And though because she has had an
half day more given her, after her time seemed to be even expiring, and after
Judgment and Desolation was beginning to enter upon her; though because of
this, she thinks the bitterness of death is past, and she shall now sit as a
Queen, a Lady, a glorious Church for ever, Rev. 18.7. yet for all this is she
come again into God's remembrance, Rev. 16.19. and she shall see Widowhood, and
be cast into a Bed of Torment, and all her Children into great Tribulation with
her, and she shall be desolate, and naked, and drink of the Cup, and not repent
that she might escape it, Rev. 16.11. and 9.20, 21. This is her portion from
the hand of the Lord: Oh happy is he whose eyes the Lord shall open to flee out
of her for his life! For the Lamb is arisen to make War, and his Spouse is
making her self ready for his pure Bed of Life, and his anger is kindled
against all the Kings and Powers of the Earth that stand in his way: and though
they fight never so resolutely against him and his meek ones, they shall not
prevail, but the Lamb will overcome all, for he is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and they that are with him in this Battle of his Spirit, are called, and
chosen, and faithful, Rev. 17.14. And though this Woman (the false Church, in
her various dresses) is so strong every where (getting the Earthly Powers and
Authorities on her side) that now it may be said concerning this Beast in the
several appearances of it, as was concerning the former, Who is able to make
war with her? Yet there is an invisible Power stronger than she, who will call
her to judgment, Rev. 18.8. and make her give an account of all the Saints
blood which she has drunk her self, and which she has taught her Daughters to
drink: And Salvation, Glory, Honor and Power shall be ascribed to the Lord for
his righteous and powerful judging of her, Rev. 19.1, 2. And he that has any
glimmering of this in the eternal Light of the Lords pure ever-living Spirit,
let him even now say, Alleluja to him who is arisen out of his holy habitation,
and has already begun this Work, who will not fail to perfect it. Amen*

Somewhat concerning the GROUND of ERROR, and the way to Truth and Unity, for
the sake of such as are more spiritual, etc.
THere is no way to become an Heir of the Kingdom of God, but by being begotten
and born of his Spirit, which blows upon the spirit of a man, breaths life into
him, and forms him in the Eternal Image, John 3.8. Gal. 4.19.

There is no way of having this Work of God preserved, but by turning to the
Spirit, which begets, standing and keeping upright in that which is begotten,
and taking heed of the fleshly wisdom, which stands near to corrupt and destroy
the work of God, tempting, and leading aside from the Truth it self, into some
Image and Resemblance of it: And if this prevail, there is suddenly a departing
from the living God, and a running a whoring after the inventions of the
fleshly Wisdom, which appears in the likeness of the true Wisdom, that it might
the better deceive:

Now when man is first breathed upon, and begotten toward God, there is but a
little life, a little simplicity, a little Light, a little Power, a little of
the Wisdom of the true Babe; but a great Body of Death, Deceit, Darkness, Power
and Wisdom of the Flesh standing: And all these apply themselves to overturn
and destroy the truework of God, by raising up a false Image of it, which is
easily done; but abiding and preservation in the Truth is difficult, and alone
maintained by that Power, which at first begat.

Now the Power preserves through keeping out of the sensual and reasoning part
(where the corrupt one has his lodging) in that poor, low, little, childish
sensibility of the life, which the Father has begotten. Here is the entrance
unto the Truth, here is the growth, here is the preservation and safety: Which
makes it so hard for those that are wise and strong in the reasoning and
comprehending part, either to enter in, or to abide and grow in the nakedness,
simplicity, and seeming folly of the truth of the Gospel. Oh what a deal is to
be brought down, before they can be truly reached and convinced by the foolish
and weak things which God chooses to effect his great Works by, 1 Cor. 1.27,
28! What a Work has God with them to batter their Wisdom, and bring down their
Understanding, which the larger it is, the more it stands in the way of his
Light, 1 Cor. 1.19. And if they be convinced at any time, what an easy and
natural return unto them does their own Wisdom find, by some subtle device or
other, to draw them back from the plainness and singleness of the Truth, into
an holding it in the wisdom and subtilty of the understanding part, where the
simplicity is soon lost, 2 Cor. 11.3.

In the Spirit which begets and in the Truth which is begotten by it, is the
true Unity. Feeling that in one another, is that which unites us to one
another. Every one keeping to that in his own particular, is kept to that which
unites; and that is kept alive in him which is to be united: But departing from
that, there is a departing from the true Unity into the Error and ground of
division. And then that which has erred and departed from the true unity,
strives to set up a false Image of unity, and blames that which abides in the
Truth, because it cannot thus unite: For that which abides in the Spirit, and
in that which the Spirit has begotten and formed, cannot unite according to
the flesh; as that which is run a whoring from the Spirit, into an Image of the
fleshly Wisdom's forming, cannot unite according to the Spirit. Consider this,
O ye Professors of this Age, ye blame us for departing from you, for
withdrawing from unity with you; we blame you for departing from the living
Principle, wherein our unity with you formerly stood, and wherein alone we can
again unite with you, and not in such things as uphold a fleshly and false
Image of the true Unity.

Oh that ye could hear the Lord's voice, who cries aloud to the Professors of
this Age to cease from man! Cease from man in thy self, O thou who have ever
had any taste of the pure Grace and Power of God. Cease from thine own
understanding, thine own affections, thine own zeal, thine own gathered
knowledge and wisdom from the Scriptures, with all the sparks of thine own
kindling, that God may be all in thee, and his eternal habitation be raised up
in thee, and perfected, and thou swallowed up and comprehended in it for ever.
Oh what a Work has God to do to drive man's Reason and Wisdom out of his
Temple, out of his Scriptures, out of all his holy things! He that has an ear,
let him hear, for the sake of his souls eternal peace. Alas, Alas how many
stumble at, and blaspheme that, which alone can save the soul. There have been
many dispensations of, but there is but one living Truth, but one Substance,
but one Arm of Salvation: And he that stumbles at the thing it self, how can he
be saved by it? It is easy misunderstanding a former dispensation, reading it
in the Letter, and so to miss of the Salvation hoped for by it. The Jews owned
the Messiah (according to the Scriptures, as they thought) but rejected him in
the way he came to save them in. Now if Christians have gathered such a kind of
knowledge from the Letter of the Scriptures, as they did, how can they avoid
the same error, namely, of owning Christ according to the Scriptures, as they
think, but rejecting him as he comes to save them, rebelling against his living
Ministry, and the pure power and demonstration of his Spirit, because it
appears vveak and lovv, because it does not appear the same thing to them
which they expect to be saved by, according to their apprehensions of the
Scriptures? Thus reading the Scriptures in another Spirit and Wisdom then that
which vvrote them, they must needs conclude and gather another thing from them,
then what is written in them, and so make that a means to them of erring from
the life, which was written to testify of, and point to the living Principle
from whence life and salvation springs, and where alone it is to be had.

THE END.

