The Ancient PRINCIPLE OF TRUTH; Or the Light Within Asserted and Held forth,
according to true Experience, and the Faithful Testimony of the Scriptures.
Also, An Appeal to the Witness of God in all Consciences, which is the More
Sure Word of Prophecy, the Testimony of the Scriptures Without, or the Voice
and Testimony of the Light and Spirit of God Within in the Heart.

By one once greatly Distressed, but now at length in the Tender Mercy of the
Lord, effectually Visited and Redeemed, by the Light and Power of Truth, Isaac
Pennington.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

THE PREFACE.
THe true Ministers of the Gospel, the Ministers of the new Covenant, were
ordained and appointed by God to be Ministers of Light, Ministers of
Righteousness, Ministers of the Spirit, Mat. 5.14. 2 Cor. 11.15. and Chap. 3.6.
And this was their work and service, even to preach the Light, to deliver their
Message concerning the Light, which they heard of Christ and were sent by him
(...) preach, as is recorded, 1 John 1.5. (...) that they were to tell men what
the Light was, and where it was to be found, and to turn men from darkness to
Light, from sin and unrighteousness to purity and righteousness, from the
spirit and power of Satan to the Spirit and Power of the living God (Dan. 12.3.
Act. 26.18.) that so they might come from under Satan's authority, power and
kingdom of darkness, into the light, wherein Christ reigns as King, Priest and
Prophet, unto and over all his: who is faithful in all his House, as Son and
Lord of all, distributing Life, Righteousness, Mercy and Peace to his whole
Family, as they abide in him and walk in subjection to his Spirit. So that
there is no condemnation to them that are gathered unto Christ, engrafted into
him, and who abide in him (walking not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit)
who is the Quickener, Guide and Rule of all the Children of the new Covenant.
For Christ is the Way, the Truth and the Life in and to them all, and is made
by God all in all unto them. He is their Shepherd, their King, their Captain,
their Vine, their Olive Tree, their Leader, their Door, their Path, their Rule,
their Righteousness, their Holiness, their Wisdom, their Redemption, their
Altar, their Sacrifice, their Priest, their Prophet, their Sabbath, their
Light, their Dayspring, their Bright and Morning Star, their Son, their
Shield, their Rock, and their High Tower. What shall I say! God has gathered
together all things into one, even in him, whose Spirit, Life and Light Eternal
is the one Substance, which answers all the Figures and Shadows of the Law; and
they are all comprehended and fulfilled and end in him. So that he is the end
of the Law for Righteousness, to all that believe in him. And he Ministers
Righteousness, he Ministers Truth, he Ministers Life, he Ministers Salvation,
he Ministers Power, he Ministers Pure Heavenly Wisdom, and no good thing will
he withold, from them that come unto him in the Drawings of his Father, and
follow him whithersoever he leads, and obey his Gospel, which is Everlastingly
new and living.

Now this precious Ministry has been withdrawn and hid from Ages and
Generations, in the long Night of the great Apostasy and thick Darkness. And
how could it be otherwise? for men being in the Dark, and having Erred from the
True Spirit, and let in a wrong spirit, and built up wrong Churches, and having
not known the True Wilderness (nor being willing to flee into it) whither the
True Church fled, and was Nourished by God with the true Food, even with the
true living virtue and Nourishment, all this Dark Night of the Apostasy: I say,
how could they come at the true Light, the true Spirit, the true Power (from
which the true Ministry is) which did not visibly now appear, but was with the
true Church in the Wilderness? So that there has been a true Church all this
while, which the Gates of Hell have not been able to prevail against, as to her
inward Temple and Altar (nor over the Worshippers which have worshipped therein)
although they have gained the outward Court, God having severed it from his
inward building, and given it to the Gentiles in spirit, who are not true Jews,
who are not Worshippers in the Spirit and in the Truth Rev. 21.1, 2.

But now at length, blessed be the Lord, the long Night of Darkness araws
toward an end, yea is come to an end in many Spirits, and the true Light is
broken forth again (and shines again inwardly in many) and the true Mninstry
is revived again, and the everlasting Gospel (the Everlasting Covenant of Life,
Mercy and Salvation, in and through Christ Jesus the Light and Life of men)
preached again. For now, it is not only outwardly read that God is Light: But
the Message has been received, and persons chosen and sent forth by God to
publish it, and to turn men from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's power to
God. And, blessed be the Lord, the publishing of this precious Testimony (in
the power and authority of the Most High) has not been in vain: but the
Captivity of many has been broken by the Power of Light, and the power and
strength of Darkness (inwardly) overturned by it. O how has the strong man
which kept the House, before the stronger then he appeared in the name and
authority of his Father, I s^y, how has he Trembled at the inward and
Spiritual Appearance of him that was stronger than he? and how have the pillars
of the old building been shaken? How has the witness of God been reached to in
men's spirits? how have the dead been raised, the blind eye opened, the deaf ear
unstopped, the dumb tongue loosed, the Lame caused to leap as an Heart and the
tongue of the dumb to sing, the inward Spiritual Leprosy cleansed and done
away forever, the wounded healed, the brokenhearted bound up: and what has
not the Lord done inwardly and spiritually for his people, who have been
sensible of his appearance, and gathered by his Spirit and Power to the true
Shiloh, who is the true Shepherd, the Land of the living, the holy City and
Temple, the Light of the City, the Life of the City, the Gates and Wall of the
City, the King and Kingdom both: for his Life, his nature, his Spirit is all
and in all. Ah what do we desire to have, but Christ the Seed, and this Seed
sown in our Hearts and abiding in us, and his Life righteousness and glory, his
holy Power Dominion and Kingdom springing up in it! And as, in the Apostles
days, there was the Seal to their Testimony in peoples hearts, where their
Ministry was ordered by the Lord and was received: even so it is now. O how
does the witness answer in men's hearts and Consciences! and they that keep to
the witness and its Testimony, not hearkening after words to the wisdom of the
flesh, how do they become living Epistles to be seen and read of all men, as
the Lord pleases to open that eye in any, which can see and read.

Now to be often Testifying of this Light (which the Lord has visited us with,
and wherein we experience the knowledge of his Son, and Redemption by him) to us
it is not grievous, and it is good and safe for others. Therefore, it arising
in my heart in the springings of Life, and lying upon me (as in the Sight of
the Lord) to give forth this further (short) Testimony, for the sakes of such
as have any desire to know and experience the Truth as it is in Jesus; I am
given up in Spirit to serve my God therein, and do give it forth in humility,
in fear, in tenderness of spirit, in true love, with breathings to my God, that
he would please to open the hearts of those that shall be inclined to read it,
that they may feel somewhat of that in themselves from which the Testimony
came, and so therefrom may hear, in true sense and understanding, the true and
good report of the sound of Life and Salvation in this our Age, and may learn
so to turn inwardly from the darkness to the Light; from the power of Satan to
Gods Spirit and appearance inwardly, that the ^rm of the Lord may be revealed
in them and powerfully stretched out for them. And this is the precious
knowledge of Christ indeed, even to know Christ the Power of God, Christ the
Wisdom of God inwardly revealed and working in the heart, destroying sin there,
and building up the holy building, wherein he himself will dwell and reign. O
that all that truly breath after him, might not be withheld from him (and his
living Testimony and inward appearance) by the power of darkness and deceit,
which works subtly in the heart against the appearance, power and work of the
Lord there: but might thus come to know him, Amen.

The Ancient Principle of Truth, or the Light Within asserted and held forth,
according to true Experience and the faithful Testimony of the Scriptures, in
the Answers to four Questions.
1. What this Light is, which we Testify of, and what is the nature of it?

2. What it does inw^rdly in the heart?

3. How it comes to be lighted, set up and and increased there?

4. How it comes to be diminished or exstinguished in any?

Quest. 1. WHat is this Light which we so earnestly testify of, and whereof we
affirm, that all men are (or have been) in some measure enlightened by it? and
what is the nature of it?

Answ. It is that which shines from God in the heart, wherein God is near to
men, and wherein and whereby men may seek after God and find him.

God is a Spirit: and his Spirit and Presence is near to all men. Whither shall
I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy Presence? ( Psalm. 139.7.
etc.) It is impossible for any so to do. For God, who is a Spirit (and the
Father of Spirits) is nigh to every Spirit. Every Spirit depends upon him the
Fountain of Spirits, and has its being, Life and motion from him and in him,
after a sense, though not after such a sense, as they who are quickened by him
experience.

Now God, who is Light, being so near every man: does he never shine upon them?
They are Darkness: but does he never appear in the darkness? He who is Light
loves Mankind: does he never visit them with his love? He knows what and how
great inward and spiritual Enemies Mankind has: does he never make any
discoveries of their Enemies to them? Yes; The Light is near all Mankind to
discover to them and help them against the darkness: and the love is near to
help them against the enmity which destroys, and so to save them. For
whosoever joyneth to the Light of Gods Spirit, cannot but witness Salvation
thereby: for it is of a saving nature, and brings Salvation with it to all
that receive it. Christ is in it, and is known by it (inwardly, spiritually,
livingly known) and he is not nor can be known without it. He that knows the
Light of Gods Spirit, knows Christ; and he that believes in it, believes in
him: and he that knows not nor believes therein, neither knows nor
believes in Christ. So that as the Jews circumcision outward, and their
knowledge and thinking to be justified by the righteousness and works of the
Law (which most of them brake and were Transgressors of, though Paul said, he
was touching the righteousness which is in the Law, blameless) I say, as this
was disowned and denied by Christ and his Apostles, and the circumcision and
work of God on the hearts of the Gentiles set over it, and exalted above it:
(as Romans 2.) So is it now also. The knowledge of those, and belief of those who
own the Light and believe in the Light, is owned by God's Spirit (in this our
day) for the true believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, and for that knowledge
which is life eternal: and the knowing and believing on him, as men account it,
according to their apprehensions of the Letter, without this, is reckoned with
God for ignorance and unbelief.

So that, in this is God known, in this is Christ believed in. Here God draws
nigh to every man, and is a God not afar off, but nigh at hand; and his
Salvation is nigh, and his Righteousness ready to be revealed here: and here
every man may seek after and obtain the knowledge of him, the saving knowledge,
the knowledge of the Grace, of the Gift of Grace which brings Salvation. In
this is the Son kissed, in this is he drawn nigh to, and come to by the Soul,
and not out of it. Here are the drawings of the Father felt. Let any man feel
this, he feels that which begets to God: he feels that which comes from the
Son, is of the nature of the Son, wherein the Father draws (the heart of the
Child whom he begets) to the Son. And in this the Soul comes: it comes out of
the darkness wherein Christ is not nor dwells, into the Light wherein Christ is
with the Father: and so in this the Soul is ever near, and out of it still afar
off. In this is the holy root witnessed, and the ingrafting thereinto: out of
this the holy Root is not known, nor can men understand what it is to be
ingrafted into him, and how he is an Olive Tree, a Vine, a Door, a Shepherd, a
Leader, a Captain, a Redeemer. Nor can men possibly know the voice of the true
Shepherd, from the voice of a Stranger, till they come hither; nor how the true
Shepherd walks before his Sheep, and what it is to follow him out of that which
destroys, into that which regenerates, makes new and living, till they come
hither.

Now this inward Light is abundantly testified of in the Scriptures.

As first by Moses, who speaking of the other Covenant, the new Covenant, the
Covenant of Circumcising the Heart, turns or directs the mind to this Word
or Commandment nigh, whereby alone it can be done, as Deuteronomy. 30. And this was
the reason, why God so often commanded the Jews to circumcise their hearts, and
to wash them and make them clean, from their wicked ways and vain thoughts,
because Moses had directed their minds to that, and that was near to them,
wherein and whereby it might be done. In another place, he bids them make them
a new heart, Ezekiel. 18.31. how could that be done? Why, by turning to Gods
Spirit which strove with them, his Power would effect it in them: and men are
said to purify their hearts, through the Spirit, in loving and obeying the
Truth which does it, 1 Pet. 1.22. Joh. 17.17.

2 dly, by Job, who speaks of Gods Candle shining upon his Head, and of walking
through Darkness by his Light, Chap. 29.30. He speaks likewise of those that
rebel against the Light, that know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the
paths thereof, Chap. 24.13.

3 dly, By David, who by it saw through the tipes and shadows to the substance,
and grew wiser then his Teachers, he knowing the Word within, and having his
Candle lighted by it, so that he knew the inward Law which converts the soul,
and was led by Gods Light and Truth shining in his inward parts, Psalm. 43.3.

4 thly, By Solomon, The Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law Light, and the
reproofs of instruction the way of Life, Prove. 6.23. Every one that
experienceth the Light, the Law, the Commandment within, knows it to be thus.
Again, says he, The Path of the just is as the shining Light, that shines
more and more unto the perfect day, Chap. 4.18. Just as a Light, which shines
outwardly, is to the outward man: such is the inward Light to the inward man;
ye more: for inwardly, the Light and the Way is all one. Christ is the way, the
Truth and the Life, which are three names of one and the same thing. And he
that walks in the Light, walks in the way of Life and Holiness; which he that
walks in the darkness, walks out of. I shall mention but one place more, which
is very differently rendered, it is Chap. 20.27. The new Translation renders it
thus, The Spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward
parts of the belly. The Old thus, The Light of the Lord is the breath of man,
and searches all the bowels of the belly. The heart of man, (the unregenerate
mind, the unregenerate spirit) is deceitful above all things and desperately
wicked: that whereby God searches it, is his Light, his Candle, his own Holy
Spirit.

5 thly, By the Prophets, as Jsaiah, Jeremy, Ezekiel, Micah, etc. who said, He
has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee,
but to do justly, and to Love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy
God? Chap. 6.8. How does God show this to mankind, but by the inward Light of
his Spirit.

6 thly, By John Baptist, who was the forerunner, and testified of Christ as
of the inward and spiritual Baptizer who had his Fan in his hand: what is that?
What does Christ Fan with? What does he fan, and with what? The Light within is
a Fan, the Spirit within, is a Spirit of Judgment and burning: it scatters the
darkness, ye^ it consumes and burns up the Dross and Stubble there.

7 thly, By Christ himself, who said, This is the condemnation, that Light is
come into the World, and men loved darkness rather then Light, because their
deeds were evil, John 3.19. Mark how Christ preached the Light (the Seed, the
Kingdom, the Leaven) and bid men bring their deeds to it, and blamed them that
did not, ver. 20.21. How can there be an inward Jew, an inward Circumcision,
without an inward Law, inward Light, an inward Testimony? and to this inward
Law and Testimony, must the inward Jew daily have recourse, and bring his deeds
thither, to be judged and scanned there. Again, Christ says, I am the Light of
the World: he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
Light of Life, Chap. 8.12. How is Christ the Light of the World, or how was
Christ the Light of the World? Was he only so, as he appeared in that body of
flesh? Is he not so in his inward and spiritual appearance? Is he not the
Universal Light, the Son of Righteousness, which enlighteneth the whole dark
World? Yet again he says, Yet a little while is the light with you; walk while
ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walks in
darkness, knows not whither he goes. While ye have the light, believe in the
light, that ye may be the Children of light, Chap. 12.35.36. This is Christ's
direction to men how they may become true Believers, to wit, by believing in
the Light. The Light shines in the darkness ( ye were darkness) and by
believing in it, men become Children of it.

8 thly, By the Apostles, and Evangelists. They were sent to turn men from
Darkness to Light, Acts. 26.18. and they testified of the Light they were to
turn men to: delivered their message that God was Light, and that in him was no
darkness at all. They preached Christ the Light, the Life, the Way, the Truth.
They turned men from Satan's spirit which is darkness, to Gods Spirit which is
Light.

John the Evangelist testified of the Word which was in the beginning, and
said, In him was life, and the Life was the Light of men. And the light shines
in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not, Chap. 1.4, 5. And again
says, speaking of him, That was the true light, which lights every man that
comes into the world, verse. 9.

Paul says, whatsoever does make manifest is Light, Ehes. 5.3. Wherefore Awake
thou that sleep, and arise from the dead (verse. 14.) for God has sent forth
the Light of his Son to rouse thee. Again, he professedly averreth, that the
word nigh in the mouth and heart, was that Word of Faith which he preached,
Romans 10.8. If so, then that is the Word of faith which is to be believed in, if
men would believe in Christ and be saved by him.

James speaks of God as the father of Lights, from whom every good and
perfect Gift proceeds, Chap. 1.17. Then surely from him is the Grace, and the
Gift (the free Gift) by Grace, which is upon all to Justification of life, that
receive it and follow the teachings of it.

Peter speaks of the more sure word of prophecy, to which men should take
heed; and wait, in taking heed to that, for the dawning of the day, and the
arising of the Day Star in the heart, 2 Pet. 1.19. Indeed, all men ought to
wait for, and give heed to the Light of God's holy Spirit, and the holy
Prophesies, Warnings and Directions thereof in their hearts.

And John, at last as I may say, in that Book of the Revelation (closing up the
Testimony of that Age and Generation) speaks of walking in the Light of the
Lamb, Chap. 21.23, 24. (which every one that comes to witness the true Light,
ought to do, else there is no true fellowship with God, nor with his Sanctified
Ones, who are gathered into and walk in the Light, even as God is in the Light,
1 John 1.7.) And the Angel that opened the Prophesies and Mysteries of that
Book to John, said, that the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy,
Chap. 19.10. So then, he that has this Spirit of Prophecy, he that has this
inward Light, has the Testimony of Jesus: but he that has it not, has not
the Testimony it self, but only words concerning the Testimony. For this is the
Distinction between the true Believer and the False: The true Believer has the
Spirit of Prophecy, the Witness in himself, (1 John 5.10.) the False Believer
has but the Outward Testimony or Relation of things, but not the Inward
Substance, the Covenant and Law of Life within.

Quest. 2. WHat does this Light do inwardly in the Hearts of those that receive
it, believe in it and give up to it?

Ans. It does all that is requisite to be done, from the Souls coming out of
Spiritual Egypt into the Land of Rest; and all that is needful for its Growth
and Preservation there.

First, it Enlighteneth. It shows what is Evil, and also what is Good,
according to the Measure and Proportion of it, and according to Gods causing it
to Shine in the Heart. It Discovers the Mystery of Darkness, the Mystery of
Ungodliness, the Mystery of Iniquity, the Mystery of Deceit in all its
Mysterious Workings: for nothing is hid from the Light of him with whom we have
to do. And it also discovers the Mystery of Godliness, the Mystery of Holiness,
the Pure Way and Commandment of Life; and gives all the Believers (the True
Believers in Christ) this Experience, That his Commandment is Life Everlasting.
There is nothing the heart needs desire to know of God, but this makes it
manifest, in the due season. It opens the very Mystery of the Scriptures, gives
the right Understanding and application of the Promises, and fulfils the
Prophesies thereof in the heart.

2 dly, It does not only manifest the good and evil, but likewise inclines the
mind to choose the good and refuse the evil. It draws from the evil and toward
the good: yea, and the soul is made willing in the day of him who is light, and
who appears in the light, and reveals his power there. There is a way, an high
way spoken of Jsa. 35.8. called the way of holiness, which the unclean can
neither discern nor pass over to: but the Light of the Lord Jesus Christ, the
measure of Grace and Truth wherewith he enlightens men, so manifests and leads
into this way, that they that are taught and guided by him shall walk therein
and not err.

3 dly, It scatters the darkness, breaks the power of the enemy; it makes one
with him who is all power, and gives ^o partake thereof, so that power is
given to become sons, in the Light, to the Children of the Light: power given
to become Kings and Priests to God: power given to reign in the dominion of his
Life, in the dominion of his Truth, over sin, over death, over deceit; and to
offer up the holy living sacrifices to God.

What shall I say? It is one with Christ, it is of his heavenly Spirit and
Nature, it makes way for him, it leads to him, it fills with him, it brings
into unity and fellowship both with the Father and the Son, where the peace
which passes understanding, and the joy unspeakable and full of glory abounds.
This is the Gospel-message, that God is Light: and they that are gathered into
and abide in this Light, they are gathered into and abide in unity and
fellowship, both with the Father and the Son.

David had great sense, and great experience of this Light of Gods holy Spirit,
and of his Truth sent forth, manifested and revealed in his inward parts, as is
signified, Psalm. 51.6. and again in that vehement Prayer of his, Psalm. 43.3. O
send out thy Light and thy Truth; let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy
holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles. Then will I go unto the Altar of God, unto
God the gladness of my joy: yea, upon the harp will I Praise thee, O God, my
God. Indeed when the Light shines and the Truth springs up in the heart, it
leads to him that is true, it leads to the Holy Hill and Mountain of the Lord
and to the Inward Altar which they have no Right to who serve and and worship
at the outward; and the Harp is known whereon the Most High is Praised, even
that Inward Harp, whereof David's outward Harp was but the Figure. Therefore
they that come to the Holy Hill of God, to the Mountain of the Lord's House,
and to that Holy building which is reared there, they invite and encourage
others ^o walk in that Light which led them thither, wherein Communion with God
and one with another, and the Blessings of Life and Peace are Enjoyed, Isa. 2.5.

But what should I speak of the Sufficiency of the Light and Grace of the
Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, or of what it is able to do, and of what he is
pleased to work by it? I shall only say this: that as the Fullness was enough
for Christ, and to fit him for the Work which he had to do: so the measure of
Grace and Truth which he bestows, is enough for every man. My Grace is
Sufficient for thee, said God to Paul: and so it is for every man. There is no
Want of Sufficiency in the Grace of God, in the Seed of the Kingdom, in the
Pearl of Price, in the Holy Leaven, in the Heavenly Salt; but the Virtue and
Strength of it is Greater, then the Enemy is able to withstand: and he that
keeps (...) and departs not from it, shall feel Life and Power springing up in
it, to quicken him and carry him through all that God requires of him. For the
Water which Christ gives is a Well, springing up (in him to whom it is Given)
unto Life Eternal: and this Water is able to Wash, able to Nourish, able to
Fill the Soul with Living Virtue, which waits for it and partaketh of it. And
all the Nations of them that are saved, are to walk in the Light of God's
Spirit. To this men are to be turned, unto this they are to be gathered, into
this they are to be Translated (even from the Kingdom of Darkness, into the
Sons Mavelous Light) and being changed by it (into its Nature) become Light
in the Lord, and ought to walk in the Light, as God is in the Light. 1 John 1.7.

Quest. 3. HOw does the Mind come to be Enlighted, and the Candle of the Lord
come to be set iup in the Soul?

Answ. By God's causing it to shine there, and the minds being turned to it and
given up to be exercised by it, as it pleases the Lord to cause it to shine.

The Power of the Lord reaches to the pure Principle of Life and Light in the
heart, in the seasons of his good Pleasure. This being reached to and touched
by the Lord, answers his touch, his visit, his call: and the mind being turned
to it, sensible of it, and willing to let it into its nature and spirit, and to
become one with it, (suffering with it and bearing its Cross;) the Seed comes
to grow there, the Light which was hid and overwhelmed under the Earth (under
the earthly Wisdom, the earthly Will, the earthly Knowledge, the earthly
Desires, the Earthly Delights, etc.) comes to be lighted up there, yea the
life comes to be quickened more and more, and the holy Leaven to spread more
and more there. And this sensible Plant of God's Renown being thus entertained,
and being not afterward grieved, despised, quenched or hurt, by the giving way
to and letting in of that which is contrary to it, it shoots up into a
Kingdom of Righteousness, into a Tree of Righteousness, within the compass
whereof and under the shadow whereof the Soul sits down in Peace and Rest,
and is defended and nourished with that which is pure and living, and full of
the pure Sap and Virtue; and so becomes strong in the Lord, and in the Power of
his Might, against the power and strength of darkness. Now this all men may
experience, (at first in some low measure and degree, and afterward more and
more) as they come to feel after, and have a sense of that which is of God and
good in the heart, and come to join and give up to it. For then it will be
working against and purging out that which is of a contrary nature, and
overspreading the heart with its own Nature: insomuch as, that which was the
least, will become the greatest; and that which was the lowest of all (and
indeed trampled under foot) will rise up into Dominion and Power over all, and
bring all under. So that the lofty City, the lofty building of fleshly Wisdom,
and of Sin and Iniquity in the heart, will be laid low; and the feet of the
Seed shall tread it down, even the feet of that which was once poor and needy,
until it was anointed, and its Horn exalted by the Lord.

Quest. 4. HOw is the Light or Candle of the Lord diminished, and at length
extinguished or put out in some? or how comes that about?

Answ. By their neglecting, despising, quenching it, hearkening and giving way
to the contrary spirit in its Motions and Temptations. For as the Good, let in,
stops and works out the Evil: so the Evil let in stops and works out the Good.
So the Philistine-nature, given way to, stops the inward Well, which Jacob had
dug and opened. There is a time wherein Life is a Mystery, a Fountain
sealed; and there is a time wherein God unseals the Fountain and opens the
Mystery in the heart. O then great care is to be had, and the Soul is to lie
very low in the pure Fear, that it may continue in his Goodness, and walk
worthy of his Love, that the Fountain may be kept open, and the pure Springs of
the holy Land flow, and not be sealed and shut up again. For there are some
that rebel against the Light, and they dwell in a dry Land. There were some
that did always resist, and vex God's Spirit, and the Lord's Spirit ceased
striving with them, and gave them up to a reprobate sense and judgment
concerning the things of God. There are some that do not improve God's good
Talent, and from them that which was once given, is again taken away. Yea the
Candle of the Wicked shall one time or other be put out, and they shall be
silent in darkness, and their Mouth stopped from having any thing to say
against God, his Truth and People for evermore. And all men had need to take
heed, how they be wanton with the Grace of God, or despise the day of their
visitation by the holy Light of God's Spirit: for if God take away the Talent,
if God put out the inward Candle, who can light it again? O how did poor David,
the man after God's own Heart suffer, by letting the Enemy's temptations in
upon him, Cast me not away from thy Presence, said he, and take not thy holy
Spirit from me. Indeed he did lose his condition at the present, and he speaks
as a man in danger of being quite undone; though afterward he came to Comfort
and Assurance, that God would restore to him the Joy of his Salvation, and
light his Candle and enlighten his Darkness again.

But I am not insensible of what doubts and disputes there are in men's minds,
about this Testimony which we give (from certain knowledge and true experience)
concerning the Light, wherewith God enlighteneth Souls. At first, when the
Testimony first came forth, men would not grant such a thing, as a Light from
God in men, which convinced of and reproved for Sin. But now there are many
will assent to that, who yet cannot believe it to be a Measure of the Grace and
Truth which comes by Jesus Christ, and that in it the Sufficiency and Power of
God is revealed against the strength and power of Satan. But let such seriously
consider.

First, who they are that have testified and testify of this Light? They are
Persons who, generally, have been deeply exercised in Religion: Persons, who
have read the Scriptures very diligently, with much praying and waiting upon
God for the true, certain and clear understanding of them: Persons, who
(several of them) have had experience of most (if not all other) separated
Ways; but could never meet with the Answer of the Cry of their Souls, nor with
Satisfaction to that Birth, which breathed in them after the Lord, night and
day.

2dly, What their Testimony is, which is manifold, as first, That they were by
the Lord (even by his holy Spirit, and the shinings and springings of his
precious Seed in them) turned to this light, and shown it to be of God. 2dly,
That in turning to it, they still met with the Presence, Appearance, and Power
of the Lord working in their hearts. 3dly, That it did not only discover Sin to
them, but also powerfully resist it, fight against it and bring it under; which
no light and power, besides the Light and Power of God's Spirit can do. 4thly,
That the Life of the Son is manifested and revealed in it, and they come
therein truly to see, and taste and handle the Word of eternal Life. 5thly,
That in this Light they come to witness cleansing by the Blood of the Lamb, and
the everlasting Covenant made with them (even the sure Mercies of David) and
the holy and precious Promises fulfilled in them, whereby they are made
Partakers of the divine Nature, and come to witness an entrance into the holy
City, and drink of the Streams of the pure Crystal River, which refresh and
make glad the City of our God, and all the Tabernacles wherein he dwells.
Lastly, to mention no more, the Lord has shown them, how this had been
formerly with them, even in the days of their former Profession; and how God
had wrought by this in them in former times, though they then knew it not; and
that all their Ability then to understand any thing of God aright, or to pray
unto him, or reap any true benefit from the Scriptures, was through the
stirring of this in them, whereby God even then in some measure enlightened and
quickened their minds. For, there being such a Principle in man, it works
variously, and many times when he is not aware of it: and he has benefit
thereby, if he resist it not, but receive its influence and operation, though
he has not the distinct knowledge and discerning of it.

3dly, Again consider, Whether the Light of Christ's Spirit, or the Grace and
Truth which is by Jesus Christ, has not this property of discovering,
convincing and reproving for sin? Doubtless the Law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, in the lowest Ministration of it, is of that nature that it
discovers, and fights against the Law of sin and death, wherever it finds
it. And whether the Comforter, the holy Spirit of Truth, who leads out of all
Error and Falsehood and into all Truth, is not as well to be known by this, even
by his convincing the world of sin, and inwardly reproving for sin, as by his
comforting of the Saints, in their holy Travels out of sin and Battles against
sin?

Consider 4thly, Whether any thing can convince of sin, but the Light of God's
holy Spirit shining in the heart? There may be an outward Declaration of sin by
the Law outward; but it never reaches the heart and Conscience, but by the
shining of the Light inward: Nay, it cannot so much as reach to the
understanding, but as God opens the heart, and brings home the conviction by
his Light and Power. This we have experience of in the Jews, who though the
Prophets came with certain evidence and demonstration from God's Spirit, yet
they were not convinced thereby, but stood it out against the Prophets, and
justified themselves against the Voice and Word of the Lord, their Eyes being
closed, their Ears shut and Hearts hardened against that of God in them, as may
be read in Jeremiah, Chap. 2. and in diverse other places, even to Admiration.
And what wickedness is so great, which the hardened man will not plead for, and
be defending and justifying himself in? Yea, if God do open men's understandings
in some measure, so that they cannot but confess such and such things to be
evil in general (as Pride, covetousness, drunkenness, riotousness, excess in
apparel, lying, swearing, etc.) yet they are not able to see the evil and
danger of these things in and to themselves, but have covers and excuses to
hide them, unless the inward Light and Spirit of the Lord search their hearts,
and make them manifest to them.

5thly, Consider the weight and proper tendency of these two Scriptures, and do
not form another meaning, and so put off the drift and intent of God's holy
Spirit in them. The first is that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.13.14. But all
things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light: For whatsoever does
make manifest, is Light. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sheepest, etc.
Every man is bid to Awake, because every man has some proportion of that in
him, which (if hearkened to) will reprove, rouse up and awaken him, and lead
him from among the dead, to him who gives the Light and causes it to shine in
him, even in the midst of his darkness and corruption, that it might awaken him
out of it. The other Scripture is that of Gal. 5.^7. where the Apostle speaks
of the Flesh its lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh,
and that these two are contrary. Did not God's Spirit strive with the old
World? not only with the Sons of God, who had corrupted themselves, but with
the rest also? And what is it that has striven with wicked men since, and that
does strive with wicked men still? Is it not the same good Spirit? What is it
also that inwardly resists and lusts against the Will and strivings of God's
Spirit? Is it not Flesh? So here are the two Seeds, the two Principles (which
are contrary one to the other) near man. For there is the Creature man (which
of right is the Lords) into whom the Destroyer has gained entrance, and in
whom he rules by the Law of Sin and Death. Now, he who made man seeks after
him, and finds out his Enemy in man, and gives forth a Law against him
inwardly in the heart: which so far as any man gives ear to, believes and
receives, there arises presently a fight and striving between these two
contrary Principles in him, so that this man cannot do the things that he
would. Now that which thus strives against sin in any man, and troubles him
because of sin, reproving and condemning him for it; that is of another nature
then the Flesh, (which harbors sin) and contrary to it.

Lastly, consider the great love of God to mankind, and the great care he has
of them. First, as touching their Bodies. How does he provide for the Bodies of
all mankind! He would have none hurt, none destroyed, but feeds all,
nourishes all, making plentiful provision and giving fruitful seasons, causing
his Sun to shine and his Rain to descend on all. Then, as to their Souls: He
knows the preciousness thereof, and what the loss of a Soul is: yea he
knows how eager the Devourer is to destroy, and sets himself against him.
He is the Father of Spirits, and his Son the Shepherd and Bishop of Souls,
whose nature it is to gather and save; and it is said expressly of God, by the
Testimony of the Spirit of Truth, that he would ^ave all to be saved and come
to the knowledge of the Truth. And whereas it was said to the Jews, that God
was as the Potter, and they as the Clay; and he could make them Vessels either
of honor or dishonor at his pleasure, Jer. 18.6. yet it was said to this end,
even to invite and encourage them to be subject to him, that they might be made
Vessels of honor by him, as appears ver. 11.

Now consider; If God be as tender of souls, as of the bodies of men; does he
not make provision for the soul, as well as for the body? Would he not have the
soul live, and would he not have the soul fed, as well as the body? If so: then
needs must the light of his holy Spirit shine inwardly throughout all Nations,
and the saving Grace and Power be manifest everywhere, even in every heart, in
some measure, and the Flesh and Blood of the Son of God (which is the souls
food) be distributed to all. And truly, the Lord is not an hard Master to any,
(as the unprofitable Servant, in every Dispensation, is ready to account of
him:) for the times of ignorance and darkness God winketh at or passes over,
being very tender toward men in that estate: yea, a little that is of him,
turned to and heeded, according to the Measure of Understanding that God gives,
will be owned and accepted, even in the midst of a great deal of Darkness and
evil-working against it.

There was a time before the Law (for the Law was given by Moses) what saved
then? Was it any thing but the saving Grace, the saving Light, the saving
Spirit, the holy Anointing? Could any be saved, but thereby?

What saved under the Law? Did the Shadows then save, or the Substance of Life
veiled under them? Did not the Spirit then work inwardly, redeem inwardly, save
inwardly? Did not the Word or Commandments nigh in the mouth and heart (to
which Moses by Gods direction had turned their minds) enlighten and save
inwardly?

And any of the Gentiles, as this Word or Spirit of Life did work in them, did
it not circumcise inwardly and save them also? So that though they had not the
Law or Ministration of Moses outward, yet they had the inward Writing from God
on their hearts, and showed the work and efficacy of it there, and shall at
last be justified by and according to the everlasting Gospel, which justifies
all whatsoever, so far as in any measure they receive and are subject to the
Light and Law of Gods pure Spirit, which the carnal mind cannot receive nor be
subject to.

O that men could dye to themselves, even to their own wisdom and prudency, and
not lean to their own understandings, nor idolize their own apprehensions and
conceivings, but wait to receive understanding from God, who gives liberally
of the true Wisdom, to those that ask and wait a right! And how does God give
true Wisdom and Understanding? Is it not by the shining of his Light in the
heart? O that men were turned inwardly thither, and inwardly dead to that
wisdom and prudency from which God ever hid things and ever will. He that will
be truly wise, must first become a Fool, that he may be wise: that is, He must
not strive to learn in the comprehensive way of man's wisdom and prudency the
things of Gods Kingdom, but feel the begettings of life in his heart, and in
that receive somewhat of the new and heavenly Understanding, and so dye to the
other, and know no more the things of God after the flesh, that is, as a wise
man, as a learned Scribe, as a great Disputant (for where is the Wise? where is
the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this World? Can they find out the mystery
of life, the Mystery of Gods Kingdom in this Age, any more then they could in
former Ages?) but become a Babe, a Fool, and so receive and bow to that which
his own wisdom will call foolishness, and account weakness, but the other Birth
which is begotten and born of God, will know and daily experience to be the
Wisdom and Power of God unto Salvation.

An APPEAL to the Witness of God in all Consciences; which is the More Sure
Word of Prophecy, the Testimony of the Scriptures Without, or the Voice and
Testimony of the Light and Spirit of God Within in the Heart.
THe Apostle Peter speaks of a more sure word of Prophecy (or of a more sure
prophetical word, as the Greek has it) then that voice which came from Heaven,
which they heard, when they were with Christ in the holy Mount, 2 Pet. 1.18,
19. Now what this more sure word is, which ought to be given heed to in the
most especial manner, more then to such an eminent Voice and Testimony from
Heaven, even from the excellent Glory, it is a very great and weighty Question.
Now some affirm that it is the word and testimony of the Scriptures without,
others affirm that its the voice, sound and testimony of the Word of Life
within.

I do not know a Scripture that my heart has been more tenderly sollicitous
about, desiring to give due honor both to the Spirit of God and to the holy
Scriptures, and also to understand what the Lord would have me in the most
especial manner give heed to, until the season came from him, in which he
should cause the Day to dawn and the Day Star to arise in my heart. And now
that others might come to the same understanding and satisfaction also, are
these following Considerations proposed in the weight of my Spirit to them.

First, consider how sure the Word of Prophecy was, how sure the Voice and
Testimony from Heaven was, then which the Apostle directs them to somewhat as
more sure. This I may clearly say of it, It was undoubtedly from God, and that
in a very extraordinary manner, even in Christ's presence, when Moses and Elias
were with him, and God bestowing upon him honor and glory, transfiguring him
before his Disciples, causing his face to shine as the Sun, and making his
Raiment white as the Light, Mat. 17.2. And the intent of it was to give the
Disciples full evidence and satisfaction (for the Voice was not for his sake,
but for theirs) or rather that they might have a full ground, after his death
and resurrection, to testify for the satisfaction and confirmation of others:
for till then, they were to keep it secret, ver. 9. Now that which was thus
provided for this end, doubtless it was very sure, testified by them who were
chosen to be faithful Witnesses in this respect.

2dly, Consider, Whether the Testimonies of the Prophets concerning Christ were
surer, then this immediate Voice from God himself? Were they surer to those
that lived in those days, or to those that should come after, then this
Testimony was to the Apostles and to those they did communicate it in the Will
and Counsel of the Lord? The Prophets did testify from Gods holy, unerring
Spirit: but they that lived in those days, did not always believe and receive
their Prophesies, but sometimes doubted of them and questioned them; yea their
Prophesies were not always evident and clearly understood by those who desired
to understand, but their Visions were many times a Book sealed, both to the
learned and unlearned. But this Testimony, this Word of Prophecy, this Voice
from the excellent Glory (This is my beloved Son, hear him) is a very plain,
evident, full Testimony, easy to be understood by any in that present or in
after Ages: and I must confess, as to my self, the reading of it did always
deeply affect and satisfy my heart.

3dly, Consider the manner of Gods appearing to the Prophets, and compare it
with the manner of this Appearance. God appeared to them sometimes in Visions,
sometimes in Dreams. Moses saw a Bush burning, and heard a Voice. The Vision of
Isaiah the son of Amos, Isa. 1.1. and Ezekiel saw Visions, Chap. 1.1. and
Daniel had a Dream and Visions on his Bed, Dan. 7.1. And Jeremiah had that
sweet Prophecy (of Gods satiating the weary soul, and replenishing every
sorrowful soul) in his sleep, Jer. 31.26. Now here, to these blessed Apostles,
was a Vision given of the glory of Christ, and of Moses and Elias with him; not
in the mind or head, as Daniels Visions were, Dan. 7.1. but the excellent glory
did appear, and Christ, Moses and Elias were really there together on the mount
(which is more then a prophetic Vision of a thing) and Christ was clothed
with and swallowed up in the glory. For God the Father did set himself to
honor and glorify him so, as never man was glorified before; and the Voice
came (the certain Voice: What Voice could be more certain?) from the excellent
Glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased, 2 Pet. 1.17. And this
pure Vision of Glory (even of Gods thus appearing, and Christ's thus
transfiguring) they saw, and heard the Voice which came from Heaven, when they
were with him in the holy Mount. Now were ^he Prophesies of the Prophets that
Christ should be born in Bethlehem, and that he should be thus and thus, etc.
equal to this in evidence and demonstration. Why was John greater then the rest
of the Prophets? Was it not in that he was chosen to be the immediate
Forerunner and Preparer of the Way, and could point with his finger to the
Messiah? And yet, is not this immediate testimony from the excellent Glory,
greater then the testimony of John?

4thly, Consider, Whether Christ's own Words, in the Flesh, to his Disciples,
were surer then this Voice from the excellent Glory? If I should extol the
Words of Christ in the Flesh, above the words of the Prophets which testified
of him, should I therein do the words and testimonies of the Prophets any
wrong? He was the Son, he had the fullness of Life, the fullness of the Spirit,
the great authority and virtue of God his Father. God (says the Apostle) who
at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the Fathers by
the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. (Hebr. 1.1,
2.) seeming to exalt and magnify Gods speaking by his Son, and the Way of this
Ministration above the Ministraon of the Prophets (which Ministration was first
by him in flesh, afterward in Spirit, which is properly called the
Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8.) Now consider, whether this sure word
of Prophecy from the excellent Glory, so immediately from the Majesty on High,
was not intended by him as a seal to the Faith of the Disciples, as a seal to
Christ's appearance in Flesh, and to what he had taught them (which was
sometimes in Parables, and not so fully understood by them;) and whether this
was not more bright, more ravishing, more certain, more establishing, then his
common Presence and Appearance among them, and then the words which he from the
Father, not the Father so immediately himself spoke to them? For that which is
given to confirm a thing, is (in order of nature and for evidence sake) more
certain and clear, then that which it is given to confirm.

5thly, Consider, Whether the Voice of Gods Spirit and Light within, in the
heart, be not more clear and certain to him that hears it, then any Word or
Testimony from without? Is it not a surer Word of Prophecy, then this Relation
or Testimony of the Apostles, of what they heard from the excellent Glory? yea
is it not surer then any Testimony of the Scriptures, or then all outward
Testimonies put together.

6thly, Consider, Whether they who are turned from Darkness to the Light, even
to the inward Manifestation of Gods holy Spirit, ought not to give diligent
heed unto it, until the day dawn and the Day Star arise in their hearts.

Lastly, Consider, What is the difference between this Light shining (as a Word
of Prophecy) in the dark place, and the day dawning and the Day Star arising
in the heart? Is it not the same Light, only further revealed and shining in
it is glory, in the holy and pure place?

The Apostle Paul excellently opens the thing, Coloss. 1.25.20, 27. First he
speaks of the Word in general, which he was to fulfill, or fully to preach.
Then he shows how this Word is a Mystery, hid in the Gentiles (for so the
Greek verse. 27. is) even in them that believe not; the Word is nigh there, the
Instruction and Commandment of Life nigh there. But, in those that receive the
Grace, and believe in the Light, and so become children of the Light, and walk
in the Light as God is in the Light; in them Christ is risen, and they are
risen together with him, and he is in them the hope of glory. So that the day
has dawned, there the Day Star has arisen; and they know not only a Measure
of Grace from Christ, but Christ himself arisen, dwelling, living, acting,
walking in them, and they in him.

Let these things be duly considered of and equally weighed in the holy
Balance, and then I dare appeal to every serious and sober heart and mind,
Whether the inward Light, the inward Word, the word nigh in the mouth and
heart, and the holy living testimony thereof, the voice of the Witness within,
of the Prophecy within, be not surer to that man that has it, and hears and
knows the voice of it, then any outward voice or testimony whatsoever?

Object. But some may object thus, or after this manner. I am satisfied that
there is a Word nigh in the mouth and heart (to which Moses did direct the
Jews, and the Apostles the Christians) and that this Word does enlighten the
mind, and does separate in the mouth between words and words, and is a swift
Witness against the bad words, and a Justifier of the good words, which come
from the truth and uprightness of the heart, and are seasoned with grace. I
also believe that this Word is quick and powerful in the heart, separating and
dividing between the thoughts and intents there, and that the testimony thereof
is surer and clearer (as to the hearts in which it shines, and to them whose
spiritual ears are opened to hear its voice) then any words and testimonies
from without. And I am satisfied also, that they who are the Sheep of Christ,
do thus hear the Shepherds Voice, and do know both the Voice behind them, when
it comes after them to reprove their wanderings and direct their minds into the
true Way, and also the voice before them, when the Shepherd (who is the Leader)
puts forth his Sheep, and goes before them and they follow him, for they
knew his Voice, John 10.4. Yea, I have had the experience hereof in my own
heart: for I have felt that work within, and that living sweet testimony of
Gods Spirit in my own heart, which has been more to me, then all that ever I
heard or read, from without: so that I can truly say (with the Samaritans, John
4.42.) Now I believe, not because of the testimonies or words I have heard from
without, but from the evidence and demonstration of Life and of Gods holy
Spirit in my own heart. Nor can I see, how the Apostle Peter in this place, can
prefer the Testimonies of the Prophets (for that which is called the new
Testament, was not yet written and added to the old) before this glorious
immediate Testimony from God Almighty, which Christ was honored with, and they
were greatly honored in being admitted to be Beholders and Witnesses of. Yet
somewhat sticks with me, namely those words of the Apostle, ver. 20.21. wherein
he plainly seems to me to speak of the Scriptures or Writings of the Prophets,
as if that had been the more sure Word of Prophecy, which in this place he had
directed to. For why should he say thus, Knowing this first, etc. unless he had
intended the same Word of Prophecy, which he had been speaking of before, and
directing their minds how they might make use of that Word of Prophecy?

Answ. Peter was the Minister of the Circumcision, and he was to deal with
people who were great Admirers and Studiers of the Letter. Therefore though he,
as well as Paul and John and the other Apostles ( Romans 10. and Acts 26.18. and
1 John 1.) was to direct men to the Word within and Light within: yet he knew
it was of great concernment to them, rightly to read and be able to understand
the Letter without. Therefore having first directed them to the Word of
prophecy, to the Path of the Just, which is the inward shining Light, to the
Light which shines more and more in the dark place, to them that give heed to
it: in the next place it was very proper, useful and necessary, to direct them
how to read the Scriptures aright. For indeed, the Oracles of God were given to
them, Romans 3.2. and they ought to be diligent in the reading of them, that they
might understand the holy Prophesies and precious Promises, etc. and reap the
hope and comfort of them, and be made Partakers of the divine Nature, which is
the thing promised. And not only to the Jews, but to the Christians gathered
from among the Gentiles in that Age, were the Scriptures greatly useful: and so
they are also to such as are gathered by the holy Spirit and Power of God in
this Age. The Prophesies, the Judgments, the Promises, the Mercies, the
Experience, etc. are all useful and profitable, to those that read and
understand them in the Light of Gods holy Spirit. But the first thing needful
is to turn a man's mind to the Light, that he may have somewhat to guide him,
somewhat to stay his mind upon in reading the Scriptures, somewhat to open and
unseal the holy and divine Words and Mysteries to him. For no man can truly and
rightly understand the Scriptures, but as his mind is opened by the Lord, and
the understanding of words and things given him. So that this is exceeding
necessary to be known (after a man is turned to the Light and Word of Prophecy
within, and comes to read the outward Oracles and Testmonies of the holy
Spirit) that all holy men spoke not in their own wills; not in the will of the
Flesh, not in the will of man; but as the Spirit of God gave them words and
moved them to speak. And those words, spoken by Gods Spirit, knows none but
that Spirit which spoke them. So that no man ought to venture by his private
Spirit, to undertake to open and interpret those words; but he must first
receive the same Word of Life, the same Spirit of Prophecy within, and wait
upon him and learn to know his Voice, who opens what and when he pleases to
the sons of men, either of what he spoke formerly, or of what he pleases to
speak now. And so, when the same Word of Life speaks in a man's heart now,
showing things to come, either concerning a man's self or others, that man must
be careful to retire and lie very low before the Lord, waiting upon him for the
true understanding and right interpreting of his own words, else a man may
easily mis-understand and mis-apply what was truly and rightly spoken. So that
this is the right way of understanding the Words of Prophecy from the holy men
of God in former Ages, and the Instructions of the Word of Life in the heart.
The secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him. In the true fear the Ear
is opened and the right Understanding given: but in the wisdom of the Flesh,
and in the confidence thereof, it is easy erring at any time from the true
sense and right use of that, which was opened and given by God, either for the
souls own good, or for the good of others.

To Conclude this appeal: There is one consideration on my heart to propose to
the serious and sober minded; and Oh that they might rightly consider and
understand it. David was a man after Gods own heart, a wise man, an inwardly
exercised man, an experienced man, an holy, spiritual, heavenly man; a man who
knew the inward, everlasting Kingdom, and had the Spirit of God, and witnessed
his Truth in the inward parts. Can ye think that David did not know the Word
and Commandment of Life within? Did not God write his Law in his heart? how
else could he become a man after Gods own heart? Did not he witness the
everlasting Covenant and the Law thereof, the new Law, the living Law, even the
Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus? Now when David said, The Law of the
Lord is perfect, converting the soul: What Law did he mean? What is the Law,
which converts the soul to God? Can any thing less then an inward Power, an
inward Light, an inward Law, an inward Life, then the inward drawings and
teachings of Gods Spirit, convert the soul to God? And what testimony is that,
which makes wise the simple? Is it not the inward testimony? What made him
wiser then the Ancients, and then his Teachers, who knew and could teach the
Law outward? were they not the inward teachings and inward precepts of Gods
holy Spirit from the Word of Life within, which doubtless was very nigh him, he
being a man so exercised by Gods Spirit, and so formed after his heart? And
what are those right Statutes, which rejoice the heart? and the pure
Commandment, which enlightens the eyes? and the clean fear, and the righteous
Judgments? Are not these all things known within, and received within? Does not
God put his fear within, in the heart? Does not God reveal his righteous
Judgments within, against sin and iniquity? O how did David cry out, because
of Gods dreadful judgments upon him for sin, and said, his Sore ran in the
night, and he watered his Couch with his Tears? and in another place, My Flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. And when he
speaks so much (as in Psalm. 119. of Gods Word, Gods Law, his Testimonies,
Precepts, Statutes, Judgments, etc. what does he speak of? Does he speak of
the outward, or inward ministration of the word in the heart? Does he not speak
of the inward writing? of the Law in the heart? of the Commandment in the
heart? of the testimony of Life there? For he had the Testimony within, the
Spirit within, the Law within, the Light within, the inward and spiritual
Kingdom (wherein the holy dominion of God is revealed) he knew within: and so,
believing, could speak of the power and glory thereof, and of Gods wondrous
works, Psalm. 145. And when he said, Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a
Light unto my Path: What Word did he mean? Did he mean the Letter or Law
outward? or the Word nigh in the mouth and heart, which Moses had testified of
and directed the Jews to, and he himself had been very well acquainted with?
When, again, he says, Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? and
immediately gives the answer, By taking heed according to thy word. Does he
mean the Letter without, or the Word within? What is it, that cleanses the
heart? that cleanses the way? Is it any less then the Water of Life, then the
Blood of the everlasting Covenant, then the Word and Life of Truth within?
Sanctify them by thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. In the sense of that inwardly
and obedience to it, is the renewing and Sanctification felt. And so this
brings to be undefiled in the way, and to keep the testimonies of Life, and
preserves from doing iniquity. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, says he,
who walk in the Law of the Lord. Blessed are they that keep his Testimonies,
that seek him with the whole heart. They also do no iniquity, etc. Had he no
experience of these things himself? Yea surely. He knew the holy heart, the
pure heart, the new and heavenly Image, the heart after Gods own heart: and he
knew what it was to walk in innocence, and to be kept out of Sin: Hear what he
himself says, Psalm. 18.21. etc. For I have kept the Ways of the Lord, and
have not wickedly departed from my God. For all his Judgments were before me,
and I did not put away his Statutes from me. I was also upright before him: and
I kept my self from mine iniquity: What was that? Was not that it which had
most power over him, and was most apt to entangle and ensnare him? Now, he that
arrives here, he that does this, that keeps himself from his iniquity,
doubtless witnesses great power and victory over lesser and smaller Sins. Was
not David strong in the Lord and in the Power of his might? did not the Word of
God abide in him? did not he overcome the wicked one by the Power thereof? How
else could he walk thus in the Ways of the Lord, as he expresses, and keep
himself from his iniquity?

Now, this Word of Life, these living Testimonies and Precepts, yea the
everlasting Ordinances and Statutes of the new Covenant, with the sure mercies
of David: which Word Moses had testified of and directed to, and David had
experienced (it being the Pearl he had treasured up and hid in his heart) and
which was the Word of Faith which Paul and the other Apostles preached and
testified of, turning men from darkness to this inward Light; I say, this Word,
this living Word (and the inward Ministration thereof) God has revealed and
made manifest in this our day, and has turned the minds of many to it, and is
daily inviting men to Shiloh's Streams, to the living Waters, to the Light and
Habitation of the Living. Blessed are they that hear the joyful sound, and come
to the holy Mount and City of our God, where Life lives and reigns, and is fed
on by all the living; who are Gods elect, Gods Heritage, Gods Vineyard of Red
Wine, Gods enclosed Garden, whom he watches over night and day, and waters
every moment; and in whom he dwells and walks, and is to them a God and
Father, and makes them daily sensible that they are his Servants, Children and
Spouse, in whom is his great delight, and on whose hearts and foreheads is
written, Holiness to the Lord. Yea and the Lord will bless thee forever, O
Habitation of Justice and Mountain of Holiness, and every tongue that rises up
in judgment against thee, will the Lord God condemn for evermore. This is the
Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, whom the Lord has gathered by the Arm of
his mighty Power (inwardly revealed and stretched forth in them and for them)
and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord.

Postscript.
There is a Scripture now opens in me, as it has often done; and it has
been very sweet to my Taste; but I have not had freedom to give it forth to
others, as at this time it is with me to do: It is that Scripture, Romans 9.18.
Therefore has he Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he
Hardens.

NOw many apprehend from this Scripture, as I also formerly did, That God has
Chosen out a certain Number of Persons, on whom he will have Mercy and Save by
Christ Jesus the Lord; and that he has passed over the rest, so that they were
never intended to have any Benefit by Christ's death, as to their Eternal
Salvation. This the wisdom of man, from the Letter of this Scripture and many
other places, may easily apprehend and strongly reason for. But as the Lord
opens the mind, and men come to a sense of his Nature and Spirit, and his
Intent in sending his Son, and receive the Key which opens the Truth as it is
in Jesus; they will easily see that this is contrary to Gods Nature, and his
Intent in sending his Son, and the universal Covenant of Light and Life, and
the manifest Testimony of the Scriptures.

First, As touching the Nature of God. His Nature is Love; Love to all his
Creatures. He would not have it go ill with any of them. He needs not their
Misery to make himself Happy. His Nature is to love, to Bless to Save: not to
Destroy or Cut off, not to Afflict or Grieve the Children of men, not to Hurt
either the Body or Soul of any. He preserves man and Beast, Psalm. 36.6.

Secondly, As touching his sending his Son. He sent him in his Love to Mankind,
to save Mankind. His Love was not to a few only: but he loved all his
Creatures, he loved all lost Souls; and he sent his Son to save them all. He
gave him Light to enlighten them all, and he gave him Life to quicken them all;
only he dispenceth this in various ways, according to the Infinite Wisdom and
Good Pleasure of his Father.

So that, Thirdly, the Covenant of Light and Life is universal and nigh all
Mankind, by which the darkest parts and corners of the Earth are at sometimes
enlightened, and feel somewhat of the Quickening Life. For the life is the light
of men: and the light comes from the life, and is a quick, piercing, quickening,
Light, conveying Warmth and Life, yea living Virtue into the darkest hearts, as
it moves and finds entertainment in them.

Lastly, As for the Testimony of the Scriptures, it is very clear that God
would have none to Perish. All Souls are mine, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.4. I
have no Pleasure in the Death of him that dies, ver. 32. and again, As I live,
says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, Chap. 33.11.
I have sent my Light to enlighten all men, and turn all men; and I would have
all men receive it and be turned by it. I have showed every man what is Good,
and what I the Lord require of him: and I would have every man answer the
Manifestation of my Light and Spirit in him. Do ye not read Gods charge against
the whole Earth, Isa. 24.5. That they had transgressed the Law, changed the
Ordinance, broken the everlasting Covenant? Why then they all had the Law, had
the Ordinance, had the everlasting Covenant: and for this cause it is that the
Curse and Judgment comes upon them, ver. 6. So that this was the Condemnation
from the beginning, and this is the Condemnation still, that Light is come into
the World, and men love darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are
Evil. Men are not condemned for want of Light from Christ Jesus; but because
they do not believe in and obey that Light which they have from him: because
they believe in the Darkness, believe in the dark spirit, believe in the dark
power which rises up against the Ministration of Light in the heart; and do
not believe in that which is given of God to discover and work it out. What
should I multiply Scriptures for? That common Scripture is absolutely
undeniable (as the Lord opens the heart unto the Simplicity of Truth, and keeps
it out of the subtle, enchanting wisdom) John 3.16, 17. For God so Loved the
World, that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever believes in Him,
should not Perish, but have Everlasting Life. For God sent not his Son into the
World to condemn the World: But that the World through him might be saved. What
can be more naked and plain then these Words of Christ, who knew the very Heart
of God in this particular, and plainly declares what it is: even not to
condemn, not to destroy; but to save men from Condemnation and Destruction? And
would Christ have so affectionately Wept over Jerusalem, had he known it to
have been his Fathers will and Determinate Counsel, that they should have
perished, and not have been gathered and saved by him? I shall add but one
Place more, where the Apostle (who knew God's Counsel, and understood the
Mystery of Election and Reprobation, and had the Mind of Christ) says
expressly, that God will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the
Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. What words can be spoken more plain and
full? And let People mind, that these words are far plainer and easier to be
understood, then those Scriptures which treat of Election and Reprobation which
is a deep Mystery; and men must come to a growth in the Truth, before they can
receive that capacity, which is necessary toward the understanding of them.
But to open the thing a little, as it is now in my heart.

There has been a threefold Dispensation of God to Mankind. A Dispensation of
the Law to the Jews. A Dispensation of the Gospel (or promise, which was as
well before the Law, as after it) to the called Jews and Gentiles. And a
secret, hidden Dispensation of the Mystery of Grace, of the Mystery of Life and
Salvation, which the Apostle calls the Mystery hid in the Gentiles, Coloss.
1.27. For somewhat of God, somewhat of the Nature and Spirit of Christ, the
Souls of all Mankind have had near them to enlighten them, and to turn them
from Satan's power to God; though it has not been a thing known to them, but a
Mystery hid in them.

Now, that God did cast off any Jew under the Law, or any whom he visits with
the Grace and Power of the Gospel, from a mere, absolute will in himself,
because he would destroy them and have them perish, to show forth the Praise of
his Justice, and his absolute Soveraignity: this the true sense of Life in me
denies. But all have a visit, of that which saves, heartily and in true
Goodwill from God: and he that is turned to that which God has sent to turn
him, shall be owned and saved thereby. He that believes in the Truth, in the
Light, in the Word nigh; even in the very lowest appearance of it (for the
lowest appearance is the same thing in nature with the highest; and the Grace
is saving in its very lowest appearance, as well as in its highest) shall be
saved thereby.

Now mark: God's Grace, God's Mercy, God's Love, Gods Light, God's Spirit,
God's Power, etc. is his own: And he may do with his own what he pleases. Now,
it being by this that he strives, converts and saves: And it being in his own
will and good pleasure, how long he will strive and contend to save; it lies
therefore absolutely in him, even in his own will, what he will do in this
kind. He may take advantage against Rebellious Man, and cut him off when he
will: And again, he may strive and raise true sense in a man's heart, and give
Repentance and Pardon his Transgressions as long as he pleases; Yea, he may so
change a man's heart, and so Create him a new in Christ Jesus, and so bring him
into Unity with the pure Seed, and to that estate in the Seed, as that he may
have assurance he shall never be utterly cast off: But that though he should
Sin, and Transgress the Holy Law of God's Spirit, his Iniquity shall be
chastised with Stripes, and his Soul recovered and brought back thereby, but
not utterly rejected by the Lord. Now, it being thus, has not God Mercy on
whom he will? And does not he Harden as he pleases? Did not God give up the
Jews to hardness, after much striving with them? Did not God give up the
Gentiles to hardness, and to vain imaginations concerning the true God, after
they had rejected a measure of the True Knowledge? ( Romans 1.21.) Have not the
Vessels of Wrath, who are fitted to destruction, a day of much long-suffering
first? Romans 9.22. Had not the Old World, who were fitted for that Destruction
of the Flood, a long day of Patience and Forbearance from God, his Spirit
reproving of them and striving with them? To what end did God forbear them, and
cause his Spirit to strive with them? Was it not to lead them to Repentance,
that thereby they might have Avoided that Destruction, which by their Rebellion
and Stiffness of Spirit, against God's good and Tender Spirit, they were fitted
for and exposed to? See Romans 2.4. So for Cain. How tenderly did God deal with
him! how uprightly did God seek his good! Would not God have had him come to a
true sense and repentance? Would not God have had him believed and offered in
the Faith, and been accepted as his brother was? And for Pharaoh: God, indeed,
was against that nature and Spirit in him, which oppressed Israel: but would
not the Lord have had him denied and turned from that nature and Spirit, and
let Israel go? God would have no man do evil and bring upon themselves
Destruction, though in his just Judgment, he is many times provoked to give
men up to that, which leads into and hardens in Evil. So not only Pharaoh,
but Israel also was given up to their own hearts Lusts, when they would none of
the Lord, nor hearken to his counsel, Psalm. 81.12. But, says the Lord, O that
it had been otherwise! O that my People had hearkened unto me, etc. it should
then have been otherwise with them, ver. 13. etc.

So that God, of himself, does not desire the Destruction of his Creature; nor
does he desire to harden them, or to give them up to a deluding spirit, that
they might be damned: but men first refuse the Truth and turn from it, or let
it go, not receiving it in the love of it, or not liking to retain the
knowledge of it (which is Death to the man's corrupt nature, spirit, will and
wisdom, and such a Cross and Yoke, as he is in no wise willing to bear:) and
then the Lord, in his just Judgment, gives them up to the Deceitfulness of
Sin, to be hardened by it. Now this lives in God's own Breast when and to whom
to do it, according to his own Will, and according to his own Wisdom and
Counsel; so that it may be truly and properly said, He has mercy and
Compassion on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. But that God has
determined to harden any, without giving them a Day of Mercy; or that it is
Gods Will and determinate Counsel, that men should reject the Day of his Mercy
and precious Invitation, that they might be hardened by him and perish: This is
not God's Truth, but men's Mis-Apprehensions upon true words, gathering Meanings
therefrom in their own wisdom, and not waiting upon God till he cause the true
Light to shine in them, and thereby give them the True Knowledge and
Understanding.

Therefore, since there is such Mercy in God toward all, and he has given all
men a Day of Visitation, greater or lesser; yea, since of late he has caused
his Light to shine forth, and given this Age such a Visitation, as many Ages
have not had: O let men take heed how they close their Eyes, stop their Ears
and harden their Hearts against it; lest they provoke God to give them up to
their own imaginary, conceited, fleshly comprehensive knowledge of the Letter,
and so seal them up in that hardness of heart and deafness of Spirit, which
they first gave themselves up to. For the Letter without the Spirit kills:
And so does all litteral knowledge: and there needs no greater Curse from God
(it will sufficiently avenge the Cause of his Reproached Light and holy
Covenant of Life in Christ Jesus, now abundantly revealed and made manifest)
then to close men's Eyes, and stop their Ears, and harden their Hearts (in their
Litteral Knowledges and Practices) from beholding and partaking of the precious
Life and Virtue of this holy and Living Ministration in Christ Jesus the Lord,
wherewith God visits and redeemeth his people.

Indeed the Physician is come inwardly and spiritually, and he inwardly heals
and restores his People; faithfully, seeking after the Sick, the Distressed,
the Broken, the Wounded; pouring Oil into their Wounds, and healing them. But
there are some, who are so sound and whole in their notional Apprehensions and
Practices, that they have no need of the Physician: and then the Physician
passes by, as unworthy of him, and whom he intends shall have no share with
him. Ephraim is joined to Idols (he is well, he has enough, he has no need of
me) let him alone, says the Lord. I will pour out the choice Virtue of my
Spiritual Life, and redeeming Power, among my gathered Sheep and Lambs, who
have need thereof and will rejoice therein. These will know my Voice, these
will justify the appearance of my spirit and power, these love the savor of
my Anointing and precious Ointment which runs down from the Head upon all the
Living Body: and these shall have it. These understand how I have Mercy on whom
I will, and whom I will I Hearden: and it is my will to have Mercy on these, my
once greatly Distressed Ones, and to destroy (inwardly to destroy, O who knows
what that means) the fat and the strong, and to feed them with judgment. O
that men did know to whom the Mercy, and to whom the Judgment belongs. To the
wisdom of the Flesh, to the wise Comprehenders of the things of God after the
Flesh, is the judgment: to the Poor, to the Distressed, to the Broken in
Spirit (not to them that are at ease in their Litteral Knowledge, but to the
Mourners in Sion after the holy God, and his living Power and Righteousness) is
the Everlasting Gospel, the Mercy, the Love, the Peace, the binding-up, the
Redemption which is by Christ Jesus, the living Minister in the holy Sanctuary
of our God.

THE END

