Some QUERIES concerning the Order and Government of the Church of CHRIST.
Query 1. WHether CHRIST, who is the Head, Lord, King, etc. has not appointed
a Spiritual Order and Government to be in his Church and Congregation?

Qu. 2. Whether a Spiritual Order and Government is not useful, profitable and
necessary, for the well-being and right-managing of this Spiritual Body and
Holy Society in the Faith and Life of our Lord Jesus Christ? In Natural
Societies Natural Government and Order is profitable and necessary, and is not
Spiritual Government as profitable and necessary in Spiritual Societies?

Qu. 3. Did not Christ give power of Government to his Apostles and Ministers,
at the first publication of his everlasting Gospel? All Power was given him in
Heaven and in Earth; and did not he who had all Power given him, give Power to
his Apostles and Ministers to preach his everlasting Gospel to the World, to
gather his Sheep out of the World, and to watch over them, oversee them,
repreve, exhort, admonish, build up in the holy Faith, and out off and cast out
that which was unholy, and would dispute against, but not submit unto the
Spirit, Life and Power of Truth?

Qu. 4. Did not Christ give them Gifts also answerable, Spirits of Discerning,
that they might be Eyes to the Body; and quick Ears, that they might hear for
the Body? For though the Lord has given every one an Eye and an Ear, as to
themselves; yet every one is not made by the Lord an Eye or Ear unto the Body:
but this is appointed for, and given to those to whom the Lord pleases, who
has ordered all things wisely, carefully and tenderly for the good of all.

Qu. 5. Were there not Titles given them suitable to their Offices and Services
in this kind, as Pastors or Shepherds after God's heart, according to the
Promise of the New Covenant, Overseers or Bishops, such as watch for the Soul;
such as were not only to lay the Foundation, but also carry on the Building
even to perfection, even till they were able to present the Gathered and
quickened Souls a chaste Virgin to Christ? and were they not to watch against,
testify against, and in the Power and Authority of the Lord to strike at all
that was contrary, and would endeavor to interrupt, overturn, and destroy
their work, which was of, in, and from the Lord?

Qu. 6. Whether the Body and common Members of the Churches, were not to
hearken to these (He that knows God, hears us, 1 John 4. 6.) to obey them
in the Lord, to submit to this Ministry, and their work in it, in the Lord, to
receive the Word of Truth and holy Exhortations and Admonitions milked out by
these to them from the Breast of Life? And were not they that did hearken and
obey, commended? and were not the other that were not subjected, but slighted
them and their Ministry and Authority, testified against as disorderly and
unruly?

Qu. 7. Were there not some relics of this Order and Government all along the
Apostasy, in the true Church and Ministry thereof? for there has been a Church
and a Ministry all along the Apostasy, blessed be the Name of the Lord, though
not so visible and outwardly glorious, as many (who have erred from the Spirit
and way of Truth and are out of the holy Understanding) would make it. It is
true, the Church has been as in a Wilderness, desolate, as a woman forsaken,
as a Widow, bereft of her Husband, stripped of her Children, her Visage marred,
her Witnesses mourning, nothing of her beauty, former estate or glory, to be
discerned or found out: yet all has been preserved in the root, and there have
been some shootings and sproutings of it forth, which have been inwardly felt
by that which is of God in the heart, though not outwardly seen by man's eye.
Thus the Witnesses have had a Ministry, have had the Testimony of Jesus, even
the Spirit of Prophecy, all this dark night of Apostasy, and in it have spoken
mourningly to the World, and to the captivated Souls, which that which was of
God in his has hearkened to, and there has been a bowing and subjection of
spirit in the Lord. O read this, and praise the Name of the Lord for his mercy
to his in former generations, ye who are now gathered into his pure Light and
living Power, from whom the Night is past, and on whom the Day, the everlasting
Dayspring from on high is risen.

Qu. 8. After the Apostasy, does not God renew his Commission, and send forth
his Angel (for they are all but one) to preach his everlasting Gospel? and does
not he give them power to preach to the World, and to gather those, that hear
the everlasting Voice through them, into Holy Assemblies, separated in spirit,
nature and appearance from the World? and have they not authority and gifts as
well to build up as to plant? and ought not those that are gathered by them, as
well to be subject to the Light, Spirit, Power and Authority of the Lord in
them, as the former to the former Ministers of the Lord? O that the World knew
them, O that the World knew the appearance of God in them! surely then they
would bow to the Word of Truth and the glorious appearance thereof, and
happiness both inward and outward would break forth upon the Earth. There would
be no more misery, sorrow nor distress in Nations, if the Dispensations of Life
from God had but their course in the Earth; yea Nations and Persons, that are
now deadly sick, would soon be healed, did they but eat of the Leaves of the
Tree of Life, which are appointed by God for their healing, and can easily heal
those wounds and repair those breaches, which the wisdom or counsels of man
cannot heal or repair. And O that they that are gathered might keep and be
preserved in that sense and subjection, which they had and received from the
Lord in the day of their Convincement. O how beautiful, how precious, how
glorious was the Ministry and Ministers of God in their eye then! And to those
that are still there, they are still precious; and to those that grow there,
they are yet more precious. But those that enter into, or are ensnared in
another thing, which leads from the true Spirit, lose the sight and sense
which they then had, and instead thereof are filled with prejudices and wise
reasonings, which to them may seem very strong and undeniable, though Truth and
the true spiritual eye, sense and understanding easily pierces through them,
and preserves those, who abide single in it, to the Lord.

Now against this holy Order and Government appointed by God, there may arise
in some hearts some such Objections as these following.

Object. 1. But is not this a turning away from the measure of Life in a man's
own vessel, to another man's measure?

Answ. Waiting on God in his Ordinances and Appointments, and upon the Ministry
which he has set up, the measure of Life in him teaches; and it is not a
turning from the measure, but a subjecting to the Lord in the measure of his
Life, so to teach and do. The measure of his Life taught me thus to do at
first, and teaches me to do so still; and will teach so still, all that
hearken to it. It did not teach subjection in the Apostles days to the
Ministry then, and another thing now to the Ministry now. But Christ is the
same to day as yesterday; his Life the same, his Spirit the same, its Doctrine
and Teaching the same: and that of God, in the Conscience within, answers the
pure Voice, when it comes to the Ear without. If Life speak in one Vessel, and
its voice be not heard or owned by another Vessel, the pure Ear (in that other
Vessel) is not at that time open; but there is somewhat there that obstructs.
And if the pure Ear of the Sheep be not open to hear the Voice of the Shepherd,
but it be accounted strange: it is much, if the other Ear in that Vessel be not
opened to hear the Voice of the Stranger, and to look upon it as the Voice of
the Shepherd, it agreeing with that and answering to that, which now goes for
the Voice of the Measure of Life in that Heart. He that has an ear, let him
hear: for it is easy being taken in this snare, and the danger thereof is very
great.

Object. 2. Is not the least measure of Life in any vessel, (if subjected to,
waited on and believed in) sufficient to instruct and build up into a perfect
man in God?

Answ. The sufficiency of the Grace of God, turned to and waited upon, there is
nothing in my heart either to undervalue my self, or to teach others so to do:
Nor, when God did appoint a Ministry to gather and build up his Church, do I
believe he did intend therein to undervalue the sufficiency of his Grace: Yea,
I verily believe, that the Grace of God turned and hearkened to, and followed
by any Soul in the darkest part of the Earth, has sufficiency in it to save,
and will save that Soul, though there be none outwardly to minister to it or
help it. Yet this I also believe, That as there is a sufficiency in every
measure of life, to the Work God has appointed for that measure: so there is a
greater sufficiency in the growth and fuller proportion of Life; and the
lesser, the weaker, the poor, the afflicted, the babes are to be helped by the
stronger, especially in their darknesses, afflictions, temptations, etc. And so
the greater and stronger in the Life, Spirit and Power of the Lord, is a
strength and blessing to the weaker, which the weaker making use of in the
guidance of the Spirit of the Lord (in the sense and benefit of the sweet help
and relief which often the Lord pleases to give forth thereby) will find just
cause and be often drawn to bless the Name of the Lord for.

The measure of Life in the Vessel, teaches to subject to the Spirit of the
Lord and his Life in others, which the measure of Life in any never refuses,
but still knows (when awake and living in the Vessel) its own, and has (at
least) a secret sense of it and unity with it. But that which pretends to set
up the measure of Life as a Teacher, otherwise than God has appointed, and in
opposition to the Teaching and Ministry which he has appointed, and to his
Gift in those Vessels, which is as well for the building up and perfecting of
the Body, as for the gathering: That is another thing in that Vessel that does
so, than the measure of Life; another Spirit, another Nature, another Ear than
that, that first heard. And though it seem to cry up the sufficiency of the
measure of Life, and to plead for that (and perhaps the creature thinks it is
really so:) yet that is not the intent of the Spirit in the Vessel, but to cry
up it self, and to make its voice go for the Voice of the Measure of Life: and
so such err from the Faith, the Truth, the Spirit, the measure of Life, and are
in the nature, spirit and measure of another thing, which is indeed Death,
though they see it not, but look upon themselves as gloriously living, and
abiding in the pure Doctrine and Principle above others.

Now to help these a little out of the snares and deep entanglements of the
Enemy, if the Lord please, I would earnestly press the consideration of this
upon them. Did not the Apostles preach up the Measure of Life, the Grace of God
in their day, Christ within, the Word of Faith nigh in the mouth and heart, the
Anointing within, its sufficiency to teach all things, etc. and yet did they so
preach it, as to overthrow the Ministry, or their Gifts or Service, either
toward them that were without or them that were within? Had they not power
over them in the Lord? were they not to teach them, to instruct them, to build
them up in the holy Faith, and also to watch against Wolves and devouring
Spirits, which would strive to enter the Flock in Sheeps clothing (and as
Preachers of Righteousness) to make a prey of the Innocent Life in the
Upright-hearted, if possible.

Object. 3. But those who have ministered from the Lord, and whose Ministry I
have felt and owned, and in the distress and affliction of my soul have had
recourse to, hoping that they might have a sense of my condition and give me
proper advice; yet they (instead thereof) have turned me to his Witness that
wounded me, counselling me to wait on the Lord there: and have they not also
told us, That if they themselves should turn from the things they have
declared, this Truth would abide for ever, to wit, that man is to keep to the
measure of Life in his own particular?

Answ. It is true, A man is to keep to the Measure of Life in his own
particular. They taught this then: they teach it now. We practiced it then: we
are to practice it now. In this Measure of Life we received them then: and in
this Measure of Life (if we abide still in it) we shall receive them now, and
feel their growth in the Ability, Gift, and Power of the Lord.

And when any come to them for advice, they are to wait on the Lord to feel in
him their state who come, and to give forth what the Lord gives them; Whether
word^ from the Lord to the party concerning his state of dire^^^ons to retire
in and wait for his more immediate appearance in their own measures. For, when
we feel ^^e Presence and mighty Power of God in them, we (...) too apt to look
at them; and then a word may come proper to our estates) to recall us to retire
to our measure. And when we feel immediate relief from the Lord and his
appearing to us, in our retiredness in our own spirits, then we may be apt to
despise the gifts and service of others; and then another word may come from
them, proper to our state then, to warn us not to despise Prophesying, or the
Gifts, Power and Authority of Life in others. Now both these are proper,
useful and weighty in their seasons, when given forth by the Spirit of the
Lord. Nor are they contradictory one to the other, but subservient in their
seasons and places, which that which is of God feels; but that which is erred
from God, and joined to another (under a false representation and belief of
things) feels not; but finds a seeming difference, and sets them at variance
one with another, as if they could not stand together. And this is the false
nature, the false spirit, the false appearance of life, which appears as if it
were the Measure of the pure true Life, but is not. This is the false Woman,
the false Wisdom, whose heart is as snares and nets, and her hands bands: who
so pleases God (abiding in the Measure of his Truth) shall escape her; but the
sinner (that departs therefrom) shall be taken by her. Therefore fear the Lord,
come to that which first convinced; to the first Truth, to the first Sense, to
the first Love etc. and all these Imaginations of the mind, and subtle devices
of the Enemy will fly away, and thy poor entangled Soul be delivered, as a Bird
out of the snare of the Fowler.

If the Enemy should directly cry out against God, or his Christ, or his Grace,
or the Measure of his Truth, he would easily be espied and turned from.
Therefore he teaches to cry up these in a wrong spirit and judgment, and after
a wrong manner, to undermine, betray and lead the heart from that secretly,
which openly it would never hear any thing against. Now those that are thus
deceived, are exceedingly to be pitied, and their deliverance from their
entanglements and captivities to be breathed after and waited for. For I may
say in truth and upright sense of heart, There are many that look toward Sion,
who yet are ignorant of the devices and slights of Satan, to entangle them in
their way; and some are caught in his snares (like foolish Birds catching at
the chaff, which makes the bigger show, instead of the Wheat) losing the
Substance for a shadow; the Life and Power in the heart, for a Notion and
Conceit in the brain. And these are wise in their own eyes, so that indeed it
is very hard to reach or recover them; yea much harder than it was at first,
because they are become more rooted and settled in the wrong ground (yea in a
worse earth) than they were, when they were first reached to by the Power of
Truth. Yet over these there is a deep Lamentation, and for these a sore Travel,
which the Lord God bless and prosper for their recovery unto that, from which
through mistake they have erred.

Object. 4. If any man has received a gift of Ministry, he has received it of
the Lord: and its end being to gather to the Lord, they that by it are gathered
are to be delivered up to the Lord, that he as King, Priest and Prophet may
govern, etc.

Answ. The end of the Ministry is not only to gather, but also to preserve and
build up what is gathered, even to perfection. And the Soul being (especially
at first, if not for a long time) weak and babish, not so fully acquainted with
the measure of Life (having had but some touches and demonstrations of it, but
not being gathered fully into it, nor rooted and settled in it) I say the Soul
in this state, has as much need of the Ministry to preserve, direct and watch
over it in the Truth, as to gather it out of the World. Therefore the Father,
in his tender mercy and love, has appointed those who are grown in his Life
(and in the power and authority of his Spirit) to oversee, watch over, instruct
and take care of the Flock, so as they may give to him an account of their
Souls: and in their care, diligence and faithfulness, they are owned and
blessed of the Lord; and the other in their holy fear, reverence and
subjection. Now this is right Order from God, wherein the safety of the Flock
consists: but out of this is danger and confusion, which the Measure of Life
teaches to avoid.

Object. 5. But in a Case of doubt or difference, which shall be the Judge; the
Measure of Life within, or the Testimony of others without? Shall I judge, as I
feel the thing, in the measure of my own Life? or shall I submit to others
against my own sense and judgment, because I have an esteem of them, as being
much above me in the growth, sense and understanding of truth?

Answ. It is a great matter to judge aright, and to discern and know the
Measure of Truth (the voice, motion and judgment thereof) from all the Enemies
false appearances, and from all the deceits of the heart. This is most certain,
Jerusalem (the Heavenly-Building, the Church of the Firstborn) is at unity
with it self. Truth is pure, eternal, unchangable, always the same; the same
in every Member, in every Vessel throughout the whole Body. And this I may say
concerning its appearance in this our Age, Was ever the like Unity known and
brought forth since the days of the Apostles? how has the Spirit been One,
the Demonstration and Testimony of Truth One, the Doctrine One, the
Conversation and Practices One in us all! Why, or how so? Because we have had
our begetting, birth and teaching from the same Life, the same Spitit; (the
same Fountain springing up and opening in us all, that have been gathered into
its Nature and Power.) Now from this Fountain, from this Spring of Life, never
issues any thing that is contrary to the Life in any. Therefore if there
appear a contrariety, there must be a waiting to feel who is erred from, or at
least not yet fully gathered into the Measure of Life. And such as are of an
inferior stature and growth in the Body, are (in an especial manner) to watch
and wait in sobriety and fear, till the Lord clear up and make things manifest;
and likewise in the mean time, to take heed of an hasty concluding, according
to what rises up in the understanding or judgment (though with never so great
a seeming clearness and satisfaction) as if it must needs be of and from the
Life in the Vessel.

It is not an easy matter, in all cases clearly and understandingly to discern
the Voice of the Shepherd, the Motions of God's Spirit, and certainly to
distinguish the Measure of Life from all other Voices, Motions and Appearances
whatsoever. Through much growth in the Truth, through much waiting on the Lord,
through much Fear and Trembling, through much Sobriety and Meekness, through
much exercise of the Senses this is at length given and obtained. And yet there
is a preservation in the mean time, to that which is lowly and submissive,
looking up to the Lord continually, and not trusting to its own understanding,
sense and judgment. But that which is hasty and confident, and so ready to
plead for its own sense and judgment, according to the measure of Life, as it
calls it; That is commonly out, entered into the erring spirit, pleading and
contending for it knows not what, and is very apt to judge and condemn others
in that very respect, wherein it self is most justly and righteously judged and
condemned by the Lord, even by his pure Life and Spirit in his People.

This then is in my heart, to say in short to this objection. Let the measure
of Life judge freely in thee at any time concerning any thing: and that
judgment will stand for ever. But be thou wary, wait on the Lord, that thou
may be sure thou do not mistake in thy own particular, calling that Life,
which the Lord and his People know to be otherwise. For if so, thou departest
from the unity and bond of the Spirit, and from the true Sense and Judgment,
and give Deceit an advantage over thee, even to lay a foundation of
destroying thee. Likewise those who are to watch over thee in the Lord (to lay
his Truth before thee, to exhort and reprove thee, as occasion is) that they
may give an account of thy Soul to him, cannot do it with joy and rejoicing in
his presence, but with grief and lamentation of heart, which is not at all
profitable, but very unprofitable for thee.

Now, for a close, There are some considerations springing up in my heart
concerning Unity, which I find drawings here to annex, in true love and
tenderness, for the use and service of others; which are as follow.

1. Unity in the Spiritual Body, which is gathered into and knit together in
the pure Life, is a most natural and comely thing. Yea, it is exceeding lovely
to find all that are of the Lord, of one heart, of one mind, of one judgment,
in one way of practice and order in all things.

2. The Lord is to be waited upon for the bringing forth of this in the Body:
that as there is a foundation of it laid in all (the Life and Spirit being one
in all:) so all may be brought by him into the true and full oneness.

3. The Lord is to be acknowledged and praised in the bringing of it forth (so
far as it is brought forth) and to be waited upon for the further perfecting of
it.

4. A Watch is to be kept (throughout the whole Body, and in every heart) for
the preserving of it, so far as it is brought forth: that the Enemy by no
device or subtilty cause disunion or difference in any respect, wherein there
was once a true unity and oneness. For the Enemy will watch to divide: and if
he be not watched against, in that which is able to discover and keep him out,
by some device or other he will take his advantage to make a rent (in those
that are not watchful) from the pure Truth and Unity of Life in the Body. For
he that in the least thing rents from the Body (in any respect or particular,
which was brought forth by the Life) he in that respect hearkens to another
spirit (even the dividing spirit) and by its instigation rents from the Life it
self, and so does not keep his habitation, nor his unity with that which abides
in its habitation.

Now it is also in my heart (for the perfecting of this close) to mention a few
things (in the same love and tenderness) which I have found helpful to me
toward the preserving of me in unity with the Body. Perhaps it may please the
Lord to refresh some others by the mention of them, and to make them useful
and helpful to them also.

1. The first is, The pure Fear of the Lord. This poizeth and guardeth the
mind, keeping down fleshly confidence and conceitedness (which is very apt to
spring up) making it wary and considerate either of what it receives or
rejects, of what it practices or forbeareth practicing, causing it to wait
much, try much, and consult much with the Lord, and with his Ministers and
People, and preserves out of that suddenness and inconsiderateness of spirit,
at which the Enemy often enters. For Truth is weighty, and will bear trial; and
the more it is tried in the balance, the more manifest its nature and ways
appear: but the Enemies appearances and likenesses are not so, but their deceit
by a through trial comes to be made manifest.

2. The second is, Humility of heart. This is very precious and of a preserving
nature. Yea in this state the Lord helps and teaches, and the Soul also (in
this state) is fit to receive the help and teachings of the Lord. That which is
lifted up and conceited (ready to justify its own way, and condemn even the
whole Body) is neither fit to be taught by the Lord, nor does the Lord delight
(but rather disdain) to teach it. And so not being taught by him, it must needs
be liable to err, yea to hearken to that spirit, whose voice is more pleasing
and suitable to the erring mind, than the Lord's Voice is.

3. A third great help, which in the tender mercy of the Lord I have had
experience of, is, Sobriety of Judgment. Not to value or set up mine own
Judgment, or that which I account the Judgment of Life in me, above the
Judgment of others, or that which is indeed Life in others. For the Lord has
appeared to others, as well as to me: yea, there are others, who are in the
growth of his Truth, and in the purity and dominion of his Life far beyond me.
Now for me to set up, or hold forth a sense or judgment of a thing in
opposition to them; this is out of the sobriety which is of the Truth.
Therefore in such cases I am to retire, and fear before the Lord, and wait upon
him for a clear discerning and sense of his Truth, in the unity and
demonstration of his Spirit with others, who are of him and see in him. And
this will prevent the rents, which the want of this Sobriety may occasion.

4. The last thing which I have now to mention, is, Tenderness, meekness,
coolness and stilness of spirit. I wrap up these together, because they are
much of a nature, and go much together. These are of an uniting preserving
nature. He that differs and divides from the Body, cannot be thus: and he that
is thus, cannot rend or divide. Thus is the pure heavenly Wisdom, which is
peaceable and keeps the peace. But the other wisdom is rough, stiff, hard,
clamourous, ready to take offense, ready to give offense; exceeding deep in the
justification of it self, exceeding deep in the condemnation of others, and
dares (in this temper) appeal to the Lord, as if it were right in its ways,
but wronged by others; as if it did abide in the measure of his Truth and Life,
which others are departed from. And how can it be otherwise: how can the wrong
eye, the wrong spirit, the wrong wisdom, but judge wrong; justifying the wrong
practices, and condemning the right? But such shall find (if they come to the
true Touchstone, even the Measure of Life indeed) that they are not in the true
Tenderness, which proceeds from the Life, in the true Meekness and
Gentleness, in the true Coolness and Stillness: but rather in the Reasonings,
Noises, Clamours and Disturbances which arise from another spirit, mind and
nature, than that which is of the Truth. And in coming back from this wisdom to
the pure Wisdom, from the pretended measure of life to the true Measure, and
becoming tender, meek, cool and still in it, they shall there feel their error
from the Spirit and Power of the Lord, and therein own their Condemnation
therefore from him, and also justify them who have abode in the Power, and been
guided by the Spirit and pure Measure of Life, which is from God and in God,
while they have departed from it. For though the spirit of Error (wherewith
they have been deceived and entangled) has made them believe, that they have
faithfully abode in the Principle and Doctrine of Truth, while others have
departed; yet that will soon vanish, as Truth comes again to be felt and heard
speak in them, and the Measure of Life to live again in them, and to redeem
them afresh into its holy Nature and pure living Sense. And blessed is he who
is not deceived, about Truth, but is of the pure Nature, and in the pure Power
of it: in whom the true Eye sees, the true Ear hears, the true Heart
understands; who is of a right Spirit, and walks uprightly before the Lord
and among his People. The blessing of the Seed, the peace, comfort, and joy
which is from the most High, shall descend upon him, fill his vessel and
continue with him, to the satisfying of his heart and the overflowing of his
cup, in the midst of his Brethren, and in the very sight of his Enemies. The
Lord God of his tender mercy, who is the great Shepherd of the Sheep, watch
over, preserve and mightily defend all his, from all devouring spirits, and
inward devices and deceits of the Enemy; carrying on and perfecting the work of
his Goodness, Love and Mercy in them, to his own glorious, eternal, everlasting
Praise. Amen.

Written by Isaac Penington in Alisbury Prison.

