THE Discoverer Discovered; OR, The LOT Cast, T. C. Taken, AND THE Babylonish
GARMENT Found Hid under his STUFF.

Being a REPLY to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, A Discovery of the Accursed
Thing, etc. Subscribed T. C.

With some Remarks upon Two Papers of JOHN PENNYMAN's.

By E. P.

Josh. 7.18. And he brought his household, man by man, and Achan (T. C.) was
taken. Ver. 25. And Joshua said, Why have thou troubled us? The Lord shall
trouble thee this day, etc.

Psalm. 109.3. They compassed me about also with words of hatred, and fought
against me without a cause.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court, in Gracious-Street. 1695.

THE Discoverer Discovered OR, The LOT Cast, T. C. Taken, AND THE Babylonish
GARMENT Found Hid under his STUFF.
WE read, Rev. 17. of a Whore, who made all Nations drunk with the Wine of her
Fornications, and her Name is declared by the Holy Spirit, to be Mystery
Babylon; which is not only Literally Fulfilled, in that a False Worship has
visibly overspread the greatest part of the World, wherein the true Christian
Religion was once planted, and flourished, and visibly a False Church has been
set up and established, to the Overthrow of great part of the Doctrine of
Christ, and the very Form of Godliness. But Mystically also, by the prevalency
of an Antichristian Spirit, which by the depth of Deceit and Mysterious
working, has deceived many, suffering them still to retain the form, but
making use of them to oppose the power of Godliness: Yea, this Mystery of
Iniquity still works, notwithstanding the dawning of the Day of God in this
last Age, has more manifested her Deeds of Darkness, than in many preceding,
and that amongst the most refined sorts of the Professors of Christianity, even
amongst some, and now appears through some, who once made a great show of being
Members of that Church, which is coming out of the Wilderness, leaning upon the
Breasts of her Beloved. And truly both Literally and Mystically, the Work of
this accursed Harlot has been to bring People into Confusion, and to afflict
the true Church, and to make War with the Remnant of her Seed, who hold the
Word of their Testimony. Now as certainly as ever that false Adulterous Spirit,
in any Age since the Holy Apostle lest that Prophecy on Record, has sought by
hidden Practices, as well as open Opposition, to undermine the true Church, and
the Foundation whereon she is Built, viz. Jesus Christ the Rock of Ages, and to
introduce a Babylonish Confusion, by intoxicating both the Heads and Hearts of
People, in order to betray them from the simplicity of the Gospel: So
certainly, has this Whorish Spirit appeared in these our Days, (to the further
fulfilling thereof) in many different shapes, that (if possible) by the
deceivableness of unrighteousness, she might deceive the very Elect. One while
acting in Opposers from without, not only by outrageous Violence, but also by
wicked Calumnies, like the Dragon, mentioned Rev. 12.15. Casting out Waters
like a Flood. At other times stirring up from within themselves, some who once
received like precious Faith with them, but being gone from their First Love,
and so growing weary of well-doing, have turned their Backs upon the Way of
God, and now push with the Horn, and kick with the Heel, against those who
abide faithful. And though these who have broke the Bond of Fellowship,
wherewith they were once United to the Church, as to the pretended Reasons of
their Dissatisfaction, as much differ from each other, as Light from Darkness,
yet like Herod and Pilate, do readily agree in Persecuting Christ, and the
Members of his Body, which is his Church: Amongst whom none have appeared more
virulent, both with Tongue and Pen, than George Keith, in whose Vindication, as
also on whose Behalf, Thomas Crisp has of late appeared, as a Second to G. K.
in the Battle he is now Engaged in: Which shows that T. C. thinks opposing the
Quakers a common Cause, let it be upon what Terms it will; or else, he who
formerly clamoured so loud against Friends, as being degenerated from what they
were in the beginning, (in that they were (as he alleged) gone too much from
the inward to the outward; would not now to serve a turn, eat his former words;
and that he might curry favor with G. K. and avoid the Inconveniency of
qu^rrelling with him, and thereby dividing their Interests, who in their
endeavors to divide the Quakers were perfectly of one Mind) now recant, and
exclaim as much on the other hand, as if they were Erroneous and Unsound, in
not sufficiently asserting the outward; as in his late Paper, Entitled, A
Discovery of the Accursed Thing, etc. now before me sufficiently appears.

T. C. begins with a Slander, not only insinuating, but positively accusing
diverse, whom he is pleased Scornfully to term The Chief Priests and Rulers of
the Quakers, of denying that Jesus is the Christ, and that therein the Spirit
of Antichrist has shown it self through them, and to prove it, tells us of VV.
Bingley's hindering G. K. from preaching, interrupting him; and when he had done
speaking himself, bidding the People pass away, etc. which he brings as an
Argument of W. B's Enmity against the preaching the Faith in the Man our Lord
Jesus Christ: But what if W. B. had another Reason for it, where will his
Inference be then? I am apt to think it proceeded more from his dislike to the
Preacher, than to the Doctri^e preached: And why (I pray) must we be forced to
receive a Testimony, if true, for that reason only, from a Person we have just
reason to except against? Since our Lord, while on Earth, rejected the
Testimony of the Devil, though true, and bade him hold his peace, Luke 4.34,
35. He proceeds to tells us, that others have done worse by him since; what
worse then say, He is mad, why hear ye him? I suppose they did not take up
stones to cast at him, as the Jews served Christ, John 10.31. But they have
thereby (says he) proved their Spirit, not to be the same as the Apostle Paul's
was; for although some preached Christ out of Envy to him, yet because Christ
was preached, he rejoiced: Well, what though the Apostle did so rejoice, that
Christ was preached, though in some, Envy was the Motive thereto, that thereby
the Knowledge of the Gospel might be more Universally spread, while the
greatest part of the World was ignorant of the very History of Christ, as in
relation to his Death, Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension, etc. Yet the
same Apostle speaking of what sort of Men should rise up in the last Days,
leaves us a direction how to behave our selves toward them, he tells us, 2 Timothy 3. That in the last days perilous times should come, for men should be
(amongst other things which he there enumerates) Lovers of their own selves,
Boasters, false Accusers, Fierce, Despisers of those that are good, Heady,
High-minded, having the Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof. From
such (says he) turn away. Now I hope T. C. will readily grant, that the Age
wherein we live, ought to be reckoned amongst the last Days, therefore if VV.
B. by frequent Experience, as well as credible Information, had ground to
believe G. K. one of those sort of Men, wherein did he amiss? And if the
Meeting were of the same Opinion, (which had they not been, I suppose they
would hardly have broke up for his saying, Pass away Friends) wherein could
they have better demonstrated their Obedience to the Apostles Exhortation? Or
wherein have they deviated from the Rule the Apostle gave them to walk by in
such a Case? Though truly it is a question to me (I must confess) whether G. K.
deserve the Character, of having the Form of Godliness: I know many are
satisfied he has not the Power of Godliness, perhaps some of his Hearers at
Harp-lane.

He tells his Reader, They Preach this, and they Print the other,but does not
Name who Preached, nor who Printed; a Man may suppose by his Method of Writing,
that every Individual Person of his so called Chief Priests and Rulers
before-named, have both Preached and Printed what he there offers; for he is
not so kind as to Name either Persons or Books, which shows him an apt Scholar
under his new Master, viz. his highly applauded Restorer of sound Doctrine G.
K. for he has exactly learnt his Method, of imposing his say so upon his
Reader, without affording him Opportunities of examining the Quotations, by
telling him where he may find them, which fault I have to object against him,
not only in this place, but also in other parts of his Paper, as I shall have
occasion to remark by and by. But pray where is the Heresy in asserting, 'That
the Jews never saw the World's Savior? Was he not God as well as Man? Had the
Godhead no share in man's Salvation, but the Manhood only? Or was the Name
Savior more eminently appropriated to the Manhood? If the Jews had seen him to
be what he was ( viz. the Savior of the World) had they Crucified the Lord of
Life and Glory, 1 Cor. 7, 8? No surely; for though they with their outward Eyes
saw the Man Jesus and his Miracles too, yet the Eyes of their minds were
blinded, so as they could not see the life that dwelt in him (but denied it,
which was revealed to the true believers, and which John testified they saw, 1
John 1.2. and consequently did not see him to be the world's Savior. And as to
his affirming, That the Quakers distinguish the Lord Jesus from Christ; and
mean something in him, and the Light in every Man, it is his own false
construction, for they do assert, That Jesus of Nazareth, who was both God and
Man, was and is the Light of the World, and that the rays or beams of Light,
which proceed from him the Sun of Righteousness, shine into the Hearts of all
Mankind, and that Christ and his Light are not divided, but what he did
outwardly in the Flesh, and what he does inwardly in Spirit in the inward parts
of the rue believers, is the efficient cause of their Salvation, and he, whole
Christ undivided, is the hope of their Glory.

But to make the Quakers amends for the other injuries he has done them, he
will now bring them into good Company, for no less then the Apostle John must
be erroneous to prove them so too, and for my part, I had rather be a Heretic
in Company with the Apostle John, then Orthodox with T. C. But a Man might
think how angry so ever he might be with the Apostle John, for siding with the
Quakers, and affording them such erroneous stuff as that of hearing, seeing and
handling the word of God, he needed not have set old friends variance, and make
as if the Apostle Peter preached another Gospel then the Apostle John, they
agreed very well while living, and why should their Epistles differ now they
are dead? Oh! T. C. wants a flyng at The Saints, etc. Communion, etc. and
rather then he will want it long, he will e'ne quote 1 Pet. 1.8. in opposition to
what the Author of the said Book asserts from 1 John 1.1. But for all T. C. and
whatever he can do or say, they are still at agreement with each other, and the
Quakers with them both, and so are like to continue, when T. C. and his
abettors; viz. the whole Gang of Apostatized Opposers may be gone to their
place. And the Foundation whereon they build, and they fixed and established
thereon, will stand all the Storms, which either Battering Rams by lies and
slanders, or The Painted Harlot (either maskt or Unmasked) by her bewitching
Sorceries may be permitted to raise. Yea, though the Watchmen (of the Night)
whom he would awake out of their slumber to his assistance, may stumble in the
dark, yet the Light he so much contemns, will shine more and more, to the
discovering of his confused works, and to the finding out 'in whose Camp it is,
that The Accursed thing has been hid.

Well, though he affirms the Quakers to be erroneous, it seems he was so
himself once, if we may take his own confession for true, and did not so fully
see the danger thereof, till convinced by G. K's (I suppose) effectual
preaching (though perhaps F. B's elaborate writings might have a share in
opening his eyes) then now it seems he is got upon the stool of Repentance, but
he must give me leave to think, that for all what that Paper offers of any
convincing Argument to the contrary, it would be well for him to Repent of this
his Repentance; for if it produce no better effect than such a malicious bundle
of stuff, as that one Sheet contains, I cannot (nor I believe many other sober
People, even of those who go not under the profession of a Quaker, who may
happen to wast time in perusing it) look upon it to be the repentance never to
be Repented of. But whatever he the Accuser may formerly have been, that does
not make the accused so too, without more proof then he has hitherto produced,
in his patched and peiced, stretched or curtailed Quotations: Neither (I
suppose) do the Christian Quakers look upon him, F. B. or G. K. either, to be
fit Persons to make their Confessors nor either D. S. or his friend G. W.
proper advocates to plead their cause for them: They all and every of them,
being no better then Renegadoes, who join with our Adversaries, in that, both
by sly Insinuations, and openly Printed slanders, as much as in them lies, they
give away the cause, and grant what the most malicious Antagonists could never
yet prove, which could they have done, they would not have left so long undone:
But to proceed.

In page second, amongst diverse gross reflections and vile slanders (with which
his Pamphlet does so abound, that it would be endless to trace him through them
all) and as it were interwoven therewith, he gives us a kind of confession of
Faith, but so worded, as if he thereby meant, to exalt the humanity of Christ
above the Divinity, and plainly undervalues the Light in every Man, much like
the old Professors, and truly puts so mean a price on it, as to its
sufficiency, as less could not well be, unless he had added their threadbare
Epithets of Natural and Diabolical. He says, And whatsoever my lot may be from
you, I am satisfied, greater is he in whom I believe and trust, even the same
Jesus of Nazareth, whom you term Vessel, Garment, etc. then the Light in every
Man in the World. And a little lower, for my trust and hope is in the mercy of
God, for the sake of my Lord Jesus of Nazareth (without me) and his Obedience
and Sufferings, etc. Now pray Observe, he esteems the Body, which the Father
prepared for the Son, wherein to do the Fathers will, Heb. 10.5.7. greater than
the word, which was in the beginning with God, and was God, John, 1.1. In whom
was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men. v. 4. and who was the true Light
which Lights every Man that comes into the world, v. 9. But to make this the
more clear: Pray what was that, (which they term Vessel, Garment, etc. 'On whom
only T. C. fixes his Faith, and relies on for Salvation? My Father I. P. at
whom T. C. designs this flurt, says Part 2. p. 19. of the Collection of his
works. Now the Scriptures do expressly distinguish between Christ and the
garment which he wore; between him that came, and the Body in which he came;
between the substance which was veiled, and the vail which veiled it. Lo I
come! a Body have thou prepared me. There is plainly he, and the Body in which
he came. There was the outward Vessel, and the inward Life. This we certainly
know, and can never call the bodily Garment Christ, but that which appeared and
dwelt in the Body. Now if ye indeed know the Christ of God, tell us plainly
what that is which appeared in the Body? Whether that was not the Christ,
before it took up the Body, after it took up the Body, and for ever? Whereby it
appears to me that it is on the outward Man of Christ, without respect to that
which dwelt therein, Col. 2.19. which my Father here terms Vessel Garment, etc.
which T. C. relies on for Salvation. If that be not his sentiments, let him lay
his matters more closely together another time, and not let his malice carry
him so far into an extreme on that hand, whilst he is laboring to prove those
he quarrels with, guilty of an extreme on the other hand. He proceeds, I am not
ashamed of this my belief, and hope in him whom ye contemn. Truly if he were
not quite shameless, he might be ashamed, that he who has been a hearer of the
Quakers above Thirty years, should now dare to say, that they contemn Jesus
Christ, whom he cannot but have heard frequently preached amongst them, not only
as he appears in Spirit, but likewise as he became Man, was born of the Virgin
Mary Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried, rose again
the third day, and ascended into Heaven, and Sits on the Right Hand of the
Majesty on High, from whence he shall come to Judge both the quick and the
dead: Therefore he is the more inexusable, in that he cannot plead ignorance,
so I shall Charge it upon him as a wilful Error and that a very vile and gross
one too; I must needs say, he don't go about to Cloak it; so and as barefaced
slander, I return it back upon him, to see whether or no it will yet make him
blush.

But now his hand is in, he scribbles on, and tumbles them out thick and
threefold, as much without fear as wit, says he, p. ibid. You preach a Christ
Crucified in him, etc. But the Author of this Doctrine being nameless, I
suppose he has forgot who it was, and truly I cannot blame him for forgetting,
what (I believe) never had any other Foundation then mere imagination. Next
comes something in Print, there I Will believe him, for I read it in a Paper
subscribed T. C. but where else to find it, I cannot tell for my part, therefore
since he has not vouchafed to instruct me in that point, I shall (for all his
Capital lettered remarks) take no farther notice of it at present, only, that
there are so many Scratches, one at the end of almost every sentence, that I
question, not but he has severly mangled that quotation, and that openly
appears, without any Mystery, to be no part of a good Christian.

Page 3. He smooths over F. B's Mock Pillory, and speaks (I doubt not) more
then he is able to prove, as in relation to the prosecution of F. B. if by they
he means the Quakers: But as to G. K's and his adherents sufferings, he has got
a pretty faculty of magnifying them, which if he be not able to make good as
there expressed, by my consent, he shall stand on F. B's Pillory next time, as a
false accuser, instead of those Twelve. In short, that whole Paragraph savours
of Tertullus's Spirit, though not of his Eloquence, in endeavoring to persuade
the Overseers (as he calls them) that the Quakers aim at the subversion of the
Faith, the contrary whereof is most true.

As to his many Quotations out of G. F's Great Mystery, I have spent some time
in examining them, and find some of them so sound, that he has not been able
to corrupt them; and truly I admire to what end he Transcribed those, unless it
were to show us that he cannot bear sound Doctrine, when G. F. is the Publisher
of it. But for the most part, he has grossly misrepresented, abused, misquoted,
curtailed and misapplied passages, which in themselves, taking them as they
stand in the Book, would not admit of such Constructions as he puts upon them,
too large to be here recited; but for a taste, I here present the Reader with
the following Observations, wherein I have endeavored to rescue them from the
false Glosses he puts upon them.

In his third page, that he may not come behind the very worst of the Opposers
and Slanderers, of that Eminent Servant of Christ now at rest, he says, G. Fox
being charged to have said, He was Christ, he answers, It was a Lie; but says,
Christ in the Male or Female, if he speak, he was Christ the Seed, and the Seed
was Christ. But he said, he did not speak it as a Creature, p. 299. Whereupon
T. C. makes this Remark, I take him to mean, It was not the Creature G. F. but
Christ in him, that said, He was Christ. But if I should tell him, That it is
either his shortness of Understanding, or aboundings of Malice against G. F.
that makes him run into this mistake, I know not how he would take it, but
however that is the true state of the Case. For the Sentence explains it self,
and take him to mean thus, viz. He G. F. though he give the Name Christ to
something that is in him, and spoke through him, yet it was no Creature, nor of
him G. F. but was the Seed which is Christ, the same in both Male and Female, 2
Cor. 13.15. compared with Gal. 3.16, and 28. He quotes p. 67. his Words are
these, Also by opposing another, they do imply, they are equal with God; for
they say to an Opponent, Thou make a great pudder that any should witness he
is equal with God. T. C. should have been so fair, as to have adjoined to this
Quotation, the latter part of G. F's Answer, but since he has not I shall do
it for him. After G. F. has recited a passage out of The Catechism of the
Assembly of Divines, (so called) viz. That the Holy Ghost and the Son is equal
in Power and Glory with the Father, he adds, Yet if any one come to witness the
Son revealed in him, or come to witness the Holy Ghost in them, as they that
gave out the Scriptures; or witness the Mind of Christ, and witness that equal
which the Father, that equality which you speak of: You Priests destroy that
which you have put forth in the Nation, and cry out Horrid Blasphemy. Thus far
G. F. and now much good may this Citation do T. C. and the pudder he has made
about it too. But he has not done with this Point yet, he says, G. F. being
charged to profess Equality with God, he answers, G. Fox 's words were spoken
beyond and out of all Creatures, p. 127. Here is mangling work with a witness,
he has cut off the Head and Tail of this Sentence, and only left us the middle,
which as it lies together is solid Sense; for after G. F. had repeated the
foregoing passage of the Assembly of Divines, he in farther Vindication of
himself, from that foul Aspersion they had cast upon him, adds, Yet
nevertheless George 's words was not spoken as ye preach them; for his words
were spoken beyond all Creatures, and out of all Creatures, and he did not say
George Fox. But of this enough, and full enough to show his corrupt Dealings,
in abusing a Man who is dead, and so not able to answer for himself; but Malice
unbounded, will take into the Graves of the Dead, if possible, to make the
Objects of their hatred stink in the Nostrils of the Living; but when all is
done, they for the most part make themselves stink alive, when the Memory of
good Men, though they have been never so much scandalized, is as the Odor of
sweet Ointment, and the good savor, which the remembrance of their Virtues,
has left upon the Spirits of those who survive, Embalms their Names to
Posterity.

So having, (I hope) cleared this Point to the Impartial Rea er, I shall next
take a view of a Scoff he puts upon the Quakers, for professing a being guided
by an Infallible Spirit, for which he quotes p. 105. which whole Paragraph has
relation to the Infallibility of the Spirit of God, which says G. F. is now
possessed and witnessed amongst those called Quakers. Now, either the Spirit of
God is a fallible Spirit, which let him assert if he dare, or it is not
communicated to Mankind, contrary to 1 Cor. 12.7. and Joel 2.28, 29. or it is
not necessary toward making a Man a Christian, contrary to Romans 8.9. or else
T. C's Cavil is groundless. And as to what he mentions concerning Peter and
Simon Magus, I wont undertake to resolve his Doubt, but I question not at all
Peter's knowing by the Revelation of the Infallible Spirit of God, and by no
outward Means, that Ananias and Sapphira had Lied against the Holy Ghost in
that Case, Acts 5. and that was 1636. Years ago, instead of his 36, and for all
that it is not lost yet. For I will undertake to prove (if T. C. be so far
degenerated from the very form of sound words, as to deny it) that the
Infallible Spirit of Christ, is now possessed and witnessed amongst all true
Christians whatsoever: For if they have it not, the Apostle tells us, they are
none of Christ's, and if not Christ's, then no true Christians. Moreover I
Challenge T. C. to prove if he can, that ever any real Quaker, owned as such
among the Quakers, ascribed Infallibility to any Man, or number of Men,
otherwise than as immediately influenced by the guidance of the Infallible
Spirit of God; for his Inferences without Proof will but show his Envy; and
considering how much he has manifested himself not only an Adversary, but also
an unfair Adversary, will not satisfy reasonable Men. Now to prove him guilty
of unfairness in this very particular, I shall Transcribe his Quotation, and
then that Paragraph in the Book it self, which compared together, will
sufficiently clear up the Matter. T. C. p. 3, and 4. Also they say, How can you
but delude the People who are not Infallible? p. 82. Hereby opposing others,
they imply (not only the Spirit, but) themselves to be Infallible. Now G. F's
own words run thus. And how can they but delude People, that are not
Infallible, and are none of Christ's, which have not the Spirit which is
Infallible, and are not Ministers of the Gospel, which is the Power of God,
which is Infallible? Pray what Credit is there to be given to this Man's
Quotations or Assertions either. Well I would advise him, the next time he
writes, either to be Honester in his Quotations, or else take that Course
altogether, which he has in part already, viz. neither Name, Book, nor Author.

In his fourth Page he quarrels with G. F. for calling Christ, The Root of God;
and nothing will serve him, but he must put it in Capital Letters, with a This
I think is Blasphemous, at the end of it; nay it sticks so in his Stomach, that
p. 5. he must have the other fling at it; and there he comes in with a
Parenthesis, and says, But I think this their Doctrine is the Root of
Blasphemous Rantism: But why so angry I pray, Is not Christ mentioned as a
Root? Romans 11.18. And is not Christ God's? 1 Cor. 3.23. Therefore where is the
Blasphemy, in saying, Christ is the Root of God; I think he may as well be
called the Root, as the Foundation of God, see 1 Cor. 3.11. compared with 2 Timothy 2.19. since it refers to Men, and not to God.

About the beginning of p. 5. he is guilty of a gross Perversion, and it looks
like a wilful one too, for he has omitted not only one whole Sentence; but the
word and at the beginning of the next, which greatly alters the Sense, besides
his omitting what followed, which is Explanatory of G. F's meaning, the passage
is so clear in it self, and T. C's abuse so visible, that I shall only rehearse
it, first as quoted by him; and secondly, as it stands in the Book it self, and
then leave it to the impartial to judge. T. C's Citation runs thus; One says
such be in Error, that knows no Christ but a Christ within. G. F. answers, They
that profess a Christ without them, have another Christ (mark that) within
them, here is two, says G. F. p. 254. Now the Book it self says, And they that
profess a Christ without them, have a Christ without them, and another Christ
within them, here is two; for if it be not the same Christ that ended all
Types, and Figures, and Shadows. If it be not him that is within them, they
have not the Possession of the Substance, nor the comfort of the true Christ;
but who have not Christ, the end of Types, Shadows and Figures in them, they
are among Antichrists, and false Christ's, and they that have a form of
Godliness, can confess a Christ without them, and not within them.

A little lower in the same p. 5. he has quite maimed another Quotation, by
cutting it in two in the middle; but as much as he disjoints it, it is not past
setting together again, and that shall be my work at this time. T. C. brings in
G. F. saying, The Devil was in thee, thou say thou art saved by a Christ
without thee, and so have recorded thy self a Reprobate, p. 250. This is all he
can afford; but G. F. proceeds, And ignorant of the Mystery of Christ within
thee; for without that thou do not know Salvation. I would ask T. C. wherein
does G. F. contradict the Apostle Paul? 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves
whether you be in the faith: prove your own selves. Know you not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? For my part I
cannot perceive how G. F. can be Erroneous, and the Apostle Orthodox, for
whatever T. C. may think, they seem to me no ways contradictory to each other.

The next Quotation I take notice of in the same Page, is very unfair, if
designed; but however I will be so fair to him, as to take his Excuse, if he
will plead Ignorance and want of Understanding; what difference there is
between words enclosed in a Parenthesis, and where there is no Parenthesis: But
if he does understand it, then it is no longer weakness, but wickedness; the
words are these, All be in the fancy that be out of the witnessing Christ that
suffered within them, p. 131. Now who would have concluded any other, but that
G. F. undervaluing the Sufferings of Christ without the Gates of Jerusalem, had
published, that his Sufferings were within Man only. But now take it with the
Parenthesis as the Book has it, viz. And so all be in the fancy, that be out
of the state of witnessing Christ (that Suffered) within them. This alters the
Case, for it is all one as if he should have said, And so all be in the fancy,
that be out of the state of witnessing Christ that suffered without, to be
revealed within them; and this is according to Christ's own words, John 14.17.
He dwells with you, and shall be in you.

Again, p. 6. One says, The Seed to whom the Promise of Salvation is made, is,
or has been Sinners. G. F. answers, The Promise is to the Seed -- which Seed
is the Hope Christ that purifies -- and this Seed never sinned, p. 324. Says T.
C. Hereby G. F. does imply, That the Promise of Salvation was to Christ, as if
he had need of Salvation, etc. Whatever Juggling T. C. may pretend to find in G.
F. I cannot acquit T. C. of Juggling, for he has left out one Sentence, which
manifests that G. F. was far from meaning, that Christ stood in need of
Salvation; for between the word purifies, and this Seed, instead of T. C's
scratch, G. F. has this Expression, And hereby is the Creature come to know
its liberty among the Sons of God; which plainly cuts off T. C's Cavil, if he
had but had the Honesty to have inserted it: And in Vindication of G. F's
asserting, That the Seed to whom the promises were made was Christ, read Gal.
3.16. and that the Creature comes no other way to be partaker of the promise,
than as found in Christ, read v. 28, 29.

But now as if he thought the errors he pretends the Quakers are guilty of in
point of Doctrine, not sufficient to do his work, as perhaps being conscious of
the weakness as well as groundlesness, of all his loud clamours against them on
that Score, he will e'ne take up his old predecessor's Argument, John 19.12. If
thou let this Man go, thou art not Caesar 's friend. And rather then fail of
his spite, he would if he could render them obnoxious to the Government, and
for that end quotes a passage concerning Monarchy, which he Fathers upon G. F.
but whether ever wrote, or at least so wrote by G. F. I know not, for the Book
is nameless, and so his clamor not worth the minding. No more is that
concerning the House of Lords; for he quotes no Quakers Book, but one of John
Pennyman's, which manifests that he is willing to take any thing upon trust,
(especially what was written by so dearly beloved a Brother in the common
cause, as the said J. P.) that will but serve for an objection against G. F. in
particular, or the Quakers in general. And as for Episcopacy, he has taken a
large step since he left the Quakers, if he be got to them again; however they
will have but little honor by such a Member, nor are we in danger of following
such an example. Now upon the whole of these three Paragraphs, I have this to
remark, that the method of his exposing them to the world, shows his great
desire that the Chief Men in the Nation may be set against us; for least they
should not be so far taken notice of, as he would have them, they must be all
in Capital Letters, that so making a great Figure in that page, the Reader
might be taken with more than ordinary curiosity to see what that was, and then
perhaps it might light into the hands of some, that owed the Quakers as little
good will as T. C. does, and so from one to another, it might at last come to
the ears of the King, Peers and Bishops: And what then? They are Men of more
understanding, than to take one Deserters malicious Libel, against a Body of
People, of whose peaceable behavior, this Nation has had so long experience,
even under all the Alterations, and various Changes which have happened, in
relation to Government, ever since they were a People.

His applauding D. S. as a Christian Quaker, and running against the Twenty
Four who disowned him, shows that he, D. S. F. B. G. K. etc. mentioned in that
paragraph, are all Birds of a feather, and no wonder then if they flock
together. And as for G. W's errors and evil deeds he hints at, let him make the
best of them, I question not but G. W. is able to answer him, if he thinks it
worth his while, which truly I think hardly is. And as to his complaint in
behalf of G. K. in relation to the proceedings in Pensylvania, against him and
his adherents; S. J. has already given an account how they were managed, in
his State of the Case, etc. and therein vindicated himself, and those concerned
with him, from the aspersion cast upon them. Perhaps he may allege, that G. K.
has answered that Book, and stated things otherways: Yet however, he ought in
justice to suspend his verdict, till he hears what proof S. J. will bring in
defense of what he has written, which (God sparing him Life) I question not
but he may be able to produce.

He says p. 7. It is not my intent to make void or undervalue the Light of
Christ, or Spirit of God within, and obedience thereto; for its our duty to
walk in the Light, but not to build thereon. If he had said so as to exclude
the benefit which accrued to Mankind, by the death of Christ, I would said so
too; but I cannot like him divide Christ, by ascribing the whole work to Christ
without, and making that the sole Foundation of the true Faith: For unless
Christ work inwardly in Men's Hearts by his Spirit, not only the will but the
deed also Phil. 2.13. And unless the Father Sanctify them through his word,
whose word is truth John 17.17. To them the Blood of Christ shed without the
Gates of Jerusalem will be of no effect. Now The word which took Flesh is
Christ and His Life is the Light of Men, John 1.4. therefore to say it is not
our duty to build thereon is erroneous, and tends to the undervaluing of
Christ, who ought not to be divided. This is other Doctrine then Christ
preached, John 12.36. While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye
may be the Children of the Light. And how can I believe in the Light, if I have
no dependence thereon? How can I obey the Light or Spirit, or walk therein
(which he grants is our duty) if I must not build upon it? The Apostle Paul's
preaching was attended with the demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power: And
the reason he gives is, That your Faith should not stand in the wisdom of men,
but in the Power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. which Power of God is Christ, not only
as he was manifested outwardly, but also as he appears inwardly, and is
certainly what is evidently demonstrated in that Chapter. And further he tells
the Colossians, Chap. 1.27. That Christ in them was the hope of their Glory.
And Romans 8.24. We are saved by hope. Must not we build then upon the saying
hope of Glory, Christ in us? Strange Doctrine surely! How else can we Fly for
refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set before us? Or how else shall we
experience Hope to be as an Anchor of our Souls, both sure and Steadfast? Heb.
6.18, 19. Or did the Apostle preach false Doctrine, and deny the appearance of
Christ in the Flesh? No surely; no more do the Quakers now. How must the whole
lump be Leavened, if we have not our Faith fixed on him, who is the Leaven of
the Kingdom, and is hid in the three measure of Meal, viz. the Soul, Body and
Spirit? Mat. 13.33. But no wonder that Men err when they walk in Darkness, and
despise that Light by which they should be preserved from it.

Having showed his contradiction to Scripture, I shall now proceed, and take
notice that he brings in diverse passages, in p. 7. and the beginning of p. 8.
with a Say they: But he neither informs us out of what Book he took them, nor
for the most part, who was the Author: Probably because he would take the more
Latitude to abuse them undiscovered; for he makes no conscience of quoting
falsely, and perverting G. F's writings, as I have showed above, though he has
in quoting that Book often referred to the pages: Therefore I cannot think I do
him any wrong in suspecting these Quotations not to be genuine; and since he
has not given me the opportunity of examining whether they be so or no, as
such I shall pass them over.

But now comes a shrewd case of Conscience, the very Master-peice of this
Babel-Builders Structure, which demonstrates that he is in confusion, or else
certainly would never have let such a blunder be exposed to the World.

He says p. 8. Now I appeal to their Consciences, whether or no if our Lord
Jesus, etc. is believed on and obeyed, so as to have his perfect work in the
Heart to Regenerate, and make all things anew, whether this can be, and the
work of Regeneration not known? Truly a very notable question, and very nicely
distinguished: I dare believe he made no use of G. K's either Logic or
Philosophy in this appeal. But I admire that G. K. should take no more care of
his Pupil in his Divinity, than to suffer him to fumble thus, I believe he
would not have suffered such a thing to escape his Cognizance among his other
sort of Scholars. However to please T. C. I will readily grant, that when a Man
is become Regenerate, he has known the work of Regeneration. But if his
Question in the sense he means it (which truly seems to me, to be what he
drives at) has respect only to a Faith on Christ as he is without, excluding
the operation of the Light and Spirit within, and Faith therein, then I deny
it: For Regeneration is a qualification, rendering a Man capable of entering the
Kingdom of Heaven, then consequently he must be in a state of Salvation, but
John Rev. 21.23, 24. After he has given an account of the Glory of the New
Jerusalem, says, The Glory of the Lord did lighten it, and the Lamb is the
Light thereof. And the Nations of them which are saved shall walk in the Light
of it. And the Apostle Peter speaking concerning the Elect, whose Souls were
purified in obeying the truth through the Spirit, says, Being Born again, not
of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and
abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.22, 23.

As for what he relates concerning a Preachers deifying G. F. it is an old
threadbare story, often recited by diverse opposers, and has been already
answered, and so I need say the less to it; all that I shall observe is, that
they do not all tell one Tale, neither (to my own knowledge, having compared
them) is this the same with what has been Printed by another person, referring
to this very letter.

I have one passage more to take notice of before I leave him, and truly I
cannot tell how to pass by it, it being indeed his Reflections on that Person
that first occasioned me to take this work in Hand, who in Truth deserves to
have a better Pen employed in his Defense than mine; but however such as it is,
though it may fall short of the end proposed, through want of Skill and
Experience in me, how to manage an Argument, yet may serve to testify the
Value I have for, and the Filial Respect I bear to the Memory of a worthily
Esteemed, deservedly Honored, and truly Honorable Father: Who though by F. B.
(whom this Man vindicates) in way of Contempt be termed a Devout Heathen, was
well known (by those who knew the Truth in which he lived, and in which he
died, and had any Acquaintance with him) to be a sincere Christian, and true
Minister of the Gospel of Christ, not of the Letter only, but of the Spirit, as
was the Apostle Paul: And his endeavor was to fix People on that Rock which
would abide the Storm, and preserve them from falling, viz. That spiritual Rock
which followed Israel, which Rock was Christ. But by reason of his vindicating
the living and lively Faith of Christ spiritually revealed in the Heart,
without which the Literal Faith, would be so far from saving them, that it
would but add to their Condemnation; I say, for this his Zealous Defense of the
Gospel of Christ, and exalting the Spirit above the Flesh, (though they could
never prove him guilty of denying or slighting the outward Appearance of Christ
in the Flesh) he was not without a share of the Slanders and Calumnies of
Adversaries of all sorts, while living; and though he has now been dead
several Years, yet T. C. will not let him rest in his Grave, but must rake in
his Ashes, for Dirt to fling at him: And truly he is an Author who has been
much quoted by T. C. in most, if not all the Pamphlets he has published
against that Church, whereof my said Father was an Eminent Member: Formerly his
Perversions of his Writings tended to make him speak contrary, when Dead, to
his Brethren, with whom he was in true Unity while Living, and then T. C. could
quote him as Authentic, and by him approved for sound Doctrine: But since that
would not effect his Design, now his Writings must be Apocryphal, and he a
Publisher of false Doctrine, to prove the Quakers guilty thereof too; but how
far he falls short in his Proofs I hope to evince by and by. He has had
several touches at him in some of the foregoing Paragraphs of his Pamphlet, but
without naming either Book or Author, but now in the close to pin the Basket,
he gives us three Letters of his Name, viz. Is. P. yet names no Book neither:
But I knowing that The Question to Professors, etc. has been a Choak-pear to
the mere Letter-mongers of our Times; I imagined it might be out of that Book
that he took his Quotations, which he quarrels so with, and upon perusing it
found them there; and therefore for the Honor I bear to the Memory of so near
a Relation, and so good a Man, I shall endeavor to wipe off the Aspersion
which T. C. casts upon him. He says, And it is astonishing to behold how they
contemn our Lord Jesus, and Deifie him, ( viz. G. F.) thereby making way for
themselves to be so many Christ's, as appears by Is. P's saying, Does not the
name belong to every Member as well as to the Head? Now if the whole Query,
from whence those words are taken, do not tend to contemn our Lord Jesus
Christ, or for making way for themselves to be so many Christ's, then is T. C. a
false Accuser; and to prove him such, I shall transcribe the Query Verbatim,
only with the Addition of those Scriptures at length in Parenthesis's, which he
quotes in proof of his Assertions, and leave it to the unbyassed to judge,
whether it has such a tendency or no? Or whether it be not sound Apostolical
Doctrine? Part 2. p. 15. of Is. P's Collection, Qu. 24. Is not the Substance,
the Life, the Anointing called Christ, wherever it be found? Does not the
Name belong to the whole Body (and every Member in the Body) as well as to the
Head? Are they not all of one, yea, all one in the Anointing? Was not this the
great desire of his Heart to the Father, that they all might be one, even as
the Father and Christ were one, John 17.21, 23. (That they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: I in
thee, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.) And so being one
in the same Spirit, one in the same Life, one in the same Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
(Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises, that by these
you might be Partakers of the Divine Nature) even Partakers of God's Holiness,
Heb. 12.10. (For they verily chastened us after their own Pleasure, but he for
our Profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness) Christ is not ashamed
to call them Brethren, Heb. 2.11. (For both he that sanctifies, and they who
are sanctified, are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
Brethren) nor is the Apostle ashamed to give them the Name Christ together with
him, 1 Cor. 12.12. (For as the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the
Members of that one Body, being many, are one Body; so also is Christ) The Body
is the same with the Head; one and the same in Nature; and does not the Name
belong to the Nature in the whole? So that the Name is not given to the Vessel,
but to the Nature, to the heavenly Treasure, to that which the Lord from Heaven
begets in his own Image and Likeness, of his own Substance, of his own Seed, of
his own Spirit and pure Life. Thus far my Father. Now I observe upon the whole,
That he does not assert, that every Member is a distinct Christ, (any more than
every Member is a distinct Body) thereby making way for themselves to be so
many Christ's, (as T. C. falsely affirms.) But so far as every one is a Member
of the Body, whereof Christ is Head, and of the Anointing, from whence the Name
Christ is derived; so far have they a Title to the Name Christ, or Anointed, as
being Christed or Anointed, begotten by him the Incorruptible Seed, sanctified
through his Blood, and thereby made Partakers of his Righteousness, are become
one with him, his Brethren, Children of the same Father, Hei^s of the same
Glory, according to their Measures. Neither does this tend to the contemning of
Christ, for this Union does not imply an equality, though the Members are all
anointed with the same Holy Oil as is Christ the Head, yet he is anointed with
the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows, Heb. 1.9. The Scripture abounds in
setting forth the Mystical Union between Christ and his Church, as particularly
Ephesians. 5. where the Apostle giving Directions, how Husbands and Wives ought to
demean themselves toward each other, stirs them up to mutual Love, by the
Example of Christ's Love to his Church, and comparing their near Alliance to
each other, by the Union of Christ with his Church, he says, v. 30. We are
Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones: Then certainly every
Member is partaker of the same Life, the same Blood, the same Strength, the
same Virtue, and the same Substance with the Head, though not in the same
degree; a lively Type whereof, was the Ointment that was upon Aaron 's head,
that went down to the very skirts of his garment, Psalm. 133.2. So that 'twas
the same Ointment still, (though not in that quantity) which was upon the Head,
that ran down to the very Skirts, but the Head was the place from whence this
Ointment flowed unto the Inferior Parts.

Now having taken notice of what passages in his Paper to me seemed most worthy
of notice, as deserving to have a black Line drawn over them, and a Mark set on
them, for the Scandals, Abuses and Unfairness contained in them, (though I must
needs confess, his whole Sheet from one end to the other, is little else but
one continued Slander) I shall draw to a Conclusion; solemnly declaring, That
it is not Malice (I can truly say) against the Man that drew these Lines from
me, but Trouble to see his gross Perversions of good Men's Writings and
Meanings, (and that I fear against his own Knowledge) after this manner; and
the very worst I wish to him, or the rest concerned with him in this ill Work,
is their Repentance: That their many hard Words and bitter Speeches against the
Church of Christ in general, or any Member or Members thereof in particular,
may not be laid to their Charge, at the great Day of Judgment; when not only
all Actions, but the Secrets of all Hearts shall be laid open, and a Just
Reward rendered by Christ to every Man according to his Doings.

E. P.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the writing of the above, I observed that at the close of his Paper. T.
C. refers to a former Book of his, Entitled, Animadversions, etc. whereupon I
perused that Book, (which I had never done before) and therein found sufficient
cause for Animadversions upon his Animadversions: However at present I shall
take notice but of two passages of my Fathers which so affront him, that the
occasion he takes to quarrel with them, takes up a considerable part of that
Book; and very angry he is with G. W. for writing any thing in Vindication of
them; but however though I should incur his Displeasure too, as a Duty I owe to
the Dead, I shall endeavor it, by taking notice of those Passages, and
comparing them with some other in the same Book Explanatory of them, in the
mean time passing over the Reflections he casts upon G. W. as knowing him able
to answer for himself, (if not already done) provided he see Cause.

The first is Part 2. p. 19. of my Father's Works; which I have quoted at large
before, but shall now take notice of that part which so much offends him, and
which (if we may believe him) he never saw nor heard of before, Anim. p. 20.
(that he should never find it, till just now he has a Mind to Cavil at it; may
be so, but it is strange, probably he means, he never saw nor heard it to be
false Doctrine before) and is as follows, This we certainly know, and can
never call the bodily Garment Christ, but that which a^peared and dwelt in the
Body. Now p. 7. He says it is evident, it was intended to undervalue our Lord
Jesus his Person, as Body and Soul living; neither are such distinctions in
Scripture, (as Is. P. makes) since Jesus his Incarnation, but by him made in
order to his Contempt, etc. But for all T. C's haste, I hope before I leave
this Subject, to prove by Scripture, that the Body when mentioned distinct from
the Divinity, is not termed Christ, but his Body both Dead and Living. When
Dead it is in so many words called, The Body of Jesus, John 19.38. And he
himself calls it a Temple, John 2.19. which v. 21. is explained to be the
Temple of his Body, which he, viz. Christ the Word, (mentioned in the foregoing
Chapter) would raise up in three days. And the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to
the Colossians, distinguishing between the Divinity and Humanity of Christ,
says, v. 16. For by him were all things created that are in heaven, etc. But
21, 22, And you that were sometimes alienated, and Enemies in your mind by
wicked works, yet now has he reconciled in the Body of his flesh through
Death. Now I would ask T. C. Does my Father deny the Name Christ to the Body
united to the Word, or abstractly, when speaking concerning the Body only? I
affirm, and that I will prove by other Quotations out of the same Book, that he
owns the Name Christ to belong to that Body, as it was the Vessel which
contained the Anointing, from whence the Name Christ proceeds. Page 6. speaking
concerning the Seed of the Woman, he says, This Seed we know to be the Seed of
Abraham, the Seed of David after the Flesh, and the Seed of God after the power
of an endless Life, and we are taught of God to give the due honor to each; to
the Seed of God in the first place, to the Seed of David in the second place:
And that due Honor he farther explains, p. 12. Q. 6. To whom do the Names and
Titles Jesus and Christ, chi fly, and in the first place belong? Do they belong
to the Body, which was took by him, or to him who took the Body, etc? Then it
seems he allows, that in the second place they belong to the Body, in respect
to him who took the Body: But to clear the Point farther, see p. 13. the latter
part of Q. 11. Have we the denomination and relation with Christ from that
which is Spiritual? And has Christ himself the Name from, or because of the
Body of Flesh? Nay, nay, the Name Christ was from the Anointing, which was in
the Body, which run into and filled the Vessel. It is true, the Body in and by
the Union, partakes with him of his Name; but the Name belongs chiefly, and
most properly to the Treasure in the Vessel. Methinks by T. C's leave this may
p^ss for an Explanation of his meaning, but if not with him, it may with others
less prejudiced, and manifest my Father not to be guilty of Errors and Contempt
of our Lord Jesus, as he is charged to be, Animadversions, p. 26.

The second passage is quoted by T. C. Animad. p. 27. His quarrel is with an
Expression in the said Book of my Fathers, which runs thus, p. 13. For that
which he took upon him was our Garment, even the Flesh and Blood of our Nature,
which is of an earthly perishing Nature. Now mark, he speaks in the present
Tense, Our Flesh and Blood is, and not in the time past, his Flesh and Blood
was of an earthly perishing Nature; it is true, 'twas our Garment, Flesh and
Blood like ours; or else how could he be perfect Man? But the Sacrifice of his
Body, was so seasoned with the Divine Salt of the Covenant, (that though in
Nature, Flesh and Blood like ours, yet being without Sin) it could not like
ours, (the best of whom have at some time or other committed Sin) perish, nor
see corruption. My Father says, p. 18. For the Flesh and Blood of our Nature,
was not his own naturally, but only as he pleased to take it upon him, and make
it his. Now if our Flesh and Blood be of an earthly perishing Nature, and
Christ was a Man made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, What was
it which preserved his Body from perishing, but the same Almighty Power which
begat it, raised it from the Dead, and preserved it spotless, so that guile was
not found in his Mouth.

But to satisfy all that are Impartial, that my Father was no Contemner nor
Undervaluer of the Person or Body of Christ, nor guilty of making or raising an
Imaginary Maulkin out of his own Brain, as T. C. unsavourly phrases it, Animad.
p. 28. I shall add two or three Quotations out of the same Book, for a
Conclusion of the whole Matter.

Page 7. My Father affirms, That it is upon Consideration (and through God's
acceptance of this Sacrifice for Sin) that the Sins of Believers are pardoned,
that God might be just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus, or
who is of the Faith of Jesus.

Page 14. Speaking concerning the Seed, he Queries, And is not this the same
Christ that took upon him the Body of Flesh, and offered it without the Gates
of Jerusalem? Is there any more than one? Or is there any other than he? Is
Christ divided? Is there one Christ within, and another without, etc?

Page 20. He asserts, That nothing can save, but the Knowledge of Christ, even
of that very Christ, and no other, who look upon him the prepared Body, and
offered it up at Jerusalem.

Now if this be false Doctrine, I must needs confess I know not what is true,
neither (I believe) can T. C. inform me, If this be a contemning or
undervaluing Christ, I know not who honors or exalts him. Let T. C. but pull
off those Magnifying and Multiplying Spectacles which G. K. and F. B. have put
upon his Nose, and I question not but the Errors which he thinks he sees in the
Quakers to be so numerous, gross and vile will soon vanish. And let him lay
aside all Malice and Prejudice, which appears so much in his Writings, and then
he will see plainly, that the Quakers are not such Beasts of Prey, as the
Wolve-skins and Bear-skins, which he has put upon them, represents them to be.
But if he will wilfully shut his Eyes, and instead of beholding them as they
really are, put frightful Disguises on them, that if possible, he might expose
them to be worried by the Dogs ( viz. such Men as are for snarling at, biting
and devouring so far as their Power reaches) I question not, but some or other
will still be stirred up to pull them off, as fast as he puts them on, and
likewise to set forth both him and his Abettors in their proper Colors,
whereby they may appear really what they are, and so may be prevented from
deceiving Innocent, Well-meaning People with their Slanders and Falsehoods.

Reader, I beseech thee bear with me a little, if in making a remarke or two
upon a friend of T. C's, and a companion of his, in promoting the work of
opposition against us, I should detain thee a little longer then I intended;
for truly I would not concern my self with him, if I thought it worth any
body's while that is of more Service; and think me not altogether besides my
self, for meddling with such a kind of a Man. I confess he exceeds mevery
eminently in 3 respects, viz. Age, Whimsies and Malice, and therefore thou must
needs grant he has me upon a disadvantage. Yet though I would respect his Age,
I cannot but pity his Whimsies, and slight his Malice; it is John Pennyman I
mean, a Man famous for three things, (the two first of which, though I cannot
affirm upon my own personal knowledge, they being done before my time, yet have
them from credible information; and my self have heard them objected against
him in public Meetings, and not by him denied) viz. First, His employing a
Porter to carry a parcel of Religious Books, amongst which the Bible is said to
be one, to the Exchange, with a design to burn them openly there: Which what
noise it made about Town, and what reflections the Quakers met with upon that
account, he being esteemed one of them, I doubt not but diverse now living, who
are no Quakers, may remember. Secondly, His providing a great number of
Venison-Pasties (the exact number whereof I will not certainly fix, though I
was informed it was Twenty seven) and a considerabel quantity of Wine, and
sending them to Merchant-Taylors-Hall, at the publication of his Marriage, (and
by the way I would Query, whether J. P. did not use the expression of inviting
Jew and Gentile, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond and Free? And when a great company
of all sorts were met there, whether he did not tell them, That the Wine was
all of a sort, and the Meat was all of a sort, and he that could receive it,
let him?) Where the great waste that was made, and the rude behavior of his
mixed multitude of guests, was scandalous to sober People, I believe not
forgotten by diverse to this very day. And Thirdly, his insipid writings, stufft
with a great deal of envy, little sense, and less proof of his Assertions; as
witness his two late bits of Paper, given away by him at our Meeting Houses
doors, one published in 1694. Entitled, A few words of great Concernment, and
directed to fourteen by name; and in general, to all the rest of our Ministers.
The other this present Year 1695. Entitled, A Few words of Moment, to be
imparted to this Yearly Meeting of the People called Quakers in London, etc.
Yet delivered by him to any that would take them, let them be Quakers or no.
Which how certain and true Testimonies they are, I am now enquiring into, and
when I have said what I have to say concerning them at present, He that can
receive them let him.

His first Paper says, Your Ministry or Ministration is at an end, and must
more and more decrease and dwindle, and for ever be extinct: From whence I
observe, he knows not which of them it is that is at an end, etc. whether
Ministry or Ministration; for it seems both are not, or else he might have used
the word and instead of the word or. Secondly, Which soever of the two it be
that is at an end, it must still decrease and dwindle, which shows he is got to
the end of sense, and perfectly nonsensical; for I think, according to my poor
capacity of understanding, that what is at an end, is past decreasing or
dwindling either. Thirdly, He lumps all our Ministers by Wholesale; for it is
not only the Fourteen, but all the rest of our Ministers also, whom this word
of untruth includes; and that, as it is more than he knows or can prove by the
Fourteen named, so is more than is possible for him to know by all the rest,
many of whom he cannot pretend to any knowledge of at all, much less can have
any thing to object against them, either as to Conversation or Doctrine. But
Christ's Ministers (he tells us) and his Ministration are to increase and
flourish; but in Crotchets says [in the appointed season] wherefore upon the
whole it appears to me, that these Words of great Concernment, proceeds not
from The word of Truth, but from the Crotchets of a Whimsical imagination,
whose Life lies in quarreling, though he knows not why, nor can give any
sensible account wherefore. But it must be to the gladding, refreshing and
comforting the Hearts of the Upright, Sincere and Single-hearted: Now if he be
one of them, it seems strange that The Word of Truth he speaks of, if it ever
spoke by him, should never send him in time of Persecution, to the saving of
him now and then 20 l. which he might have been in probability of losing, for
his Poor Insignificant says. But perhaps the Constables and Informers had not
an Ear to hear, and so he would not let them hear him: Neither might they have
received his (so called) certain and true Testimony, and so he would not let
them receive it. However it was, it happened very well for him, for by that
means he saved his Pocket.

Well, since that Paper in 1694. did not quite blow up the Quakers Ministry or
Ministration, out comes another in 1695. of as Great Moment perhaps as an
Oracle from Delphos, delivered from the Infallible Tripus, and uttered with
such Zeal, that if this do not stop their Mouths, he may e'ne conclude, that
they are past his mending; for if this will not do it, I dare engage nothing
that J. P. can write ever will. He begins with two Quotations of Their great
Apostle and Prophet (as he calls him) George Fox, to manifest to them that they
ought to be silent, viz. All you that speak, and not from the Mouth of the
Lord, are False Prophets; Westmorland Petit. p. 5. 1653. They are Conjurers and
Diviners; and their preaching is from Conjuration, that is not spoken from the
Mouth of the Lord; G. F 's Saul 's Errand, etc. p. 7. 1654. Now to show he is a
Man of use and application, he drives the Nail home, and says, If this be true,
then are you (who are of his Party, and Preachers among the Quakers) guilty
both before God and Men, of being False Prophets, Conjurers, Diviners; and your
preaching from Conjuration, whereby you deceive and bewitch the People. A high
Charge I will assure you; but if any should Query, how he clinches this Nail,
and what proof he brings to make good this Indictment? I answer, John Pennyman
has said it; he from his vain boasting and self-exalted Spirit, is to testify
to them, viz. That they do not preach from the Mouth of the Lord, as they
pretend. And he, from the vain Imaginations of his own proud, deceived and
deceitful Heart, is to warn them, That they presume not to Preach any more in
the Name of the Lord, till they come into deep Humility, etc. Therefore to
silence them, J. P. has sent forth his Bull, and forbids them; (but be he
never so cursed, one good turn is, he has but short Horns). And if this be not
a certain and true Testimony, and proof enough too to satisfy the Reader, that
they are guilty of this Charge, both before God and Men, he may e'ne go seek
for proof elsewhere, though J. P. (no doubt) would have him think it enough:
But if he should chance to insist upon more, he may look it where he can find
it, for J. P. will afford him no more: Nor indeed is it reasonable to expect
any more in such a scrap of Paper; and since J. P. is at so much Charge and
Pains as to Print them, and come to our Meeting House Doors to give them away,
han't he done enough? Ay, and too much too, (I think) and therefore for this
time pray put it up, and be thankful. But wherefore his Confederate F. B.
should Print this Passage of G. F's I cannot conceive; for if it be true, as J.
P. seems to grant, what will become of F. B's Pastor, and his Brethren of the
Clergy, who do not so much as pretend to speak from the Mouth of the Lord by
immediate Inspiration? And if F.B. do not grant it, they may chance to weaken
their Cause by differing among themselves. Moreover, if that Man may be said to
be of a Party with another, who agrees with him in his Sentiments, then thus
far is J. P. of Party with G. F. by granting these Quotations, and not only he,
but all Speakers or Preachers that are of Party with him therein, or in the
Work he thereby promotes; and so let them take those Quotations, and J. P's
Conclusions, and make the Application themselves, and the use he makes of it
too, viz. Not to presume to Preach, (and I may add, or write either) till the
Work he mentions is wrought in them, viz. They be come into deep Humility, and
out of their Vain-boasting, and Self-exalted Spirit they are at present found
in.

Now after all the preceding Objections against J. P. I sincerely declare, that
the good Character I have heard concerning him as to his upright Dealing
between Man and Man in Way of Commerce, and some other Points of Morality, for
which I have heard him Commended, has often raised a Pity in me toward him,
and a desire he might not lose the Reward of them, by his defect in respect to
Christianity, the Chiefest Point whereof is Charity, and the want of which
spoils all the other Parts of a Man's Religion, and without which a Man cannot
indeed be truly Religious, according to the right definition of Religion. And I
do at this time heartily desire on his behalf, that he may meet with true
Repentance, for all that through Malice he has ^acted against us; (which truly
I do in great ^e^sure attribute to the weakness of his Understanding, and the
Whimsies of his Brain, which he has so evidently and frequently manifested in
diverse of his Actions) lest the Judgment which came upon his Brother Jeffery
Bullock, viz. a Despairing Deathbed overtake him.

And Reader, if thy Inclination farther leads thee to be informed of our Holy
Religion, and the unholy Treatment it and we have received at the Hands of our
Adversaries, especially Apostates, such as T. C. F. B. G. K. etc. the many
Tracts that have been written in defense thereof, against the
Misrepresentations and Perversions of our Enemies, which for these Twenty Years
and upwards, have from time to time been published, to numerous here to
nominate, will more at large inform thee: And are sold by Tace Soul, next Door
to our Meeting House in White-hartcourt in Gracious-street; and by Thomas
Northcot, in George-yard in Lumbard-street, Booksellers.

FINIS.

