SOME THINGS Relating to RELIGION, Proposed to the consideration of the Royal
Society, (So termed) to wit, Concerning the right Ground of Certainty therein.
Concerning Tenderness of Spirit, and Persecution. A Query Concerning
Separation. Concerning washing away Sin from the Conscience; and the Garment of
Salvation, and what it is that is covered therewith.

Likewise, Some Questions and Answers concerning the Church of the
New Covenant, the Rock or Foundation whereon it is built, and its preservation
by and upon the Rock. With some Queries concerning the scattered and hidden
estate of the Church; and concerning that Church which got up in the view of
the world, instead thereof, and was acknowledged by the world as if she had
been the true Church, though indeed and truth she was not so.

Whereunto are added, Some QUERIES to Professors, who speak of high
Seize, etc.

Written by one, whom it has pleased the Lord (of his great goodness and
tender mercy) to lead out of the darkness, into his mavelous Light; known
among men by the name of ISAAC PENINGTON,

Printed in the Year, 1668.

To the Royal Society, so termed.
FRIENDS,
I Have heard that ye are seeking after the excellency of Nature and Learning.
I am not for discouraging any Man in endeavoring after that which is good,
useful and excellent in its kind and place: But it is the advantage of
everything, to know and abide in its place, and to honor and serve him from
whom all good Gifts and Endowments come. Man has but a moment in this world,
and he is here no more; and then the spirit returns to God that gave it, to
give an account of the Talent which he gave it, and its improvement thereof to
the Glory of him that gave it, and to the salvation of its own soul. Now this
Talent is of an higher kind than Nature, and will lead higher than Nature,
giving a man to partake of that wisdom from which Nature came; and teaching him
to order all that is natural, to its right end: For God is not an Enemy to
Nature, but to the corruption and disorder of Nature. I desire ye might know
and partake of the true wisdom, and feel union with God in the principle of his
own Life, and in the incorruptible and Heavenly seed of God receive dominion
over the earthly and corruptible. For this end singly, in the love springing up
in my heart toward you (as it often does, both toward particular persons and
Societies: For I am a friend to all, and a lover of all, sincerely desiring the
good of all, and the right guidance of their souls to happiness) have I
proposed these things following more particularly to your view, though they
concern others also, that ye thereby might be awakened to search after that
which is most excellent in you, and be acquainted with the virtue and precious
effects thereof, to the full satisfaction and complete joy of your souls, in
that which alone is able fully to satisfy, and give them ground of durable joy
and rejoicing in that which is not of a perishing nature, but which was, and
is, and will be the same for ever.

From a friend to the everlasting Peace of your souls, and a desirer of your
welfare and prosperity in this world, ISAAC PENINGTON.

Of Certainty, and rightly grounded Assurance, in matters of Religion.
THERE is a Witness of, and from God in every Conscience, which in his Light,
Power and Authority witnesses for him, and against that which is contrary to
him, as he pleases to move upon it, visiting and drawing the hearts of the
sons of men by it.

From this Witness proceeds the true and well-grounded Religion in the mind
toward God. For this Witness both testifies and demonstrateth, that there is
a God; and also, inclines the mind to desire and seek after the right knowledge
and true worship of him.

And such who keep to this Witness, and wait upon God therein, are taught by it
the true spiritual worshp, the true and pure fear of the Most High; the Faith
which he gives to his Saints, the Love which is chaste and unseigned, the Hope
which purifieth the mind, and Anchors it on the eternal Rock; the meekness,
patience, gentleness, humility, etc. which is not of man's nature; but the gift
of God, and the Nature of the Heavenly Giver. And then for exercises of
Religion, as praying to the Father of Spirits, hearing the Heavenly voice,
reading in the Spirit, and with the renewed Understanding, Singing, and making
melody in the heart (and also with the voice) to the Lord, as his life is felt,
and the spiritual blessings and treasure received; all these, and whatever else
is judged necessary for the soul; are taught by this Witness of God in the
Conscience, as the Soul grows up in the Light, Spirit, Nature, and Holy Power
thereof.

But now, when the Lord reaches to his Witness in men, and is teaching their
hearts by it; then the Enemy, the other Spirit, whose seat is in the other
part, keeps a noise there, to overbear the voice of the Witness, and to make
men take up Religion in another part, which is shallow, and reaches not to the
depth and weight of truth, which is in the Witness of God, and which the
Witness of God gives to them that come thither.

Thus the Enemy stirs up Reasonings, Imaginations and Consultations about
God and his Worship, wherein he raises up the vain shallow mind, forging and
bringing forth somewhat pleasing and suitable to the earthly understanding,
taking up the mind therewith, and engaging the heart in some such practices
therefrom, as may quiet and satisfy that part in men. For the ways that men
take up in their reasonings and understandings, satisfy their reasonings and
understandings; and so they walk in the light of the sparks, and warm
themselves by the fire of their own kindling: But all this answers not the
Witness of God in them, nor will be approved by his Light in their own
Consciences, when it comes again to be revealed and made manifest in them.

This was the ground of the error both of the Jews and Gentiles.

The Gentiles were enlightened by God with his true light; what might be known
of God (suitable to their state and capacity) being manifested in them,
insomuch as it is witnessed concerning them in the Scriptures, (which are a
true record and testimony) That they knew God. But when they knew him, they
glorified him not as God, but became vain in their imaginations, and so their
foolish heart was darkened concerning him; and they worshipped him not as the
Witness taught them he was to be worshipped; not according to the manifestation
of his Light in them, but according to their own foolish imaginations and
reasonings, which taught them to make Images of him, and so to worship him in
and through creatures, according to their own inventions, which is not the true
worship, Romans 1. 21, 22, 23.

So likewise the Jews, not keeping to the manifestation of his Light within
them (to the Word or Commandment nigh in the mouth and heart, to which Moses
directed them) which would have taught and enabled them to have kept to the Law
of the Letter without them, they also ran into the Nature and Spirit of the
Heathen, and fell into imaginings and reasonings, which led them to worship
like them: Insomuch that they also changed their glory, into the image of an
Ox that eats grass, Psalm. 106. 20.

Now from this part in man arises all the uncertainty, and doubts and
dissatisfaction about Religion. And hence arise the Opinions, and Judgments,
and Reasonings in the minds of men. Yea, indeed the best of Men's Religion here,
is but an opinion or judgment, which the breath of God's Spirit will shake and
dissolve every where, sooner or later. All flesh is grass, and all the beauty
of men's Knowledge, Religion and Worship here, will wither like grass. All the
buildings and Churches that are raised here (how beautiful soever) are but
Babylon, built by man's understanding, by man's knowledge, by man's
comprehension, by man's wisdom, by man's skill, and indeed in man's will and
time: And their standing, beauty, strength and glory, is but from man, and in
man's day; and will fade away like a Flower.

But the true certainty is in the day of God, from the Light of his spirit
shining into man's spirit, from God's inward reaching to his heart by his
power, and testifying his truth there. And this all the powers of darkness
cannot prevail against in it self, no, nor against that man that is kept to it.
For it is the Rock (the only Rock) upon which the whole Church is built, and
which cannot fail to preserve every member of the Church, which is built upon
it.

Ye then, which would come to certainty in Religion, observe the way, which is
made manifest from God in this our day, blessed be his name, which is this:
Mind the Witness of God in thy heart, and come to, and build upon the Light
thereof. Dwell not in reasonings, take not up thy Religion in reasonings of the
mind; but pass through them, pass beyond them into a light of an higher nature.
Wait to know the birth which is from God, and the light which he gives to that
birth. What is the birth? Is not the birth of, and from the second Adam? And
what is the Heavenly birth's light? Is it not the light of the second Adam? Is
it not in nature and kind above the light of the first Adam? Where is the seat
of reasonings? Is it not the earthly mind, the fallen mind? Here lies man's
strength. Here is man's wisdom. Here is man's life. It is so indeed. But the
wisdom of Christ, the light of Christ, the life of Christ, the power of Christ,
is a cross to this; finds it in the enmity against God, crucifies it, slays it,
brings it to nothing; and he that will become wise as to God, must become a
Fool unto all this, a Child, a Babe, entering the Kingdom without this, and must
there remain naked as to this, and never put it on more.

Now observe (ye that have understanding and true sense) the difference between
the Religion which God has taught us, and led us into, and the Religions of
all men upon the Earth besides. Our Religion stands wholly out of that, which
all their Religion stands in. Their Religion stands in the Comprehension, in a
belief of a litteral relation or description. Our Religion stands in a
Principle, which changes the mind, wherein the Spirit of Life appears to,
and witnesses in the Conscience to and and concerning the things of the
kingdom; where we hear the voice, and see the express Image of the invisible
One, and know things not from an outward relation, but from their inward
nature, virtue and power. Yea, here (we must profess) we so know things, that
we are fully satisfied about them, and could not doubt concerning them, though
there had never been word or letter written of them: though indeed it is also a
great comfort and sweet refreshment to us, to read that testified of outwardly,
which (through the tender mercy of our God) we feel and enjoy inwardly. And in
this our whole Religion consists, to wit, In the silence and death of the
flesh, and in the quickening and flowing life of the spirit. For he who is of
the New Birth, of the New Creation, of the second Adam (the Lord from Heaven)
is as really alive to God, and as really lives to him in his spirit, as ever he
was really dead in trespasses and sins, in the time of his alienation and
estrangement from God.

Of Tenderness of Spirit, and Persecution.
He which is born of God, he who is of the Love, and dwells in the Love, cannot
but be tender. He who is born of the earthly Wisdom, who takes up and holds
forth a Religion there, cannot but persecute. Why so? Because he cannot but
judge, that any man may take up Religion as he has done, and so by reasonings
may come to acknowledge and take up, what he has taken up and holds forth, or
else he is wilful and stubborn, as he judges. But now, he that is born of God,
and has received his Light, Knowledge, Religion and way of Worship from him; He
knows that no man can rightly receive them, but the same way, to wit, from
God, by the Light which he causes to shine into the heart at his pleasure, and
in the Faith which he gives. So that God's free and powerful spirit is to be
waited upon, for the working of all in his people, and not any forced to act
beyond or contrary to the Principle of his Life and Light in them.

A Query concerning Separation.
Quer. Whether after the Apostasy from the Spirit, Life and Power of the
Apostles, and the getting up of the Antichristian state, Church and Worship,
there must not of necessity be a separation from all these, before there can be
a recovery of the Life and Power again, and of the true Churchstate, which was
brought forth in the days of the Apostles? Must there not be a perfect coming
out of the corrupt state (in the whole nature, several parts and degrees of it)
before there can be a restoration to and witnessing of the true and pure state?
Must not the Christians now come out of all the Antichristian Inventions and
Churches, as well as the Christians of old came out of all the Heathenish
worships, yea out of the Jewish worship and Church (which once was of God)
before they can become an holy building and habitation to God in the spirit?
Yea does not the same spirit, which cried to the people of God then, Come out
from among them, and be ye separate etc. call and cry now, Come out of her, my
people, out of Babylon, out of the false Church, out of all the Antichristian
buildings, which are reared up after the several forms and ways of men's
inventing, but out of the spirit, life and power, which alone is able to build
up in and unto the Lord? And what is that which cries out against separation,
in this day of the Lord's dividing and separating, but that spirit which would
hold back the soul, from being gathered to the Lord, in the Chains of darkness
and in the Land of death and confusion?

O that men knew that which divides and separates, and which is appointed by
God to divide and separate both inwardly and outwardly, and might feel the full
work and effect of it, even perfect separation from all that is not of God,
that so they might be joined to him and built up in him, who is the life, rest,
peace, joy and pure breath of the soul for ever! The word of God is quick and
powerful, sharper than any two-edged Sword, and what does it do? Why, it
separates between Nation and Nation, between Church and Church, between People
and People, between Cattle and Cattle, between Soul and Soul, yea between the
thoughts and intents of the same heart, owning and cherishing all that is of
the pure, and condemning and destroying all that is of the impure. And happy, O
for ever happy is he, who can witness the work of this word perfected in his
soul, even the Axe of the Lord powerfully laid to and having cut down all that
is corrupt in him, that the pure plant of God may flourish and bring forth
fruit in him in peace, without Annoyance or Interruption of the impure. Then
the River of Life as the Streams of everlasting Righteousness shall flow into
his vessel, and Jerusalem become in and to him a quiet habitation, and nothing
be able to hurt or destroy any thing of Life in him, who dwells in and abides
on the Mountain of God's Holiness. O blessed is the Race of Travelers, which
in the pure Light of the everlasting day are traveling thitherwards, even with
their hearts and faces faithfully bent toward Sion, which is the Holy,
Spiritual, Heavenly Hill of God! And blessed, O blessed for ever, is the Lord
God of Life and Power, who is the Faithful Guider, Leader and Conducter, of all
that follow the footsteps of the flock, in the way which is Pure, True, Living
and Everlasting.

Concerning the washing away of Sin from the Conscience, and the Garment of
Salvation, and what it is that is covered therewith.
There is somewhat appointed by God to wash away Sin, which is the Water of
Regeneration, the Water of Life, the Spirit's Water, and the Blood of the Lamb,
which are known, received and felt by Faith in the Light of the Spirit, wherein
alone his work is wrought.

Thus now, upon believing the Soul is washed. The Faith brings in or lets in
the Water and Blood, which cleanse and purge the Conscience from the Sin, which
before stained and defiled it: And according to the Faith, so is the Water and
Blood let in, and accordingly is the washing. And he that is baptized, he that
is washed by the spirit, comes out of the water clean, and watching to the
Light wherein he was purified, witnesses the powerful word of Life as able to
preserve in cleanness, as it was to cleanse.

But if there be not a watch to, and Faith in and single-hearted obedience to
that which purified and keeps pure, there is that near which will defile,
where it is hearkened to and let in, there is that which will tempt to lust and
sin, and so draw into darkness and death again. And if any man sin afterward,
sin defiles again, and the stain thereof will lie upon the Conscience, till by
Repentance and Faith the Water and Blood be let in again, and the cleansing
virtue from it received and restored again. So if But this is not the state of
them that sin wilfully after they have received the knowledge of the truth.
any man sin, there is an Advocate, an Intercessor, a divine Helper, one who
has the Water of Life and the Blood of Life to wash with. There is a Fountain
set open for Sin and for Uncleanness, for Judah and Jerusalem to wash
therefrom: But every defilement and pollution sticks, until it be washed off.

Now there are sins of several kinds. Some are easily remitted and washed off,
insomuch as the stain is hardly felt by the Soul, the tender Mercy and pure
Life does so readily and naturally flow over them. Some again are long held and
bound by the Spirit upon the Conscience, and often remembered to the heart which
is apt to backslide: Yea there is in some cases a severe judgment, and a long
waiting on the Lord for his mercy, and for his renewing and enlivening of
Faith, before the Water and Blood which washes can be again felt. For Faith is
not in a Man's power, nor Repentance neither; but they are given of God to whom
and when he pleases. And a man that is in part converted, may give ear to the
Enemy, and let in sin and death upon his soul: but he cannot repent again
presently, nor believe again presently, but as God breathes upon him, and
revives the work of Faith and Repentance in him.

There were Sins under the Old Covenant, and there are Sins under the New, or
against the Law of the New. The Sins of the Old Covenant did lie upon him that
committed them, until they were expiated according to the Law of the Old
Covenant. And Sins under the New Covenant lie also upon the Soul and
Conscience, until they be expiated according to the Law of the New Covenant,
which is until the Advocate interpose and plead with the Father, and give Faith
and Repentance to the Soul, and sprinkle upon the heart and conscience that
Water and Blood which has virtue in it to wash. And if it were not for this
after-washing (as I may so say) no man could be saved: But though he were once
washed, yet sinning again afterward he would die in his sins (and so under
Condemnation) unless he were again washed. O blessed be the name of the Lord
for the Water and Blood of the Covenant, and for his continual pouring them out
upon the souls of his, in the Light that is Eternal!

Now as men come to the truth as it is in Jesus, they will find their own
apprehensions about these things to have been but dreams, wherewith the Enemy
has fed and pleased them, while he has lulled them asleep in the Night of
Darkness, that he might the better steal away the true weighty knowledge of the
things of the Kingdom from them. Thus men have dreamed about Justification,
about Sanctification, about Regeneration, about Redemption, about Faith, Hope,
Love, Righteousness, Peace, Joy etc. And have been mistaken about them, missing
of that Power and Light whereby and wherein they are revealed and made
manifest. Now he that will rightly know these things, must know them in the
feeling and true experience: And therein he shall find all these are wrought in
a mysterious way of pure Life's operation, out of the reach of man's
comprehension; and that no Man can understand them, but as the New and Holy
understanding is given him; nor retain the sense and knowledge of them, but as
he abides in the new nature and retains the new understanding.

So for the Garment of Salvation; that is Christ, the righteousness of Christ,
the Nature of Christ, the Spirit of Christ. This is the holy covering. He that
puts on Christ, puts on this: He that wears Christ, wears this; he that appears
before God in Christ, appears in this. And the Soul puts on this, as it puts
off the other. It is the purified Soul, that only puts on him that is pure: And
as a man is cleansed from the impure, so only has he in him a capacity of
receiving and being clothed with Christ. And this now is the work of the true
Ministry, to wit, to preach the Word, to reveal the Word, and bring the Mind to
the Word (which changes it and begets the new capacity) and so to begin the
work of Life and reconciliation, wherein and whereby there is some unclothing
of the Old, and some clothing with the New; and so to carry on this work in the
Spirit and power of the Father, until it be perfected. And this is a blessed
work, and blessed is the Ministry which is called to and entrusted with this
work, being faithful in it: and blessed are they that witness the truth of and
receive the effect of this Ministry, and are subject to it in the Lord. For
through and under this Ministry, there is a receiving of a perfect gift in some
measure at first (wherein some true union and little acquaintance with the Lord
of Life is at first witnessed, and some operation of the Light and Power of his
Holy Spirit:) And a growing up in it unto perfection, as the Soul is exercised
by it, and faithful to the Lord in the exercise, under the daily Cross, which
daily works against and crucifieth in the Heart, Mind, Life and Conversation
what ever is contrary to God, as it is singly vvaited for, taken up and
subjected to.

Some Questions and Answers concerning the Church of the New Covenant, the Rock
or Foundation whereupon it is built, and its preservation by and upon the Rock.
With some Queries concerning the scattered estate of the true Church, and
concerning that Church which got up in its stead, and made a great show with
her Golden Cup, for the time while the true Church was scattered.
Qu. 1. What is the Church of God under the new Agreement or Covenant?

An. It is a company of Living Stones, quickened by God, and knit together in
the unity and fellowship of his Spirit, to worship God together in his Spirit,
and offer up unto him spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
What was the Church of the Old Covenant? Was it not the seed of Abraham, the
outward Jews, the Children of the Old Covenant? And what is the Church of the
New Covenant? Is it not the seed of God, the Jews inward, the Children of the
New Covenant?

Qu. 2. How are these Stones joined together?

An. By the Spirit of Life, which begets them all in one Nature, and knits them
together in that nature. By the inward circumcision, cutting off that which
causes Enmity and Disunion, and so fitting them to be made one New Lump in
Christ. By Christ's Baptism, which is the Baptism of Fire and of his Spirit,
which burns up the Old earthly Nature, and so Baptizes them into one New Living
Body, suitable and fitting to their Head, which is the Fountain of Life and
distributes Life through all the Body, according to its capacity, need and
service.

Qu. 3. Upon what is this Church built?

An. Upon the Rock or Foundation of God, which God has laid in his spiritual
Sion, which Rock is Christ For other Foundation can no man lay, than that which
is laid, which is Jesus Christ, nor other Rock did the Lord ever choose for his
Church to be built upon: Nor has any other Rock sufficient strength to bear up
the building, against the storms and stress of the powers of darkness, which it
often meets with, even every member in its travels; after it is once built on
the Rock, the Gates of Hell press hard upon it; but abiding on the Rock, it
feels the strength and preservation of the Rock. For as they cannot prevail
against Christ, so neither can they prevail against that which is built upon
him. But if there be a going forth from the strength and preservation, there is
a liableness to be made a prey. And the promise is not, absolutely and
perpetually to that Person or Congregation which is received or let into the
truth, but to that Person or Church which abides and continues in the truth
unto the end. The Jews were safe in the Faith and Obedience of their Covenant,
and the Christians or Christian Churches are not safe, but in the Faith and
Obedience of theirs. For if they walked not humbly with the Lord and in his
Fear, which keeps the heart from departing from him, and in the Faith whereby
they stand, they were to be cut off from their Church State, as well as the
Jews were from theirs, as the Apostle Paul expressly tells the Church at Rome,
Romans 11. 21, 22.

Qu. 4. What was Paul?

An. The Apostle of the Gentiles, who Labored abundantly, even more abundantly
than all the other Apostles, and has left more instructions, relating to the
Gentiles, than all the Apostles besides; and was tender of them, in standing
for and defending their liberty in Christ, when Peter a little warped and was
to be blamed, Gal. 2. 11. For indeed man cannot be certain and infallible,
further than he keeps to and is exercised by the certain and infallible
Spirit; which he is subject to be tempted to err from, further than he stands
upon the watch; and cannot but err from, unless he feel a continual
preservation in the Fear and by the Power of the Lord. And the certainty of
truth does not depend so much upon the person from whom it is received, as upon
the demonstration and evidence to the conscience wherein it is received. The
Apostles were not Lords over the true Christians Faith, but helpers of their
joy. And Christ did not require his Disciples to believe what ever he knew to
be true, but prepared their capacities, and dropped in according to their
capacities. And this is the way of the true Ministers, to wait on God to beget,
and on him again to Water the begotten Soul, and carry on his work in it: to
make them know Christ their Master, from whom they are to receive Light, Life,
Instruction and Direction; and to feel the Head, and be joined to the Head, and
receive from the Head their knowledge, as well the least as the greatest, Ebr.
8. What is Paul? What is Apollos? What is Cephas? Were not they carnal that
cried up these one above another? Yet the younger ought to be subject to the
elder, and all to be subject one to another in the truth, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

Qu. 5. What was Peter?

An. One of the Disciples of Christ, a precious Stone in the building (Joh. 1.
43.) one of the most eminent Apostles, even the chosen Minister to them of the
circumcision, as Paul was to the Gentiles. But he knew that Christ was the only
Rock or Foundation, as well as Paul, and that Christ alone was able to bear the
weight of that building, and to defend it against the Gates of Hell; and he
never had commission, nor can it be proved that ever he preached himself the
Rock, but he preached Christ the Foundation-Stone, the Rock of Offense, the
Rock of Defense etc. see 1 Pet. 2. 4. and v. 6, 7, 8. And if an Angel from
Heaven, or any Man or Church on Earth, so interpret any Scripture, as to hold
forth any such thing, that any else besides Christ is the Rock, they plainly
show that they are erred from the truth, and that their interpretation is of
their own private Spirit, and not that public Spirit, which all the Prophets
of God and Apostles and Truly-Holy men were guided by.

Qu. 6. Was the Church always to be a gathered Company? or was there a
possibility of their being scattered?

An. There was a possibility of their being scattered, yea a certainty, if they
grew corrupt in Doctrine and Practice, and kept not the Faith, Romans 11. For the
Lord God intended a pure building, a spiritual building, fit to offer the
spiritual Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2. 5. An Holy People, separated from the World, 2
Cor. 6. 17. In which he might dwell and walk, ver. 16. If therefore any Church
depart from the Spirit and Life and Power of the Apostles, and mix again with
the World, losing their own proper pale which fenced from the World, they soon
lose that which makes them a Church of God, and so become a Synagoge of Satan.

Now it is in my heart also to propound a few Queries concerning the scattered
and hidden estate and condition of the Church, and concerning that Church which
got up in the view of the World, and was acknowledged by the World instead
thereof afterward.

Q. 1. Whether the true Church did retain her Ministry outwardly, and her
outward Ordinances, and way of worship of the outward Court after her
scattering? or whether the false Church, which appeared in her room as if she
had been the true, caught up and appeared in the outwardness of these? The
grounds of this Querie are these following.

1. Because upon God's measuring of his Temple and Worshippers, the outward
Court (consider well what that is, and how far it extends) was left out of
God's measure, so that he intended to reckon it no longer as his but given by
him to the Gentile-Christians, such as were Christians or Jews in Name, but
Gentiles in Spirit and Nature, Rev. 11.

2. Because in the Last days, when that strange Generation of Christians was to
spring up, who should be Lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false-accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, Lovers of pleasures more
than Lovers of God: Yet these should have a form of Godliness, but deny the
power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 1, to 6. Now mind. The Temple, wherein was the Power,
God had removed with the true Worshippers; but the outward Court (wherein was
the appearance or some kind of a form of Church, Ministry and Ordinances) those
had got, and were found worshipping in it, in the midst of all this great
wickedness and abomination of spirit.

3. Because the Jews (who were the type) while they were in captivity in
Babylon, could not sing the Songs of Sion, nor had the Worship of the outward
Jerusalem there. And can the spiritual Jews, sing the spiritual Songs of
spiritual Sion, in mystery Babylon? No, there they are but witnesses to that
Life and Power, which the true Church enjoyed and flourished with, in her built
estate.

Q. 2. Whether this is not an infallible mark, and most certain demonstration
of the false Church, her sitting upon many Waters, which Waters are Peoples,
Multitudes, Nations and Tongues? Did not the Spirit of the Lord thus mark her
out to John, Rev. 17. 15. Did the true Church ever sit upon many Waters? Was
not the Church a gathering out of the Nations, into the Power and Life which
the Nations persecuted? But the false Church sits over the Nations with a form
of Godliness, but without the true Power thereof. Then if this be a mark that
God has set upon her, let every one wait to read it aright, that he may know
thereby which is she, and praise the name of the Lord for discovering her to
him.

Q. 3. Whether this false Church be not rightly called Babylon, even an heap of
confusion (in a mystery) as to God's eye, though to man's eye her appearance
may be orderly and decent? And whether she be not justly termed by the Spirit
of the Lord, the Great Whore, both for largeness in bulk, and for the greatness
of her fornications, having whored from the bed of the Husband, and entered into
the bed of a Stranger, and having taught and compelled others to acknowledge and
worship in her forms, which thus held forth and maintained by her, are not only
without, but also against the true Power?

Q. 4. Whether Antichrist be not entered into and become the head of this false
Church, and whether he does not sit there ruling in it, even as Christ was Head
of the True, and sat ruling in the True? And whether Antichrist does not keep
his hold of this Church, and possess his seat in it, for many Ages and
Generations, even from the time he got in after the days of the Apostles, till
the very coming of Christ in his Power and Brightness? 2 These. 2.

Q. 5. Whether the great Plagues, Woes, terrible Thunders and Cups of God's
Indignation, spoken of in the Book of the Revelations, are not to be poured, in
their several orders and degrees, upon this false Church, and upon Antichrist
her beloved Head and King, even till she be stripped naked, made desolate, and
her Flesh burnt with Fire, and her Head bruised and destroyed, by Christ the
true Head and King of the true Church?

Q. 6. Whether the people of God, such as feel somewhat of the Power, and bow
to the Lord in Spirit and Truth in some measure, yet these, if they mind not
his call out of this Babylon, and come not fully out of her, but abide in any
part of her, observing any of her ways or worships, till the time of God's
controversy with her and judging of her, whether they also shall not partake
of her Plagues? Rev. 18. 4.

Q. 7. Whether all people have not great reason to fear before the Lord, and to
look to their ways and worships lest they be found in any thing therein which
is not of him, but contrary to him, and so bring upon their Souls and Bodies
that wrath and sore Judgment from God, which they are not able to bear? Rev.
14. 9, 10, 11.

Q. 8. Whether it was not the great Love and Mercy of God, to warn the Churches
of these things in the Book of the Revelations? And whether he can be safe in
these respects, who either does not understand or not observe the warnings
given by the Spirit of the Lord therein? How often is it therein said; He that
has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit of God says to the Churches! It is
also said, Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: For the time is at
hand. He then that reads not, that has not an ear to hear the words of this
Prophecy, how can he keep what is written therein? How can he beware of and
avoid the seeming Beauty and Glory of the false Church, or suffer with the
Faithful Witnesses of God in their Testimony against her? And if he do not
thus, but is entangled by the false Church with her Golden Cup of Fornications
(Rev. 17. 4.) he misseth of the blessing, and ah what is he to meet with
instead thereof! My heart has often melted within me, and my bowels rolled at
the consideration and deep sense, which the Lord has given me of these things:
and this I say therein, to those that desire Life and Peace from God, O wait on
him for the eye which sees in his Light, for the ear which hears his Voice, and
for the heart which understands the words and messages of his Spirit, that ye
may feel his gathering, guidance and preservation out of that, to which his
wrath is for ever; and against which his wrath is to be made more manifest, and
poured out more fully and abundantly, than ever it yet was. For the Lord will
empty his Love and his Life into Sion, and empty the very dregs and thick
mixtures of the Cups of his Indignation into the very heart and bowels of
Babylon; and her sickness, misery, woe, death and destruction will be exceeding
dreadful and unutterable. Therefore wait on the Lord in fear and singleness of
Spirit, crying and mourning to him to discover to you the extent and limits of
this false Church, this false Building, this building in a form and outward
order without the Life and Power of the Spirit; and then fly as fast out of her
and from her (and as far) as the Spirit of the Lord leads, even till ye come to
the Holy building which is of him, and the Heavenly places which are prepared
there by him, for every one of his, (according to their growth and stature in
his Son) that ye may sit down in him.

Some Queries to Professors, who speak of high seize and experiences in
Religion, and yet do not witness nor can acknowledge the truth, as the Lord has
now revealed it (and done great things by it in the Spirits of his People) but
look upon it as a poor, mean and low thing.
Q. 1. Have ye known the great and terrible day of the Lord, wherein he arises
to shake terribly the Earth? And have ye known that shaken down in you, which
must be shaken down and removed as a Cottage, before the everlasting kingdom
can be estableshed in you?

Q. 2. Do ye know the Living, Powerful, Eternal Word, which is quick and
piercing, sharper than any two-edged Sword, dividing between Thought and
Thought, Grace and Grace (as I may so speak) Light and Light, Life and Life,
Spirit and Spirit, Power and Power etc? Have ye known it an Hammer, a Fire, an
Axe laid to the Root of the corrupt Tree? and do ye know the corrupt Tree?
Root, Branches, Leaves and Fruit so cut down by it, as to cumber the ground no
more?

Q. 3. Do ye know the Paradise of God, and the Tree of Life there? Do ye indeed
feed thereon? Have you passed through the Flaming Sword to the Tree of Life?
and is the Flaming Sword (which once fenced from Life and the Power thereof)
set now to fence up the way to the Tree of Knowledge, that ye may feed no more
thereon and dye, but feed only on that which is Life and gives Life, and so
live for ever?

Q. 4. Have ye witnessed the effects of the great and terrible day of the Lord
in your Spirits? Is Antichrist destroyed, the Whore burnt, Flesh consumed, Man
ceased from, both within and without? Is the Loftiness of Man bowed down in
you, the Mighty removed out of his seat, and the Meek, Holy, Humble seed raised
up to rule in Righteousness in your hearts? Is every high Tower battered down,
and every fenced Wall laid flat? are all your imaginations and conceivings, and
fleshly apprehendings upon Scriptures, yea every pleasant Picture and Image of
the things in Heaven (formed in your minds) brought to an end, and the pure
living truth of the Father waited for, received from him, and lived in? Yea is
the Lord alone exalted in your Spirits, and all other Dominion, Authority, Rule
and Lordship put under?

Q. 5. Do ye know the Mountain of the Lord's House, and the Lord's House built
and established by his own Holy Spirit and Power upon his own Holy Mountain?
and do ye worship the Lord alone therein? Do ye come up to the New-Jerusalem to
offer your sacrifices there according to the institution of the Gospel? And do
ye worship the Lord there on his own Day, which he has spiritually made? And
do ye bear no burden, kindle no fire, do no work on that his Day? Do ye never
warm your selves at any fire, or by any sparks of your own kindling? Or are ye
yet worshipping upon some of the many Mountains and Hills, which the Lord has
not formed nor established, but have been formed and set up by Man in the Night
of Darkness, before the everlasting Light of the Day brake forth?

Q. 6. Do ye know the Wilderness, through which the passage is from Egypt to
Canaan, and have ye faithfully traveled in the leadings of God's Spirit
therethrough, and are ye entered into the pure rest thereof? Are ye not under
the Law, but under Grace? Not under the Enemy's power, but under the Spirit's
power, out of the other's reach, so that the wicked one cannot touch you? Have
ye gone through the exercises and trials of the Wilderness? Have ye fed on the
Manna dropped down from Heaven upon your Spirits therein? Have ye drunk of the
Water of the Rock? Have ye seen the Serpent lifted up, and felt the healing
thereby? Have ye witnessed the Pillar of Cloud by Day, and the Pillar of Fire
by Night to be your Defense and Leader? And have ye now at length received the
Kingdom of Life, and sit under the shadow of it, drinking Water out of your own
Cistern, and eating under your own Vine and Figtree the Fruits of the good
Land, after the shaking of that which was to be shaken, now being come to and
enjoying the Kingdom which cannot be shaken? Have ye really felt these things,
or have ye been in the Dreams and Imaginings about them?

Q. 7. Do ye walk in the Light of the Lord (as the Spiritual House of Jacob is
to do?) Have ye received the Spirit? Do ye live in the Spirit? are ye truly
united, so as to become one Spirit with the Lord? Are all the walls of
partition broken down, and is there nothing now between you, but of two are ye
made one in that which uniteth?

If it be thus with you, then hold forth the right hand of fellowship to those
whom the Lord has brought hither, and know and acknowledge that whereby the
Lord has wrought it in them. But if ye be not really in the thing it self, but
only in the apprehensions and conceivings about it, ye can never so be
witnesses concerning these things, nor concerning the truth whereby God works
these things: and ye will find there is a great gulf between you and us, which
ye cannot possibly pass over, till ye meet with our Principle and Guide, and
Faithfully travel with him in the footsteps of the Flock, that ye may come to
the Shepherds Tents (even the Tents which the Shepherd pitcheth, and which no
man can pitch) and may know the true Tabernacle, Sanctuary and Temple, whereof
he is the Minister.

THE END

