CONCERNING The SUM or SUBSTANCE OF OUR RELIGION, Who are called QUAKERS, And
the Exercises and Travels of our Spirits therein.
THis is the Sum or Substance of our Religion, to wit, to feel and discern the
two Seeds: the Seed of Enmity, the Seed of Love; the Seed of the Flesh, the
Seed of the Spirit; the Seed of Hagar, the Seed of Sarah; the Seed of the
Egyptian womb, the holy Seed of Israel: and to feel the Judgments of God
administered to the one of these, till it be brought into bondage and death; and
the other raised up in the Love and Mercy of the Lord to live in us, and our
Souls gathered into it, to live to God in it.

Now when the Light of Gods holy Spirit breaks in upon man, and his quickening
virtue is felt; then life enters into that which was slain, and there is a
desire begotten in the heart to travel out of the Egyptian state, into the good
Land; that the Soul which came from God, might return back again to him (out of
the sinful, wandering, miserable, lost estate) and might live and walk with
him, in the purity, virtue and power of his own Life and Spirit.

But then the other birth strives for its life, and Pharaoh (the King of Egypt)
takes part with his Egyptians against Israel; and there is no help to the poor
soul, but as God pour out his Judgments upon that hard nature and spirit in
man, which is of the Birth of the Flesh, and receives the influences and
strength of its father, which harden it against the true Seed. And now what a
condition is this poor Soul in! The Light of Gods Spirit gives it the sense of
its state, and the quicknings of Life make it sensible of its bondage, there
are also some desires and longings after deliverance: but this does but provoke
the Enemy, and the Soul being yet in his Territories, and under his power, he
deals the more hardly with it, increasing its burdens and oppressions daily.
And O the outcries of the Soul in this state! how is its spirit pained,
anguished and vexed within it, so that it could almost many times choose rather
to lie still in Egypt then undergo the heavy burdens, oppressions, fears and
dangers, that it daily meets with in this state.

Yet there is a Secret hope, springing up in the heart from the true Seed,
which often encourages it to trust him, and wait upon him who has visited, in
his pure ministration of Judgment. For this is felt many times (as the Soul is
made truly sensible by the Lord) that the Judgment is not to the Seed, not to
Israel; but to Pharaoh and his Egyptians: and by every stroke of Gods Wrath
upon them, the Seed is eased, and its deliverance working out.

And so at last when the Judgment is finished in the Land of Egypt, the
strength of Pharaoh and his Egyptians broken, their firstborn slain, out comes
Israel, out of the Dark Land, out of the House of Bondage, to travel toward
its resting place. Then the Paschal Lamb is known and fed on; yea, it is
because of the Blood of the Lamb, sprinkled upon the Door-posts, that Israel is
passed over and saved, in the day of Egypts visitation, O who can read this
truly, that has not felt and been a living Witness thereof!

But now, when the seed is come out of Egypt, there is not the end, but rather
the beginning of its Travels. Pharaoh and his Egyptians (with their Horses and
Chariots) may pursue again and even overtake; and there may seem no way of
escape or help to the Soul, but only to stand still, hope in the Lord and wait
to see his Salvation. Then shall the Sea be divided, which stopped Isreal's
course, and Pharaoh with his Egyptians (the Enemies of the Soul in this
appearance of dreadful oppressing power) be destroyed and seen no more.

Yet in the Wilderness in the passage through the entanglements to the holy
Land, there are many straits, trials and sore Enemies to be met with, who will
strive by open force and also with enchantments to betray Israel: yea there is
a part yet unbrought down, yet unwrought out, at which they will be striving to
enter the mind. And as Israel forgets his God, walking out of his Counsel,
harkening to that which his ear should be shut against, and so joining to the
contrary Seed; the Plagues, the Judgments, the Indignation and Woe will be felt
by him, and many Carkases may fall there. So that there may be a great outcry
in the heart, Who can stand before this holy Lord God? shall we be consuming
with dying? yes, there is somewhat must be consumed with dying. Yea, if a man
came so far, as to witness dominion and victory over his Souls Enemies, the
evil Seed brought into death in him, and a possession and inheritance in the
pure rest of Life: yet if that part be not kept in the death, if there be not a
praying and watching to the Preserver of Israel (in the pure fear and humility)
the Enemy will be sowing to the Flesh again; he will be getting some of his
corrupt Seeds into the heart again (if the Soul do but sleep and become
negligent) and so corruption will take root again, and the contrary Birth grow
up again, and the Foxes break into the Vineyard and spoil the tender grapes.

So that this is our Religion, to witness the two Seeds, with the Power of the
Lord bringing down the one, and bringing up the other: and then to witness and
experience daily the same Power, keeping the one in Death and the other in
Life, by the holy ministration of Gods pure living Covenant. And so, to know
God in this Covenant (in this Covenant which lives, gives Life and keeps in
Life) and to walk with God and worship and serve him therein, even in his Son,
in the Light of his Son, in the Life of his Son, in the virtue and ability
which flows from his Son into our Spirits, This is our Religion, which the Lord
our God in his tender mercy has bestowed upon us: And indeed we find this to
be a pure, living and undefiled Religion before God, daily witnessing his
acceptance of it in and through his Son, whose Name is here known and
confessed, worshipped and honored, according to the very heart of the Father.

This may be further illustrated, and perhaps made more manifest to some, by a
Scripture or two.

The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and
these are contrary one to the other, says the Apostle, Gal. 5.17.

Here are the two Seeds (the Seed of the Serpent, the Seed of the woman) whose
striving and fight is in man, when God awakens the Soul, the one whereof has a
nature, a desire or lust contrary to the other. Now as the one of these
prevails in any heart; so the other goes down. As the one gains Life and Power:
so the other is brought into Death and Captivity. So that this is it every one
is to wait for, after they once come to the sensible knowledge and experience
of these two, to feel the Flesh brought down, the lusts of it denied, the
Judgments of the Lord administered to it; that so the other may come up to live,
thrive and prevail in the Soul, and so the Soul witness Salvation and
Redemption under its shadow. Thus Sion is Redeemed with Judgment, and her
Converts with Righteousness, Isa. 1.27. What is Sion? Is it not the holy hill
of God, whereon his Son is set King to reign, whereon the holy City is to be
built, and God to be worshipped in Spirit: what condition is Sion in, when God
visits her to redeem her? Is she not laid wast, desolate, lying in the dust:
(as Psalm. 102.13, 14.) Well: how will God redeem her? Zion shall be redeemed
with Judgment, and her Converts with Righteousness. By bringing Judgments upon
that which keeps her under, upon her Enemies, the contrary Seed, God redeems
her: and by bringing forth Righteousness (the righteous Life and Spirit of his
own Son) in those whose minds are turned to her, whose faces are set Sion-ward,
thus God redeems her Converts. Yes, yes; it is truly felt and witnessed, The
living Righteousness of Christ, revealed in the heart and having power there,
sets free from all the unrighteousness which was there before. And then, when
the unrighteous one is cast out, and the righteous one revealed, and the Soul
united to him and receives virtue and power from him; then he becomes a Servant
of righteousness, and does not commit sin, but does righteousness: and he that
does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous, 1 John 3.7. For how
can it be otherwise, when the righteous Life is revealed and brought up into
dominion in him? How can the same righteous Spirit and Life (revealed in the
members, as was in the head) bu^ live and act after the same manner in the
members, as it did in the head? (O that men were turned to that, which would
give them the certain knowledge and sensible experience of this!) Now this is
exceeding comfortable and precious to them that are in the true travel toward
it: much more to them that enjoy it.

This is the sum of all, even to know and experience what is to be brought down
into death, and kept in death, what to be brought up out of the grave, to live
to God and reign in his dominion, and what to be kept in subjection and
obedience to him who is to reign. Now to experience it thus done in the heart;
the Flesh brought down, the Seed of Life raised, and the Soul subject to the
pure heavenly Power, whose right it is to reign in the heart in and by the
Seed, this is a blessed state indeed. For here the work is done: here the
Throne of God is exalted, and his King reigns in righteousness and peace, and
all his Enemies are under his feet; and this Soul* this true Israelite, this
redeemed one may wear the white Robe, and serve God in righteousness and
holiness without fear of his Enemies (keeping in and to the Covenant, which
ministers Life and Power abundantly) all the days of his life. For that was to
be the outward state of the outward Israel, keeping to God in the outward
Covenant: and it is to be the inward state of the inward Israel, keeping to God
in the inward Covenant, which is a pure Covenant of Life and Peace, of all
inward and spiritual blessigs and mercies in Christ, wherewith the Souls are
blessed that are obedient to God, and walk humbly with him in this Covenant.
And I beseech you to consider (O tender people, who are grieved because of sin
and corruption in your hearts, and would fain witness victory and dominion over
it, in the Name and Strength of the Lord Jesus Christ) Whom did that Prophecy
of Zachary (Luke 1.71, 72, 74, 75.) concern? What was that holy Covenant? who
were to be so redeemed? who were the Israel that was to inherit this promise?
All the Promises are yea and amen in Christ to the Israel of God. Why should
not the Israel of God hope to enjoy this? even so to be acquainted with Gods
holy Spirit and to wait upon him, that they may witness it granted to them,
that they being delivered out of the hands of their Enemies, might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him (whose eyes are
piercing, and can behold no iniquity) all the days of their lives? Surely they
who witness that promise (mentioned Isa. 35.8) fulfilled to them, cannot fall
short of this. And truly, the Children of the new Covenant can never come
thoroughly to live to God, till they witness the inward circumcision of the
heart, so as to love the Lord with all the heart and soul, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Now,
where it is so, the Devil or Lust can find no place of entrance: and how then
should they be able to sow their Seed and bring forth sin? Out of the evil
heart proceeds all evil: but out of that heart which is thoroughly circumcised,
to love the Lord God wholly, evil cannot proceed. If Lust be not conceived, it
cannot bring forth Sin: and where the womb, which conceived it, is kept dry and
barren, it cannot conceive again. And is not this the Promise of the Gospel,
that the womb, which was once barren, shall be very fruitful and bear
abundantly; but the other grow feeble, and be able to bear no more? O that
people had experience of Gods power, and did believe therein! what should stand
in the way of it? It was Isreal's sin of old, when they looked at their Enemies,
and saw their footing and strength in the Land which God had promised to
Abraham's Seed for an Inheritance, they could not believe that they could be
overcome. O take heed of the same unbelief now.

Concerning Christ, coming to the Father by him, receiving him, walking in him
(not in the oldness of the letter, but in the newness of the Spirit) and
concerning reading the Scriptures aright.
I am the Way, the Truth and the Life: no man comes unto the Father but by me,
says Christ, Joh. 14.6.
MAn in the corrupt, degenerate estate, is fallen from God, has lost his Image
(the holy, heavenly Image of the Father of Spirits) is driven out from his
presence, dwells in the Land of darkness and confusion, under the Government of
the Prince of the power of the Air, who rules in and has power over all the
Children of Disobedience.

Now this should be man's work, even to return to the Father: to come back, out
of the prodigal lost state, to the Fathers house; where there is sufficiency
and fullness of true Bread and Water of Life, to satisfy every hungry and
thirsty Soul.

The Way whereby a man must come, the Truth wherein he must be renewed, the
Life wherewith a man must be quickened, is Christ, the Son of the living God:
and he must know him as the Son of the living God, and feel him revealed in him
and received by him, and so walk in him the Way, in him the Truth, in him the
Life, if ever he come to the Father. He must not rest in the description of
things; but feel and know, receive and walk in the thing, which by the Spirit
of the Lord has been often formerly and is still described, in what words and
by what means the Spirit pleases. But to receive all the descriptions of him
that were formerly given forth, or all the descriptions that are now given
forth, that will not do: but the soul that will live by him, must receive him
and feel the ingrafting into him, the holy Root, the living Word of Gods
eternal Power, and must feel this Word ingrafted into his heart, so that there
be a real becoming one in nature and spirit with him. And then he is truly in
the Vine, in the Olive Tree, and partakes of the virtue and sap thereof, he
abiding therein and walking in the Spirit, Life and Power thereof.

Now here a man walks not, nor cannot walk in the oldness of the Letter; but in
the newness of the Spirit only. Paul, notwithstanding all his knowledge of the
Scriptures, walked but in the oldness of the Letter, before Christ was revealed
in him. And those in the Apostles days, who had got the form of godliness, but
turned from and denied the power, they walked but in the oldness of the Letter.
Yea, the Church of Sardis (for the most part) and the Church of Laodicea, who
had received the right order and ordinances, and the true descriptions of
things, and thought they were full and rich and wanted nothing, they walked but
according to the oldness of the Letter, and not in the newness and power of the
Spirit of Life. But alas, how far are many (who pretend to Christ in this day)
from this state! who never came so far as to walk in the oldness of the Letter,
from a true understanding thereof; but have only learned and continued to walk
in the oldness of their own apprehensions and conceivings upon the Letter.

Can these, in this state, possibly understand Truth, or know the inward
spiritual, precious appearances thereof, either in their own hearts or others?
Surely no. Why so? Why this is the reason; because the measure the appearances
of Truth (either in themselves or others) by their own old apprehensions and
conceivings upon Scriptures concerning Truth, which is not the proper measure
of it. Now all such are yet in darkness, let them pretend what they will, and
grow never so high in knowledge, exercises and experiences after this manner:
and so the best, zealousest and most knowing of them in this state, are but
blind leaders of the blind, and (thus going on) shall most certainly fall into
the Ditch of perdition. O that men could feel that which makes rightly
sensible, and might lay it to heart! For no man can confess Christ (how then
can he receive him and walk in him?) but by the holy Spirit.

And he that knows not the Spirit rightly, knows not Christ rightly: and he
that does not know him rightly, does not confess him rightly: and none can know
him rightly, but by the revelation of the Father inwardly. The mystery must be
opened within, or there is no true knowing. The mystery of deceit is discovered
within; and the mystery of Life is discovered within also. And though the heart
of man (in the unregenerate estate) is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, and no man of himself can search or know it: yet that is
not the state of the true Israelites whom God has cleansed, and taught to deny
themselves daily; but they have boldness before that God who has searched
them, and removed from them the iniquities which he found therein. Yea, whoever
witnesses Christ revealed within, shall find him revealed within for this very
end, to destroy the works of the Devil there: and he is a powerful Savior of
the Soul from sin, and a powerful Destroyer of the works of the Devil within.

Now concerning reading the Scriptures, mind this. It is said of the Jews, that
when they read Moses (or in reading the old Testament) the vail was upon their
heart, which vail is done away in Christ, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15. O consider
seriously, is the vail done away from thee? Do thou read the Scriptures with
the unvailed eye? do thou read in the Anointing, in Christ's Spirit, in the
pure heavenly Wisdom of the divine Birth? It was promised of old, that God
would take away the face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail
spread over all Nations. Do thou witness this Promise fulfilled to thee? Do
thou know the difference between reading the Scriptures with the vail on thee,
and with the vail off? Are the Scriptures opened and unlocked to thee by the
Key of David, so that thou read and understandest them in the Light and
Demonstration of Gods holy Spirit; or is thy own understanding and will at work
of it self, in searching into the Scriptures? If the wrong birth, the wrong
wisdom, the wrong understanding be at work; it can gather but that which will
feed and strengthen it self: and if thou be not in Christ, and do not read
in Christ, the vail is not taken away from thee: (for the vail is only done
away in him:) but thou read and walk in the oldness of thy apprehensions
upon the Letter, and not in the newness of the Spirit; and so know neither
the Scriptures nor the Power of God, what ever thou professest to men, or
dreamest concernning thy self. For it is no other indeed: Thy knowledge, thy
apprehensions, thy faith, thy hope, thy peace, thy joy (being out of the
compass of the pure living Truth, in which the Substance, the virtue, the
kernel of all is comprised and comprehended for ever) are but as so many dreams.

O that men that are any whit tender, and have any sincere desires in them
toward the Lord, could read that one Scripture ( Psalm 43.3, 4.) sensibly and
experimentally. O send out thy Light and thy Truth; let them lead me, let them
bring we unto thy holy Hill and to thy Tabernacles. (what, did not David know
how to go to the Hill and Tabernacles of God, without a particular sending
forth of Light and Truth from God to lead him thither?) Then may men go unto
the Altar of God, unto God their exceeding joy, and witness his Hill and House
their dewlling place, when God by his Light and Truth, send forth from him into
them, leads them thither.

The Scriptures are words, whose chief end, drift and service is, to bring men
to the Word from which the Scriptures came. And when men are there; then they
are in the Life of the Scriptures, and witness the fulfilling of the
Scriptures, even the executing of the righteous judgments of God upon that
spirit, mind and nature in them, which is contrary to his image; and the
fulfilling of the Promises and sure Mercies, which belong to Christ the Seed,
and to them who are gathered into, and abide in Christ the Seed. Here Is the
Covenant, the new Covenant. That which is said, or those things which are said
concerning the Covenant in the Scriptures, are but descriptions of the new
Covenant: but Christ within, the Hope of glory, the Spirit within, the Fear
within, the Power of Life within, breaking down and reigning over the power of
sin and death (so that the Lord is served in the dominion and power of his own
Life, in righteousness and holiness before him, out of the fear of sin and
death, all the days of our lives; so that captivity can lead captive nor break
the Souls peace no more, nay not so much as make afraid those, that keep their
Habitation on Gods holy Mountain) Here is the Covenant indeed: the strength and
virtue whereof is witnessed in the Soul, as the Soul feels the power of Life
revealed in it, and is made subject by the power to Christ who reigns in
righteousness, love, mercy and peace, in the hearts of those whom he redeems
out of the earthly nature and spirit, up to the Mind and Spirit of his Father.
And here the Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs, the pure Songs, (the Song of
Moses, the Song of the Lamb) are sung to the Father of Spirits, to the Redeemer
of Israel, which never were sung, nor can be sung in any part of Babylon: but
all those Songs are but Dreams of the night, which will be turned into howling
and bitter lamentation, when the Whore (that which has whored from God, and is
not in the Wisdom of his Spirit, what ever she may pretend) is stripped, and
the nakedness of her Profession and Religion (with all her Duties and
Ordinances, as she calls them) made manifest.

Concerning the Gospel Ministration.
IF the Gospel be not a Ministration of Words or Letter; but of Spirit, Life
and Power; and if it was the intent of God, that men should not stick in Words
or Testimonies concerning the thing, but come to the thing it self, and live in
the Sons Life and Power, and feel the Son living in them: Then they are greatly
mistaken, who think to gather a Rule to themselves out of the Testimonies and
Declarations of things in the Scriptures, and do not wait upon the Lord to
receive the Spirit it self to become their Rule, Guide and Way. For these are
all, one. The Truth is the Way. The Truth, which lives and abides in the heart
(where it is received and entertained) is the Way: the Rule is the Guide. For
God is one. There are many names, but the thing is one. The Life, the Power,
the Wisdom in the Father, Son and Spirit, is all one: yea they themselves are
one, perfectly one, not at all divided or separated; but where the Father is,
the Son is; and where the Son is, the Spirit is; and where the Spirit is, there
is both the Father and the Son, who tabernacle in man in the day of the Gospel.
And where these are, there that is which is to be preferred before all words,
which was before them, and is in Nature, Spirit and Glory above them. He that
has the Son, has Life, even the Life Eternal, which the words testify of. He
that has the Son, has him which is true: and he that is in the Son, is in him
that is true; and abiding there, cannot be deceived: but he that is not there,
is deceived, let him apprehend and gather out of the Scriptures what he can. O
how is God glorified, and how is Redemption and real Salvation of the Soul
witnessed in this despised Dispensation of Truth, which God has held forth in
these latter days! Blessed be the Name of the Lord, who has hid this pure
Dispensation of Life from the eye of the prudent, worldly wise part in every
man, revealing it only to the babish simplicity which is of his Son, and which
lives in him and by him.

Concerning Christ's being manifested without, and his being also manifested
within, and how both are owned by them that know the Truth.
IT is objected against us, who are called Quakers, That we deny Christ (and
look not to be saved by him) as he was manifested without us, but look only to
be saved by a Christ in us. To which this is in my heart to answer to such as
singly desire satisfaction therein.

We do indeed expect to be saved (yea and not only so, but do already in our
several measures witness Salvation) by the revelation and operation of the Life
of Christ within us; yet not without relation to what he did without us. For
all that he did in that Body of Flesh, was of the Father, and had its place and
service in the Will and according to the Counsel of the Father. But the
knowledge and belief of that, since the days of the Apostles, has been very
much held in the unrighteousness, and in the separation from the inward work of
the Power and Life of Christ in the heart: which, as so held, cannot save any.
But whoever feels the Light and Life of Christ revealed in him, and comes into
union with God therethrough; he feels the work of Regeneration, of
Sanctification, of Justification, of Life and Redemption; and so comes to reap
benefit inwardly, and to partake of the blessed fruits of all that Christ did
outwardly. Yea, he that is thus one with Christ in the Spirit, cannot exclude
himself, nor is excluded by God from the advantage of any thing, nor every
thing Christ did in that Body of Flesh.

This indeed is the main thing, to witness Salvation wrought out in the heart:
to witness the eternal Power and Arm of the Lord, laying hold on the Soul to
save it; and not only laying hold on it to save it, but to witness the working
out and the effecting of the Salvation, as really in the Substance, as Israel
of old did in the shadow. For as they witnessed Moses and Joshua outwardly: so
the true Israelite (the inward Israelite, the spiritual Israelite) is to
witness that which is the Substance of these, even the Son of God revealed
inwardly. Now they were not saved outwardly by a bare outward believing, that
Moses and Joshua were sent of God to save them: but by following them, in faith
and obedience to what from God they required. So to the inward Israel Christ is
given for a Leader and Commander, who appears to the distressed, embondaged
Soul in Egypt, brings out of Egypt, and so leads on toward the good Land and
into it. Now, as the Soul follows; as the Soul believes in his Appearances, and
obeys his voice in the holy pure Covenant of Life; so he works out the
Redemption thereof. But as unbelief and disobedience gets up, and the heart is
heardened at any time against his Voice and Counsel, and the ear open to the
temptations of the Enemy; the Redemption thereby goes backward, and the
distress and captivity returns again. This is witnessed, known and experienced
by every true Traveller toward Sion. therefore the main thing requisite, is to
abide in the sense of the Redeemers Power, as also in waiting for his motions
and appearances, and in the Faith and Obedience thereof. For sin gathers
strength and is brought forth, by letting in and giving way to the motions
thereof: and so also Holiness and Righteousness is brought forth and gets
ground in the mind, by hearkening and giving up to the stirrings and movings of
Gods holy Spirit. Therefore it is of great necessity to every true Traveller,
to come to a right* understanding and distinguishing of these: and then that
the heart be kept with all diligence, because out of it are the issues both of
life and death. And most happy is he, who knows the issues of death stopped,
and the issues of Life opened, and whose spirit is naked and open before the
Lord, for Life to spring up in him and issue forth through him at its pleasure.
O it is a precious state to witness Captivity let Captive by Life, and the
power of Life reigning over it. And truly, there is as real deliverance
witnessed inwardly, by those that wait upon the Lord and are faithful to the
leadings of his holy Spirit, as ever there was by the Jews outwardly, in their
faithful following Moses and Joshua: and Christ is as truly an Healer of his
People, in this ministration of Life to them by his holy Spirit, as ever he was
an Healer of Persons outwardly in the days of his Flesh. That (with the other
Miracles which he wrought then) was but a shadow of what he would work and
perform inwardly in the day of his Spirit and holy Power: and shall he or can
he (to those that faithfully wait upon him) fall short in the one, of what he
shadowed out in the other? Nay surely, it was the intent of his heart, and he
will not fail to perform it, to save to the very utmost all that come to God by
him and abide in his holy, pure, righteous, living Covenant. Here is the skill
of Christianity, to abide in him: and here the living Virtue and pure Power is
felt, which overcomes all, but nothing can overcome it; but Victory, Dominion,
Glory, Majesty and Power is sung unto him, who is King of Saints, who reigns in
righteousness, and who establishes Peace and Truth within his Borders.

A few words concerning the Principle of Truth, what it is, how it may be
discerned, and how it may be purchased and possessed.
QUest. 1. What is the Principle of Truth?

Answ. It is the Light which reproves and makes sin manifest. Whatsoever does
make manifest is Light. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, arise
from the dead, etc. Ephesians. 5.13, 14. There is no other way of awaking out of
sleep and arising from the dead, but by the Light which makes sin manifest. And
O how precious is that Light!

Quest. 2. How may the Principle of Truth be discerned?

Answ. By its piercing, quickening nature, which discovers it self in its
appearances and operations. For it appears and works, not like man's reason, or
like motions of his mind which he takes into his understanding part: but it
appears and works livingly, powerfully and effectually in the heart.

Man's reason is corrupt, dark, impure, since the fall; and in the hand and
under the power of the wicked one. Its nature is to hide and cover sin, not to
discover it. Now the Light of the Law, which discovers sin, arises not hence.
Who can bring the clean, pure Light of the Law, out of the unclean, impure
reason of man? The Light indeed may shine in the Darkness: but it is no part of
it, but of another nature and descent. It is from Gods Spirit, and given to man
in his love unto him, to lead him out of his dark ways and spirit, into the
pure Spirit and Way of Holiness. For the Light which discovers sin, is all holy
and pure, like the Fountain from whence it comes. Now a man that is acquainted
both with reason and with this Light, he can distinguish the nature and
operations of both. For there is a great difference between Truth held in the
reasoning part, and Truth held in its own Principle. It is very powerful in
the one: it effects little in the other. In the pure quicknings of Life this
distinction is perceived and also held. Therefore our advice is to all men, to
retire from all mortality, that they may come to feel the Spring of Life in
themselves (and something springing therefrom into them to quicken them) and to
wait to have their understandings opened and kept open by that; that so they
may receive, retain, and not again lose the capacity of understanding the
things of Gods King^^^.

Quest. 3. How may this Principle ^^eed or Pearl) be purchased and possessed?

Answ. By dying to a man's own wisdom and will. There is not another way. For
the Light is wholly contrary to man, as he stands in the alienation from God.
It crosses his spirit, his thoughts, his desires, his knowledge, his reason,
his understanding; even all that is of himself. He must therefore consult with
none of these, but prefer the little, pure Demonstration of the Light of
Christ's Spirit above all these, and stand in the parting with and loss of them
all for ever. O this is an hard saying, who can bear it? Surely none but those
that are taught and learn of the Father, can thus come to give up to and follow
the Light of the Son.

The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting (or restoring) the Soul (Psalm.
19.7.) What Law was this, or what Law is this? Was it the Law of works in the
hand of Moses? or is it the Law of Faith in the hand of Christ? Does not Christ
enlighten every man that comes into the World? Would not God have all men to
be saved? and does he not give to all, a proportion of the true Light whereby
they may be saved? And is it not the property of this Light to convert to God?
Can any man receive this and be united to this, and it not change his nature?
so that he must needs have a new nature, and from that new nature do that
naturally, which the Jews by all their endeavors without this, could never do.

Can any thing convert fallen man to God, but Christ? has any thing power to
convert to God, but his pure Law of Life? Can Christ and his Light be
separated? Can any man receive his Light and be united thereto, and not receive
him? O that men's hearts and understandings were opened by the Spirit and Power
of the Lord! For this is a direct riddle to all men, who have not Gods Heifer
to Plow with, to understand it by. And so for want of a true understanding, it
is despised and rejected among the Builders: but with us it is elect and
precious, chosen of God, and precious in the eye of our Souls.

Now this does not exclude or make void any thing, that Christ did in his Body
of Flesh here on Earth, or that he does in Heaven for his: but this brings unto
a Right, and into a Possession and Enjoyment of his Purchase. For all that are
in the Darkness, and walk in the Darkness, have nothing to do with Christ in
truth and reallity, what ever they may profess, and what hopes soever they may
feed themselves with: but all that are in any measure of his Light, and walk
therein; they are so far of him* and have a right to and share in all that he
did in and from the same Light and Spirit.

And this I dare positively hold forth as a standing Truth, which has been
sealed unto me by constant experience; That no man can fall in with and obey
the Light wherewith he is enlightened, but he must deny himself, and take up a
cross to his own wisdom and will, which Cross is the Cross of Christ, which is
the Power of God to the Salvation of the Soul. And he that takes it up daily
and waits upon the Lord therein, shall witness the Power of the Lord Jesus
Christ to the redeemption of his Soul: yea then he shall be able in true
understanding to say, This is Light indeed, Life indeed, Power indeed. That
powerful Arm which has saved me from Sin, and breaks the Snares, Devices and
Strength of the Enemy before me (delivering me daily when none else can, and
when my own strength and wisdom is as nothing) I cannot but call Christ, the
living Power and Wisdom of God revealed in me, who will not give his glory to
another. For he is the Lord God of pure Power and Life for evermore; and beside
him there is no such Savior. Yea, blessed be the Name of the Lord for ever,
the days of mourning after Salvation are over with many, and the days of
reaping and enjoying Salvation are come, which shall endure with the Israel of
God for evermore, Amen

Isaac Penington.

THE END.

