Some Considerations proposed to this distracted nation of England concerning
the present design and work of God therein, upon their submitting whereto does
their Settlement alone depend, and not upon any form of Government, or change
of Governors, as that Spirit which seeks their ruin, tempts them to believe.
1. THAT God in great mercy, brake the bands of the Romish yoke, which lay hard
upon the neck of this Nation, and was very weighty upon those consciences,
wherein the true reforming light did arise in any measure; and who were in any
measure true to that light, which the Lord caused to break in upon them.

2. That the reformation out of Popery, was not presently perfected (nay was
never yet perfected) but was very weak and low, many things therein savouring
very much of Popery, (the Nation being hardly able to bear at that time what
was done,) so that there were many things, still continuing which could not but
be burdensome to the upright-hearted, and to the tender consciences, as the
light which began their reformation, did grow and increase in them.

3. That the Lord God (who in such great mercy had delivered this Nation from
the yoke of Popery) could not but expect that the reformation should grow and
increase, until it were perfected; even until nothing were left which arose
from that spirit from whence Popery sprang, and which might (in its proper
tendency) be serviceable to that spirit, but that all his people in this
Nation, might have free liberty at least (if not encouragement) to return to
the pure worship of him in spirit and truth, even as in the days of the
Apostles, before the apostasy from the Spirit, and from the truth.

4. That the reformation out of Popery, was not pursued as the Lord expected it
should, but a dark way of worship established in the land, and a dark Church
government (both very like that of Rome) whereby those that were truly
conscientious, and in whom the reformed light did further and further arise,
were reproached, nicknamed, hated, persecuted, etc. insomuch as that there was
a bar set up against the proceeding of the reformation any further, and a
formal way of Church Government and worship erected, which was pleasing to the
loose and carnal Spirit, but sharp, cruel, and burdensome to the stricter
sort, and to such as were tenderhearted toward God

5. That under this Church Government, and way of worship, there was a go^ng
backwards toward Popery again, instead of going further from it. Things grew
every day worse and worse, ceremonies daily abounding, and were more and more
strictly enjoined, wearing of Surplices, bowing at the name of Jesus, railing
of the Communion tables, and making steps up to it, calling them high Altars,
(bowing thrice at their approach to them) having corporasses over the bread,
saying second service, etc. And the chief end of their visitations, was to
establish such things as these, and to suppress Lecturers and conscientious
Preachers (among whom some fresh life did spring up, for the relief of the
needy and desolate) and to curtal preaching (and praying before and after
Sermons) yea and catechizing too, which by authority was appointed in the place
of the afternoon Sermons, when they found it exceed the limits they intended.
And this proceeded so far, that there was very little difference between us and
the Papists, save only the name; the worship in both becoming dead, and formal,
and pleasing to the fleshly part, but empty of that which should feed and
refresh the Spirit. Only the Lord had reserved to himself a remnant, who could
not bow to these things, but groaned under them, and witnessed against them,
mourning bitterly to the Lord under the load and weight of them.

6. That when the wrath of the Lord arose against this form of
Church Government, and worship (as indeed it was high time for the Lord to
appear, for the power and life of Religion was even expiring) and he brake down
all that stood up in the defense of it, and gave much liberty to the oppressed
spirits and consciences of his people, yet this was not pleasing to the Nation,
but fain would they have had either the same form up again, or at least some
other such like in the stead of it; whereby the loose spirit of the Nation,
might be settled in some way of formal worship, and the growing reforming light
snibbed in the spirits of the tenderhearted toward God.

Look back with a single and honest eye, Has it not been thus? Has there not
been a sharp contention, between God and this Nation concerning this thing? The
Lord has risen to remove the yoke from off the oppressed, that he might cause
the Powers of this Nation, to let the oppressed conscience go free, but the
Nation would have them bound. It is still crying to the powers and authorities
in being, to lay the yoke on again; When one power is broken down (because it
is not faithful in the Lords hand, but starts aside from the Lords work, for
which it was chosen, to another of its own choosing) it seeks to have another
harder power set up, (I mean harder to the tender conscience) yet God overturns
that also, and what can stand before him, who is risen to shake terribly the
earth, and to make the Oaks, and Cedars thereof to fail, totter, and fall? O
England! Will nothing serve thy turn, but the enslaving of Gods heritage? That
tenderness of conscience, (...) God has begotten in his people, is his own, is
that which he will inherit. It is that which he brought out of the Egyptian
darkness of Popery, and which he is now redeeming, and delivering from the
relics thereof: and if these three Nations should for the generality, join
together as one man, yea, and though other Nations should join with them, yet
will they fall short of power and wisdom to prevent the Lord of bringing to
pass his intended work.

Was it the generality of the Nations God redeemed out of Popery, or was it a
poor persecuted remnant for whose sakes he did it, and whom he chiefly had
respect unto? And is not the Lord able to carry on this work, further and
further? Did he suffer them always to be stopped in their progress, and held
in bondage by Episcopacy? Nay, did he not at length break it down at their
cries, and for their sakes? And do ye think he will now suffer the line of
Presbytery to be stretched over them, to keep them down from rising up any
further in obedience to the pure Law of life in their Spirits? O England, in
the zeal of the Lord of Hosts, I could bid defiance to all thy councils and
strength, though I should see thee encompasse round his poor suffering seed
(who are very weak and foolish, as to that kind of strength and wisdom)
because mine eye sees the Almighty one (before whom in thy greatest strength,
and height of confidence, thou art as nothing) engaged against thee: but I
rather choose to mourn over thee, and to wait for the opening of thine eyes, by
the anointing of the true eye salve, which alone can unbewitch the Nations? Yea
in bowels of tender love and pity to thee, I do beseech thee, O England
consider thy self, do not undo thy happiness and prosperity, fight not against
the holy one, the mighty one of despised, distressed Israel: be not tempted to
follow Israel into the wilderness, (where they now are, and whither the hand of
the Lord has led them) to bring them back again into bondage, because thou
see them entangled in the straits, and nothing appears able to deliver them
out of thy hand. Remember what befell Pharaoh and his host. This Israel whom
thou huntest, is dearer to the Lord then ever that Israel was: for that was but
a shadow of the true seed, but the true life it self is begotten, and brought
forth in many of these, and the power, and presence of the Lord is mightily
with them and amongst them, though thou in the unbelief can not see it.
There is now an hour of temptation upon thee, there appears a fair opportunity
to thee to be revenged on them, and to bring them under: take heed what thou
do, lest he who has the power over all, bring thee under, and set them on
top; seek righteousness, seek the good of all, seek true reformation, and the
Lord will bless thee; but if thou think to obtain the setting up of old forms,
and ways of worship and Government, or any new ones like to the old, under
which the righteous cannot but groan (though the wicked, and loose spirit way
rejoice) thou will be deceived, and thy mistake may prove very dangerous and
bitter to thee. Our earnest desires to the Lord for thee are, that thou may
be spared as much as is possible (and that the sufferings of Gods People from
thee, from the very first rent from Popery till this day, may not be laid to
thy charge) but iniquity is so twisted into thy bowels, that without much
tearing, which will cause great pain to thee, it can hardly be separated from
thee. Thou art too wise and wilful, this is the cause of thy sorrow. If thou
could fear before the Lord, and patiently wait for the revealing of his will,
and of his guiding thee by his wisdom, and not be so enraged against
instruments, but see through them to his hand (who has afflicted thee,) and
humble thy self before that, how sweetly and easily might his work go on in
thee! But alas, have thou not set thy self against it from the very first? And
now thou art much pleased with a seeming probability of turning it backward. Ah
poor land, what will this stiff spirit, (which has all along these times of
trouble, repined at, and opposed the work of the Lord) bring thee to?

The time of reformation is come, the work of reformation is begun by that
power, which is able to carry it on, and that which now stands in the way
thereof, (how high, and mighty soever) will be overturned. And although (as to
what men have done) the cause and work of reformation may justly become a
reproach, yet the foundation of reformation which God has laid, is glorious:
and in these troublesome times, is he rearing up the building of his new
Jerusalem, which when he has finished and brought forth, will dazzle the eyes
of the whole Earth. O England be not high minded, run not out into parties, and
breaches in the heady will, but fear before him whose power is over thee, (who
comprehends all thy councels, strength, designs, and hopes, as with a span; and
when they are at the height, can moulder them to nothing, with the touch of his
finger) for his will must stand, not thine.

Written the 19th. of the 11th. month, 1659. This is from him, whom in the day
of thy distress, and bitter calamity (which thy present courses lead apace
unto) thou will confess to have been thy true friend. Isaac Penington, the
Younger.


