A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Rise and Progress Of the People called QUAKERS.

IN Which their Fundamental Principle, Doctrines, Worship, Ministry and
Discipline are Plainly Declared to prevent the Mistakes and Perversions that
Ignorance and Prejudice may make to abuse the Credulous.

With a Summary Relation of the former Dispensations of God in the World, by
way of Introduction.

As unknown, and yet well known,

2 Cor. 6.9. By W. Penn.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street- and at the Crooked-Billet in
Holy-well-lane near Shore-ditch, 1694.

AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER, this Following Account of the People called Quakers, etc. was writ in
the Fear and Love of God: First as a standing Testimony to that ever Blessed
Truth, in the inward Parts, with which God, in my Youthful time, visited my
Soul, and for the Sense and Love of which I was made willing, in no ordinary
Way, to relinquish the Honors and Interests of the World. Secondly, as a
Testimony for that Despised People, that God has in his Great mercy gathered
and united by his one blessed Spirit in the Holy Profession of it; whose
Fellowship I value above all Worldly Greatness. Thirdly, in Love and Honor to
the Memory of that Worthy Servant of God G. Fox, the First Instrument thereof,
and therefore styled by me the Great and Blessed Apostle of our Day. As this
gave Birth to what is here presented to thy view, in the first Edition of it,
by way of Preface to G.F's excellent Journal; so the Consideration of the
present usefulness of the following Account of the People called Quakers, (by
reason of the unjust Reflections of some Adversaries that once walked under the
Profession of Friends) and the Exhortations that conclude it, prevailed with me
to consent that it should be republisht in a smaller Volume; knowing also full
well that Great Books, especially in these days, grow Burdensome, both to the
Pockets and Minds of too many; and that there are not a few that desire (so it
be at an easy rate) to be informed about this People, that have been so much
every where spoken against: But, blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, it is upon no worse Ground than it was said of old time, of the
Primitive Christians; as I hope will appear to every Sober and Considerate
Reader. Our Business after all the ill usage we have met with, being the
Realities of Religion, an effectual change before our last and great change:
That all may come to an Inward, Sensible and Experimental knowledge of God,
through the Convictions and Operations of the Light and Spirit of Christ in
themselves; the sufficient and blessed means given to all, that thereby all may
come savingly to know the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent to
Enlighten and Redeem the World: Which knowledge is indeed Eternal Life. And
that thou, Reader, may obtain it, is the earnest desire of him that is ever

Thine in so good a Work, W.P.

THE CONTENTS
Chap. I. Containing a brief Account of diverse Dispensations of God in the
World, to the time he was pleased to raise this despised People called Quakers.
Chap. II. Of the Rise of this People, their Fundamental Principle and
Doctrines, and Practice in twelve Points resulting from it; their Progress and
Sufferings: An Expostulation with England thereupon. Chap. III. Of the
Qualifications of their Ministry. Eleven Marks that it is Christian. Chap. IV.
Of the Discipline and Practice of this People as a Religious Society The Power
Church they own and exercise, and that which they reject and Condemn; With the
Method of their Proceedings against Erring and Disordering Persons. Chap. V. Of
the First Instrument or Person by whom God was pleased to gather this People
into the way they Profess. His Name G. Fox; his many excellent Qualifications;
showing a Divine, and not a Human Power to have been their Original in him. His
Troubles and Sufferings both from without and within. His End and Triumph at
it. Chap. VI. Containing Five several Exhortations. First General, reminding
this People of their Primitive Integrity and Simplicity. Secondly in
Particular, to the Ministry. Thirdly to the Young convinced. Fourthly to the
Children of Friends. Fifthly to those that are yet Strangers to this People and
Way, to whom this Book, and that it was Preface to, in its former Edition, may
come. All the several Exhortations accommodated to their several States and
Conditions; that all may answer the end of God's love to them, viz. God's Glory
and their own Salvation.
A BRIEF ACCOUNT, etc.
CHAP I.
Containing a brief Account of diverse Dispensations of God in the World, to the
time he was pleased to raise this Despised People called Quakers.

DIVERSE have been the Dispensations of God since the Creation of the World unto
the Sons of Men; But the Great End of all of them has been the Renown of his
own Excellent Name in the Creation and Restoration of Man: Man, the Emblem of
himself, as a God on Earth, and the Glory of all his Works. The World began
with Innocence: All was then good that the good God had made: And as he blessed
the Works of his Hands, so their Natures and Harmony magnified Him their
Creator. Then the Morning Stars Sang together for Joy, and all parts of his
Works said Amen to his Law. Not a Jarr in the whole Frame; but Man in Paradise,
the Beasts in the Field, the Fowl in the Air, the Fish in the Sea, the Lights
in the Heavens, the Fruits of the Earth; yea the Air, the Earth, the Water and
Fire Worshipped, praised and exalted his Power, Wisdom and Goodness. O Holy
Sabbath, O Holy Day to the Lord!

But this Happy State lasted not long: For Man, the Crown and Glory of the
Whole, being tempted to aspire above his place, unhappily yielded against
Command and Duty, as well as Interest and Felicity, and so fell below it; lost
the Divine Image, the Wisdom, Power and Purity he was made in. By which, being
no longer fit for Paradise, he was expelled that Garden of God, his proper
Dwelling and Residence, and was driven out, as a poor Vagabond, from the
presence of the Lord, to wander in the Earth, the Habitation of Beasts.

Yet God that made him had pity on him; for He seeing Man was deceived, and
that it was not of Malice, or an Original Presumption in him, but through the
Subtilty of the Serpent (who had first fallen from his own State, and by the
Mediation of the Woman, Man's own Nature and Companion, whom the Serpent had
first deluded) in his infinite Goodness and Wisdom found out a way to Repair
the Breach, Recover the Loss, and Restore fallen Man again by a Nobler and more
Excellent Adam, promised to be born of a Woman; that as by means of a Woman the
evil one had prevailed upon Man, by a Woman also He should come into the World,
who would prevail against him and bruise his Head, and deliver Man from his
Power: And which, in a signal manner, by the Dispensation of the Son of God in
the Flesh, in the fullness of Time, was Personally and Fully accomplished by
him, and in him, as Man's Savior and Redeemer.

But his Power was not limited, in the Manifestation of it, to that time; for
both before and since his blessed Manifestation in the Flesh, he has been the
Light and Life, the Rock and Strength of all that ever feared God: Was present
with them in their Temptations, followed them in their Travels and Afflictions,
and supported and carried them through and over the Difficulties that have
attended them in their Earthly Pilgrimage. By this Abel's heart excelled
Cain's, and Seth obtained the pre-eminence, and Enoch walked with God. It was
this that strove with the Old World, and which they rebelled against, and which
sanctified and instructed Noah to Salvation.

But the outward Dispensation that followed the benighted State of Man, after
his Fall, especially among the Patriarchs, was generally that of Angels; as the
Scriptures of the Old Testament do in many places express, as to Abraham,
Jacob, etc. The next was that of the Law by Moses, which was also delivered by
Angels, as the Apostle tells us. This Dispensation was much outward, and suited
to a low and servile State; called therefore by the Apostle Paul, that of a
Schoolmaster, which was to point out and prepare that People to look and long
for the Messiah, who would deliver them from the servitude of a Ceremonious and
imperfect Dispensation, by knowing the Realities of those Mysterious
Representations in themselves. In this time the Law was written on Stone, the
Temple built with Hands, attended with an Outward Priesthood, and External
Rites and Ceremonies, that were Shadows of the Good Things that were to come,
and were only to serve till the Seed came, or the more excellent and general
manifestation of Christ, to whom was the Promise, and to all Men only in him,
in whom it was Yea and Amen, even Life from Death, Immortality and Eternal Life.

This the Prophets foresaw; and comforted the believing Jews in the certainty
of it; which was the Top of the Mosaical Dispensation, and which ended in
John's Ministry, the Forerunner of the Messiah, as John's was finished in him,
the Fullness of all. And then God, that at sundry Times and in diverse manners
had spoken to the Fathers by his Servants the Prophets, Spoke to Men by his Son
Christ Jesus, Who is Heir of all things; being the Gospel-day, which is the
Dispensation of Sonship: Bringing in thereby a nearer Testament and a better
hope; even the Beginning of the Glory of the latter days, and of the
Restitution of all things; yea, the Restoration of the Kingdom unto Israel.

Now the Spirit that was more sparingly communicated in former Dispensations,
began to be Poured forth upon all Flesh, according to the Prophet Joel, and the
Light that shined in Darkness, or but dimly before, the most gracious God
caused to Shine out of Darkness, and the Day Star began to arise in the Hearts
of Believers, giving unto them the knowledge of God in the Face (or Appearance)
of his Son Christ Jesus.

Now the Poor in Spirit, the Meek, the true Mourners, the Hungry and Thirsty
after Righteousness, the Peacemakers, the Pure in Heart, the Merciful and
Persecuted, came more especially in Remembrance before the Lord, and were
sought out and blessed by Israel's True Shepherd. Old Jerusalem with her
Children grew out of Date, and the New Jerusalem into Request, the Mother of
the Sons of the Gospel-Day. Wherefore no more at Old Jerusalem, nor at the
Mountain of Samaria, will God be worshipped above other places; for, behold, he
is, by his own Son, declared and preached a Spirit, and that he will be known
as such, and worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth! He will now come nearer
than of old time, and he will write his Law in the Heart, and put his Fear and
Spirit in the inward parts, according to his promise. Then Signs, Types and
Shadows flew away, the Day having discovered their Insufficiency in not
reaching to the inside of the Cup, to the cleansing of the Conscience; and all
Elementary services were expired in and by him that is the substance of all.

And to this Great and Blessed End of the Dispensation of the Son of God, did
the Apostles Testify, whom he had chosen and anointed by his Spirit, to turn
the Jews from their Prejudice and Superstition, and the Gentiles from their
Vanity and Idolatry, to Christ's Light and Spirit that shined in them; that
they might be quickened from the Sins and Trespasses in which they were Dead, to
serve the Living God in the Newness of the Spirit of Life, and walk as Children
of the Light, and of the Day, even the Day of Holiness: For such put on Christ,
the Light of the World, and make no more Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the
Lusts thereof. So that the Light, Spirit and Grace that come by Christ, and
appear in Man, were that divine Principle the Apostles ministered from, and
turned Peoples Minds unto, and in which they gathered and built up the Churches
of Christ in their Day. For which cause they advise them not to quench the
Spirit, but to wait for the Spirit, and Speak by the Spirit, and Pray by the
Spirit, and Walk in the Spirit too, as that which approved them the truly
begotten Children of God; Born, not of Flesh and Blood, or of the will of Man,
but of the will of God; by doing his will, and denying their own; by drinking
of Christ's Cup, and being Baptized with his Baptism of Self-denial; the Way
and Path that all the Heirs of Life have ever trod to Blessedness. But alas!
even in the Apostles Days, those bright Stars of the first Magnitude of the
Gospel Light, some Clouds, foretelling an Eclipse of this Primitive Glory,
began to appear, and several of them gave early Caution of it to the Christians
of their Time, that even then there was, and yet would be more and more, a
falling away from the Power of Godliness, and the Purity of that Spiritual
Dispensation, by such as sought to make a fair show in the Flesh, but with whom
the offense of the Cross ceased. Yet with this comfortable Conclusion, that
they saw beyond it a more glorious Time than ever to the true Church. Their
sight was true, and what they foretold to the Churches, gathered by them in the
Name and Power of Jesus, came to pass: For Christians degenerated a-pace into
outsides, as Days and Meats, and diverse other Ceremonies. And which was worse,
they fell into Strife and Contention about them, separating one from another,
then Envying, and, as they had Power, Persecuting one another, to the shame and
scandal of their common Christianity, and grievous stumbling and offense of the
Heathen; among whom the Lord had so long and so marvellously preserved them.
And having got at last the Worldly Power into their Hands, by Kings and
Emperors embracing the Christian Profession, they changed, what they could, the
Kingdom of Christ, which is not of this World, into a Worldly Kingdom; or at
least styled the Worldly Kingdom that was in their Hands the Kingdom of Christ,
and so they became Worldly, and not true Christians. Then Humane Inventions and
Novelties, both in Doctrine and worship, crowded fast into the Church; a Door
being opened thereunto, by the Grossness and Carnality that appeared then among
the generality of Christians, who had long since left the Guidance of God's
meek and heavenly Spirit, and given themselves up to Superstition,
Will Worship, and Voluntary Humility. And as Superstition is Blind, so it is
Heady and Furious; for all must stoop to its blind and boundless Zeal or Perish
by it: In the Name of the Spirit, persecuting the very appearance of the Spirit
of God in others, and opposing that in others which they resisted in
themselves, viz. the Light, Groce and Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ: But
always under the Notion of Innovation, Heresy, Schism, or some such plausible
Name. Though Christianity allows of no Name or Pretense whatever for
persecuting of any Man for matters of mere Religion being in its very Nature,
Meek, Gentle and Forbearing; and consists of Faith, Hope and Charity, which no
Persecutor can have whilst he remains a Persecutor; in that a Man cannot
believe well, or hope well, or have a Charitable or tender regard to another,
whilst he would violate his mind or persecute his Body for matters of Faith or
Worship toward his God.

Thus the False Church sprang up, and mounted the Chair. But though she lost
her Nature, she would needs keep her good Name of the Lambs-bride, the True
Church and Mother of the Faithful: Constraining all to receive her Mark, either
in their Forehead or Right hand; that is, publicly or privately. But Indeed
and in Truth she was Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, Mother of those
that, with all their show and outside of Religion, were adulterated and gone
from the Spirit, Nature and Life of Christ, and grown Vain, Worldly, Ambitious,
Covetous, Cruel, etc. which are the Fruits of the Flesh and not of the Spirit.

Now it was that the True Church fled into the Wilderness: That is, from
Superstition and Violence, to a Retired, Solitary and Lonely State; hidden, and
as it were out of Sight of Men, though not out of the World. Which shows that
her wonted Visibility was not Essential to the being of a True Church in the
Judgment of the Holy Ghost; she being as True a Church in the Wilderness,
though not as Visible and Lustrious, as when she was in her former Splendour of
Profession. In this State many Attempts She made to return, but the Waters were
yet too High, and her way blocked up, and many of her excellent Children, in
several Nations and Centuries, fell by the Cruelty of Superstition, because
they would not fall from their Faithfulness to the Truth.

The last Age did set some steps toward it, both as to Doctrine, Worship and
Practice. But Practice quickly failed; for Wickedness flowed in a little time,
as well among the Professors of the Reformation as those they reformed from; so
that by the Fruits of Conversation they were not to be distinguished. And the
Children of the Reformers, if not the Reformers themselves, betook themselves
very early to Earthly Policy and Power, to uphold and carry on their
Reformation that had been begun with Spiritual Weapons; which I have often
thought, has been one of the greatest reasons the Reformation made no better
Progress, as to the Life and Soul of Religion. For whilst the Reformers were
Lowly and Spiritually Minded, and trusted in God, and looked to Him, and lived
in his Fear, and consulted not with Flesh and Blood, nor sought Deliverance in
their own way, there were daily added to the Church such as one might
reasonably say should be saved: For they were not so careful to be safe from
Persecution, as to be Faithful and Inoffensive under it: Being more concerned
to spread the Truth by their Faith and Patience in Tribulation, than to get the
worldly Power out of their Hands that inflicted those Sufferings upon them: And
it will be well if the Lord suffer them not to fall by the very same way they
took to stand.

In Doctrine they were in some things short; in other things, to avoid one
extreme they run into another: And for Worship, there was for the generality,
more of man in it than of God. They owned the Spirit, Inspiration and
Revelation indeed, and grounded their Separation and Reformation upon the Sense
and Understanding they received from it, in the Reading of the Scriptures of
Truth. And this was their Plea, The Scripture is the Text, the Spirit the
Interpreter, and that to every one for himself. But yet there was too much of
humane Invention, Tradition and Art that remained both in Praying and
Preaching; and of worldly Authority and worldly Greatness in their Ministers;
especially in this Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark, and some Parts of Germany. God was
therefore pleased in England to shift us from Vessel to Vessel: And the next
remove humbled the Ministry, so that they were more Strict in Preaching, Devout
in Praying, and Zealous for keeping the Lord's Day, and Catechizing of Children
and Servants, and Repeating at Home in their Families what they had heard in
public. But even as these grew into Power, they were not only for Whipping
some out, but others into, the Temple: And they appeared Rigid in their
Spirits, rather than Severe in their Lives, and more for a Party than for
Piety: Which brought forth another People, that were yet more retired and
select.

They would not communicate at Large, or in common with others; but formed
Churches among themselves of such as could give some account of their
Conversion; at least, of very promising experiences of the Work of God's Grace
upon their Hearts; and under mutual Agreements and Covenants of fellowship,
they kept together. These People were somewhat of a Softer Temper, and seemed
to recommend Religion by the Charms of its Love, Mercy and Goodness, rather
than by the Terrors of its Judgments and Punishment; by which the former Party
would have awed People into Religion.

They also allowed greater liberty to Prophecy than those before them* for they
admitted any Member to Speak or Pray, as well as their Pastor, whom they always
Chose, and not the Civil Magistrate. If such found any thing pressing upon them
to either Duty, even without the Distinction of Clergy or Laity, Persons of any
Trade had their Liberty, be it never so Low and Mechanical. But alas! even
these People suffered great loss: For tasting of Worldly Empire, and the favor
of Princes, and the Gain that ensued, they degenerated but too much. For though
they had cried down National Churches and Ministry, and Maintenance too; some
of them, when it was their own turn to be Tried, fell under the Weight of
Worldly Honor and Advantage, got into profitable Parsonages too much, and
outlived and contradicted their own Principles: And, which was yet worse,
turned some of them absolute Persecutors of other Men for God's Sake, that but
so lately came themselves out of the Furnace; which drove many a step farther,
and that was into the Water: Another Baptism, as believing they were not
Scripturally Baptized; and hoping to find that Presence and Power of God in
submitting to this Watery Ordinance, which they desired and wanted.

These People made also Profession of Neglecting, if not Renouncing and
Censuring, not only the Necessity, but Use of all Humane Learning as to the
Ministry; and all other Qualifications to it besides the Helps and Gifts of the
Spirit of God, and those natural and common to Men. And for a time they seemed
like John of Old, a Burning and a Shining Light to other Societies.

They were very Diligent, Plain and Serious; strong in Scripture, and bold in
Profession; bearing much Reproach and Contradiction. But that which others fell
by, proved their Snare. For worldly Power spoiled them too; who had enough of
it to try them what they would do if they had had more: And they rested also
too much upon their Watery Dispensation, instead of passing on more fully to
that of the Fire and Holy Ghost, which was his Baptism, who came with a Fan in
his Hand, that he might thoroughly (and not in part only) purge his Floor, and
take away the Dross and the Tin of his People, and make a Man finer than Gold.
Withal, they grew High, Rough and Self-righteous; opposing further attainment:
Too much forgetting the Day of their Infancy and Littleness, which gave them
something of a real Beauty; in so much that many left them and all visible
Churches and Societies, and Wandered up and down, as Sheep without a Shepherd,
and as Doves without their Mates; seeking their Beloved but could not find Him
(as their Souls desired to know Him) whom their Souls loved above their
chiefest Joy.

These People were called Seekers by some, and the Family of Love by others;
because, as they came to the knowledge of one another, they sometimes met
together, not formally to Pray or Preach, at appointed times or Places, in
their own Wills, as in times past they were accustomed to do; but waited
together in Silence, and as any thing rose in any one of their Minds that they
thought Savoured of a Divine Spring, they sometimes Spoke. But so it was that
some of them not keeping in Humility and in the Fear of God, after the
Abundance of Revelation, were exalted above Measure; and for want of staying
their Minds in an humble Dependence upon him that opened their Understandings
to see great things in his Law, they ran out in their own Imaginations, and
mixing them with those Divine Openings, brought forth a Monstrous Birth, to the
Scandal of those that feared God, and waited daily in the Temple, not made with
Hands, for the Consolation of Israel; the Jew inward, and Circumcision in
Spirit.

This People obtained the Name of Ranters from their extravagant Discourses and
Practices. For they interpreted Christ's fullfilling of the Law for us, to be a
discharging of us from any Obligation and Duty the Law required of us, instead
of the Condemnation of the Law for sins past, upon Faith and Repentance; And
that now it was no Sin to do that which before it was a Sin to commit; the
slavish Fear of the Law being taken off by Christ, and all things good that Man
did, if he did but do them with the Mind and Persuasion that it was so.
Insomuch that diverse fell into Gross and Enormous Practices; pretending in
excuse thereof that they could, without Evil, commit the same Act which was Sin
in another to do; thereby distinguishing between the Action and the Evil of it,
by the Direction of the Mind and Intention in the doing of it. Which was to
make Sin super-abound by the aboundings of Grace, and to turn from the Grace of
God into Wantonness; a securer way of Sinning than before: As if Christ came
not to save us from our Sins but in our Sins; not to take away Sin, but that we
might Sin more freely at his Cost, and with less Danger to our selves. I say,
this ensnared Diverse, and brought them to an utter and lamentable Loss as to
their Eternal State; and they grew very troublesome to the better sort of
People, and furnished the looser with an occasion to Profane.

CHAP. II.
Of the Rise of this People, their Fundamental Principle and Doctrine and
Practice in twelve Points resulting from it: Their Progress and Sufferings: An
Expostulation with England thereupon.

IT was about that very time, as you may see in G.F's Annals, that the Eternal,
Wise, and Good God was pleased, in his infinite Love, to Honor and Visit this
benighted and bewildred Nation with his Glorious Dayspring from on High; yea
with a most sure and certain sound of the Word of Light and Life, through the
Testimony of a Chosen Vessel, to an effectual and blessed purpose, can many
thousands say, Glory be to the Name of the Lord for ever.

For as it reached the Conscience and broke the Heart, and brought many to a
Sense and Search, so that which People had been vainly seeking without, with
much Pains and Cost, they by this Ministry, found within; where it was they
wanted what they sought for, viz. The right way to Peace with God. For they
were directed to the Light of Jesus Christ within them, as the Seed and Leaven
of the Kingdom of God; Near All, because in All, and God's Talent to All. A
Faithful and True Witness and Just Monitor in every Bosom. The Gift and Grace
of God to Life and Salvation that appears to all, though few regard it. This,
the Traditional Christian conceited of himself, and strong in his own Will and
Righteousness, and overcome with blind Zeal and Passion, either despised as a
Low and Common thing, or opposed as a Novelty, under many hard Names and
opprobrious Terms, denying, in his ignorant and angry Mind, any fresh
Manifestation of God's Power and Spirit in Man in these days, though never more
needed to make true Christians. Not unlike those Jews of Old that rejected the
Son of God at the very same time that they blindly professed to wait for the
Messiah to come; because, alas, he appeared not among them according to their
Carnal Mind and Expectation.

This brought forth many abusive Books, which filled the greater sort with
Envy, and lesser with Rage; and made the way and progress of this Blessed
Testimony Straight and Narrow indeed to those that received it. However, God
owned his own Work, and this Testimony did effectually Reach, Gather, Comfort
and Establish the Weary and Heavy Laden, the Hungry and Thirsty, the Poor and
Needy, the Mournful and Sick of many Maladies, that had spent all upon
Physicians of no Value, and waited for Relief from Heaven; Help only from
above: Seeing, upon a serious Trial of all things, nothing else would do but
Christ himself; the Light of his Countenance, a Touch of his Garment, and Help
from his Hand; who cured the poor Woman's Issue, raised the Centurion's Servant,
the Widow's Son, the Ruler's Daughter, and Peter's Mother: And like Her, they
no sooner felt his Power and Efficacy upon their Souls, but they gave up to
obey him in a Testimony to his Power; and that with resigned Wills and faithful
Hearts, through all Mockings, Contradictions, Confiscations, Beatings, Prisons,
and many other Jeorpardies that attended them for his Blessed Name's Sake.

And truly, they were very many and very Great; so that in all Humane
Probability they must have been swallowed up Quick of the Proud and Boisterous
Waves that swelled and beat against them, but that the God of all their tender
Mercies was with them, in his Glorious Authority; so that the Hills often Fled
and the Mountains Melted before the Power that filled them; working mightily
for them as well as in them; one ever following the other. By which they saw
plainly, to their exceeding great Confirmation and Comfort, that all things
were possible with him with whom they had to do. And that the more that which
God required seemed to cross Man's Wisdom, and expose them to Man's Wrath, the
more God appeared to help and carry them through all to his Glory. Insomuch,
that if ever any People could say in Truth, Thou art our Sun and our Shield,
our Rock and Sanctuary; and by thee we have leaped over a Wall, and by thee we
have run through a Troop, and by thee we have put the Armies of the Aliens to
Flight, these People had Right to say it. And as God had delivered their Souls
of the wearisom Burdens of Sin and Vanity, and enriched their poverty of
Spirit, and satisfied their great Hunger and Thirst after Eternal
Righteousness, and filled them with the Good Things of his own House, and made
them Stewards of his Manifold Gifts; so they went forth to all Quarters of
these Nations, to declare to the Inhabitants thereof, what God had done for
them; what they had found, and where and how they had found it; viz. The way to
Peace with God: Inviting all to come and see and taste, for themselves, the
Truth of what they Declared unto them.

And as their Testimony was to the Principle of God in Man, the Precious Pearl
and Leaven of the Kingdom, as the only blessed means, appointed of God, to
Quicken, Convince and Sanctify Man; so they opened to them what it was in it
self, and what it was given to them for: How they might know it from their own
Spirit, and that of the Subtle appearance of the Evil one: and what it would do
for all those whose minds Should be turned off from the Vanity of the World and
its Lifeless ways and Teachers, and ad-here to this blessed Light in
themselves, which discovers and condemns Sin in all its appearances, and shows
how to overcome it, if minded and obeyed in its holy Manifestations and
Convictions: Giving Power to such to Avoid and Resist those things that do not
please God, and to grow strong in Love, Faith, and Good Works. That so Man,
whom Sin has made as a Wilderness, overrun with Briars and Thorns, might
become as the Garden of God, cultivated by his divine Power, and replenisht
with the most Virtuous and Beautiful Plants of God's own Right Hand Planting,
to his Eternal Praise.

But these Experimental Preachers of Glad Tidings of God's Truth and Kingdom
could not run when they List, or Pray or Preach when they Pleased, But as
Christ their Redeemer prepared and moved them by his own Blessed Spirit, for
which they waited in their Services and Meetings, and Spoke as that gave them
utterance; and which was as those having Authority, and not like the Dreaming,
Dry and Formal Pharisees. And so it plainly appeared to the serious Minded,
whose Spiritual Eye the Lord Jesus had in any measure opened: So that to one
was given the Word of Exhortation, to another the Word of Reproof, to another
the Word of Consolation; and all by the same Spirit and in the good Order
thereof, to the Convincing and Edifying of many.

And truly they waxed Strong and Bold through Faithfulness; and by the Power
and Spirit of the Lord Jesus became very Fruitful; thousands, in a short time,
being turned to the Truth in the inward parts, through their Testimony, in
Ministry and Sufferings: Insomuch as in most Counties, and many of the
considerable Towns of England, Meetings were settled, and daily there were
added such as should be saved. For they were Diligent to Plant and to Water,
and the Lord blessed their Labors with an Exceeding great Increase;
notwithstanding all the opposition made to their blessed Progress, by false
Rumors, Calumnies and bitter Persecutions; not only from the Powers of the
Earth, but from every one that listed to injure and abuse them: So that they
seemed indeed to be as poor Sheep appointed to the Slaughter, and as a People
killed all the Day long.

It were fitter for a Volume than a Preface, but so much as to repeat the
Contents of their cruel Sufferings from Professors as well as from Profane,
and from Magistrates as well as the Rabble: That it may well be said of this
abused and despised People, they went forth Weeping and sowed in Tears,
bearing Testimony to the Precious Seed, even the Seed of the Kingdom, which
stands not in Words; the Finest the Highest that Man's Wit can use, but in
Power: The Power of Christ Jesus, to whom God the Father has given all Power
in Heaven and in Earth, that he might rule Angels above, and Men below. Who
empowered them, as their Work witnesses, by the many that were turned, through
their Ministry, from Darkness to the Light, and out of the Broad into the
Narrow Way of Life and Peace; bringing People to a Weighty, Serious and
God-like Conversation; the Practice of that Doctrine which they Taught.

And as without this Secret Divine Power there is no Quickening and
Regenerating of dead Souls, so the want of this Generating and Begetting Power
and Life, is the Cause of the little Fruit that the many Ministries that have
been, and are in the World, bring forth. O that both Ministers and People were
sensible of this! My Soul is often troubled for them, and Sorrow and Mourning
compass me about for their Sakes. O that they were Wise! O that they would
consider, and lay to Heart the things that truly and substantially make for
their lasting Peace!

Two things are to be considered, the Doctrine they Taught, and the Example
they lead among all People. I have already touched upon their Fundamental
Principle, which is as the Corner stone of their Fabric: And indeed to speak
eminently and properly their Characteristick, or main distinguishing Point or
Principle, viz. the Light of Christ within, as God's Gift for Man's Salvation.
This I say, is as the Root of the goodly Tree of Doctrines that grew and
branched out from it, which I shall now mention in their Natural and
Experimental Order.

First, Repentance from dead Works to serve the Living God. Which comprehends
three Operations. First a sight of Sin. Secondly, A Sense and Godly Sorrow for
Sin. Thirdly, An Amendment for the Time to come. This was the Repentance they
preached and pressed, and a Natural result from the Principle they turned all
People unto. For of Light came Sight; and of Sight came Sense and Sorrow; and
of Sense and Sorrow, came Amendment of Life. Which Doctrine of Repentance leads
to Justification; that is, Forgiveness of the Sins that are past through Christ
the alone Propitiation, and the Sanctification or Purgation of the Soul, from
the defiling Nature and Habits of Sin, Present by the Spirit of Christ in the
Soul. Which is Justification in the complete Sense of that Word: Comprehending
both justification from the Guilt of the Sins that are past, as if they had
never been committed, through the Love and Mercy of God in Christ Jesus; and
the Creatures being made inwardly just through the Cleansing and Sanctfiying
Power and Spirit of Christ revealed in the Soul; which is commonly called
Sanctification. But that none can come to know Christ to be their Sacrifice
that Reject him as their Sanctifier. The End of his coming being to save his
People from the Nature and Defilement, as well as Guilt of Sin; and that
therefore those that resist his Light and Spirit, make his coming an offering
of none effect to them.

From hence sprang a Second Doctrine they were led to declare, as the Mark of
the Price of the High Calling to all true Christians, viz. Perfection from Sin,
according to the Scriptures of truth; which testify it to be the End of
Christ's coming and the Nature of his Kingdom, and for which his Spirit was and
is given, viz. to be Perfect as our Heavenly Father is Perfect, and Holy
because God is Holy. And this the Apostles labored for, that the Christians
should be Sanctified Through-out in Body, Soul and Spirit. But they never held
a Perfection in Wisdom and Glory in this Life, or from Natural Infirmities, or
Death, as some have, with a weak or ill mind, imagined and insinuated against
them.

This they called a Redeemed State, Regeneration, or the New Birth: Teaching
every where, according to their Foundation, that without this Work were known,
there was no inheriting the Kingdom of God.

Thirdly, This leads to an acknowledgment of Eternal Rewards and Punishments,
as they have good Reason; for else, of all People, certainly they must be the
most Miserable; Who, for about Forty Years, have been exceeding great Sufferers
for their Profession; and, in some Cases, treated worse than the worst of Men;
yea, as the Refuse and Off-scowering of all things.

This was the Purport of their Doctrine and Ministry; which, for the most part,
is what other Professors of Christianity pretend to hold in Words and Forms,
but not in the Power of Godliness; which, generally speaking, has been long
lost by Men's departing from that Principle and Seed of Life that is in Man, and
which Man has not regarded, but lost the Sense of; and in and by which he can
only be quickened in his Mind to serve the living God in Newness of Life. For as
the Life of Religion was lost, and the generality lived and Worshipped God
after their own Wills, and not after the Will of God, nor the mind of Christ,
which stood in the Works and Fruits of the Holy Spirit; so that which they
pressed, was not Notion but Experience; no Formality but Godliness; as being
sensible in themselves, through the Work of God's Righteous Judgments, that
without Holiness no Man should ever see the Lord, with Comfort.

Besides these General Doctrines, as the larger Branches, there sprang forth
several particular Doctrines, that did exemplify and further explain the Truth
and Efficacy of the General Doctrine before observed, in their Lives and
Examples. As,

I. Communion, and loving one another. This is a noted Mark in the Mouth of all
sorts of People concerning them. They will meet, They will help and stick one
to another. Whence it is common to hear some say, Look how the Quakers love and
take care of one another. Others, less Moderate, will say; The Quakers love
none but themselves: And if loving one another and having an Intimate Communion
in Religion, and constant care to meet to Worship God, and help one another, be
any Mark of Primitive Christianity, they had it, Blessed be the Lord, in an
ample manner.

II. To love Enemies: This they both Taught and Practiced. For they did not
only refuse to be revenged for Injuries done them, and condemned it as of an
Unchristian Spirit, but they did freely Forgive; yea, Help and Relieve those
that had been Cruel to them, when it was in their Power to have been even with
them: Of which many and singular Instances might be given: Endeavoring,
through Faith and Patience, to overcome all Injustice and Oppression, and
Preaching this Doctrine as Christian for others to follow.

III. Another was, The Sufficiency of Truth speaking, according to Christ's own
form of sound Words, of Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, among Christians, without
Swearing; both from Christ's express Prohibition to Swear at all, Mat. 5. and
for that they being under the Tie and Bond of Truth in themselves, there was no
Necessity for an Oath; and it would be a Reproach to their Christian Veracity
to Assure their Truth by such an Extraordinary way of Speaking; simple and
uncompounded Answers, as Yea and Nay, (without Asseverations, Attestations, or
Supernatural Vouchers) being most suitable to Evangelical Righteousness. But
offering at the same time to be punished to the full, for False-Speaking, as
others for Perjury, if ever guilty of it: And hereby they exclude, with all
True, all False and Profane Swearing; for which the Land did and does Mourn,
and the great God was and is not a little offended with it.

IV. Not Fighting but Suffering, is another Testimony peculiar to this People:
They affirm that Christianity teaches People To beat their Swords into
Plough-Shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, and to learn War no more,
that so the Wolf may lie down with the Lamb, and the Lion with the Calf, and
nothing that destroys be entertained in the Hearts of People: Exhorting them to
employ their Zeal against Sin, and turn their Anger against Satan, and no
longer War one against another; because, all Wars and Fightings come of Men's
own Hearts Lusts, according to the Apostle James, and not of the Meek Spirit of
Christ Jesus, who is Captain of another Warfare, and which is carried on with
other Weapons. Thus, as Truth speaking succeeded Swearing, so Faith and
Patience succeeded Fighting, in the Doctrine and Practice of this People. Nor
ought they for this to be obnoxious to Civil Government, since if they cannot
Fight for it, neither can they Fight against it; which is no mean security to
any State. Nor is it reasonable that People should be blamed for not doing more
for others than they can do for themselves. And, Christianity set aside, if the
Costs and Fruits of War were well considered, Peace, with all its
Inconveniences, is generally Preferrable. But though they were not for Fighting,
they were for submitting to Government; and that, not only for Fear, but for
Conscience Sake; where Government does not interfere with Conscience: Believing
it to be an Ordinance of God, and where it is justly administered, a great
Benefit to Mankind. Though it has been their Lot, through blind Zeal in some, and
Interest in others, to have felt the Strokes of it with greater Weight and
Rigor than any other Persuasion in this Age; whilst they, of all others,
Religion set aside, have given the Civil Magistrate the least occasion of
Trouble in the Discharge of his Office.

V. Another part of the Character of this People was, and is, They refuse to
pay Tithes, or Maintenance to a National Ministry; and that for two Reasons:
The one is, They believe all compelled Maintenance, even to Gospel Ministers,
to be Unlawful, because expressly contrary to Christ's Command, who said, Freely
you have received, freely give: At least, that the Maintenance of Gospel
Ministers should be free and not forced. The other Reason of their Refusal is,
Because those Ministers are not Gospel Ones, in that the Holy Ghost is not
their Foundation, but Humane Arts and Parts. So that it is not matter of Humor
or Sullenness, but Pure Conscience toward God, that they cannot help to
support National Ministries where they dwell, which are but too much and too
visibly become ways of Worldly Advantage and Preferment.

VI. Not to respect Persons, was and is another of their Doctrines and
Practices, for which they were often Buffetted and Abused. They Affirmed it to
be sinful to give Flattering Titles, or to use Vain Gestures and Complements of
Respect. Though to Virtue and Authority they ever made a Difference; but after
their Plain and Homely Manner, yet sincere and substantial way: Well
remembering the Examples of Mordecai and Elihu; but more especially the Command
of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who forbad his Followers to call Men
Rabbi, which implies Lord or Master; also the fashionable Greetings and
Salutations of those Times; that so Self-love and Honor, to which the proud
Mind of Man is incident, in his fallen Estate, might not be Indulged but
Rebuked. And though this rendered their Conversation disagreeable, yet they that
will remember what Christ said to the Jews, How can ye believe in me who
receive honor one of another, will abate of their resentment, if his Doctrine
has any Credit with them.

VI. They also used the Plain Language of Thou and Thee to a single Person,
whatever was his Degree among Men. And indeed the Wisdom of God was much seen
in bringing forth this People in so Plain an Appearance. For it was a Close and
Distinguishing Test upon the Spirits of those they came among; showing their
Insides and what predominated, notwithstanding their High and Great Profession
of Religion. This, among the rest, sounded so harsh to many of them, and they
took it so ill, that they would say, Thou me, Thou my Dog! If thou Thouest me,
I Will thou thy Teeth down thy Throat; forgetting the Language they use to God in
their own Prayers, and the common Style of the Scriptures, and that it is an
absolute and essential Propriety of Speech. And what good alas, had their
Religion done them, who were so sensibly touched with Indignation for the use of
this Plain, Honest and True Speech?

VII. They recommended Silence by their Example, having very few words upon all
Occasions. They were at a Word in Dealing: Nor could their customers many Words
tempt them from it; having more regard for Truth than Custom, to Example than
Gain. They sought Solitude; but when in Company, they would neither use nor
willingly hear Unnecessary as well as Unlawful Discourses: Whereby they
preserved their Minds pure and undisturbed from unprofitable Thoughts and
Diversions. Nor could they humor the Custom of Good Night, Good Morrow, God
Speed; for they knew the Night was Good, and the Day was Good, without wishing
of either; and that in the other Expression, the Holy Name of God was too
lightly and unthinkingly used, and therefore taken in Vain. Besides, they were
Words and Wishes of Course, and are usually as little meant, as are Love and
Service in the Custom of Cap and Knee; and superfluity in those as well as in
other things was Burthensom to them: And therefore They did not only decline to
use them, but found themselves often pressed to reprove the Practice.

VIII. For the same reason they forbore Drinking to People, or Pledging of
them, as the manner of the World is: A Practice that is not only Unnecessary,
but they thought Evil in the Tendencies of it; being a Provocation to Drink
more than did People good, as well as that it was in it self Vain and
Heathenish.

IX. Their way of Marriage is peculiar to them; and shows a distinguishing Care
above other Societies professing Christianity. They say that Marriage is an
Ordinance of God, and that God only can rightly join Man and Woman in Marriage.
Therefore they use neither Priest nor Magistrate; but the Man and Woman
concerned, take each other as Husband and Wife in the presence of diverse
Credible Witnesses, promising unto each other, with God's Assistance, to be
Loving and Faithful in that Relation till Death shall separate them. But,
antecedent to all this, They first present themselves to the Monthly Meeting
for the Affairs of the Church where they reside; there declaring their
Intentions to take one another as Husband and Wife, if the said Meeting have
nothing material to object against it. They are constantly asked the necessary
Questions, as in Case of Parents, or Guardians, if they have acquainted them
with their Intention, and have their Consent, etc. The Method of the Meeting is
to take a Minute thereof, and to appoint Proper Persons to enquire of their
Conversation and Clearness from all others, and whether they have discharged
their Duty to their Parents or Guardians; and make report thereof to the next
Monthly Meeting, where the same Parties are desired to give their Attendance.
In case it appears they have proceeded Orderly, the Meeting Passes their
Proposal, and so Records it in their Meeting Book. And in Case the Woman be a
Widow and has Children, due care is there taken that Provision also be made by
her for the Orphans before the Meeting pass the Proposal of Marriage: Advising
the Parties concerned to appoint a convenient Time and place, and to give
fitting Notice to their Relations, and such Friends and Neighbors, as they
desire should be the Witnesses of their Marriage. Where they take one another
by the Hand, and, by Name, promise Reciprocally Love and Fidelity, after the
manner before expressed. Of all which Proceedings, a Narrative, in a way of
Certificate, is made, to which the said Parties first set their Hands, thereby
making it their Act and Deed; and then diverse of the Relations, Spectators and
Auditors set their Names as Witnesses of what they Said and Signed. And this
Certificate is afterward Registered in the Record belonging to the Meeting where
the Marriage is Solemnized. Which Regular Method has been, as it deserves,
adjudged in Courts of Law a good Marriage; where it has been by Cross and Ill
People Disputed and Contested, for want of the accustomed Formality of Priest
and Ring, etc. Ceremonies they have Refused, not out of Humor, but Conscience,
reasonably grounded; in as much as no Scripture Example tells us that the
Priest had any other part of Old Time, than that of a Witness among the rest,
before whom the Jews used to take one another: And therefore this People look
upon it as an Imposition to advance the Power and Profits of the Clergy. And
for the use of the Ring, it is enough to say that it was an Heathenish and vain
Custom, and never in Practice among the People of God, Jews or Primitive
Christians. The words of the Usual form, as With my Body I thee Worship, etc.
are hardly Defensible. In short, they are more Careful, Exact and Regular than
any Form now used; and it is Free of the inconveniences with which other
Methods are attended: Their Care and Checks being so many, and such, as no
Clandestine Marriages can be performed among them.

X. It may not be unfit to say something here of their Births and Burials,
which make up so much of the Pomp and Solemnity of too many called Christians.
For Births, the Parents Name their own Children; which is usually some days
after they are Born, in the presence of the Midwife, if she can be there, and
those that were at the Birth: Who afterward sign a Certificate, for that
purpose prepared, of the Birth and Name of the Child, or Children; which is
Recorded in a proper Book, in the Monthly Meeting to which the Parents belong;
avoiding the accustomed Ceremonies and Festivals.

XI. Their Burials are performed with the same Simplicity. If the Body of the
Deceased be near any public Meeting Place, it is usually carried thither, for
the more convenient Reception of those that Accompany it to the Burying-Ground.
And it so falls out sometimes, that while the Meeting is gathering for the
Burial, some or other has a Word of Exhortation, for the sake of the People
there met together. After which, the Body is born away by the Young Men, or
those that are of their Neighborhood, or that were most of the Intimacy of the
Deceased Party: The Corpse being in a plain Coffin, without any Covering or
Furniture upon it. At the Ground, they pause sometime before they put the Body
into its Grave, that if any one there should have any thing upon them to exhort
the People, they may not be disappointed, and that the Relations may the more
Retiredly and Solemnly take their last leave of the Body of their departed
Kindred, and the Spectators have a Sense of Mortality, by the occasion then
given them to reflect upon their own Latter End. Otherways, they have no set
Rites or Ceremonies on those Occasions. Neither do the Kindred of the Deceased
ever wear Mourning; they looking upon it as a Worldly Ceremony and piece of
Pomp; and that what Mourning is fit for a Christian to have, at the Departure
of a beloved Relation or Friend, should be worn in the Mind, which is only
sensible of the Loss, and the Love they had to them, and Remembrance of them:
To be outwardly expressed by a respect to their Advice, and care of those they
have left behind them, and their Love of that they Loved. Which Conduct of
theirs, though unmodish or unfashionable, leaves nothing of the Substance of
things neglected or undone: And as they aim at no more, so that simplicity of
Life is what they observe with great Satisfaction; though it sometimes happens
not to be without the Mockeries of the vain World they live in.

These things to be sure gave them a Rough and Disagreeable Appearance with the
Generality; who thought them Turners of the World upside down, as indeed, in
some Sense, they were: But in no other than that wherein Paul was so charged,
viz. To bring things back into their Primitive and right Order again. For
these, and such like Practices of theirs, were not the Result of Humor, or for
civil Distinction, as some have fansied, but a Fruit of Inward Sense, which
God, through his holy Fear, had begotten in them. They did not consider how to
contradict the World, or distinguish themselves as a Party from others; it
being none of their Business, as it was not their Interest: No, it was not the
Result of Consultation, or a framed design by which to declare or recommend
Schism or Novelty. But God having given them a sight of themselves, they saw
the whole World in the same Glass of Truth; and sensibly discerned the
Affections and Passions of Men, and the Rise and Tendency of Things: What it
was that gratified the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life, which are not of the Father, but of the World. And that from thence
Sprang in the Night of Darkness and Apostasy, which has been over People,
through their Degeneration from the Light and Spirit of God, these and many
other vain Customs, which are seen by the Heavenly Day of Christ that dawns in
the Soul, to be, either wrong in their Original, or, by Time and Abuse, Hurtful
in their Practice. And though these things seemed Trivial to some, and rendered
this People Stingy and Conceited in such Persons Opinion; there was and is more
in them than they were or are aware of.

It was not very easy to our Primitive Friends, to make themselves Sights and
Spectacles, and the Scorn and Derision of the World; which they easily foresaw
must be the Consequence of so Vfashionable a Conversation in it. But herein was
the Wisdom of God seen in the Foolishness of these things; First, That they
discovered the Satisfaction and Concern that People had in and for the Fashions
of this World, notwithstanding their high Pretenses to another; in that any
disappointment about them came so very near them, as that the greatest Honesty,
Virtue, Wisdom and Ability, were unwelcom without them. Secondly, It seasonably
and profitably divided Conversation: For this making their Society uneasy to
their Relations and Acquaintance, it gave them the opportunity of more
Retirement and Solitude; wherein they met with better Company, even the Lord
God their Redeemer; and grew strong in his Love, Power and Wisdom, and were
thereby better qualified for his Service: And the success abundantly showed it:
Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

And though they were not Great and Learned in the Esteem of this World (for
then they had not wanted Followers upon their own Credit and Authority) yet
they were generally of the most Sober of the several Persuasions they were in,
and of the most Repute for Religion; and many of them of good Capacity,
Substance and Account among Men.

And also some among them wanted not for Parts, Learning, or Estate; though
then, as of Old, not many Wise, or Noble, etc. were called; or at least
received the Heavenly Call, because of the Cross that attended the Profession
of it in Sincerity. But neither do Parts or Learning make Men the better
Christians, though the better Orators and Disputants; and it is the Ignorance
of People about the Divine Gift that causes that vulgar and mischievous
mistake. Theory and Practice, Speculation and Enjoyment, Words and Life, are
two things. Oh it is the Penitent, the Reformed, the Lowly, the Watchful, the
Self-denying and Holy Soul that is the Christian! And that Frame is the Fruit
and Work of the Spirit, which is the Life of Jesus: Whose Life, though hid in
the fullness of it in God the Father, is shed abroad in the Hearts of them that
truly Believe according to their Capacity. Oh that People did but know this to
Cleanse them, to Circumcise them, to Quicken them, and to make them New
Creatures indeed! Recreated, or Regenerated after Christ Jesus unto good Works;
that they might live to God and not to themselves; and offer up living Prayers
and living Praises, to the living God, through his own living Spirit, in which
he is only to be Worshipped in this Gospel Day.

Oh that they that read me could but feel me! For my Heart is affected with
this Merciful Visitation of the Father of Lights and Spirits to this poor
Nation, and the whole World, through the same Testimony. Why should the
Inhabitants thereof reject it? Why should they lose the Blessed Benefit of it?
Why should they not turn to the Lord with all their Hearts, and say from the
Heart, Speak Lord, for now thy poor Servants hear? Oh that thy Will may be
done; thy Great, thy Good and Holy Will, in Earth as it is in Heaven! Do it in
us, do it upon us, do what thou will with us; for we are thine, and desire to
glorify thee our Creator, both for that, and because thou art our Redeemer;
for thou art redeeming us from the Earth; from the Vanities and Pollutions of
it, to be a Peculiar People unto thee. Oh this were a Brave Day for England, if
so she could say in Truth! But alas, the Case is otherwise; for which some of
thine Inhabitants, O Land of my Nativity! have mourned over thee with bitter
Wailing and Lamentation. Their Heads have been indeed as Waters, and their Eyes
as Fountains of Tears, because of thy Transgression and Stiffneckedness;
because thou will not Hear, and Fear and Return to the Rock, even thy Rock, O
England! from whence thou were Hewn. But be thou warned, O Land of great
Profession, to receive him into thy Heart: Behold, at That Door it is he has
stood so long Knocking! but thou will yet have none of him. Oh be thou
awakened, lest Jerusalem's Judgments do swiftly overtake thee, because of
Jerusalem's Sins that abound in thee. For she abounded in Formality, but made
void the Weighty things of God's Law as thou daily do.

She withstood the Son of God in the Flesh, and thou resistest the Son of God
in the Spirit. He would have gathered her as an Hen gathers her Chickens
under her Wings, and she would not; so would he have gathered thee out of thy
Life-less Profession, and have brought thee to inherit Substance; to have known
his Power and Kingdom: For which he often knocked within, by his Grace and
Spirit; and without, by his Servants and Witnesses: But thou would not be
gathered: But on the Contrary, as Jerusalem of old Persecuted the Manifestation
of the Son of God in the Flesh, and Crucified him, and Whipped, and Imprisoned
his Servants; so have thou, O Land! Crucified to thy self afresh the Lord of
Life and Glory, and done despite to his Spirit of Grace; slighting the Fatherly
Visitation, and Persecuting the blessed Dispensers of it by thy Laws and
Magistrates: Though they have Early and Late pleaded with thee in the Power and
Spirit of the Lord; in Love and Meekness, that thou might know the Lord and
serve him and become the Glory of all Lands.

But thou have Evilly entreated and requited them. Thou have set at naught all
their Counsel, and would have none of their Reproof, as thou should have
done. Their Appearance was too Straight, and their Qualifications were too Mean
for thee to receive them; like the Jews of Old, that cried, Is not this the
Carpenters Son, and are not his Brethren among us; which of the Scribes, of the
Learned (the Orthodox) believe in him? Prophesying their Fall in a Year or two,
and making and executing of severe Laws to bring it to pass: Endeavoring to
terrify them out of their Holy way, or destroy them for abiding Faithful to
it. But thou have seen how many Governments that rise against them, and
determined their Downfall, have been overturned and extinguished, and that they
are still preserved, and become a great and a considerable People, among the
Middle sort of thy numerous Inhabitants. And notwithstanding the many
difficulties Without and Within, which they have Labored under, since the Lord
God Eternal first gathered them, they are an Increasing People; the Lord still
adding unto them, in diverse Parts, such as shall be saved, if they persevere to
the End. And to Thee, O England! were they, and are they lifted up as a
Standard, and as a City set upon a Hill, and to the Nations round about thee,
that in their Light thou may come to see Light, even in Christ Jesus, the
Light of the World, and therefore thy Light, and Life too, if thou would but
turn from thy many evil ways, and receive and obey it. For in the Light of the
Lamb, must the Nations of them that are saved walk, as the Scripture Testifies,

Remember, O Nation of great Profession! How the Lord has waited upon thee
since the Dawnings of Reformation, and the many Mercies and Judgments by which
he has pleaded with Thee; and Awake and Arise out of thy deep Sleep, and yet
hear his Word in thy Heart that thou may live.

Let not this thy day of Visitation pass over thy Head, nor neglect thou so
great Salvation as is This which is come to thy House, Oh England! For why
should thou die, Oh Land that God desires to Bless! Be assured it is He that
has been in the midst of This People, in the midst of Thee, and not a
Delusion, as thy mistaken Teachers have made Thee believe. And this thou shall
find by their Marks and Fruits, if thou will consider them in the Spirit of
Moderation.

CHAP. III.
Of the Qualifications of their Ministry. Eleven Marks that it is Christian.

I. THey were changed Men themselves before they went about to change others.
Their Hearts were Rent as well as their Garments; and they knew the Power and
Work of God upon them. And this was seen by the great Alteration it made, and
their stricter Course of Life, and more Godly Conversation that immediately
followed upon it.

II. They went not forth, or Preached in their own Time or Will, but in the
Will of God; and Spoke not their own studied Matter, but as they were opened
and moved of his Spirit, with which they were well acquainted in their own
Conversion: Which cannot be expresed to Carnal Men so as to give them any
intelligible account; for to such it is as Christ said, like the blowing of the
Wind, which no man knows whence it comes, or whither it goes. Yet this Proof
and Seal went along with their Ministry, that many were turned from their
Life-less Professions, and the Evil of their Ways, to an inward and
experimental knowledge of God, and an Holy Life, as thousands can witness. And
as they Freely received what they had to say from the Lord, so they Freely
administered it to others.

III. The Bent and Stress of their Ministry was Conversion to God; Regeneration
and Holiness. Not Schemes of Doctrines and Verbal Creeds, or new Forms of
Worship; But a leaving off in Religion the Superfluous, and reducing the
Ceremonious and Formal part, and pressing earnestly the Substantial, the
Necessary and Profitable part to the Soul; as all, upon a serious Reflection,
must and do accknowledge.

IV. They directed People to a Principle in themselves, though not of themselves,
by which all that they asserted, Preached and Exhorted others to, might be
wrought in them, and known to them, through Experience, to be true: Which is a
high and distinguishing Mark of the Truth of their Ministry, both that they
knew what they said, and were not afraid of coming to the Test. For as they
were bold from Certainty, so they required Conformity upon no Humane Authority,
but upon Conviction, and the Conviction of This Principle; which they asserted
was in them that they Preached unto, and unto that they directed them, that
they might examine and prove the Reality of those things which they had
affirmed of it, as to its Manifestation and Work in Man. And this is more than
the many Ministries in the World pretended to. They declare of Religion, say
many things true, in words, of God, Christ, and the Spirit; of Holiness and
Heaven; that all Men should Repent and mend their Lives, or they will go to
Hell, etc. But which of them all pretend to speak of their own Knowledge and
Experience? Or ever directed Men to a Divine Principle, or Agent, placed of God
in Man, to help him; and how to know it, and wait to feel its Power to work
that good and acceptable Will of God in them.

Some of them indeed have Spoke of the Spirit, and the Operations of it to
Sanctification, and Performance of Worship to God; but Where, and How to find
it, and wait in it, to perform our duty to God, was yet as a Mystery to be
declared by this further degree of Reformation. So that this People did not
only in words, more than equally press Repentance, Conversion and Holiness, but
did it knowingly and experimentally; and directed those, to whom they preached,
to a sufficient Principle; and told them where it was, and by what Tokens they
might know it, and which way they might experience the Power and Efficacy of it
to their Soul's Happiness. Which is more than Theory and Speculation, upon
which most other Ministries depend: For here is certainty; a Bottom upon which
Man may boldly appear before God in the great Day of Account.

V. They reached to the Inward State and Condition of People, which is an
Evidence of the Virtue of their Principle, and of their Ministering from it, and
not from their own Imaginations, Glosses or Comments upon Scripture. For
nothing reaches the Heart, but what is from the Heart, or pierces the
Conscience, but what comes from a living Conscience. Insomuch as it has often
happened, where People have under Secrecy revealed their State or condition to
some choice Friends, for Advice or Ease, they have been so particularly
directed in the Ministry of this People, that they have challenged their
Friends with discovering their Secrets, and telling the Preachers their Cases,
to whom a word had not been spoken. Yea, the very Thoughts and Purposes of the
hearts of many have been so plainly detected, that they have, like Nathanael,
cried out, of this inward appearance of Christ, Thou art the Son of God, Thou
art the King of Israel. And those that have embraced this Divine Principle,
have found this Mark of its Truth and Divinity (that the Woman of Samaria did
of Christ when in the Flesh, to be the Messiah,) viz. It had told them all that
ever they had done; showed them their insides, the most inward secrets of their
Hearts, and laid Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet; of
which Thousands can, at this day, give in their Witness. So that nothing has
been affirmed by this People, of the Power and Virtue of this Heavenly
Principle, that such as have turned to it have not found true, and more; and
that one half had not been told to them of what they have seen of the Power,
Purity, Wisdom and Goodness of God therein.

VI. The Accomplishments with which this Principle fitted, even some of the
meanest of this People, for their Work and Service: Furnishing some of them
with an Extraordinary Understanding in Divine Things, and an admirable Fluency
and Taking way of Expression, which gave occasion to some to wonder, saying of
them, as of their Master, Is not this such a Mechanick's Son, how came he by
this Learning? As from thence others took occasion to suspect and insinuate
they were Jesuits in Disguise, who have had the Reputation of Learned Men for
an Age past, though there was not the least ground of Truth for any such
Reflection. In that their Ministers are known, the places of their Abode, their
Kindred and Education.

VII. That they rise Low, and Despised, and Hated, as the Primitive Christians
did, and not by the help of Worldly Wisdom or Power, as former Reformations, in
part, have done: But in all things, it may be said, this People were brought
forth in the Cross; in a Contradiction to the Ways, Worship, Fashions and
Customs of this World; yea, against Wind and Tide, that so no Flesh might Glory
before God.

VIII. They could have no design to themselves in this Work, thus to expose
themselves to Scorn and Abuse; to spend and be spent: Leaving Wife and
Children, House and Land, and all that can be accounted dear to Men, with their
lives in their Hands, being daily in Jeopardy to declare this Primitive
Message, revived in their Spirits, by the good Spirit and Power of God. viz.

That God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all; and that he has sent his
Son a Light into the World to enlighten all Men in order to Salvation; and that
they that say they have Fellowship with God and are his Children and People,
and yet walk in Darkness, viz. in Disobedience to the Light in their
Consciences, and after the Vanity of this World, they lie and do not the Truth.
But that all such as love the Light, and bring their Deeds to it, and walk in
the Light, as God is Light, the blood of Jesus Christ his Son should cleanse
them from all Sin. Thus Jo. 1.4.19. Chapter 3.20.21. 1 Jo. 1.5.6.7. IX. Their known
great Constancy and Patience in Suffering for their Testimony, in all the
Branches of it; and that sometimes unto Death, by Beatings, Bruisings, long and
crowded Imprisonments, and Noisome Dungeons. Four of them in New England Dying
by the Hands of the Executioner, purely for Preaching amongst that People:
Besides Banishments, and Excessive Plunders and Sequestrations of their Goods
and Estates, almost in all parts; not easily to be expressed, and less to have
been endured, but by those that have the support of a good and glorious Cause;
refusing Deliverance by any indirect ways or means, as often as it was offered
to them.

X. That they did not only, not show any disposition to Revenge, when it was at
any time in their Power; but forgave their cruel Enemies; showing Mercy to
those that had none for them.

XI. their Plainness with those in Authority, like the Ancient Prophets, not
fearing to tell them, to their Faces, of their Private and Public Sins; and
their Prophecies to them of their Afflictions and Downfall, when in the Top of
their Glory. Also of some National Judgments, as of the Plague, and Fire of
London, in express Terms: And likewise particular ones to diverse Persecutors,
which accordingly overtook them, and were very remarkable in the Places where
they dwelt, which in time may be made public for the Glory of God.

Thus, Reader, thou see this People in their Rise, Principles, Ministry and
Progress; both their General and Particular Testimony: By which thou may be
informed, how, and upon what foot they Sprang and became so considerable a
People. It remains next that I show also their Care, Conduct and Discipline, as
a Christian and Reformed Society; that they might be found living up to their
own Principles and Profession. And this, the rather, because they have hardly
suffered more in their Character from the Unjust Charge of Error, than by the
false Imputation of Disorder: Which Calumny indeed has not failed to follow all
the true steps that were ever made to Reformation, and under which Reproach
none suffered more than the Primitive Christians themselves, that were the
Honor of Christianity, and the great Lights and Examples of their own and
succeeding Ages.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Discipline and Practice of this People as a Religious Society. The
Church Power they own and exercise, and that which they reject and condemn:
With the Method of their Proceedings against Erring and Disorderly Persons.

THis People increasing daily both in Town and Country, an Holy Care fell upon
some of the Elders among them, for the Benefit and Service of the Church. And
the first Business in their View, after the Example of the Primitive Saints,
was the exercise of Charity; to supply the Necessities of the Poor, and answer
the like Occasions. Wherefore Collections were early and liberally made for
that and diverse other Services in the Church, and entrusted with Faithful Men,
Fearing God, and of Good Report, who were not weary in well-doing; adding often
of their own, in large Proportions, which they never brought to account, or
desired should be known, much less restored to them, that none might want, nor
any Service be retarded or disappointed.

They were also very careful, that every one that belonged to them, answered
their Profession in their Behavior among Men, upon all Occasions; that they
lived Peaceably, and were in all things good Examples. They found themselves
engaged to record their Sufferings and Services: And in case of Marriage, which
they could not perform in the usual Methods of the Nation, but among
themselves, they took care that all things were clear between the Parties and
all others: And it was then rare that any one entertained an Inclination to a
Person on that account, till he or she had communicated it secretly to some
very Weighty and Eminent Friends among them, that they might have a sense of
the matter; looking to the Council and Unity of their Brethren as of great
Moment to them. But because the Charge of the Poor, the Number of Orphans,
Marriages, Sufferings and other matters multiplied; and that it was good that
the Churches were in some way and Method of proceeding in such Affairs among
them, to the end they might the better correspond upon occasion, where a Member
of one Meeting might have to do with one of another; It pleased the Lord in his
Wisdom and Goodness, to open the Understanding of the first Instrument of this
Dispensation of Life, about a Good and Orderly way of Proceeding: Who felt an
Holy Concern to visit the Churches in Person thoroughout this Nation, to begin
and establish it among them: And by his Epistles the like was done in other
Nations and Provinces abroad; which he also afterward Visited, and helped in
that Service, as shall be observed when I come to speak of him.

Now the Care, Conduct and Discipline, I have been speaking of, and which are
now practiced among this People, is as follows.

This Godly Elder, in every County where he traveled, exhorted them, that
Some, out of every Meeting of Worship, should meet together once in the Month,
to confer about the Wants and Occasions of the Church. And as the Case
required, so those Monthly Meetings were fewer or more in number in every
respective County: Four or Six Meetings of Worship, usually making one Monthly
Meeting of Business. And accordingly the Brethren met him from place to place,
and began the said Meetings, viz. For the Poor, Orphans, Orderly Walking,
Integrity to their Profession, Births, Marriages, Burials, Sufferings, etc. And
that these Monthly Meetings should, in each County, make up one Quarterly
Meeting, where the most Zealous and Eminent Friends of the County should
assemble to Communicate, Advise and Help one another, especially when any
Business seemed difficult, or a Monthly Meeting was tender of determining a
Matter.

Also that these several Quarterly Meetings should digest the Reports of their
Monthly Meetings, and prepare one for each respective County, against the
Yearly Meeting, in which all Quarterly Meetings resolve; which is held in
London: Where the Churches in this Nation, and Other Nations and Provinces Meet
by chosen Members of their Respective Counties, both mutually to communicate
their Church Affairs, and to advise and be advised in any depending Case to
Edification. Also to provide a Requisite Stock for the discharge of general
Expenses for general Services in the Church, not needful to be here
particularized.

At these Meetings Any of the Members of the Churches may come, if they please,
and speak their Minds freely, in the Fear of God, to any matter; but the Mind
of each Quarterly Meeting, therein represented, is chiefly understood, as to
particular Cases, in the Sense delivered by the Persons deputed or chosen for
that Service by the said Meeting.

During their Yearly Meeting, to which their other Meetings referr in their
Order, and naturally Resolve themselves, care is taken by a Select Number, for
that service chosen by the General Assembly, to draw up the Minutes of the said
Meeting, upon the several matters that have been under Consideration therein;
to the end that the Respective Quarterly and Monthly Meetings may be informed
of all Proceedings; together with a general Exhortation to Holiness, Unity and
Charity. Of all which Proceedings in Yearly, Quarterly and Monthly Meetings,
due Record is kept by some One appointed for that Service, or that has
voluntarily undertaken it. These Meetings are opened, and usually concluded in
their Solemn waiting upon God, who is sometimes graciously pleased to answer
them with as signal Evidences of his Love and Presence, as in any of their
Meetings of Worship.

It is further to be Noted, that in these Solemn Assemblies, for the Church's
Service, there is no one presides among them after the manner of the Assemblies
of other People: Christ only being their President, as he is pleased to appear
in Life and Wisdom in any one or more of them, to whom, whatever be their
Capacity or Degree, the rest adhere with a Firm Unity; not of Authority but
Conviction, which is the Divine Authority and Way of Christ's Power and Spirit
in his People: Making good his blessed Promise, That he would be in the Midst
of his, where and whenever they were met together in his Name, even to the End
of the World. So be it.

Now it may be expected, I should here set down what sort of Authority is
exercised by this People, upon such Members of their Society as correspond not
in their Lives with their Profession, and that are Refractory to this good and
wholesome Order settled among them; and the rather, because they have not wanted
their Reproach and Sufferings from some Tongues and Pens, upon this occasion,
in a plentiful manner.

The Power they exercise is such as Christ has given to his own People, to the
End of the World, in the Persons of his Disciples; viz. To Oversee, Exhort,
Reprove, and after long Suffering and Waiting upon the Disobedient and
Refractory, to Disown them, as any more of their Communion, or that they will
any longer stand Charged in the Sight and Judgment of God or Men, with their
Conversation or Behavior as one of them, until they Repent. The subject
matter about which this Authority, in any of the foregoing Branches of it, is
Exercised, is First, in Relation to common and general Practice; and Secondly,
about those things that more strictly referr to their own Character and
Profession, and which distinguish them from all other Professors of
Christianity; avoiding two Extremes upon which many Split, viz. Persecution and
Libertinism. That is, a Coercive Power, to Whip People into the Temple; that
such as will not Comform, though against Faith and Conscience, shall be punished
in their Persons or Estates: Or leaving all loose and at large, as to Practice;
and so unaccountable to all but God and the Magistrate. To which hurtful
Extreme, nothing has more contributed than the Abuse of Church Power, by such
as suffer their Passions and private Interests to prevail with them to carry it
to Outward Force and Corporal Punishment. A Practice they have been taught to
dislike, by their extreme Sufferings, as well as their known Principle for an
Universal Liberty of Conscience.

On the other hand, they equally dislike an Independancy in Society. An
unaccountableness in Practice and Conversation to the Rules and Terms of their
own Communion, and to those that are the Members of it. They distinguish
between Imposing any Practice that immediately regards Faith or Worship (which
is never to be done or suffered, or submitted unto) and requiring Christian
Compliance with those Methods that only respect Church Business in its more
Civil part and Concern; and that regard the Discreet and Orderly Maintenance of
the Character of the Society as a Sober and Religious Community. In short, what
is for the Promotion of Holiness and Charity, that Men may Practice what they
profess, live up to their own Principles, and not be at Liberty to give the Lie
to their own Profession without Rebuke, is their Use and Limit of Church Power.
They compel none to them, but oblige those that are of them to walk Suitably,
or they are denied by them: That is all the Mark they set upon them, and the
Power they Exercise, or Judge a Christian Society can Exercise, upon those that
are the Members of it.

The way of their Proceeding against such as have Lapst or Transgrest, is this.
He is visited by some of them, and the matter of Fact laid Home to him, be it
any evil Practice against known and general Virtue, or any Branch of their
Particular Testimony, which he, in Common, professes with them. They labor
with him in much Love and Zeal for the good of his Soul, the Honor of God, and
Reputation of their Profession, to own his Fault and condemn it, in as ample a
Manner as the Evil or Scandal was given by him; which for the most part, is
performed by some Written Testimony under the parties Hand: And if it so happen
that the party prove Refractory, and is not willing to clear the Truth, they
profess, from the Reproach of his or her evil doing or Unfaithfulness, they,
after repeated Entreaties and due waiting for a Token of Repentance, give forth
a Paper to disown such a Fact, and the Party offending: Recording the same as a
Testimony of their care for the Honor of the Truth they profess.

And if he or she shall clear their Profession and themselves, by sincere
Acknowledgment of their Fault, and Godly sorrow for so doing, they are received
and looked upon again as Members of their Communion. For as God, so his true
People Vpbraid no Man after Repentance.

This is the account I had to give of the People of God called Quakers, as to
their Rise, Appearance, Principles and Practices in this Age of the World, both
with Respect to their Faith and Worship, Discipline and Conversation. And I
Judge it very proper in this place, because it is to Preface the Journal of the
First Blessed and Glorious Instrument of this Work, and for a Testimony to Him,
in his singular Qualifications and Services, in which he abundantly excelled in
this day, and are worthy to be set forth as an Example to all succeeding Times;
to the Glory of the Most High God, and for a just Memorial to that Worthy and
Excellent Man, his Faithful Servant and Apostle to this Generation of the World.

CHAP. V.
Of the First Instrument or Person by whom God was pleased to gather this
People into the way they Profess. His Name G. Fox: His many excellent
Qualifications; showing a Divine, and not a Human Power to have been their
Original in Him. His Troubles and Sufferings both from without and within. His
End and Triumph.

I Am now come to the Third Head or Branch of my Preface, viz. The Instrumental
Author. For it is Natural for some to say, Well, here is the People and Work,
but where and who was the Man, the Instrument: He that in this Age was sent to
begin this Work and People? I shall, as God shall enable me, declare who and
what he was, not only by report of others, but from my own long and most inward
Converse and intimate knowledge of him; for which my Soul blesses God, as it
has often done: And I doubt not, but by that time I have discharged my self of
this part of my Preface, my serious Readers will believe I had good Cause so to
do.

The Blessed Instrument of, and in this day of God, and of whom I am now about
to Write, was George Fox, distinguished from another of that Name, by that
Other's addition of Younger to his Name in all his Writings; not that he was so
in Years, but that he was so in the Truth: But he was also a Worthy Man,
Witness and Servant of God in his time.

But this George Fox was Born in Leichestershire, about the Year 1624. He
descended of Honest and Sufficient Parents, who endeavored to bring him up, as
they did the rest of their Children, in the Way and Worship of the Nation:
Especially his Mother, who was a Woman accomplished above most of her Degree in
the place where she lived. But from a Child he appeared of another Frame of
Mind than the rest of his Brethren; being more Religious, Inward, Still, Solid,
and Observing beyond his Years, as the Answers he would give, and the Questions
he would put, upon occasion, manifested, to the Astonishment of those that
heard him, especially in Divine Things.

His Mother taking Notice of his Singular Temper, and the Gravity, Wisdom and
Piety that very early shined through him, refusing Childish and Vain Sports,
and Company, when very Young: She was Tender and Indulgent over him, so that
from her he met with little Difficulty. As to his Employment he was brought up
in Country Business, and as he took most delight in Sheep, so he was very
skilful in them: An Employment that very well suited his mind in several
Respects, both for its Innocence and Solitude; and was a just Emblem of his
after Ministry and Service.

I shall not break in upon his own Account, which is by much the best that can
be given, and therefore desire, what I can, to avoid saying any thing of what
is said already, as to the particular Passages of his coming forth: But, in
general, when he was somewhat above Twenty he left his Friends, and visited the
most Retired and Religious People in those Parts: And some there were short of
few, if any, in this Nation, who waited for the Consolation of Israel Night and
Day; as Zacherias, Anna and good Old Simeon did of Old Time. To these he was
sent, and these he sought out in the Neighboring Countys, and among them he
Sojourned till his more ample Ministry came upon him. At this time he taught
and was an Example of Silence, endeavoring to bring them from
Self-performances: Testifying of and turning them to the Light of Christ within
them, and encouraging them to wait in Patience to feel the Power of it to stir
in their Hearts, that their Knowledge and Worship of God might stand in the
Power of an Endless Life, which was to be found in the Light, as it was obeyed
in the Manifestation of it in man. For in the Word was Life, and that Life is
the Light of Men. Life in the Word, Light in Men; and Life in Men too, as the
Light is obeyed: The Children of the Light living by the Life of the Word, by
which the Word begets them again to God, which is the Regeneration and
New Birth, without which there is no coming into the Kingdom of God: And to
which, whoever comes, is greater than John; that is, than John's Dispensation,
which was not that of the Kingdom, but the Consummation of the Legal, and
Forerunning of the Gospel Times, the time of the Kingdom. Accordingly, several
Meetings were gathered in those Parts; and thus his Time was employed for some
Years.

In 1652. He being in his usual Retirement, his Mind exercised toward the
Lord, upon a very High Mountain, in some of the hither parts of Yorkshire, as I
take it, he had a Vision of the great Work of God in the Earth, and of the way
that he was to go forth in a public Ministry, to begin it. He saw People, as
thick as Motes in the Sun, that should, in time, be brought Home to the Lord,
that there might be but one Shepherd and one Sheepfold in all the Earth. There
his Eye was directed Northward, beholding a great People that should receive
him and his Message in those Parts. Upon this Mountain he was moved of the Lord
to sound out his Great and notable Day, as if he had been in a great Auditory;
and from thence went North, as the Lord had shown him. And in every place where
he came, if not before he came to it, he had his particular Exercise and
Service shown to him, so that the Lord was his Leader indeed. For it was not in
vain that he Travailed; God in most places sealing his Commission with the
Convincement of some of all sorts, as well Publicans as sober Professors of
Religion. Some of the first and most Eminent of those that came forth in a
public Ministry, and which are now at Rest, were Richard Farnsworth, James
Nayler, William Dewsberry, Tho. Aldam, Francis Howgil, Edward Buroughs, John
Camm, John Audland, Richard Hubberthorn, T. Tailor, T. Holmes, Alexander
Parker, William Simpson, William Catton, John Stubbs, Robert Withers, Tho. Low,
Josiah Coal, John Burnyeat, Robert Lodge, Thomas Salt-house, and many more
Worthies, that cannot be well here Named; together with diverse yet living of
the first and Great Convincement; who after the knowledge of God's purging
Judgments in themselves, and some time of waiting in silence upon him, to feel
and receive Power from on High, to speak in his Name, (which none else rightly
can, though they may use the same Words) They felt Its Divine Motions, and were
frequently drawn forth, especially to visit the Public Assemblies, to reprove,
inform and exhort them: Sometimes in Markets, Fairs, Streets, and by the
High-way-side; calling People to Repentance, and to turn to the Lord with their
Hearts as well as their Mouths; directing them to the Light of Christ within
them, to see, examine, and consider their ways by, and to eschew the evil, and
do the Good and Acceptable Will of God. And they suffered great Hardships for
this their Love, and Good Will; being often Stockt, Stoned, Beaten, Whipped and
Imprisoned; though Honest Men, and of Good Report where they lived; that had
left Wives and Children, and Houses and Lands to visit them with a living Call
to Repentance. And though the Priests generally set themselves to oppose them,
and write against them, and insinuated most False and Scandalous Stories to
Defame them; stirring up the Magistrates to suppress them, especially in those
Northern Parts; yet God was pleased so to fill them with his living Power, and
give them such an open Door of utterance in his Service, that there was a
mighty Convincement over those Parts.

And through the tender and singular Indulgence of Judge Bradshaw and Judge
Fell, and Coll. West, in the Infancy of things, the Priests were never able to
gain the point they labored for; which was to have proceeded to Blood; and, if
possible, Herod-like, by a Cruel exercise of the Civil Power, to have cut them
off and rooted them out of the Country. But especially Judge Fell, who was not
only a Check to their Rage in the Course of Legal Proceedings, but otherwise,
upon occasion; and finally countenanced this People. For his Wife receiving the
Truth with the First, it had that Influence upon his Spirit, being a Just and
Wise Man, and seeing in his own Wife and Family a full Confutation of all the
popular Clamours against the Way of Truth, that he covered them what he could,
and freely opened his Doors, and gave up his House to his Wife and her Friends;
not valuing the Reproach of Ignorant or of Evil Minded People; Which I here
mention, to His and her Honor, and which will be, I believe, an Honor and a
Blessing to such of their Name and Family, as shall be found in that
Tenderness, Humility, Love and Zeal for the Truth and People of the Lord.

That House was for some Years, at first especially, till the Truth had opened
its way into the Southern parts of this Island, an Eminent Receptacle of this
People. Others, of good Note and Substance in those Northern Countries, had also
opened their Houses, with their Hearts, to the many Publishers, that, in a
short time, the Lord had raised to declare his Salvation to the People; and
(...) Meetings of the Lord's Messengers were frequently held, to communicate
their Services and Exercises, and Comfort and Edify one anohter in their
Blessed Ministry.

But least this may be thought a Digression, having touched upon this before, I
return to this Excellent Man: And for his Personal Qualities, both Natural,
Moral and Divine, as they appeared in his Converse with Brethren, and in the
Church of God, take as follows.

I. He was a Man that God endued with a Clear and Wonderful Depth: A Discerner
of others Spirits, and very much a Master of his own. And though that side of
his Understanding which lay next to the World, and especially the Expression of
it, might sound Uncouth and Unfashionable to Nice Ears, his matter was
nevertheless very profound; and would not only bear to be often considered, but
the more it was so, the more Weighty and Instructing it appeared. And as
Abruptly and Brokenly as sometimes his Sentences would seem to fall from him,
about Divine Things, it is well known they were often as Texts to many fairer
Declarations. And indeed it showed, beyond all Contradiction, that God sent
him; in that no Arts or Parts had any share in the matter or manner of his
Ministry; and that so many Great, Excellent and Necessary Truths, as he came
forth to Preach to Mankind, had therefore nothing of Man's Wit or Wisdom to
recommend them. So that as to Man he was an Original, being no Man's Copy. And
his Ministry and Writings show they are from one that was not Taught of Man,
nor had Learned what he said by Study. Nor were they Notional or Speculative,
but sensible and Practical Truths, tending to Conversion and Regeneration, and
the setting up of the Kingdom of God in the Hearts of Men; and the way of it
was his Work. So that I have many times been overcome in my self, and been made
to say, with my Lord and Master upon the like Occasion; I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Wise and
Prudent of this World, and revealed them to Babes: For many times has my Soul
bowed in an Humble Thankfulness to the Lord, that he did not choose any of the
Wise and Learned of this World to be the first Messenger in our Age, of his
blessed Truth to Men; but that he took one that was not of High Degree, or
Elegant Speech, or Learned, after the way of this World, that his Message and
Work, he sent him to do, might come with less Suspicion, or Jealousy of Humane
Wisdom and Interest, and with more Force and Clearness upon the Consciences of
those that sincerely Sought the way of Truth, in the Love of it. I say,
beholding with the Eye of my mind, which the God of Heaven had opened in me,
the Marks of God's Finger and Hand visibly, in this Testimony, from the
Clearness of the Principle, the Power and Efficacy of it, in the Exemplary
Sobriety, Plainness, Zeal, Steadiness, Humility, Gravity, Punctuality, Charity
and Circumspect care in the Government of Church Affairs, which shined in his
and their Life and Testimony that God employed in this Work, it greatly
confirmed me that it was of God, and engaged my Soul in a Deep Love, Fear,
Reverence and Thankfulness for his Love and Mercy therein to Mankind: In which
Mind I remain, and shall, I hope, through the Lord's strength, to the end of my
Days.

II. In his Testimony or Ministry, he much labored to open Truth to the
Peoples Understandings, and to Bottom them upon the Principle, and Principal,
Christ Jesus, the Light of the World; that by bringing them to something that
was from God in themselves they might the better know and judge of him and
themselves.

III. He had an Extraordinary Gift in opening the Scriptures. He would go to
the Marrow of things, and show the Mind, Harmony and Fullfilling of them with
much Plainness, and to great Comfort and Edification.

IV. The Mystery of the first and second Adam, of the Fall and Restoration, of
the Law and Gospel, of Shadows and Substance, of the Servants and Sons State,
and the fullfiling of the Scriptures in Christ, and by Christ, the True Light,
in all that are his, through the Obedience of Faith, were much of the Substance
and Drift of his Testimonies. In all which he was witnessed to be of God, being
sensibly felt to speak that which he had received of Christ, and was his own
Experience, in that which never Errs or Fails.

V. But above all, he excelled in Prayer. The Inwardness and Weight of his
Spirit, the Reverence and Solemnity of his Address and Behavior, and the
Fewness and Fullness of his Words, have often struck, even Strangers, with
Admiration, as they used to reach others with Consolation. The most Awful,
Living, Reverent Frame I ever Felt or Beheld, I must say was His in Prayer. And
truly it was a Testimony he knew and lived nearer to the Lord than other Men;
for they that know him most will see most reason to approach him with Reverence
and Fear.

VI. He was of an Innocent Life, no Busie-body, nor Self-seeker; neither
Touchy, nor Critical: What fell from him was very Inoffensive, if not very
Edifying. So Meek, Contented, Modest, Easy, Steady, Tender; it was a pleasure
to be in his Company. He exercised no Authority but over Evil, and that every
where, and in all; but with Love, Compassion and Long-suffering. A most
Merciful Man, as ready to Forgive, as unapt to take or give an Offense.
Thousands can truly say he was of an Excellent Spirit and Savor among them,
and because thereof of the most Excellent Spirits loved him with an unfeigned
and unfading Love.

VII. He was an Incessant Labourer: For in his Younger time, before his many,
great and deep Sufferings and Travels had enfeebled his Body for Itinerant
Services, he labored much in the Word, and Doctrine, and Discipline, in
England, Scotland and Ireland; turning many to God, and confirming those that
were convinced of the Truth, and settling Good Order, as to Church Affairs,
among them. And toward the Conclusion of his Traveling Services, between the
Years Seventy One, and Seventy Seven, he Visited the Churches of Christ in the
Plantations in America, and in the United Provinces, and Germany, as his
Journal Relates; to the Convincement and Consolation of many. After that time
he chiefly resided in and about the City of London; and besides his Labor in
the Ministry, which was Frequent and Serviceable, He writ much, both to them
that are within, and those that are without the Communion. But the care he took
of the Affairs of the Church in General was very great.

VIII. He was often where the Records of the Business of the Church are kept,
and where the Letters from the many Meetings of God's People over all the World
use to come: Which Letters he had read to him, and Communicated them to the
Meeting that is Weekly held there for such Services; and he would be sure to
stir them up to answer them, especially in Suffering Cases: Showing great
Sympathy and Compassion upon all such Occasions; carefully looking into the
Respective Cases, and endeavoring Speedy Relief, according to the Nature of
them. So that the Churches, or any of the Suffering Members thereof, were sure
not to be forgotten or delayed in their Desires if he were there.

IX. As he was Unwearied, so he was Undaunted in his Services for God and his
people: He was no more to be moved to Fear than to Wrath. His Behavior at
Darby, Litchfield, Appleby, before Oliver Cromwell, at Launston, Scarborough,
Worcester and Westminster Hall, with many other places and Exercises, did
abundantly evidence it to his Enemies as well as his Friends.

But as, in the Primitive Times, some rise up against the blessed Apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ, even from among those that they had turned to the Hope
of the Gospel, and they became their greatest Trouble; so this Man of God had
his share of Suffering from some that were convinced by him, who, through
prejudice or mistake, ran against him, as one that sought Dominion over
Conscience, because he pressed, by his presence or Epistles, a ready and zealous
compliance with such good and wholesome things as tended to an Orderly
Conversation about the Affairs of the Church, and in their walking before men.
That which contributed much to this ill Work, was, in some, a begrudging of
this Meek Man the love and esteem he had and deserved in the Hearts of the
people, and weakness in others, that were taken with their groundless
Suggestions of Imposition and blind Obedience.

They would have had every man Independent, that as he had the Principle in
himself, he should only stand and fall to that, and no Body else: Not
considering that the Principle is One in all; and though the measure of Light
or Grace might differ, yet the Nature of it was the same; and being so, they
struck at the Spiritual Unity, which a people, guided by the same Principle,
are naturally led into: So that what is an evil to One, is so to All, and what
is Virtuous, Honest, and of good Repute to One, is so to All, from the Sense
and Savor of the One Universal Principle which is common to all, and which the
disaffected also profess to be the Root of all True Christian Fellowship, and
that Spirit into which the people of God drink, and come to be
Spiritually-minded, and of one Heart and one Soul.

Some weakly mistook good Order in the Government of Church Affairs, for
Discipline in Worship, and that it was so pressed or recommended by Him and other
Brethren: And thereupon they were ready to reflect the same things that
Dissenters had very reasonably objected upon the National Churches, that have
coercively pressed Conformity to their Respective Creeds and Worships. Whereas
these things related wholly to Conversation, and the Outward (and as I may say)
Civil part of the Church; that men should walk up to the Principles of their
Belief, and not be wanting in Care and Charity. But though some have stumbled
and fallen through mistakes, and an unreasonable Obstinancy, even to a
Prejudice; yet, blessed be God, the Generality have returned to their First
Love, and seen the Work of the Enemy, that loses no Opportunity or Advantage by
which he may check or hinder the Work of God, and disquiet the Peace of his
Church, and chill the Love of his people to the Truth, and one to another; And
there is hope of diverse of the few that yet are at a Distance.

In all these Occasions, though there was no Person the Discontented struck so
sharply at, as this Good Man, he bore all their Weakness and Prejudice, and
returned not Reflection for Reflection; but forgave them their weak and bitter
Speeches, praying for them that they might have a Sense of their hurt, and see
the Subtilty of the Enemy to Rend and Divide, and return into their First Love
that thought no Ill.

And truly I must say that though God had visibly clothed him with a Divine
Preference and Authority, and indeed his very presence expressed a Religious
Majesty; yet he never abused it; but held his place in the Church of God with
great Meekness, and a most engaging Humility and Moderation. For upon all
Occasions, like his blessed Master, he was a Servant to all; holding and
exercising his Eldership in the Invisible Power that had gathered them, with
Reverence to the Head and Care over the Body: And was received, only in that
Spirit and Power of Christ, as the First and Chief Elder in this Age: Who, as
he was therefore worthy of double Honor, so for the same Reason it was given
by the Faithful of this day; because his Authority was inward and not outward,
and that he got it and kept it by the Love of God, and Power of an Endless
Life. I write my Knowledge, and not Report, and my Witness is True; having been
with him for Weeks and Months together on diverse Occasions, and those of the
nearest and most exercising Nature; and that by Night and by Day, by Sea and by
Land; in this and in Foreign Countries: And I can say, I never saw him out of
his Place, or not a Match for every Service or Occasion.

For in all things he acquitted himself like a Man, yea a strong Man, a New and
Heavenly-minded Man. A Divine and a Naturalist, and all of God Almighty's
making. I have been surprised at his Questions and Answers in Natural things:
That whilst he was Ignorant of useless and Sophistical Science, he had in him
the Grounds of useful and commendable Knowledge, and cherisht it every where.
Civil, beyond all Forms of Breeding, in his Behavior. Very Temperate, Eating
Little, and Sleeping Less, though a Bulky Person.

Thus he Lived and Sojourned among us: And as he lived, so he died; feeling the
same Eternal Power that had raised and preserved him, in his last Moments. So
full of Assurance was he, that he Triumphed over Death; and so even in his
Spirit to the last, as if Death were hardly worth Notice or a mention:
Recommending to some of us with him the Dispatch and Dispersion of an Epistle
just before given forth by him to the Churches of Christ throughout the World,
and his own Books: But above all, Friends, and of all Friends, those in Ireland
and America, twice over. Saying, Mind poor Friends in Ireland and America.

And to some that came in and enquired how he found himself, he answered, Never
heed, the Lord's Power is over all Weakness and Death, the Seed reigns, Blessed
be the Lord: Which was about Four or Five Hours before his Departure out of
this World. He was at the great Meeting near Lombard Street on the First Day of
the Week, and it was the Third following about Ten at Night When he left us;
being at the House of H. Goldney in the same Court. In a good Old Age he went,
after having lived to see his Childrens Children to many Generations in the
Truth. He had the Comfort of a short Illness, and the Blessing of a clear Sense
to the last: And we may truly say, with a Man of God of Old, that being Dead,
he yet Speaks: And though now absent in Body, he is Present in Spirit:
Neither Time nor Place being able to interrupt the Communion of Saints, or
dissolve the Fellowships of the Spirits of the Just. His Works praise him,
because they are to the praise of him that worked by him; for which his
Memorial is and shall be blessed. I have done, as to this part of my Preface,
when I have left this short Epitaph to his Name. Many Sons have done virtuously
in this Day, but, Dear George, thou Excellest them All.

CHAP. VI.
Containing Five several Exhortations. First General, reminding this People of
their Primitive In^egrity and Simplicity. Secondly in Particular, to the
Ministry. Thirdly to the Young Convinced. Fourthly to the Children of Friends.
Fifthly to those that are yet Strangers to this People and Way, to whom this
Book, (and That it was Presace to, in its former Edition) may come. All the
several Exhortations accommodated to their several States and Conditions; that
all may answer the end of God's love to them, viz. God's Glory and their own
Salvation.

AND now, Friends, you that profess to walk in the way that this Blessed Man
was sent of God to turn us into, suffer I beseech you the word of Exhortation,
as well Fathers as Children, and Elders as Young Men. The Glory of this Day,
and Foundation of the Hope that has not made us ashamed since we were a People,
you know is that Blessed Principle of Light and Life of Christ which we
profess, and Direct all people to, as the great and Divine Instrument and Agent
of Man's Conversion to God. It was by this that we were first Touched, and
effectually enlightened, as to our Inward State; which put us upon the
Consideration of our Latter End, causing us to set the Lord before our Eyes,
and to Number our Days that we might apply our Hearts to Wisdom. In that Day we
judged not after the Sight of the Eye, or after the Hearing of the Ear, but
according to the Light and Sense this Blessed Principle gave us, so we judged
and acted in reference to Things and Persons, our selves and others; yea,
toward God our Maker. For being quickened by it in our Inward Man, we could
easily discern the difference of things, and feel what was Right, and what was
Wrong, and what was Fit and what not, both in reference to Religious and Civil
Concerns. That being the ground of the Fellowship of all Saints, it was in That
our Fellowship stood. In this we desired to have a Sense one of another, acted
toward one another, and all Men; in Love, Faithfulness and Fear.

In the feeling of the Stirrings and Motions of this Principle in our Hearts,
we drew near to the Lord, and waited to be prepared by it, that we might feel
Drawings and Movings, before we approached the Lord in Prayer, or opened our
Mouths in Ministry. And in our Beginning and Ending with This stood our
Comfort, Service and Edification. And as we ran faster or fell short, we made
Burdens for our selves to bear; our Services finding in our selves a Rebuke
instead of an Acceptance; and in lieu of Well done, who has required this at
your hands? In that day we were an Exercised People, our very Countenances and
Deportment declared it.

Care for others was then much upon us, as well as for our selves; especially
of the Young Convinced. Often had we the Burden of the Word of the Lord to our
Neighbors, Relations and Acquaintance; and sometimes Strangers also. We were
in Travail likewise for one another Preservation: Not seeking, but shuning
Occasions of any Coldness or Misunderstanding; treating one another as those
that believed and felt God present. Which kept our Conversation Innocent,
Serious and Weighty; guarding our selves against the Cares and Friendships of
the World. We held the Truth in the Spirit of it, and not in our own Spirits,
or after our own Wills and Affections.

They were bowed and brought into Subjection, in so much that it was visible to
them that knew us, we did not think our selves at our own Dispose, to go where
we List, or say or do what we List, or when we List. Our Liberty stood in the
Liberty of the Spirit of Truth; and no Pleasure, no Profit, no Fear, no Favor
could draw us from this retired, strict and watchful Frame. We were so far from
seeking occasions of Company, that we avoided them what we could; pursuing our
own Business, with Moderation, instead of meddling with other Peoples
Unnecessarily.

Our Words were Few and Savoury, our Looks Composed and Weighty, and our whole
Deportment very Observable. True it is, that this Retired and strict sort of
Life from the Liberty of the Conversation of the World, exposed us to the
Censures of many, as Humourists, Conceited and Self-righteous Persons, etc. But
it was our Preservation from many Snares, to which others were continually
exposed, by the prevalency of the lust of the Eye, the lust of the Flesh, and
the pride of Life, that wanted no Occasions or Temptations to excite them
abroad in the Converse of the World.

I cannot forget the Humility and Chaste Zeal of that Day. Oh, how Constant at
Meetings, how Retired in them, how firm to Truth's Life, as well as Truth's
Principles! And how Entire and United in our Communion, as indeed became those
that profess One Head, even Christ Jesus the Lord.

This being the Testimony and Example the Man of God, beforementioned, was
sent to Declare and Leave amongst us, and we having Embraced the same as the
Merciful Visitation of God to us, the Word of Exhortation at this time is, That
we continue to be found in the Way of this Testimony, with all Zeal and
Integrity, and so much the more, by how much the Day draws near.

And First, as to you my Beloved and much Honored Brethren in Christ, that are
in the Exercise of the Ministry: Oh, feel Life in your Ministry! Let Life be
your Commission, your Wellspring and Treasury in all such Occasions; else, you
well know, there can be no begetting to God, since nothing can quicken or make
People alive to God but the Life of God: And it must be a Ministry in and from
Life that enlivens any People to God. We have seen the Fruit of all other
Ministries by the few that are turned from the Evil of their Ways. It is not
our Parts, or Memory, the repetition of former Openings, in our own will and
time, that will do God's Work. A dry Doctrinal Ministry, however sound in
Words, can reach but the Ear, and is but a Dream at the Best: There is another
Soundness, that is soundest of all, viz. Christ the power of God. This is the
Key of David, that Opens and none Shuts, and Shuts, and none can Open: As the
Oil to the Lamp, and the Soul to the Body, so is that to the best of Words.
Which made Christ to say, My Words they are Spirit, and they are Life; that is,
they are from Life, and therefore they make you alive that receive them. If the
Disciples, that had lived with Jesus, were to stay at Jerusalem till they
received it; much more must we wait to receive before we Minister, if we will
turn People from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's power to God.

I fervently bow my Knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
you may always be like minded, that you may ever wait Reverently for the coming
and opening of the Word of Life, and attend upon it in your Ministry and
Service, that you may serve God in his Spirit. And be it little, or be it much,
it is well; for much is not too much, and the least is enough, if from the
motion of God's Spirit; and without it, verily, never so little is too much,
because to no profit.

For it is the Spirit of the Lord immediately, or through the Ministry of his
Servants, that teaches his People to profit; and to be sure, so far as we take
him along with us in our Services, so far we are profitable and no farther. For
if it be the Lord that must work all things in us for our own Salvation, much
more is it the Lord that must work in us for the Conversion of others. If
therefore it was once a Cross to us to Speak, though the Lord required it at
our Hands; let it never be so to be silent, when he does not.

It is one of the most dreadful Sayings in the Book of God, That he that adds
to the Words of the Prophecy of this Book, God will add the Plagues written in
this Book. To keep back the Counsel of God, is as Terrible; for he that takes
away from the Words of the Prophecy of this Book, God shall take away his part
out of the Book of Life. And truly, it has great Caution in it to those that
use the Name of the Lord, to be well assured the Lord Speaks, that they may not
be found of the Number of those that add to the Words of the Testimony of
Prophecy, which the Lord gives them to bear; nor yet to mince or diminish the
same, both being so very offensive to God.

Wherefore, Brethren, let us be careful neither to out-go our Guide, nor yet
loiter behind Him; since he that makes Haste, may miss his Way, and he that
stays behind, lose his Guide. For even those that have Received the Word of the
Lord, had need wait for Wisdom, that they may see how to divide the Word
aright: Which plainly implies that it is possible for one, that has received
the Word of the Lord, to miss in the Dividing and Application of it, which must
come from an Impatiency of Spirit, and a Self-working, which makes an unsound
and dangerous Mixture; and will hardly beget a right minded living People to
God.

I am earnest in this, above all other Considerations, as to Public Brethren;
well knowing how much it concerns the present and future State, and
preservation of the Church of Christ Jesus, that has been gathered and built up
by a Living and Powerful Ministry, that the Ministry be held, preserved and
continued in the Manifestations, Motions and Supplies of the same Life and
Power from time to time.

And where ever it is observed that any one does Minister more from Gifts and
Parts, than Life and Power, though they have an Enlightened and Doctrinal
Understanding, let them in time be advised and admonished for their
Preservation, because insensibly such will come to depend upon a
Self-sufficiency; to forsake Christ the living Fountain, and hew out unto
themselves Cisterns that will hold no living waters: And by degrees such will
come to draw others from waiting upon the Gift of God in themselves, and to
feel it in others, in order to their strength and Refreshment, to wait upon
them, and to turn from God to Man again, and so to make Shipwreck of the Faith
once delivered to the Saints, and of a good Conscience toward God; which are
only kept by that Divine Gift of Life, that begat the one, and awakn'd and
sanctified the other in the beginning.

Nor is it enough that we have known the Divine Gift, and in it have reached to
the Spirits in Prison, and been the Instruments of the Convincing of others of
the way of God, if we keep not as low and poor in our selves, and as depending
upon the Lord as ever: Since no Memory, no Repetitions of former Openings,
Revelations or Enjoyments will bring a Soul to God, or afford Bread to the
Hungry, or Water to the Thirsty, unless Life go with what we say, and that must
be waited for.

O that we may have no other Fountain, Treasure or Dependence! That none may
presume at any rate to Act of themselves for God, because they have long Acted
from God; that we may not supply want of waiting with our own Wisdom, or think
that we may take less Care, and more liberty in speaking than formerly; and
that where we do not feel the Lord by his Power to open us and enlarge us,
whatever be the Expectation of the People, or has been our Customary Supply and
Character, we may not exceed or fill up the time with our own.

I hope we shall ever Remember who it was that said, Of your selves you can do
nothing: Our sufficiency is in him. And if we are not to speak our own Words,
or take Thought what we should say to Men in our defense, when exposed for our
Testimony, surely we ought to speak none of our own Words, or take Thought what
we shall say in our Testimony and Ministry in the Name of the Lord to the Souls
of the People; for then of all Times, and of all other Occasions should it be
fulfilled in us; for it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of my Father that
speaks in you.

And indeed, the Ministry of the Spirit must and does keep its Analogy and
Agreement with the Birth of the Spirit; that as no Man can Inherit the Kingdom
of God, unless he be born of the Spirit, so no Ministry can beget a Soul to
God, but that which is from the Spirit. For this, as I said before, the
Disciples waited before they went forth; and in this our Elder Brethren, and
Messengers of God in our Day, waited, visited and reached to us. And having
begun in the Spirit, let none ever hope or seek to be made perfect in the
Flesh: For what is the Flesh to the Spirit, or the Chaff to the Wheat? And if
we keep in the Spirit, we shall keep in the Unity of it, which is the ground of
true Fellowship. For by Drinking into that one Spirit, we are made one People
to God, and by it we are continued in the Unity of the Faith, and the Bond of
Peace. No Envying, no Bitterness, no Strife can have place with us. We shall
watch always for Good, and not for Evil over one another, and rejoice
exceedingly, and not begrudge at one another increase in the Riches of the
Grace with which God replenisheth his Faithful Servants.

And Brethren, as to you is committed the Dispensation of the Oracles of God,
which give you frequent Opportunities, and great Place with the People among
whom you Travail, I beseech you that you would not think it sufficient to
declare the Word of Life in their Assemblies, however Edifying and Comfortable
such opportunities may be to you and them: But, as was the Practice of the Man
of God before mentioned in great Measure, when among us, inquire the State of
the several Churches you Visit; who among them are Afflicted or Sick, who are
Tempted, and if any are Unfaithful or Obstinate; and endeavor to Issue those
things in the Wisdom and Power of God, which will be a glorious Crown upon your
Ministry. As that prepares your way in the Hearts of the People to receive you
as Men of God, so it gives you Credit with them to do them good by your Advice
in other Respects. The Afflicted will be Comforted by you, the Tempted
Strengthened, the Sick Refreshed, the unfaithful Convicted and Restored, and
such as are Obstinate Softened and fitted for Reconciliation; which is Clenching
the Nail, and applying and Fastening the general Testimony by this particular
Care of the several Branches of it; in reference to them more immediately
concerned in it.

For though Good and Wise Men, and Elders too, may reside in such places, who
are of Worth and Importance in the general, and in other Places; yet it does
not always follow, that they may have the Room they deserve in the Hearts of
the People they live among; or some particular occasion may make it unfit for
him or them to use that Authority. But you that Travail as God's Messengers, if
they Receive you in the Greater, shall they refuse you in the Less? And if they
own the general Testimony, can they withstand the particular Application of it
in their own Cases? Thus, ye will show your selves Workmen indeed, and carry
your Business before you, to the praise of his Name that has called you from
Darkness to Light, that you might turn others from Satan's Power unto God and
his Kingdom, which is within. And Oh that there were more of such Faithful
Laborers in the Vineyard of the Lord! Never more need since the day of God.

Wherefore I cannot but Cry and Call aloud to you that have been long
Professors of the Truth, and know the Truth in the convincing Power of it, and
have had a sober Conversation among Men, yet content your selves only to know
Truth for your selves, to go to Meetings, and Exercise an ordinary Charity in
the Church, and an honest Behavior in the World; and limit your selves within
those Bounds; feeling ttle or no concern upon your Spirits for the Glory of the
Lord in the Prosperity of his Truth in the Earth, more than to be glad that
others succeed in such Service. Arise Ye in the Name and Power of the Lord
Jesus! Behold how white the Fields are unto Harvest in this and other Nations,
and how few Able and Faithful Laborers there are to work therein! Your
Country-Folks Neighbors and Kindred want to know the Lord and his Truth, and
to Walk in it. Does nothing lie at your Door upon their Account? Search and
see, and lose no time, I beseech you, for the Lord is at Hand.

I do not Judge you, there is one that Judges all Men, and his Judgment is
true. You have mightily increased in your outward Substance: May you equally
increase in your inward Riches, and do good with both while you have a day to
do Good. Your Enemies would once have taken what you had from you, for his Name
Sake in whom you have believed; wherefore he has given you much of the World in
the Face of your Enemies. But Oh let it be your Servant and not your Master;
your Diversion rather than your Business! Let the Lord be chiefly in your Eye,
and ponder your Ways, and see if God has nothing more for you to do: And if you
find your selves short in your Account with him, then wait for his Preparation,
and be ready to receive the word of Command, and be not weary of well doing,
when you have put your Hand to the Plow, and assuredly you shall Reap, if you
faint not, the Fruit of your Heavenly Labor in God's Everlasting Kingdom.

And You Young Convinced Ones, be you Entreated and Exhorted to a Diligent and
Chaste waiting upon God, in the way of his Blessed Manifestation and appearance
of himself to you. Look not out, but within: Let not another Liberty be your
Snare: Neither Act by Imitation, but Sense and Feeling of God's Power in your
selves: Crush not the tender Buddings of it in your Souls, nor overrun, in
your desires and warmness of Affections, the Holy and Gentle Motions of it.
Remember it is a still Voice that Speaks to us in this Day, and that it is not
to be heard in the Noises and Hurries of the Mind; but is distinctly understood
in a Retired Frame. Jesus loved and chose Solitudes; often going to Mountains,
to Gardens and Sea-sides to avoid Crowds and Hurries, to show his Disciples it
was Good to be Solitary, and sit loose to the World. Two Enemies lie near your
States, Imagination and Liberty; but the plain, practical, Living, Holy Truth,
that has convinced you will preserve you, if you Mind it in your selves, and
bring all Thoughts, Inclinations and Affections to the Test of It, to see if
they are wrought in God, or of the Enemy, or your own selves: So will a true,
Taste, Discerning and Judgment be preserved to you, of what you should do and
leave undone. And in your diligence and Faithfulness in this way you will come
to inherit Substance; and Christ, the Eternal Wisdom, will fill your Treasury.
And when you are Converted, as well as Convinced, then confirm your Brethren;
and be ready to every good Word and Work, that the Lord shall call you to; that
you may be to his Praise, who has chosen you to be partakers, with the Saints
in Light, of a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, an Inheritance incorruptible, in
Eternal Habitations.

And now, as for you that are the Children of God's People, a Great Concern is
upon my Spirit for your good: And often are my Knees Bowed to the God of your
Fathers for you, that you may come to be partakers of the same Divine Life and
Power, that have been the Glory of this Day; that a Generation you may be to
God, an Holy Nation and a Peculiar People, Zealous of Good Works, when all our
Heads are laid in the Dust. Oh you Young Men and Women, let it not suffice you
that you are the Children of the People of the Lord! you must also be born
again, if you will inherit the Kingdom of God. Your Fathers are but such after
the Flesh, and could but beget you into the likeness of the first Adam; but you
must be begotten into the likeness of the second Adam by a Spiritual
Generation, or you will not, you cannot be of his Children or Offspring. And
therefore look carefully about you, Oh ye Children of the Children of God!
Consider your Standing, and see what you are in Relation to this Divine
Kindred, Family and Birth! Have you obeyed the Light, and received and walked
in the Spirit, which is the incorruptible Seed of the Word and Kingdom of God,
of which you must be born again. God is no respecter of Persons. The Father
cannot save or answer for the Child, or the Child for the Father, but in the
Sin thou Sinnest, thou shall die; and in the Righteousness thou do, through
Christ Jesus, thou shall live; for it is the Willing and Obedient that shall
eat the Good of the Land. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, such as all
Nations and People Sow, such they shall reap at the hand of the just God. And
then your many and great Privileges above the Children of other People, will
add weight in the scale against you, if you choose not the way of the Lord. For
you have had Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, and not only good
Doctrine, but good Example; and which is more, you have been turned to and
acquainted with a Principle in your selves which others have been ignorant of:
And you know you may be as Good as you please, without the Fear of Frowns and
Blows, or being turned out of doors and forsaken of Father and Mother for God's
Sake and his Holy Religion, as has been the Case of some of your Fathers in the
day they first entered into this Holy Path. And if you, after hearing and seeing
the Wonders that God has wrought in the deliverance and preservation of them,
through a Sea of Troubles, and the manifold Temporal, as well as spiritual
Blessings, that he has filled them with in the sight of their Enemies, you
should neglect and turn your backs upon so great and so near a Salvation, you
would not only be most ungrateful Children to God and them, but must expect
that God will call the Children of those that knew him not, to take the Crown
out of your Hands, and that your lot will be a dreadful Judgment at the hand of
the Lord. But Oh that it may never be so with any of you! The Lord forbid,
says my Soul.

Wherefore, Oh ye Young Men and Women, look to the Rock of your Fathers! choose
the God of your Fathers: There is no other God but him; no other Light but his;
no other Grace but his, nor Spirit but his, to Convince you, Quicken and
Comfort you; to Lead, Guide and Preserve you to God's Everlasting Kingdom: So
will you be Possessors, as well as Professors of the Truth; embracing it, not
only by Education but Judgment and Conviction: From a Sense begotten in your
Souls, through the operation of the Eternal Spirit and Power of God; by which
you may come to be the Seed of Abraham, through Faith, and the circumcision not
made with Hands, and so Heirs of the Promise made to the Fathers of an
Incorruptible Crown. That, as I said before, a Generation you may be to God,
holding up the Profession of the blessed Truth in the Life and Power of it. For
Formality in Religion is Nauseous to God and good Men; and the more so, where
any Form or Appearance has been new and peculiar, and begun and practiced upon
a Principle, with an Uncommon Zeal and Strictness. Therefore I say, for you to
fall flat and formal, and continue the profession without that Salt and Savor,
by which it is come to obtain a good Report among Men, is not to answer God's
Love, or your Parents Care, or the mind of Truth in your selves, or in those
that are without: Who, though they will not obey the Truth, have Sight and Sense
enough to see if they do that make a Profession of it. For where the Divine
Virtue of it is not felt in the Soul, and waited for, and lived in,
imperfections will quickly break out, and show themselves, and detect the
Unfaithfulness of such Persons; and that their Insides are not seasoned with
the Nature of that holy Principle which they profess.

Wherefore, Dear Children, let me entreat you to shut your Eyes at the
Temptations and Allurements of this Low and Perishing World, and not suffer
your affections to be captivated by those Lusts and Vanities that your Fathers,
for the Truths Sake, long since turned their Backs upon: But as you believe it
to be the Truth, receive it into your Hearts, that you may become the Children
of God: So that it may never be said of you, as the Evangelist Writes of the
Jews of his time, That Christ, the true Light, came to his own, but his own
received him not; but to as many as received him, to them he gave Power to
become the Children of God; which were born, not of Blood, nor of the Will of
the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. A most close and comprehensive
Passage to this occasion. You exactly and peculiarly answer to those professing
Jews, in that you bear the Name of God's People, by being the Children and
wearing of the Form of God's People: And He, by his Light in you, may be very
well said to come to his own, and if you obey it not, but turn your Back upon
it, and walk after the Vanities of your Minds, you will be of Those that
receive him not, which I pray God may never be your Case and Judgment. But that
you may be thoroughly sensible of the many and great Obligations you lie under
to the Lord for his Love, and to your Parents for their Care: And with all your
Heart, and all your Soul, and all your Strength turn to the Lord, to his Gift
and Spirit in you, and hear his Voice and obey it, that you may Seal to the
Testimony of your Fathers, by the Truth and Evidence of your own Experience;
that your Childrens Children may bless you, and the Lord for you, as those that
delivered a faithful Example, as well as Record of the Truth of God unto them.
So will the Gray Hairs of your Dear Parents, yet alive, go down to the Grave
with Joy, to see you the posterity of Truth, as well as theirs, and that not
only their Natures but Spirit shall live in you when they are gone.

I shall conclude this Account with a few Words to those that are not of our
Communion, into whose hands this may come; especially those of our own Nation.

Friends, As you are the Sons and Daughters of Adam, and my Brethren after the
Flesh, often and earnest have been my Desires and Prayers to God on your
behalf, that you may come to know your Creator to be your Redeemer and Restorer
to the Holy Image that, through Sin, you have lost, by the power and Spirit of
his Son Jesus Christ, whom he has given for the Light and Life of the World.
And Oh that you, who are called Christians, would receive him into your Heart!
For there it is you want him, and at that Door he stands knocking that you
might let him in, but you do not open to him: You are full of other Guests, so
that a Manger is his Lot among you Now, as well as of Old. Yet you are full of
Profession, as were the Jews when he came among them, who knew him not, but
rejected and evilly entreated him. So that if you come not to the Possession
and Experience of what you profess, all your Formality in Religion will stand
you in no stead in the Day of God's Judgment.

I beseech you ponder with your selves your Eternal Condition, and see what
Title, what Ground and Foundation you have for your Christianity: If more than
a Profession, and an Historical Belief of the Gospel? Have you known the
Baptism of Fire, and the Holy Ghost, and the Fan of Christ that winnows away
the Chaff in your minds, the Carnal Lusts and Affections? That Divine Leven of
the Kingdom, that, being received, Levens the whole Lump of Man, sanctifying
him throughout in Body, Soul and Spirit? If this be not the Ground of your
Confidence, you are in a Miserable Estate

You will say perhaps, that though you are Sinners, and live in the daily
Commission of Sin, and are not Sanctified, as I have been speaking, yet you
have Faith in Christ, who has born the Curse for you, and in him you are
Complete by Faith; his Righteousness being imputed to you.

But my Friends, let me entreat you not to deceive your selves, in so Important
a Point, as is that of your Immortal Souls. If you have true Faith in Christ,
your Faith will make you Clean; it will Sanctify you: For the Saints Faith was
their Victory of old: By this they overcame Sin within and Sinful Men without.
And if thou art in Christ thou walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit, whose Fruits are Manifest. Yea, thou art a New Creature: New Made, New
Fashioned; after God's Will and Mould. Old things are done away, and behold,
all things are become New: New Love, Desires, Will, Affections and Practices.
It is not any longer Thou that live; Thou Disobedient, Carnal, Worldly One;
but it is Christ that lives in thee; and to live is Christ and to die is thy
Eternal Gain: Because thou art assured, That thy Corruptible shall put on
Incorruption, and thy Mortal, Immortality; and that thou have a Glorious House
Eternal in the Heavens that will never wax Old or pass away. All this follows
being in Christ, as Heat follows Fire, and Light the Sun.

Therefore have a Care how you presume to Rely upon such a Notion, as that you
are in Christ, whilst in your old fallen Nature. For what Communion has Light
with Darkness, or Christ with Beial? Hear what the beloved Disciple tells you:
If we say we have fellowship with God, and walk in Darkness, we lie, and do not
the Truth. That is, if we go on in a Sinful way, are Captivated by our Carnal
Affections, and are not Converted to God, we walk in Darkness, and cannot
possibly in that state have any Fellowship with God. Christ Cloths them with
his Righteousness that receive his Grace in their Hearts, and deny themselves,
and take up his Cross daily, and follow him. Christ's Righteousness makes Men
inwardly Holy; of Holy Minds, Wills and Practices. It is never the less
Christ's, because we have it; for it is ours, not by Nature, but by Faith and
Adoption: It is the Gift of God. But still though not ours, as of or from our
selves, for in that Sense it is Christ's, for it is of and from him; yet it is
ours, and must be ours in Possession, Efficacy and Enjoyment, to do us any
good; or Christ's Righteousness will profit us nothing. It was after this
manner that he was made to the Primitive Christians, Righteousness,
Sanctification, Justification and Redemption; and if ever you will have the
Comfort, Kernel and Marrow of the Christian Religion, thus you must come to
learn and obtain it.

Now, my Friends, by what you have Read, and will Read in what Follows, you may
perceive that God has visited a Poor People among you with this saving
Knowledge and Testimony: Whom he has upheld and increased to this Day,
notwithstanding the fierce opposition they have met withal. Despise not the
Meanness of this Appearance: It was, and yet is (we know) a day of small
things, and of small Account with too many; and many hard and ill Names are
given to it: But it is of God, it came from him because it leads to him. This
we know, but we cannot make another know it, as we know it, unless he will take
the same way to know it that we took. The World talks of God, but what do they
do? They pray for Power, but reject the Principle in which it is. If you would
know God, and Worship and serve God as you should do, you must come to the
means he has ordained and given for that purpose. Some seek it in Books, some
in Learned Men, but what they look for, is in themselves, though not of
themselves, but they overlook it. The Voice is too still, the Seed too small,
and the Light shines in Darkness. They are abroad, and so cannot divide the
Spoil: But the Woman that lost her Silver, found it at Home, after she had
lighted her Candle and swept her House. Do you so too, and you shall find what
Pilate wanted to know, viz. Truth. Truth in the Inward Parts, so valuable in
the sight of God.

The light of Christ within, who is the Light of the World, (and so a Light to
you, that tells you the Truth of your Condition) leads all, that take heed unto
it, out of Darkness into God's mavelous Light. For Light grows upon the
Obedient: It is sown for the Righteous, and their way is a shining Light, that
shines forth more and more to the perfect day.

Wherefore, O Friends, Turn in, Turn in I beseech you: Where is the Poison,
There is the Antidote. There you want Christ, and There you must find him; and
blessed be God, There you may find him. Seek and you shall find, I testify for
God. But then you must seek aright; with your whole Heart, as Men that seek for
their Lives, yea, for their Eternal Lives: Diligently, Humbly, Patiently, as
those that can taste no Pleasure, Comfort or Satisfaction in any thing else,
unless you find him whom your Souls want, and desire to know and love above
all. O it is a Travail, a Spiritual Travail! Let the Carnal, Profane World
think and say as it will. And through This Path you must walk to the City of
God, that has Eternal Foundations, if ever you will come there.

Well! And what does this blessed Light do for you? Why, 1. It sets all your
Sins in order before you: It detects the Spirit of this World in all its Baits
and Allurements, and shows how Man came to fall from God, and the fallen Estate
he is in. 2. It begets a Sense and Sorrow, in such as believe in it, for this
fearful Lapse. You will then see him Distinctly whom you have Pierced, and all
the Blows and Wounds you have given him by your Disobedience, and how you have
made him to serve with your Sins; and you will Weep and Mourn for it, and your
Sorrow will be a Godly Sorrow. 3. After this it will bring you to the Holy
Watch, to take Care that you do so no more, and that the Enemy surprise you not
again. Then Thoughts, as well as Words and Works, will come to Judgment, which
is the way of Holiness, in which the Redeemed of the Lord do walk. Here you
will come to love God above all, and your Neighbors as your selves. Nothing
Hurts, Nothing Harms, Nothing makes Afraid on this Holy Mountain. Now you come
to be Christ's indeed; for you are his in Nature and Spirit, and not your own.
And when you are Thus Christ's, then Christ is yours, and not before. And here
Communion with the Father, and with the Son you will know, and the Efficacy of
the Blood of Cleansing, even the Blood of Jesus Christ, that Immaculate Lamb,
which speaks better things than the Blood of Abel; and which cleanses from
all Sin the Consciences of those that, through the living Faith, come to be
sprinkled with it from dead Works to serve the living God.

To Conclude, Behold the Testimony and Doctrine of the People called Quakers!
Behold their Practice and Discipline! And behold the blessed Man and Men (at
least many of them) that were sent of God in this Excellent Work and Service!
All which is more particularly expressed in the Annals of that Man of God:
Which I do heartily recommend to my Readers most serious Perusal; and beseech
Almighty God, that his Blessing may go along with both, to the Convincement of
many, as yet Strangers to this Holy Dispensation, and also to the Edification
of the Church of God in General. Who, for his manifold and repeated Mercies and
Blessings to his People, in this day of his great Love, is worthy ever to have
the Glory, Honor, Thanksgiving and Renown; and be it rendered and ascribed,
with Fear and Reverence, through him in whom he is well pleased, his Beloved
Son and Lamb, our Light and Life, that sits with him upon the Throne, World
without End. Amen,

Says One, that God has long since Mercifully favored with his Fatherly
Visitation, and who was not Disobedient to the Heavenly Vision and Call; to
whom the Way of Truth is more Lovely and Precious than ever, and that knowing
the Beauty and Benefit of it above all Worldly Treasure, has chosen it for his
Chiefest Joy; and therefore recommends it to thy Love and Choice, because he is
with great Sincerity and Affection thy Soul's Friend, William Penn.

The END.

