THE Peoples Ancient and Just Liberties ASSERTED, IN THE TRIAL OF William Penn,
and William Mead, At the Sessions held at the Old Bailey in London, the first,
third, fourth and fifth of Sept. 70. against the most Arbitrary procedure of
that Court.

Isa. 10. 1, 2. Woe unto them that Decree Unrighteous Decrees, and write
grievousness, which they have prescribed; to turn away the Needy from Judgment,
and to take away the right from the Poor, etc.

Psalm. 94. 20. Shall the Throne of Iniquity have fellowship with thee, which
frames mischief by a Law.

Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.

Old Bailey, 1st. 3d. 4th, 5th of Sept. 1670.

Printed in the Year, 1670.

To the English Reader.
IF ever it were time to speak or write, it is now, so many strange Occurrances,
requiring both.

How much thou art concerned in this ensuing Trial (where not only the
Prisoners, but the Fundamental Laws of England) have been most Arbitrarily
Arraigned, Read, and thou may plainly judge.

Liberty of Conscience, is counted a Pretense for Rebelliion, and Religious
Assemblies, Routs, and Riots; and the Defenders of both, are by them, reputed
Factious and disaffected.

Magna Charta, is Magnaf -- with the Recorder of London; and to demand Right an
Affront to the Court.

Will and Power are their great Charter, but to call for Englands, is a Crime,
incurring the penalty of their Bale-Dock, and Nastyhole, nay, the menace of a
Gag, and Iron Shackles too.

The Jury (though proper Judges) of Law and Fact) they would have overruled in
both, as if their Verdict signified no more, then to echo back the illegal
charge of the Bench; and because their courage, and honesty did more then hold
pace, with the threat and abuse of those, who sat as Judges, (after two days
and two nights restraint for a Verdict) in the end were fined and imprisoned,
for giving it.

O! what monstrous, and illegal proceedings are these? Who reasonably can call
his Coat his own? When Property, is made subservient to the Will and Interest
of his Judges; or, who can truly esteem himself a Free man? When all Pleas for
liberty are esteemed Sedition, and the Laws, that give, and maintain them, so
many insignificant pieces of formality.

And What do they less then plainly tell us so, who at will and pleasure break
open our Locks, rob our Houses, raze their Foundations, imprison our Persons,
and finally deny us Justice to our relief; as if they then acted most like
Christian men, when they were most barbarous, in ruining such, as really are
so; and that no Sacrifice could be so acceptable to God, as the destruction of
those, that most fear him.

In short, That the Conscientious should only be obnoxious, and the just demand
of our Religious Liberty, the reason, why we should be denied our civil freedom
(as if to be a Christian and an Englishman were inconsistant) and that so much
solicitude and deep contrivance, should be employed only, to ensnare, and ruin,
so many ten thousand conscientious Families) so eminently, industrous,
serviceable, and exemplary; whilst Murders can so easily obtain pardons, Rapes
be remitted, public Uncleanness pass unpunisht, and all manner of Levity,
Prodigallity, Excess, Profaneness, and Atheism, universally connived at; if
not in some respect manifestly encouraged) cannot but be detestably abhorrent,
to every serious and honest mind.

Yet that this lamentable state is true, and the present Project in hand, let
London's Recorder, and Canterburies Chaplain be heard.

The first in his public Panegerick, upon the Spanish inquisition, highly
admiring the Prudence of the Romish Church, in the erection of it, as an
excellent way, to prevent Schism, which unhappy expression, at once passes
sentence, both against our fundamental Laws, and Protestant. Reformation.

The second, In his printed Mercenary discourse against Toleration, asserting
for a main Principle, That it would be less injurious, to the Government, to
dispense with profane and loose Persons, then to allow a toleration to
religious Dissenters: It were to over-do the business, to say any more, where
there is so much said already.

And therefore to conclude, we cannot choose but admonish all, as well
Persecutors, to relinquish their Heady, Partial, and Inhumane Prosecutions (as
what will certainly issue in disgrace here, and inevitable condign punishment
hereafter) as those who yet dare express their moderation (however out of
fashion, or made the brand of Phanatischism) not to be huf d, or menaced, out
of that excellent temper, to make their parts, and persons subservient, to the
base humors, and sinister designs of the bigest mortal upon Earth: But to
reverence and obey, the Eternal just God, before whose great Tribunal, all must
render their accounts, and where he will recompense to every Person according
to his works.

The Trial of William Penn and William Mead.
AS there can be no Observation, where there is no Action; so its impossible,
there should be a juditious Intelligence, without due Observation.

And since there can be nothing more seasonable then a right Information,
especially of Public Acts; and well knowing, how industrious some will be, to
mis-represent, this Trial to the disadvantage of the Cause and Prisoners, it
was thought requisite, in defense of both, and for the satisfaction of the
People, to make it more public; nor can there be any business wherein the
People of England are more concerned, then in that which relates to their civil
and Religious Liberties, questioned in the Persons abovenamed, at the
Old Bailey, the first, third, fourth and fifth of Sept. 1670.

There being present,
Sam. Starling, Mayor, Tho. Howel, Recorder. Tho. Bludworth, Alder. William
Peak, Alderm. Richard Ford, Alderman. Joseph Shelden, Alderman. John Smith,
James Edwards, Sheriffs.
Crier, O Yes, Thomas Veer, John. Bushel, John Hammond, Charles Milson, Gregory
Walklet, John Brightman, Will. Plumsted, Henry Henley, Thomas Damask, Henry
Michel, William Lever, John Baily.

The Form of the Oath.
You shall well and truly try, and true Deliverance make betwixt our Sovereign
Lord the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar, according to your Evidence; So
help you God.

That, William Penn Gent. and William Mead late of London, Linen Draper, with
diverse other Persons to the Jurors unknown, to the number of three hundred, the
14th day August, in the 22th year of the King, about eleaven of the clock in
the ^orenoon, the same day, with force and arms, etc. in the Parish of St. Bent
Grace-Church in Bridge-ward, London, in the Street called
Gratious-Church-Street, unlawfully and tumultuously did assemble and congregate
themselves together, to the disturbance of the Peace of the said Lord the King:
and the aforesaid William Penn, and William Mead, together with other Persons,
to the Jurors aforesaid unknown, then and there so assemble and congregate
together; the aforesaid William Penn, by agreement between him and William
Mead, before made; and by abetment of the aforesaid William Mead then and
there, in the open Street, did take upon himself to preach and speak, and then,
and there, did preach and speak unto the aforesaid William Mead, and other
Persons there, in the Street aforesaid, being assembled and congregated
together, by reason whereof a great concourse and tumult of People in the
Street aforesaid, then, and there, along time did remain and continue, in
contempt of the said Lord the King, and of his Law, to the great disturbance of
his peace, to the great terror and disturbance of many of his Liege people and
Subjects, to the ill example of all others, in the like case Offenders, and
against the peace of the said Lord the King, his Crown, and dignity.

What say you, William Penn and William Mead, are you guilty, as you stand
indicted, in manner and form, as aforesaid, or not guilty.

Penn, It is impossible, that we should be able to remember the indictment
verbatim, and therefore we desire a Copy of it, as is customary in the like
occasions.


Rec. You must first plead to the indictment, before you can have a Copy of it.


Pen. Iam unacquainted with the formality of the Law, and therefore, before I
shall answer directly, I request two things of the Court. First, that no
advantage may be taken against me, nor I deprived of any benefit, which I might
otherwise have received. Secondly, that you will promise me^ a fair hearing,
and liberty of making my defense.


Court, No advantage shall be taken against you; you shall have liberty; you
shall be heard.


Pen. Then I plead not guilty in manner and form.


Cla. What say thou William Mead, art thou guilty in manner and form, as
thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


Mead, I shall desire the same liberty as is promised William Penn.


Court, You shall have it.


Mead, Then I plead not guity in manner and form.


The Court adjourned until the afternoon. Crier, O yes, etc.


Cla. Bring William Penn and William Mead* to the Bar.


Obser. The said Prisoners were brought, but were set aside, and other business
prosecuted. Where we cannot choose but observe, that it was the constant and
unkind practices of the Court, to the Prisoners, to make them wait upon the
Trials of Fellons and Murderers, thereby designing in all probability, both to
affront and tire them.


After five hours attendance, the Court broke up and adjourned to the third
instant. The third of September, 1670. the Court sat.

Cry, O yes, etc.


Cla. Bring William Penn and William Mead before the Bar.


Mayor. Sirrah, who bid you put off their Hats? put on their Hats again.


Obser. Whereupon one of the Officers putting the Prisoners Hats upon their
Heads (pursuant to the Order of the Court) brought them to the Bar.


Record. Do you know where you are?


Pen. Yes.


Record. Do not you know it is the Kings Court?


Pen. I know it to be a Court, and I suppose it to be the Kings Court.


Record. Do you not know there is respect due to the Court?


Pen. Yes.


Record. Why do you not pay it then?


Pen. I do so.


Record. Why do you not pull off your Hat then?


Pen. Because I do not believe, that to be any respect.


Record. Well, the Court sets forty Marks a piece upon your Heads, as a Fine
for your contempt of the Court.


Pen. I desire it might be observed, that we came into the Court with our Hats
off, (that is, taken off) and if they have been put on since, it was by order
from the Bench; and therefore not we, but the Bench should be fined.


Mead, I have a Question to ask the Recorder, Am I fined also?


Recor. Yes.


Mead, I desire the Jury, and all people to take notice of this injustice of
the Recorder; who spoke to me to pull off my Hat? and yet has he put a fine
upon my head. O fear the Lord, and dread his Power, and yield to the guidance
of his holy Spirit, for he is not far from every one of you.


The Jury Sworn again. Obser. J. Robinson Lieutenant of the Tower,
disingeniously objected against John Bushel, as if he had not kissed the Book,
and therefore would have him sworn again; though indeed, it was on purpose, to
have made use of his tenderness of Conscience in avoiding reiterated Oaths, to
have put him by his being a Jury-man, apprehending him to be a person, not fit
to Answer their arbitrary ends.


The Clark read the indictment, as aforesaid. Clar. Crier, Call James Cook into
the Court, give him his Oath.


Cla. James Cook lay your hand upon the book, the evidence you shall give to
the Court, betwixt our Sovereign the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar, shall
be the Truth, and the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth; so help you God,
etc.


Cook. I was sent for, from the Exchange, to go and disperse a Meeting in
Gratious-street, where I saw Mr. Penn speaking to the people, but I could not
hear what he said, because of the noise; I endeavored to make way to take him,
but I could not get to him for the crowd of people; upon which Captain Mead
came to me, about the Kennel of the Street, and desired me to let him go on;
for when he had done, he would bring Mr Penn to me.


Cour. What number do you think might be there?


Cook. About three or four hundred People.


Cour. Call Richard Read, Give him his Oath.

Read being sworn was asked, what do you know concerning the Prisoners at the
Bar.


Read, My Lord, I went to Gracious- street, where I found a great crowd of
People, and I heard Mr. Pen preach to them; and I saw Captain Mead speaking to
Leivtenant Cook, but what he said, I could not tell.


Mead, What did William Penn say?


Read. There was such a great noise, that I could not tell what he said.


Mead, Jury observe this Evidence, He says he heard him preach, and yet says,
he does not know what he said.

Jury take notice, he swears now a clean contrary thing, to what he swore
before the Mayor, when we were committed: For now he swears that he saw me in
Gratious-street, and yet swore before the Mayor, when I was committed, that he
did not see me there. I appeal to the Mayor himself, if this be not true; but
no answer was given.


Cour. What number do you think might be there?


Read. About four or five hundred.


Pen. I desire to know of him what day it was?


Read. Answ. the 14th day of August.


Pen. Did he speak to me, or let me know he was there; for I am very sure I
never saw him?


Cla. Crier call into the Court.


Cour. give him his Oath.

My Lord, I saw a great number of People, and Mr Penn I suppose was speaking; I
see him make a motion with his hands, and heard some noise, but could not
understand what he said; but for Captain Mead I did not see him there.


Rec. What say you Mr. Mead? were you there?


Mead, It is a Maxim in your own Law, Nemo tenetur accusare seipsum, which if
it be not true Latin, I am sure it is true Enlish, That no man is bound to
accuse himself: And why do thou offer to ensnare me, with such a question?
Does not this show thy malice? Is this like unto a Judge, that ought to be
Counsel for the Prisoner at the Bar?


Record. Sir, Hold your Tongue, I did not go about to ensnare you.


Pen. I desire we may come more close to the point, and that silence be
commanded in the Court.


Cry. O yes, All manner of Persons keep silence upon pain of imprisonment --
silence in the Court.


Pen. We confess our selves to be so far from recanting, or declining to
vindicate the assembling of our selves, to Preach, Pray, or Worship the
Eternal, Holy, Just God, that we declare to all the World, that we do believe
it to be our indispensable duty, to meet incessantly upon so good an account;
nor shall all the powers upon Earth, be able to divert us from reverencing and
adoring our God, who made us.


Brown. You are not here for worshipping God, but for breaking the Law; you do
your selves agreat deal of wrong in going on in that discourse.


Pen. I affirm I have broken no Law, nor am I guilty of the Indictment, that is
laid to my charge, and to the end, the Bench, the Jury, and my self, with these
that hear us, may have a more direct understanding of this procedure: I desire
you would let me to know by what Law it is you prosecute me, and upon what Law
you ground my indictment.


Rec. Upon the common Law.


Pen. where is that common Law?


Rec. You must not think that I am able to run up so many years, and over so
many adjudged Cases, which we call Common Law, to answer your curiosity.


Pen. This Answer I am sure is very short of my Question, for if it be Common,
it should not be so hard to produce.


Rec. Sir, will you plead to your Indictment?


Pen. Shall I plead to an Indictment, that has no Foundation in Law, if it
contain that Law you say I have broken, why should you decline to produce that
Law, since it will be impossible for the Jury to determine, or agree to bring
in their Verdict, who have not the Law produced, by which they should measure
the truth of this Indictment, and the guilt or contrary of my Fact?


Rec. You are a saucy Fellow, speak to the Indictment.


Pen. I say, it is my place to speak to matter of Law; I am arraigned a
Prisoner, my liberty, which is next to life it self, is now concerned; Obser.
at this time several upon the Bench urged hard upon the Prisoner to bear him
down.
you are many Mouths and Ears against me, and if I must not be allowed to make
the best of my Case, it is hard: I say again, unless you show me, and the
People, the Law you ground your Indictment upon; I shall take it for granted,
your proceedings are merely Arbitrary.


Rec. The Question is whether you are guilty of this Indictment?


Pen. The Question is not whether I am guilty of this Indictment, but whether
this Indictment be legal, it is too general and imperfect an Answer, to say it
is the Common Law, unless we knew both where, and what it is; For where there
is no Law, there is no Transgression; and that Law which is not in being, is so
far from being Common, that it is no Law at all.


Rec. You are an impertinent Fellow, will your teach the Court what Law is? Its
Lex non scripta, that which many have studied thirty or forty years to know,
and would you have me to tell you in a moment?


Pen. Certainly, If the Common Law be so hard to be understood, its far from
being very Common; but if the Lord Cook, in his Institutes, be of any
consideration, he tells us, That Common Law is Common Right, and that Common
Right is the great Charter-Priviledges: Confirmed 9 Hen. 3. 29. 25 Edw. 1. 1. 2
Edw. 3. 8. Cook Instit. 2. p. 56.


Rec. Sir, you are a troublesome Fellow, and it is not for the honor of the
Court to suffer you to go on.


Pen. I have asked but one Question, and you have not answered me; though the
Rights and Privileges of every English man be concerned in it.


Rec. If I should suffer you to ask Questions till to morrow morning you would
be never the wiser.


Pen. That is according as the Answers are.


Rec. Sir, We must not stand to hear you talk all night.


Pen. I design no affront to the Court, but to be heard in my just Plea, and I
must plainly tell you, that if you will deny me Oyer of that Law, which you
suggest I have broken, you do at once deny me an acknowledged right, and
evidence to the whole World your resolution to sacrifice the Privileges of
English men to your Sinister and Arbitrary designs.


Rec. Take him away: my Lord, if you take not some course with this pestilent
Fellow, to stop his mouth, we shall not be able to do any thing to Night.


May. Take him away, Take him away, turn him into the Bale-dock.


Pen. These are but so many vain exclamations; Is this Justice or true
Judgment? Must I therefore be taken away because I plead for the fundamental
Laws of England? However, this I leave upon your Consciences, who are of the
Jury (and my sole Judges) that if these Ancient Fundamental Laws, which relate
to liberty and property, and (are not limited to particular persuasions in
matters of Religion) must not be indispensibly maintained and observed; Who can
say he has right to the Coat upon his back? Certainly our liberties are openly
to be invaded, our Wives to be ravished, our Children slaved, our Families
ruined, and our Estates led away in Triumph, by every sturdy Beggar and
malicious Informer, as their Trophies, but our (pretended) Forfeits for
Conscience sake; the Lord of Heaven and Earth will be Judge between us in this
matter.


Rec. Be silent there.


Pen. I am not to be silent in a Case wherein I am so much concerned, and not
only my self, but many ten thousand Families besides.


Obser. They having rudely haled him into the Bale-dock, William Mead they left
in Court, who spoke as follows.


Mead. You men of the Jury, here I do now stand, to answer to an Indictment
against me, which is a bundle of Stuff, full of Lies and Falsehoods; for therein
I am accused, that I met vi et armis, illicite et tumultuose.: time was, when I
had freedom to use a carnal Weapon, and then I thought I feared no man; but now
I fear the Living God, and dare not make use thereof, nor hurt any man; nor do
I know I demeaned my self as a tumultuous person: I say, I am a peaceable man,
therefore it is a very proper question what William Penn demanded in this Case,
An Oyer of the Law, on which our Indictment is grounded.


Recor. I have made answer to that already.


Mead. Turning his face to the Jury, says, You men of the Jury, who are my
Judges, if the Recorder will not tell you what makes a Riot, a Rout, or an
unlawful Assembly, Cook, he that once they called the Lord Cook, tells us what
makes a Riot, a Rout, and an unlawful Assembly -- A Riot is when three, or
more, are met together to beat a man, or to enter forcibly into another man's
Land, to cut down his Grass, his Wood, or break down his Pales.


Obser. Here the Recorder interrupted him, and said, I thank you Sir, that you
will tell me what the Law is, scornfully pulling off his Hat.


Mead. Thou may put on thy Hat, I have never a Free for thee now.


Brown. He talks at random, one while an Independent, another while some other
Religion, and now a Quaker, and next a Papist.


Mead. Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ad ipsum.


May. You deserve to have your Tongue cut out.


Rec. If you discourse on this manner, I shall take occasion against you.


Mead, Thou did promise me, I should have fair liberty to be heard; Why may I
not have the privilege of an English man? I am an English man, and you might
be ashamed of this dealing.


Rec. I look upon you to be an Enemy to the Laws of England, which ought to be
observed and kept, nor are you worthy of such privileges, as others have.


Mead, The Lord is Judge between me and thee in this matter.


Obser. Upon which they took him away into the Bale-dock, and the Recorder
proceeded to give the Jury their charge, as follows.


Rec. You have heard what the indictment is, It is for preaching to the People,
and drawing a tumultuous Company after them, and he was speaking; if they
should not be disturbed, you see they will go on; there are three or four
Witnesses, that have proved this, that he did preach there, that Mr Mead did
allow of it; after this, you have heard by substantial Witnesses what is said
against them: Now we are upon the Matter of fact, which you are to keep to, and
observe, as what has been fully sworn at your peril.


Obser. The Prisoners were put out of the Court, into the Bale-doke, and the
charge given to the Jury in their absence at which W. P. with a very raised
voice, it being a considerable distance from the Bench, spoke.


Pen. I appeal to the Jury, who are my Judges, and this great Assembly, whether
the proceedings of the Court are not most arbitrary, and void of all Law, in
offering to give the Jury their Charge in the absence of the Prisoners; I say,
it is directly opposite to, and destructive of the undoubted right of every
English Prisoner, as Cook in the 2 Iustit. 29. on the Chap. of Magna Charta
speaks.


Obser. The Recorder being thus unexpectedly lasht for his extra-juditial
procedure, said with an enraged smile.


Rec. Why, ye are present, you do hear, do you not?


Pen. No thanks to the Court, that commanded me into the Bale-dock; and you of
the Jury take notice, that I have not been heard, neither can you legally
depart the Court, before I have been fully heard, having at least ten or twelve
Material points to offer, in order to invallid their Indictment.


Rec. Pull that Fellow down, pull him down.


Mead. Are these according to the rights and privileges of English men, that
we should not be heard, but turned into the Bale-dock, for making our defense,
and the Jury to have their Charge given them in our absence; I say these are
Barbarous and Unjust proceedings.


Rec. Take them away into the Hole; to hear them talk all night, as they would,
that I think does not become the honor of the Court, and I think you (i. e.)
the Jury) your selves would be tired out, and not have patience to hear them.


Obser. The Jury were commanded upto agree upon their verdict, the Prisoners
remaining in the stinking Hole; after an hour and halfs time eight came down
agreed, but four remained above, and the Court sent an Officer for them, and
they accordingly came down, the Bench used many unworthy threats to the four
that discented; and the Recorder, addressing himself to Beshell, said, Sir, You
are the cause of this disturbance, and manifestly show your self an abettor of
faction, I shall set a Mark upon you Sir.


J. Robinson, Mr. Bushel, I have known you near this fourteen years; you have
thrust your self upon this Jury, because you think there is some service for
you, I tell you, you deserve to be indicted more then any man that has been
brought to the Bar this day.


Bush. No Sir John, There were threescore before me, and I would willingly have
got off, but could not.


Bloodw. I said when I saw M. Bushel, what I see is come to pass, for I knew he
would never yield. Mr. Bushel, we know what you are.


May. Sirrah, you are an impudent Fellow, I will put a mark upon you.


Obser. They used much menacing Language, and behaved themselves very
imperiously to the Jury, as persons not more void of Justice then sober
Education: After this Barbarous Usage, they sent them to consider of bringing
in their Verdict, and after some considerable time they returned to the Court.
Silence called for, and the Jury called by their names.


Cla. Are you agreed upon your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Cla. Who shall speak for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Cla. Look upon the Prisoners at the Bar; How say you? Is William Penn guilty
of the matter wherefore he stands indicted in manner and form, or not guilty?


Fore-m. Guilty of speaking in Gracious-Street.


Court. Is that all?


Fore-m. That is all I have in commission.


Recor. You had as good say nothing.


May. Was it not an unlawful Assembly? you mean he was speaking to a Tumult of
People there?


Fore-m. My Lord, This was all I had in Commission.


Obser. Here some of the Jury seemed to buckle to the questions of the Court,
upon which Bushel, Hammond, and some others opposed themselves, and said, they
allowed of no such word, as an unlawful Assembly in their Verdict; at which the
Recorder, Mayor, Robinson and Bloodworth took great occasion to villifie them
with most opprobious language; and this Verdict not serving their turns, the
Recorder expressed himself thus.


Recor. The Law of England will not allow you to part till you have given in
your Verdict.


Jury. We have given in our Verdict, and we can give in no other.


Recor. Gentlemen, you have not given in your Verdict, and you had as good say
nothing; therefore go and consider it once more, that we may make an end of
this troublesome business.


Jury. We desire we may have Pen, Ink and Paper.


Obser. The Court adjourned for half an hour; which being expired, the Court
returns, and the Jury not long after.

The Prisoners were brought to the Bar, and the Juries names called over.


Clar. Are you agreed of your verdict.


Jur. Yes.


Clar. Who shall speak for you?


Jur. Our Foreman.


Clar. What say you, look upon the Prisoners; Is William Penn guilty in manner
and form, as he stands indicted, or not guilty.


Fore-m. Here is our Verdict, holding forth a piece of Paper to the Clark of
the Peace, which follows.

WE the Jurors, hereafter named, do find William Pen to be guilty of Speaking
or Preaching to an Assembly, met together in Gratious-Street, the 14th of
August last 1670. And that William Mead not guilty of the said indictment.


Fore-m. Thomas Veer, Edward Bushel, John Hammond, Henry Henley, Henry Michel,
John Brightman, Charles Milson, Gregory Walklet, John Baily, William Lever,
James Damask, Will. Plumsted.



Obser. This both Mayor and Recorder resented at so high a rate, that they
exceeded the bounds of all reason and civility.


May. What will you be lead by such a silly Fellow as Bushel? an impudent
canting Fellow; I warrant you, you shall come no more upon Juries in haste: You
are a Foreman indeed, addressing himself to the Foreman, I thought you had
understood your place better.


Rec. Gentlemen, You shall not be dismissed till we have a Verdict, that the
Court will accept; and you shall be locked up, without Meat, Drink, Fire, and
Tobacco; you shall not think thus to abuse the Court; we will have a Verdict,
by the help of God, or you shall starve for it.


Pen. My Jury, who are my Judges, ought not to be thus menaced; their Verdict
should be free, and not compelled; the Bench ought to wait upon them, but not
forestaul them; I do desire that Justice may be done me, and that the arbitrary
resolves of the Bench may not be made the measure of my Juries verdict.


Rec. Stop that prateing Fellows mouth, or put him out of the Court.


May. You have heard that he preached, that he gathered a company of tumultuous
people, and that they do not only disobey the martial Power, but civil also.


Pen. It is a great mistake, we did not make the tumult, but they that
interrupted us; the Jury cannot be so ignorant, as to think, that we met there,
with a design to disturb the civil Peace, since (1st.) we were by force of Arms
kept out of our Lawful House, and met as near it in the street, as their
Soldiers would give us leave; and (2d.) because it was no new thing, (nor with
the circumstances expressed in the indictment) but what was usual and customary
with us; it is very well known that we are a peaceable People, and cannot offer
violence to any man.


Obser. The Court being ready to break up, and willing to huddle the Prisoners
to their Goal, and the Jury to their chamber, Penn spoke as follows.


Pen. The agreement of twelve men is a Verdict in Law, and such a one being
given by the Jury, I require the Clark of the Peace to record it, as he will
answer it, at his peril. And if the Jury bring in another Verdict,
contradictory to this, I affirm they are perjured men in Law. (and looking upon
the Jury said) You are English men, mind your Privilege, give not away your
Right.


Bush. etc. Nor will we ever do it.


Obser. One of the Jury men, pleaded indisposition of body, and therefore
desired to be dismissed.


May. You are as strong as any of them; starve them; and hold your Principles.


Rec. Gentlemen, You must be contented with your hard fate, let your patience
overcome it; for the Court is resolved to have a verdict, and that before you
can be dismissed.


Jury. We are agreed, we are agreed, we are agreed.


Obser. The Court swore several persons, to keep the Jury all night without
Meat, Drink, Fire, or any other accommodation; they had not so much as a
Chamber Pot, though desired.


Cry. O yes, etc.


Obser. The Court adjourns till seven of the Clock next morning (being the
fourth instant, vulgarly called Sunday) at which time the Prisoners were
brought to the Bar; the Court sat, and the Jury called to bring in their
Verdict.


Cry. O yes, etc. -- Silence in the Court, upon pain of imprisonment.

The Juries names call dover.


Cla. Are you agreed upon your verdict?


Jur. Yes.


Cla. Who shall speak for you?


Jur. Our Foreman.


Cla. What s^y you? Look upon the Prisoners at the Bar; Is he guilty of the
matter whereof he stands indicted, in manner and form as aforesaid, or not
guilty?


Foreman, William Penn is guilty of Speaking in Gratious-street.


May. To an unlawful Assembly?


Bush. No my Lord, We give no other verdict, then what we gave last night, we
have no other verdict to give.


May. You are a factious Fellow, i will take a course with you.


Blood. I knew Mr. Bushel would not yield.


Bush. Sir Tho. I have done according to my Conscience.


May. That Conscience of yours would cut my throat.


Bush. No my Lord, it never shall.


May. But I will cut yours so soon as I can.


Rec. He has inspired the Jury, he has the spirit of Divination, methinks I
feel him; I will have a positive Verdict, or you shall starve for it.


Pen. I desire to ask the Recorder one Question; Do you allow of the Verdict
given of William Mead?


Rec. It cannot be a verdict, because you were indicted for a Conspiracy, and
one being found not guilty, and not the other, it could not be a verdict.


Pen. If Not guilty be not a verdict, then you make of the Jury and Magna
Charta but a mere nose of Wax.


Mead, How! is Not guilty no verdict?


Rec. No, it is no verdict.


Pen. I affirm that the consent of a Jury, is a verdict in Law; and if W. M. be
not guilty, it consequently follows, that I am clear, since you have indicted
us of a conspiracy, and I could not possibly conspire alone.


Obser. There were many passages, that could not be taken, which past between
the Jury and the Court. The Jury went up again, having received a fresh charge
from the Bench, if possible to extort an unjust verdict.


Cry. O yes, etc. Silence in the Court.


Cour. Call over the Jury. Which was done.


Cla. What say you? is William Penn guilty of the matter whereof he stands
indicted, in manner and form asoresaid, or not guilty?


Foreman, Guilty of speaking in Gratious-Street.


Rec. What is this to the purpose? I say, I will have a verdict. And speaking
to Edw. Bushel said, You are a factious Fellow; I will set a Mark upon you; and
whilst I have any thing to do in the City, I will have an eye upon you.


May. Have you no more wit then to be led by such a pitiful Fellow? I will cut
his Nose.


Pen. It is intolerable that my Jury should be thus menaced; Is this according
to the fundamental Laws? Are not they my proper Judges by the great Charter of
England? What hope is there of ever having justice done, when Juries are
threatened, and their Verdicts rejected? I am concerned to speak and grieved to
see such arbitrary proceedings. Did not the Lieutenant of the Tower render one
of them worse then a Fellon? And do you not plainly seem to condemn such for
factious Fellows, who answer not your ends? Unhappy are those Juries, who are
threatened to be fined, and starved, and ruined, if they give not in Verdicts
contrary to their Consciences.


Rec. My Lord, you must take a course with that same Fellow.


May. Stop his Mouth; Jailer bring Fetters, and stake him to the ground.


Pen. Do your pleasure, I matter not your Fetters.


Rec. Till now I never understord the reason of the policy and prudence of the
Spaniards, in suffering the Inquisition among them: And certainly it will never
be well with us, till something like unto the Spanish-Inquisition be in England.


Obser. The Jury being required to go together to find another Verdict, and
steadfastly refusing it (saying they could give no other Verdict, then what was
already given) the Recorder in great passion was running off the Bench, with
these words in his mouth, I protest I will sit here no longer to hear these
things; at which the Mayor calling, Stay, stay, he returned, and directed
himself unto the Jury, and spoke as follows:


Rec. Gentlemen, we shall not be at this Trade always with you; you will find
the next Sessions of Parliament, there will be a Law made, that those that will
not conform shall not have the protection of the Law. Mr. Lee, draw up another
Verdict, that they may bring it in special.


Lee, I cannot tell how to do it.


Jur. We ought not to be returned, having all agreed, and set our hands to the
Verdict.


Rec. Your Verdict is nothing, you play upon the Court; I say you shall go
together, and bring in another Verdict, or you shall starve; and I will have
you charted about the City, as in Edward the thirds time.


Fore-m. We have given in our verdict, and all agreed to it, and if we give in
another, it will be a force upon us to save our lives.


May. Take them up.


Offic. My Lord, they will not go up.


Obser. The Mayor spoke to the Sheriff, and he came off of his seat, and said.


Sher. Come, Gentlemen, you must go up; you see I am commanded to make you go.


Obser. Upon which the Jury went up; and several sworn, to keep them without
any accommodation as aforesaid, till they brought in their verdict.


Cry. O yes, etc. The Court adjourns till to morrow morning, at seven of the
clock.


Obser. The Prisoners were remanded to Newgate, where they remained till next
morning, and then were brought unto the Court, which being sat, they proceeded
as follows.


Cry. O yes, etc. Silence in the Court upon pain of imprisonment.


Cla. Set William Pen and William Mead to the Bar. Gentleof the Jury, answer to
your Names, Tho. Veer, Edw. Bushel, John Hammond, Henry Henly, Henry Michell,
John Brightman, Clarles Milson, Gregory Walklet, John Baily, William Leaver,
James Damask, William Plumstead. Are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Jur. Yes.


Cla. Who shall speak for you?


Jur. Our Foreman.


Cla. Look upon the Prisoners. What say you? is William Penn guilty of the
matter whereof he stands indicted, in manner and form etc. or not guilty?


Foreman, Here is our verdict in writing, and our hands subscribed


Obser. The Clark took the Paper, but was stopped by the Recorder from reading of
it; and he commanded to ask for a posstive verdict.


Foreman, That is our verdict; we have subscribed to it.


Cla. How say you is William Penn guilty. etc. or not guilty?


Foreman, Not guilty.


Cla. How say you? is William Mead guilty, etc. or not guilty?


Foreman, Not guilty.


Cla. Then hearken to your verdict, you say that William Penn is not guilty in
manner and form as he stands indicted; you say that William Mead is not guilty
in manner and form as he stands indicted, and so you say all,


Jur. Yes, we do so.


Obser. The Bench being unsatisfied with the verdict, commanded that every
person should distinctly answer to their names, and give in their verdict,
which they unanimously did, in saying, Not guilty, to the great satifaction of
the Assembly.


Rec. I am sorry, Gentlemen, you have follollowed your own judgments and
Opinions, rather then the good and wholesome advice, which was given you; God
keep my life out of your hands; but for this the Court fines you forty Mark a
man; and imprisonment, till paid. At which Penn stepped up toward the Bench, and
said.


Pen. I demand my liberty, being freed by the Jury.


May. No, you are in for your Fines.


Pen. Fines, for what?


May. For contempt of the Court.


Pen. I ask, if it be according to the fundamental Laws of England, that any
Englishman should be fined or amerced, but by the judgment of his Peers or
Jury; since it expressly contradicts the fourteenth and twenty ninth Chap. of
the great Charter of England, which say, No Freeman ought to be amerced, but
by the Oath of good and Lawful men of the Vicinage.


Rec. Take him away, Take him away, take him out of the Court.


Pen. I can never urge the fundamental Laws of England, but you cry, Take him
away, take him away. But it is no wonder, Since the Spanish Inquisition has so
great a place in the Recorders heart. God Almighty, who is just, will judge you
all for these things.


Obser. They haled the Prisoners into the Bale-dock, and from thence sent them
to Newgate, for non payment of their Fines; and so were their Jury.


An Appendix, by way of Defense for the Prisoners, as what might have been
offered against the Indictment, and illegal 'Proceedings of the Court thereon,
had they not violently overruled and stopped them.
UPon a sober disquisition into the several parts of the Indictment, we find it
so wretchedly defective, as if it were nothing else but a mere composition of
error, rather calculated to the malicious designs of the Judges, then to the
least verity of Fact committed by the Prisoners.

To prove this, what we say, will be a main help to discover the Arbitrary
proceedings of the Bench in their frequent Menaces to the Jury; as if it were
not so much their Business to try, as to condemn the Prisoners; and that not so
much for any fact they had committed, as what the Court would have suggested to
the Jury to have been their Fact.

. 1. It is the constant Common Law of England, that no man should be Taken,
Imprisoned, Amerced, Deseized of his Freehold, of his Liberties or free
Customs, but by the judgment of his Peers, which are vulgerly called a Jury,
from Jurare, because they are sworn to do right.

. 2. The only assistance that is given the Jury, in order to a Verdict is;

First, The Evidence given of the Fact committed, by the person indicted.

Secondly, The knowledge of that Law, Act or Statute the Indictment is grounded
upon, and which the Prisoners are said to have transgressed.

. 3. We shall neglect to mention here, how much they were deprived, of that
just advantage the ancient equal Laws of England do allow; designing it for a
conclusion of the whole, and shall only speak here to matter of Fact and Law.

. 4. The Evidence, you have read in the Trial, the utmost import of which, is
no more then this; That William Penn was speaking in Gracious-Street, to an
Assembly of people, but knew not what he said, which is so great a
contradiction, as he that runs may read it; for no man can say another man
Preaches, and yet understand not what he says; he may conjecture it, but that
is a lame evidence in Law; it might as well have been sworn, That he was
speaking of Law, Physic, Trade, or any other matter of civil concernment.
Besides, there is no Law against Preaching what is Truth, whether it be in the
Street, or in any other place; nor is it possible, that any man can truly
swear, That he Preached Sedition, Heresy, etc. unless he so heard him, that he
could tell what he said.

. 5. The Evidence further says, That W. Mead was there, but til being in
Gracious-Street be a fault, and hearing a man speak the Witness knows not what,
be contrary to Law, the whole Evidence is useless, and impertinent; but what
they want of that, they endeavor to supply with Indictment; whose parts we
proceed to consider.

Exceptions against the Indictment.
. 6. It says, That the Prisoners [were met upon the 15th day of August, 1670]
whereas their own Evidence affirms it to be upon the 14th day of August, 70.

. 7. [That they met with force and Arms] which is so great a Lie, that the
Court had no better cover for it, then to tell the Jury, it was only a piece of
Form, urging that the man tried for clipping of money this present Sessions had
the same words used in his Indictment.

But that this Answer is too scanty, as well as it was too weak to prevail with
the Jury; we desire it may be considered, that the same words may be used more
of course, and out of form at one time, then at another: And though we grant
they can have little force with any Jury in a Clippers case, for mere Clipping;
yet they are words that give so just a ground of jealousy, nay, that carry so
clear an Evidence of illegallity where they are truly proved and affirmed of
any Meeting, as that they are the proper Roots from whence do spring those
Branches which render an Indictment terrible, and an Assembly truly the terror
of the people.

. 8. [Unlawfully, and tumultuously to disturb the Peace] which is as true, as
what is said before, (that is, as false) this will evidently appear to all that
consider how lawful it is to assemble, with no other design then to worship
God, and their calling a lawful Assembly an unlawful one, no more makes it so,
then to say Light is darkness, black is white, concludes so impudent a falsity
true.

In short, because to worship God can never be a crime, no Meeting or Assembly,
designing to worship God, can be unlawful. Such as go about to prove an
unlawful Assembly, must prove the Assemblers intent not to Worship God, but
that no man can do, because no man can know another man's intentions, and
therefore its impossible that any should prove such an Assembly unlawful. That
is properly an unlawful Assembly, according to the definition of the Law; when
several persons are met together, with design to use violence and to do
mischief; but that Dissenters meet with no such intention, is manifest to the
whole World, therefore their Assemblies are not unlawful; he that has only
right to be worshipped, which is God, has only right to institute how he will
be worshipped; and such as worship him in that Way they apprehend him to have
instituted, are so far from being unlawful Assemblers, that therein they do but
express the duty they owe to God.

[Tumultuously] Imports as much as Disorderly, or an Assembly full of Noise,
Bussle, and Confusion, using force and violence, to the injury of Persons,
Houses, or Grounds. But whether Religious Dissenters, in their peaceable
Meetings, therein desiring, and seeking nothing more then to express that duty
they owe to God Almighty, be a Tumultuous action, or meetting in the sense
expressed (and which is the very definition of the Law) will be the question.
Certainly such as call these Meetings tumultuous, as to break the peace, offer
the greatest violence to common words, that can be well imagined; for they may
as rightly say, such persons meet adulterously, thievishly, etc. as to affirm
they meet tumultuously, because they are as truly applicable; in short, such
particulars, as are required to prove them such Meetings in Law, are wholly
wanting.

. 9. [To the disturbance of the peace]

If the disturbance of the peace be but matter of form with the rest, as is
usually pleaded; leave out this matter of form and then see what great matter
will be left.

Certainly such Assemblies, as are not to the breach and disturbance of the
peace, are far from being unlawful or tumultuary: but if the peace be broken by
them, how comes it the evidence was so short? We cannot believe it was in
favor of the Prisoners. This may show to all the reasonable World, how forward
some are, to brand innocence with hateful Names, to bring a suspicion, where
there was none deserved.

. 10. [That the said Penn and Mead met by agreement before hand made.]

But if persons that never saw each other, nor converse together, neither had
correspondence by any other hand, cannot be said to be agreed, to any action,
before it be done; then the Prisoners were far from an Agreement; for they had
never Seen, Converst, nor Corresponded, directly, nor indirectly, before the
Officers came to disturb the Assembly: We well know how far they would have
stretched the word, Agreement, or Conspiracy; but God who brings to naught, the
Counsels of the wicked, prevented their cruel designs.

. 11. [That William Mead did abet the said William Penn in preaching.]

No man can be said to abet another, whilst they are both unknown to each
other, especially in this case, where abetting follows agreeing, and agreeing
supposes foreknowledge. Nay, the word abet in Law signifies to command,
procure or counsel a person, which W. Mead, could not be said to do, in
reference to W. Pen, they being so great Strangers one to another, and at so
great a distance; for the Evidence proves that he was with Lieutenant Cook, and
Lieutenant Cook swears he could not make his way to W. Penn, for the Crowd.

. 12 [That W. Penn' s Preaching and speaking caused a great co(...) and tumult
of People, to remain and continue a long time in the (...).]

But this is so improbable to believe, that the very nature of a tumult admits
of no such thing as preaching; but implies a disorderly multitude, where all
may be said to speak, rather then any to hear.

. 1. [In contempt of the King and his Laws.]

They are so sar from contemning the King and his Laws, that they are obleiged
and constrained by their own principles, to obey every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, but not against the Lord for man's sake, which is the question in
hand. Besides, their continuance there, was not in contempt, but by the
permission of the chief Officer present, that came there by the Kings
authority; nor is it for the honor of the King that such persons should be
said to act in contempt of his Laws, as only meet to honor God and his Laws.

. 2. [And to the great disturbance of the Kings peace.]

It is far from disturbing and breaking the Kings peace for men peaceably to
meet to worship God; for it is then properly broken and invaded, when force and
violence are used, to the hurt and prejudice of Persons and Estates; or when
any thing is done that tends to the stirring up of Sedition, and begetting in
people a dislike of the civil Government: But that such things are not
practiced by us in our Assemblies, either to offer violence to men's Persons and
Estates, or to stir up People to Sedition, or dislike to the civil Government,
is obvious to all that visit our Assemblies.

. 3. [To the great terror and disturbance of the Kings liege people and
Subjects, and to the evil example of all others in the like case offending,
against the Kings peace, his Crown, and Dignity.]

Were these black Criminations as true as they are wretchedly false, we should
give as just an occasion, to loose our Liberties, as our cruel Adversaries, are
ready to take any to deprive us unjustly of them, O! How notorious is it to all
sober people, that our manner of life is far from terrifying any; and how
absurd to think that naked men (in the generality of their conversation, known
to be harmless and quiet) should prove a terror or disturbance to the people;
certainly, if any such thing should be in the time of our Meetings, it is
brought with the cruelty and barbarous actions of your own Soldiers; they
never learned by our example to beat, hale before Magistrates, fine, and
imprison for matters relating to Gods Worship; neither can they say, we are
their presidents; for all those Adulterous, Prodigal, Lascivious, Drunken,
Swearing, and Profane acts, they daily commit, and esteem rather occasion of
brag and boast, then forrow and repentance: No, they need not go so far, they
have too many (God Almighty knows) of their own Superiors for their example.

. 4. But we can never pass over with silence, nor enough observe the detestible
juggle of such Indictments, which we require all English and Conscientious men
to mind, as they value themselves in the like occasions. How little a grain of
fact was proved, yet how spacious an Indictment was made? had it related to the
evidence, the bulk had been excusable; but when it only swelled with malicious
scaring Phrases, to suggest to the people, that they were the meerest Villains,
the most dangerous Persons, and designing mutually the subversion of the Laws,
and breach of the peace, to the terrifying of the People, etc.

Who can choose but tell them of their Romance-Indictment, that is so forged,
as it truly merits another against it self. This they childishly call Form; but
had an Italian or other Stranger been in Court, he would have judged it matter
of fact, as thinking it unworthy of a Kings Court, to accuse men in terms, not
legally, truly, or probably due to the fact, they really had committed; as well
as that no Court would practice it, but that which loved to deprive men of
their Liberties, and Lives, rather then to save them; Nolens Volens.

. 5. Had their cruelty and juggle ended here it self, they would have spared us
the pains of any further observation. But that which we have to add, on the
Prisoners behalf, renders their actions so abominable, in the sight of Justice,
that all honest and ingenious hearts must needs abhor their base snares.

They tell the Jury, That being but Judges of fact only, they were to bring the
Prisoners in guilty (that is of the fact) at their peril; and it was the part
of the Bench, to judge what was Law: So that if the Jury had brought them in
Guilty, without any further additional explanation (though intentionally they
meant only of the fact proved by evidence) yet the Bench would have extended it
to every part of the Indictment, and by this impious delusion, to have perjured
a well meaning Jury, and have had their barbarous ends upon the innnocent
Prisoners. But the Jury better understanding themselves brought in Will. Penn
guilty of the fact proved, namely, That he was speaking to some people met in
Gratious-Church-Street, but not of an unlawful Assembly, so circumst antiated
(the mention of which stabbed their design of moulding the general answer of
guilty, to their own ends, to the heart) nor indeed could they do otherwise;
for as well the Jury as Prisoners, were denied to have any Law produced, by
which they might measure the Truth of the Indictment, and guilt of the fact.
But because the Recorder would or could not (perhaps it is so long since he read
Law that he may have forgotten it) we shall perform his part, in showing what
is that common Law of the Land, which in general, he said, they were Indicted
for the breach of, and which indeed if rightly understood, is the undoubted
Birthright of every Englishman; yea, the Inheritance of Inheritances, Major
Haeridit as venit unicuique nostrum a Jure, et Legibus, quam a Parentibus. Cook
Instit. 2. 56.

. 6. All the various kinds or models of Government, that are in the World,
stand either upon Will and Power, or Condition and Contract, the first, rule by
men, the second, by Laws: It is our happiness to be born under such a
constitution, as is most abhorrent in it self, of all arbitrary Government, and
which is, and ever has been, most choice and careful of her Laws, by which all
Right is preserved.

. 7. All Laws are either Fundamental, and so immutable; or Superficial and so
alterable. By the first we understand such Laws, as enjoin men to be just,
honest, virtuous; to do no wrong, to kill, rob, deceive, prejudice none; but to
do, as one would be done unto; to cherish good, and to terifie wicked men; in
short, universal Reason, which are not subject to any revolutions, because no
emergency, time, or occasion can ever justify a suspention of their execution,
much less their utter Abrogation.

. 8. By Superficial Laws we understand, such Acts, Laws, or Statutes; as are
suited to present occurrances; and which may as well be abrogated, for the good
of the Kingdom, as they were first made for it. For instance, those Statutes,
that relate to Victuals, Clothes, and Places of Trade, etc. which have ever
stood whilst the reason of them was in force, but when that benefit, which once
redounded, sell by cross occurrances, they ended according to that old maxim,
Cessante ratione Legis, cessat Lex; but this cannot be said of Fundamental
Laws, Till Houses stand without their Foundations, and English mankind wholly
cease to be, which brings close upon the point.

. 9. There is not any Country, that has more constantly expressed her care and
deep solicitude, to the preservation of her fundamental Laws, then the English
Nation; and though the evil of some particular times and persons have
endeavored an utter Abolition of those excellent Fundamentals, which we have
before defined and defended from any just reason of revolution; yet God
Almighty, who is always concerned to avenge the cause of Justice, and those
excellent good Laws, by which it is upheld, has by his providence befooled
their contrivances, and basfled their attempts, by bringing their designs to
naught, and their persons frequently to condign punishment and disgrace, their
Age no Antiquary living can assure us, unless they say, As old as Reason it
self; but our own Authors are not lacking to inform us, that the Liberties,
Properties and Privileges of the English Nation are very ancient.

. 10. For Hern in his Mirror of Justice (writ in Edward the first's time) Fol.
1. tells us, That after God had abated the Nobility of the Britans, he did
deliver the Realm to men more humble and simple, of the Countries adjoining, to
wit, the Saxons, which came from the parts of Almaign to conquer this Land, of
which men there were forty Sovereigns, which did rule as Companions; and those
Princes did call this Realm England, which before was named the greater Britan:
These, after great wars, tribulations and pains, by long time suffered, did
choose a King to reign over them, to govern the people of God, and to maintain
and defend their persons, and their good in quiet, by the Rules of Right, and
at the beginning they did cause him to swear to maintain the holy Christian
Faith, and to guide his people by Right, with all his power, without respect of
persons, and to observe the Laws: And after when the Kingdom was turned into an
Heritage, King Alfred, that governed this Kingdom about an hundred seventy one
years before the Conquest, did cause the great men of the Kingdom to assemble
at London, and there did ordain for a perpetual usage, That twice in the year,
or oftener, if need should be, in time of Peace, they should assemble at London
in Parliament; for the Government of Gods People, that men might live in quiet
and receive right by certain usages and holy Judgments.

In which Parliament (says our Author) the Rights and Prerogatives of the
Kings and of the Subjects are distinguished and set apart; and particularly by
him expressed, too tedious here to insert; amongst which Ordiances we find,
That no man should be imprisoned, but for a capital Offense. And if a man
should detain another in Prison, by color of right (where there was none) till
the party imprisoned died; he that kept him in Prison should be held guilty of
murder, as you may read page 33. And page 36. He is declared guilty of
Homicide, by whom a man shall die in prison, whether it be the Judges; that
shall too long delay to do a man right, or by cruelty of Goalers, or suffering
him to die of Famine; or when a man is adjudged to do penance, and shall be
surcharged by his Jailer with Irons, or other pain, whereof he is deprived of
his life. And p. 149. That by the ancient Law of England, it was Felony to
detain a man in prison, after sufficient Bale offered; where the party was
plevisable; every person was plevisable, but he that was appealed of Treason,
Murder, Robbery or Burglary, page 35. None ought to be put in common Prisons,
but only such as were ATTAINTED, or principally APPEALED or INDICTED of some
capital Offense, or ATTAINTED of false or wrongful Imprisonment; so tender
have the ancient Laws and Constitutions of this Realm been of the Liberty of
their Subjects persons, that no man ought to be Imprisoned, but for a Capital
Offense, as Treason, Murder, Robbery, or Burglary.

. 11. Nor is Lambard short in his excellent translation of the Saxon Laws, from
King Ina's time, 712. to Hen. 3. 1100. In describing to us the great
Obligation, and strong Condition, the people were wont to put upon their Kings,
To observe the ancient fundamental Laws, and free Customs of this Land, which
were handed down from one Age to another. And in the 17th Chap. of Edw. the
Confessors Laws, the mention there made of a Kings duty is very remarkable,
That if he break his Oath, or performed not his Obligation (Nec nomen Regis in
eo constabit) The same Lambard further tells us, that however any may affirm
William of Normandy to be a Conqueror; He was received by the people as Edwards
Successor, and by solemn Oath taken, to maintain unto them the same Laws that
his Kinsman Edward the Confessor did; this doctrine remained in the general,
unquestioned, to the reign of King John, who imperiously thought that Voluntas
Regis and not salvus Populi, was suprema Lex, or the Kings will was the supreme
Law, and not the Peoples preservation; till the incensed Barons of that time,
betook themselves to a vigorous defense of their ancient Rights and Liberties,
and learnt him to keep those Laws by a due restraint and timely compulsion,
which his former invasion of them evidenced to the World he would never have
done willingly.

. 12. The Proposals and Articles of agreement, with the Pledges given to the
Barons, on the behalf of the People by the King, were confirmed in Hen. the
3ds. time, his Son and Successor; When the abused, slighted, and disregarded
Laws, by his Father, were thought fit to be reduced to record, that the people
of England might not forever after be to seek for a written recorded Law, to
their defense and security; for, Misera servitus est ubi jus est vagum aut
incognitum; and so we enter upon that grand Carter of Liberty and Privilege,
in the Cause, Reason, and End of it.

. 1. We shall first rehearse it, so far as we are concerned (with the
formalities of Grant and Curse) and shall then say something as to the Cause,
Reason and End of it.

A Rehearsal of the Material Parts of the Great Charter of England.
HEnry, by the Grace of God, King of England, etc. To all Archbishops, or
Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, Provosts, Officers, and to all Bailiffs, and our
faithful Subjects, who shall see this present Charter, greeting. Know ye that
we 9 H. 3. confirmed 28 Ed. 3.
unto the honor of Almighty God, and for the Salvation of the Souls of our
Progenitors, and our Successors, Kings of England, to the advancement of holy
Church, and amendment of our Realm, of our mere and free will have given and
granted to all Archbishops, etc. and to all Freemen of this our Realm, these
Liberties underwritten, to be holden and kept in this our Realm of England for
evermore. Chap. 1. the form of ancient Acts, etc. Co. 2. Inst. fol. 2. Chap. 14


We have granted and given to all Freemen of our Realm, for us and our Heirs
for evermore, these Liberties underwritten, to have and to hold to them, and
to their Heirs, of us and our Heirs fore-nam'd.

A Freeman shall not be Amerced for a small fault, but after the quantity of
the fault. And for a great fault, after the manner thereof, saving to him his
Contenements or Freehold. And a Merchant likewise shall be amerced, saving to
him his Merchandise; and none of the said Amercements shall be assessed, but by
the Oath of good and honest men of the Vicinage.

No Freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, nor be disseized Cha. 29.
of his Freehold, or Liberties, or free Customs, or be Outlawed, or Exiled,
or any other ways destroyed; nor we shall not pass upon him, nor condemn him,
but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; we shall sell
to no man, we shall deny nor defer to no man either Justice or Right.

And to all these Customs, Liberties aforesaid, which we have granted to be
holden within this our Realm, as much as appertains to us and our Heirs we
shall observe; and all men of this our Realm, as well Spiritual as Temporal,
(as much as in them is) shall observe the same against all persons in likewise.
And for this our Gift, and Grant of these Liberties, and for other contained in
our Charter of Liberties of our Forest, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights, Freeholders, and other our Subjects, have
given unto us the fifteenth pars of all their movables; And we have granted
unto them on the other part, that neither we, nor our Heirs, shall procure or
do any thing whereby the Liberties in this Charter contained shall be infringed
or broken; and if any thing be procured by any person contrary to the Premises,
shall be had of no force nor effect. These being Witnesses, Boniface
Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. We ratifying and approving those Gifts and
Grants aforesaid, confirm and make strong all the same, for us and our Heirs
perpetually, and by the Tenor of these Presents do renew the same willingly;
and granting for us and our Heirs, that this Charter, in all and singular his
Articles for evermore shall be steadfastly, firmly, and inviolably observed. And
if any Article in the same Charter contained, yet hither to peradventure has
not been observed, nor kept, we will, and by our Authority-Royal command, from
henceforth firmly they be observed. Witness, etc.

The Sentence of Curse given by the Bishops, with the Kings consent, against
the Breakers of the great Charter.
IN the year of our Lord 1253. the third day of May, in the great Hall of the
King at Westminster, in the presence, and by the consent of the Lord Henry, by
the Grace of God, King of England, and the Lord Richard, Earl of Cornwall, his
Brother; Roger Bigot, Earl of Norfolk Marshal of England; Humphr^, Earl of
Hereford; Henry, Earl of Oxford; John, Earl Warren; and other Estates of the
Realm of England: We Boniface, by the mercy of God, Archbishop of Centerbury,
Primate of England, F. of London, H. of Ely, S. of Worcester, E. of Lincoln, W.
of Norwich, P. of Hereford, W. of Salesbury, W. of Durham, R. of Excester, M.
of Carlisle, W. of Bath, E. of Rochester, T. of St David's, Bishops, apparelled
in Pontificals, with Tapers burning, against the Breakers of the Churches
Liberties, and of the Liberties and other Customs of this Realm of England, and
namely these which are contained in the Charter of the common Liberties of
England, and Charter of the Forest, have denounced Sentence of Excommunication
in this form, by the Authority of Almighty God, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, etc. of the bl^ssed apostl^s Peter and Paul, and of all Apostles,
and of all Martyrs, of bl^ssed Edw. King of England, and of all the Saints of
Heaven, We Excommunicate and Accurse, and from the benefits of our holy Mother
the Church we sequester all those that hereafter willingly and maliciously
deprive or spoil the Church of her Right; and all those that by any craft, or
willingness, do violate, break, diminish, or change the Churches Liberties, and
free Customs contained in the Charters of the common Liberties, and of the
Forest, granted by our Lord the King to Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Prelates of England, and likewise to the Earls, Barons, Knights, and other
Freeholders of the Realm; and all that secretly and openly, by deed, word or
counsel do make Statutes, or observe them being made, and that bring in Customs
to keep them, when they be brought in, against the said Liberties, or any of
them, and all those that shall presume to judge against them; and all and every
such person, before mentioned, that ^iningly shall commit any thing of the
premises, let them well know that they incur the aforesaid Sentence ipso facto.

A Confirmation of the Charters and Liberties of England, and of the Forest,
made the twenty fifth year of Edward the first.
EDward, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Guyan,
to all those that these present Letters shall hear or see, greeting. Know ye
that we to the honor of God, and to the profit of our Realm, have granted for
us, and our Heirs, and the Charter of Liberties, and the Charter of Forest,
which were made by common assent of all the Realm, in the time of King Henry
our Father, shall be kept in every point, without breach; and we will that the
same Charters shall be sent under our Seal, as well to our Justices of the
Forest, as to others, and to all Sheriffs of Shires, and to all our other
Officers, and to all our Cities throughout the Realm, together with our Writs,
in the which it shall be contained, that they cause the aforesaid Charters to
be published, and to declare to the People, that we have confirmed them in all
points; and that our Justices Sheriffs, Mayors, and other
Ministers, which under us have the Laws of our Land to guide, shall allow the
same Charters pleaded before them in Judgment, in all their points; that is, to
wit, the great Charter, as the Common Law, and the Charter of our Forest, for
the Welsh of our Realm.

And we will, that if any judgment be given from henceforth, contrary to the
points of the Charter aforesaid, by the Justices, or by any other of our
Ministers that hold
Plea before them, against the points of the Charters, it shall be undone, and
holden for naught.

And we will that the same Charters shall be sent under our Seal to Cathedral
Churches throughout our Realm, there to remain, and shall be read before the
people two times by the year.

And that all Archbishops and Bishops shall pronounce the Sentence of
Excommunication against all those that by word, deed or counsel do contrary to
the foresaid Charters, or that in any point do break or undo them; And that the
said Curses be twice a year denounced and published by the Prelates aforesaid;
and if the same Prelates, or any of them be remiss in the denunciation of the
said Sentences, the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, for the time being,
shall compel and distrain them to the execution of their duties in form
aforesaid.

The Sentence of the Clergy against the Breakers of the Articles
abovementioned.
IN the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen: Whereas our
Sovereign Lord the King, to the honor of God, and of holy Church, and for the
common profit of the Realm, has granted for him, and his Heirs for ever, these
Articles above written: Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all
England, admonished all his Province once twice and thrice, because that
shortness will not suffer so much delay, as to give knowledge to all the People
of England of these presents in writing: We therefore enjoin all Persons, of
what estate soever they be, that they, and every of them, as much as in them
is, shall uphold and maintain these Articles granted by our Sovereign Lord the
King, in all points: And all those that in any point do resist, or break, or in
any manner hereafter Procure, Counsel, or in any wise Assent to Testify or
Break those Ordinances, or go about it, by word or deed, openly or privily, by
any manner of pretense or color; we, the aforesaid Arch Bishop, by our
Authority in this Writing expressed, do Excommunicate and Accurse, and from the
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and from all the Company of Heaven, and from all
the Sacraments of Holy Church do sequester, and exclude.

We may here see, that in the obscurest Times of sottish Popery, they were not
left without a sense of Justice, and the necessity of Liberty and Property, to
be inviolably enjoyed which brings us to the cause of it.

1st The cause of this famous Charter, was, as we have already said, the
Encroachments that were made by several Ministers of precedent Kings, that
almost became Customary, and which had near extinguished the free Customs due to
Englishmen: How great care it cost our Ancestors, it unbecomes us to ignore, or
by our silence to neglect; It was that Yoke and Muzzle, which failed not to
dis-able many rageing Bears, from entering the pleasant Vineyard of
English-Freedoms, that otherwise would not have left a fruitful Vine in being.
Anon we may give the Reader an account of some, with their Wages as well as
Works.

2d The Reason of it, is so great, that it seems to be its own. It is the very
Image and Expression of Justice, Liberty, and Property; Points of such eminent
importance, as without which no Government can be said to be reasonable, but
arbitrary and tyrannical. It allows every man that liberty God and nature have
given him, and the secure possession of his property, from the In-road or
Invasion of his Neighbor, or any else of that constitution. It justifies no
man in a fault, only it provides equal and just ways to have the Offender
tried; considering the malice of many Prosecutors, and the great value of
Liberty and Life.

3d The End of it was the most noble of any earthly projection, to wit, The
refixing of those shaken Laws, held for many hundred years, by constant claim,
that they living might be re-enstated in their primitive liberty, and their
posterity secured in the possession of so great a happiness.

Amongst those many rich Advantages, that accrue to the free People of England,
from this great Charter; and those many confirmatory Statutes of the same, we
shall present the Reader with the sight of some few, that may most properly
fall, under the consideration and inquiry of these present times, as found in
our Common Law Books.

1st [That every Englishman, is born free.]

2d [That no such Freeman shall be taken, attached, assessed, or imprisoned,
by any Petition or Suggestion to the King or his Counsel, unless by the
indictment or presentment of good and lawful men where such deeds be done] 5
Edw. 3. Chap. 9. 25 Edw. 3. Chap. 4. 17 R. 2. Chap. 6 Rot. Parl. 42 Edw. 3.
Cook 2 Inst. 46.

3d [That no Freeman shall be diseized of his Freehold or Liberties, or free
Customs, etc. Hereby is intended, says Cook, That Lands, Tenements, Goods, and
Chattels] shall not be seized into the Kings hands contrary to this great
Charter, etc. 43. Ass. page 12. 43 Edw. 3. Cook 2 Inst. 32. Neither shall any
such Freeman be put from his Livelihood without answer, Cook 2. Inst. 47.

4ly [That no Freeman shall be outlawed.] unless he shroud and hide himself
voluntarily from the Justice of the Law, 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. Dier. 114. 145.

5ly [No Freeman shall be exiled.] Cook says there are but two Grounds, upon
which any man may be exiled. One by Act of Parliament (supposing it not
contrary to the great Charter.) -- The other in case of abjuration, for Felony
by the Common Law, etc. Cook 2. Inst. 47.

6ly [No Freeman shall be destroyed, that is, he shall not be fore-judged, of
Life, Limb, Dis-herited, or put to Torture, or Death.] every oppression against
Law, by color of any usurped Authority, is a kind of Destruction, and it is the
worst Oppression that is done by color of Justice. Cook Institu. 2. 48.

7th [That no Freeman shall be thus taken, or imprisoned, diseized, outlawed,
exiled, or destroyed of his Liberties, Free-holds, and free Customs, but BY THE
LAWFUL JUDGMENT OF HIS PEERS] (vulgarly called Jury) So that the Judgment of
any fact or person, is by this fundamental Law, referred to the Breasts, and
Consciences of the Jury; Its rendered in Latin PER LEGALE JUDICIUM, that is
Lawful Judgment; from whence it is to be observed, that the Judgment must have
Law in it, and be according to Law, which cannot be where they are not Judges,
how far the fact is legal, or the contrary; Judicium quasi Juris Dictum [The
Voice of Law and Right] And therefore is their Verdict not to be rejected,
because it is supposed to be the Truth, according to their Consciences: For Ver
dictis from vere dictum, is quasi dictum veritatis [or a true saying or
judgment] 9 Hen. 3. 29. Cook Inst. 1. 39. Just 4. 207. Cook says, that by the
word LEGALE three things are employed.

(1st) That this was by Law, before the Statute, and therefore this Statute but
declaratory of the ancient Law.

(2d) That their Verdict must be legally given; wherein is to be observed.
(1st) The Jury ought to hear no Evidence, but in the hearing and presence of
the Prisoner. (2d) That they cannot send to ask any Question in Law of the
Judges, but in the presence of the Prisoner, for, de facto Jus oritur.

(3d) The Evidence produced by the Kings Counsel, being given, the Judges
cannot collect the Evidence, nor urge it by way of charge to the Jury, nor yet
confer with the Jury about the Evidence, but in the presence of the Prisoner.
Cook Inst. 2. 49.

8th [Or by the Law of the Land] It is a Synonimous expression, importing no
more then by a Trial of Peers or a Jury; for it is sometimes rendered not (or)
disjunctively, but (and) which is connectively, however, it can never signify
any thing contrary to the old way of trying by Peers; for then it would be
connected to a contradiction.

Besides Cook well observes, that in the 4th Chap. of the 25th Edw. 3, Per
Legem Terrae, imports no more, then a Trial by due process, and writ Original
at Common Law, which cannot be without a Jury; therefore, Per Judicium parum
and per Legem Terrae, signify the same privilege unto the people. Cook Inst.
2. page 50.

Thus have we presented you with some of those maxims of Law, dearer to our
Ancestors, then life; Because they are the defense of the Lives and Liberties
of the People of England; it is from this 29th Chap. of the great Charter;
Great, not sor its Bulk, but the Privileges in it; as from a spacious Root,
that so many fruitful Branches of the Law of England springs, if Cook may be
credited. But how sacred soever they have been esteemed, and still are by noble
and just minds, yet so degenerate are some, in their proceedings, that
conscious to themselves of their baseness, they will not dare stand the touch
of this great Charter, and those just Laws grounded upon it, of which number we
may truly rank the Mayor, and Recorder of London, with the rest of their wise
Companions, in their late Sestions, at the Old Baily, upon the occasion of the
Prisoners.

First, The Prisoners were taken, and imprisoned without presentment of good
and Lawful men of the Vicinage, or the Neighborhood, but after a military and
tumultuous manner, contrary to the grand Charter.

2d They refused to produce the Law upon which they proceeded; leaving thereby
the Prisoners, Jury, and whole Assembly in the dark.

3d They refused the Prisoners to plead, and directly withstood that great
Privilege, mentioned in the first Chap. 25 Edw. 1. Where all Justices, Mayors,
Sheriffs, and other Ministers, that have the Laws of the Land, to guide them,
are required to allow the said Charter to be pleaded in all its points, and in
all causes that shall come before them in Judgment. For no sooner did William
Penn, or his Fellow Prisoner, urge upon them the great Charter, and other good
Laws, but the Recorder cried, Take him away, take him away, put him into the
Bale-dock or Hole; From which the Recorder can never deliver himself, unless it
be by avowing; the Laws are not his Guide, and therefore does not suffer them
to be pleaded before him in Judgment.

4ly They gave the Jury their charge, in the Prisoners absence, endeavoring
highly to insence the Jury against them.

5ly The verdict being given, which is in Law, DICTUM VERITATIS, (The voice of
Truth her self) (because not suitable to their humor) They did five times reject
it, with many abusive imperious, and menacing Expressions to the Jury, (such as
no president can afford us) as if they were not the only constituted Judges by
the Fundamental Laws of the Land, but mere Ciphers only to signify something
behind their Figures.

6ly Though the Prisoners were cleared by their Jury, yet were they continued
for the non-payment of their Fines, laid upon them, for not pulling off their
Hats, in which the Law is notoriously broken.

(1st) In that no man shall be amerced, but according to the Offense; and they
have fined each forty Marks.

(2d) They were not merced by any Jury, but at the will of an incensed Bench.

Besides there is no Law against the Hat, and where there is no Law there can
be no Transgression, and consequently no legal Amercement or Fine 9 H. 3. Chap.
14. But how the Prisoners were trapanned into it, is most ridiculous on the
side of the contrivers, that finding their Hats off, would have them put on
again by their Officers, to fool the Prisoners, with a trial of putting them
off again, which Childish conceit not being gratified they fined them the forty
Marks a piece.

7ly Instead of accepting their Verdict as good in Law, and for the true
decission of the matter, according to the great Charter (that constitutes them
proper Judges, and which bears them out, with many other good Laws, in what
they agreed to, as a Verdict, the Court did most illegally, and tyrannically
fine and imprison them, as in the Trial was expressed. And that notwithstanding
the late just resentment of the House of Commons, in Judge Keelings Case, where
they resolved, that the president and practice of Fining, and Imprisoning of
Juries, for their Verdicts, were illegal. And here we must needs observe two
things.

(1st) That the Fundamental Laws of England cannot be more slighted, and
contradicted in any thing (next Englishmens being quite destroyed) then in not
suffering them to have that equal medium, or just way of trial, that the same
Law has provided, which is by a Jury.

(2d) That the late proceeding of the Court, at the Old Baily, is an evident
Demonstration, that Juries are now but mere Formality, and that the partial
charge of the Bench must be the Verdict of the Jury; for if ever a Rape were
attempted on the Consciences of any Jury, it was there. And indeed the
ignorance of Jurors of their authority by Law, is the only Reason of their
unhappy cringing to the Court, and being scared into an Anti-Conscience
Verdict, by their lawless threats.

But we have lived to an Age, so deboist from all humanity and reason, as well
as Faith and Religion, that some stick not to turn Butchers to their own
Privileges, and Conspirators against their own liberties. For however Magna
Charta had once the reputation of a sacred unalterable Law, and few hardened
enough, to incur and bear the long Curse, that attends the Violaters of it, yet
it is frequently objected now, that the benefits there designed are but
temporary, and therefore liable to alteration, as other Statutes are. What Game
such Persons play at, may be lively read, in the attempts of Dyonisius,
Palaris, etc. which would have Will and Power be the peoples Law.

But that the Privileges due to Englishmen, by the great Charter of England,
have their Foundation in Reason and Law; and that those new Cassandrian ways,
to introduce Will and Power deserve to be detested by all persons professing
sense and honesty, and the least Allegiance to our English Government; we shall
make appear from a sober consideration of the nature of those Privileges
contained in that Charter.

(1) The Ground of alteration of any Law in Government (where there is no
invasion) should arise from the universal discommodity of its continuance, but
there can be no disprofit in the discontinuance of Liberty and Property,
therefore there can be no just ground of alteration.

(2) No one Englishman is born Slave to another, neither has the one a right
to inherit the sweat and benefit of the others labor (without consent)
therefore the Liberty and Property of an English- man, cannot reasonably be at
the will and beck of another, let his quality and rank be never so great.

(3) There can be nothing more unreasonable then that which is partial, but to
take away the LIBERTY and PROPERTY of any (which are natural Rights) without
breaking the Law of nature (and not of Will and Power) is manifestly partial,
and therefore unreasonable.

(4) If it be just and reasonable for men to do as they would be done by, then
no sort of men should invade the Liberties and Properties of other men, because
they would not be served so themselves.

(5) Where Liberty and Property are destroyed, there must always be a state of
force and war, which however pleasing it may be unto the Invaders it will be
esteemed intolerable by the Invaded, who will no longer remain subject in all
humane probability, then while they want as much power to free themselves, as
their Adversaries had to enslave them: The troubles, hazards, ill-consequences,
and illegality of such attempts, as they have declined by the most prudent in
all Ages, so have they proved most uneasy to the most savage of all Nations,
who first or last have by a mighty Torent freed themselves, to the due
punishment and great infamy of their Oppressors: such being the advantage, such
the disadvantage which necessarily do attend the fixation, and removal of
Liberty and Property.

We shall proceed to make it appear that Magna Charta (as recited by us)
imports nothing less then their preservation.

No Freemen shall be taken, or imprisoned, or be disseized of his Freehold,
or Liberties, or free Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any other ways
destroyed; nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful
judgment of his Peers, etc.

A Freeman shall not be amerced for a small fault, but after the manner of the
fault, and for a great fault, after the greatness thereof, and none of the said
amercement shall be assessed, but by the Oath of good and lawful men of the
Vicinage.

First, It asserts Englishmen to be free; that's Liberty.

Secondly, that they have Free-holds, that's Property.

Thirdly, That Amercement, or Penalties, should be proportioned to the faults
committed, which is Equity.

Fourthly, That they shall lose neither, but when they are adjudged to have
forfeited them, in the judgment of theirh onest Neighbors, according to the
Law of the Land; which is lawful Judgment.

It is easy to discern to what pass the Enemies of the great Charter would
bring the People.

First, They are now Freemen; but they would have them Slaves.

Secondly, They have now Right unto their Wives, Children, and Estates, as
their undoubted property; but such would rob them of all.

Thirdly, Now no man is to be amerced, or punished, but suitably to his fault;
whilst they would make it suitable to their revengefull minds.

Fourthly, Whereas the Power of Judgment lies in the Bre^sts and Consciences of
twelve honest Neighbors; they would have it at the discretion of mercenary
Judges: To which, we cannot choose but add, That such Discourses manifestly
strike at this present constitution of Government; for it being founded upon
the Great Charter (which is the Ancient Common Law of the Land) as upon its
best Foundation; none can design the concelling of the Charter, but they must
necessarily intend the extirpation of the English Government: For where the
cause is taken away the effect must consequently cease. And as the restoration
of our ancient English Laws, by the Great Charter, was the sovereign Balsom
which cured our former breaches, so doubtless will the continuation of it,
prove an excellent prevention to any future disturbances.

But some are ready to object, That the Great Charter consisting as well of
Religions as civil Rights, the former having received an alteration, there is
the same reason, why the latter may have the like.

To which we answer, That the reason of alteration cannot be the same,
therefore the consequence is false. The one being matter of Opinion, about
Faith and Religious Worship, which is as various, as the unconstant
apprehensions of men; but the other is matter of so immutable right, and
justice, that all Generations (however differing in their religious Opinion)
have concentered, and agreed to the certainty, equity, and indispensable
necessity of preserving these fundamental Laws; so that Magna Charta has not
risen and fallen with the differing religious Opinions, that have been in this
Land, but have ever remained, as the stable right, of every individual
Englishman, purely as an Englishman. Otherwise, If the civil Privileges of
the People, had fallen with the pretended Religious Privileges, of the Popish
Tyranny, at the first Reformation (as must needs be suggested by this
Objection) our case had ended here, that we had obtained a Spiritual Freedom,
at the cost of a Civil bondage; which certainly was far from the intention of
the first Reformers, and probably an unseen consequence, by the Objectors to
their idle Opinion.

In short, there is no time, in which any man may plead the necessity of such
an action, as is unjust in its own nature, which he must unavoidably be guilty
of, that does deface or cancel that Law by which the justice of Liberty and
Property is confirmed and maintained to the People. And consequently, no person
may legally attempt the subversion, or extenuation of the force of the Great
Charter. We shall proceed to prove from instances out of both.

1st Any Judgment given contrary to the said Charter, is to be undone, and
holden for naught. 25 Edw. 1. Chap. 2.

2d Any that by Word, Deed, or Counsel, go contrary to the said Charter, are to
be excommunicated by the Bishops: And the Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
are bound to compel the other Bishops to denounce Sentence accordingly, in case
of their remissness, or neglect; which certainly has relation to the State,
rather then the Church; since there was never any necessity of compelling the
Bishops to denounce sentence in their own case, though frequently in the
peoples, 25 Edw. 1. Chap. 4.

3d That the great Charter, and Charter of Forest, be holden and kept in all
Points, and if any Statute be made to the contrary, that it shall be holden for
naught. 42 Edw. 3. 1. Upon which Cook, that famous English Lawyer, said, That
albeit Judgments in the King Courts, are of high regard in Law, and Judicia are
accounted as Juris Dicta; yet it is provided by Act of Parliament, That if any
Judgment be given contrary to any of the points of the great Charter, it shall
be holden for naught.

He further says, That upon the Statute of the 25th Edw. 1. Chapter 1. That
this great Charter, and the Charter of Forest, are properly the Common Law of
this Land, or the Law is Common to all the People thereof.

4ly Another Statute runs thus, If any force come to disturb the execution of
the Common Law, ye shall cause their bodies to be arrested, and put in Prison;
Ye shall deny no man right by the Kings Letters, nor counsel the King any
thing, that may turn to his damage, or disherison. 18 Edw. 3. Chap. 7. Neither
to delay right by the great and little Seal. This is the Judges Charge and
Oath. 2 Edw. 3. chap. 8. 14 Edw. 3. 14. 11 R. 2. chap. 10.

5ly Such care has been taken, for the preservation of this great Charer, that
in the 25th of Edw. 1. It was enacted, That Commissioners should issue forth,
that there should be chosen in every Shire-Court, by the commonalty of the same
Shire, three substantial men, Knights, or other lawful, wise, and well disposed
persons, to be Justices, which shall be assigned by the Kings Letters, Patents,
under the great Seal, to hear and determine (without any other writ, but only
their Commission) such plaints as shall be made upon all those, that commit, or
offend against any point, contained in the aforesaid Charters. 28 Edw. 1. chap.
1.

6ly The necessity of preserving these Charters, has appeared in nothing more,
than in the care they have taken to confirm them; which as Cook observes, has
been by thirty two Parliaments confirmed, established, and commanded to be put
in execution, with the condign punishment they had inflicted upon the
Offenders. Cooks Proem, to the second Book of his Inst.

7ly That in the notable Petition of Right, many of these great Privileges,
and free Customs, contained in the aforesaid Charters, and other good Laws, are
recited and confirmed, 3 Car. 1.

8ly The late King, in his Declaration, at New Market, 1641. acknowledged the
Law to be the Rule of his Power, By which he doubtless intended Fundamental
Laws, since it may be the great advantage of Countries, sometimes to suspend
the execution of temporary Laws.

Having so manifestly evidenced that venerable esteem, our Ancestors had of
that Golden Rule (the great Charter) with their deep solicitude, to preserve
it, from the defacing of usurpation and faction. We shall proceed to give an
account of their just resentment and earnest prosecution against some of those,
who in any Age have adventured, to undermine that ancient Foundation, by
introducing an arbitrary way of Government.

1st, As Juditious Lambard reports in his Saxon Translation; That the Kings in
those days, were by their Coronation-Oaths obliged, to keep, the ancient
fundamental Laws, and Customs of this Land (of which this great Charter is but
declaratory) so did King Alfred (reputed the most famous Compiler of Laws
amongst them) give this discovery of his Indignation against his own Judges,
for actions contrary to those fundamental Laws, that he commanded the execution
of forty of them; which may be a seasonable Caveat to Judges of our times.

2d Hubert de Burgo, once chief Justice of England (having advised Edw. 1. in
the eleventh year of his reign, (in his Counsel holden at Oxford) To cansel
this great Charter, and that of the Forest) was justly sentenced according to
Law, by his Peers, in open Parliament. When the Statute called CONFIRMATIONIS
CARTARUM was made; in the first Chapter whereof, Magna Charta, is peculiarly
called, the Common Law, 25 Edw. 1. Chap. 2.

3d The Spencers (both Father and Son) for their arbitrary domination, and
rash, and evil counsel to Edw. the 2d (by which be was seduced to break the
great Charter) were banished for their pains, as Cook relates.

4ly The same fate attended Tresillian and Belknap, for their illegal
proceedings.

5ly the Breach of this great Charter, was the ground of that exemplary
Justice, done upon Empson and Dudley, whose case is very memorable in this
point; For though they gratified Hen. 7. in what they did, and had an Act of
Parliament for their Warrant, made the eleventh of his reign; yet met they with
their due reward from the hands of Justice, that Act being against Equity and
common Reason, and so no justifiable ground, or Apology, for those frequent
abuses, and oppressions of the People, they were found guilty of. Here what the
Lord Cook further says, concerning the matter, There was an Act of Parliament,
made in the eleaventh year of King Hen. 7. which had a fair flatteriing
Pr^^mble, pretending to avoid diverse mischiefs, which were (...) The high
displeasure of Almighty God. (2d) The great let of the common Law. And (3d) The
great Let of the Wealth of this Land. And the purvien of that Act, tended in
the execution contrary, EX DIAMETRO. viz. To the high Dispeasure of Almighty
God, and the great Let, nay the utter subversion of the common Law, and the
great Let of the Wealth of this Land, as hereafter shall appear; the substance
of which Act follows in these words.

THat from thenceforth, as well Justices of Assize, as Justices of the Peace,
in every County, upon information for the King, before them made, without any
Finding or Presentment by Twelve men, shall have full Power and Authority, by
their discretion; and to hear and determine all Offenses, as Riots, unlawful
Assemblies, etc. committed and done against any Act or Statute made, and not
repealed, etc. (a Case that very much resembles this of our own times.)

By pretext of this Law, Empson and Dudley did commit upon the Subjects,
unsufferable Pressure, and Oppressions; and therefore this Statute was justly,
soon after the decease of Hen. 7. repealed, at the next Parliament, after his
decease, by the Statute of the 1 H. 8. chap. 6.

A good Caveat to Parliaments, to leave all causes to be measured by the Golden
and Straight Metwand of the Law, and not to the uncertain and crooked Cord of
discretion.

It is almost incredible to foresee, when any Maxim, or Fundamental Law, of
this Realm is altered (as elsewhere has been observed) what dangerous
inconveniences do follow; which most expressly appears by this most unjust and
strange Act of the eleventh of H. 7. For hereby, not only Empson and Dudley
themselves, but such Justices of Peace (corrupt men) as they caused to be
authorized, committed most grievous, and heavy Oppressions and Exactions;
grinding the faces of the poor Subjects by penal Laws (be they never so
obsolete, or unfit for the time) by information only, without any presentment,
or trial by Jury, being the ancient Birthright of the Subject; but to hear and
determine the same, by their discretions; inflicting such penalty, as the
Statute, not repealed imposed. These and other like Oppressions, and Exactions
by, or by the means of Empson and Dudley, and their Instruments, brought
infinite treasure to the Kings Cofers, whereof the King himself, at the end,
with great grief, and compunction, repented, as in another place we have
observed.

This Statute of the 11th of H. 7. we have recited, and showed the just
inconveniences thereof; to the end, that the like should never hereafter be
attempted in any Court of Parliament; and that others might avoid the fearful
end of those two Time-servers, Empson and Dudley, Qui eorum urstiquijs
insistunt, eorum exitus per horrescant.

See the Statute of 8. Edw. 4. chap 2. a Statute, of Liveries, an Information,
etc. By the discretion of the Judges, to stand as an Original, etc. This Act is
desertedly repealed, vide, 12 R. 2. chapter 13. punishment by discretion, etc.
vide, 5th of H. 4. Chap. 6, 8. See the Commission of Sewers; discretion ought
to be thus discribed, Discretio est descernere per Legem; quid sit justum; From
whence three things seem, most remarkable.

First, The great equity and justice of the great Charter, with the high value
our Ancestors have most deservedly set upon it.

Secondly, The dreadful Maledictions, or Curse, they have denounced upon the
Breakers of it; with those exemplary punishments they have not spared, to
inflict upon such notorious Offenders.

Thirdly, So heinous a thing was it esteemed of old, to endeavor an
enervation, or subversion of these ancient Rights and Privileges, that Acts of
Parliaments themselves (otherwise the most sacred with the people,) have not
been of force enough to secure or defend such persons from condign punishment,
who in pursuance of them, have acted inconsistant with our great Charter.
Therefore it is, that great Lawyer; the Lord Cook, does once more agravate the
example of Empson and Dudley (with persons of the same rank) into a just
caution, as well to Parliaments as Judges, Justices and inferior Magistrates,
to decline making, or executing any Act, that may in the least seem, to
restring or confirm, this so often avowed and confirmed Great Charter of the
Liberties of England, since Parliaments are said to err when they cross it; the
Obeyers of their Acts punished, as Time-serving Transgressors; and that Kings
themselves, (though enriched by those courses) have with great Compunction and
Repentance, left among their dying words their recantations.

Therefore most notable and true it was, with which we shall conclude this
present Subject, what the King pleased to observe in a speech to the
Parliament, about 1662. (viz.) The good old Rules of Law are our best security.

The manner of the Courts behavior toward the Prisoners, and Jury, with their
many extravigant expressions, must not altogether slip our observation.

(1st) Their carriage to the Jury outdoes all presedents; they entertained them
more like a Pack of Fellons, then a Jury of honest men, as being fitter to be
tried themselves, then to acquit others. In short, no Jury, for many Ages,
received so many instances of displeasure and affront, because they prefered
not the humor of the Court, before the quiet of their own Consciences, even to
be esteemed as perjured, though they had really been so, had they not done what
they did.

(2d) Their treatment of the Prisoners was not more unchristian, then inhumane,
History can scarce tell us of one Heathen Roman that ever was so ignoble to his
Captive: what! to accuse, and not hear them; to threaten to Bore their tongues,
Gag and Stop their Mouths, Fetter their Legs, merely for defending
themselves, and that by the ancient fundamental Laws of England too. O
Barbarous! had they been Turks and Infidels, that carriage would have ill
become a Christian Court, such actions proving much stronger disswasives, then
Argument to convince them, how much the Christian Religion inclines men to
Justice and moderation above their dark Idolatry. It is truly lamentable that
such occasion should be given, for Intelligence to Foreign Parts, where
England has had the reputation of a Christian Country, by the ill treating of
its sober and religious Inhabitants for their conscientious Meetings to worship
God. But above all, Dissenters had little reason to have expected this boarish
fierceness from the Mayor of London, when they consider his eager prosecution
of the Kings Party under Cromwells Government, as thinking he could never give
too great a testimony of his Loyalty to that new Instrument, which makes the
old saying true, That one Runagade is worse then three Turks.

Alderman Bludworth, being conscious to himself of his partial kindness to the
Popish Firers, hopes to make amends by his zealous prosecution of the poor
Dissenters; for at the same Sessions he moved to have an Evidence (of no small
quality) against Harrison, the Friar, sent to Bridewel and whipped, that he was
earnest to have the Jury fined and imprisoned, because they brought not the
Prisoners guilty, for only worshipping their God: whence it may be easy to
observe, That Popish Friars, and Prelatical Persecutors are mere Confederates.

But what others have only adventured to stammer at, the Recorder of London,
has been so ingenious as to speak most plainly; or else what means those two
fatal Expressions, which are become the talk and terror both of City and
Country?

First, in assuring the Jury, That there would be a Law next Session of
Paliament, That no man should have the protection of the Law, but such as
conformed to the Church: which, should it be as true, as we hope it is false
(and a dishonorable Prophecy of that great Assembly) the Papists may live to
see their Marian days outdone by professed Protestants.

But surely no Englishman can be so sottish, as to conceive that his right to
Liberty and Property, came in with his Profession of the Protestant Religion;
or that his natural and humane Rights, are dependant on certain religious
apprehensions, and consequently he must esteem it a cruelty in the abstract,
that Persons should be denied the benefit of those Laws which relate to civil
concerns. who by their deportment in civil affairs, have no ways transgrest
them, but merely upon an opinion of Faith and matter of Conscience.

It is well known that Liberty and Property, Trade and Commerce were in the
World long before the Points in difference betwixt Protestants and Dissenters,
as the common Privileges of Mankind; and therefore not to be measured out by a
conformity to this, or the other religious persuasion, but purely as
Englishmen.

Secondly, But we should rather choose to esteem this an Expression of heat in
the Recorder, then that we could believe a Londons Recorder should say, an
English Parliament should impose so much Slavery on the present Age, and entayl
it upon their own Posterity (who for ought they know may be reckoned among the
Dissenters of the next Age) did he not encourage us to believe, it was both his
desire and his Judgment, from that deliberate Elogy he made on the Spanish
Inquisition, expressing himself much to this purpose: viz. Till now I never
understood the reason of the policy and prudence of the Spaniards, in
suffering the Inquisition amonst them: And certainly it will never be well with
us, till some thing like unto the Spanish Inquisition be in England. The gross
malignity of which saying, is almost inexpressable: What does this but justify
that Hellish design of the Papists to have prevented the first Reformation; If
this be good Doctrine, then Hoggestrant, the grand Inquisitor, was a more
venerable Person then Luther the Reformer. It was an expression that had better
become Cajetan the Popes Legate, then Howel, a Protestant Cities Recorder. This
is so far from helping to convert the Spaniard, that it is the way to harden
him in his Idolatry; when his abominable cruelty, shall be esteemed prudence,
and his most barbarous and exquisite torturing of Truth, an excellent way to
prevent Faction.

If the Recorder has spoke for no more then for himself, it is well; but
certainly he little deserves to be thought a Protestant, and a Lawyer, that put
both Reformation and Law into the Inquision: There being nothing more
destructive of the fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, and that noble
design of primitive Reformation; then the Arbitrary Power and terrifying Raks
of the Spanish Inquisition. And doubtless the supreme Governors of the Land,
are highly obliged in Honor and Conscience (in discharge of their Trust to
God and the Peoples to take these things into their serious consideration, as
what is expected from them, by those who earnestly wish theirs and the Kingdoms
safety and prosperity.

A Postscript.
The Copy of Judge Keeling's Case, taken out of the Parliament Iournal.
Die Mercurij, 11th Decembris, 1667.
THe House resumed the Hearing of the rest of the Report touching the matter of
Restraints upon Juries; and that upon the examination of diverse Witnesses, in
several Clauses of restraints, put upon Juries, by the Lord Chief Justice
Keeling; whereupon the Committee made their Resolutions, which are as follows.

First, That the proceedings of the Lord Chief Justices, in the Cases now
reported, are Innovations, in the Trial of men for their Lives and Liberties;
and that he has used an Arbitrary and Illegal power, which is of dangerous
consequence to the Lives and Liberties of the people of England, and tends to
the introducing of an Arbitrary Government.

Secondly, That in the place of Judicature, the Lord Chief Justice has
under-valued, vilified, and contemned Magna Charta, the great preservers of our
Lives, Freedom, and Property.

Thirdly, That he be brought to Trial, in order to condign punishment, in such
manner as the House should judge most fit and requisite.

Die Veneris, 13th Decembris, 1667.
Resolved, etc.
That the Presedents and Practice of Fining or Imprisoning, Jurors, for
Verdicts, is Illegal.

Now whether the Justices of this Court, in their Proceedings (both toward the
Prisoners, and Jury) have acted according to Law, to their Oaths and Duty, and
to do Justice without partiality? whereby Right might be preserved, the Peace
of the Land secured, and our Ancient Laws established; or whether such Actions
tend not to deprive us of our Lives and Liberties, to rob us of (our
Birthright) the Fundamental Laws of England? and finally to bring in an
Arbitrary and Illegal power to usurp the Benches of all our Courts of Justice,
we leave the English Reader to judge.

Certainly, there can be no higher affront offered to King and Parliament, then
the bringing their Reputations into suspicion with their People, by the
irregular actions of subordinate Judges: And no Age can parallel the carriage
of this Recorder, Mayor, etc. Nor can we think so ignobly of the Parliament, as
that they should do less then call these Persons to account, who failed not to
do it to one less guilty, and of more repute, (to wit) Judge Keeling: For if
his behavior gave just ground of jealousy, that he intended an Innovation,
and the introducing an Arbitrary Government, this Recorder much more. Did chief
Justice Keeling say, Magna Charta was Magna farta; so did this Recorder too:
And did Justice Keeling Fine and Imprison Juries, contrary to all Law, so did
this Recorder also. In short, there is no difference, unless it be, that the
one was questioned, and the other deserves it: But we desire in this they may
be said to differ. That though the former escaped punishment, the latter may
not, who having a Presedent before, did notwithstanding notoriously transgress.

To conclude, The Law supposes the King cannot err, because it is willing to
suppose, he always acts by Law (and Volunt as Legis, est voluntas Regis, Or
the Kings Will is regulated by the Law) but it says no such thing of his
Judges. And since they are obliged by Oath to disregard the Kings Letters
(though under the Broad and Privy Seal) if they any wise oppugn, or contradict
the Laws of the Land; and considering that every singular Action of an inferior
Minister, has an ugly reference to the Supreme Magistrate, where not rebuked;
we cannot but conclude, that both Judges are answerable for their
irregularities, especially, where they had not a limitation of a Kings Letter,
or Command; and that the Supreme Magistrate is obliged, as in Honor and Safety
to himself, Alfred-like, to bring such to condign punishment, lest every
Sessions produce the like Tragical Scenes of Usurpation over the Consciences of
Juties, to the villifying and contemning of Justice, and great detriment, and
prejudice of the good and honest men of this Famous and Free City.

FIAT JUSTICIA.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. after line 20. read (John Robinson Alderman, and Richard Brown)

The line following r. (Call over the Jury.)

P. 6. before the first l. r. (the Indictment)

P. 7. l. 25. for (before) r. (to)

P. 10. l. 26. blot out (to)

P. 17. l. 4. r. (is not)

P. 19. l. 7. instead of (is he guilty) r. (is W. P. guilty)

P. 26. l. 11. r. (to the terror)

P. 27. l. 6. for (as) r. (and)

P. 32. l. 13. for (Nern) r. (Horn)

P. 44. l. 11. for (For Ver dictis from) r. (For Verdict from)

P. 47. l. 31. for (Palaris) r. (Phalaris).


