THE PREFACE, BEING A SUMMARY ACCOUNT Of the DIVERSE Dispensations of God TO MEN,
FROM The Beginning of the World to That of our present Age, by the Ministry
and Testimony of his Faithful Servant George For, as an Introduction to the
ensuing Journal.
DIVERSE have been the Dispensations of God since the Creation of the World unto
the Sons of Men; But the Great End of all of them has been the Renown of his
own Excellent Name in the Creation and Restoration of Man: Man, the Emblem of
himself, as a God on Earth and the Glory of all his Works. The World began with
Innocence: All was then good that the good God had made: And as he blessed the
Works of his hands, so their Natures and Harmony magnified him their Creator.
Then the Morning Stars Sang together for Joy, and all parts of his Works said
Amen to his Law. Not a Jarr in the whole Frame, but Man in Paradise, the Beasts
in the Field, the Fowl in the Air, the Fish in the Sea, the Lights in the
Heavens, the Fruits of the Earth; yea the Air, the Earth, the Water and Fire
Worshipped, praised and exalted his Power, Wisdom and Goodness. O Holy Sabbath,
O Holy Day to the Lord!

But this Happy State lasted not long: For Man, the Crown and Glory of the
Whole, being tempted to aspire above his place, unhappily yielded against
Command and Duty, as well as Interest and Felicity; and so fell below it, lost
the Divine Image, the Wisdom, Power and Purity he was made in. By which, being
no longer fit for Paradise, he was expelled that Garden of God, his proper
Dwelling and Residence, and was driven out, as a poor Vagabond, from the
presence of the Lord, to wander in the Earth, the Habitation of Beasts.

Yet God, that made him had pity on him; for He seeing he was deceived, and
that it was not of Malice, or an Original Presumption in him, but through the
Subtilty of the Serpent, (that had first fallen from his own State, and by the
Mediation of the Woman, man's own Nature and Companion, whom the Serpent had
first deluded) in his infinite Goodness and Wisdom found out a way to Repair
the Breach, Recover the Loss, and Restore fallen Man again by a Nobler and more
Excellent Adam, promised to be born of a Woman; that as by means of a Woman the
evil one had prevailed upon Man, by a Woman also He should come into the World,
who would prevail against him and bruise his Head, and deliver Man from his
Power: And which, in a signal manner, by the Dispensation of the Son of God in
the Flesh, in the fullness of Time, was personally and fully accomplished by
him, and in him, as Man's Savior and Redeemer.

But his Power was not limited, in the Manifestation of it, to that time; for
both before and since his blessed Manifestation in the Flesh, He has been the
Light and Life, the Rock and Strength of all that ever feared God: Present with
them in their Temptations, followed them in their Travels and Afflictions, and
supported and carried them through and over the Difficulties that have attended
them in their Earthly Pilgrimage. By this Abel's heart excelled Cains, and Seth
obtained the pre-eminence, and Enoch walked with God. It was this that strove
with the Old World, and which they rebelled against, and which sanctified and
instructed Noah to Salvation.

But the outward Dispensation that followed the benighted State of Man, after
his Fall, especially among the Patriarcks, was generally that of Angels; as the
Scriptures of the Old Testament do in many places express, as to Abraham,
Jacob, etc. The next was that of the Law by Moses, which was also delivered by
Angels, as the Apostle tells us. This Dispensation was much outward, and suited
to a low and servil State; called therefore that of a Schoolmaster, to point
out and prepare that People to look and long for the Messiah, who would deliver
them from the servitude of a Ceremonious and imperfect Dispensation, by knowing
the Realities of those Misterious Representations in themselves. In this time
the Law was written on Stone, the Temple built with Hands attended with an
outward Priesthood and External Rites, and Ceremonies, that were Shadows of
the Good Things that were to come, and were only to serve till the Seed came,
or the more excellent and general manifestation of Christ, to whom was the
Promise, and to all Men only in him, in whom it was Yea and Amen; even Life
from Death, Immortality and Eternal Life.

This the Prophets foresaw, and comforted the believing Jews in the certainty
of it; which was the Top of the Mosaical Dispensation, and which ended in
John's Ministry, the Forerunner of the Messiah, as John's was finished in him,
the Fullness of all. And God, that at sundry Times and in diverse manners had
spoken to the Fathers by his Servants the Prophets, Spoak then by his Son
Christ Jesus, Who is Heir of all things; being the Gospel-Day, which is the
Dispensation of Sonship: Bringing in thereby a nearer Testament and a better
hope; even the beginning of the Glory of the latter days, and of the
Restitution of all things; yea, the Restoration of the Kingdom unto Israel.

Now the Spirit, that was more sparingly communicated in former Dispensations,
began to be Poured forth upon all Flesh, according to the Prophet Joel, and the
Light that shined in Darkness, or but dimly before, the most gracious God
caused to Shine out of Darkness, and the Day Star began to arise in the Hearts
of Believers, giving unto them the knowledge of God in the Face (or Appearance)
of his Son Christ Jesus.

Now the Poor in Spirit, the Meek, the true Mourners, the Hungry and Thirsty
after Righteousness, the Peacemakers, the Pure in Heart, the Merciful and the
Persecuted, came more especially in Remembrance before the Lord, and were
sought out and blessed by Israel's true Shepherd. Old Jerusalem with her
Children grew out of Date, and the New Jerusalem into Request, the Mother of
the Sons of the Gospel-Day. Wherefore no more at Old Jerusalem, nor at the
Mountain of Samaria, will God be worshipped above other places; for, behold, he
is declared and preached a Spirit, and he will be known as such, and worshipped
in the Spirit and in the Truth. He will come nearer then of old time, and he
will write his Law in the Heart, and put his Fear and Spirit in the inward
parts, according to his promise. Then Signs, Types and Shadows flew away, the
Day having discovered their Insufficiency in not reaching to the inside of the
Cup, to the cleansing of the Conscience; and all Elementary services were
expired in and and by him that is the substance of all.

And to this Great and Blessed End of the Dispensation of the Son of God, did
the Apostles Testify, whom he had chosen and anointed by his Spirit, to turn
the Jews from their Prejudice and Superstition, and the Gentiles from their
Vanity and Idolatry, to Christ's Light and Spirit that shined in them; that
they might be quickened from the Sins and Trespasses in which they were Dead, to
serve the Living God in the Newness of the Spirit of Life, and walk as Children
of the Light, and of the Day, even the Day of Holiness: For such put on Christ,
the Light of the World, and make no more Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the
Lusts thereof. So that the Light, Spirit and Grace that comes by Christ, and
appears in Man, was what the Apostles ministered from, and turned Peoples Minds
unto, and in which they gathered and built up the Churches of Christ in their
Day. For which cause they advised them not to quench the Spirit, but wait for
the Spirit, and Speak by the Spirit, and Pray by the Spirit, and Walk in the
Spirit too, as that which approved them the truly begotten Children of God;
born, not of Flesh and Blood, or of the will of Man, but of the will of God; by
doing his will, and denying their own; by drinking of Christ's Cup, and being
Baptized with his Baptism of Self-denial: The Way and Path that all the Heirs
of Life have trod to Blessedness. But alas! even in the Apostles Days, (those
bright Stars of the first Magnitude of the Gospel Light) some Clouds
(foretelling an Eclipse of this Primitive Glory) began to appear, and several
of them gave early Caution of it to the Christians of their Time; that even
then there was, and yet would be more and more, a falling away from the Power
of Godliness and the Purity of that Spiritual Dispensation, by such as sought
to make a fair show in the Flesh, but with whom the offense of the Cross
ceased: Yet with this comfortable Conclusion, that they saw beyond it a more
glorious Time than ever, to the true Church. Their sight was true, and what
they foretold to the Churches, gathered by them in the Name and Power of Jesus,
came so to pass: For Christians degenerated a-pace into outsides, as Days and
Meats, and diverse other Ceremonies. And which was worse, they fell into Strife
and Contention about them, separating one from another, then Envying, and, as
they had Power, Persecuting one another, to the shame and scandal of their
common Christianity, and grievous stumbling and offense of the Heathen, among
whom the Lord had so long and so marvellously preserved them. And having got at
last the Worldly Power into their Hands, by Kings and Emperors embracing the
Christian Profession, they changed what they could, the Kingdom of Christ,
which is not of this World, into a Worldly Kingdom; or at least styled the
Worldly Kingdom that was in their Hands the Kingdom of Christ, and so they
became Worldly, and not true Christians. Then Humane Inventions and Novelties,
both in Doctrine and Worship, crowded fast into the Church; a Door being opened
thereunto by the Grossness and Carnality that appeared then among the
generality of Christians; who had long since left the Guidance of God's meek
and heavenly Spirit, and given themselves up to Superstition, Will Worship, and
Voluntary Humility. And as Superstition is Blind, so it is Heady and Furious;
for all must stoop to its blind and boundless Zeal or Perish by it: In the Name
of the Spirit, persecuting the very appearance of the Spirit of God in others,
and opposing that in them which they resisted in themselves, viz. the Light,
Grace and Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ; but always under the Notion of
Innovation, Heresy, Schism, or some such plausible Name. Though Christianity
allows of no Name or Pretense whatever for persecuting of any Man for matters
of mere Religion; Religion being in its very Nature, Meek, Gentle and
Forbearing; and consists of Faith, Hope and Charity, which no Persecutor can
have, whilst he remains a Persecutor; in that a Man cannot believe well, or
hope well, or have a charitable or tender regard to another, whilst he would
violate his mind or persecute his Body for matters of Faith or Worship toward
his God.

Thus the False Church sprang up, and mounted the Chair. But though she lost
her Nature, she would keep her good Name of the Lambs-bride, the True Church
and Mother of the Faithful; constraining all to receive her Mark, either in
their Forehead or Righthand, publicly or privately: But Indeed and in Truth
she was Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots: Mother of those that with all
their show and outside of Religion, were adulterated and gone from the Spirit,
Nature and Life of Christ, and grown Vain, Worldly, Ambitious, Covetous, Cruel,
etc. which are the Fruits of the Flesh and not of the Spirit.

Now it was that the True Church fled into the Wilderness, that is, from
Superstition and Violence, to a Retired, Solitary and lonely State; hidden and
as it were out of Sight of Men, though not out of the World: Which shows that
her wonted Visibility was not Essential to the Being of a True Church in the
Judgment of the Holy Ghost; she being as True a Church in the Wilderness,
though not as Visible and Lustrious, as when she was in her former Splendour of
Profession. In this State many Attempts She made to return, but the Waters were
yet too High, and her way blocked up, and many of her excellent Children in
several Nations and Centuries fell by the Cruelty of Superstition, because they
would not fall from their Faithfulness to the Truth.

The last Age did set some steps toward it, both as to Doctrine, Worship and
Practice. But Practice quickly failed, for Wickedness flowed in a little time,
as well among the Professors of the Reformation as those they reformed from; so
that by the Fruits of Conversation they were not to be distinguished. And the
Children of the Reformers, if not the Reformers themselves, betook themselves
very early to Earthly Policy and Power to uphold and carry on their Reformation
that had been begun with Spiritual Weapons; which I have often thought, has
been one of the greatest reasons the Reformation made no better Progress, as to
the Life and Soul of Religion: For whilst the Reformers were Lowly and
Spiritually Minded, and trusted in God, and looked to Him, and lived in his
Fear, and consulted not with Flesh and Blood, nor sought Deliverance in their
own way, there were daily added to the Church such as, one might reasonably
say, should be saved. For they were not so careful to be safe from Persecution
as to be Faithful under it.

Being more concerned to spread the Truth by their Faith and Patience in
Tribulation, than to get the worldly Power out of their Hands that inflicted
their Sufferings upon them; and it will be well if the Lord suffer them not to
fall by the very same way they took to stand. In Doctrine they were in some
things short, in other things, to avoid one extreme they run into another: And
for Worship, there was for the generality, more of Man than God. They owned the
Spirit, Inspiration and Revelation indeed, and grounded their Separation and
Reformation upon the Sense and Understanding they received from it, in the
Reading of the Scriptures of Truth; and this was their Plea, the Scripture was
the Text, the Spirit the Interpreter, and that to every one for himself. But
yet there was too much of humane Invention, Tradition and Art that remained
both in Praying and Preaching, and of worldly Authority and worldly Greatness
in their Ministers, especially in this Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark and some Parts
of Germany. God was therefore pleased among us, to shift from Vessel to Vessel:
And the next remove humbled the Ministry, so that they were more Strict in
Preaching, Devout in Praying, and Zealous for keeping the Lord's Day, and
Catechizing of Children and Servants, and Repeating at Home in their Families
what they had heard in public.

But even as these grew into Power, they were not only for Whipping some out,
but others into the Temple: And they appeared Rigid in their Spirits, rather
than Severe in their Lives, and more for a Party then for Piety: Which brought
forth another People, that were yet more retired and select. They would not
communicate at large, or in common with others; but formed Churches among
themselves of such as could give some account of their Conversion, at least, of
very promising experiences of the Work of God's Grace upon their Hearts, and
under mutual Agrements and Covenants of fellowship they kept together. These
People were somewhat of a Softer Temper, and seemed to recommend Religion by
the Charms of its Love, Mercy and Goodness rather than by the Terrors of its
Judgments and Punishment; by which the former Party would have terrified People
into Religion.

They also allowed greater liberty to Prophecy than those before them; for they
admitted any Member to Speak or Pray, as well as their Pastor (whom they always
Chose, and not the Civil Magistrate). If such found any thing pressing upon
them to either Duty, even without the Distinction of Clergy or Laity; Persons
of any Trade, be it never so Low and Mechanical. But alas! even these People
suffered great loss: For tasting of Worldly Empire, and the favor of Princes,
and the gain that ensued, they degenerated but too much. For though they had
cried down National Churches and Ministry and Maintenance too, some of them,
when it was their own turn to be Tried, fell under the Weight of Worldly Honor
and Advantage, got into profitable Parsonages too much, and outlived and
contradicted their own Principles: And, which was yet worse, turned some of
them absolute Persecutors of other Men for God's Sake, that but so lately came
themselves out of the Furnace, which drove many a step farther, and that was
into the Water. Another Baptism, as believing they were not Scripturally
Baptized; and hoping to find that Presence and Power of God in submitting to
that Ordinance, which they desired and wanted.

These People made also Profession of Neglecting, if not Renouncing and
Censuring, not only the Necessity but use of all Human Learning as to the
Ministry; and all other Qualifications to it besides the Helps and Gifts of the
Spirit of God, and those natural and common to Men; and for a time they seemed
like John of Old, a Burning and a Shining Light, to other Societies.

They were very Diligent, Plain and Serious, strong in Scripture, and bold in
Profession, bearing much Reproach and Contradiction: But that which others fell
by, proved their Hurt. For worldly Power spoiled them too; who had enough of it
to try them what they would do if they had more; and they rested also too much
upon their Watery Dispensation, instead of passing on more fully to the Fire and
Holy Ghost, which was his Baptism, who came with a Fan in his Hand, that he
might thoroughly (and not in part only) purge his Floor, and take away the Dross
and the Tin of his People and make a Man finer than Gold. Withal, they grew
High, Rough and Self-righteous, opposing further attainment; too much
forgetting the Day of their Infancy and Littleness, which gave them something
of a real Beauty; in so much that many left them and all visible Churches and
Societies, and Wandered up and down, as Sheep without a Shepherd, and as Doves
without their Mates; seeking their Beloved but could not find Him, as their
Souls desired to know Him; whom their Souls loved above their chiefest Joy.

These People were called Seekers by some, and the Family of Love by others;
because, as they came to the knowledge of one another, they sometimes met
together, not formally to Pray or Preach, at appointed times or Places, in
their own Wills, as in times past they were accustomed to do; but waited
together in Silence, and as any thing rose in any one of their Minds that they
thought Savoured of a Divine Spring, so they sometimes Spoke. But so it was
that some of them not keeping in Humility and in the Fear of God, after the
Abundance of Revelation, were exalted above Measure, and for want of staying
their Minds in an humble Dependence upon him that opened their Understandings
to see great things in his Law; they run out in their own Imaginations, and
mixing them with those Divine Openings, brought forth a Monstrous Birth; to the
Scandal of those that feared God, and waited daily in the Temple, not made with
Hands, for the Consolation of Israel; the Jew inward, and Circumcision in
Spirit.

This People obtained the Name of Ranters from their extravagant Discourses and
Practices. For they interpreted Christ's fullfilling of the Law for us, to be a
discharging of us from any Obligation and Duty the Law required, instead of the
Condemnation of the Law for sins past, upon Faith and Repentance, and that now
it was no Sin to do that which before it was a Sin to commit; the slavish Fear
of the Law being taken off by Christ, and all things good that Man did, if he
did but do them with the Mind and Persuasion that it was so. Insomuch that
diverse fell into Gross and Enormous Practices; pretending in excuse thereof
that they could, without Evil, commit the same Act which was Sin in another to
do; thereby distinguishing between the Action and the Evil of it, by the
Direction of the Mind and Intention in the doing of it. Which was to make Sin
Super-abound by the aboundings of Grace, and to turn from the Grace of God into
Wantonness, a securer way of Sinning than before: As if Christ came not to take
away Sin, but that we might Sin more freely at his Cost, and with less Danger
to our selves. I say, this ensnared Diverse, and brought them to an utter and
lamentable Loss as to their Eternal State; and they grew very troublesome to
the better sort of People, and furnished the looser with an occasion to
Profane.

It was about that very same time, as you may see in the ensuing Annals, that
the Eternal, Wise, and Good God was pleased, in his Infinite Love, to Honor
and Visit this benighted and bewildred Nation with his Glorious Dayspring from
on High; yea with a most sure and certain sound of the Word of Light and Life,
through the Testimony of a Chosen Vessel, to an effectual and blessed purpose,
can many thousands say, Glory be to the Name of the Lord for ever.

For as it reached the Conscience and broak the Heart, and brought many to a
Sense and Search, so what People had been vainly seeking without, with much
Pains and Cost, they by this Ministry found within; where it was they wanted
what they sought for, viz. The right way to Peace with God. For they were
directed to the Light of Jesus Christ within them, as the Seed and Leven of the
Kingdom of God; near All, because in All, and God's Talent to All. A Faithful
and True Witness and Just Monitor in every Bosom. The Gift and Grace of God to
Life and Salvation that appears to all, though few regard it. This, the
Traditional Christian, conceited of himself, and strong in his own Will and
Righteousness, and overcome with blind Zeal and Passion, either despised as a
low and common thing, or opposed as a Novelty, under many hard Names and
opprobrious Terms; denying, in his ignorant and angry Mind, any fresh
Manifestation of God's Power and Spirit in Man in these days, though never more
needed to make true Christians: Not unlike those Jews of Old that rejected the
Son of God at the very same time that they blindly professed to wait for the
Messiah to come; because, alas, he appeared not among them according to their
Carnal Mind and Expectation.

This brought forth many abusive Books, which filled the greater sort with
Envy, and lesser with Rage, and made the way and progress of this Blessed
Testimony Straight and Narrow indeed to those that received it. However, God
owned his own Work, and this Testimony did effectually Reach, Gather, Comfort
and Establish the Weary and Heavy Leaden, the Hungry and Thirsty, the Poor and
Needy, the Mournful and Sick of many Maladys, that had spent all upon
Physicians of no Value, and waited for Relief from Heaven; Help only from
above: Seeing upon a serious Trial of all things, nothing else would do but
Christ himself, the Light of his Countenance, a Touch of his Garment and Help
from his Hand, who cured the poor Woman's Issue, raised the Centurions Servant,
the Widows Son, the Rulers Daughter, and Peter's Mother, and like Her, they no
sooner felt his Power and Efficacy upon their Souls; but they gave up to obey
him in a Testimony to his Power, and with resigned Wills and faithful Hearts,
through all Mockings, Contradictions, Beatings, Prisons, and many other
Jeopardies that attended them for his Blessed Name Sake.

And truly, they were very many and very Great; so that in all Humane
Probability they must have been swallowed up Quick of the Proud and Bosterous
Waves that swelled and beat against them; but that the God of all their tender
Mercies was with them in his Glorious Authority, so that the Hills often Fled
and the Mountains melted before the Power that filled them; working mightily
for them as well as in them, one ever following the other. By which they saw
plainly, to their exceeding great Confirmation and Comfort, that all things
were possible with him with whom they had to do. And that the more that which
God required seemed to cross Man's Wisdom, and expose them to Man's Wrath, the
more God appeared to help and carry them through all to his Glory: Insomuch
that if ever any People could say in Truth, Thou art our Sun and our Shield,
our Rock and Sanctuary, and by thee we have leaped over a Wall, and by thee we
have run through a Troop, and by thee we have put the Armies of the Aliens to
Flight, these People had Right to say it. And as God had delivered their Souls
of the warisom Burdens of Sin and Vanity, and enriched their poverty of
Spirit, and satisfied their great Hungar and Thirst after Eternal
Righteousness, and filled them with the Good Things of his own House, and made
them Stewards of his Manifold Gifts; so they went forth to all Quarters of
these Nations, to Declare to the Inhabitants thereof, what God had done for
them; what they had found, and where and how they had found it; viz. The way to
Peace with God: Inviting them to come and see and taste, for themselves, the
Truth of what they Declared unto them.

And as their Testimony was to the Principle of God in Man, the precious Pearl
and Leven of the Kingdom, as the only blessed means appointed of God to
Quicken, Convince and Sanctify Man; so they opened to them what it was in it
self, and what it was given to them for: How they might know it from their own
Spirit, and that of the Subtle appearance of the Evil one; and what it would do
for all those whose minds are turned off from the Vanity of the World and its
Lifeless ways and Teachers, and ad-hear to this blessed Light in themselves,
which discovers and condemns Sin in all its appearances, and shows how to
overcome it, if minded and obeyed in its holy Manifestations and Convictions:
Giving Power to such to Avoid and Resist those things that do not please God,
and to grow Strong in Love, Faith, and Good Works: That so Man, whom Sin has
made as a Wilderness, overrun with Briers and Thorns, might become as the
Garden of God, cultivated by his divine Power, and replenisht with the most
Virtuous and Beautiful Plants of God's own Right Hand Planting, to his Eternal
Praise.

But these Experimental Preachers of Glad Tidings of God's Truth and Kingdom
could not run when they List, or Pray or Preach when they Pleased, But as the
Christ their Redeemer prepared and moved them by his own Blessed Spirit, for
which they waited in their Services and Meetings, and Spoak as that gave them
utterance, and which was as those having Authority, and not like the Dreaming,
Dry and formal Pharisees. And so it plainly appeared to the serious Minded,
whose Spiritual Eye the Lord Jesus had in any measure opened; so that to one
was given the Word of Exhortation, to another the Word of Reproof, to another
the Word of Consolation, and all by the same Spirit and in the good Order
thereof, to the Convincing and Edifying of many.

And truly, they waxed Strong and Bold through Faithfulness; and by the Power
and Spirit of the Lord Jesus became very Fruitful; thousands, in a short time,
being turned to the Truth through their Testimony in Ministry and Sufferings,
insomuch as in most Counties, and many of the considerable Towns of England,
Meetings were settled, and daily there were added such as should be saved. For
they were Diligent to Plant and to Water, and the Lord blessed their Labors
with an Exceeding great Increase; notwithstanding all the opposition made to
their blessed Progress, by false Rumors, Calumnies and bitter Persecutions; not
only from the Powers of the Earth, but from every one that listed to injure and
abuse them: So that they seemed indeed to be as poor Sheep appointed to the
Slaughter, and as a People killed all the Day long.

It were fitter for a Volumn than a Preface, but so much as to repeat the
Contents of their cruel Sufferings from Professors as well as from Prophaine,
and from Magistrates as well as the Rabble, that it may well be said of this
abused and despised People, they went forth Weeping and sowed in Tears, bearing
Testimony to the Precious Seed, the Seed of the Kingdom, which stands not in
Words, the Finest the Highest that Man's Wit can use, but in Power; the Power
of Christ Jesus, to whom God the Father has given all Power in Heaven and in
Earth, that he might rule Angels above, and Men below; who empowered them, as
their Work witnesses, by the many that were turned through their Ministry from
Darkness to the Light, and out of the Broad into the Narrow Way, bringing
People to a Weighty, Serious and God-like Conversation; the Practice of that
Doctrine which they Taught.

And as without this Secret Divine Power there is no Quickening and Regenerating
of dead Souls, so the want of this Generating and begetting Power and Life, is
the Cause of the little Fruit that the many Ministrys that have been, and are
in the World bring forth. O that both Ministers and People were sensible of
this! My Soul is often troubled for them, and Sorrow and Mourning compass me
about for their Sakes. O! that they were Wise, O! that they would consider, and
lay to Heart the things that truly and substantially make for their lasting
Peace.

Two things are to be briefly touched upon, the Doctrine they Taught, and the
Example they lead among all People. I have already touched upon their
Fundamental Principle, which is as the Corner stone of their Fabric: And to
speak eminently and properly, their Characteristick, or main distinguishing
Point or Principle, viz. the Light of Christ within, as God's Gift for Man's
Salvation. This I say, is as the Root of the goodly Tree of Doctrines that grew
and branched out from it, which I shall now mention in their Natural and
Experimental Order.

First, Repentance from dead Works to serve the Living God. Which comprehends
three Operations. First, a sight of Sin. Secondly, A Sense and Godly Sorrow for
it. Thirdly, An Amendment for the Time to come. This was the Repentance they
preached and pressed, and a Natural result from the Principle they turned all
People unto. For of Light came Sight; and of Sight came Sense and Sorrow; and
of Sense and Sorrow, came Amentment of Life: Which Doctrine of Repentance leads
to Justification; that is, Forgiveness of the Sins that are past through Christ
the alone Propitiation and the Sanctification or Purgation of the Soul from the
defiling Nature and Habits of sin present; which is justification in the
complete Sense of that Word; comprehending both justification from the Guilt of
the Sins that are past, as if they had never been committed, through the Love
and Mercy of God in Christ Jesus; and the Creatures being made inwardly just
through the Cleansing and Sanctifying Power and Spirit of Christ revealed in
the Soul; which is commonly called Sanctification.

From hence sprang a Second Doctrine they were led to declare, as the Mark of
the Price of the High Calling of all true Christians, viz. Perfection from sin,
according to the Scriptures of Truth, which testify it to be the end of
Christ's coming and the Nature of his Kingdom, and for which his Spirit was
given. But they never held a Perfection in Wisdom and Glory in this Life, or
from Natural Infirmities or Death, as some have with a weak or ill mind,
imagined and insinuated against them.

This they called a Redeemed State, Regeneration, or the New Birth: Teaching
every where, according to their Foundation, that without this Work were known,
there was no inheriting the Kingdom of God.

Third, To an acknowledgment of Eternal Rewards and Punishment, as they have
good Reason; for else of all People, certainly they must be the most Miserable:
Who for about Forty Years, have been exceeding great Sufferers for their
Profession, and in some Cases, treated worse then the worst of Men; yea, as the
Refuge and Off-scowering of all things.

This was the Purport of their Doctrine and Ministry; which, for the most part,
is what other Professors of Christianity pretend to hold in Words and Forms,
but not in the Power of Godliness; that has been long lost by Men's departing
from that Principle and Seed of Life, that is in Man and which Man has not
regarded, but lost the Sense of; and in and by which he can only be quickened in
his Mind to serve the living God in Newness of Life. For as the Life of
Religion was lost, and the generality lived and Worshipped God after their own
Wills, and not after the Will of God, nor the mind of Christ, which stood in
the Works and Fruits of the Holy Spirit; so that which they pressed, was not
Notion but Experience, no Formality but Godliness; as being sensible in
themselves, through the Work of God's Righteous Judgments, that without
Holiness no Man should ever see the Lord with Comfort.

Besides these Doctrines, and out of them, as the larger Branches, there sprang
forth several particular Doctrines, that did exemplify and further explain the
Truth and Efficacy of the General Doctrine before observed, in their Lives and
Examples. As,

I. Communion and loving one another. This is a noted Mark in the Mouth of all
sorts of People concerning them. They will meet, They will help and stick one
to another. Whence it is common to hear some say, Look how the Quakers love and
take care of one another. Others less Moderate will say, The Quakers love none
but themselves, and if loving one another and having an Intimate Communion in
Religion, and constant care to meet to Worship God and help one another, be any
Mark of Primitive Christianity, they had it, Blessed be the Lord, in an ample
manner.

II. To love Enemies: This they both Taught and Practiced: For they did not
only refuse to be revenged for Injuries done them, and condemned it as of an
Unchristian Spirit, but they did freely Forgive, yea, Help and Relieve those
that had been Cruel to them, when it was in their Power to have been even with
them; of which many and singular Instances might be given: Endeavoring,
through Patience, to overcome all Injustice and Oppression, and Preaching this
Doctrine as Christian for others to follow.

III. The Sufficiency of Truth speaking, according to Christ's own form of
Words, of Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, among Christians without Swearing, both from
Christ's express Prohibition to Swear at all. Mat. 5. And for that they being
under the Tie and Bond of Truth in themselves, there was both no Necessity for
an Oath, and it would be a Reproach to their Christian Veracity to Assure their
Truth by such an Extraordinary way of Speaking: But offering at the same time,
to be punnisht to the full, for false Speaking, as others for Perjury, if ever
guilty of it; and hereby they exclude, with all True, all False and Profane
Swearing; for which the Land did and does Mourn, and the great God was and is
not a little offended with it.

IV. Not Fighting but Suffering, is another Testimony peculiar to this People:
They affirm that Christianity teaches People To beat their Swords into Plough
Shears, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, and to learn War no more, that so
the Wolf may lie down with the Lamb, and the Lion with the Calf, and nothing
that destroys be entertained in the Hearts of People; exhorting them to employ
their Zeal against Sin, and turn their Anger against Satan, and no longer War
one against another; because, all Wars and Fightings come of Men's own Hearts
Lusts, according to the Apostle James, and not of the Meek Spirit of Christ
Jesus who is Captain of another Warfare, and which is carried on with other
Weapons. Thus, as Truth speaking succeeded Swearing, so Faith and Truth
succeeded Fighting, in the Doctrine and Practice of this People. Nor ought they
for this to be Obnoxious to Civil Government, since if they cannot Fight for
it, neither can they Fight against it; which is no mean security to the State:
Nor is it reasonable that People should be blamed for not doing more for others
than they can do for themselves. And Christianity set aside, if the Costs and
Fruits of War were well considered, Peace, with its Inconveniences, is
generally Preferable. But though they were not for Fighting, they were for
submitting to Government; and that, not only for Fear, but for Conscience Sake,
where Government does not interfere with Conscience: Believing it to be an
Ordinance of God, and where it is justly administered, a great Benefit to
Minkind: Though it has been their Lot, through blind Zeal in some, and Interest
in others, to have felt the Strokes of it with greater Weight and Rigor than
any other Persuasion in this Age; whilst they, of all others (Religion set
aside) have given the Civil Magistrate the least occasion of Trouble in the
Discharge of his Office.

V. Another part of the Character of this People is, They refuse to pay Tithes,
or Maintenance to a National Ministry, and that for two Reasons; The one is,
that they believe all compelled Maintenance, even to Gospel Ministers, to be
Unlawful, because expressly contrary to Christ's Command, who said, Freely you
have received, freely give: At least, that the Maintenance of Gospel Ministers
should be free and not forced. The other Reason of their Refusal is, Because
those Ministers are not Gospel ones, in that the Holy Ghost is not their
Foundation, but Humane Arts and Parts: So that it is not matter of Humor or
Sullenness, but pure Conscience toward God, that they cannot help to support
National Ministers where they dwell, which are but too much and too visibly
become ways of Worldly Advantage and Preferment.

VI. Not to respect Persons, was another of their Doctrines and Practices, for
which they were often Buffeted and Abused. They Affirmed it to be sinful to
give Flattering Titles, or to use Vain Gestures and Complements of Respect;
though to Virtue and Authority they ever made a Difference, but after their Plain
and Homely Manner, yet sincere and substantial way; well remembering the
Example of Mordecai and Elihu, but more especially the Command of their Lord
and Master Jesus Christ, who forbad his Followers to call Men Rabby, which
implies Lord and Master, also the fashionable Greetings and Salutations of
those Times; that so Selflove and Honor, to which the proud Mind of Man is
incident, in his fallen Estate, might not be Indulged but Rebuked.

They also used the Plain Language of Thou and Thee to a single Person,
whatever was his Degree among Men. And indeed the Wisdom of God was much seen,
in bringing forth this People in so Plain an Appearance; for it was a Close and
Distinguishing Test upon the Spirit of those they came among; showing their
Insides and what predominated, notwithstanding their High and Great Profession
of Religion. This, among the rest, sounded so harsh to many of them, and they
took it so ill, that they would say, Thou me, Thou my Dog: If thou thouest me,
I Will thou thy Teeth down thy Throat, forgetting the Language they use to God in
their own Prayers, and the common Style of the Scriptures, and that it is an
absolute and essential Propriety of Speech: And what good had their Religion
done them, who were so sensibly touched with Indignation for the use of this
Plain, Honest, and True Speech?

VI. They recommended Silence by their Example, having very few words upon all
Occasions: They were at a Word in Dealing; nor could their Customers many Words
tempt them from it; having more regard for Truth than Custom, to Example then
Gain, they sought Solitude; but when in Company, they would neither use nor
willingly hear Unnecessary as well as Unlawful Discourses; whereby they
preserved their Minds pure and undisturbed from unprofitable Thoughts and
Diversions: Nor could they humor the Custom of Good Night, Good Morrow, God
Speed; for they knew the Night was Good, and the Day was Good, without wishing
of either; and that in the other Expression, the Holy Name of God was too
lightly and unthinkingly used, and therefore taken in Vain. Besides, they were
Words and Wishes of Course, and are usually as little meant, as are Love and
Service in the Custom of Cap and Knee; and superfluity in those as well as in
other things was Burthensom to them; and therefore They did not only decline to
use them, but found themselves often pressed to reprove the Practice.

For the same reason they forbore Drinking to People, or Pledging of them, as
the manner of the World is: A Practice that is not only Unnecessary, but they
thought Evil in the Tendencies of it; being a Provocation to Drinking more than
did People Good, as well as that it was in it self Vain and Heathenish.

VII. Their way of Marriage is peculiar to them; and is a distinguishing
Practice from all other Societies professing Christianity. They say that
Marriage is an Ordinance of God, and that God only can rightly join Man and
Woman in Marriage. Therefore they use neither Priest nor Magistrate, but the
Man and Woman concerned take each other as Husband and Wife in the presence of
diverse Credible Witnesses, promising unto each other with God's Assistance, to
be Loving and Faithful in that Relation till Death shall separate them. But,
antecedent to all this, They first present themselves to the Monthly Meeting
for the Affairs of the Church, where they reside; There declaring their
Intentions to take one another as Man and Wife, if the said Meeting have
nothing material to object against it. They are constantly asked the necessary
Questions, as in Case of Parents, or Guardians if they have acquainted them
with their Intention, and have their Consent, etc. The Method of the Meeting is
to take a Minute thereof, and to appoint Proper Persons to enquire of their
Conversation and Clearness from all others, and whether they have discharged
their Duty to their Parents or Guardians; and make report thereof the next
Monthly Meeting; where the same Parties are desired to give their Attendance.
In case it appears they proceeded Orderly, the Meeting passes their Proposal,
and so Records it in their Meeting Book; and in Case the Woman be a Widow and
has Children, due care is there taken, that Provision also be made by her for
the Orphans before the said Marriage; advising the Parties concerned to appoint
a convenient Time and place, and to give fitting Notice to their Relations, and
such Friends and Neighbors, as they desire should be the Witnesses of their
Marriage: Where they take one another by the Hand, and by Name promising
Reciprocally after the Manner before expressed. Of all which Proceedings, a
Narative, in a way of Certificate, is made, to which the said Parties first set
their Hands, thereby making it their Act and Deed; and then diverse of the
Relations, Spectators and Auditors set their Names as Witnesses of what they
Said and Signed. Which Certificate, is afterward Registered in the Record
belonging to the Meeting, where the Marriage is Solemnized. Which Regular
Method has been, as it deserves, adjudged in Courts of Law a good Marriage,
where it has been Disputed and Contested, for want of the accustomed Formality
of Priest and Ring, etc. which Ceremonies they have Refused, not out of Humor,
but Conscience reasonably grounded, in as much as no Scripture Example tells
us, that the Priest had any other part of Old Time, than that of a Witness
among the rest, before whom the Jews used to take one another: And therefore
this People look upon it as an Imposion, to advance the Power and Profits of
the Clergy. And for the use of the Ring, it is enough to say that it was an
Heathen and vain Custom. and never in Practice among the People of God, Jews or
Primitive Christans. The words of the Usual form, as With my Body I thee
Worship, etc. are hardly defensible: In short, they are more Careful, Exact and
Regular than any Form now used, and it is Free of the inconveniences other
Methods are attended with. Their Care and Checks being so many, and such, as no
Clandestine Marriages can be performed among them.

VIII. It may not be unfit to say something here of their Births and Burials,
which make up so much of the Pomp and Solemnity of too many called Christians.
For Births, the Parents Name their own Children, which is usually some days
after they are Born, in the presence of the Midwife (if she can be there) and
those that were at the Birth, etc. who afterward sign a Certificate, for that
purpose prepared, of the Birth and Name of the Child, or Children, which is
Recorded in a proper Book, in the Monthly Meeting, to which the Parents belong;
avoiding the accustomed Ceremonies and Feastivals.

IX. Their Burials are performed with the same Simplicity. If the Corpse of the
Deceased be near any public Meeting Place, it is usually carried thither, for
the more convenient Reception of those that Accompany it to the Ground they
Bury in, and it so falls out sometimes, that while the Meeting is gathering for
the Burial, some or other have a Word of Exhortation, for the sake of the
People there met together: After which, the Body is borne away by the Young
Men, or those that are of their Neighborhood, or that were most of the
Intimacy of the Deceased Party: The Corpse being in a plain Coffin, without any
Covering or Furniture upon it. At the Ground, they pause some time before they
put the Body into its Grave, that if any one there should have any thing upon
them to exhort the People, they may not be dissappointed, and that the
Relations may the more Retiredly and Solemnly take their last leave of the
Corpse of their departed Kindred, and the Spectators have a Sense of Mortality,
by the occasion then given them to reflect upon their own Latter End.
Otherways, they have no set Rites or Ceremonies on those Occasions; neither do
the Kindred of the Deceased ever wear Mourning; they looking upon it as a
Wordly Ceremony and piece of Pomp, and that what Mourning is fit for a
Christian to have at the Departure of a beloved Relation or Friend, should be
worn in the Mind which is only sensible of the Loss, and the Love they had to
them, and Remembrance of them, to be outwardly expressed by a respect to their
Advice, and care of those they have left behind them, and their Love of that
they Loved. Which Conduct of theirs, though unmodish or unfashionable, leaves
nothing of the Substance of things neglected or undone; and as they aim at no
more, so that simplicity of Life is what they observe with great Satisfaction,
though it sometimes happens not to be without the Mockeries of the vain World
they live in.

These things gave them a Rough and Disagreeable Appearance with the
Generality; who thought them Turners of the World upside down, as indeed, in
some Sense they were; but in no other than that wherein Paul was so charged,
viz. To bring things back into their Primitive and right Order again. For these
and such like Practices of theirs were not the Result of Humor, as some have
fancied, but a Fruit of Inward Sense, which God, through his Fear, had begotten
in them. They did not consider how to contradict the World, or distinguish
themselves; being none of their Business, as it was not their Interest, no, it
was not the Result of Consultation, or a framed design to declare or recommend
Schism or Novelty. But God having given them a sight of themselves, they saw
the whole World in the same Glass of Truth; and sensibly discerned the
Affections and Passions of Men, and the Rise and Tendency of Things. What
gratified the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye and the Pride of Life
which are not of the Father, but of the World; and from thence Sprang in that
Night of Darkness and Apostasy, which has been over People, through their
Degeneration from the Light and Spirit of God, these and many other vain
Customs; which are seen by the Heavenly day of Christ which dawns in the Soul,
to be, either wrong in their Original, or, by Time and Abuse, Hurtful in their
Practice. And though these things seemed Trivial to some, and rendered this
People Stingy and conceited in such Persons Opinions; there was and is more in
them than they were aware of. It was not very easy to our Primitive Friends,
to make themselves Sights and Spectacles, and the Scorn and Derision of the
World; which they easily foresaw must be the Consequence of so Unfashionable a
Conversation in it. But herein was the Wisdom of God seen in the Foolishness of
these things; First, That they discovered the Satisfaction and Concern that
People had in and for the Fashions of this World, notwithstanding their
Pretenses to another; in that any disappointment about them came so very near
them; that the greatest Honesty, Virtue, Wisdom and Ability, were unwelcom
without them. Secondly, It seasonably and profitably divided Conversation; for
making their Society uneasy to their Relations and Acquaintance, it gave them
the opportunity of more Retirement and Solitude, wherein they met with better
Company, even the Lord, God their Redeemer, and grew strong in his Love, Power
and Wisdom, and were thereby better qualified for his Service; and the success
abundantly showed it: Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

And though they were not Great and Learned in the Esteem of this World (for
then they had not wanted Followers upon their own Credit and Authority) yet
they were generally of the most Sober of the several Persuasions they were in,
and of the most Repute for Religion; and many of them of good Capacity,
Substance and Account among Men.

And also some among them neither wanted for Parts, Learning nor Estate; though
then, as of Old, not many Wife, nor Noble, etc. were called, or at least
received the Heavenly Call; because of the Cross that attended the Profession
of it in Sincerity: But neither do Parts or Learning make Men the better
Christians, though the better Orators and Disputants; and it is the Ignorance
of People about the Divine Gift that causes that vulgar and mischievous
mistake. Theory and Practice, Expression and Enjoyment; Words, and Life; are
two things. Oh! it is the Penitent, the Reformed, the Lowly, the Watchful, the
Self-denying and Holy Soul that is the Christian; and that Frame is the Fruit
and Work of the Spirit, which is the Life of Jesus; whose Life, though hid in
God the Father, is shed abroad in the Hearts of them that truly Believe. Oh!
that People did but know this to cleanse them, to circumcise them, to quicken
them, and to make them New Creatures indeed; Re-created or Regenerated after
Christ Jesus unto good Works. That they might live to God and not to
themselves; and offer up living Prayers and living Praises, to the living God,
through his own living Spirit, in which he is only to be Worshipped in this
Gospel Day. Oh! that they that read me could but feel me; for my Heart is
affected with this Merciful Visitation of the Father of Lights and Spirits, to
this poor Nation, and the whole World through the same Testimony. Why should
the Inhabitants thereof reject it? Why should they loose the Blessed Benefit of
it? Why should they not turn to the Lord with all their Hearts, and say from
the Heart, Speak Lord, for now thy poor Servants hear. Oh! that thy will may be
done, thy Great, thy Good and Holy will in Earth as it is in Heaven: Do it in
us, do it upon us, do what thou will with us, for we are thine and desire to
glorify thee our Creator, both for that, and because thou art our Redeemer;
for thou art redeeming us from the Earth; from the Vanities and Pollations of
it, to be a Peculiar People unto thee. Oh! this were a Brave Day for England,
if so she could say in Truth. But alas, the Case is otherwise, for which some
of thine Inhabitants, O Land of my Nativity! have mourned over thee with bitter
Wailing and Lamentation. Their Heads have been indeed as Waters, and their Eyes
as Fountains of Tears, because of thy Transgression and Stiffneckedness;
because thou will not Hear, and Fear and Return to the Rock, even thy Rock, O
England! from whence thou were Hewn. But be thou warned, O Land of great
Profession, to receive him into thy Heart; Behold at that Door it is, he has
stood so long Knocking, but thou will yet have none of him. Oh! be thou
awakned, least Jerusalem's Judgments do swiftly overtake thee, because of
Jerusalems Sins that abound in thee. For she abounded in Formality, but made
void the Weighty things of God's Law as thou daily do.

She withstood the Son of God in the Flesh, and thou resists the Son of God
in the Spirit. He would have gathered her as an Hen gathers her Chickens
under her Wings, and she would not; so would he have gathered thee out of thy
Life-less Profession, and have brought thee to inherit Substance, to have known
his Power and Kingdom, for which he often knocked within, by his Grace and
Spirit, and without by his Servants and Witnesses; but thou would not be
gathered: But on the Contrary, as Jerusalem of old persecuted the Manifestation
of the Son of God in the Flesh, and Crucified him and Whipped and Imprisoned his
Servants; so have thou, O Land, Crucified to thy self afresh the Lord of Life
and Glory, and done dispite to his Spirit of Grace; slighting the Fatherly
Visitation, and persecuting the blessed Dispensers of it by thy Laws and
Magistrates; though they have Early and Late pleaded with thee in the Power and
Spirit of the Lord; in Love and Meekness, that thou might know the Lord and
serve him, and become the Glory of all Lands.

But thou have Evilly entreated and requited them. Thou have set at naught all
their Counsel, and would have none of their Reproof, as thou should have
done. Their appearance was too Straight, and their qualifications were to Mean
for thee to receive them; who like the Jews of Old, that cried, Is not this the
Carpenters Son, and are not his Brethren among us; which of the Scribes, of the
Learned (the Orthodox) believe in him? Prophesying their fall in a year or two,
and making and executing of severe Laws to bring it to pass; by endeavoring to
terrify them out of their Holy way, or distroying them for abiding Faithful to
it. But thou have seen how many Governments that rise against them, and
determined their Downfall, have been overturned and extinguished, and that they
are still preserved, and become a great and a considerable People, among the
Middle sort of thy numerous Inhabitants. And notwithstanding the many
difficulties without and within, which they have Labored under, since the Lord
God Eternal first gathered them, they are an increasing People, the Lord still
adding unto them, in diverse Parts, such as shall be saved, if they persevere to
the End. And to thee; were they and are they lifted up as a Standard, and as a
City set upon a Hill, and to the Nations round about thee, that in their Light,
thou may come to see Light, even in Christ Jesus, the Light of the World;
and therefore thy Light, and Life too, if thou would but turn from thy many
evil ways, and receive and obey it. For in the Light of the Lamb, must the
Nations of them that are saved walk, as the Scriptures Testify.

Remember, O Nation of great Profession! How the Lord has waited upon thee
since the Days of Reformation, and the many Mercies and Judgments with which he
has pleaded with Thee; and awake and arise out of thy deep Sleep, and yet hear
(his Word in thy Heart) that thou may live.

Let not this thy day of Visitation pass over thy Head, nor neglect thou so
great Salvation as is this which is come to thy House, Oh England! For why
should thou die, Oh Land that God desires to Bless? Be assured it is he that
has been in the midst of this People, in the midst of thee; and no Delusion,
as thy mistaken Teachers have made thee believe. And this thou shall find by
their Marks and Fruits, if thou will consider them in the Spirit of Moderation.
For,

I. They were changed Men themselves before they went about to change others.
Their Hearts were rent as well as their Garments; and they knew the Power and
Work of God upon them. And this was seen by the great Alteration it made, and
their stricter Course of Life, and more Godly Conversation, that immediately
followed upon it.

II. They went not forth or Preached in their own Time or Will, but in the Will
of God, and Spoke not their own studdied Matter, but as they were opened and
moved of his Spirit, with which they were well acquainted in their own
Conversion; which cannot be expressed to Carnal Men so as to give them any
intelligible account; for to such it is as Christ said, like the blowing of the
Wind, which no Man knows whence it comes, or whether it goes: Yet this Proof
and Seal went along with their Ministry, that many were turned from their
Life-less Professions, and the Evil of their Ways, to the knowledge of God, and
an Holy Life, as thousands can witness. And as they Freely received what they
had to say from the Lord, so they Freely administered it to others.

III. The Bent and Stress of their Ministry was Conversion to God, Regeneration
and Holiness; not Schemes of Doctrines and Verbal Creeds, or new Forms of
Worship; but a leaving off in Religion the Superfluous, and reducing the
Ceremonious and Formal part, and pressing earnestly the Substantial, the
Necessary and Proffitable part; as all upon a serious Reflection must and do
accknowledge.

IV. They directed People to a Principle, by which all that they asserted,
Preached and Exhorted others to, might be wrought in them and known, through
Experience, to them to be true; which is a high and distinguishing Mark of the
Truth of their Ministry; both that they knew what they said, and were not
afraid of coming to the Test. For as they were bold from Certainty, so they
required Conformity upon no Humane Authority, but upon Conviction, and the
Conviction of this Principle, which they asserted was in them that they
Preached unto, and unto that directed them, that they might examine and prove
the Reaality of those things which they had affirmed of it, and its
Manifestation and Work in Man. And this is more than the many Ministries in the
World pretend to. They declare of Religion, say many things true; in words of
God, Christ, and the Spirit; of Holiness and Heaven; that all Men should Repent
and mend their Lives, or they will go to Hell, etc. but which of them all
pretend to speak of their own Knowledge and Experience? Or ever directed Men to
a Divine Principle, or Agent, placed of God in Man, to help him; and how to
know it, and wait to feel its Power to work that good and acceptable Will of
God in them.

Some of them indeed have Spoke of the Spirit, and the Operations of it to
Sanctification, and Performance of Worship to God; but where and how to find it
and wait in it to perform, was yet as a Mystery reserved for this further
degree of Reformation. So that this People did not only in words, more than
equally press Repentance, Conversion and Holiness, but did it knowingly and
experimentally; and directed those to whom they preached, to a sufficient
Principle, and told them where it is, and by what Tokens they might know it,
and which way they might experience the Power and Efficacy of it to their
Soul's Happiness. Which is more then Theory and Speculations, upon which most
other Ministries depend; for here is certainly, a bottom upon which Man may
boldly appear before God in the great Day of Account.

V. They reached to the Inward State and Condition of People, which is an
Evidence of the Virtue of their Principle, and of their Ministering from it, and
not their own Imaginations, Glosses or Comments upon Scripture. For nothing
reaches the Heart, but what is from the Heart, or pierces the Conscience, but
what comes from a living Conscience. Insomuch as it has often happened, where
People have under Secrecy revealed their State or Condition to some choice
Friends, for Advice or Ease, they have been so particularly directed in the
Ministry of this People, that they have challenged their Friends with
discovering their Secrets, and telling the Preachers their Cases. Yea, the very
Thoughts and Purposes of the hearts of many have been so plainly detected; that
they have (like Nathaniel) cried out of this inward appearance of Christ, Thou
art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. And those that have embraced
this Divine Principle, have found this Mark of its Truth and Divinity (that the
Woman of Samaria did of Christ when in the Flesh, to be the Messiah,) viz. It
had told them all that ever they did; showed them their insides, the most
inward secrets of their Hearts, and laid Judgment to the Line, and
Righteousness to the Plummet; of which Thousands can, at this day give in their
Witness. So that nothing has been affirmed by this People, of the Power and
Virtue of this Heavenly Principle, that such as have turned to it have not
found true, and more; and that one half had not been told to them of what they
have seen of the Power, Purity, Wisdom, Mercy and Goodness of God herein.

VI. The Accomplishments with which this Principle fitted, even some of the
meanest of this People, for their Work and Service; Furnishing some of them
with an Extraordinary Understanding in Divine Things, and an admirable Fluency
and Taking way of expression, which gave occasion to some to wonder, saying of
them, as of their Master, is not this such a Mechanick's Son, how came he by
this Learning? As from thence others took occasion to suspect and insinuate
they were Jesuits in Disguise; who have had the Reputation of learned Men for
an Age past; though there was not the least ground of Truth for any such
Reflection.

VII. That they rise Low, and Despised and Hated, as the Primitive Christians
did, and not by the help of Worldly Wisdom or Power, as former Reformations, in
part did: But in all things it may be said, this People were brought forth in
the Cross, in a Contradiction to the Ways, Worship, Fashion and Customs of this
World; yea, against Wind and Tide, that so no Flesh might Glory before God.

They could have no design to themselves in this Work, thus to expose
themselves to Scorn and Abuse; to spend and be spent: Leaving Wife and
Children, House and Land, and all that can be accounted dear to Men, with their
lives in their Hands, being daily in Jeopardy, to declare this Primitive
Message, 1 Jo. 1. 5. revived in their Spirits, by the good Spirit and Power of
God. viz. That God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all; and that he has
sent his Son a Light into the World to enlighten all Men in order to Salvation;
and that they that say they have Fellowship with God and are his Children and
People, and yet walk in Darkness, viz. in Disobedience to the Light in their
Consciences, and after the Vanity of this World, they lie and do not the Truth.
But that all such as love the Light and bring their Deeds to it, and walk in
the Light, as God is Light, the blood of Jesus Christ his Son should cleanse
them from all Sin.

VIII. Their known great Constancy and Patience in Suffering for their
Testimony, in all the Branches of it, and that, sometimes unto Death, by
Beatings, Bruisings, long and crowded Imprisonments, and Noisome Dungeons. Four
of them in New England Dying by the Hands of the Executioner, purely for
Preaching amongst that People; besides Banishments and Excessive Plunders and
Sequestrations of their Goods and Estates, almost in all parts; not easily to
be expressed, and less to be endured, but by those that have the support of a
good and glorious Cause; refusing Deliverance by any indirect ways or means, as
often as it was offered to them.

IX. That they did not only, not show any disposition to Revenge, when it was
at any time in their Power; but forgave their cruel Enemies; showing Mercy to
those that had none for them.

X. Their Plainness with those in Authority: not unlike the Ancient Prophets,
not fearing to tell them to their Faces of their Private and Public Sins, and
their Prophecies to them of their Afflictions and Downfall, when in the Top of
their Glory; also of some National Judgments, as of the Plague, and Fire of
London, in express Terms, and likewise particular ones to diverse Persecutions,
which accordingly overtook them; and which were very remarkable in the Places
where they dwelt, and in time they may be made public for the Glory of God.

Thus Reader, thou see this People in their Rise, Principles, Ministry and
Progress, both their General and Particular Testimony, by which thou may be
informed how and upon what foot they Sprung and became so considerable a
People. It remains next that I show also their Care, Conduct and Discipline, as
a Christian and Reformed Society, that they might be found living up to their
own Principles and Profession. And this, the rather, because they have hardly
suffered more in their Character from the Unjust Charge of Error, than by the
false Imputation of Disorder: Which Calumny indeed has not failed to follow all
the true steps that were ever made to Reformation, and under which Reproach
none suffered more than the Primitive Christians themselves, that were the
Honor of Christianity, and the great Lights and Examples of their own and
succeeding Ages.

This People increasing daily both in Town and Country, an Holy Care fell upon
some of the Elders among them, for the Benefit and Service of the Church. And
the first Business in their View, after the Example of the Primitive Saints,
was the Exercise of Charity, to supply the Necessities of the Poor, and answer
the like Occasions: Wherefore Collections were early and liberally made for
that, and diverse other Services in the Church, and entrusted with Faithful Men,
fearing God, and of good Report, who were not weary in well-doing; adding often
of their own, in large Proportions, which they never brought to account, or
desired should be known, much less restored to them, that none might want, nor
any Service be retarded or disappointed.

They were also very careful, that every one that belonged to them, answered
their Profession in their Behavior among Men, upon all Occasions; that they
lived Peaceably, and were in all things good Examples. They found themselves
engaged to record their Sufferings and Services; and in case of Marriage, which
they could not perform in the usual Methods of the Nation, but among
themselves; they took care thal all things were clear between the Parties and
all others, and it was then rare that any one entertained such Inclination to a
Person on that account, till he or she had communicated it secretly to some
very Weighty and Eminent Friends among them, that they might have a sense of
the Matter; looking to the Council and Unity of their Brethren, as of great
Moment to them. But because the Charge of the Poor, the Number of Orphans,
Marriages, Sufferings and other Matters multiplied, and that it was good that
the Churches were in some way and Method, of proceeding in such Affairs among
them, to the end they might the better correspond upon occasion, where a Member
of one Meeting, might have to do with one of another: It pleased the Lord in
his Wisdom and Goodness, to open the Understanding of the first Instrument of
this Dispensation of Life, about a Good and Orderly way of Proceeding; and he
felt an Holy Concern to visit the Churches in Person throughout this Nation, to
begin and establish it among them; and by his Epistles the like was done in
other Nations and Provinces abroad; which he also afterward Visited, and
helped in that Service, as shall be observed when I come to speak of him.

Now the Care, Conduct and Discipline, I have been speaking of, and which is
now practiced among this People, is as follows.

III. This Godly Elder, in every County where he traveled, exhorted them, that
some out of every Meeting of Worship, should meet together once in the Month,
to confer about the Wants and Occasions of the Church. And as the Case
required, so those Monthly Meetings were fewer or more in number in every
respective County; Four or Six Meetings of Worship, usually making one Monthly
Meeting of Business. And accordingly the Brethren met him from place to place,
and began the said Meetings, viz. For the Poor, Orphans orderly Walking,
Integrity to their Profession, Births, Marriages, Burials, Sufferings etc. And
that these Monthly Meetings should, in each County make up one Quarterly
Meeting, where the most Zealous and Eminent Friends of the County should
assemble to Communicate, Advise and Help one another, especially when any
Business seemed difficult, or a Monthly Meeting was tender of determining a
Matter.

Also these Quarterly Meetings should digest the Reports of the Monthly
Meetings, and prepare one for the County, against the Yearly Meeting; in which
the Quarterly Meetings resolve, which is held Yearly in London; where the
Churches in this Nation, and other Nations, and Provinces Meet, by chosen
Members of their Respective Counties, both mutually to communicate their Church
Affairs, and to advise and be advised in any depending Case to Edification.
Also to provide a requisite Stock, for the discharge of general Expenses for
general Services in the Church, not needful to be here particularized.

At these Meetings any of the Members of the Churches may come if they please,
and speak their Minds freely, in the Fear of God, to any matter; but the Mind
of each Meeting therein represented is chiefly understood, as to particular
Cases, in the Sense delivered by the Persons deputed or chosen for that Service.

During their Yearly Meeting, to which their other Meetings referr in their
Order and Resolve themselves; care is taken by a Select Number, for that
service chosen by the General Assembly, to draw up the Minutes of the said
Meeting, upon the several matters that have been under Consideration therein,
to the end that the Respective Quarterly and Monthly Meetings may be informed
of all Proceedings, together with a general Exhortation to Holiness, Unity and
Charity: Of all which Proceedings in Yearly, Quarterly and Monthly Meetings,
due Record is kept by some One appointed for that Service, or that has
voluntarily undertaken it. These Meetings are opened, and usually concluded in
their Solemn waiting upon God, who is sometimes graciously pleased to answer
them with as signal Evidences of his Love and Presence, as in any other their
Meetings of Worship.

It is further to be Noted, that in these Solemn Assemblies, for the Church's
Service, there is no one presides among them after the manner of the Assemblies
of other People; Christ only being their President, as he is pleased to appear
in Life and Wisdom in any one or more of them, to whom, whatever be their
Capacity or Degree, the rest adhere with a Firm Unity, not of Authority but
Conviction, which is the Divine Authority and way of Christ's Power and Spirit
in his People: Making good his blessed Promise, That he would be in the Midst
of his, where and whenever they were met together in his Name, even to the End
of the World. So be it.

Now it may be expected, I should here set down what sort of Authority is
exercised by this People, upon such Members of their Society, as correspond not
in their Lives with their Profession, and that are Refractory to this good and
wholesome Order settled among them; and the rather because they have not wanted
their Reproach and Suffering from some Tongues, upon this occasion in a
plentiful manner.

The Power they exercise is such as Christ has given to his own People, to the
End of the World, in the Persons of his Disciples, viz. To Oversee, Exhort,
Reprove, and after long Suffering and Waiting upon the Disobedient and
Refractory, to disown them, as any more of their Communion, or that they will
any longer stand Charged in the Sight and Judgment of God or Men, with their
Conversation or Behavior as one of them, until they Repent. The subject
matter about which this Authority, in any of the foregoing Branches of it, is
Exercised; is First, in Relation to common and general Practice, and Secondly,
about those things that more strictly referr to their own Character and
Profession, and distinguish them from all other Professors of Christianity;
avoiding two Extremes upon which many Split, viz. Persecution and Libertinism.
A Coercive Power to Whip People into the Temple, that such as will not Conform,
though against Faith and Conscience, shall be punished in their Persons or
Estates; or leaving all loose and at large, as to Practice, unaccountable to
all but God and the Magistrate. To which hurtful Extreme, nothing has more
contributed than the Abuse of Church Power, by such as suffer their Passions
and private Interests to prevail with them to carry it to outward Force and
Corporal Punishment. A Practice they have been taught to dislike, by their
extreme Sufferings, as well as their known Principle for an universal Liberty
of Conscience.

On the other hand, they equally dislike an Independency in Society. An
unaccountableness in Practice and Conversation to the Terms of their own
Communion, and to those that are the Members of it. They distinguish between
Imposing any Practice that immediately regards Faith or Worship, (which is
never to be done nor suffered or submitted unto) and requiring Christian
Compliance with those Methods that only respect Church Business in its more
Civil part and Concern, and that regard the Discreet and Orderly Maintenance of
the Character of the Society as a Sober and Religious Community. In short, what
is for the Promotion of Holiness and Charity, that Men may Practice what they
profess, live up to their own Principles, and not be at Liberty to give the Lie
to their own Profession, without Rebuke. They compel none to them, but oblige
those that are of them to walk Suitably, or they are denied by them: That is
all the Mark they set upon them, and the Power they Exercise, or Judge a
Christian Society, can Exercise upon those that are the Members of it.

The way of their Proceedings against such as have Lapst or Transgrest, is
this. He is visited by some of them, and the matter of Fact laid Home to him,
be it any evil Practice against known and general Virtue, or any Branch of
their Particular Testimony, which he, in Common, professes with them. They
labor with him in much Love and Zeal for the good of his Soul, the Honor of
God, and Reputation of their Profession, to own his Fault and condemn it, in as
ample a Manner as the Evil or Scandal was given by him; which for the most
part, is performed by some Written Testimony under the Partys Hand; and if it
so happen that the Party prove Refractory, and is not willing to clear the
Truth they profess, from the Reproach of his or her evil doing or
Unfaithfulness, they, after repeated Entreaties and due waiting for a Token of
Repentance, give forth a Paper to disown such a Fact, and the Party offending;
recording the same as a Testimony of their care for the Honor of the Truth
they profess.

And if he or she shall clear their Profession and themselves, by sincere
Acknowledgment of their Fault, and Godly sorrow for so doing, they are received
and looked upon again as Members of their Communion. For as God, so his true
People upbraid no Man after Repentance.

This is the account I had to give of the People of God called Quakers, as to
their Rise, Appearance, Principles and Practices, in this Age of the World,
both with Respect to their Faith and Worship, Discipline and Conversation. And
I Judge it very proper in this place, because it is to Preface the Journal of
the first Blessed and Glorious Instrument of this Work, and for a Testimony to
him in his singular Qualifications and Services, in which he abundantly
excelled in this day, and are worthy to be set forth as an Example to all
succeeding Times; to the Glory of the Most High God, and for a just Memorial to
that Worthy and Excellent Man, his Faithful Servant and Apostle to this
Generation of the World.

I am now come to the Third Head or Branch of my Preface, viz. The Instrumental
Author. For it is Natural for some to say, Well, here is the People and Work,
but where and who was the Man, the Instrument; he that in this Age was sent to
begin this Work and People. I shall, as God shall enable me, declare who and
what he was, not only by report of others, but from my own long and most inward
Converse and intimate knowledge of him; for which my Soul blesses God, as it
has often done; and I doubt not, but by that time I have discharged my self of
this part of my Preface, my serious Readers will believe I had good Cause so to
do.

The Blessed Instrument of and in this day of God, and of whom I am now about
to Write, was George Fox, distinguished from another of that Name, by that
Other's addition of Younger to his Name in all his Writings; not that he was so
in Years, but that he was so in the Truth, but he was also a Worthy Man,
Witness and Servant of God in his time.

But this George Fox was Born in Leicestershire, about the Year 1624. He
descended of Honest and Sufficient Parents, who endeavored to bring him up, as
they did the rest of their Children, in the Way and Worship of the Nation;
especially his Mother, who was a Woman accomplished above most of her Degree in
the place where she lived. But from a Child he appeared of another Frame of
Mind than the rest of his Brethren; being more Religious, Inward, Still, Solid
and Observing beyond his Years, as the Answers he would give, and the Questions
he would put upon occasion, manifested to the Astonishment of those that heard
him, especially in Divine Things.

His Mother taking Notice of his Singular Temper, and the Gravity, Wisdom and
Piety that very early shined through him, refusing Childish and Vain Sports and
Company, when very Young; she was Tender and Indulgent over him, so that from
her he met with little Difficulty. As to his Employment he was brought up in
Country Business, and as he took most delight in Sheep, so he was very skillful
in them, an Employment that very well suited his mind in several Respects, both
for its Innocence and Solitude; and was a just Figure of his after Ministry and
Service.

I shall not break in upon his own Account, which is by much the best that can
be given, and therefore desire, what I can, to avoid saying any thing of what
is said already, as to the particular Passages of his coming forth; but, in
general, when he was somewhat above Twenty, he left his Friends, and visited
the most Retired and Religious People in those Parts; and some there were short
of few, if any, in this Nation, who waited for the Consolation of Israel Night
and Day; as Zacherias, Anna and good Old Simeon did of Old Time. To these he
was sent, and these he sought out in the Neighboring Countries, and among them
he Sojourned till his more ample Ministry came upon him. At this time he taught
and was an Example of Silence, endeavoring to bring them from
Self-performances, Testifying and turning to the Light of Christ within them,
and encouraging them to wait in Patience to feel the Power of it to stir in
their Hearts, that their Knowledge and Worship of God might stand in the Power
of an Endless Life, which was to be found in the Light, as it was obeyed in the
Manifestation of it in Man. For in the Word was Life, and that Life is the
Light Men. Life in the Word, Light in Men, and Life in Men as the Light is
obeyed; the Children of the Light living by the Life of the Word, by which the
word begets them again to God, which is the Regeneration and New Birth, without
which there is no coming unto the Kingdom of God; and which, whoever comes to,
is greater than John, that is, than John's Dispensation, which was not that of
the Kingdom, but the Consummation of the Legal, and Forerunning of the Gospel
Times. Accordingly, several Meetings were gathered in those Parts, and thus his
Time was employed for some Years.

In 1652. He being in his usual Retirement to the Lord upon a very High
Mountain, in some of the hither parts of Yorkshire, as I take it, his Mind
exercised toward the Lord, he had a Vision of the great Work of God in the
Earth, and of the way that he was to go forth to begin it. He saw People as
thick as Motes in the Sun, that should in time, be brought Home to the Lord;
that there might be but one Shepherd and one Sheepfold in all the Earth. There
his Eye was directed Northward, beholding a great People that should receive
him and his Message in those Parts. Upon this Mountain he was moved of the Lord
to sound out his Great and notable Day, as if he had been in a great Auditory,
and from thence went North, as the Lord had shown him; and in every place where
he came, if not before he came to it, he had his particular Exercise and
Service shown to him, so that the Lord was his Leader indeed; for it was not in
vain that he Travailled, God in most places sealing his Commission with the
Convincement of some of all sorts, as well Publicans as sober Professors of
Religion. Some of the first and most Eminent of them, which are at Rest, were
Richard Farnsworth, James Nayler, William Dewsberry, Francis Howgil, Edward
Buroughs, John Camm, John Audland, Richard Hubberthorn, T. Tailor, John Aldam,
T. Holmes, Alexander Parker, William Simpson, William Caton, John Stubbs,
Robert Widders, John Burnyeat, Robert Lodge, Thomas Salthouse, and many more
Worthies, that cannot be well here Named, together with diverse yet living of
the first and great Convincement, who after the knowledge of God's purging
Judgments in themselves, and some time of waiting in silence upon him, to feel
and receive Power from on High to speak in his Name, (which none else rightly
can, though they may use the same Words.) They felt the Divine Motions, and
were frequently drawn forth, especially to visit the Public Assemblies, to
reprove, inform and exhort them, sometimes in Markets, Fairs, Streets, and by
the High-way-side, calling People to Repentance, and to turn to the Lord with
their Hearts as well as their Mouths; directing them to the Light of Christ
within them, to see and examine and consider their ways by, and to eschew the
Evil and do the Good and Acceptable Will of God. And they suffered great
Hardships for this their Love, and Good Will, being often Stockt, Stoned,
Beaten, Whipped and Imprisoned, though Honest Men and of Good Report where they
lived, that had left Wives and Children, and Houses and Lands to visit them
with a living Call to Repentance. And though the Priests generally set
themselves to oppose them, and write against them, and insinuated most False
and Scandalous Stories to Defame them, stirring up the Magistrates to suppress
them, especially in those Northern Parts; yet God was pleased so to fill them
with his living Power, and give them such an open Door of utterance in his
Service, that there was a mighty Convincement over those Parts.

And through the tender and singular Indulgence of Judge Bradshaw and Judge
Fell, who were wont to go that Circuit, in the Infancy of things, the Priests
were never able to gain the point they labored for, which was to have
proceeded to Blood, and if possible, Herod like, by a Cruel exercise of the
Civil Power, to have cut them off and rooted them out of the Country.
Especially Judge Fell, who was not only a Check to their Rage in the Course of
Legal Proceedings, but otherwise upon occasion, and finally countenanced this
People; for his Wife receiving the Truth with the First, it had that Influence
upon his Spirit, being a Just and Wise Man, and seeing in his own Wife and
Family, a full Confutation to all the popular Clamours against the Way of
Truth, that he covered them what he could, and freely opened his Doors, and
gave up his House to his Wife and her Friends, not valuing the Reproach of
Ignorant or Evil Minded People, which I here mention, to His and her Honor,
and which will be I believe, an Honor and a Blessing to such of their Name and
Family, as shall be found in that Tenderness, Humility, Love and Zeal for the
Truth and People of the Lord.

That House was for some Years at first, till the Truth had opened its way in
the Southern parts of this Island, an Eminent Receptacle of this People. Others
of good Note and Substance in those Northern Countries, had also opened their
Houses with their Hearts, to the many Publishers, that in a short time the Lord
had raised to declare his Salvation to the People, and where Meetings of the
Lord's Messengers were frequently held, to communicate their Services and
Exercises, and Comfort and Edify one another in their Blessed Ministry.

But least this may be thought a Digression, having touched upon this before, I
return to this Excellent Man: And for his Personal Qualities, both Natural,
Moral and Divine as they appeared in his Converse with Brethren and in the
Church of God; take as follows.

I. He was a Man that God endued with a Clear and Wonderful Depth, a discerner
of others Spirits, and very much a Master of his own. And though the side of
his Understanding which lay next to the World, and especially the Expression of
it might sound Uncouth and Unfashionable to Nice Ears, his matter was
nevertheless very profound; and would not only bear to be often considered, but
the more it was so, the more Weighty and Instructing it appeared. And as
abruptly and brokenly as sometimes his Sentences would fall from him, about
Divine Things, it is well known they were often as Texts to many fairer
Declarations. And indeed it showed beyond all Contradiction that God sent him,
that no Arts or Parts had any share in his matter or manner of his Ministry;
and that so many Great, Excellent and Necessary Truths as he came forth to
Preach to Mankind, had therefore nothing of Man's Wit or Wisdom to recommend
them. So that as to Man he was an Original, being no Man's Copy. And his
Ministry and Writings show they are from one that was not Taught of Man, nor
had Learned what he said by Study. Nor were they Notional or Speculative, but
sensible and Practical Truths, tending to Conversion and Regeneration, and the
setting up the Kingdom of God in the Hearts of Men, and the way of it was his
Work. So that I have many times been overcome in my self, and been made to say,
with my Lord and Master upon the like Occasion; I thank thee O Father Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent of
this World, and revealed them to Babes, For many times has my Soul bowed in an
Humble Thankfulness to the Lord, that he did not choose any of the Wise and
Learned of this World to be the first Messenger in our Age, of his blessed
Truth to Men; but that he took one that was not of High Degree, or Elegant
Speech, or learned after the way of this World, that his Message and Work he
sent him to do, might come with less Suspicion or Jealousy of Humane Wisdom
and Interest, and with more Force and Clearness upon the Consciences of those,
that sincerely Sought the way of Truth in the Love of it. I say, beholding with
the Eye of my mind which the God of Heaven had opened in me, the Marks of God's
Finger and Hand visibly in this Testimony, from the Clearness of the Principle,
the Power and Efficacy of it in the Exemplary Sobriety, Plainness, Zeal,
Steadiness, Humility, Gravity, Punctuality, Charity and Circumspect care in the
Government of Church Affairs, which shined in his and their Life and Testimony
that God employed in this Work, it greatly confirmed me that it was of God, and
engaged my Soul in a Deep Love, Fear, Reverence and Thankfulness for his Love
and Mercy therein to Mankind; in which Mind I remain, and shall, I hope, to the
end of my Days.

II. In his Testimony or Ministry, he much labored to open Truth, to the
Peoples Understandings, and to bottom them upon the Principle, and Principal,
Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, that by bringing them to something that
was of God in themselves, they might the better know and judge of him and
themselves.

He had an Extraordinary Gift in opening the Scriptures. He would go to the
Marrow of things, and show the Mind, Harmony and Fullfilling of them with much
Plainness, and to great Comfort and Edification.

The Mystery of the first and second Adam, of the Fall and Restoration, of the
Law and Gospel, of Shadows and Substance, of the Servant and Sons State, and
the fullfiling of the Scriptures in Christ, and by Christ the True Light, in
all that are his, through the Obedience of Faith, were much of the Substance
and Drift of his Testimonies. In all which he was witnessed to be of God, being
sensibly felt to speak that which he had received of Christ, and was his own
Experience, in that which never Ers nor Fails.

But above all, he excelled in Prayer. The Inwardness and Weight of his Spirit,
the Reverence and Solemnity of his Address and Behavior, and the Fewness and
Fullness of his Words, have often struck, even Strangers, with Admiration, as
they used to reach others with Consolation. The most Awful, Living, Reverent
Frame I ever Felt or Beheld, I must say was his in Prayer. And truly it was a
Testimony he knew and lived nearer to the Lord than other Men; for they that
know him most will see most reason to approach him with Reverence and Fear.

He was of an Innocent Life, no Busy Body, nor Self Seeker, neither Touchy,
nor Critical: What fell from him was very Inoffensive, if not very Edifying. So
Meek, Contented, Modest, Easy, Steady, Tender, it was a pleasure to be in his
Company. He exercised no Authority but over Evil, and that every where and in
all; but with Love, Compassion and Long Suffering. A most Merciful Man, as
ready to Forgive as unapt to take or give an Offense. Thousands can truly say,
he was of an Excellent Spirit and Savor among them, and because thereof, the
most Excellent Spirits loved him with an unfeigned and unfading Love.

He was an Incessant Labourer; for in his Younger time, before his many great
and deep Sufferings and Travels had enfeebled his Body for Itinerant Services,
he labored much in the Word, and Doctrine and Discipline in England, Scotland
and Ireland, turning many to God, and confirming those that were convinced of
the Truth, and settling Good Order as to Church Affairs among them. And toward
the Conclusion of his Traveling Services, between the Years Seventy One, and
Seventy Seven, he Visited the Churches of Christ in the Plantations in America,
and in the United Provinces, and Germany as his following Journal Relates, to
the Convincement and Consolation of many. After that time he chiefly resided in
and about the City of London, and besides the Services of his Ministry which
were Frequent and Serviceable, he writ much both to them that are within, and
those that are without the Communion. But the care he took of the Affairs of
the Church in General was very great.

He was often where the Records of the Affairs of the Church are kept, and the
Letters from the many Meetings of God's People over all the World where
settled, come upon Occasions, which Letters he had read to him, and
Communicated them to the Meeting that is Weekly held there for such Services,
he would be sure to stir them up to discharge them, especially in Suffering
Cases. Showing great Sympathy and Compassion upon all such Occasions, carefully
looking into the Respective Cases, and endeavoring Speedy Relief according to
the Nature of them. So that the Churches and any of the Suffering Members
thereof, were sure not to be forgotten or delayed in their Desires if he were
there.

As he was Unwearied, so he was Undaunted in his Services for God and his
People, he was no more to be moved to Fear than to Wrath. His Behavior at
Darby, Litchfield, Appleby, before Oliver Cromwell at Launston, Scarborough,
Worcester and Westminster Hall, with many other Places and Exercises, did
abundantly evidence it to his Enemies as well as his Friends.

But as in the Primitive Times, some rise up against the blessed Apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ, even from among those that they had turned to the Hope
of the Gospel, and who became their greatest Trouble; so this Man of God had
his share of Suffering from some that were convinced by him, who through
prejudice or mistake run against him, as one that sought Dominion over
Conscience; because he pressed by his Presence or Epistles, a ready and zealous
compliance with such good and wholesome things, as tended to an Orderly
Conversation about the Affairs of the Church, and in their walking before Men.
That which contributed much to this ill Work, was in some a begrudging of this
Meek Man, the love and esteem he had and deserved in the Hearts of the People,
and weakness in others, that were taken with their groundless Suggestions of
Imposition and blind Obedience.

They would have had every Man Independent, that as he had the Principle in
himself, he should only stand and fall to that and no Body else; not
considering that the Principle is One in all; and though the Measure of Light
or Grace might differ, yet the Nature of it was the same, and being so, they
struck at the Spiritual Unity, which a People, guided by the same Principle,
are naturally led into: So that what is an evil to One, is so to All, and what
is Virtuous, Honest and of good Report to One, is so to All, from the Sense and
Savor of the one Universal Principle which is common to all, (and which the
disaffected profess to be) the Root of all True Christian Fellowship, and that
Spirit into which the People of God drink and come to be Spiritually Minded,
and of one Heart and one Soul.

Some weakly mistook good Order in the Government of Church Affairs, for
Discipline in Worship, and that it was so pressed or recommended by Him and other
Brethren: And they were ready to reflect the same things that Dissenters had
very reasonably objected upon the National Churches, that have coercively
pressed Conformity to their Respective Creeds and Worships: Whereas these
things related wholly to Conversation, and the Outward (and as I may say) Civil
part of the Church, that Men should walk up to the Principles of their Belief,
and not be wanting in Care and Charity. But though some have stumbled and
fallen through Mistakes, and an unreasonable Obstinancy, even to a Prejudice;
yet blessed be God, the Generality have returned to their First Love, and seen
the Work of the Enemy, that looses no Opportunity or Advantage by which he may
check or hinder the Work of God, and disquiet the Peace of his Church, and
chill the Love of his People to the Truth and one to another; and there is hope
of diverse that are yet at a Distance.

In all these Occasions, though there was no Person the Discontented struck so
sharply at, as this Good Man, he bore all their Weakness and Prejudice, and
returned not Reflection for Reflection; but forgave them their weak and bitter
Speeches, praying for them that they might have a Sense of their hurt, and see
the Subtilty of the Enemy to Rend and Devide, and return into their First Love,
that thought no Ill.

And truly, I must say, that though God had visibly clothed him with a Divine
Preference and Authority, and indeed his very Presence expressed a Religious
Majesty; yet he never abused it, but held his Place in the Church of God with
great Meakness and a most engaging Humility and Moderation. For upon all
Occasions, like his blessed Master, he was a Servant to all; holding and
exercising his Eldership, in the Invisible Power that had gathered them, with
Reverence to the Head and Care over the Body: And was received only in that
Spirit and Power of Christ as the First and Chief Elder in this Age; who, as he
was therefore worthy of double Honor, so for the same Reason it was given by
the Faithful of this day; because his Authority was inward and not outward, and
that he got it and kept it by the Love of God and Power of an Endless Life. I
write my Knowledge and not Report, and my Witness is True, having been with him
for Weeks and Months together on diverse Occasions, and those of the nearest and
most exercising Nature, and that by Night and by Day, by Sea and by Land; in
this and in Foreign Countries: And I can say, I never saw him out of his Place,
or not a Match for every Service or Occasion.

For in all things he acquitted himself like a Man, yea a strong Man, a New and
Heavenly minded Man. A Divine and a Naturalist, and all of God Almighty's
making. I have been surprised at his Questions and Answers in Natural things;
that whilst he was Ignorant of useless and Sophistical Science, he had in him
the Foundation of useful and commendable Knowledge, and cherisht it every
where. Civil beyond all Forms of Breeding, in his Behavior. Very Temperate,
eating Little, and sleeping Less, though a Bulky Person.

Thus he Lived and Sojourned among us, and as he lived, so he died; feeling the
same Eternal Power that had raised and preserved him in his last Moments. So
full of assurance was he, that he Triumphed over Death; and so even to the last,
as if Death were hardly worth Notice or a Mention: Recommending to some with
him, the Dispatch and Dispersion of an Epistle, just before Written to the
Churches of Christ, throughout the World, and his own Books; but above all,
Friends, and of all Friends, those in Ireland and America, twice over. Saying,
mind poor Friends in Ireland and America.

And to some that came in and enquired how he found himself, he answered, Never
heed, the Lord's Power is over all Weakness and Death, the Seed reigns, Blessed
be the Lord: Which was about Four or Five Hours before his Departure out of
this World. He was at the great Meeting near Lombard Street on the First day of
the Week, and it was the Third following about Ten at Night when he left us;
being at the House of H. Goldney in the same Court. In a good Old Age he went,
after having lived to see his Childrens Children to many Generations in the
Truth. He had the Comfort of a short Illness, and the Blessing of a clear Sense
to the last; and we may truly say, with a Man of God of Old, that being Dead,
he yet Speaks; and though absent in Body, he is Present in Spirit; neither
Time nor Place being able to interrupt the Communion of Saints, or dissolve the
Fellowships of the Spirits of the Just. His Works praise him, because they are
to the Praise of him that worked by him; for which his Memorial is, and shall
be Blessed. I have done, as to this part of my Preface, when I have left this
short Epitaph to his Name. Many Sons have done virtuously in this Day, but Dear
George thou Excellest them All.

And now, Friends, you that profess to walk in the way, this Blessed Man was
sent of God to turn us into, suffer I beseech you the word of Exhortation, as
well Fathers as Children, and Elders as Young Men. The Glory of this Day and
Foundation of the Hope that has not made us ashamed since we were a People, you
know is that Blessed Principle of Light and Life of Christ which we Profess,
and Direct all People to, as the great Instrument and Agent of Man's Conversion
to God: It was by this we were first Touched, and effectually enlightened as to
our Inward State, which put us upon the Consideration of our Latter End,
causing us to set the Lord before our Eyes, and to Number our Days, that we
might apply our Hearts to Wisdom. In that Day we judged not after the Sight of
the Eye, or after the Hearing of the Ear, but according to the Light and Sense
this Blessed Principle gave us; we judged and acted in reference to Things and
Persons, our selves and others, yea, toward God our Maker. For being quickened
by it in our Inward Man, we could easily discern the difference of things, and
feel what was Right, and what was Wrong, and what was Fit and what not, both in
reference to Religion and Civil Concerns. That being the ground of the
Fellowship of all Saints, it was in that our Fellowship stood. In this we
desired to have a Sense one of another, acted toward one another, and all Men,
in Love, Faithfulness and Fear.

In the feeling of the Motions of this Principle we drew near to the Lord, and
waited to be prepared by it, that we might feel those Drawings and Movings,
before we approached the Lord in Prayer, or opened our Mouths in Ministry. And
in our Beginning and Ending with th^^, stood our Comfort, Service and
Edification. And as we run faster, or fell short we made Burdens for our
selves to bear; our Services finding in our selves a Rebuke instead of an
Acceptance, and in lieu of Well done, who has required this at your Hands? In
that day we were an Exercised People, our very Countenances and Deportment
declared it.

Care for others was then much upon us, as well as for our selves, especially
the Young Convinced. Often had we the Burden of the Word of the Lord to our
Neighbors, Relations and Acquaintance; and sometimes Strangers also, We were
in Travail for one another Preservation: Not seeking, but shunning Occasions
of any Coldness or Misunderstanding, treating one another as those that
believed and felt God present. Which kept our Conversation Innocent, Serious
and Weighty, guarding our selves against the Cares and Friendships of the
World. We held the Truth in the Spirit of it, and not in our own Spirits, or
after our own Wills and Affections.

They were bowed and brought into Subjection, in so much that it was visible to
them that knew us, we did not think our selves at our own Dispose, to go where
we List, or say or do what we List, or when we List. Our Liberty stood in the
Liberty of the Spirit of Truth, and no Pleasure, no Profit, no Fear no Favor
could draw us from this retired, strict and watchful Frame. We were so far from
seeking occasions of Company, that we avoided them what we could; persuing our
own Business with Moderation, instead of meddling with other Peoples
Unnecessarily.

Our Words were Few and Savoury, our Looks Composed and Weighty, and our whole
Deportment very Observable. True it is, that this Retired and strict sort of
Life from the Liberty of the Conversation of the World, exposed us to the
Censures of many, as Humourists, Conceited and Self-righteous Persons, etc. But
it was our Preservation from many Snares, to which others were continually
exposed by the Prevalency of the lust of the Eye, the lust of the Flesh, and
the Pride of Life, that wanted no Occasions or Temptations to excite them
abroad in the Converse of the World.

I cannot forget the Humility and Chaste Zeal of that Day. Oh! how Constant at
Meetings, how Retired in them, how firm to Truth's Life, as well as Truth's
Principles; and how Entire and United in our Communion, as indeed became those
that profess One Head, even Christ Jesus the Lord.

This being the Testimony and Example the Man of God, before mentioned, was
sent to Declare and Leave amongst us, and we having Embraced the same as the
Merciful Visitation of God to us, the Word of Exhortation at this time is, that
we continue to be found in the Way of this Testimony with all Zeal and
Integrity, and so much the more, by how much the Day draws near.

And First, as to you, my Beloved and much Honored Brethren in Christ, that
are in the Exercise of the Ministry: Oh, feel Life in the Ministry! Let Life be
your Commission, your Wellspring and Treasury, in all such Occasions, else you
well know, there can be no begetting to God, since nothing can quicken or make
People alive to God, but the life of God: And it must be a Ministry in and from
Life, that enlivens any People to God. We have seen the Fruit of all other
Ministrys by the few that are turned from the Evil of their Ways. It is not our
Parts, or Memory, the repetition of former Openings in our own will and time,
that will do God's Work. A dry Doctrinal Ministry, however sound in Words, can
reach but the Ear, and is but a Dream at the Best: There is another Soundness,
that is soundest of all, viz. Christ the power of God. This is the Key of
David, that Opens and none Shuts, and Shuts, and none can Open; as the Oil to
the Lamp, and the Soul to the Body, so is that to the best of Words. Which made
Christ to say, My Words they are Spirit, and they are Life; that is, they are
from Life, and therefore they make you alive, that receive them. If the
Disciples that had lived with Jesus, were to stay at Jerusalem till they
received it; so must we wait to receive, before we Minister, if we will turn
People from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's power to God.

I fervently bow my Knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
you may always be like minded, that you may ever wait Reverently for the coming
and opening of the Word of Life, and tend upon it in your Ministry and Service,
that you may serve God in his Spirit. And be it little, or be it much, it is
well; for much is not too much, and the least is enough, if from the motion of
God's Spirit; and without it, verily, never so little is too much, because to
no profit.

For it is the Spirit of the Lord immediately, or through the Ministry of his
Servants, that teaches his People to profit; and to be sure, so far as we take
him along with us in our Services, so far we are profitable and no farther. For
if it be the Lord that must work all things in us and for our selves; much more
is it the Lord, that must work in us for the Conversion of others. If therefore
it was once a Cross to us to Speak, though the Lord required it at our Hands;
let it never be so to be silent, when he does not.

It is one of the most dreadful Sayings in the Book of God, That he that adds
to the Words of the Prophency of this Book, God will add the Plagues written in
this Book. To keep back the Counsel of God, is as Terrible; for he that takes
away from the Words of the Prophecy of this Book, God shall take away his part
out of the Book of Life. And truly, it has great Caution in it to those, that
use the Name of the Lord, to be well assured, the Lord Speaks, that they may
not be found of the Number of those, that add to the Words of the Testimony of
Prophecy, which the Lord gives them to bear; nor yet to mince or diminish the
same, both being so very offensive to God.

Wherefore, Brethren, let us be careful neither to out-go our Guide, nor yet
loiter behind him; since he that makes Haste, may miss his Way, and he that
stays behind, loose his Guide: For even those, that have Received the Word of
the Lord, had need wait for Wisdom, that they may see how to divide the Word
aright; which plainly implies that it is possible for one, that has received
the Word of the Lord, to miss in the Division and Application of it, which must
come from an Impatiency of Spirit, and a Self-working, which makes an unsound
and dangerous Mixture; and will hardly beget a right minded living People to
God.

I am earnest in this, above all other Considerations, as to public Brethren,
well knowing how much it concerns the present and future State, and
preservation of the Church of Christ Jesus, that has been gathered and built up
by a Living and Powerful Ministry, that the Ministry be held, preserved and
continued in the Manifestations, Motions and Supplies of the same Life and
Power from time to time.

And where ever it is observed, that any one does Minister more from Gifts and
Parts, than Life and Power, though they have an Enlightened and Doctrinal
Understanding; let them in time be advised and admonished for their
Preservation, because insensibly such will come to depend upon a
Self-sufficiency; to forsake Christ the living Fountain, and to hew out unto
themselves Cisterns that will hold no living Waters; and by degrees draw others
from waiting upon the Gift of God in themselves, and to feel it in others, in
order to their Strength and Refreshment to wait upon them, and to turn from God
to Man again, and so to make Shipwreck of the Faith once delivered to the
Saints, and of a good Conscience toward God; which are only kept by that
Divine Gift of life, that begat the one and awakened and sanctified the other
in the Beginning.

Nor is it enough that we have known the Divine Gift, and in it have reached to
the Spirits in Prison, and been the Instruments of the Convincing of others of
the way of God, if we keep not as low and poor in our selves, and as depending
upon the Lord as ever; since no Memory, no Repetitions of former Openings,
Revelations or Enjoyments will bring a Soul to God, or afford Bread to the
Hungry, or Water to the Thirsty, unless Life go, with what we say, and that
must be waited for.

O that we may have no other Fountain, Treasury or Dependence! that none may
presume at any rate to Act of themselves for God! Because they have long acted
from God, that we may not supply want of waiting with our own Wisdom, or think
that we may take less Care, and more liberty in speaking, than formerly; and
that where we do not feel the Lord by his Power to open us and enlarge us,
whatever be the Expectation of the People, or has been our Customary Supply and
Character, we may not exceed or fill up the time with our own.

I hope, we shall ever Remember, who it was that said, Of your selves you can
do nothing, our sufficiency is in Him: And if we are not to speak our own
Words, or take Thought what we should say to Men in our Defense, when exposed
for our Testimony, surely, we ought to speak none of our own Words, or take
Thought what we shall say in our Testimony and Ministry in the Name of the Lord
to the Souls of the People; for then of all Times, and of all other Occasions
should it be fulfilled in us; for it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of
my Father that speaks in you.

And indeed, the Ministry of the Spirit must and does keep its Analogy and
Agreement with the Birth of the Spirit; that as no Man can Inherit the Kingdom
of God, unless he be born of the Spirit; so no Ministry can beget a Soul to
God, but that which is from the Spirit. For this, as I said before, the
Disciples waited before they went forth; and in this our Elder Brethren, and
Messengers of God in our Day, waited, visited and reached to us. And having
begun in the Spirit, let none ever hope or seek to be made perfect in the
Flesh: For what is the Flesh to the Spirit, or the Chaff to the Wheat? And if
we keep in the Spirit, we shall keep in the Unity of it, which is the ground of
true Fellowship. For by Drinking into that one Spirit, we are made one People
to God, and by it we are continued in the Unity of the Faith, and the Bond of
Peace. No Envying, no Bitterness, no Strife can have place with us. We shall
watch always for Good, and not for Evil over one another, and rejoice
exceedingly, and not begrudge at one another increase in the Riches of the
Grace, with which God replenisheth his Faithful Servants.

And, Brethren, as to you is committed the Dispensation of the Oracles of God,
which give you frequent Opportunities, and great Place with the People among
whom you Travail, I beseech you that you would not think it sufficient to
declare the Word of Life in their Assemblies, however Edifying and Comfortable
such opportunities may be to you and them: But as was the Practice of the Man
of God before mentioned, in great Measure, when among us, inquire the State of
the several Churches you Visit; who among them are Afflicted or Sick, who are
Tempted; if any are Unfaithful or Obstinate, and endeavor to Issue those
things in the Wisdom and Power of God, which will be a glorious Crown upon your
Ministry. As that prepares your way in the Hearts of the People to receive you
as Men of God, so it gives you Credit with them to do them good by your Advice
in other Respects. The Afflicted will be Comforted by you, the Tempted
Strengthened, the Sick Refreshed, the Unfaithful Convicted and Restored, and
such as are Obstinate Softened and fitted for Reconciliation, which is Clenching
the Nail, and applying and Fastening the general Testimony by that particular
Care of the several Branches of it, in reference to them more immediately
concerned in it.

For though Good and Wise Men and Elders too, may reside in such places, who
are of Worth and Importance in the general, and in other Places; yet it does
not always follow, that they may have the Room they deserve in the hearts of
the People they live among; or some particular occasion may make it unfit for
him or them to use that Authority. But you that Travail as God's Messengers, if
they receive you in the Greater, shall they refuse you in the Less? And if they
own the general Testimony, can they withstand the particular Application of it
in their own Cases? Thus, ye will show your selves Workmen indeed, and carry
your Business before you, to the praise of his Name that has called you from
Darkness to Light, that you might turn others from Satan's Power unto God and
his Kingdom, which is within. And Oh that there were more of such Faithful
Laborers in the Vineyard of the Lord! Never more need since the day of God!

Wherefore I cannot but Cry and Call aloud to you, that have been long
Professors of the Truth, and know the Truth in the convincing Power of it, and
have had a sober Conversation among Men, yet content your selves only to know
Truth for your selves; to go to Meetings, and Exercise an ordinary Charity in
the Church, and an honest Behavior in the World, and limit your selves within
those Bounds, feeling little or no concern upon your Spirits for the Glory of
the Lord in the prospirity of his Truth in the Earth, more than to be glad that
others succeed in such Service; Arise ye in the Name and Power of the Lord
Jesus! Behold, how white the Fields are unto Harvest in this and other Nations,
and how few Able and Faithful Laborers there are to work therein! Your Country
Folks, Neighbors and Kindred want to know the Lord and his Truth, and to Walk
in it. Does nothing lie at your Door upon their Account? Search and see, and
loose no time, I beseech you, for the Lord is at Hand. I do not Judge you,
there is one that Judges all Men, and his Judgment is true: You have mightily
increased in your outward Substance; may you equally increase in your inward
Riches, and do good with both, while you have a day to do Good. Your Enemies
would once have taken what you had from you, for his Names Sake, in whom you
have believed; wherefore he has given you much of the World in the Face of your
Enemies. But Oh let it be your Servant and not your Master, your Diversion
rather than your Business! Let the Lord be chiefly in your Eye, and ponder your
Ways, and see if God has nothing more for you to do; and if you find your
selves short in your Account with him, then wait for his Preparation, and be
ready to receive the word of Command, and be not weary of well doing, when you
have put your Hand to the Plow; and assuredly you shall Reap (if you faint not)
the Fruit of your Heavenly Labor in God's Everlasting Kingdom.

And you, Young Convinced Ones, be you Entreated and Exhorted to a Diligent and
Chaste waiting upon God, in the way of his Blessed Manifestation and appearance
of himself to you. Look not out, but within: Let not another Liberty be your
Snare. Neither Act by Imitation, but Sense and Feeling of God's Power in your
selves: Crush not the tender Buddings of it in your Souls, nor over run in your
desires, and your warmness of Affections the Holy and Gentle Motions of It.
Remember it is a still Voice that Speaks to us in this Day, and that it is not
to be heard in the Noises and Hurries of the Mind; but is distinctly understood
in a retired Frame. Jesus loved and chose out Solitudes; often going to
Mountains, to Gardens and Sea-sides to avoid Crowds and Hurries, to show his
Disciples it was good to be Solitary, and sit loose to the World. Two Enemies
lie near your States, Imagination and Liberty, but the plain, practical,
Living, Holy Truth, that has convinced you will preserve you, if you mind it in
your selves, and bring all Thoughts, Imaginations and Affections to the Test of
it, to see if they are wrought in God, or of the Enemy, or your own selves: So
will a true Taste, Discerning and Judgment, be preserved to you, of what you
should do and leave undone: And in your diligence and Faithfulness in this way
you will come to inherit Substance; and Christ, the Eternal Wisdom, will fill
your Treasury. And when you are Converted, as well as Convinced, then confirm
your Brethren, and be ready to every good Word and Work, that the Lord shall
call you to; that you may be to his Praise, who has chosen you to be partakers
with the Saints in Light of a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, an Inheritance
incorruptible, in Eternal Habitations.

And now, as for you that are the Children of God's People, a Great Concern is
upon my Spirit for your good; and often are my Knees Bowed to the God of your
Fathers for you, that you may come to be partakers of the same Divine Life and
Power, that has been the Glory of this Day; that a Generation you may be to
God, an Holy Nation and a Peculiar People, Zealous of Good Works, when all our
Heads are laid in the Dust. Oh you Young Men and Women, let it not suffice you,
that you are the Children of the People of the Lord! you must also be born
again, if you will inherit the Kingdom of God. Your Fathers are but such after
the Flesh, and could but beget you into the likeness of the first Adam; but you
must be begotten into the likeness of the second Adam by a Spiritual
Generation. And therefore look carefully about you, Oh ye Children of the
Children of God, Consider your Standing, and see what you are in Relation to
this Divine Kindred, Family and Birth! Have you obeyed the Light, and received
and walked in the Spirit, that is the incorruptible Seed of the Word and
Kingdom of God, of which you must be born again: God is no respecter of
Persons. The Father cannot save or answer for the Child, the Child for the
Father, but in the Sin thou Sinnest, thou shall die; and in the Righteousness
thou do, through Christ Jesus, thou shall live; for it is the Willing and
Obedient that shall eat the Good of the Land. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, such as all Nations and People Sow, such they shall reap at the hand of
the just God. And then your many and great Privileges, above the Children of
other People, will add weight in the scale against you, if you choose not the
way of the Lord. For you have had Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, and
not only good Doctrine, but good Example; and which is more, you have been
turned to and acquainted with a Principle in your selves, which others have
been ignorant of; and you know, you may be as Good as you please, without the
Fear of Frowns and Blows, or being turned out of doors and forsaken of Father
and Mother for God's Sake, and his Holy Religion, as has been the Case of some
of your Fathers in the day they first entered into this Holy Path: And if you,
after hearing and seeing the Wonders that God has wrought in the deliverance
and perservation of them, through a Sea of Troubles, and the manifold Temporal,
as well as spiritual Blessings, that he has filled them with in the sight of
their Enemies, you should neglect and turn your backs upon so great and so near
a Salvation, you would not only be most ungreatful Children to God and them,
but must expect that God will call the Children of those that knew him not, to
take the Crown out of your Hands, and that your lot will be a dreadful Judgment
at the hand of the Lord. But Oh that it may never be so with any of you! The
Lord forbid, says my Soul.

Wherefore, Oh ye Young Men and Women, look to the Rock of your Fathers! choose
the God of your Fathers: There is no other God but him; no other Light but his;
no other Grace but his, nor Spirit, but his to Convince you, Quicken and
Comfort you; to Lead, Guide and Preserve you to God's Everlasting Kingdom: So
will you be Possessors, as well as Professors of the Truth; embracing it not
only by Education but Judgment and Conviction, from a Sense begotten in your
Souls, through the operation of the Eternal Spirit and Power of God in your
hearts, by which you may come to be the Seed of Abraham through Faith, and the
circumcision not made with Hands, and so heirs of the promise made to the
Fathers of an Incorruptible Crown: That (as I said before) a Generation you may
be to God, holding up the Profession of the blessed Truth in the Life and Power
of it. For Formality in Religion is Nauseous to God and good Men; and the more
so, where any Form or Appearance has been new and peculiar, and begun and
practiced upon a Principle, with an Uncommon Zeal and Strictness. Therefore I
say, for you to fall flat and formal, and continue the profession without that
Salt and Savor, by which it is come to obtain a good Report among Men, is not
to answer God's Love, nor your Parents Care, nor the mind of Truth in your
selves, nor in those that are without; who though they will not obey the Truth,
have Sight and Sense enough to see if they do that make a Profession of it. For
where the Divine Virtue of it is not felt in the Soul, and waited for, and
lived in, imperfections will quickly break out, and show themselves, and detect
the Unfaithfulness of such Persons, and that their insides are not seasoned
with the Nature of that holy Principle which they profess.

Wherefore, Dear Children, let met entreat you to shut your Eyes at the
Temptations and Allurements of this low and perishing World, and not suffer
your affections to be captivated by those Lusts and Vanities that your Fathers,
for Truths Sake, long since turned their Backs upon: But as you believe it to
be the Truth, receive it into your Hearts, that you may become the Children of
God: So that it may never be said of you, as the Evangelist Writes of the Jews
of his time, That Christ, the true Light, came to his own, but his own received
him not; but to as many as received him, to them he gave Power to become the
Children of God; which were born, not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh,
nor of the Will of Man, but of God. A most close and comprehensive Passage to
this occasion: You exactly and peculiarly answer to those professing Jews, in
that you bear the Name of God's People, by being the Children and wearing of
the Form of God's People: So that he by his Light in you, may be said to come
to his own, and if you obey it not, but turn your Back upon it, and walk after
the Vanities of your Minds, you will be of those that receive him not, which, I
pray God, may never be your Case and Judgment; but that you may be thoroughly
sensible of the many and great Obligations you lie under to the Lord for his
Love, and your Parents for their Care: And with all your Heart and all your
Soul, and all your Strength turn to the Lord, to his Gift and Spirit in you,
and hear his Voice and obey it, that you may Seal to the Testimony of your
Fathers, by the Truth and Evidence of your own Experience; that your Childrens
Children may bless you, and the Lord for you, as those that delivered a
faithful Example, as well as Record of the Truth of God unto them. So will the
Gray Hairs of your Dear Parents yet alive, go down to the Grave with Joy, to
see you the posterity of Truth, as well as theirs, and that not only their
Natures but Spirit shall live in you when they are gone.

I shall conclude this Preface with a few Words to those that are not of our
Communion, into whose hands this may come, especially those of our own Nation.

Friends, As you are the Sons and Daughters of Adam, and my Brethren after the
Flesh, often and earnest have been my Desires and Prayers to God on your
behalf, that you may come to know him that has Made you to be your Redeemer and
Restorer to the Image that, through Sin, you have lost, by the power and Spirit
of his Son Jesus Christ, whom he has given for the Light and Life of the
World. And Oh that you, who are called Christians, would receive him into your
Heart! for there it is you want him, and at that Door he stands knocking, that
you should let him in, but you do not open to him; You are full of other
Guests, so that a Manger is his Lot among you Now, as well as of Old: Yet you
are full of Profession, as were the Jews when he came among them, who knew him
not, but rejected and evilly entreated him. So that if you come not to the
Possession and Experience of what you profess, all your Formality in Religion
will stand you in no stead in the Day of God's Judgment.

I beseech you ponder with your selves your Eternal Condition, and see what
Title, what Ground and Foundation you have for your Christianity: If more than
a Profession, and an Historical Belief of the Gospel. Have you known the
Baptism of Fire, and the Holy Ghost, and the Fan of Christ that winnows away
the Chaff; The Carnal Lusts and Affections? That Divine Leven of the Kingdom,
that being received, Levens the whole Lump of Man, sanctifying him throughout
in Body, Soul and Spirit? If this be not the Ground of your Confidence, you are
in a Miserable Estate.

You will say perhaps, that though you are Sinners, and live in the daily
Commission of Sin, and are not Santified, as I have been Speaking, yet you have
Faith in Christ, who has borne the Curse for you, and in him you are Complete
by Faith; his Righteousness being imputed to you.

But my Friends, let me entreat you not to deceive your selves, in so Important
a Point, as is that of your Immortal Souls. If you have true Faith in Christ,
your Faith will make you Clean, it will Sanctify you; for the Saints Faith was
their Victory: By this they over came Sin within, and Sinful Men without. And
if thou art in Christ thou walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit,
whose Fruits are Manifest. Yea, thou art a New Creature, New Made, New
Fashioned after God's Will and Mold: Old things are done away, and behold, all
things are become New: New Love, Desires, Will, Affections and Practices. It is
not any longer Thou that live, Thou Disobedient, Carnal, Worldly One; but it
is Christ that lives in thee, and to live is Christ and to die is thy Eternal
Gain; because thou art assured, That thy Corruptible shall put on Incorruption,
and thy Mortal, Immortality; and that thou have a Glorious House Eternal in the
Heavens that will never wax Old or pass away. All this follows being in Christ,
as Heat follows Fire and Light the Sun.

Therefore have a Care how you presume to Rely upon such a Notion, as that you
are in Christ, whilst in your old fallen Nature. For what Communion has Light
with Darkness, or Christ with Belial? Hear what the beloved Disciple tells you:
If we say we have fellowship with God, and walk in Darkness, we lie, and do not
the Truth. That is, if we go on in a sinful way, are Captivated by our Carnal
Affections, and are not Converted to God, we walk in Darkness, and cannot
possibly have any fellowship with God. Christ Cloths them with his
Righteousness that receive his Grace in their Hearts, and deny themselves, and
take up his Cross daily, and follow him. Christ's Righteousness makes Men
inwardly Holy, of Holy Minds, Wills and Practices. It is nevertheless Christ's,
because we have it; for it is ours, not by Nature, but by Faith and Adoption:
It is the Gift of God: But still though not ours, as of or from our selves, for
in that Sense it is Christ's, for it is of and from him, yet it is ours; and
must be ours in Possession, Efficacy and Enjoyment to do us any Good, or
Christ's Righteousness will profit us nothing. It was after this manner, That
he was made to the primitive Christians, Righteousness, Sanctification,
Justification and Redemption; and if ever you will have the Comfort, Kernel and
Marrow of the Christian Religion, thus you must come to learn and obtain it.

Now, my Friends, by what you have Read, and will Read in what Follows, you may
perceive, that God has visited a Poor People among you with this saving
Knowledge and Testimony; whom he has upheld and increased to this Day,
notwithstanding the fierce opposition they have met withal. Despise not the
meanness of this Appearance: It was, and yet is (we know) a day of small
things, and of small Account with too many; and many hard and ill Names are
given to it; but it is of God, it came from him because it leads to him. This
we know, but we cannot make another know it, as we know it, unless he will take
the same way to know it, that we took. The World talks of God; but what do they
do? They pray for Power, but reject the Principle in which it is. If you would
know God and Worship and serve God, as you should do, you must come to the
means he has ordained and given for that purpose. Some seek it in Books, some
in Learned Men, but what they look for, is in themselves, but they overlook it.
The Voice is too still, the Seed too small, and the Light shines in Darkness.
They are abroad, and so cannot divide the Spoil; but the Woman, that lost her
Silver found it at Home, after she had light her Candle and swept her House. Do
you so too, and you shall find what Pilate wanted to know, viz. Truth.

The light of Christ within, who is the Light of the World, (and so a Light to
you, that tells you the Truth of your Condition) leads all, that take heed unto
it, out of Darkness into God's mavelous Light; for Light grows upon the
Obedient. It is sown for the Righteous, and their way is a shining Light, that
shines forth more and more to the perfect day.

Wherefore, O Friends, Turn in, Turn in, I beseech you! Where is the Poison,
there is the Antidote: There you want Christ, and there you must find him; and
blessed be God, there you may find him. Seek and you shall find, I testify for
God: But then you must seek aright, with your whole Heart, as Men that seek for
their Lives, yea, for their Eternal Lives: Diligently, Humbly, Patiently, as
those that can taste no Pleasure, Comfort or Satisfaction in any thing else,
unless you find him whom your Souls want, and desire to know and love above
all. O it is a Travail, a Spiritual Travail! Let the Carnal, Profane World
think and say as it will. And through this Path you must walk to the City of
God, that has Eternal Foundations, if ever you will come there.

Well! And what does this blessed Light do for you? Why, 1. it sets all your
sins in order before you: It detects the Spirit of this World in all its Bates
and Allurements, and shows how Man came to fall from God, and the fallen Estate
he is in. 2. It begets a Sense and Sorrow, in such as believe in it, for this
fearful Laps. You will then see him Distinctly, whom you have Pierced him, and
all the Blows and Wounds you have given him by your Disobedience; and how you
have made him to serve with your Sins, and you will Weep and Mourn for it, and
your Sorrow will be a Godly Sorrow. 3. After this it will bring you to the Holy
Watch, to take Care that you do so no more, that the Enemy surprise you not
again: Then Thoughts, as well as Words and Works, will come to Judgment, which
is the way of Holiness, in which the Redeemed of the Lord do Walk. Here you
will come to love God above all, and your Neighbors as your selves. Nothing
Hurts, Nothing Harms, Nothing makes Afraid on this Holy Mountain: Now you come
to be Christ's indeed, for you are his in Nature and Spirit, and not your own.
And when you are thus Christ's, then Christ is yours, and not before: And here
Communion with the Father and with the Son you will know, and the Efficacy of
the Blood of Cleansing, even the Blood of Jesus Christ, that Immaculate Lamb,
which speaks better things than the Blood of Abel, and which cleanses from
all Sin the Consciences of those that, through the living Faith, come to be
sprinkled with it from dead Works to serve the living God.

To Conclude, Behold the Testimony and Doctrine of the People called Quakers!
Behold their Practice and Discipline! And behold the blessed Man and Men that
were sent of God in this Excellent Work and Service! All which will be more
particularly expressed in the Ensuing Annals of the Man of God; which I do
heartily recommend to my Readers most serious Perusal, and beseech Almighty
God, that his Blessing may go along with it, to the Convincing of many, as yet
Strangers to this Holy Dispensation, and also to the Edification of the Church
of God in General: Who, for his manifold and repeated Mercies and Blessings to
his People in this day of his great Love, is worthy ever to have the Glory,
Honor, Thanksgiving and Renown; and be it rendered and ascribed, with Fear and
Reverence, through him in whom he is well pleased, his bloved Son and Lamb, our
Light and Life, that sits with him upon the Throne, World without End.

Amen, Says One that God has long since Mercifully favored with his Fatherly
Visitation, and who was not Disobedient to the Heavenly Vision and Call, to
whom the Way of Truth is more Lovely and Precious than ever, and that knowing
the Beauty and Benefit of it above all Worldly Treasure, has chosen it for his
Chiefest Joy, and therefore recommends it to thy Love and Choice, because he is
with great Sincerity and Affection thy Souls Friend. William Penn.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, at the Crooked Billet in
Holly-well-lane, Shoreditch, and near the Meeting House in White-hart-court in
Grace Church Street, 1694.


