Christian Liberty As it was SOBERLY DESIRED IN A LETTER TO CERTAIN FOREIGN
STATES, Upon Occasion of their late Severity to several of their Inhahitants,
merely for their Different Persuasion and Practice in Point of Faith and
Worship toward God.

Made public on the behalf of the present suffering Diffenters within this
Kingdom.

Printed in the Year 1674.

TO THE Supreme Council OF THE STATES, etc. The King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, who is God of all the Families of the Earth, incline your Hearts to
Justice, Mercy and Truth.
THe Noise of your severe Treatment of several Persons that are Inhabitants of
your State, reproachfully termed QUAKERS, has reached these Parts, and filled
several with Compassion and Surprise: Compassion, to hear of the Our Account
says, Some were cruelly beaten by Order; others Banished; some put in a
Dungeon, and fed with Bread and Water only; several Fined greater sums of
Money, it is thought, then they had to pay.
Miseries of Men Innocent and upright, against whom you have nothing to object,
but the pure Exercise of their Conscience to God: Surprise, That you, a
Protestant-State, should employ your Civil Power to Deter, Punish and
grievously Afflict Men for Answering the Convictions of their Consciences, and
Acting according to the best of their Understandings. Methinks you should not
be oblivious of your own Condition in the Loins of your Ancestors, who, you
think, with great Reason and Justice strenuously advocated the Cause of Liberty
of Conscience against the Popes Bulls and the Spanish Inquisition; how did they
Antichristian all Force on Conscience, or Punishment for Nonconformity? Their
own many and large Apologies, and particularly, their Demands at the Diets of
Norimberg and Spira, are pregnant Proofs in the Case: and your Practice does
not lessen the Weight of their Reasons; on the contrary, it aggravates your
Unkindness, let me say, Injustice.

Protestants (and such you glory to be thought) got their Name by protesting
against Imposition; and will you turn Imposers? They condemned it; and will you
practice it? They thought it a Mark peculiar to the Beast; and can you repute
it the Care of a Christian Magistracy? I mean, that Persons must not live under
your Government, unless they receive your Mark in their Forehead or Right Hand?
which in plainer Terms is, to submit their Consciences to your Edicts, and to
ask your Leave, What Religion they should be of. Remember, that Faith is the
Gift of God; and, that What is not of Faith is Sin: Nothing can be more
Unreasonable, then to compel Men to believe against their Belief, or to trouble
them for practicing what they believe, when it thwarts not the Moral Law of God.

You doubtless take your selves to be Christians, and would esteem it no little
Injury to be otherwise represented; yet what more Unchristian, then to use
External Force, to sway the Consciences of Men about the Exercise of Religious
Worship?

CHRIST Jesus, the Lord and Author of the Christian Religion, censured his own
Disciples, that would have had Fire from Heaven to destroy those that conformed
not to what their blessed Master taught: Are you surer of your Religion? Are
you better Christians? Or, have you more Christian-Authority, then they that
were the chosen Witnesses of Jesus? However remember, they called but for Fire
from Heaven; and can you kindle Fire on Earth to devour them? Them, I say, that
are of your own People, merely for their Religious Dissent from you? Doubtless,
if that was then thought no fit Argument to induce Men to Conformity by him
that was wiser then Solomon, it reflects greatly upon your Modesty and
Prudence, that you should find out new Ways, or rather old exploded ones to
effect so ill a Design. Besides, you do not say, you know all you ought to
know, or that there is nothing further to be revealed; have a Care therefore,
that you persecute not Angels, by being harsh to that which you call Strange:
Think not ill, much less speak, and least of all act that which is so against
what you do not perfectly understand. I am well persuaded, that those you
inflict such severe Penalties upon, mean well in what they believe (to be sure
much better then you think they do, or else you are extremely to blame) and
that the Reason of their present Distance from you, is not to introduce or
insinuate Dangerous or Exotic Opinions; but to live a Life of more Holiness,
Purity and Self-Denial, then before: They do not think that you walk up to your
own Principles; and have Reason to believe that the Power of Godliness is much
lost among you; and having long lain under a Decay and Languishing of Soul for
Want of true spiritual Nourishment, they have now betaken themselves to that
Heavenly Gift and Grace of God in themselves for Divine Satisfaction, even that
Holy Anointing that is able to teach them all things necessary for them to
know, as the Blessed Apostle speaks; and they find the Joys of the Holy Ghost
in so doing: And I am persuaded, they are not less Peaceable, Sober, Just and
Neighbourly then formerly, and altogether as consistent with the Prosperity of
Civil Society; and I am sure, it is both found and confessed among us here by
some Men of Quality, Learning and Virtue. Further, be pleased to consider with
your selves, that you justify the ancient Persecutions of the Christians and
first Reformers, whose Superiors thought as ill of them, as you do of these
Men; nay, you show the Papists what to do in their Dominions to your own
Brethren. Do as you would be done by: if you would have Liberty, give it; you
know that God's Witness in your Hearts dictates this to you as an Immutable Law.

Could you give Faith, it were more excusable for you to punish such as should
resist; but since that is impossible, the other is unreasonable; for it is to
afflict Men for not being what they cannot be, unless they turn Hypocrites: That
is the highest pitch your coercive Power can arrive at; for never did it
convert or preserve one Soul to God; instead thereof, it offers Violence upon
Conscience, and puts a Man either upon the Denial of his Faith and Reason, or
being destroyed for acting according to them: But what greater Disproportion
can there be, then what lies between the Intellect of Man, and Prisons, Fines
and Banishments? They inform no Man's Judgment, resolve no Doubts, convince no
Understanding: The Power of Persuasion is not to be found in any such Barbarous
Actions, no more then the Doctrine of Christianity. This Course destroys the
Bodies and And Property, which they repute themselves Guardians of, is hereby
lost.
Estates of Men, instead of saving their Souls: Were they in the Wrong, it
would become you to use God's Weapon, his Sword of the Spirit, that saves the
Creature, and slays the Evil in him; This Course tends to Heart-Burnings and
Destruction; I am sure it is no Gospel Argument.

I beseech you for the sake of that Lord Jesus Christ, that suffered so
patiently for his own Religion, and so sharply prohibited making other men to
Suffer for theirs, that you would have a Care, now you exercise Power over men's
Consciences. My Friends, Conscience is God's Throne in Man, and the Power of
it, his Prerogative: It Is to usurp his Authority, and boldly ascend his Throne
to sit Lords over it. Were their Conversation Scandalous, and Destructive to
the Good of your State, you were to be held excusable; But verily, no man of
Mercy and Conscience, can defend your Practice upon poor Men so peaceable and
Inoffensive. Gamaliel will rise up in Judgment against you, if you persevere in
this course. Do not you help to fill the Catalogue of Persecutors, in much Love
I entreat you; but as becomes Christian men and true Protestants, leave men to
their particular Persuasions of Affairs relative of the other World, which have
no ill Aspect on the Affairs of this; but Vice has an evil Consequence as to
both: Therefore punish Vice, and affect Truth and Righteousness, and bend not
your Civil Power to Torment Religious Dissenters; but to retrive good Life,
lamentably lost amidst the great Pretenses that are made to Religion.
Doubtless, Magistracy was both ordained of God, and elected by Men, to be a
Terror to Evildoers, and not to them that do well, though of different
Judgments. You oppugn the Roman Church for assuming Infallibility to herself,
and yet your own Practice makes you guilty of the same Presumption, or worse:
For, either you do exercise that Severity upon an Infallible Knowledge, or you
do not; if you do, you take that to your selves, your Principles deny to any
Church whatever, which is a Contradiction; if you do not, you punish People for
not conforming to what you your selves deny any Certainty about: And how do you
know but you compel them to that which is false, as well as that which is true?
Verily, this Dilemma is not easily avoided, as well as that this inhuman
Practice will stain your Profession, infame your Government, and bring a Blot
upon your Posterity.

Remember that they are Men as well as your selves, born free, and have equal
Plea to Natural and Civil common Privileges with your selves: The different
Persuasion of their Consciences about Things relating to another Life, can no
ways render them unfit for this; it neither Unmans nor Uncivilizes them. They
have the same Right to their Liberty and Property as ever, having by no
Practice of theirs in the least forfeited any of those human Advantages, the
Great Charters of Nature and Scripture have conferred upon them: And the
Opulency of your Neighbors, and Prosperity of their Affairs, prove to you that
Indulgence is not inconsistent with Policy; howbeit, you have now tried the
Sincerity of their Procedure by what you have already inflicted, and they
sustained; Let the Time past suffice, and make them not Sacrifices for their
conscientious Constancy. If they are in the Wrong, it is more then they know:
Will you persecute Men for being what they must be, if they will be true to
themselves? this were great Violence; rather Commiserate, then thus violently
Compel them. I beseech you, seek some cheaper Way to accommodate your selves,
then by their Destruction, who are so very remote from seeking yours. Oh! the
Day will come, wherein one Act of Tenderness about Matters of Conscience, shall
find a better Reward, then all the Severity by which Men use to propagate their
Persuasions in the World; and there is great Reason for it, since the one flows
from the Savior, the other, from the Destroyer of Men. In fine, Let your
Moderation be known unto all Men, for the Lord is at hnad, whose Reward it with
him; and he will recompense every Man, Family, State, Kingdom and Empire,
according to the Nature of their Works, committed in this mortal Body; at whose
Bar it shall never be laid to your Charge, that out of Fear of taking God's
Office out of his Hands, and being unmerciful to tender Consciences, you
admitted Men of differing Judgments to dwell quietly among you; truly, you
cannot be too tender in this Point.

Imitate the God of Nature and Grace, by being propitious to all; his Sun
shines on all, his Rain falls on all, he gives Life and Being to all; his
Grace visits all, and in Times of Ignorance he winketh: And though such you may
repute ours, I hope you cannot think you wink at it, who make such broad Tokens
of your Displeasure. Oh! how forbearing and merciful is he toward you? Have
you so lately escaped the Wrath of Enemies, and can you already thus sharply
treat your Friends? Had he entered into Judgment with you, what had become of
you? Let his Goodness to you prevail with you, to express Clemency to others,
that so the Great God of the whole Earth, even the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh, who respects not the Persons of the Rich, Poor, or Powerful in Judgment,
may show you Mercy in the day of his Righteous Judgments, Ame^.

London, the 14 th December, 1674.

