THE OATHS OF Irish Papists NO EVIDENNCE AGAINST Protestants: OR, A Warning
piece to JVRORS. In a LETTER to a FRIEND.
SIR!
THE present state of things affords such various matter of serious reflection,
that to give you my Opinion concerning it, would be to confound and entangle my
thoughts in the most intricate Labyrinths of Popish Villainies, and render my
Discourse as confused a Chaos as the Subject of it. I have therefore singled
out this one Question, as more particularly deserving a satisfactory Answer:

Whether notwithstanding many full and positive Oaths of IRISH PAPISTS, a
Protestant JURY may with a safe conscience give their Verdict contrary to the
matter sworn in the present business of a PRESBYTERIAN Plot?

AND in Answer hereunto, I humbly offer to your more solid judgment these
following Considerations.

I.
PROTESTANTS in the general are supposed to be very well satisfied of this Real
Truth, That it is a Popish Principle inseparably annexed to that Faithless
Religion, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics. And the experience of
all Ages confirms their Practice to be conformable to Principles of their own
making, however unsuitable they have been to those of Christianity. To instance
in particular persons, nay to enumerate Popish Princes as well as their Council
of Constance, who have given abundant testimony to the truth of this Assertion,
would take up too much room in this short Discourse, and insinuate that you are
either not at all, or (at least) a very ignorant Protestant. But since it is
more consonant to the present Design, I cannot forbear to refer you to the
several accounts which have been given of the Irish Rebellion in 41. and those
yet living witnesses of the Truth thereof, by which you may be satisfied that
this one Excuse cut the throats of many thousand Protestants in that Kingdom,
who surrendered themselves upon the promise of Life and safe Convoy into the
English Quarters; and yet were forthwith most barbarously Butchered. This
Principle, I say, was the only Funeral-Service of those poor credulous Murdered
Innocents.

II.
WE have therefore very little reason to expect that any other Oath should be
thought more obligatory than that of Allegiance has been; or that Perjury
should be more scrupled by a Roman Conscience than Massacres and Murders. But
the Papists in that Kingdom did not only by the Martyrdom of some Hundred of
thousands, give as great testimony to the Falseness and Cruelty of their
Religion, as the primitive Martyrs did to the truth of Christianity: But as
they had Treason enough to forfeit their Estates, so they had Liberty of
Conscience enough to save them too in this very point of Perjury. For the price
of an Irish Papists Oath was as generally known at the Court of Claims, as that
of all sins is at the Court of Rome: And the multitude of persons in that
Kingdom that enjoy their Estates, though actually concerned in that Horrid
Rebellion, is a sufficient evidence of the truth hereof. So that if it were
demanded, I doubt not but most of the Protestants in Ireland would sign a
Certificate to this purpose; and if Oaths were so plentiful a Commodity that a
small sum could purchase them to save the Estates of others, and that only for
the advancement of a particular Papist; how will those in whom want, and
baseness, and lewd principles, all concur to qualify them for such a purpose,
judge an Oath or two an easy purchase of Wealth and Favor, Fame and Saintship
to themselves, the Advancement of the Catholic Cause, and the utter
destruction of Three Nations of Heretics? Alas! 'twas a small piece of Policy
to teach their Cubs of Five or Six year old to stab the Protestants Children! A
Butcher's Trade, even in the Irish Shambles, is not worth an Apprenticeship, if
their Childrens Tongues can do so much more than their Fathers hands, by making
them dye like Traitors, whose Ancestors they destroyed as Innocents, if not
Martyrs; whilst a Protestant Jury by believing their Evidence, will be
unhappily assistant to make them as impudent in this way of Murder, as they
were in the Other.

III.
BUT let me a little consider the Gift of Swearing more particularly: Certainly
an Oath unless given by lawful Authority, is not more considerable than we so
abundantly hear in common discourse; and therefore if these Irish Witnesses are
of opinion That the King, nor any person deriving Authority from him, have
power to administer an Oath, and the Courts of Judicature no more material in
this case than the Marketplace, a Jury may as well believe the full-mouthed
Oaths which have these many months infected the air, as a proof of a
Presbyterian Plot in general, as they can the Depositions of such persons to
fix it on any Protestant in particular. But that our Kings have been, and His
present Majesty (as He is a Protestant Prince) is now Actually Excommunicated
by the Pope, not only by his Bulla Cenae, but particularly and by Name; and his
Subjects Absolved from their Allegiance, and any acknowledgment of his
Authority, is past all contradiction; so that upon the matter, I am as much
bound to believe every Damn-me, as such men's Oaths. But besides, it is
universally known, with what contempt the Papists have at all times used our
English Bibles, and especially in Ireland, where they have deposed that on the
Evangelists which they have refused on the Mass Book. Again: Their Doctrine of
Equivocation has such influence on this Affair, that the Assertion of a
Protestant must be far more considerable than a Romanists Oath. For when they
have sworn matter most intelligible, and in expressions most emphatical, no
Juror can possibly know what they mean. For still they may have a Reservation
in their minds of a quite contrary sense, for ought he knows. And it can be no
objection, That they boggle at the Oath of Supremacy; for the foundation of
their Religion is so directly contrary to the matter of that Oath, that the
very sound of the words in the ears of Protestants out of a Roman mouth, is not
to be endured by the Holy See, unless dispensed with on particular occasions.
Neither can it be urged with any success, That Protestants at this rate could
not possibly live and enjoy their Estates in that Kingdom: For (as every
Climate has peculiar Medicine suited to the predominant Maladies thereof; so)
their want of Honesty is tolerably remedied by their want of sense; and they
have been so often detected, that it is the invincible Charity of the English
which preserves the whole Herd from the common fate of Liars. And here I cannot
forbear to instance in one Example of their prodigious want of Thought. I could
name the persons, parties to the Action, in which two Irish men swore that they
were Witnesses to a Deed of Lease made by a certain Lord there on a set day,
and a set place; when upon examination it was found that the Lord was dead ten
years and above before the time deposed: And they will generally, though they can
neither Read nor Write, swear to Limitations of Estates at Thirty years
distance, which the Councellor himself will scarcely undertake to remember the
next day after the Conveyance. And here I must not neglect the objection, That
if they be such block-heads, they will easily discover themselves: For there
never was a Nation of fools, though that Qualification may be most predominant;
and the Popish Party in England have expressed so much both of the subtilty and
poison of the Serpent, that it must not be thought strange though some prove more
docible than the St. Omers Lads.

IV.
BUT I expect it will be retorted, That upon the Evidence of these persons
Protestant Juries have not scrupled to pronounce many guilty of the most horrid
Crimes. And that this may give pretense to Popish Juries, if we must ever be so
miserable as to be tried by such, to give as little credit to a Protestant Oath
as we do to a Popish. To the first I answer: That there is no other Evidence
can be expected of Popish Treasons, but some of their own Confederates (I mean
as to Oral Testimony): Those Oaths of Secrecy which have been administered in
their Respective Plots since the Gunpowder-Treason, and were so lately renewed
in Ireland, exclude all Protestants from the knowledge of their practices: And
the Discoverer of the Horrid Irish Rebellion in 41. was forced to take Oaths
and Sacraments enough to damn a World, before he was capable of that Service
which he did in preserving the City of Dublin. Besides, he must be supposed
more likely to speak truth, who pretends to discover a Plot among persons of
his own Persuasion, and intimate acquaintance, than against those whom they
always reckon their most formidable Enemies, and have so often used as such,
especially when the Discovery of it exposes him to the greatest dangers, and
makes him forfeit both his Religion and Relations; and he swears without the
assistance of the forementioned principle, or any temptation: Such an one, I
say, is much rather to be credited than he who will needs be a Discoverer of
Designs among persons of a far different judgment, and his professed Enemies;
and who will be reckoned almost as much deserving pity for their more than
Irish folly, as hatred for their detestable Treasons, should they be guilty of
the Crimes pretended. But perhaps 'twas not the Oaths of the Irish Witnesses,
so much as the Irresistible Evidence of concurring circumstances, and violent
presumptions, which it is probable did most influence the Jurors in those
Verdicts: For he that either knows (or has heard) any thing of the state of
Ireland, must confess, That since they became subject to the English
Government, every Forty years at least has produced an Actual Rebellion, and
the seeds thereof are continually sowing, and more industriously cultivated
amongst them since the Reformation, by the Romish Emissaries. And why should we
not think Protestant Plotters (if such there be) as prudent to keep their
Intrigues from the knowledge of such Weather-cocks as the Irish are generally
reputed; as the Romanists, who never discover theirs unless to persons fixed to
their Party with all possible Obligations? For such Reasons as these we believe
Papists against Papists: But cannot (their Principles considered) allow them to
be sufficient Evidence against Protestants, as well for the Causes
beforementioned, as also for this considerable difference: A Protestant
believes Perjury in any case against any person, be he Papist, Jew or Infidel,
to be a damnable Sin; and that no person on Earth can Pardon it, or Absolve him
for such a Guilt. But a Papist either believes that it is meritorious to
forswear himself against an Heretic, when it may considerably advantage Holy
Church; or at worst, if it be a Crime, he knows it is but going to Confession,
and he can get an Absolution, which you need not doubt but in such Cases as we
are speaking of, the Ghostly Father will grant a very easy Penance: which
being once performed, our Irish Popish Evidence reckons himself as clear from
the Guilt of the Perjury, and all the Murders thereby occasioned, as the Child
unborn.

V.
BUT as to the other part of the Objection, drawn from the fear of such usage
from them, viz. That if we will not believe Popish Witnesses now, they will not
believe Protestant Witnesses another day. The answer is very plain. Surely no
Protestant expects to be troubled with a Trial for Treason, in case we must be
blessed with a Popish Successor. Heresy is a ready and greater Crime, and that
in the Roman sense every true Protestant will be Convicted of by his own
Confession, without Verdict. But supposing the Wolf should Parley with the
Lamb, and give a Protestant Trial on an Accusation for Treason; or upon Issue
joined between a Papist and Protestant under such a Government, unless they can
charge the Protestant Principles with the same Justice, with which we condemn
theirs, Equity demands more credit to our Depositions: But the sad Instances in
the Neighbour-Nation, of what Right Protestants find in Popish Judicatures,
makes this Objection of as little Weight, as their Oppressions are heavy and
intolerable.

VI.
ONCE more consider, what a special case the Lord Shaftsbury (for example) or
any other Protestant so publicly engaged against Popery, should be in, if
Coleman and that Herd of Priests and Jesuits, who have lied and equivocated
themselves into the other world, were alive, and the Plot undiscovered? Will
any Protestant believe that the Authors of those Speeches which they left
behind them (those prodigious Untruths of seared Consciences, which had not the
Divine Oracles warned us of, we could not believe any thing of humane shape
could utter on this side of Hell) would have made any more scruple to accuse
others, than they did to excuse themselves? and yet they had not that
Emphatical addition of Irish Witnesses! The Case indeed had been extremely
difficult to have cleared a person charged by so many Witnesses; especially
when the Quality of the persons might have been better concealed, than that of
Modern Swearers. But the Reason, why noted Protestants have so long lived free
from such Hellish Attempts, must, next to the Protection of Divine Providence,
be imputed to their spotless Loyalty and prudent Circumspection; and on the
other part, to the fear of detection, which has a far greater awe on Catholic
Consciences than that of Damnation.

VII.
I observe, that when Mr. F -- had changed his Coat, and was grown too
Court-like for his former Acquaintance, he presently changed his Note too; and
the Influence of Surprising Gold was such, that his foolish Ostentations were
rendered ridiculous by Mr. M -- himself, to whom he often produced his Handful
of Temptation: And I no sooner saw Mr. M -- new- thatcht, but he had found a
New Plot; I suppose in the Pockets of his New Clothes. For will any man of
common Sense believe, that if the Protestant Interest had been so far left of
God, that they should endeavor to secure themselves by Subornation, they would
not also have put these men beyond the Temptation of a piece of Cloth and a
few Guinies? But if some persons of the Protestant Religion, out of pity to
their seeming Necessities, who pretended to leave their Country and their Gods,
to save Innocent Blood, did contribute so far as not to suffer these wretches
to starve, who can conclude hence the Guilt of Subornation? That they did so
much as to keep them alive, is an Evidence of Christian Charity; and that they
did no more, is an invincible Proof of their Christian Truth, Loyalty, and
Innocence.

VIII.
BUT (some say) One positive Oath, nay oftentimes presumptions without an Oath
are sufficient Evidence to a Grand Jury. To this what I have already said, may
I hope give some Answer. The Question is not, Whether a Jury may give their
Verdict against Evidence? But whether such Oaths are any Evidence to a Jury,
where the things sworn are Improbable, nay morally Impossible? Can a Jury find
a Bill, because some Fellows say, (for I have before proved an Oath with them
to be no more) that the person is Guilty, when the matter of the Accusation is
absurd; and it is apparent their Principles, their Clothes, their Pockets and
their Salvation incline 'em to such an Assertion? But this is but an
Accusation, say others; and the business of a Grand Jury is only to bring the
party accused to Answer: But not to say a Conspiracy, because some people say a
Conspiracy, was a Caution given long ago by the Prophet. And certainly, a false
Accusation is but few degrees less Devilish than a false Condemnation; and he
that will Accuse another without grounds, will make but little Conscience to
Condemn him too. But there are Peers concerned, and according to the present
Scheme of our Laws, a Peer seems to be in a worse condition on any Criminal
Charge, than the meanest Commoner. For the latter, besides the Grand Juries
Accusation, must have another Jury Impannell'd by the Sheriff, who is sworn
impartially to execute his Office; and he has the liberty in Case of Treason to
except peremptorily against Thirty Five without assigning any Cause, and
against as many more as he can show just Reason; and then the Twelve that he
puts himself upon, (who must be of his own Neighborhood) are upon Oath, and
can make no Verdict against him without every man of them agree to it. Whereas
when once a Bill is found against a Peer, his Trial (unless in Case of
Impeachments) is by a select number of Peers (commonly Twenty Five) constituted
by Royal Commission; against any of whom, though his known and professed Enemies,
he is allowed no Liberty of Challenge. And as they are not Sworn, so likewise
the Majority of their Voices includes the rest; so that if any Thirteen of them
are pleased to pronounce him Guilty, To the Gibbet, or at least to the Ax he
must go. And therefore certainly it concerns Grand Juries (especially in such
Cases) to be duly circumspect and well satisfied of the Evidence on which they
find Bills, wherein a man's Life, and Estate, and Honor, and the utter Ruin of
his Family is concerned. For should we ever fall under a Popish Successor, it is
to be feared in such cases, Accusation and Condemnation will differ only
Objective in Intellectu. For should a Bill be found against a Protestant Lord,
one might without consulting the Stars, or breach of Prerogative, venture to
name the Triers, and foretell the Verdict. For though I have a just Deference
and Veneration for the English Nobility; yet it is not easily to be decided,
whether in case of this vast consequence to the Popish Interest, the Honor of
Popish Lords, or the Oaths of their Commons, deserve the greater credit.

IX.
BUT still it is Objected, That a Lawful Witness is according to the general
sense of the Law, such a Witness as is allowed by the Laws of the Realm; and if
what has been said be true, How is it that there is no Law disabling persons of
this Character to be allowed as Evidence? It Is true, the Law admits almost all
persons to be Sworn as Witnesses; but the Oath of every Lawful Witness (in this
sense) is not Evidence, as was remarkably Adjudg'd in the Case of Mr.
Dangerfield. And if the Debauched Practices of a Witness will destroy his
Evidence, for the supposition that he dare be perjured, though he is also
supposed to know it to be a Sin, What Influence will debauched Principles,
which make Perjury a Duty, have to take away the Credit of a Witness? If the
Oaths of Swearers were sufficient to rule the Conscienees of Twelve men,
without any consideration of the Persons, or their Principles, or the matter
Sworn; how little are we beholding to that Clause of Magna Charta, which
confirms the ancient Law of Trials by Jurors? It is a wonderful grace in a
Protestant Kingdom, that the Romanists, who own Allegiance to a Foreign Power,
are permitted to enjoy Liberam Legem; and while such undeserved Favor is
continued, they cannot be Excluded from Swearing, or Challenged to be Witnesses;
but still it is left to the Jury to value their Testimony; And (especially in
this case of concern to Holy Mother Church) they are, as in Cases of Alliance,
Relation, and parties in Interest, to be Sworn indeed; but their Credit left to
those of the Jury, which in Civil Causes may be considerable; but where the
Catholic Cause is concerned, cannot be so.

X.
BUT what is it which these Fellows would Swear upon the World? A Plot! a Plot
of Protestants against themselves! and (the only security they have under God)
the Life of their Prince! A Sham so often discovered, and so generally known,
that by attempting to Retrieve it, they demonstrate their matchless Impudence,
and the desperate condition of their Cause. Mr. Dangerfield (how honest soever
he be grown) is not yet arrived to such perfection, as to pretend a Prophetic
Spirit; yet his particular Narrative will well serve for a History of the
Presbyterian-Plot. The Paper-Designs indeed were ruined by the Meal-Tub, his
and Fitz-Harris's Business; and there was no hiding Treason in Presbyterian
Houses or Pockets; but Downright Swearing will serve as well; and the 500 l.
which Dangerfield had merited by one Stab, will go a good way in Irish Oaths.
You must know, Sir, these watchful Loyalists spied Treason just peeping out of
Presbyterian mouths, and sink down again into their hearts! And if Oaths will
do, they will have it out Blood and all. But we in the Country can never
believe that His Majesty (who was pleased to declare in Council, that he gave
no credit to Dangerfield's private pretended Discovery, because the business
was impossible, can incline His Royal Heart to believe the same Sham on such
paltry Testimony; or that the Army listed in the Meal-tub, can ever attempt
much on his Person; but rather, that the whole business is a Story contrived,
and consented to, and carried on in general by the Popish Party, and intended
for a Mask, hoping that whilst the King, if His Majesty should believe it, was
preparing for the Safety of His Sacred Person, against the pretended Conspiracy
of the Presbyterian Party, they might have the more time to move on with their
own Plot, which was still to possess the King with the real belief of the said
Sham-Plot. See Dangerfields Narrat. p. 34.

XI.
NOR is it sufficient to Apologize for these Witnesses, That possibly they
profess themselves Protestants; considering how easy it is for a Romanist to
take a new Epithete according to the nature of his design. Therefore what
Profession he was of when his Thoughts were free and undisturbed with the
Temptations of Honor and Wealth, must be the Rule of Judgment, especially when
his Actions are still apparently calculated for the Interest of the Religion,
which he pretends to have abandoned, and against that which he would be thought
to have embraced. And though the small Remains of Humanity, which
Antichristianism leaves, improved by the probability of Advantage, might
provoke them to discover the Irish Treasons; yet when the hopes of the Reward
vanishes, and the Traitors seem to have weathered the point, and have Reason to
promise themselves Success, what can be more natural than to accept of
Reconciliation to the prevailing Party on Terms of such extraordinary Advantage
both to the Cause and themselves? 'Twas no slight Argument of the Lords of the
Philistines to dissuade Achish from accepting David's Service, Wherewith shall
he reconcile himself to his Master, but with the heads of these men? And the
same Argument cannot be inconsiderable in our case to any man of tolerable
understanding. And truly these men's Circumstances duly considered, though they
were persons otherwise of some Credit; their Testimony in this Case seems very
unhappy: For either there is a Popish Plot or no: If there be, the design of
the casting the odium of it on the Prsbyterians, evidently appears (in the
business of Claypole and the Discoveries before mentioned) to have been from
the most labored Scene of that horrid Tragedy; and then for a Protestant to be
credulous of such a forged design, is little less than Self-Murder. But if
there be no Popish Plot, these persons are already perjured; and consequently
their Evidence wholly insufficient.

XII.
BUT there is a Corner of the World near Oxford, where, as if the University
did not only Monopolize the Learning, but the very Sense of the County too,
there are (they say) Twelve men to be found, who notwithstanding all this, are
ready to show their implicit Faith, That they have lately approved themselves
fit for this (pretended Loyal) Service, without all Contradiction, in a very
remarkable manner; For some Persons in that County being lately presented for
Conventiclers, and the Evidence proving only an Assembly of four beside the
Family; the Jury was directed, That according to the very Letter and sense of
the Statute, they could not find the Persons guilty; yet such was the Zeal of
these blessed Jurors (you must believe) for the Protestant Religion established
by Law, That notwithstanding the Mathematical Demonstration, That 4 are not 5
or more, they could do no less than find them Guilty.

BUT Sir, in what I have said, I would not be understood to excuse Treason in
men of my own Religion. I should abhor my very being, should my Soul be
contaminated with the least spot of Treason against my Sovereign; and nothing
is more seriously my desire, than that all Persons who are guilty, may be
brought to condign punishment; neither will I affirm, That it is impossible for
a man zealous for the Protestant Religion, to be betrayed into Treason by his
Passions, though I am sure he can never be so by his Principles. And if any such
person suffer for it, there is no Reason that Protestants should be reproacht on
that account. But this general Design of Protestants so much talked of, if it be
imposed on the belief of English men upon no better grounds than I have yet
heard, ENTER ROME TRIUMPHANT, I^paean to the Whore of Babylon; we are fit to
pay Peter Pence once more; When we begin to deny Mathematical Demonstration,
and to believe a Presbyterian Plot on Popish Evidence, we are just molded to
receive the impression of all absurdities, even the Popes Infallibility and
Transubstantiation it self.

Yours Philanglus.
August 1st. 1681.
LONDON: Prined for William Inghall the Eld. Book-binder. 1681.


