Advice to Freeholders and other Electors of Members to serve in PARLIAMENT* In
Relation to the PENAL LAWS and the TESTS.
In a Letter to a Friend in the Country.
With Allowance.
SIR.
IT having pleased the King, to emit a gracious Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, and it being more than probable, that the matter thereof, may be
the Subject of the next Parliament; I do here present you (my old Friend) with
some of the Motives, inclining me to exert my self to my Ability, when called
to it (whatsoever Opposition or Censure, may therein attend me) for the
Election of such Members as may concur with his Majesty, in giving Sanction to
this Indulgence (it being what we have long wanted, and wished for) and in
securing it to after Ages, which is as undoubtedly the King's Royal Purpose, as
it is our common Interest; my Reasons are.

1. That herein I shall be found to act in consistency with my constant
Principle, for I always esteemed it, to be a glorious Work, to set Conscience
free from Church-Tyranny, and to extricate the Nation from the intolerable
Burden of destructive Penal Laws.

2. That in the present Undertaking; I see my Security, we have in this happy
Juncture, the Advantage of promoting what we highly prize, and that with his
Majesty's Royal Recommendation; so we are safe (whosoever snarles) in
conforming, to so great, so good, and so wise a Resolution, as the King has
propitiously taken. And moreover,

3. Gratitude to his Majesty for this Declaration, and for his gracious
Proclamation of Pardon of the 10th, of March 1685, engages and spurs me (as I
hope it will do Multitudes) to promote with my utmost Might, this present Work,
as it is a thing acceptable to the King.

To add no more, these Reasons are prevalent with me, and if they may dispose
you to contribute to the making proper Elections, so that his Majesty's
gracious Purpose, for the Relief and Tranquillity of his People, may not be
frustrated, by unreasonable Malcontents, it will be most grateful to me; for I
know you to be very capable, of contributing significantly to this public Good.

I perceive that some of your Neighbors are beating their Brains for
Arguments, to justify the upholding the persecuting Laws, and the
discriminating, and most unreasonable Tests: With me it is out of Question,
that those Men, are very narrow soul'd, and their Maxims ill grounded; pray
therefore bear with me, that I present you with my Thoughts, of the great Point
now agitated, Liberty of Conscience, or Toleration.

I am well satisfied, of the Truth, and Stability of the following Positions,
and he that is so, must cease to Love Persecution.

1. Liberty of Conscience is consonant to the Gospel which no where
countenances Force and Compulsion.

2. To grant this Liberty, is the true Interest both of Prince and People, to
evince the Truth of these, let it be considered as to the first:

That Liberty of Conscience is consonant to the Gospel. It is a Gospel of
Peace, and not of Force and Fury: If so, it is most unbeseeming this Gospel, to
do things rashly and violently, for its Advancement, it is not to be so
propagated: Its Language is, he that believes shall be saved. And our blessed
Lord, and his Apostles (who had the command of all Power) to bring Men to this
Faith, used Instruction, Persuasion, and Reasoning, but never went about to
deal with Men's Consciences, by Violence; they used no Sword but that of the
Spirit, and left every Man to his own Light.

Error, as well as Truth, is seated in the Mind of Man, and we are without one
Instance since the Creation, where Compulsion ever wrought a Change in any ones
Principles, tho it has wrought on many, to deny or conceal their Opinions. The
Soul of Man is out of the reach of the Magistrates Sword, and therefore it is as
vain to pretend to direct what I shall believe, and to force in me a Faith of
any thing, as it is to attempt to bring the Angels under an outward secular
Power. Compulsion undoubtedly will dispose a Man to hate whatsoever is so
proposed, and not better evinced. To proceed,

2. That Liberty of Conscience is the Interest both of the King and his People,
this is well proved, by the invincible Reasons in his Majesty's gracious
Declaration, which are these.

1. The Glory of the King. 2. The Peoples Peace. 3. Union between the King and
his People. 4. The Unreasonableness of constraining Conscience, and forceing
People in matters of mere Religion. 5. The Mischiefs of Compulsion by spoiling
Trade, depopulating Countries, and discouraging Strangers. And lastly, the ill
Success which Force has had in Religious Matters, which shows the invincible
Difficulties which attend those Methods.

1. The Glory of the King. Will any Member of the Church of England (so famed
for Loyalty) repine at his Majesty's being truly Glorious? surely no; and has
not this his Act of Tenderness, added highly to his Glory? It undoubtedly has:
It secures not only common Homage of Obedience, and Subjection to his Majesty;
but with it, that more noble, of the Hearts and Affections, of a very great
multitude of his People, who are sober, serious, industrious, and also wealthy;
these by Persecution have been made heartless in themselves, and useless in a
very great Measure, to the King, and Kingdom: I say this Indulgence has
secured to the King the Hearts of his dissenting Subjects, who are brought to
depend upon him, and they will love him, who favors and protects them, and
has put them into a Posture, than which they can never hope for a better; and
seeing the Church of England cannot but love him, and be Loyal, he is without
Controversy become the most Glorious, because the greatest, and most beloved
Prince, that ever yet swayed the English Scepter.

2. The Peoples Peace. Do not we know by sad Experience, how greatly Coercion
in things relating to God and Conscience, has disturbed the Peace of Mankind,
and created terrible Concussions in these Kingdoms? What lamentable Divisions
and Animosities, have we beheld to spring from the Execution of the Penal Laws,
and how dismally sad have been their Effects? It is not reasonable to imagine
that Persecution should not disgust those who suffer; and By-slanders (tho
otherwise persuaded as to Religion) are dissatisfied, to behold their peaceable
honest dealing Neighbors, torn to pieces for Conscience sake, such are
disposed to pity the Sufferers, and to dislike the Severities wherewith they
are exercised.

3. Union between the King and his People. It is most evident that the
Disaffection, which not long since had overspread our Horizon, did spring from
the Severities of the Laws, and of their Execution. The happy Union between
Prince and People has been (if not broken) to a very great degree weakened, by
a mistaken Maxim, that but one part of his Majesty's Subjects (and that a much
lesser part, than some are willing they should be thought) deserved to live,
and to be protected: This too predominant Opinion, did manifestly narrow the
Interest of the King, by confining it to one Party; but blessed be God, and the
King, that we have out lived that fond Conceit, and that we see, that Liberty
of Conscience has united the Dissenters to his Majesty, and that he becomes
the common Father of all his People.

4. The Unreasonableness of constraining Conscience, and forcing People in
matters of mere Religion. Conscience is God's peculiar, and so out of Man's
Jurisdiction: Is it not then most unreasonable, to have it floating about at
the Will of humane Powers, and to oblige Christians to suffer or to fall in
with all Changes of Religion? It is unreasonable, because impossible, to compel
a Man to the Belief of any thing, out of the compass of his Knowledge; our Lord
left neither Precept nor President for such a Practice: Men under the Gospel
are first to be enlightened, and then to practice in Conformity thereto: The way
of dealing with Men by Violence, was in all Ages unsuccessful, therefore it is
more than time to explode it; and ad hominem, to give one irrefragible Argument
to our Church of England (which at this day, is, or would be the Persecutor of
her Brethren;) Is it not unreasonable, nay absurd, that that Church which in
its Doctrine allows Judicium discretionis, a liberty of judging for our selves,
and pretends not to Infallibility; should require me to change my Opinion, and
to be of hers, when I conceive my self to be in the right, and she has no
infallible Assurance that she is not in the wrong?

5. The Mischiefs of Compulsion, in spoiling Trade, depopulating the Country,
and discouraging Strangers, amongst the many mischievous Events which we have
seen, from the denial of Liberty of Conscience, that upon Trade is not the
least, nor to be last mentioned: Imposition in Religion damps men's
Undertakings, and has drove Multitudes into foreign Parts, and not a few to a
Retirement from their Trades, and Vocations, who would otherwise have been very
useful to the Commonwealth* Conscientious Men have a very sow Esteem of all
things, compared with their religious Liberty; who will lay out his Estate and
Trade freely, where the bare exercising his Religion, gives vile Informers a
Power to dispoil him of his Substance? Toleration in the united Netherlands,
has brought them from all parts of Europe, a Confluence of People, and by
consequence of Treasure, and Trade; wherefore their Policy, has heretofore, as
much approved our pressing a Uniformity here, as they now seem disturbed at our
Liberty of Conscience, it being that, which with so great Advantage they have
long monopolized. And Lastly, The ill Success which Force in Religious Matters
has always been attended with: Compulsion never attained the intended End, it
may, and has too often made Hypocrites, never sincere Converts. The earnest
desire of Liberty when refused, creates Discontents, which boil in the Breasts
of Men, and have too often broken out, to the endangering Governments; for
Persons of differing Sentiments in Religion will unite in an Opposition to the
Force about Religious Things, which renders every dissenting Party uneasy, so
that the Danger seems to lie in Persecution for Conscience sake, and not in the
having under one Government several Persuasions and Parties in Religion.

I shall now proceed to the Objections made against this Liberty of Conscience,
and the Repeal of the Penal Laws, by some very warm Clergy Men (for the Church
is not a little divided in this Point, and the best, possibly the greatest part
thereof, will be found not to approve Persecution.)

1. They say, their Opposition arises from a Dread of Popery. To answer these
Gentlemen, and dissipate their Fears.

1. Can the Church of England (Circumstances considered) possibly invent a
better Security than she has by his Majesty's Declaration? That first of all
Declares, that the King will protect and maintain Her, in the free Exercise of
her Religion, as, by Law established, and in the quiet and full Enjoyment of
all her Possessions without any Molestation or Disturbance whatsoever. What
would she further have? Will she call into question the Sincerity of his
Majesty's Promise? The King intends the Concurrence of a Parliament for the
establishing the Indulgence, and the abolishing the Tests and Penal Laws: It
will be then seasonable, for the Church of England to ask her further Security,
if she will pretend to stand in need thereof.

2. Let the Church consider that the King only takes from her the Power of
doing Mischief. She will not pretend to deny his Majesty Liberty of Conscience;
If she does not, can she expect by his Permission and Authority to cudgel her
fellow Subjects into a Communion which he does not approve, and that after he
has so solemnly declared his Royal Judgment to be against all Persecution for
Conscience sake? He intends not to deprive the Church of England of such Laws
as are defensive of her Religion and Possessions, but only to abrogate such
Statutes, as the Iniquity or short-sightedness of past Ages has armed her with
to annoy and offend her Neighbors; Laws wicked in themselves, and which she
has too long, very wickedly executed, and therefore very fit to be yielded up.

The Objectors fear of Popery, by the Repeal of the Penal Statutes, is not
easily to be comprehended; let the Papists, with all other the Kings Subjects,
be restored to what ought to be theirs, by the Laws of God, and let them have
their Birthrights, and we have them in the common Interest of the Nation. Such
who are in love with Persecution, may not think to make the Romanists uneasy,
in the Reign of the present King; let us then weigh it, whether it be not the
best Discretion, to secure them of Ease in the next Reign.

Another Objection brought for keeping up the Penal Laws is, That they for whom
Liberty is desired, are Factious, and that it will strengthen those who have
always been for a Commonwealth. Of what force this Objection is, will be seen,
if it be considered.

That Persecution foments Faction, but Liberty wins over the Malecontent, if
not, it lays him open, and will make every Body ready to be his Executioner.
Violence may have forced many to factious Practices, who were not, nor would
not choose be Factious, Oppression making the wise Man mad: Give Men Security in
their worshipping God, and you may soon distinguish between Conscience and
Faction. It has been well observed, that no Government is endangered by the
People it seeks to preserve: Did not the Church, by Rigor and Severity in time
past, drive many Dissenters from their Native Country, and force those who
remained, to shelter themselves under the Enemies of the Crown? I justify not
the Practice, nor can the Fact be denied: The King is at this Day, by his
transcendent Grace and Tenderness to Consciences become Master of the Hearts,
and by consequence of the Lives and Estates of his dissenting Subjects.

I shall in the next place take the liberty of offering some things to the
Consideration of all our Countrymen, both of such as are Members of the Church
of England, and of Dissenters.

1. The Gentlemen of the established Church may please to remember, that their
Church, when brought under, pleaded for Liberty, and thankfully accepted it
from the late Usurpers; surely then, they will, or ought to deport themselves
decently in this Juncture, to their lawful Sovereign (differing from them in
Religion) and not censure, or repine at his Resolution to make all his People
easy, when that same Clemency of the Kings, secures them in their Religion,
with the comfortable Addition of their large Possessions.

Let them consider their ancient Loyalty (interwoven with their Religion) and
approve themselves (against those, who begin to accuse them of turning upon the
Government) what they have always boasted, unalterably Loyal.

Shall the Fanatics with alacrity come into the King's Interest, and will the
Church of England appear sullen, sour and averse thereto? I am confident she
will not: To clear up my meaning herein, let me tell you, I take not the Clergy
to constitute the Church of England: No, not in conjunction with some cloudy,
morose and ambitious great Men, who seem at this Day to abet their Discontents,
but the People who join in her Communion, will be found to be the best, and by
far the greatest part of that Church.

The Ecclesiastics and some of their designing Adherents, are indeed angry,
and why? Because his Majesty resolves they shall not confound their Neighbors:
But did you ever observe a violent persecuting Minister, to enjoy the Hearts of
the People who lent him their Ears? You may remember, that in our late highly
contested Elections of Parliament Men, we saw in many parts of the Kingdom the
rigid, siery Parson abandoned his by Flock, and galloping to give his single
Voice, which was all that he and his Horse could bring in; the Parish certainly
falling in with the Side which he opposed, and why? Because detesting his
Spirit and Principles, they could not be disposed to esteem him a good Man for
whom their Minister voted. May this go for some sort of measure of the Churches
Interest? I think we cannot readily have a better, than that of the Freedom of
voting in Elections, how miserably then will that Interest be found to dwindle,
when the Clergy shall come stripped of the Advantage of compelling Men into it,
by making use of the Kings Name (to that they were formerly owing their Success
where they found it, and not to the Esteem they had with their own Members.) I
have heard some compute, that not above one 5th or 6th. part of the known World
is Christian: It will be found that his Majesty's Interest in his People,
vastly excels that of the Clergies, and that the Church of England in the Point
now discussed, Liberty of Conscience, will not be found to comprehend such a
part of the Nation, as the Christians make of the World.

Would our Militant Churchmen but put on Temper, and sequester so much Time,
as to weigh with calmness and deliberation, the Opinions of the most eminent
Divines of their Church, in the Point of Imposition, they would be found no
Friends to Persecution. Reverend Dr. Tailor, late Bishop of Down, thus
expressed himself for Liberty of Conscience, viz, I do earnestly contend, that
another Man's Opinion shall be no Rule to mine, and that my Opinion shall be no
Snare or Prejudice to my self. In another place that learned Man proceeds thus;
It is a part of Christian Religion, that the Liberty of Men's Consciences should
be preserved in all things, where God has not set a Limit. And further -- The
same Meekess and Charity should be preserved in propagating Christianity, which
was in its first Publication.

The Reverend and Learned Dr. Stillingfleet did once apprehend the Mischief of
Imposition, when he declared his Opinion to be, That Nonconformity to any
suspected Practice, required by any Church Governor, as the Condition of her
Communion, was lawful, if the thing so required, was judged unwarrantable by a
Man's own Conscience.

I have been told and doubt not the Truth thereof, that a late Reverend
Prelate, Dr. Brownrig (who lived to see the Restoration of his late Majesty,
and of the Church of England secured, though not actually accomplished) did upon
his Deathbed lament the imposing presecuting Spirit, which he foresaw would
return with the Church: And I think I have good ground to say, that at a late
Conference between a Bishop (whose Health is drank throughout the Kingdom) and
some of his Clergy of great note, a dignified Doctor of eminent Learning, and
candor of Spirit, did very freely declare, That he thought the Church was under
Gods Displeasure for her Severity to Dissenters, and that thereupon the Bishop
lamented that he ever had his Hand in that Work, and declared, that should he
be restored to Power, he would use it better than he had done: I wish all the
Clergymen then present and throughout the Kingdom, were so resolved, and would
show themselves for Peace, by throwing away their Weapons of War.

2. I propose to the Consideration of Dissenters, and that of every
Denomination, that as when a Town is on Fire every Man (without any great
Regard to what Intimacy or Distance has been amongst Neighbors) does his best
to extinguish the devouring Flames, so that they would with unanimity join in
this common Cause, of removing, and that for ever, the undistinguishing
Instruments of Mischief, the Penal Statutes: They do equally extend to all, and
may by turns reach every Dissenter. Has not the Church of England persisted to
exercise her Severities upon all Dissenters within her reach, even in the
present Reign? Are the Roman Catholics (tho sheltered by the Kings Religion)
willing to deliver other Dissenters with themselves from those destroying Laws,
and to secure them, from what has been of so terrifying an Aspect in Popery,
Persecution? And will they refuse to be unshakled? I cannot imagine they
should, especially when I observe amongst them such a universal Serenity since
his Majesty's Declaration. They owe their Ease to the Kings Princely Clemency,
he invites them out of Slavery; if they will, their Liberty may be established;
his Majesty is resolved to do that which the Church never would when she had
Power, nor can we think she would now, if it be true that she accosts the King
with heat against it: Let then all Dissenters see their common Interest, to
approach the King with Duty and Affection, and to evidence their Affection, by
closing with the happy Opportunity which now offers, of setting themselves free
by Law, seeing his Majesty calls them to it: But,

The Fanatics are told by Churchmen, That it is not now either seasonable or
safe (I doubt in their Opinion it never will) and they promise that they will
do the Work. Affliction is the best School, and I do hope the Fanatics have
learned therein better, than to be tampered withal, and decoyed into an
Opposition to his Majesty's so gracious Disposition: They know the King never
broke his Word, that the Church has, and that with them in this very Point of
Indulgence.

I appeal herein to the Memories of some Men of Note now living, who were of so
clear Credit, and so great Reputation in the House of Commons (tho Dissenters)
that without their Concurrence, an Address had not been obtained for the
recalling the late King's Declaration of Indulgence, which for the time made
the Kingdom happy; it must be acknowledged by these honest well meaning
Gentlemen, that they were wheedled and cheated of that Indulgence, by the fair
Promises and Caeresses of some, who are now also living, and attempting to play
that Game over again: I conclude therefore, with difference to their Qualities,
that they are not to be again trusted.

To provoke Dissenters to avoid the Rock, and gain a safe Harbor, I shall
remind them (though I would not have it remembered for Vengeance, but for
Prevention sake) what and how they have suffered by the Penal Laws, which some
so highly struggle to keep up. How many Families have we seen ruined, by the
vexation of Citations, and what quickly followed, Excommunications, in the
Courts Ecclesiastic: The Lawyers say that Excommunication is a Disability to
sue for Debts, and many honest Men have found that wicked Advantage made
thereof; I know the Name of a Clergyman, who to supply his Occasions, borrowed
Money of a Neighbor, a Dissenter, and to defraud him of the Money (instead of
Payment) pleaded that his Creditor stood excommunicate:
A more severe Step of those Courts was, the burying the Dissenter alive in a
Goal by a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, from which there was no Redemption,
but at the Price of his Conscience. Indeed where Men had money, and would farm
their Liberty (not of Conscience but) from Prison, I have seen the tender
hearted Gentlemen of Doctors Commons (since the Death of his late Majesty) for
Fifteen or Twenty Pound paid, half yearly, to respit the claping up of an
industrious man, and they have permitted him, till the next Rent Day, to work
for his Family.

That the Dissenters have been Tenants to under Sheriffs, Clerks of the Peace,
Town Clerks, Apparitors, Bailiffs, etc. Is too well known
throughout the Kingdom, the first came but twice a year, the others quarterly
or monthly. If these Devourers left any thing, the Informer followed, and very
often swept all, and sometimes stocked a Justices House or Farm with Beds,
Horses, Cowes, or what else the Gentleman wanted, and that at very reasonable
Rates.

Are there not also, to make the Dissenter completely miserable, Imprisoning,
Banishing, murdering Laws? To them, what can the Invention of Cruelty it self
add? Have we not, with regret beheld the Execution of these Laws? It may
possibly be said that none have been hanged for Nonconformity, if so, we may
say, thanks to the Kings Mercy, for restraining the Churches foolish Rage, but
it is not a small number both of Ministers and others, whose Lives have been
destroyed by lingering pining Deaths in noisome Goals and Dungeons.

Nay the rigorous Execution of these too rigid Laws, did not suffice, we have
known many Informers swear by guess, and very fasly, and the Perjured protected
and rewarded, of which take an Instance: An Informer (by Trade a Tinker) having
manifestly perjured himself in swearing against an honest Gentleman upon the
Conventicle Act, and being indicted for the Perjury, the Prosecutor was hurried
by the procurement of the Informers Patron, into no less Prison than the Tower
of London, and there closely detained: The Villain was rewarded with a place
worth Twenty Pound per Annum,
and still enjoys it. But why should I argue with Dissenters from particular
Instances, to make them out of Love with their Shackles, when it is evident the
whole Kingdom groans under, and would gladly throw off the Burden of these
oppressive bloody Laws.

I shall therefore take my Leave of the Dissenters with the Story of the Jews
in good Nehemiah's time. He being informed of the very deplorable Case, of
those who were left of the Captivity, made an Address to the King, representing
the sad State of Jerusalem, and petitioned for Leave to rebuild it: The King
(who was the great Artaxerxes) gave a gracious Answer, and not only permitted
it, but contributed to the Work; and Nehemiah (to the Grief of Courtiers) went
cheerfully about it. Sanballat and Tobiah, (men of great Power under the King)
appeared grieved that there was come a man to seek the Welfare of Israel;
however Nehemiah invited the Jews to build the Wall, and they came unanimously
and cheerfully into the Work.

Sanballat and Tobiah having drawn into their Faction, Geshem an Arabian,
laughed the Jews to Scorn, and termed the Work Rebellion against the King.
Nehemiah, knowing that God would prosper him, (mangre Opposition) proceeded to
build, and all the People assisted, but the Nobles contributed not to the Work
of the Lord, but held Correspondance with the Enemy Tobiah,
and betrayed to him Nehemiah's Counsels.

Sanballat and Tobiah, that they might obstruct the Work, resolved to fight the
Jews: In this great Distress God fought for them, and brought the Enemies
Counsel to naught, and the Jews made up the Breaches in the Wall: Then
Sanballat and his Confederates, betook themselves to Flattery and
Dissimulation, and invited Nehemiah again and again to a Conference, but he
declines the Invitation, answering, that he was doing a great Work, and would
not leave it. Thereupon Sanballat (still pretending Friendship) informed
Nehemiah by Letter, That the Heathen reported, and Geshem said it, that he and
the Jews thought to rebel, and to make Nehemiah King, and that this would be
told the
King, and therefore Sanballat offered to Counsel him how to obviate this
heinous Charge. But Nehemiah (seeing the Snake in the Grass) refused to take
Counsel of him, and answered Sanballat, that no such things were doing, and
that he feigned the Accusation out of his own Heart: Then these Men of
Mischief, hire false Prophets to Prophesy Nehemiah's Death, in case he did not
withdraw: This Plot also failed; Nehemiah saying, should such a Man as I flee:
So persisting, the Wall was finished, to the Enemies Confusion, who perceived
at length, that the Work was of God.

I have made the History too long, the Application shall be shorter. Has God
put it into the King's Heart to pity them, who are left of the Captivity, such
whom Penal Laws have not destroyed? Let us return
due Thanks to God and the King.

Are there Sanballats, Tobiah's, and Geshem's, who vex themselves that there is
come a Man to seek the Welfare of all his Israel? Do they in Confederacy with
the Arabians, and false Prophets, and with Tobiah's Correspondents undermine
and discourage the great Work of delivering Conscience from the pernicious
Penal Laws? Let us with Heart and Hand unite therein, and not be seduced by
Flattery or Threats, to leave this glorious Work half done: Do the Heathen
report, and Gesham say, or does false Sanballat so pretend, that we are
overturning the Government, and introducing a Commonwealth? Let us deport our
selves with such Duty and Affection to the King, that his Majesty, and his
Successors
also, may tell Sanballat, That no such things, as he suggested, were doing by
the Kings peaceable dissenting Subjects, but that the Accusation was a Fiction
of his own wicked Brain; and when this blessed Work shall be finished, may the
Enemies thereof be cast down in their own Eyes, perceiving that this Work was
wrought of our God; I am, what I always was, and therefore most certainly,

Yours POSTS^^IPT.
I would beseech the Church of E^^land to yield to Christ, his own Throne in
the Kingdom of God, and to Magistrates their Thrones in the Kingdoms of the
World; the whole inward Man is under Christ's Power, and the whole outward Man
is under the Magistrates; if so, the inward and outward Man being disposed of
before, what room is there left for Ecclesiastical Power? The Clergy indeed
have long pretended to lift up the Magistrate to the Throne of Christ over
Conscience, not that they would have him sit there, but place them upon it, and
we have seen the Power Ecclesiastic, interweaving it self with the Power of
Princes, that their Power which was not of God; might be supported by the Power
which was of God: But it may be worth Consideration whether they do not exalt
themselves in Christ's stead in the Church, and set under their Feet the
Magistrates Power in the World; and whether they are Friends to Magistracy,
further than it is serviceable to their Ends, who is it that discerns them not
at this Day, venting their Discontents against the King in Pamphlets and
Discourses, and in spreading very false News (in which, with too great Boldness
they take their full swing) and why? Because he will not do all that they would
have him do, and restrains their Power in Religious Things. And when they mind
his Majesty of the Services they have done him, do they not do it, in such a
manner, as hints what they can do against him, as well as for him, if he will
not serve their Designs? But these Gentlemen demand, Would you have no Laws:
Yes, but no other in God's Kingdom, but his own Laws, those only being proper,
and adequate, and therefore a Thousand times better than all the Laws of Men,
which never acquired any other sort of Proselytes, than such as the young Man
in the Story in Frithe's Answer to the Bishop of Rochester; which is this; A
young Man having beheld his Fathers Martyrdom; the Officers (laying hold of
him, and of that Opportunity to work his Conversion) examined him of his Faith;
the Youth dismayed, and fearing his Father's Fate, answered, Gentlemen, I
believe even as it pleases you. Our Church has of late Years (by breathing
out Threatenings, Punishments, Imprisonments, etc.) made too many such Converts.

Once more adieu.


London, Printed, and sold, by Andrew Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch, and at the Three Keys, in Nags Head Court, in
Grace Church Street, overagainst the Conduit, 1687.


