THE Converted Friar, Or a DEFIANCE to the Church of Rome, As it was acted in
the Pallace-Yard at Westminster on Saturday the 8th. of this instant March 1672.

By one of her late Sons an Eminent CAPUCHIN, Who being happily Converted to
the PROTESTANT RELIGION; Did then, and there publicly Burn his Beads,
Crucifixes, Agnus Dei's, Rosary, Mass Book, Cowl, Habit, and other Popish
Knacks, in Detestation of their ridiculous Idolatries.

Rev. 17.16. And they shall hate the Whore, and make her Desolate and Naked,
and burn her with Fire. Published for general Information, by W.P. Philoprotest.

London, Printed for H. B. Anno 1673.

THE CONVERTED FRIAR; Or a Defiance to the Church of Rome, As it was acted by
an Eminent CAPUCHIN, Who being happily Converted to the Protestant Religion,
etc.
THough it is sufficiently notorious, That never any Cause was more Deplum'd and
rendered contemptibly weak, and deservedly Triumphed over than that of the Romish
Faction has been by a Glorious throng of our worthy Divines, whose matchless
Labors, both in the former and present Age, have beyond all possibility of
reasonably Reply, bafled the subtlest of their Adversaries in all the material
Tenets wherein they under pretense of Antiquity have Innovated from the pure
Apostolic Doctrine, and are become equally Repugnant to us and the Primitive
times; yet so gross a Cloud of Ignorance or obstinacy, does generally possess
the Heads and Hearts of that Party, That they will still resolutely continue
rather what they are, than what they should be: And sooner hazard themselves
through an Ocean of Error in their old Leaky Bark, than bring it into the Dock
to be Carreen'd and New Rigged, according to the Original Pattern in the Mount,
As if with the foolish Islanders, mentioned in History; They thought it Impiety
to sweep a Room after it has contracted the dust of three Generations:

Indeed though Admiration be the usual daughter of Folly, yet a Wiseman may be
allowed to wonder; How a Religion that has so little to recommend it to serious
Spirits, or Spiritual minds, whose Idolatries are the coursest spun, whose
practices have been no nauseous and scandalous, and their Cruelties so
unparalled, that none can blanch them but such as have taken an equal Dose of
Interest and Impudence. How I say under all this disadvantages, it should still
keep footing in the World in this quick-sighted Age, or find entertainment
amongst Persons endued with any Competency of understanding.

Yet to deal freely, It requires more time than depth to unfold this Mystery;
whereof because we would not be prodigal, (but hasten to the intended
Narrative) The Reader is only desired at his leisure to consider the ensuing
Particulars.

The willfulness of that Ignorance that boasts it self Mother of Devotion. The
Glorious Tytles wherewith they Celebrate their Church, and Bugbear names with
which they Brand all others. The Locking up the Scriptures in unknown
Languages; The Bait of Preferment. The Pomp of their outward Ceremonies, The
cunning Accommodation of Principles to the Humors and vicious Inclinations of
Men, to evident in the points of Indulgences, Absolutions, Purgatory, etc. The
Reverence kept up for their Priests. The various subtleties of the Learned
Jesuits, and the very much affecting (though misguided) Sanctity and mortifying
Austerities of some other Orders.

All these will be found main props to uphold this tottering Kingdom of
Darkness.

Out of which it yet sometimes pleases Almighty God (maugre all the Bird-lime
of Satan) wonderfully to draw some particular Persons; as in that Remarkable
Instance which gives Birth to all this, (perhaps too tedious, yet we hope not
altogether Impertinent Discourse.)

A Capuchin Friar, (whether Portugueze or Irish by Birth, our Information
cannot assure us, and we would not impose on the Reader in so serious a
Relation, the least jot of Fancy.

Certain it is he was educated from his infancy in the Romish Faith beyond the
Seas, and being of a grave well disposed pious temper, when he grew up to the
more advanced years of Discretion, he resolved to enter into Religion, (as they
call it) that is to turn Monk, as the nearest and speediest Cut to Heaven; but
then surveying the several allureing Orders (wherewith that Church well
Emblem'd by a Serpents spotted Skin, is variously speckled.) He could not think
any of them strict enough for his Devotion, but that of the most severe and
self mortifying Capuchin.

In that rigid Society he Lists himself, and with much Zeal and a great deal of
applause continued amongst them several years, and though the active Disloyal
Loyallists or Fraternity of Jesus (As they Impiously enough style themselves)
do generally arrogate the glory of all Learning, and strive to persuade the
World that all the other orders are but mere Sotts and Ignoramousses, fit only
with their yiedling Asses-Backs to bear or undertake what ever desperate Load
or design the Politic Conclave shall think fit to Impose on them, whom they
hold fast shakled to the Holy See by a vow of blind obedience, as well as
voluntary Poverty, yet we know that there want not amongst both the Dominicans
and Franciscans Persons excellently accomplished, with all kind of Literature,
And such was our Capuchin, well styled in Language, in Philosophy, and in
Divinity too, As their stinted Students would permit, in which respect he was
thought not unfitly qualified to be sent into England to officiate and promote
the Catholic Religion?

Being here somewhat remor'd from the continual Inspection of his rigid
Superiors wary Eye, he took the boldness to gratify his Curiosity a little in
perusing the Holy Scriptures, and meetting there St. Paul's Try all things,
assumed that desperate Liberty to read the writtings of several of our ablest
Divines concerning Points in Controversy, Like a noble Berean he compares our
proof with the Rhomiss Arguments, and both, with the unerring Rule of Gods Word.

He no sooner had waded into this Examination, but a strange Tempest arises in
his Soul, He finds by that sacred Balance a sad Mean Tekel inscribed on most of
Romes Doctrines, and perceives those gaudy ornaments wherewith she is wont to
trick up her self to allure unwary spectators, are only meritricious paintings,
or usurped Embelishment, and begins to be ashamed of these darling Popperies,
which before he esteemed his Glory.

These seeds of his Conversion a further and deliberate Reading, and some
Converse with some of our Orthodox Divines in short time Ripened to a Joyful
Harvest, when he openly Professed his Concurrence in all things with the Church
of England, and his desires to be admitted and received into her Embraces and
Communion.

But further and more signally to Testify by some vert Art, his total denial of
the Romish opinions, and Renunciation of these Orders he had received from
thence, His Zeal prompts him to a very remarkable performance, For, behold! on
Satuaday last being the Eighth of this Instant March; he freely of his own
Accord repairs into the Pallace-Yard at Westminster, about 4. or 5. a Clock in
the afternoon, and there having sent for some Fagots, and procured Fire, he
took his Beads, a Crucifix, some Popish Mass Book his Cowls and the whole Habit
of his Order, and there very reverendly Burnt them in the presence of a
numerous Crowd, whom he desired to take notice, That he did that unexpected
Action, to witness to them and the world his sorrow for and detestation of
those Errors and ridiculous Vanities of the Church of Rome, wherein he had been
hitherto brought up and with formerly he had a great value for; But that he did
now absolutely renounce that Church, and would heartily subscribe in all things
with the Doctrine and Discipline of the Established Church of England?

After which public declaration of his mind in terms very sober and
significant he departed seeming very well satisfied with his rare Burnt
offering.

It Is not to be doubted, but the Romish Emissaries (who have ever been known
for the most dexterous Contrivers, and exactest Masters of Calumny) will have a
Flood of slanders to vimit forth after this Poor Man, sometimes perhaps that
will suggest, that he is a Cheat, was never a Catholic never in Orders etc.
but when that is proved beyond the Impudence of a Jesuits denial, they will
next insinuate, that he was Frantic, distempered in mind, has been a long time
distracted, but we are well acquainted with those little Arts of Rome: remember
the same aspersions on Luther and Calvin, and know of whom it was said of old,
He saw a Devil and is mad; As there are enough credible Gentlemen in Town that
knowing this person beyond the Seas, can Evidence his being a real Capuchin, so
his free rational discourses to all whose Curiosity leads them to visit him
sufficiently dispels that pitiful objection of his distraction.

We shall therefore say no more, but conclude with hearty wishes, That the
Conversion and Zeal of this quondam Friar, may invite others of those poor
enslaved Orders, to examine their Condition and inquire after Truth, and (...)
last to find it, and therein Rest to their Souls.

And also, That it may confirm and establish all weak and doubting Heads
amongst us, in the verity of the Protestant Religion, which they hence may
observe carries with it so much Power and Luster, As the very Champions of its
Adversaries Troops are not able to resist it.

FINIS.

