Good Advice TO THE Church of England, Roman Catholic, and Protestant
Dissenter. In which it is endeavored to be made appear that it is their Duty,
Principles and Interest To abolish the Penal Laws and Tests.

Beati Pacifici. Licenced June the 30th 1687.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold, by Andrew Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch, and at the Three Keys in Nags-Head-Court in
Grace Church Street, over against the Conduit, 1687.

THE PREFACF.
Reader,
NO matter who, but what; and yet if thou would know the Author, he is an
Englishman, and therefore obliged to this Country, and the Laws that made him
Free.

That single Consideration were enough to command this Undertaking; for it is to
persuade his Country Men to be delivered of the greatest Yoke a Nation can well
Suffer under; Penal Laws for Religion, I mean. And now thou have, both the who,
and what; If thou art Wise and Good, thou art above my Epethites, and more my
Flatteries; If not, I am in the Right to let 'um alone. Read, Think and Judge.
Liberty, English and Christian, is all that is sought in the ensuing Discourse.

Adieu.
Good Advice, etc.
PART I.
I Must own, it is my Aversion at this time, to meddle with Public Matters,
and yet my Duty to the Public will not let me be Silent. They that move by
Principles must not regard Times nor Factions, but what is just, and what is
honorable; and that no Man ought to Scruple, nor no Time nor Interest to
Contest.

The single Question I go upon, and which does immediately concern and exercise
the Minds of the Thinking, as well as Talking Men of this Kingdom, is, whether
it be fit to repeal the Penal Laws and Tests, in matters of Religion, or not. I
take the Affirmative of the Question, and humbly submit my Reasons to every
reasonable Conscience. I say reasonable, because That which knows not its own
Duty, Principles and Interest, is not so, and That which is not willing to do
to others as it would be done by, less deserves to be thought so.

Now there are three sorts of People that will find themselves concerned in
this Question; The Church of England, the Roman Catholic, and the Protestant
Dissenter, and these make up the whole Body of the Kingdom; If it appear to be
their Duty, Principles and Interest, the Question is gained, and no body is
left to complain; and if I am mistaken, it is with so great an inclination to
serve them all, that their good nature cannot but plead my Excuse, especially
when they consider I am neither moved by Hopes nor Fears. Private Loss or Gain
being farther from my thought, then I hope they are from a good Understanding.

I say, first, then it is the Duty of all of them, because they all profess
that Religion which makes it their common duty to do it; Christianity, I mean:
For no Christian ought to deprive any man of his native Right for matters of
Faith and Worship toward God, in the way that he thinks most agreeable to the
Will of God; because it is necessary to a Christian to believe that Faith is
the Gift of God alone, and that He only is Lord of Conscience, and is able
truly to enlighten, persuade, and establish it; and consequently that
prejudicing Men in their Persons or Estates, or depriving them of any Station
in the Government, they might otherwise, in their turn, be capable to serve the
Public in, is contrary to the tenderness and equity of that Religion; which
will yet further appear, if we consider that Christianity is the sole Religion
of the World, that is built on the Principles of Love; which brought with it
the greatest Evidences of Truth. Equally convincing our Understandings with its
Light, and bearing down our Senses with its Miracles: Which silenced the
Oracles of the Heathens by the Divine Power present with it, and vanquished
their Hearts, that had left nothing else to conquer, leading Kings and Emperors
with their Courts and Armies in triumph after the despised Cross of him, who
was the holy and blessed Author of it.

It was he that laid not his Religion in worldly Empire, nor used the Methods
of worldly Princes to propagate it; as it came from Heaven, so that only should
have the Honor of protecting and promoting it. His whole business to mankind,
from first to last, was Love. 'Twas first Love in his Father to send him (as
St. John teaches) God so loved the World that he sent his Son, etc. It was love
in Jesus Christ to*come on that Arrand; that he, who thought it no Robbery to
be equal with God, should take the form of a Servant to adopt us Children, and
make himself of no Reputation with the World, that he might make us of
Reputation with God his Father.

And he did not only come in much Love, but preached it and pressed it both to
Friends and Foes; Love one another, Love Enemies, do good to them that hate
you, forgive them that trespass against you; what you would that other Men
should do unto you, do that unto them; by these things shall all Men know you
are my Disciples; for I came not to destroy Men's Lives, no, not for Religion it
self; for my Kingdom, Power, Force, Weapons, and Victory are not of this World.
In all this Love prevails. It was his great, his new, his last Commandment; of
all his Disciples, the most persued by his beloved One, that in his Bosom had
learned his Heart, as his Divine Doctrine of Love in his Epistle tells us.

As he lived in Love, so he died in Love, with us, and for us, and that while
we were rebellious too; ay, he prayed and died for them who put him to Death,
showing us (says St. Peter) an Example that we also should follow his Steps.
And what are they? doubtless the Steps of Love, the Path he trod: To do good to
Mankind, Enemies as well as Friends, that we may be like our heavenly Father,
that causes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall upon the Just and Unjust.
This must be the Apostles meaning, for the rest of his Passion was Inimitable.

Now if this be the Doctrine of Christ, the Nature of Christ^anity, the
Practice of the Primitive Church, that, like Adam, was Created in full
Strength, Beauty and Wisdom, and so an Example to succeeding Ages of Religion,
and to which we so often refer as our Original; with what Pretense to a
Christian Conscience can any one stickle to keep Imprisoning, Banishing,
Impoverishing, Hanging and Quartering Law^ on ^oot for Religion sake, but
especially against such as are by Creed professors of Christianity as well as
themselves.

I know the Case is put hard by those that have the Laws on their side, We do
this to save our selves; but an harder Case than Christ's can never be put,
whose Answer in his, ought to resolve theirs fully.

Christ is sent by his Father for the Salvation of the World: He introduces and
proves his Mission by Miracles, and the great Authority of his Word and
Doctrine; His Followers fully satisfied who he was, whence he came, what he
taught, and how eminently confirmed, grew impatient at Contradiction; they
could not bear the least Dissent; for when some of the Samaritans refused to
entertain their Lord, because they thought he was going for Jerusalem, the
place of their greatest aversion; these Disciples were for having but the Word
from his Mouth, and they would, in imitation of Elijah, have called for Fire
from Heaven to have destroyed them. But he turned and rebuked them, and said,
ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of, for the Son of Man is not come to
Destroy Men's Lives but to Save them. This Answer is to purpose, and for all
times, to be sure Christian ones; and the higher the Pretentions of any Party
are to Christianity, the more inexcusable if they practice the contrary, Would
not Christ then hurt them that refused him, and can we hurt our Neighbors for
not receiving us? He condemned that Spirit in his Disciples, and shall we
uphold the same Spirit, and that by Law too, which he condemned by his Gospel?
This is killing for Gods sake, expressly charged by Christ with Impiety. They
shall think, says he to his Disciples, they do God good service to kill you;
who should think so? why the Christian Persecutors. Is it their Property to do
so? yes, what shall one think then of those Christians that profess it.

The Jews were grievously punished of God, for that abomination of sacrificing
their Children to Moloch, but these (...) though they change the Object, they
have not lessened the Sin; for they offer up Man, Woman and Child, and tho they
say it is to God, no matter for that, since it makes their Case worse, for it is
to imagine that so good, so just, so sensible, so merciful a Being can take
pleasure in so much Cruelty. Well, but if we must not knock Folks on the Head,
what must we do with them? Take an Answer at the Mouth of Truth and Wisdom. Let
the Tears and Wheat grow together till the Harvest; what is that? he tells you,
it is the end of the World; so that whatever the Church of England is, it is
certain Christ is for a Toleration, and his Doctrine is always in Fashion; what
he was, he is, and will be; he went not by Reasons of State, or Customs of
Countries; his Judgment was better built, who came to give Law, and not to
receive it, and it is a Light and Rule to all times: And He that loves Father,
or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or House, or Land better than him, that is,
his Doctrine (of which this is so great a part) is not worthy of him; and I
fear no other Reason induces the Church of England to decline it.

To confirm what has been said, tho I design Brevity, let me not lose another
Passage very pregnant to our purpose; when his Disciples had accomplished their
first Mission, at their return they gave him the History of their Travels:
Among the rest, they tell him of one they met with, that in his Name cast out
Devils, but because he would not follow with them, they forbad him; here is at
least a Dissenting Christian, tho a Believer, yet it seems not one of that
closer Congregation; we also see their Zeal and Sentence. But what says the
Master, yet alive, and with them, the infallible Doctor, in whose Mouth was no
Guile, who had not the Spirit by measure, and was the great Wisdom of God to
his People, was he of the same mind, or did he leave them without rule in the
Point? His Answer is this. And Jesus said to them, forbid him not, for he that
is not against us is for us. The Prohibition is taken off, and their Judgment
reversed, and from his, to be sure, there lies no Appeal. For tho a Power of
Decision were allowed to some one or more on Earth, in matters obscure and
undetermined, yet in cases already adjudged by the Son of God himself, who had
the Chair, and could not Err, there can be no room for another Judge.

Now to apply it, I must first say, I find no such Disciples among those that
are of the side of keeping up the Penal Laws, God knows, the disparity is but
too unequal. But next, if they were all Twelve in Westminster Abbey, and should
be of the side of upholding the Penal Laws (which is the wrong side they were
of before) I should beg their Pardon, if I were of their Masters mind, and
objected his Wisdom to their Zeal, and his gentle Rule to their harsh and
narrow Judgment. And I beseech the Church of England to consider, that no
Pretense can excuse her Dissent, and less her cross Practice to the Judgment of
her Savior: A Judgment that seems given and settled for the Conduct of the
Church on the like Occasions in succeeding times. And it is pity any worldly
thing should have place with her to divert her Obedience. Did Christ then come
to save Men's Lives, and not to destroy them? and should she (she I say, that
pretends to be a reformed Church) uphold those Laws that do destroy them? He,
Alas! went to another Village instead of burning them, or theirs, for refusing
him: And she forbids any, that belongs to any other, to lodge in hers, upon
pain of loosing Life or Estate; This may make her a Samaritan indeed; but not
the good One, whose Example would have taught her, instead of these sharp and
ruder Remedies, to have poured the Oil of Peace and Gladness into those Chops
and Wounds that Time and Heats of all Hands had made in every Religious Party
of Men. Nor does she lose anything by repealing those Laws, but the Power of
Persecuting, and a good Church would never have the Temptation. Come some body
must begin to forgive, let her not leave that Honor to another, nor draw upon
her self the Guilt and Mischief of refusing it. She pretends to fear the
Strokes of the Romanists, but I would fain know of her, if following their
Example will convert them, or secure her? Does she hope to keep them out by the
Weapons that have failed in their Hands, or can she honorably censure
Persecution in them, and yet use it her self?

But she is extremely scandal'd and scared at the Severity upon Protestants in
France. It Is certainly very ill; but do not the Laws she is so fond of point at
the same Work, Conformity, or Ruin. And don't we know, that in some Places, and
upon some Parties her Magistrates have plowed as deep Furrows, especially
within these six and twenty Years* Husbands separated from their Wives, Parents
from their Children, the Widows Bed and the Orphans Milk made a Prize for
Religion, Houses stripped, Barns and Fields swept clean, Prisons crowded without
regard to Sex or Age, and some of both sorts Dungin'd to Death, and all for
Religion. If she says they were peevish Men, Biggots, or moved by private
Interest, she still made the Laws, and says no more for her self than the
French say for their King, which yet she refuses to take for an Answer. Perhaps
I could parralel some of the severest Passages in that Kingdom out of the
Actions of some Members of the Church of England in cool Blood, that are even
yet for continuing the Penal Laws upon their plundered Neighbors; so that this
Reflection of hers upon France, is more popular than just from her. But I
beseech her to look upon a Country four times bigger than France; Germany I
mean, and she will there see both Religions practiced with great Ease and
Amity, yet of this we must not hear one Word: I hope it is not for fear of
imitating it. However it is disingenious to object the Mischiefs of Popery to a
general Ease, when we see it is the way to prevent them. This is but in the
name of Popery to keep all to herself, as well from Protestant Dissenters, as
Roman Catholics. How Christian, how equal, how safe, that narrow Method is,
becomes her well to consider, and methinks she ought not to be long about it.

I know she flatters herself and others to believe, she is a Bulwork against
Popery; and with that, without any further Security to other Protestants, wipes
her Mouth of all old Scores, and makes her present Court for Assistance. But
when that word Bulwork is examined, I fear it appears too mean no more than
this, That she would keep out Popery for that reason for which she apprehends
Popery would turn her out, viz. Temporal Interest. But may I without Offense
ask her, when she kept Persecution out? Or if she keeps out Popery for any
bodies sake but her own? Nay, if it be not to hold the Power she has in her
hands, that she would frighten other Parties (now she has done her worst) with
what mischief Popery would do them when it has Power. But to speak freely, can
she be a Bulwork in the Case, that has been bringing the worst part of Popery
in these six and twenty Years, if Persecution be so as she says it is? This
would be called Canting to the World in others. But I hear she begins to see
her Fault, is heartily sorry for it, and promises to do so no more: And why may
not Popery be as wise, that has also burnt her Fingers with the same work?
Their praying for ease by Law looks as if they chose That rather than Power for
Security; and if so, why may not the Papists Live, as well as she Reign? I am
none of their Advocate, I am no Papist, but I would be just and merciful too.
However, I must tell her, that keeping the Laws on foot, by which she did the
mischief, is none of the plainest Evidences of her Repentance: They that can
believe it, have little reason to quarrel the unaccountableness of
Transubstantiation. Is it unjust in Popery to invade her Privileges, and can
it be just in her to provoke it, by denying a Christian Liberty? or can she
expect what she will not give? or not do as she would be done by, because she
fears others will not observe the same Rule to her? Is not this doing Evil that
Good may come of it, and that uncertain too, against an express Command as well
as common Charity? But to speak freely, whether we regard the Circumstances of
the King, the Relation of his Children, the inequality of the Number and
Strength of those of each of their Communions, we must conclude, that the
Aversion of the Church of England to this entreated Liberty, cannot reasonably
be thought to come from the Fear she has of the prevalency of Popery, but the
loss of that Power the Law gives her to domineer over all Dissenters. And is
not this a Rare Motive for a Christian Church to continue Penal Laws for
Religion? If her Piety be not able to maintain her upon equal terms, methinks
her having so much the whip hand and start of all others, should satisfy her
Ambition, and quiet her Fears; for it is possible for her to keep the Churches
if the Laws were abolished; all the difference is, she could not force: She
might persuade and convince what she could: And pray, is not that enough for a
true Church, without Goales, Whips, Halters and Gibbets? O what Corruption is
this that has prevailed over Men of such Pretensions to Light and Conscience?
that they do not, or will not, see nor feel their own Principles one remove
from themselves; but sacrifice the noblest part of the Reformation to Ambition,
and compel Men to truckle their tender Consciences to the Grandeur and Dominion
of their Doctors.

But because the Sons of the Church of England keep at this time, such a stir
in her favor, and fix her excellency in her opposition to Popery, it is worth
while to consider a little further, if really the most feared and disagreeable
part of Popery in her own opinion, does not belong to her, and if it does,
should we not be in a fine Condition, to be in Love with our Fetters, and to
Court our Misery?

That part of Popery which the Church of England with most success objects
against, is her Violence. This is that she can only pretend to fear: Her
Doctrines she partly Professes or thinks she can easily refute. She does not
think her Doctors Conjurers* for their Transubstantiation, or dangerous to the
State for their Beads, or their Purgatory. But forcing others to their Faith,
or ruining them for refusing it, is the terrible thing we are taught by her to
apprehend. Now granting this to be the case, in reference to the Roman
Religion, where it is in the Chair: I ask, if the Church of England, with her
better Doctrines, has not been Guilty of this Impiety, and for that cause more
blameable the the Church she opposes so much? If we look into her Acts of
State, we find them many, and bitter, against all sorts of Dissenters. There is
nigh twenty Laws made, and yet in force, to constrain Conformity, and they have
been executed too, as far and as often as she thought it fit for her Interest
to let them. Some have been Hanged, many Banished, more Imprisoned, and some to
Death; and abundance Impoverish't; and all this merely for Religion: Tho, by a
base and barbarous use of Words, it has been called Treason, Sedition, Routs
and Riots; the worst of aggravations, since they are not contented to make
People unhappy for their Dissent, but rob them of all they had left, their
Innocence. This has been her State Craft, to coin Guilt, and make men
dangerous, to have her ends upon them. But that way of Palliating Persecution,
by rendering a thing that it is not, and punishing men for Crimes they never
committed, show but little Conscience in the Projectors. The Church of England
cries out against Transubstantiation, because of the Invisibility of the Change.
She don't see Christ there, and therefore he is not there, and yet her Sons do
the same thing. For tho all the tokens of a Riot are as invisible in a
Dissenters Meeting, as Christ in the Transubstantiation, yet it must be a Riot
without any more to do: The English of which is, it is a Riot to pray to God in
the humblest and peaceablest manner in a Conventicle.

I know it is said, The Bloodshed in the foregoing Reign, and the Plots of
the Papists against Queen Elizabeth, drew those Laws from the Church of
England. But this was no reason why she should do ill because they had done so:
Besides, it may be answered, that that Religion having so long intermixed it
self with worldly Power, it gave way to take the revenges of it. And certainly
the great men of the Church of England endeavoring to intercept Queen Mary, by
proclaiming the Lady Jane Gray, and the Apprehension the Papists had of the
better Title of Mary Queen of Scots, together with a long Possession, were
scurvy Temptations to kindle ill Designs against that extraordinary Queen. But
tho nothing can excuse and less justify those cruel Proceedings; yet if there
were any reason for the Laws, it is plainly removed; for the Interests are
joined, and have been since King James the first came to the Crown. However,
it is certain there were Laws enough, or they might have had them, to punish all
civil Enormities, without the necessity of making any against them as Papists.
And so the civil Government had stood upon its own Legs, and Vices only against
it had been punishable by it. In short, it was the falsest Step that was made
in all that great Queens Reign, and the most dishonorable to the Principles of
the first Reformers, and therefore I know no better Reason why it should be
continued, than that which made the Cardinal in the History of the Council of
Trent oppose the Reformation at Rome; That tho it was true that they were in
the wrong, yet the admitting of it approved the judgment of their Enemies, and
so goodnight to Infallibility. Let not this be the Practice of the Church*of
England, and the rather, because she does not pretend to it: But let her
reflect, that she has lost her King from her Religion, and they that have got
him, naturally hope for ease for theirs by him, that it is the end they
labored, and the great use they have for him, and I would fain wonder that she
never saw it before; but whether she did or no, why should she begrudg it, at
least refuse it now? Since it is plain, that there is nothing we esteem
dangerous in Popery that other Laws are not sufficient to secure us from: Have
we not enough of them? let her think of more, and do the best she can to
discover Plotters, punish Traitors, suppress the Seditious, and keep the Peace
better than those we have can enable us to do: But, for Gods sake, let us never
direct Laws against Men for the cause of Religion, or punish them before they
have otherwise done amiss. Let Men's Works, not their Opinions, turn the Edg of
the Magistrates Sword against them, else it is Beheading them before they are
Born.

By the common Law of this Kingdom there must be some Real and Proper Overt Act
that proves Treason; some Malice that proves Sedition; and some violent Action
that proves a Rout or Riot. If so, to call any sort of Religious Orders, the
one, or Praying to God in a way out of fashion, the other, is prepostrous, and
punishing People for it, down right Murder, or Breach of the Peace, according
to the true use of Words, and the old Law of England.

If the Church of England fears the growth of Popery, let her be true to the
Religion she owns, and betake her self to Faith, rather than Force, by a pious,
humble, and a good Example: To convince and persuade, which is the highest
honor to any Church, and the greatest Victory over Men. I am for a National
Church as well as she, so it be by Consent, and not by Constraint. But Coercive
Churches have the same Principle, tho not the same Interest. A Church, by Law
established, is a State Church, and that is no Argument of Verity, unless the
State that makes her so be infallible; and because that will not be asserted,
the other can never oblige the Conscience, and consequently the Compulsion she
uses, is unreasonable. This very Principle justifies the King of France, and
the Inquisition. For Laws being equally of Force in all Countries where they
are made, it must be as much Fault in the Church of Englands Judgment to be a
Protestant at Rome, or a Calvanist at Paris, as to be a Papist at London: Then
where is Truth or Conscience but in the Laws of Countries! which renders her an
Hobbist, notwithstanding her long and loud Clamours against the Leviathan:

I beg her, for the love of Christ, that she would think of these things, and
not esteem me her Enemy for performing the part of so good a Friend. Plain
Dealing becomes that Caracter; no matter whether the Way be agreeable, so it be
right: We are all to do our Duty, and leave the rest to God: He can best answer
for our Obedience, that Commands it; and our Dependence upon his Word, will be
our Security in our Conduct. What weight is it to a Church, that she is the
Church by Law established, when no humane Law can make a true Church? A true
Church is of Christ's making, and is by Gospel established. It Is a Reflection to
a Church that would be thought true, to stoop to humane Law for her
Establishment. I have been often scandal'd at that Expression from the Sons of
the Church of England, especially those of the Robe, What do you talk for? our
Religion is by Law established, as if that determined the Question of its Truth
against all other Persuasions.

The Jews had this to say against our Savior, We have a Law, and by our Law he
ought to Dye. The Primitive Christians, and some of our first Reformers Dyed as
by Law established, if that would mend the matter; but does that make it lawful
to a Christian Conscience? we must ever demur to this Plea. No greater Argument
of a Churches Defection from Christianity than turning Persecutor. It Is true,
the Scripture says, The Earth shall help the Woman, but that was to save her
self, not to destroy others: For it is the Token that is given by the Holy Ghost
of a false Church; That none must Buy or Sell in her Dominions that will not
receive her Mark in their Forehead, or Right Hand. That is by going to Church
against Conscience, or bribing lustily to stay at Home.

Things don't change, tho men do. Persecution is still the same, let the hand
alter never so often; but the Sin may not: For doubtless it is greatest in
those that make the highest claim to Reformation. For while they plead their
own Light for doing so, they hereby endeavor to extinguish another Light that
cannot concur. What a Man cannot do, it is not his Fault he don't do, nor should
he be compelled to do it, and at least of all be punished for not doing it. No
Church can give Faith, and therefore cannot force it; for what is constrained is
not Believed; since Faith is in that sense free, and constraint gives no time
to assent; I say, what I don't will is not I, and what I don't Choose is none
of mine, and another cannot save me, tho it should save him. So that this
Method never obtains the end designed, since it Saves no body, because it
Converts no body; it may breed Hypocrisy, but that is quite another thing than
Salvation.

What then is the use of Penal Laws? only to show the Sincerity of them that
Suffer, and Cruelty of those that make and execute them. And all time tells us
they have ever failed those that have leaned upon them: They have always been
loosers at last: Besides, it is a most unaccountable obstinacy in the Church of
England to stickle to uphold them, for after having made it a matter of
Religion and Conscience to Address the late King in behalf of this, to think He
should leave his Conscience behind him in Flanders, or when they waited on him
to the Crown, that he should send it thither upon a Pilgrimage, is want of wit
at best, pardon the censure. Could they Conscientiously oppose his Exclusion
for his Religion, and now his Religion because he will not leave it? Or can
they reasonably maintain those Tests that were contrived to exclude him when
Duke of York, while they endured none to hinder him from the Crown? I heartily
beg the Church of Englands excuse, if I say I cannot comprehend her: Perhaps the
fault is mine, but sure I am she is extremely dark. How could she hope for this
King without his Conscience? or conceive that his Honor or Conscience would
let him leave the Members of his Communion under the lash of so many Destroying
Laws? would she be so served by a Prince of her own Religion, and she in the
like Circumstances? She would not, let her talk till Doomsday.

To object the Kings promise, when he came to the Crown, against the repeal of
the Penal Laws, shows not his Insincerity, but her Uncharitableness, or that
really she has a very weak place: For it is plain the King first declared his
own Religion, and then promised to maintain hers; but was that to be without,
or together with his own? His Words shows he intended that his own should Live,
tho the other might Reign. I say again, it is not credible that a Prince of any
Sincerity can refuse a being to his own Religion, when he continues another in
its well being. This were to act upon State not Conscience, and to make more
Conscience to uphold a Religion he cannot be of, than of giving ease to one his
Conscience obliges him to be of. I cannot imagine how this thought could enter
into any Head that had Brains, or Heart that had Honesty* And to say true, they
must be a sort of State Consciences, Consciences as by Law Established, that
can follow the Law against their Convictions.

But this is not all I have to observe from that objection: It implies too
evidently, first, that she thinks her self shaken, if the Penal Laws be
repealed; then by Law Established she must mean, Established by those Penal
Laws. Secondly, that the King having promised to maintain her, as by Law
established, he ought not to endeavor their Repeal by which she is
established. I confess this is very close arguing, but then she must not take
it ill, if all Men think her ill founded; for any thing must be so, that is
established by destroying Laws? Laws, that Time and Practice have declared
Enemies to Property and Conscience. O let her not hold by that Charter, nor
Point thither for her Establishment and Defense, if she would be thought a
Christian Church.

Plutarch had rather one should think there never was such a Man in the World,
than that Plutarch was an ill Man. Shall the Church of England, that glories in
a great Light, be more concerned for her Power, than her Credit? To be, than to
be that which she should be? I would say, far be it from her, for her own sake,
and which is of much more moment, for the sake of the general Cause of Religion.

Let us see therefore if there be not another way of understanding those Words,
more decent to the King, and more honorable for her, viz. that she is in the
National Chair, has the Churches and Revenues, and is Mother of those that do
not adhere to any separate Communion, and that the King has promised to
maintain her in this Post from the Invasions of any other persuasion that would
wrest these Privileges out of her hands: this he promised formerly; this he
has very particularly repeated in his gracious Declaration: But to Ruin Men
that would not Conform, while himself was so great a Dissenter, and came such,
to her knowledge, to the Crown, can be no part of his Promises in the Opinion
of common Sense and Charity. Is there no Difference to be observed between not
turning her out, and destroying all others not of her Communion: He will not
turn her out, there is his Promise, and he has not done there is his performance:
Nor will he do it, am confident, if she pleases. But there is no manner of
necessity from this Engagement that all Parties else are to be Confounded. Tho
if it were so, it is ill Divinity to pr^ss such Promises upon a Princes
Conscience, that cannot be performed with a good One by Any Body.

Let her remember how often she has upbraided her Dissenters with this, Render
to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, whilst they have returned upon her
the other half of the Text, and render unto God the things that are Gods. It
happens now that God and Caesar are both of a mind, which perhaps does not
always fall out, at least about the Point in hand. Will she Dissent from both
now? Her case, believe me, will be doubtful then. I beg her to be Considerate.
It Is the greatest time of Trial she has met with since she was a Church* To
acquit her self like a Member of Christ's Universal One let her keep nothing
that voids her pretentions. The Babilonish Garment will undo her. Practices
Inconsistant with her Reformation will ruin her. The Martyrs Blood Won the Day,
and her Severity has almost lost it. They Suffered by Law, she makes Laws for
Suffering. Is this an Immitation of their practice, to uphold the Weapons of
their Destruction? I must tell her, it is being a Martyr for Persecution, and
not by it. Another Path then that the holy Ancients, and our humble Ancestors
trod, and which wll lead her to be deserted and Contemned of every Body that
counts it safer to follow the Blessed Rule and practice of Christ and his
inspr'd Messengers, then her narrow and worldly Policies. But that which
heighthens the Reproach, is the offer of the Romanists themselves to make a
perpetual civil Peace with her, and that she refuses, Would the Martyrs have
done this? surely no. Let her remember the first Argument honest old Fox
advances against that Church, is the Church of Englands present Darling, viz.
Penal Laws for Religion; as she may see at the beginning of his first Volumn:
Doubtless he was much in the right, which makes her extremely in the wrong.
Nothing, says the Prophet, must harm in Gods holy Mountain, and that is the
Church says Fox, and therefore he says, Christ's Church never Persecutes.
Leave then God with his own Work, and Christ with his own Kingdom. As it is not
of the World, let not the World touch it; no, not to uphold it, tho they that
bear it should trip by the way. Remember Vzza, he would needs support the Ark
when the Oxen Stumbled; but was struck Dead for his Pains. The Presumption is
more than Parralel. Christ promised to be present with his Church to the end of
the World. He bid them fear not, and told them, that sufficient was the Day for
the Evil thereof. How? with Penal Laws? no such matter; but his Divine
Persence. Therefore it was, He called not for Legions to fight for him, because
his Work needed it not They that want them have an other sort of Work to do:
And it is too plain, that Empire, and not Religion, has been too much the
Business. But, O let it not be so any more! To be a True Church is better then
to be a National One; especially as so uphold. Press Virtue, Punish Vice,
Dispense with Opinion; Persuade, but don't Impose. Are there Tares in Opinion?
let them alone; you heard they are to grow with the Wheat till Harvest, that
is, the end of the World. Should they not be plucked up before? no; and it is
Angles Work at last too. Christ that knew all Men, saw no Hand on Earth fit for
that Business. Let us not then usurp their Office Besides, we are to Love
Enemies; this is the great Law of our Religion; by what Law then are we to
Persecute them? and if not Enemies, not Friends and Neighbors certainly.

The Apostle rejoiced that Christ was Preached out of Envy, If so, I am sure we
ought not to envy Christians the enjoyment of the Liberty of their Consciences.
Christianity should be propagated by the Spirit of Christianity, and not by
Violence or Persecution, for that is the Spirit of Antichristianity. Nor for
fear of it, should we, of Christians, become Antichristians. Where is Faith in
God? where is trust in Providence? let us do our Duty, and leave the rest with
Him; and not do Evil that Good may come of it; for that shows a Distrust in
God, and a Confidence in our own Inventions for security. No reason of State
can excuse our Disobedience to his Rule; and we desert the Principles of our
heavenly Master when we decline it. The Question is about Conscience, about
this we can none of us be too tender nor exemplary. It Is in right doing that
Christians can hope for Success; and for true Victory only through Faith and
Patience. But if to avoid what we fear, we contradict our Principles, we may
justly apprehend that God will desert us in an unlawful way of maintaining
them. Perhaps this may be Gods time of trying all Parties, what we will do;
whether we well rely upon him or our own feeble Provisions; whether we will
allow what we our selves in our turn have all of us desired; if not, may we not
expect to suffer the thing we would inflict? for our Penal Laws cannot secure
us from the turns of Providence, and less support us under them. Let us
consider the true ground of the difficulty that is made, if it be not partial
and light in Gods Scale; for to that trial all things must come, and his
Judgment is inevitable as well as infallible. Besides, if we have not tried all
other methods, we are inexcusable in being so tenacious for this. I do
therefore, in all humility, beseech all sorts of Professors of Christianity in
these Kingdoms, to abstract themselves from those Jealousies which worldly
motives are apt to kindle in their Minds, and with an even and undisturbed Soul
pursue their Christian Duty in this great Conjuncture: Considering the Race is
not to the Swife, nor the Battle to the Strong, and that for all our Watchmen,
it is God alone (at last) that keeps the City. Not that I would decline a
fitting, but an unchristian Provision: For though the Foundation were never so
true, yet if our Superstructure be Hay and Stuble (our own narrow Devices) the
Fire will consume it, and our Labor will be worse then in vain. Let us not
therefore Sow what we would not Reap, because we must Reap what we Sow: And
remember who told us, what we measure to others shall be meeted to us again.
Let us therefore do unto all Parties of men, as we would be done unto by them
in their tu^n of Power: Least our fear of their undutifulness, should tempt us
out of our Duty, and so draw upon our selves the mischiefs we are afraid of.
Sacred Writ is full of this, in the Doctrine of both Testaments; and as we
profess to believe it, we are inexcusable if we do not practice it. Let the
Spirit then of Christian Religion prevail. Let our Policies give way to our
Duty, and our Fears will be overcome of our Hopes, which will not make us
ashamed at the last and great Judgment: where, O God! let us all appear with
Comfort.

I could yet Enlarge upon this Subject; for nothing can be more fruitful. I
could say, that a Church that Denies Infallibility, cannot force, because she
cannot be certain, and so Penal Laws (tho it were possible that they could be
lawful in others) in her, would be Unjust. That Scripture leaves Men to
Conviction and Persuasion. That the true Chruch-Weapons are Light and Grace;
and her punishments, Censure and Excommunication. That Goals and Gibbets are
Inadiquated Methods for Conversion, and that they never succeeded. That this
forbids all further light to come into the World, and so limits the Holy One,
which in Scripture is made a great Sin. And lastly, that such ensnare their own
Posterity that may be of an other mind, and forfit by it the estates they have
so carefully transmitted to them. Thus far against Imposition. And against
Compliance* I could say, that its to betray Gods Sovereignty over Conscience;
To deify Men; Gratify presumption; foil and extinguish truth in the mind; obey
blindfold; make over the Soul without Security; turn Hipocrite, and abundance
more; each of which heads might well merit an whole chapter. But this having
been well and seasonably considered elsewhere, I shall now proceed to the
second part of this discourse in which I will be as brief, and yet as full as I
can.

PART II. That it is the Principle of Men of Note of all Parties.
BUT what need is there of this, may some say, when all Parties profess to be
of the same Judgment, That Conscience ought not to be forced, nor Religion
imposed upon men at their civil peril? I own they are all of that mind, at one
time or other, and therefore that I may purge my self of any Animosity to the
Doctrine of the Church of England, I will Ingeniously confess* the severe
conduct I have argued against, is not to be imputed to her Principles; but then
her Evil will be the greater, that in fact has so notoriously contradicted
them. I know some of her defenders will hardly allow that too; Tho the more
candid give us their Silence or Confession: For they tell us, it is not the
Church that has done it, which, unless they mean, the Laws were not made a
Church, must needs be false, since those that made and executed them were of
her own Communion, and are that great body of Members that constitute her a
Church; but by her shifting them off, it is but reasonable to conclude that she
tacitly condemns what she publicly disowns. One would think then it should not
be so hard to persuade her to quit them, in the way she made them, or to enjoin
her Sons to do it, if that language be to harsh for her. This Story she must
hear of some way, and I pray God she may endeavor to do her duty in it. She is
not alone; for every Party in Power has too evidently lapst into this Evil; tho
under the prevalency and persecution of another Interest they have ever writ
against club Law for Religion. And to the end that I may do the Reformation
Right, and the Principles of the Church of England, Justice, I must say, that
hardly one person of any note, dyed in the time of Queen Mary, that did not
pass Sentance upon Persecution as Antichristian, particularly Latimer, Philpot,
Bradford, Rogers, very Eminent Reformers. The Apologies that were writ in those
times, are of the same strain, as may be seen in Jewel, Haddon, Reynalds, etc.
and the Papists were with reason thought much in the wrong by those Primative
Protestants, for the Persecution that they raised against them, for matters of
pure Religion. But what need we go so far back? is it not recent in memory,
that Bishop Usher was Employed to O. Cromwell by some of the Clergy of the
Church of England for Liberty of Conscience? Dr Parr, in the Life of Dr Usher
Primate of Armagh, fol. 75. has that passage thus.

Cromwell forbidding the Clergy, under great penalties, to teach Schools, or to
perform any part of their ministerial function; some of the most Considerable
Episcopal Clergy in and about London, desired my Lord Primate that he would use
his Interest with Cromwell, (since they heard he pretended a great respect for
him) that as he granted Liberty of Conscience to almost all sorts of Religions,
so the Episcopal Divines might have the same freedom of serving God in their
private Congregations (since they were not premitted the public Churches)
according to the Liturgy of the Church of England; and that neither the
Ministers, nor Those that frequented That Service, might be any more hindered,
or disturbed by his Soldiers: So according to their desire, he went and used
his utmost Endeavors with Cromwell, for the taking off this restraint, which
was at last promised (tho with some difficulty) that they should not be
molested, provided they meddled not with any matters relating to his
Government.

Certainly those Gentlemen were of my mind. And to give Dr Hammond his due, who
I understand was one of them, he left it to the Witnesses of his end, as his
dying Counsel to the Church of England, That they displaced no man out of the
University or present Church, but that by Love, and an holy Life they should
prevail upon those in possession to come into their Church. But this looked so
littie like the Policy and Ambition of the Living, that they resolved it should
be Buried with him. This I had from an eminent Hand in Oxford, a year or two
after his Death. An older man out lived him, and one of the most Learned and
Pious of that Communion, Bishop Sand son I mean: They were the two great men
of their sort that was of the Party. Let us see what this Reverend man says to
our point.

The Word of God does expressly forbid us to subject our Consciences to the
Judgment of any other, or to usurp a Dominion over the Consciences of any One.
Several cases of Conscience discussed in ten Lectures in the Divinity School at
Oxford, 3 Lect. 30 Sect. page ^03. Printed 1660.

He is not worthy to be Christ's Disciple, who is not the Disciple of Christ
alone. The Simplicity and Sincerity of the Christian Faith, has suffered a
great prejudice since we have been divided into Parties, neither is their any
hope that Religion should be restored to her former Original and Purity, until
the Wounds that were made wider by our daily Quarrels and Dissentions, being
anointed with the Olye of Brotherly Love, as with a Balsom, shall begin to
close again, and to grow entire into the same Unity of Faith and Charity, ibid
Sect. 29.

The obligation of Conscience does not signify any Compulsion, for, to speak
properly, the Conscience can no more be compelled than the Free Will. ibid 4.
Lecture Sect. 5. page 109.

The express Commandment of God does oblige the Conscience properly by it self
and by its own force; and this obligation is absolute, because it does directly
and always oblige* and because it obliges all persons* and the obligation of
it is never to be cancelled. No^e but God alone has power to impose a Law upon
the Conscience of any Man, to which it ought to be subjected, as obliging by it
self, -- This Conclusion is proved by the words of the Apostle, There is but
one Lawgiver, who can both save and destroy, In which words two Arguments do
profer themselves to our Observation; In the first place they assert there is
but one Legislator; not one picked out amongst many; not one above many; but
one exclusively, that is to say, One, and but one only. The Apostle otherwise
had made use of a very ineffectual argument, to prove what he had propounded;
for he rebukes those who unadvisedly did pass their Judgment either on the
persons, or the deeds of other Men, as the Invaders of their Rights. Who art
Thou (says he) who do judge another? as if he should have said, do thou
know thy self, what thou art, and what thou do? It does not belong to Thee to
thrust thy saucy Sickle into the harvest of another Man, much less boldly to
fling thy self into the Throne of Almighty God. If already Thou art Ignorant of
it, then know, that it belongs to him alone to judge of the Consciences of
men, to whom alone it does belong to impose Laws upon the Consciences of men,
which none can do but God alone. ibid page 111, 112, 113.

The Condition and Natural estate of the Conscience it self is so placed as it
were in the middle betwixt God and the will of Man, as that which is usually
and truly spoken of Kings and Emperors, may as truly be verified of the
Consciences of every man, Solo Deo minores esse, nec aliquam in Terris
superiorem ag noscere; They are less than God only, and on Earth do acknowledge
no Superior. That Speech of the Emperor Maximilian the first is very memorable,
Consciencij Dominari velle, est Arcem Coeli invadere; To exercise a Domination
over Consciences, is to invade the Tower of Heaven. He is a Plunderer of the
Glory of God, and a nefarious Invader of the Power that is due unto him,
whosoever he is that shall claim a right to the Consciences of men, or practice
an Usurpation over them. ibid. Sect. 11. page 115.

And yet this is the sad consequence of imposing Religion upon Conscience, and
punishing Nonconformity with worldly Penalties.

Let us now hear what the late Bishop of Down says in his Lib. of Prophecy to
our Point, I am very much displeased that so many Opinions and new Doctrines
are commenced amongst us, but more troubled, that every man that has an
Opinion thinks his own and other men's Salvation is concerned in its
maintenance, but most of all, that men should be Persecuted and Afflicted for
disagreeing in such Opinions, which they cannot with sufficient grounds obtrude
upon others necessarily, because they cannot propound them Infallibly, and
because they have no warrant from Scripture so to do; for if I shall tie other
men to believe my Opinion, because I think I have a place of Scripture which
seems to warrant it to my understanding; why may he not serve up another dish
to me in the same Dress, and exact the same task of me to believe the
contradictory? Liberty of Prophecy, Epist. Dedic. page 8, 9.

The Experience which Christendom has had in this last Age is Argument enough
that Toleration of differing Opinions is so far from disturbing the Public
Peace, or destroying the Interest of Princes and Commonwealths, that it does
advantage to the Public, it secures Peace, because there is not so much as the
pretense of Religion left to such Persons to contend for, it being already
indulged to them. ibid. p. 21.

It is a proverbial saying, Quod nimia familiaritas servorum est conspiratio
adversus Dominum, and they who for their security run in Grots and Cellers, and
Retirements, think that they being upon the defensive, those Princes and those
Laws that drive them to it are their Enemies, and therefore they cannot be
secure, unless the Power of the one, and the Obligation of the other be
lessened and rescinded; and then the being restrained and made miserable
indears the discontented Persons mutually, and makes more hearty and dangerous
Confederations. ibid. page 23.

No man speaks more unreasonably, than he that denies to men the use of their
Reason in choice of their Religion. ibid. page 169.

No Christian is to be put to Death, Dis-membred, or otherwise directly
Persecuted for his Opinion, which does not teach Impiety or Blasphemy. ibid.
page 190.

There is a popular Pity that follows all Persons in Misery and that Compassion
breeds likeness of Affections, and that very often produces likeness of
Persuasion; and so much the rather because there arises a Jealousy and
pregnant Suspicion that they who Persecute an Opinion are destitute of
sufficient Arguments to confute it, and that the Hangman is the best Disputant.
ibid. page 197, 198.

If a man cannot change his Opinion when he lists, nor ever does heartily or
resolutely, but when he cannot do otherwise, then to use Force, may make him a
Hypocrite, but never to be a right Believer, and so instead of erecting a
Trophee to God and true Religion, we build a Monument for the Devil. ibid. page
200.

The Trick of giving Persons differing in Opinion over to the secular Power, at
the best is no better than Hypocrisy, removing Envy from themselves, and
laying it upon others, a refusing to do that in external Act, which they do in
Council and Approbation. ibid. page 209.

Thus far Bishop Tayl^r, and one of the most Learned Men of the Church of
England in his time.

Let me add another Bishop, held learned by all, and in great Reputation with
the men of his Communion, and among them the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parlioment assembled, who have sufficiently declared against this persecuting
Spirit on the account of Religion by their full approbation of, and thanks
returned to the Bishop of St Asaph for his Sermon preached before them November
the 5 th. 1680. and their desire that he would Print and Publish that Sermon.
The Bishop says, that, They who are most given to hate and destroy others,
especially those others who differ from them in Religion, they are not the
Church of God, or at least they are so far corrupt in that particular. page 8.

Again he says, That of Societies of Men, Christians, of all others are most
averse from ways of Violence and Blood; especially from using any such ways
upon the account of Religion: And among Christian Churches, where they differ
among themselves, if either of them use those ways upon the account of
Religion, they give a strong Presumption against themselves that they are not
truly Christians. ibid. page 9.

There is reason for this, because, we know that Christ gave Love for the
Caracter by which his Disciples were to be known. John 13.35. By this shall all
Men know that you are my Disciples, if you have Love to one another. And least
men should unchristen others first, that they may hate them, and Destroy them
afterward, Christ enlarged his Precept of Love, and extended it even to
Enemies, and not only to ours, but to the Enemies of our Religion, Matt. 5.43,
44. ibid. page 9.

As our holy Religion excels all others in this admirable temper, so by this we
may usually judge who they are that excel among Christian Churches, when there
happens any difference between them, whether touching the Faith, or the terms
of Communion. They that were the more Fierce, they generally had the worst
Cause. ibid. page 12, 13.

The Council of Nice suppressed the Arians by no other Force, but putting
Arians out of their Bishoprics; they could not think Heretics fit to be
trusted with cure of Souls; but otherwise, as to Temporal things, I do not find
that they inflicted any kind of Punishment; but when the Arians came to have
the Power in their Hands, when theirs was come to be the Imperial Religion,
then Depriving was nothing, Banishment was the least that they inflicted. ibid.
page 14.

Neither our Religion, nor our Church, is of a persecuting Spirit. I know not
how it may be in particular Persons; but I say again, it is not in the Genius
of our Church: She has no Doctrine that teaches Persecution. ibid. page 20.

I would have no man punished for his Religion, no not them that destroy men
for Religion. ibid. page 37.

Dr Stillingfleet comes short of none of them on this Subject. Our Savior,
says he, never pressed Followers as men do Soldiers, but said, If any man will
come after me, let him take up his Cross (not his Sword) and follow me. His was
(...), his very Commands showed his Meekness; Irenicum, a Weapon-Salve for the
Churches Wounds, by Edward Stillingfleet, Rector of ^uton in Bedfordshire, in
Preface to the Reader.
his Laws were sweet and gentle Laws; not like Draco's that were writ in Blood,
unless it were his own that gave them. His design was to ease men of their
former Burdens, and not lay on more; the Duties he required were no other but
such as were necessary, and withal very just and reasonable. He that came to
take away the insupportable Yoke of Jewish Ceremonies, certainly did never
intend to gall the Necks of his Disciples with another instead of it. And it
would be strange the Church should require more than Christ himself did; and
make other conditions of her Communion, than our Savior did of Discipleship.
What possible reason can be assigned or given why such things should not be
sufficient for Communion with a Church, which are sufficient for eternal
Salvation? And certainly those things are sufficient for that; which are laid
down as necessary Duties for Christianity by our Lord and Savior in his Word.
What ground can there be why Christians should not stand upon the same terms
now which they did in the time of Christ and his Apostles? Was not Religion
sufficiently guarded and fenced in them? Was there ever more true and cordial
Reverence in the Worship of God? What Charter has Christ given the Church to
bind men up to more than himself has done? Or to exclude those from her
Society who may be admitted into Heaven? Will Christ* ever thank Men at the
great day for keeping such out from Communion with his Church, when he will
vouchsafe not only Crowns of Glory to, but it may be Aureolae too, if there be
any such things there? The Grand Commission the Apostles were sent out with,
was only to teach what Christ had commanded them. Not the least Intimation of
any Power given them to impose or require any thing beyond what himself had
spoken to them, or they were directed to by the immediate Guidance of the
Spirit of God.

Without all Controversy, the main Inlet of all the Distractions, Confusions
and Divisions of the Christian World, has been by adding other Conditions of
Church Communion than Christ has done.

There is nothing the Primitive Church deserves greater imitation by us in,
than in that admirable Temper, Moderation and Condesention which was used in it
toward all the Members of it.

This admirable Temper in the Primitive Church might be largely cleared from
that Liberty they allowed freely to Dissenters from them in matters of Practice
and Opinion; as might be cleared from Cyprian, Austin, Jerome, and others. --
Leaving the Men to be won by observing the true decency and order of Churches,
whereby those who act upon a true Principle of Christian Ingenuity may be
sooner drawn to a Compliance in all lawful things, than by Force and rigorous
Impositions, which make men suspect the weight of the thing it self, when such
Force is used to make it enter.

in Preface. The same is in effect declared by the House of Commons, when they
returned their Thanks to Dr. T^llotson, Dean of Canterbury, for his Sermon
preached before them November the 5 th. 1678. desiring him to Print that
Sermon, where he says, upon our Saviors Words, Ye know not what manner of
Spirit ye are of, Ye own your selves to be my Disciples, but do you consider
what Spirit now Acts and Governs you? not that surely which my Doctrine
designs to mould and fashion you into, which is not a Furious and Persecuting,
and Destructive Spirit, but Mild and Gentle, and Saving; tender of the Lives
and Interests of Men, even of those who are our greatest Enemies. page 6, 7.

No difference of Religion, no pretense of Zeal for God and Christ can warrant
and justify this Passionate and Fierce, this Vindictive and Exterminating
Spirit. ibid. page 7.

He ( i. e. Christ) came to introduce a Religion, which consults not only the
Eternal Salvation of men's Souls, but their Temporal Peace and Security, their
Comfort and Happiness in this World, ibid* page 8.

In seemed good to the Author of this Institution to compel no man to it by
Temporal Punishment. ibid. page 13.

To separate Goodness and Mercy from God, Compassion and Charity from Religion,
is to make the two best things in the World, God and Religion, good for
nothing. idid. page 19.

True Christianity is not noly the best, but the best natured Institution in
the World; and so far as any Church is departed from good Nature, and become
Cruel and Barbarous, so far it is degenerated from Christianity. idid. page 30.

Thus far Dr Tillotson, who to be sure, deserves not to be thought the least
Eminent in the present Church of England. Let us hear what Doctor Burnet says
to it.

Men are not Masters of their own Persuasions, and cannot change their thoughts
as they please; he that believes any thing concerning Religion, cannot turn as
the Prince commands him, or accomodate himself to the Law or his persent
Interests, unless he arrive at that pitch of Atheism, as to look on Religion
only as a matter of Policy, and an Engine for civil Government; Dr Burnet's
History of the Rights of Princes, etc. in his Preface, page 49.

It Is to this Doctor's pains she ows the very History of her Reformation, and
as by it he has perpetuated his Name with hers, certainly he must have Credit
with her, or we can deserve none with any body else, for no man could well go
further to oblige her.

Let me here bring in a lay Member of the Church of England, Sir Robert Pointz,
in his vindication of Monarchy, who yields us an excellent Testimony to the
matter in hand, The Sword avails little with the Souls of Men, unless to
destroy them together with their Bodies, and to make men desperate, or
dissemblers in Religion, and when they find oppertunity to fall into Rebellion,
as there are many Examples. p. 27.

In the Ancient Times of Christianity, such means were not used as might make
Heretics and Schismatics more obstinate than docible, through the
preposterous proceedings of the Magistrates and Ministers of Justice in the
Execution of Penal Laws, used rather as Snares for gaining of Money and
Pecuniary Mulcts imposed, rather as Prices set upon Offenses, than as
Punishments for the Reformation of Manners* ibid. page 28.

The Ancient Christians were forbidden by the Imperial Law, L. 6. Cod. de
Paganis.
as also by the Laws of other Christian Nations, under a great Penalty to
meddle with the Goods of the Jews or Pagans living peaceably ibid. page 29.

For, the Goods of the Jews, although Enemies to the Christian Religion, cannot
for the cause of Religion come, by Escheat unto Christian Princes, under whom
they live. ibid. page 29.

It is truly said, that Peace, a Messenger whereof, an Angel has been chosen
to be, is scarce ever established by the Sword; and the Gospel, the blessed
Peace, cannot be published by the Sound of the Cannon; neither the Sacred Word
be conveyed unto us by the impious hands of Soldiers; neither Tranquillity be
brought to the Persons and Consciences of Men, by that which brings Ruin unto
Nations. ibid. page 30.

He has said much in a little, the Talent and Honor of Men truly great. I give
this still to the Church of Englands Principles, which yet makes it harder for
her to justify her Practice in her use of Power. But let us hear a King speak,
and one the Church of England is bound to hear by many Obligations.

King Charles the First, out of his tender and princely sense of the sad and
bleeding Condition of the Kingdom, and his unwearied Desires to apply such
Remedies, as by the blessing of Almighty God, might settle it in Peace; by the
Advice of his Lords and Commons of Parliament Assembled at Oxford, propounded
and desired, that all the Members of both Houses might securely meet in a full
and free Convention of Parliament, there to treat, consult and agree upon such
things, as may conduce to the maintenance and defense of the Reformed
Protestant Religion, with due consideration to all just and reasonable ease to
tender Consciences. The Kings Message of a Treaty, March 3. 1643. from Oxford,
Superscribed to the Lords and Commons of Parliament assembled at Westminster.

In the Kings Twentieth Message for Peace, January 29. 1645. he has these
Words, That by the Liberty offered in his Message of the 5 th. present, for the
ease of their Consciences who will not Communicate in the Service already
established by Act of Parliament in this Kingdom, He intends that all other
Protestants behaving themselves peaceable in and toward the civil Government,
shall have the free Exercise of their Religion according to their own way.

In the Thirty third Message for Peace, November 17. 1647. there are these
Words, His Majesty considering the great present Distempers concerning Church
Discipline, and that the Presbyterian Government is now in practice, his
Majesty to eschew Confusion, as much as may be, and for the satisfaction of his
two Houses, is content that the said Government be legally permitted to stand
in the same Condition it now is, for three Years; provided, that his Majesty
and those of his Judgment (or any other who cannot in Conscience submit
thereunto) be not obliged to comply with the Presbyterian Government, but have
free Practice of their own Profession without receiving any Prejudice thereby.
From the Isle of Wight.

In his Declaration to all his People, January 18. 1645. from Carisbrook
Castle, after the Votes of no Address, He says, I have sacrificed to my two
Houses of Parliament, for the Peace of the Kingdom, all, but what is much more
dear to me then my Life, my Conscience and my Honor.

In his Letter to the Lords, Gentlemen and Committee of the Scotch Parliament,
together with the Officers of the Army, July 3. 1648. from Carisbrook Castle.
-- As the best foundation of Loyalty is Christianity, so true Christianity is
perfect Loyalty.

VI. (...) Upon his Majesty's retirement from Westminster. -- Sure it ceases to
be Counsel, when not Reason is used, as to Men to Persuade, but Force and
Terror as to Beasts, to drive and compel men to whatever tumultary Patrons
shall project. He deserves to be a Slave without Pity or Redemption, that is
content to have his Rational Sovereignty of his Soul, and Liberty of his Will
and Words so captivated. -- Again, ibid. Sure that Man cannot be blameable to
God or Man, who seriously endeavors to see the best reason of things, and
faithfully follows what he takes for reason; the uprightness of his Intentions
will excuse the possible failings of his Understanding. -- Again, ibid. I know
no Resolutions more worthy a Christian King, then to prefer his Conscience
before his Kingdoms.

XII. Upon the Rebellion and Troubles in Ireland, -- Some kind of Zeal counts
all merciful Moderation Lukewarmness, and had rather be Cruel than accounted
Cold, and is not seldom more greedy to kill the Bear for her Skin, than for any
harm he has done. -- ibid, O my God, thou see how much Cruelty among
Christians is acted under the color of Religion, as if we could not be
Christians unless we Crucify one another.

XIII. Upon the calling the Scots and their coming. -- Sure in matters of
Religion those Truth's gain most on men's Judgments and Consciences which are
least urged with Secular Violence, which weakens Truth with Prejudices; and is
unreasonable to be used, till such means of rational Conviction has been
applied, as leaving no excuse for Ignorance condemns men's Obstinacy to deserved
Penalties. -- Violent Motions are neither Manly, Christian nor Loyal. -- The
proper Engine of Faction is Force; the Arbitrator of Beasts, not of reasonable
Men, much less of humble Christians and loyal Subjects, in matters of Religion.

XIV. Upon the Covenant. -- Religion requires Charity and Candor to others of
different Opinions. -- Nothing Violent and Injurious can be Religions.

XV. Upon the many Jealousies raised, and Scandals cast upon the King to stir
up the People against him. -- In point of true Conscientious Tenderness
(attended with Humility and Meekness, not with proud or arrogant Activity,
which seeks to hatch every egg of indifferent Opinion to Faction or Schism) I
have often declared how little I desire my Laws and Scepter should entrench over
Gods Sovereignty, which is the only king of men's Consciences.

XXVII. To the Prince of Wales. -- Take heed of abetting to any Factions; your
partial adhereing to any one Side gains you not so great Advantages in some
Men's Hearts (who are prone to be of their Kings Religion) as it loses you in
others, who think themselves, and their Profession, first despised, then
persecuted by you. -- My Counsel and Charge to you is, That you seriously
consider the former real or objected Miscarriages, which might occasion my
Troubles, that you may avoid them. -- A Charitable Connivance and Christian
Toleration, often dissipates their Strength whom rougher Opposition fortifies.
-- Always keep up Sollid Piety and those Fundamental Truths (which mend both
Hearts and Lives of Men) with impartial Favor and Justice. -- Your Prerogative
is best showed and exercised in remitting rather then exacting the rigor of
the Law, there being nothing worse than legal Tyranny.

And as this was the Sense and Judgment of a King that Time and the greatest
Troubles had informed with a superior Judgment, (and which to be sure highly
justifies the measures that are now taken) So Dr. Hudson his Plain-dealing
Chaplain must not be forgotten by us on this occasion, who took the freedom to
tell his Royal Master, That he looked upon the Calamities he labored under, to
be the hand of God upon him, for not having given God his due over Conscience.

One can easily imagine this to be Reformation Language, and then it is not hard
to think how low that Church must be fallen, that from so free and excellent a
Principle, is come to make, execute and uphold Penal Laws for Religion, against
her Conscientious Neighbors; but it is to be hoped, that like Nebuchadnezzar's
Image, whose Feet was a mixture of Iron and Clay, and therefore could not stand
for ever; Persecution will not be able to mix so with the Seed of Men but that
Humanity will overcome it, and Mankind one day be delivered from that Iron hard
and fierce Nature.

I have done with my Church of Englands Evidences against Persecution. And for
the Judgment of all sorts of Dissenters in that Point, let their Practice have
been what it will, nothing is clearer than that they disallow of Persecution,
of which their daily Addresses of Thanks to the King, for his General Ease by
his Excellent Declaration are an undoubted Proof.

Thus then we see it is evident, that it is not only the Duty of all Parties,
as they would be thought Christians, to Repeal Penal Laws for Religion, but
upon a fair enquiry, we see it is the avowed Principle of every Party at one
time or other that Conscience ought not to be compelled, nor Religion imposed
upon worldly Penalties. And so I come to the third and last part of this
Discourse.

PART III. It is the Interest of all Parties, and especially the Church of
England.
AS I take all Men to be unwillingly separated from their Interests, and
consequently ought only to be sought and discoursed in them, so it must be
granted me on all hands, that Interests change as well as Times, and it is the
Wisdom of a Man to observe the Courses, and humor the Motions of his Interest,
as the best way to preserve it. And least any ill-natured or mistaken Person
should call it temporizing, I make this early Provision; That I mean no
immorral or corrupt compliance: A Temporizing, deservedly base with Men of
Virtue, and which in all times, my Practice as well as Judgment has shown the
last Aversion to. For upon the Principle I now go, and which I lay down, as
common and granted in Reason and Fact with all Parties concerned in this
Discourse, that Man, does not change, that morrally follows his Interest under
all its Revolutions, because to be true to his Interest is his first civil
Principle. I premise this to introduce what I have to offer, with respect to
the Interests to be now treated upon.

And first, I say, I take it to be the Interest of the Church of England to
abolish the Penal Laws, because it never was her Interest to make them. My
reasons for that Opinion are these. First, they have been an Argument to
invalidate the Sufferings of the Reformers, because if it be unlawful to
disobey Government about matters of Religion they were in the wrong. And if
they say, O but they were in Error that punished their Nonconformity; I
answer, how can she prove that she is Infallibly in the Right? And if this
cannot be done, she compels to an uncertainty upon the same terms. Secondly,
She has overthrown the Principles upon which she separated from Rome. For if it
be unlawful to plead Scripture and Conscience to vindicate Dissent from her
Communion, it was unlawful for her upon the same Plea to dissent from the
Church of Rome, unless she will say again, that she was in the Right, but the
other in the Wrong, and she knows this is no Answer, but a begging of the
Question; for they that separate from her, think themselves as Serious, Devout,
and as much in the Right as she could do. If then Conscience and Scripture,
interpreted with the best Light she had, were the ground of her Reformation,
she must allow the Liberty she takes, or she eats her Words, and subverts her
Foundation; then which nothing can be more destructive to the Interest of any
Being, Civil or Ecclesiastical. Thirdly, The Penal Laws have been the great
Makebate in the Kingdom from the beginning. For if I should grant that she had
once been truly the Church of England, I mean, consisting of all the People of
England, (which she was not, for there were diverse Parties dissenting from the
first of her establishment) yet since it afterward appeared she was but one
Party tho the biggest, she ought not to have made her Power more National than
her Faith, nor her Faith so by the Force of her Temporal Authority. It Is true
she got the Magistrate of her side, but she engaged him too far. For she knew
Christ did not leave Caesar Executor to his last Will and Testament, and that
that should be the reason why she did so, was none of the best Ornament^ to her
Reformation. That she was but a Party, tho the biggest, by the Advantages that
temporal Power brought her, I shall easily prove, but I will introduce it with
a short Account of our State-Reformation here in England,

Henry the Eighth, was a kind of Hermophredite in Religion, or in the Language
of the times, a Trimmer; being a meddly of Papist and Protestant, and that part
he acted to the Life, or to the Death rather; Sacrificing on the same Day Men
of both Religions, because one was not Protestant enough, and the other Papist
enough for him. In this time were some Anabaptists, for the distinction of
Church of England, and Calvanist was not then known.

Edward the Sixth succeeded, a Prince that promised Virtues, that might more
than balance the Excesses of his Father, and yet by Archbishop Cranmer, was
compelled to sign a Warrant to Burn poor Joan of Kent, a famous Woman, but
counted an Enthusiast: But to prove what I said of him, 'twas not without
frequent Denials and Tears, and the Bishop taking upon him to answer for it at
Gods Judgment; of which I hope his Soul was discharged, tho his Body, by the
same Law, suffered the same Punishment in the succeeding Reign. Thus even the
Protestants begun with Blood for mere Religion, and taught the Romanists, in
succeeding times, how to deal with them.

At this time the Controversy grew warm between the Church of England and the
Calvanists, that were the Abler Preachers and the Better Livers. The Bishops
being mostly men of State, and some of them looking rather backward then
forward, Witness the Difficulty the King had to get Hooper Consecrated Bishop,
without Conformity to the reserved Ceremonies.

Queen Mary came in, and ended the Quarrel at the Stake* Now Ridly and Hooper
hug, and are the dearest Brethren and best Friends in the World. Hooper keeps
his Ground, and Ridly stoops with his Ceremonies to to others further
Reformation. But this Light and Union flowed from their Persecution: For those
abroad at Frankford, and other places were not upon so good Terms: Their Fewds
grew so great that the one refused Communion with the other, many endeavors
were used to quench the Fire, but they were ineffectual; at best it lay under
the Ashes of their Affliction for another time; for no sooner was Queen
Elizabeth upon her Throne then they returned, and their Difference with them.
They managed it civilly for a while, but Ambition in some, and Covetousness in
others on the one hand, and Discretion giving way to Resentment on the other,
they first ply the Queen and her Ministers, and when that ended in favor of
the Men of Ceremony, the others arraigned them before the first Reformers
abroad, at Geneva, Bazil, Zurich, etc. The leading Prelates by their Letters,
as Doctor Burnet lately tells us, in his Printed Relation of his Travels, clear
themselves to those first Doctors of any such Imputation, and lay all upon the
Queen, who for Reasons of State would not be brough to so Inceremonious a way
of Worship as that of the Calvanists.

At this time there were Papists, Protestants, Evangelists, Praecisians,
Vbiquitists, Familists or Enthusiasts and Anabaptists in England; when the very
first Year of her Reign, a Law for Uniformity in Worship and Discipline was
enacted, and more followed of the severest Nature, and sometimes executed. Thus
then we see* that there never was such a thing as a Church of England since the
Days of Popery, that is, a Church of Communion containing all the People of the
Kingdom, and so cannot be said to be so much as a Twin of the Reformation;
nevertheless she got the Blessing of the Civil Magistrate. She made him great
to be great by him: If She might be the Church, He should be the Head. Much
good may the Bargain do her. Now is the time for her to stand to her Principle.
I never knew any body exceed their Bounds that were not met with at last. If we
could escape Men, God we cannot, his Providence will overtake us, and find us
out.

By all this then it appearing, that the Church of England was not the Nation,
the Case is plain that the Penal Laws were a Makebate, for they Sacrificed
every sort of People whose Consciences differed from the Church of England;
which first put the Romanist upon flattering Prerogative, and courting its
Shelter from the wrath of those Laws. The Address could not be unpleasant to
Princes; and we see it was not; for King James, that came in with Invectives
against Popery, entering the List with the Learned of that Church, and charging
her with all the Marks the Revelation gives to that of Antichrist, grew at last
so tame and easy toward the Romanists, that our own Story tells us of the
Fears of the increase of Popery in the latter Parliament of his Reign.

In King Charles the First's time, no body can doubt of the Complaint, because
that was in great measure the drift of every Parliament, and at last one Reason
of the War. On the other hand the Severity of the Bishops against Men of their
own Principles, and in the main, of their own Communion, either because they
were more zealous in Preaching, more followed of the People, or could not wear
some odd Garment, and less, lead the Dance on a Lords Day at a Maypole, (the
Relic of Flora the Roman Strumpet) or perhaps for rubbing upon the Ambition,
Covetousness and Laziness of the Dignified, and Ignorance and Looseness of the
ordinary Clergy of the Church (of which I could produce Five hundred gross
Instances) I say these things breed bad Blood, and in part, gave beginnings to
those Animosities, that at last broke forth, with some other Pretenses into all
those National Troubles that agitated this poor Kingdom for Ten Years together,
in which the Church of England became the greatest Looser, Her Clergy turned
out* her Nobility and Gentry Sequestered, Decimated, Imprisoned, etc. And
whatever she is pleased to think, nothing is truer, then that her Penal Laws,
and Conduct in the Star Chamber, and high Commission Court in matters of
Religion, was her overthrow.

It Is as evident, the same Humor since the Restoration of the late King, has
had almost the same Effect. For nothing was grown so little and contemptible as
the Church of England in this Kingdom she now intitles her self the Church of:
Witness the Elections of the last three Parliaments before this, I know it may
be said the Persons chosen were Church goers; I confess it, for the Law would
have them so. But no body were more avers to the Politics of the Clergy;
insomuch that the Parson and the Parish almost every where divided upon the
question of their Election. In truth, it has been the Favor and Countenence of
the Crown, and not her intrinsic Interest or Value, that has kept her up to
this Day; else her Penal Laws, the Bulwork of the Church of England, by the
same figure, than she is one against Popery, had sunk her long since.

I hope I may, by this time, conclude, without offense, that the Penal Laws
have been a Makebate in the great Family of the Kingdom, setting the Father
against his Children, and Brethren against Brethren; not only giving the Empire
to one, but endeavoring to extinguish the rest, and that for this the Church
of England has once paid a severe Reckoning. I apply it thus: Is it not her
Interest to be careful she does it not a second time? she has a fair
Opportunity to prevent it, and keep her self where she is, that is* the Public
Religion of the Country, with the real Maintenance of it; which is a plain
preference to all the rest. If she hopes by her Aversion to a general Ease, to
set up for a Bulwork against Popery, one Year will show the trick, and mightily
deceive her, and the Oppertunity will be lost, and another Bargain driven, I
dare assure her, mightily to her Disadvantage. Violence and Tyranny are no
natural Consequences of Popery, for then they would follow every where, and in
all places and times alike. But we see in twenty Governments in Germany there
is none for Religion, nor was not for an Age in France, and in Poland, the
Popish Cantons of Switzerland, Venice, Lucca, Colonia, etc. where that Religion
is Dominant, the People enjoy their Ancient and Civil Rights a little more
steadily than they have of late time done in some Protestant Countries nearer
home, almost ever since the Reformation. Is this against Protestancy? No, but
very much against Protestants, For had they been true to their Principles, we
had been upon better Terms. So that the Reformation was not the Fault, but not
keeping to it better than some have done; For whereas they were Papists that
both obtained the Great Charter and Charter of Forests, and in the successive
Reigns of the Kings of their Religion, Industriously labored the Confirmation
of them, as the great Text of their Liberties and Properties, by above thirty
other Laws; we find almost an equal Number to Destroy them, and but one made in
their Favor since the Reformation, and that shrowdly against the will of the
high Churchmen too; I mean the Petition of Right, in the third Year of Charles
the first. In short, They desire a legal Security with us, and we are afraid of
it, least it should insecure us; when nothing can do it so certainly as their
Insecurity, for Safety makes no Man Desparate. And he that seeks ease by Law,
therefore does it, because he would not attempt it by Force. Are we afraid of
their Power and yet provoke it? If this Jealousy and Aversion prevail, it may
drive her to a Bargain with the Kingdom for such general Redemption of
Property, as may desolve our great Corporation of Conscience, and then she will
think that half a Loaf had been better than no Bread, and that it had been more
advisable to have parted with Penal Laws, that only served to dress her in
Satyr, then have lost all for keeping them; especially, when it was but parting
with Spurs, Claws and Bills that made her look more like a Vulter than a Dove,
and a Lion than a Lamb.

But I proceed to my next Reason, why it is her Interest to Repeal those Penal
Laws, (tho a greater cannot be advanced to Men than self Preservation) and that
is, That she else breaks with a King heartily inclined to preserve her by any
way that is not Persecuting, and whose Interest she once persu'd at all
Adventures, when more than she sees was suggested to her by the Men of the
Interest she opposed in favor of his Claim. What then has befallen her, that
she changes the course she took with such resolutions of perseverance? for
bringing him to the Crown with this Religion, could not be more her Duty to his
Title, or her Interest to support her own, than it is still, to be fair with
him. If she owed the one to him and to Christianity, she is not less indebted
to her self the other. Does he seek to impose his own Religion upon her? By no
means. There is no body would abhor the Attempt, or, at all Adventures, condemn
it more than my self. What then is the matter? why he desires ease for his
Religion, she does not think fit to consider him in this, (no not to the King
she brought with this Objection to the Crown) Certainly she is much in the
wrong, and shows her self an ill Courtier (tho it was become her calling) first
to give him Roast-meat, then beat him with the Spit. Is not this to quit those
high Principles of Loyalty and Christianity she valued her self once upon, and
what she can, provoke the Mischiefs she fears? certainly this is dividing in
Judgment from him that she has ackowledged to be her Ecclesiastical Head.

My fifth Reason is, that as the making and executing the Penal Laws for
Religion affects all the several Parties of Protestant Dissenters as well as
the Papists (the Judges in Vaughhan's time, and he at the Head of them, giving
it as their Opinion, they were equally exposed to those Laws) and that are
thereby naturally driven into an Interest with them; so it is at this time
greatly the Prudence of the Church of England to repeal them, for by so doing
she divides the Interest that self Preservation allows all Men to pursue, that
are united by danger: And since she is assured the Papists shall not have the
less Ease in this King's time than if the Laws were Repealed, and that her
Fears are not of the succeeding Raigns, how is their Repeal a great Insecurity,
especially, when by that, she draws into her Interest all the Protestant
Dissenters, that are abundantly more considerable than the Papists, and that
are as unwilling that Popery should be National as her self. For if this be not
granted, see what Reputation follows to the Church of England. She tells the
King she does not desire his Friends should be persecuted, yet the forbearance
must not be by Declaration to save the Government, nor by Law to save her; and
without one of these Warrants* every civil Magistrate and Officer in England is
Perjured that suffers them in that Liberty against Law. How can she be
sincerely willing that should be done, that she is not willing should be done
legally?

But Sixthly, the Church of England does not know but they or some other Party
may at one time or other prevail. It seems to me her Interest to set a good
Example, and so to bespeak easy Terms for her self. I know of none intended,
and believe no body but her self can place her so low, yet if it were her
unhappiness, I think to have civil Property secured out of the Question of
Religion, and Constraint upon Conscience prevented by a Glorious Magna Charta
for the liberty of it, were not a thing of ill Consequence to her Interest. Let
us but consider what other Princes did for their own Religion, within the last
seven Raigns, when they came to the Crown, and we cannot think so soft and
equal a thing as an impartial Liberty of Conscience, after all that has been
said of a Popish Successor, an ordinary Caracter of a Prince, or a mean
Assurance to us: This ought not to slip her Reflection. Besides, there is some
care due to Posterity: Tho the present Members of her Communion may escape the
Temptation, their Children may not: They may change the Religion of their
Education, and Conscientiously choose some other Communion. Would they submit
the Fortunes they leave them to the Rape of hungry Courtiers, Biggots and
indigent Informers, or have their poor Posterity Impoverisht, Banished or
Executed for Sober and Religious Dissent? God knows into whose hands these Laws
at last may fall, what Mischief they may do, and to whom. Believe me, a King of
the humor of Sr J.K. of the West, or Sr W.A. of Reading, or Sr R.B. or Sr S.S.
of London, would, with such vouchers, quickly make a Golgatha of the Kingdom.
If she thinks her self considerable in Number or Estate, she will have the more
to loose. Let her not therefore establish that in the Prejudice of others, that
may in the hands of others turn to her Prejudice.

Lastly, I would not have her miss the advantage that is designed her by those
that perhaps she thinks worst of. I dare say no body would willingly see the
Presbyterian in her Chair, and yet that may happen to be the Consequence of her
Tenaciousness in a little time. For if the Aversion her Sons promote by whole
sale against Popery should prevail, the remains of it in her self are not like
to escape that Reformation: I mean, her Episcopal Government, and the
Ceremonies of her Worship, for which she has vexed the most Conscientious People
of this Kingdom above an Age past. And the Presbyterian being a Rich,
Industrious and Numerous Party, as well among the Nobility and Gentry, as
Trading and Country People, I cannot see but the next Motion, naturally
speaking, is like to tend that way; for other Parties, however well esteemed
may seem too great a step of Reformation at once, and methinks she has tasted
enough of that Regiment, to be once wise, and keep the Balance in her own
Hands. And certain it is, that nothing will so effectually do this as the
entreated Liberty of Conscience; for then there will be four Parties of
Dissenters besides her self, to Balance against any Designs that may warp or
bias things to their Advancement. And that which ought to induce the Church of
England not a little to hasten, as well as do the thing, is this; she is now a
sort of National Church by Power, she will then be the Public Church by
Concurrence of all Parties. Instead of Enemies to invade or undermine her, they
that should do it are made the Friends of her safety by the happiness they
enjoy through her complacency: And if any should be so unnatural or ungrateful
to her, the Interest of the rest will oblige them to be her Spys and Security
against the Ambition of any such Party. I do heartily pray to God that he would
enlighten the Eyes of her Leaders, and give them good Hearts too, that Faction
may not prevail against Charity, in the name of Religion: And above all, that
she would not be proud of her Numbers, or stand off upon that Reflection; for
that alone will quickly lessen them in a Nation loving Freedom as much as this
we live in; And what appears in the Town is an ill Glass to take a prospect of
the Country by: There are Parishes that have Fifteen Thousand Souls in them and
if two come to Church it is matter of Brag, tho half the rest be sown among the
several dissenting Congregations of their Judgment. I would not have her
mistaken, tho Popery be an Unpopular thing, it is as certain she of a long time
has not been Popular, and on that Principle never can be: And if she should
Plow with that Heifer now, and gain a little by the Aversion to Popery; when it
is discerned that Popery does return to the civil Interest of the Kingdom they
will quickly be Friends. For besides that we are the easiest and best natured
People in the World to be appeased, there are those charms in Liberty and
Property to English Nature that no endeavors can resist or disapoint. And can
we reasonably think the Romanists will be wanting in that, when they see it is
their own (and perhaps their only) Interest to do so? These are the Arguments
which, I confess, have prevailed with me to importune the Church of England to
yield to the Repeal of all the Penal Statutes, and I should be glad to see them
either well refuted or submitted to.

I shall now Address my self to those of the Roman Church, and hope to make it
appear it is their Interest to sit down thankfully with the Liberty of
Conscience herein desired, and that a Toleration and no more, is that which all
Romanists ought to be satisfied with. My Reasons are these. First, The
Opposition that Popery every where finds: For in nothing is the Kingdom so much
of a mind as in this Aversion: It Is no news, and so may be the better said and
taken. I say then this Unity, this Universality and this Visibility against
Popery, make the attempt, for more then Liberty of Conscience, too great and
Dangerous. I believe there may be some poor silly Biggots that hope bigger, and
talk further, but who can help that? there are weak People of all sides, and
they will be making a Pudder: But what is the language of their true Interest,
the Infallible guide of the wiser Men? Safety certainly; and that in succeeding
Raigns to choose: And if so, their Steps must be modest, for they are Watched and
Numbered. And tho their Prudence should submit to their Zeal, both must yield
to Necessity, whether they like it or no. What they convert upon the Square,
Persuasion I mean, is their own, and much good may it do them. But the fear is
not of this, and for compelling the avers Genius of the Kingdom, they have not
the means, what ever they would do if they had them: Which is my second Reason.
I say they have not the Power, and that is what we apprehend most. There are
three things that prove this in my Opinion. First, their want of Hands, next,
want of Time, and lastly, their Intestine Division; which, whatever we think,
is not inconsiderable. They are few, we must all agree, to the Kingdom, upon
the best Computation that could be made. Out of eight Millions of People, they
are not Thirty thousand, and those but thinly sown up and down the Nation; by
which it appears that the Disproportion of the natural strength is not less
than two hundred and seventy Persons to one. So that Popery in England is like
a Spirit without a Body, or a General without an Army. It can hurt no more than
Bullets without Powder, or a Sword and no Hand to use it. I dare say, there is
not of that Communion, enough at once, to make all the Coal Fires in London,
and yet we are apprehensive they are able to consume the whole Kingdom. I am
still more afraid of her Fears than of them; for tho they seem high, she thinks
their Religion in no Reign has appeared much lower.

O but they have the King of their Side, and he has the Executive Power in his
Hands! True, and this I call the Artificial Strength of the Kingdom. But I say,
first we have his Word to bind him. And tho some may think our Kings cannot be
tied by their People, certainly they may be tied by themselves. What if I don't
look upon the Act of both Houses to oblige the King, his own Concession must;
and that may be given in an Act of State I take the King to be as well obliged
in Honor and Conscience to what he promises his People in another Method, as
if it had been by his Royal Assent in Parliament; for an honest man's Word is
good every where, and why a Kings should not I cannot tell. It Is true, the Place
differs and the Voice comes with greater Solemnity, but why it should with
greater Truth I know not. And if the Church of England will but be advised to
give him the opportunity of keeping his repeated Word with her, and not deprive
her self of that advantage by Jealousies and Distances that make her suspected,
and may force him into another Conduct, I cannot help believing that the King
will not to a tittle let her feel the assurance and benefit of his Promises.

But next, we have his Age for our Security, which is the second Proof, of the
second Reason, why the Papists should look no farther then a Toleration. This
is the want of time I mentioned. They have but one Life in the Lease, and it is
out of their power to renew; and this Life has lived fast too, and is got
within seven of threescore; A greater Age then most of his Ancestors ever
attained. Well, but he has an Army and many Officers of his own Religion. And
if it be so, what can it do? It may suppress an Insurrection, but upon the
attemps we foolishly fear, they were hardly a Breakfast to the Quarters they
live in. For if they were together, all the confines or remote parts of the
Nation would Rise like Grass upon them, and if dispersed, to be sure they have
not strength for such an Attempt.

But if they are not sufficient, there is a Potent Prince not far off can help
the Design, who is not angry with Protestancy at home only. Suppose this, is
there not as Potent Naval Powers to assist the Constitution of the Kingdom from
such Invasions? yes, and Land ones too. And as the Protestant Governments have
more Ships then the other, so an equal Land Force, when by such attempts to
make Popery universal, they are awakened to the use of them: But certainly we
must be very silly to think the King should suffer so great a shake to his own
Interest as admitting an Army of Forraigners to enter his Kingdom on any
pretense, must necessarily occasion. These Bull-Beggers, and Raw-Heads and
Bloody-Bones, are the Malice of some, and Weakness of others. But time, that
Informs Children, will tell the World the meaning of the Fright.

The third Proof of my second Reason, is the Intestine Division among
themselves. That Division, weakens a great Body, and renders a small one
harmless, all will agree. Now that there is such a thing as Division among them
is town talk The Seculars and Regulars have ever been two Interests all the
Roman Church over, and they are not only so here, but the Regulars differ among
themselves. There is not a Coffee-House in Town that does not freely tell us
that the Jesuits and Benedictines are at variance, that Count Da Da the Popes
Nuncio and Bishop Lyborn Dissent mightily from the Politics of the first; Nay
the other Day the Story was that they had prevailed Entirely over them. The Lords
and Gentlemen of her Communion have as warmly contested about the lengths they
ought to go, Moderation seems to be the conclusion. Together they are little,
and can do little; and divided, they are Contemptible instead of Terrible.

Lastly, the Roman Church ought to be discreet, and think of nothing further
then the entreated general Ease, because it would be an extreme that must beget
another in the succeeding Reign. For as I can never think her so weak as well
as base, that after all her Arguments for the Jus divinum of Succession, she
should, in the Face of the World, attempt to violate it in the wrong of One of
another Persuasion, (for that were an eternal loss of her with Mankind) So if
she does not, and yet is Extravagant, she only rises higher to fall lower then
all others in another Reign. This were provoking their own Ruin. And to say
true, either way would, as the second Letter has it, discredit her for ever and
make true Prophets of those they had taken such pains to prove false Witnesses.
And supposing her to reckon upon the just Succession, nothing can recommend
her, or continue her happiness in a Reign of another Judgment, but this Liberty
equally maintained, that other Persuasions, more numerous, for that reason as
well as for their own sakes, are obliged to insure her. Here the Foundation is
broad and strong, and what is built upon it, has the looks of long Life. The
Indenture will at least be, quint-pertite, and Parties are not so mortal as
Men. And as this joins, so it preserves Interest entire, which amounts to a
Religious Amity and a Civil Unity at the worst.

Upon the whole matter, I advise the Members of the Roman Communion in this
Kingdom, to be moderate, it is their Duty and it belongs to all Men to see it
and feel it from them, and it behooves them mightily they would; for the first
part of this Discourse belongs to their Hopes, as well as to the Church of
Englands Fears, viz. the Duty and Spirit of Christianity. Next, let them do
good Offices between the King and his excellent Children, for as that will be
well taken by so affectionate a Father, so it gives the lie to their Enemies
Suggestions, and recommends them to the Grace and Favor of the Successors. And
having said this, I have said all that belongs to them in particular. There is
left only my Address to the Protestant Dissenters and a general Conclusion to
finish this Discourse.

Your Case that are called Protestant Dissenters, differs mightily from that of
the Church of England and Rome. For the first have the Laws for her, the last
the Prince. Those Laws are against you, and she is not willing they should be
Repealed: The Prince offers to be kind to you if you please; Your Interest, in
this Conjuncture, is the Question. I think none ought to be made, that it is
the Liberty of Conscience, desired, because you have much more need of it,
having neither Laws nor Prince of your side, nor a Successor of any of your
Persuasions. The Fears of Popery I know reach you; but it is to be remembered
also, that if the Laws are not Repealed, there wants no new ones to Destroy
you, of the Papists making; so that every fear you are taught to have of their
Repeal, is against your selves. Suppose your Apprehensions well grounded, you
can but be Destroyed; Which is most comfortable for you to suffer by Law or
without it? The Church of England, by her Penal Laws, and the Doctrine of
Headship, has Armed that Religion (as it falls out) to Destroy you. Nay, has
made it a Duty in the King to do it, from which (says she) nothing but an Act
of Parliament can absolve him, and that she is not willing to allow. And is it
not as reasonable that you should seek their Repeal, that if you suffer from
the Papists, It may be without human Law, as well as against Christ's Law, as
for the Church of England to keep them in force, because if she suffers, it
shall be against the Laws made to uphold her? For not repealing them, brings
you an inevitable mischief, and her* at most, but an uncertain safety; tho it is
certain, she at the same time will Sacrifice you to it. And yet if I were in
her case, it would please me better to remove Laws that might reproach me, and
stop my Mouth when turned against me, and be content, that if I Suffer for my
Religion, it is against the Law of God, Christianity and the Fundamentals of
the old and true Civil Government of my Country, before such Laws helped to
spoil it. In short, you must either go to Church, or Meet, or let fall your
Worshipping of God in the way you believe. If the first, you are Hypocrites,
and give away the Cause, and reproach your dead Brethrens Sincerity, and
gratify the old accusation of Schism, Ambition, etc. and finally loose the
Hope and Reward of all your Sufferings. If the second, viz. that you Meet
against Law, you run into the Mouth of the Government, whose Teeth are to meet
in you and Destroy you, as by Law established,. If the last, you deny your
Faith, overthrow your own Arguments, fall away from the Apostolical Doctrine
of assembling together, and so must fall into the Hands of God, and under the
troubles of your own Consciences and woundings of his Spirit, of which it is
said, who can bear them. So that nothing is plainer then that Protestant
Dissenters are not obliged to govern themselves after such Church of England
Measures, supposing her Fears and Jealousies better Bottomed then they are: For
they are neither in this Kings time in the same Condition, with her if the
Penal Laws remain in force, nor like to be so, if she can help it, in the next
Reign, if they are not Repealed in this; so that they are to be certainly
Persecuted now, in hopes of an uncertain Liberty then. Uncertain both whether
it will be in her Power, and whether she will do it if it be. The Language of
Fear and Assurance are two things, Affliction promises what Prosperity rarely
performs. Of this the Promises made to induce the late Kings Restoration, and
the cancelling of the former Declaration, and what followed upon both are a
plain proof. And tho the last Westminster Parliament inclined to it; no body so
much opposed it as the Clergy, and the most Zealous Sons of that Church: And if
they could or would not then see it to be reasonable, I cannot see why one
should trust to People so selfish and short sighted. But if she will stoop to
all those Dissenting Interests that are Protestant, it must either be by a
comprehension, and then she must part with her Bishops, her Common Prayer, her
Ceremonies, and this it self is but Presbyterian; (and she must go lower yet,
if she will comprehend the rest) or, if not, she must Persecute or give this
Liberty of Conscience at last; which, that she will ever yield to uncompel'd,
and at a time too, when there is none to do it, while she refuses it under her
present pressing Circumstances, I confefs I cannot apprehend. But there is yet
one Argument that can never fail to oblige your compliance with the General
Ease entreated; viz. That the Penal Laws are against our great Law of Property,
and so void in themselves. This has been the Language of every Apology, and
that which, to say true, is not to be answered: How then can you decline to
help their Repeal, that in Conscience, Reason and Law you think void in their
own Nature?

Lastly, There is nothing that can put you in a Condition to help your selves
or the Church of England against the Domination of Popery, but that which she
weakly thinks the way to hurt you both, viz. The Repeal of the Penal Laws. For
as you are, you are tied Hand and Foot, you are not your own men, you can
neither serve her nor your selves, you are fast in the Stocks of her Laws, and
the course she would have you take, is to turn Martyrs under them to suppo^t
them. If you like the Bargain you are the best natured People in the World, and
something more. And since Begging is in Fashion, I should desire no other Boon;
for upon so plain a loss of your Wits, your Estates will of course fall a stray
to the Government, so that without the help of a Penal Law, you make an
admirable Prize.

I have no mind to end so pleasantly with you. I have a sincere and Christian
regard to you and yours. Be not Couzn'd, nor Captious, at this Juncture. I know
some of you are told, if you lose this Liberty, you Introduce Idolatry, and for
Conscience sake you cannot do it. But that is a pure mistake, and improved, I
fear, by those that know it is so, which makes it the worse; for it is not
Introducing Idolatry (taking for granted that Popery is so) but saving the
People from being Destroyed that profess that Religion. If Christ, and his
Apostles had taken this course with the World, they must have Killed them
instead of Converting them. It Is your mistake to think the Jewish rigorous
Constitution is adequate to the Christian Dispensation; by no means: That one
Conceit of Judaising Christianity in our Politics, has filled the World with
Misery, of which this poor Kingdom has had its share. Idolators are to be
Enlightened and Persuaded, as St. Paul did the Athenians and Romans, and not
knock on the Head, which mends no body. And to say a Christian Magistrate is to
do that, that a Christian cannot do, is ridiculous; unless like the Bishop of
Munster, who goes like a Bishop one part of the Day, and a Soldier the other,
he is to be a Christian in the Morning and a Magistrate in the Afternoon.
Besides, it is one thing to enact a Religion National, and compel Obedience to
it (which would make this Case abominable indeed) and another thing to take off
unchristian Penalties for the sake of such mistakes, since that is to give them
Power to hurt others, and this only to save you from being hurt for mere
Religion.

To conclude my Address to you, of all People, it would look the most
disingenious in you, and give you an Air, the least Sensible, Charitable and
Christian not to endeavor such an Ease that have so much wanted it, and so
often and so earnestly pressed it, even to Clamor. But that you should do it
for their Sakes who have used you so, and that the Instruments of their
Cruelty, the Penal Laws, should from a common Grievance become a Darling to any
among you, will be such a Reproach to your Understandings and Consciences, that
no Time or Argument can wipe off, and which I beseech God and You to prevent.

The Conclusion.
I Shall conclude with one Argument, that equally concerns you all, and that is
this; you claim the Caracter of English Men. Now to be an English Man, in the
sense of the Government, is to be a Freeman, whether Lord or Commoner, to hold
his Liberty and Possessions by Laws of his own consenting unto, and not to
forfeit them upon Facts made Faults, by Humor, Faction or Partial Interest
prevailing in the Governing part against the Constitution of the Kingdom; but
for Faults only, that are such in the nature of civil Government; to wit,
Breaches of those Laws that are made by the whole, in persuance of common
Right, for the good of the whole.

This regard must at no time be neglected, or violated toward any one
Interest; for the moment we concede to such a Breach upon our General Liberty,
be it from an aversion we carry to the Principles of those we expose, or some
little sinister and temporary Benefit of our own, we Sacrifice our selves in
the prejudices we draw upon others, or suffer them to fall under; for our
Interest in this respect is common. If then as English men, we are as mutually
interested in the inviolable conservation of each others Civil Rights, as men
embarked in the same Vessel are to save the Ship they are in for their own
sakes, we ought to Watch, Serve and Secure the Interest of one another, because
it is our own to do so; and not by any means endure that to be done to please
some narrow regard of any one Party, which may be drawn in Example at some
other turn of Power to our own utter Ruin.

Had this Honest, Just, Wise and English Consideration prevailed with our
Ancestors of all Opinions from the days of Richard the second, there had been
less Blood, Imprisonment, Plunder, Beggary for the Government of this Kingdom
to answer for. Shall I speak within our own knowledge, and that without
Offense, there has been Ruined, since the late Kings Restoration, above Fifteen
Thousand Families, and more then Five Thousand Persons Dead under Bonds for
matters of mere Conscience to God: But who has laid it to Heart? It is high
time now we should, especially when our King, with so much Grace and Goodness
leads us the way.

I beseech you all, if you have any Reverence toward God, any Value for the
Excellent Constitution of this Kingdom, any Tenderness for your Posterity, any
Love for your Selves, you would embrace this happy Conjuncture, and pursue a
common Expedient; That since we cannot agree to meet in one Profession of
Religion, we may entirely do it in this common civil Interest where we are all
equally engaged; and therefore we ought for our own sakes to seek one an^^^ers
Security, that if we cannot be the Better, we may not be the Worse for our
Persuasions, in things, that bear no relation to them* and in which, it is
impossible we should Suffer, and the Government escape that is so much
concerned in the civil Support and Prosperity of every Party and Person that
belongs to it.

Let us not therefore uphold Penal Laws against any of our Religious
Persuasions, nor make Tests out of each others Faiths, to exclude one another
our civil Rights; for by the same Reason that denying Transubstantiation, is
made One to exclude a Papist, to own it, may be made one to exclude a Church of
England-man, a Presbyterian, an Independent, a Quaker, and Anabaptist: For the
Question is not who is in the right in Opinion, but whether he is not in
Practice in the wrong, that for such an Opinion deprives his Neighbor of his
common Right? Now it is certain there is not one of any Party, that would
willingly have a Test made out of his Belief, to abridge him of his native
Privilege; and therefore neither the Opinion of Transubstantiation in the
Papists, Episcop^cy in the Church of England Man, Free Will in the Arminian,
Predestination in the Presbyterian, Particular Churches in the Independent,
Dipping of adult People in the Anabaptist, nor not-swearing in the Quaker,
ought to be made a Test of, to deprive him of the comforts of his Life, or
render him incapable of the service of his Country, to which by a natural
Obligation he is indebted, and from which, no Opinion can discharge him, and
for that Reason, much less should any other Party think it fit, or in their
power to exclude him.

And indeed it were ridiculous to talk of giving Liberty of Conscience (which
yet few have now the forehead to oppose) and at the same time imagine those
Tests that do exclude men that Service and Reward, ought to be continued: For
though it does not immediately concern me, being neither Officer nor Papist,
yet the Consequence is general, and every party, even the Church of England,
will find her self concerned upon reflection; For she cannot assure her self it
may not come to be her turn.

But, Is it not an odd thing, that by leaving them on foot, every Body shall
have Liberty of Conscience but the Government? for while a man is out of Office,
he is Test-free, but the hour he is chosen to any station, be it in the
Legislation or Administration, he must wiredraw his Conscience to hold it, or
be excluded with the Brand of Dissent: And can this be equal or wise? Is this
the way to employ men for the good of the Public, where Opinion prevails above
virtue, and Abilities are submitted to the humor of a Party; surely none can
think this a Cure for Division, or that Animosities are like to be prevented by
the only ways in the World that beget and heighten them. Nor is it possible
that the ease that should be granted can continue long when the Party in whose
savor they are not repealed, may thereby be enabled to turn the point of the
sword again upon Dissenters.

I know Holland is given in Objection to this extent of freedom, where only one
Persuasion has the Government, tho the rest their Liberty: But they don't
consider, first, how much more Holland is under the power of Necessity then we
are. Next, That our Constitutions differ greatly. For the first, it is plain, in
the little compass they live in; the uncertainty and precariousness of the
means of their subsistence: That as they are in more danger of Drowning, so
nearer ruin by any Commotion in the State, then other Countries are. Trading is
their Support, This, keeps them busy, That, makes them Rich; and Wealth,
naturally gives them caution of the disorders that may spoil them of it. This
makes the governing Party wary how they use their power, and the other
Interests tender how they resist it; for upon it, they have reason to fear a
public Desolation; since Holland has not a natural and Domestic Fund to rely
upon, or return to from such national Disorders.

The next Consideration is as clear and cogent; our Constitutions differ
mightily: For though they have the Name of a Republic, yet in their choice, in
order to the Legislature they are much less free then we are: And since the
Freeholders of all Parties in England may Elect, which in Holland they can no
more do then they can be chosen, there is good reason why all may be elected to
serve their King and Country here, that in Holland cannot be chosen or serve.
And if our Power to choose be larger then theirs in Holland, we are certainly
then a freer People, and so ought not to be confined, as they are about what
Person it is that must be chosen: Methinks it bears no proportion, and
therefore the Instance and Objection are improper to our purpose.

But it is said by some, That there cannot be two predominant Religions, and if
the Church of England be not that, Popery by the Kings Favor is like to be so.
It is certain that two predominant Religions, would be two Uppermosts at once,
which is nonsense every where: But as I cannot see what need there is for the
Church of England to lose her Churhces or Revenues, so while she has them,
Believe me, she is Predominant in the thing of the World that lies nearest her
Guides. But if I were to speak my inclination, I cannot apprehend the necessity
of any Predominant Religion, understanding the word with Penal Laws in the tale
of it: The Mischief of it, in a Country of so many powerful Interests as this,
I can easily understand, having had the opertunity of seeing and feeling it
too: And because nothing can keep up the Ball of Vengance like such a
Predominant Religion, and that Penal Laws and Tests are the means of the
Domination, I, for that reason, think them fit to be Repealed, and let English
Mankind say AMEN.

I do not love Quibling, but it is true, to a Lamentation, that there is little
of the power of Religion seen where there is such a predominant one, unless
among those it Domineers over.

I conclude, they that are so Predominant, and they that seek to be so (be they
who they will) move by the same Spirit and Principle, and however differing
their Pretentions and Ends may be, the odds are very little to me, by which it
is I must certainly be Oppressed.

Dare we then do (for once) as we would be done by, and show the World, we are
not Religious without Justice, nor Christians without Charity: That False self
shall not govern us against True self; nor oppertunity make us Thieves, to our
Neighbors for Gods sake? the end of Testing and Persecuting under every
Revolution of Government. If this we can find in our Hearts to do, and yet as
Men, and as Christians, as English Men, we do but do our Duty, let the Penal
Laws and Tests be Repealed; and in order to it, Let us now take those measures
of men and things, that may give our Wishes and Endeavors the best success for
the public good, that our Posterity may have more reason to bless our Memories
for their Freedom and Security, then for their Nature and Inheritance.

FINIS.

