A COMMENTARY Upon the Present Condition OF THE KINGDOM And its Melioration.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1677.

The Kingdoms Sickness, and its Cure, etc.
IT is not unknown to any person that is concerned in the welfare of his
Country, that there are now very ill symptoms in the countenance thereof; and
not many particular persons there are, who can say, that their private affairs
receive not a malignant influence from the ill Crasis and indisposition of the
whole Body Politic: I shall therefore endeavor to give an account of this its
malady, and propose the means of its redress and succor; wherein I shall play
the part of a bold Physician to a desperate and Chronical Disease, neither will
I handle the matter as if I were to deal with a nice and tender Lady,
consulting her ease, and the delight of her Palate, more than the benefit of a
firm and lasting health, and therefore rejects the nauseous Potion offered for
her Cure: But I shall prescribe, (if occasion) a Vomit, both strong and bitter,
that will cause not only cause aversion in the taking, but likewise in the
operation may put all parts into some perturbation, for the more effectual
support and comfort of them all: I shall not savor my Lancet, nor the Saw it
self if I find it necessary: To come to my design; The sickness of the Nation
appears evidently by those symptoms that are upon it, an Atrophy, listlesness
to Action, Paleness and fearfulness; I mean three things the main Indications
of its weakness. 1. Want of Money and Trade, the nourishment of a Commonwealth.
2. A Consequent of the former; People are of low spirits, like Men expecting
Ruin, they are without those lively and vigorous designs they were wont to
have when full of Money. 3. Fear and apprehension of danger from a Foreign
Enemy; These are the principal symptoms of which we complain at this day. The
last of these I shall not need to say much to; For if the Purses and Stomachs
of Englishmen be fraighted with a sufficient Cargo, it will have such
influence upon their Courage, as to make them resolute, and bold enough in
opposing any Foreign undertakings against them, It being an improvement of
their natural Genius, it will rather push them upon the offensive part; This
our Neighbor Nations are aware of; A Frenchman having observed, that England
is like a great Beast, that can no otherwise be killed, but by being it self
accessory and assistant to its own Ruin, or intangling it self in the snare
may be laid for it: Let us then endeavor to keep it alive, by applying good
nourishment, by correcting the Humors, cleansing the Blood; and when it is
healthfully settled upon a good Basis, freed from malignant humors, we may
venture it to shift in all other encounters and hazards. Our business then is,
to help in the two first particulars, For by them alone the last is made
secure: There have been many attempts made of late for the Redress of the
Former especially; but by dealing too lightly, fearing to search to the bottom,
they do but make things worse, and to stop one hole make three; Prohibiting
Irish Cattle, French Goods, etc. I like not those Physicians that apply
themselves to remove two or three particular symptoms, and leave the sourse and
Cause of the Disease untouched; I shall therefore enquire into the very Springs
and Original of our Distempers, and endeavor to show, that without a deeper
search and stronger application, no good is to be expected.

The Tinker will tell us, that it is in vain to bestow mending upon that Kettle
whose bottom is grown thin with age and much use; and certainly there is
something of the same nature in Kingdoms and Commonwealths, which in continuance
of time, will require not emendation and alteration by parcels of new Laws,
some whereof are made at one time, some another; some in one Century, some in
many after; till at length they are multiplied to such a number that they become
to the Government like Patches to a Tinkers Kettle; which after it will be
patcht no longer, fine, must have a new bottom; so also the Government must
have a Restoration which is no longer capable of alteration and amendment in
that part thereof which is weak and ill constituted. The reason whereof may be
cast upon the prevailing power of Time, which subjects all things to its
Dominions, and nothing can be secure from its over-turning Influence; the
strongest Forts and Castles are battered down by it; Cities are metamorphos*d
into a Cottage, and a Wilderness into a City; it removes Commerce, and
Traffic, and Civility from one Country to another, and makes an Unwonted
Village a well traded Port, and a Barbarous and Savage People nice and sinical;
And farther it d^ff^rently influences the nature of Mankind, that those of our
generation are quite of another disposition than in former ages; The civil
Conversation we now cultivate, within Four or Five hundred years, was Milita^y
Discipline, and Feats of Arms; The Execution of Justice which is now performed
with Gown and Scrowl, they did the same in Armor complete, and with naked
Sword. This alteration of men's inclinations and humors effected in process of
time, is the reason, that, though the Form and Manner of Government may
continue perfectly and entirely the same, yet there are distinct Parts and
Members thereof, which re-iterated Laws and emendations cannot preserve from
being the dissl^ke and burde- of the Subject, and so to be abolished, and
something substitunted in the room thereof that is capable of obliging and
comprehending the present Genius that has taken place; something that may agree
with those inclinations of Men which have succeeded in the room of those worn
out by Time; and till this be done there will be a discrasie in the body
Politic; there will be complaining and repining, and people will be ill at
ease, dissatisfied, unsettled, by reason of something in the present Government
that suits not now with their stomachs and appetites; and there cannot be
introduced a Settlement and Composure the mother of all blessings in
Commonwealths, till some strong Medicine cause this to be disgorged. Now as all
Laws and Government designs the benefit of the People governed, that there be a
Harmony and Agreement in all the parts thereof; so do they diligently avoid all
things that may avert this harmony, and expel what is dossonant thereto, and
causes that disagreement and uneasiness which fills men's minds to the prejudice
of their settlement, their amity, and consequently their Traffic one with
another; Nay, though the Laws established by antiquity are still in Force for
the preservation and maintenance of such Government, yet they must be abrogated
or changed according to the present Genius, Manners and Inclinations of Men;
for Laws are Arbitrary, and in circumstantial things may be brought to our
Manners; whereas our Members have something of natural necessity in them, and
cannot without prejudice and violence be brought to the Laws; I mean such
things as are free and in our choice, not such as are of eternal necessity to
be done or omitted; and likewise I mean the abrogation of such Laws as
dis-agreeing with our present Inclination, will bring no damage in other
respects to the Public. Now in this case, in my apprehension it is a Solicisme
in Politics, that Government being designed chiefly for the benefit of those
that live under it, yet that the Laws should not comprehend and agree with the
inclinations of the present generation, but of another worn off and gone: And
this seems to be the right of a prevailing temper, as of a Conqueror that
obtains another Country, not to be engaged to the former Laws he finds there,
but to give them from himself. Thus when it was in fashion, and the humor
prevailed of making Churchmen great, and rich, and honorable, Laws were
directed and promulgated to this purpose: If the fashion come again to contemn
and slight them, and bring them down, the Laws ought to favor us in it, and
not to suffer a discording note, to prejudice the harmony whereon the public
establishment and settlement is founded. Having seen that the Public
dis-satisfaction may give occasion to change some particular part of the
Government; we must enquire how it may be manifest, what must be done for the
relief of it, and that we mistake not the minds and desires of people thus
unsatisfyed; In a word, this may be known by the general resentments of the
most, or wisest, or soberest of the people; If these generally agree in one
vote as it were, either tacitly or expressly, by plain testimony, or such signs
as are equivalent thereto, of a dislike of a Constitution in the Government,
that is no essential part thereof, which serves to irritate them, and is the
Mother of oppression, if it be protested against, and forsaken by most,
contemned by others, and slighted by all, it may be said to be the discording
Note, and hurtful to the harmony of the public repose and consent. But perhaps
this will not be a sufficient Plea for its expulsion unless other things
concur; In the mean time thus much we have got through the alterations of men's
inclinations, Laws must be remitted, and perhaps some less essential part of
Government changed, or else there will be an unsatisfyedness and discrasy
amongst the People; or thus in time men's Inclinations are changed, and the
Constitutions of Government that are opposite thereto must be altered. If we
look for examples of this, we may find in all Histories infinite thereof; Thus
the people of Israel were sick and discontented for a King, and no means to
satisfy them but by indulging this humor: This also may be observed in the
Roman Government, and also in the Commonwealths of Greece; in our age we may
observe the like; France will allow no privilege to the Pope-in-Secular
Affairs and Revenues of the Clergy in that Dominion, though they still own his
Authority. The Netherlands could not swallow the Inquisition, and Venice soon
grew sick of the subtle practices of the Jesuits. Many might be heaped to
this purpose. And thus much may serve for Apology, if we find that the state of
things do require some change in a less material part of Government, that it is
no new thing, but such as time does in every age produce.

To proceed then, It may be demanded whether there be any such thing amongst
us, That this unsatisfyed humor is prevalent with us, may be known from
converse and society of Men, and their mouths are filled with complaints of the
badness of the times, wishing for, and expecting some change of affairs that
may give them some settlement and peace: Likewise it may be known whom it aims
at, and what this burden is by the open protestation of the greatest part of
the Nation, by the careless and remiss carriage of others, and by open contempt
and derision of many, which is the present Ecclesiastical Government; This all
the different sorts and Opinions do protest against; This wise Men and
Politicians do barely suffer and allow as far as their Interest is concernd
with it, without any zeal for its continuance. The third are, the Wits and
Atheists of the age who contemn and deride it: As that we may safely conclude
it is the public nuisance and disgust of the Nation: and as an ill humor that
is at enmity with the rest of the humors in a body natural, is the occasion of
a perturbation, and that its actions are performed with less life and freedom
than they were wont. So likewise this dis-agreeing part in the body Politic
from the other parts, may be said to be occasion of its lowness of courage, and
unwillingness to act in the matters which concern its welfare, as Trade, and
the like. But if we look into the concerns of Trade, the life of our nation,
and of the Body Politic, and to the Nation more attentively, we shall find
that our condition is such, that we are near lost, unless we shall make this
one part a Sacrifice to the preservation of the whole; and we are not now so
low in our own esteem, or the esteem of Foreigners, but by means thereof we
may raise up our heads that lie in the dust, and not only obtain a firm and
lasting constitution of Health and Integrity, in the advancement of our wealth
at home, but we may be enabled to make our selves great enough to offer some
attempts abroad, to serve our selves our selves of the spoils of other Nations,
and take our share in the Ruins of the house of Austria, and once again
retrieve our sullied glories, and reassume the Palms that were wont to be the
Merits of our victorious Armies.

It being then thus with us, that most men complain of the badness of the
times; The Labourer has no work, the Husband man has no price for his Corn
whereby to pay his Rent; the Grazier gets little for his Wool, Cloth lies upon
the hands of the Clothier, strangers run away with our Fishing-trade, for want
of Money or willingness in our own Nation to encourage it at home; The power of
France grows formidable, and Money must be had to put us in a posture of
Defense; when yet the people are so dreined already, that they are scarce able
to pay more. If we come to consider the original of these evils, it can be no
other then that our Money is taken away by the late Taxes; for Trade is then
most full and redundant, and with it all things else, when Money is equally
(that is in moderate portions suitable to every man's condition) distributed
throughout the whole Nation; when each particular man has sufficient for his
necessity, and the condition of his life and calling: for Money being thus
generally distributed, M^n will (to find themselves employment, if for no other
reason) be turning their Money into Goods, and their Goods again into Money, and
every body will confer something to the general emolument of Traffic; so that
the means of advancing Trade, is so to influence every particular person in the
Kingdom, that he may have Money according to the degree of his Calling, and to
carry on the designs be they smaller or greater which he has undertaken: and by
the rule of contraries, the way to destroy Trade, is to draw the Money from the
Body of all the People, and gather it from all the particulars of the
Commonwealth; and the more this is done, the more the materials of Trade are
taken away, and consequently it must weaken and consume, so that we do plainly
see the Cause of the evils at this time; The Parliament having granted the King
such Immense sums of Money, and that collected upon the whole Body of the
Subject, which alone were capable to manage a great Trade; and besides these,
Excise and Hearth-mony collected also as the other, but never known till of
late; to this may be added the new Building of LONDON, especially in the
concerns thereof; so that putting these things together, we may wonder we are
not much lower and weaker than we seem to be at this time: Well may Landlords
complain of the fall of Rents, and have their Lands thrown into their own
hands, when by their own Acts they have taken away the means of Traffic, and
those materials that Men must work upon for their support: For as in a natural
Body there is required nourishment to keep it in life and consistency; and also
this nourishment must have a Vehicle, which is the Blood, whereby it may be
conveyed to all parts of the Body; Now if you take away this too often, and in
too great quantities, no wonder if at last the Body grow weak, and unable to
perform what otherwise might be required of it: When the Blood is perfectly
distributed through all the parts, and permitted to take its free and natural
Circulation; So it is in a Body Politic, Trade is its nourishment, maintains
its life, and keeps it in heart, gives it a healthful Constitution, and
preserves it from sinking by any weakness within, and enables it also to repel
external violence; The Vehicle to convey this nourishment to all the parts for
their relief, is Money, the very Blood of the Body Politic, of which, the more
we take from this Body, the nearer we do bring it to a Consumption and
inability to sustain it self. Farther, we must not imagine that the burden is
made lighter when divided amongst so many Interests, which as to private
concerns perhaps is not so much perceived at present, but as to the concerns of
Trade, the whole Nation is but as one Man, and so much as you take there*from,
so much you take from Trade and the livelihood of the Nation; which in time
will return with more weight upon particulars, as we find by experience in
Rents, Wool, etc. This being the condition of the Nation dreyned to this
faintness and weakness as at this day, and still there is occasions for more
Money, and those no light ones neither, such as to put us in a posture of
Defense in case of any attempt from a Foreign Enemy, which our present
circumstances leave us not without cause to apprehend, also to take off the
burden that lies upon the Kings Revenue; and further, if we can, to recover
those eruptions and devastations made upon our Trade and Livelihood, to set us
upon our legs, that we may show something of ancient valor in times of such
action and enterprises as are now on foot; But how shall this be done? to take
more blood from the Public, is to bring us down beyond hopes of Becovery,
after so many plentiful evacuations. But some course must be taken, and which
way shall we turn? shall we exenterate our own bowels, and sacrifice our Lives
and Livelihoods for our Liberties? shall we destroy our selves, that we may
save our selves; and give away the support of our lives for the defense of
them; or to what purpose is it to defend them from outward violence, when they
must thus sink from within, though they should be secured from without? Is it
not better we cast about, and see if there be not some other means of Relief?
Can we not find an Ulcerated part in this Body, which being lopt off, that
nourishment which it too potently draws to it self, may by its separation be
distributed through the whole Mass, for the support of its weakness and
indisposition; To be short, there cannot be any better means or other method to
complete our hapiness, and to make amends for all our evils, than to take away
the Lands of laizy and deceitful Clergymen; there seems to be a fatal
necessity upon us to do it, they being not only useles^, but a bitter Fountain,
that sends forth streams to the annoyance of the greatest and meanest of the
people; and when it shall appear that this may be done with honesty and Honor,
with ^ight of Justice, with safety to the Government, and advancement of
Religion, as I shall show; The design will be more worthy to be put in
execution: Supposing then, that the Tithes throughout England be allotted to be
the Portion of the Clergy, as in the old Law by Divine Constitution, which
being equally divided amongst them throughout England, will amount to 100 l. a
year or better, an ample Revenue for a Clergyman that will answer the ends of
his Calling, as we shall show hereafter; And in case any Controverse arise, it
may be determined by the general Assembly of the County, or by the gravet and
wiser amongst them; but by all means that their hands be kept off from Secular
business, which belongs not to their Function upon any account* Having so well
provided for them; Let their Lands and Manors, etc. be given to the Public
Benefit, and that the Parliament have the power over it, to appoint Officers
about the Concerns of that Revenue, and to take an account of them, and that it
be by their prudence and Care so disbursed to the several Affairs that may
require its assistance, to D^mise throughout the Nation those Lands for the
raising Money upon a sudden exigency: That part of these rents be implied in
Maritine affairs, the building of Busses, Galleys and other Vessels for the
Fishing, likewise for greater Ships as shall be necessary; and for mantaining
and repairing Forts and Walled Towns. Another part for the Improvement of Trade
by Land, there may small Stocks be derived into all parts of the Kingdom to set
the poor on work; Likewise in diverse parts that Work houses may be built for
the Improvement of our Manufactures in the manner of Hospitals, wherein the
lame and blind, and all sorts may have some employment whereby to get their own
livelihood; and also others may make some advantages by their labors. Likewise
other Houses may be built for the Benefit and Improvement of the Mineral Trade,
whither may be sent to works of Industry, such whom we now too severely deliver
to death upon small offenses; All these Methods will not diminish the revenue,
but increase it; For if well managed, it will return into their hands again
perhaps double; As suppose Ffty Thousand Pound a year be allowed, and well
managed in these uses, this Money lies not dead, as in Hospitals or such
Foundations, but will perhaps return Fourscore thousand pound again, or more,
for the benefit of the public, and yet the Nation is advantaged as much as
that Fifty thousand pounds comes to, and perhaps more than if it were given
without any return: So that besides the Commodities of our Country well
improved, and every man has work and dealings enough; there will be an ample
foundation for Banks of Piety, for encouragements to advance Trade, as to send
Men into Foreign Countries upon the Public Charges, for the advancement of
Trade; to learn skill in Manufactures, to improve Commerce; also liberal
Sallaries and Rewards for such as have deserved well of the Commonwealth by
useful Inventions, Fighting for its Defense etc. Hence also Allowance may be
given to decayed Gentlemen; such whose Estates are encumbered by Debts; and more
by Interest may hence be relieved: Out of this the necessities of the KING may
often be supplied without burden to His Subjects; and it will be as an eternal
Cement to unite the hearts of the King and his Sub^ects; The People shall not
be burdened with Taxes, or else made able to pay them; and thereby the King
shall be freed from the Complaints and Grievances of the People, more burdensome
than any part of administration: Thus shall these Lands which have hitherto
mantained unjust usurpation, which served Pride and Malice to distress and
grieve Mankind in all Orders and Degrees; By this means they shall become the
happy Instruments of universal benefit to all Orders and Degrees amongst us:
Now if the Remedy must be contrary to the Distemper, then have we a very apt
Remedy for all our evils, which as they have been brought upon us by dreyning
the Nation of so much of its Blood; so shall our Cure be by deriving these
refreshing Springs into all the exhausted and weak'ned parts of the Kingdom;
and we may promise our selves from the wisdom of the Parliament, that no corner
of the Kingdom shall be excluded from the benign Influence thereof: The young
Man may be advanced into Trade without any Fortune of his own; the poor Man
shall have work, the Tradesman Business, the Mariner is made happy, the
Ingenious rewarded, the Unfortunate relieved, and the whole Nation so exalted
and Improved, that we shall be like the Israelites returning from Captivity as
Men in a Dream, scarce believing on a sudden that happiness which we see and
feell: Now it being so, that Episcopal Govrnment expelled, such Blessings
follow as are like the Glories of the Morning Sun to Midnight darkness; Is it
not to be wished, that the King and Parliament having laid such continued
burdens upon the Subject, would consult their own Honor and Reputation, and
transmit their Names and Memory to Posterity with some sweet odours of Praise
and Blessing; that they would once in so many Essays do something which may
prove the Universal Benefit of the Civil State, and of Religion, which may make
their Fame Glorious and Renowned to the present and future Generations, and may
bring a blessing from Heaven to prosper and establish all other their
undertakings. What though our Ancestors eyes were blinded to give the best of
the Kingdom to Clergymen, and to confirm them by Laws; Yet since our eyes are
open, to discover the Cheats and folly thereof, we should commit a greater
folly than they, if we in so great necessity should suffer them to enjoy what
was so exorbitantly given, or rather what was gotten by Fraud and Collvsion;
Have not we the same power to nullify Laws made against the Common good, as
they had to establish the same; And have we not yet more Reason, since they
granted them through Collusion and deceit, whereas every day discovers to us,
that there is no ne^essity and occasion thereof; And moreover, it is returned
into the bosom of their Posterity with a hundred Fold disadvantage instead of
Benefit.

Now though it were enough to say, that the Supreme Law did require this, even
the safety of the Kingdom being concerned in it; There being a necessity that
all Government be directed according to the course and exigency of the present
circumstances and conditions in which they live to whom the mannagement of
affairs is committed, or else it loses its end, and is not established for the
preservation of the Subject, his peace and settlement, but by a kind of
Solaecism in Politics, for the preservation of that which is no more, even a
worn off generation gone to their Fathers. Yet I shall add farther, that there
ir Right and Equity enough in the thing; For 1st. They obtained their Lands by
Collusion and Fraud. 2ly. They managed them so as to be the Instruments of
oppression and disturbance to all Mankind, and to this Commonwealth in
particular; which is Treason enough in a sound sense, if not directly, yet
interpretatively: As for the Imputation of Sacrilege we shall see more
hereafter. But the Collusion and deceit will appear plainly, if we consider,
that these Lands and Privileges were granted in such an age and time of
Darkness, when nothing of the Scripture, or of the Truth was known, and less of
Religion practiced; Men pretended then a great deal of Ze^l for Religion, but
really abominated the plainness and simplicity that was in the Gospel, and the
spiritual exercise it did require; So that all their Zeal was spent in pursuit
of a strange Worship, things diametrically opposite to the Gospel of Truth,
whereby they might make themselves Great or Honorable, that they might abound
with all things that could minister to their Pride, their Luxury and Excess,
and what ever else was contrary to the rule of sound Doctrine. To accomplish
these their extravagant and wicked designs; They first trouble and muddy the
pure Springs of Christian Doctrine and Practice, br^ng first Liturgies, Forms
and Ceremonies of Worship, and then went on to Altars, Crosses, Bowings,
Washings, Images, Masses, and Infinite such trumpery, to amuse men's minds with
a show of outside Worship; Then they set apart multitudes of Men devoted to
these wickednesses, who had no other Employment but to read M^sses, filling the
world with Lies, and Forgeries of Miracles, whereby to bring the world into
Fear and Superstition, chiefly to induce Men to impart to them of their wealth
and substance; relating wonderful Apparitions and Visions of such who had been
favorable to their greedy desires, ma^ing them no less than Saints, that
others might be encouraged to follow their works; And more Fuel might be added
to their ungodly Lusts: But if any did discountenance them in their Designs, or
not fulfill their desires to the utmost, they had a serviceable invention of
Purgatory, whereby they would make up their Markets; For their Prayers were of
no Force to deliver Men from thence, unless they were well paid in hand before
they begun to work: Also Confession, and Extreme Unction were none of their
meanest Engines to cheat the world; For by virtue of these being near the Beds
of departing Souls, they made successful use of the opportunity, either to
Forge Wills and Donations, or else by aggravating their sins, and the torments
of Purgatory, get from them what men in despair, (and no more capable of
enjoyments in this world, and therefore prone enough to throw them away,
(especially where there appeared hopes of a return in another) were willing to
part with. Add to this, that having locked up the pure Truth in an unknown
language, and few Bibles also to be got by reason of the unlearnedness of the
age; All their Devotions they comprehended in Rituals and Rosaries, etc. All
their Religion was external Pomp, Ceremony and Magnificence, puzzled and
intricated with a thousand inventions and devices, that had no relation to it,
otherwise than to destroy it from the Earth: Now by these means they had got
the Keys into their hands; But what Keys? even those of the bottomless Pit, to
sink men in Perdition. But thus it was, and by these evil arts they had made
themselves the oracles of the age, through whose mouth all Religion and Devotion
must proceed; They called themselves the Church, all their Constitutions and
Injunctions must now be irrefragable, and they must needs pretend to be
Infallible, since they saw all matters of Religion depending upon them, and
nothing was seen or known but what was their pleasure to apoint and declare:
And who could convince them of Error in the midst of darkness? when all light
of the Gospel, and of Truth it self seemed to be extinguished? Thus have they
overthrown that pure and undefiled Religion, denying the Lord that bought them,
and betraying him with Judas into the power of his Enemies; But he rises again
to take vengeance of his Oppressors. But these things considered, it is no
wonder that our Ancestors could not see through this mist and darkness of
error, thicker than that of Egypt, which had by this time overspread the face
of the whole earth. But partly mistaking a generation of Deceivers, for the
true Church, thought it Honorable to confer what they could to its
Greatness, partly through fear of Purgatory, and to deliver their Souls from
that torment which they were taught to believe, partly to save their souls; For
which purpose they were taught that these Donations were effectual, settled
upon them their Lands, which were afterward confirmed to them by Law upon the
same account; For in Magna Charta there is express mention made by the King of
this end of his Grants, (viz.) the saving of his Soul: Now that they were
deluded in these Donations, we need go no farther than the universal consent of
those Churches who have shaken off the Papal Usurpation, who have all declared
against Praying for the Dead as insignificant; and do acknowledge that all
Donations given to the Clergy, could have no effect (as was pretended,) to save
men's Souls* Add to this, there is no color for it in Scripture, and was only
then invented as a serviceable Engine to deceive men of their Estates, and
thereby to Benefit and Enrich that Idolatrous Church: Which being considered,
that these Conditions on which they obtained their Lands were proposed dolo
malo, and farther, that they are not kept according to the will of the Feoffor;
Those Customs being now abolished of Praying for Souls, upon which account they
held many considerable Lands; Whether the Statute of Marlbridge or other Laws
will extend to redeem those Lands, I leave to the learned in the Law to judge.
If it be alleged, that these Lands, and their Privileges have been confirmed
to them all along under Protestant Princes; and that the King takes an Oath at
his Coronation to defend them: It may be answered, that such use and benefit of
those Lands may be permitted them by those who were Proprietors thereof; Not
that the right of the Successor should be prejudiced thereby: Or perhaps they
understood not so fully their condition in respect to that Right, and therefore
more justly accrues to us as the discoverers; or else they had not the same
necessity to reassume it: For our condition is such, by Divine Providence
appointed* that there is no other mea^s to save us from Ruin. I shall here add
something much to this purpose out of Grotius; Si Lex fundetur in praesumptione
aliqua facti, quod factum revera ita se non habeat tunc ea Lex non obliget.
Seneca says, Demens est qui fidem praestat Errori; Grotius also brings the
opinion of Bodinus much to our purpose. Bodinus censet iisdem ex causis Regem
sive aliena fraud and dolo, sive errore circumventum, sive metu restitui
posse. In another place the same Grotius, Sed hoc quoque sciendum est posse
subditis jus etiam quaesitum auferri per Regem duplici modo, aut in Poenam, aut
ex vi super-eminentis Dominii; Sed ut id fiat ex vi super eminentis Dominii
primum requiritur utilitas publica. Again, Illud quoque a multis traditum
beneficia principum quae liberaliter sunt concessa semper posse revocari.

As concerning the Kings Oath, I shall only propose the words of the same
Grotius, Ut valeat Juramentum oportet ut obligatio sit licita; Quare nullas
vires habebit jurata promissio de re illicita aut naturaliter, aut Divina
interdictione, aut etiam humana, If this be not sufficient, he adds farther,
Imo etiamsi res quae promittitur non sit illicita, sed majus bonum morale
impediens, sic quoque non valebit Juramentum.

As for the Imputation of Sacrilege, we have thus much to say. 1. That the
word has a very large signification, and it is hard to be punctually decided
what is Sacrilege, and what not; But 2. Of this we are certain, that extreme
necessity cannot be praescribed to by it; For we find David made use of the
Shewbread in this case: And it is farther to be noted, that I have not
directed that they should be appropriate to any private use, but to be
preserved as a support of the Commonwealth in all degrees where there may be
necessity, and so to become the public Endowment; For it is not to be applied
to the use of any particular Man, or Men, so as to be appropriated to them; It
being like Judas's Money, the price of a Savior, with which the Jews bought the
Potters Field to bury strangers in, when it was returned by Judas: So these
Lands also ought to be converted to the benefit and relief of the Poor, the
Stranger, and Necessitous, which may very well consist with the method I have
before mentioned.

But farther, we may do well to consider how they have behaved themselves in
the Fruition of these ample Privileges they have been invested with: I shall
not now trouble the Reader with a particular recitation of those disturbances
and molestations wherewith our Kings and Nobles, as well as Commons have
suffered under Popish Bishops; Nor yet the Practices of our late Bishops of the
Reformation; how they oppressed the Subjects, and overthrew all Laws and
Constitutions of the Kingdom, to set up their own Power, and satisfy the lust
of tyrannous and absolute Dominion, abusing the goodness of our Kings to this
purpose, which things have been showed already by others: It shall be
sufficient to observe, that when by the Reformation the Scriptues were opened,
and put into every man's hands for their Direction, there were found very few
whose minds were dis-engaged from the Superstition of Popery, but manifested an
inclination to embrace the Scripture in the true and native plainness of it,
and to yield obedience to the sincere practical Duties therein contained; And
at that time it seemed to have an Influence upon the Clergy as well as others,
who minding the calling the People off from Popery, or Confirming them in the
Reformed Religion, or building them up in Faith and good Works, were not much
sollicitous of Dominion and Jurisdiction, but depended upon the Kings Grace,
not only for any Authority to be exercised by them, but also for their very
Lands and Revenues; And he that had so boldly spoiled Abbeys and Monasteries,
bringing down proud and stately Fabrics to the dust, and Confiscating their
Revenues, could also upon the least occasion offered, or tending to oppose his
Projects, have caused them to taste of the same Lot with their Brethren; These
two things were concurring the Truth of Christ, and Fear of the Prince to whom
they were subject, must needs make tolerable Bishops, though it is probable
they were good men notwithstanding. But as it was in the Bishops of Rome, who
of tolerable Bishops at the first, when their Fortunes were small, and the
Secular Authority too Potent to be resisted, became intolerable Usurpers of
uncontrollable Power, when once they had settled their Foot, and enlarged their
Dominions; So likewise the old Serpent had the same Game to play with us; For
after a little time having settled themselves by Law, they began to look about,
and think of amplifying their Power, making all men submit thereto, and to
suppress all opposition, and root it out; And now they held no longer of the
Kings Grace, but Jure Divino, still augmenting and riveting themselves by
degrees in Secular Authority, and exceeding therewth from the Light and Purity
of Scripture, to a hatred thereof, and the Preaching of it, and all such as
owned it in Public, declaring and teaching it, or in private; Till at length
no Remonstrances or Petitions to the contrary notwithstanding; They had erected
a Court of Commission, and had brought a Spanish Inquisition amongst us, and
proceeded to other acts, by corrupting or delaying Justice, that it was hard to
say whether the Subject was more oppressed, by being deprived of the Privileges
the Law allows him, or the Bishops more Tirants and Usurpers in going so far
beyond the limits that the Law had set them; every where acting with such a
Power as the Effects made appear to be unlimited: They having been thus seduced
by Riches and Greatness, to abandon the Truth and Purity of Christian Religion,
Yet other Persons wanting that Temptation, had no reason to submit to a
domineering Lust, against the Testimony of Truth and Religion, nor lend their
assistance to maintain a laizy and usurped authority; So that animosities must
needs be kindled; and as the Bishops grew more in Authority and Dominion, and
farther departed from this Truth, the Malice and Rage of the one increased,
which added stubborness and resolution to the other; These Causes of dissension
were kindling and somenting a long while, till the Bishops at last so far
abused the good nature of K. Charles I. so far to the oppression of the Truth,
and the mantainers of it, and it was but the Name of a Puritan that must make a
Man liable to all the Inconveniences of a tyranical Court, to be susspended
from his Office, and the Benefits of it; to have his Study and House ransacked,
forced to accuse himself by an Oath Ex Officio; and besides waiting upon
Vexatious and Dilatory Suits, without liberty of Pleading or answering to any
thing that was objected against him: He must thus spend his Time and his Estate
to the Ruin of Himself and his Family. These and other things became so
general a burden, that there was no redress but by taking up Arms against those
unjust Invaders of their Liberty, whose original Greatness being established by
Deceit and Falsehood, their Authority a Usurpation* their Government, though it
had been Legal, yet so unreasonably abused, to the disturbance of the Peace and
Liberty of the Subject; It were not in the Kings power, though they decoyed him
to their Party; nor was it just and right in him to defend or abett them, much
less to esteem what was done against them, to be done against Himself, His
Royal Crown, or Sacred Authority; He is to be the Minister of Justice, and this
must be adherd to, though with the loss of whatsoever is most dear to him; It Is
He acts against his own Life and Crown, He betrays his Scepter and Authority,
and is guilty of Treason against himself, when he takes part with the
unrighteous, with cruel and blood-thirsty men, to disturb the Peace of his true
and Loyal Subjects; to spoil them of their Lives and Fortunes, and leave the
Children of Innocent Men to the extremity of Sorrow and Distress: Thus were we
at length engaged in a Civil War, and by a soul and reproachful Disaster
contrary to the desires and wishes of the Nation: The Hand of the Subject was
imbrued in the Blood of his King; and shall we think these Men Innocent in all
this? Then may it be said that he who shall all manner of ways exagitate his
enemy, and leave no part of malice unattempted to hasten the destruction of
him, who has no other quarrel to his Persecutor, but the desire of his
amendment; if he shall drive him to the utmost and last extremity, so that he
knows not which way to turn, and finds no possible means of Recovery and
safety, but by disarming his Persecutor, and captivating that Power that was so
unjustly drawn out against him: This Person thus disarmed, may then complain he
is abused and set upon, his Life and Fortune assaulted upon no ground or
reason, he is Innocent, and only guilty (if that be guilt) of endeavoring to
bring his Enemy to a right mind; that is, to be his Vassal, that he may set his
foot upon the neck of his Enemy, and make him know, that HE also is a God that
rules in the Earth: The same imbittered Spirit seems to continue still with
us, and has not been without its Essays of disturbing that Peace and repose
which we at present enjoy; But their wings are cut, and their nails* paired,
Men do generally do see into the cheat, and every day brings fresh discoveries*
thereof; and it were strange that now men's minds are so busily employed in the
search of Knowledge and Improvement of Sciense to that degree, as to have
arrived at such seize in one Century, as we do not find that former ages
were at any time Masters of. It were strange I say in such increase of
knowledge, if we should be still blind in matters that concern Religion; That
we should not apprehend that all that Pomp and stateliness is vanished, for the
support and mantaining whereof, the Clergy were Invested with such great
Possessions, and ample Privileges. I have two things more especially, which
with some reason I may impute the occasion of them to the present
Church Government. 1. The present Atheism and Debauchery that the Age and
Nation labor with, which though it may have its rise from some other Cause,
yet it receives at least strength and Confirmation, partly from the empty
Formality of the Clergy, who have apparently no other Designs but their own
gains, partly from the open contradiction they see between their Life and
Manners, and the^ Doctrine; who are all the week after refuting and pulling
down that in their Practice, which a few empty words of speculation, like the
Calf that Aaron made to guide the People, and to as much purpose) set forth on
the first day of it: They see that whilst these Men Preach against worldliness,
they themselves are the most desirous, greedy and ambitious of all the world
can afford; Whilst they preach against Drunkenness and Debauchery, yet
Themselves are never satisfied with those advantages of Riches and enlarged
Revenues, which serve but to keep these Vices in heart and life. They* may add
with some show of Reason; Perhaps we should not hear one word from them of
these things, did they not find the Trade gainful, and the means to be great in
this world, was to profess to deny it; They will go on, sure these Men do but
*tell us Stories and Fancies, and maze in a wilderness of Tattle and empty
sounding words; For if there were any reality in the thing they propose, it
would sure have some effect upon themselves, to moderate their Projects and
Desires. Such kind of Conclusions as these they may draw from a
Religious-Government; stamped for true and Orthodox by Public Authority* Yet
thus betraying it self to its own Condemnation: As for the Dissenters, they
will appear to these Men silly deluded Creatures that know nothing.

The 2. Thing is, the various Opinions and Phrensies that have of late infested
our Nation, may be thought to have their original from hence, next to the Craft
and Subtilty of our grand Enemy; For English men (to speak without flattery,)
are generally lovers of Truth and Integrity, and somewhat stiff and rigid in
those Principles they adhere to, especially if they imagine them agreeable to
Truth and Honesty; When therefore they had embraced the Gospel and the
Reformation; and conceiving withal, it manifested an opposition to the
Ecclesiastical Government; To keep to the one, they grew into dislike of
the other, which took deeper root when this Government began Vex and Beat their
Fellow Servants, and so instead of lessening the difference, make the gap
wider. Now what must ^hey do in this Case, the Government had thrown them off,
and pursued them as Enemies to it; They were too rigid to quit those Principles
they had taken up with such appearance of Truth; And the Government would not
yield to such whom they thought must receive and not give Laws, according to
the pride of Usurpation; So that they were forced to wander as Sheep without a
Shepherd, or rather whose Shepherd was unfaithful; Some took one way, some
another, as their Fancy led them, to Munster, or Geneva, or worse, till at last
all things came into Confusion. Thus has Ecclesiastical Authority given birth
to disscentions, and Fuel to continual Animosities, administered strength and
growth to Atheism and Irreligion; By it Men have been staved off from Unity,
and peaceable enjoyment of their Lives; Thereby they have been plunged in the
depth of error and distraction; have been driven to sheath their Swords in the
Bowels of their Brethren; And that no wickedness might be left un-atchieved,
the sad effects of all this has been yet depending upon, and a Consequent to
the former, the spilling the Blood of the Sacred person of their King; These
evils hang together as a Chain of many Links, whose first Link is the denying,
not harkening to, rejecting and disobeying the word of God, and the light of
the Gospel; Bring in this, and the rest follow as part of the Chain; But
establish the Truth of Christian Religion, and you have therewith security and
peace, and a strong defense against all these Evils. Now our Enquiry shall be
concerning Religion, How it may be settled with Truth as to it self, with
Comfort to all people, and with security to the Nation. We shall therefore
endeavor to give a brief account of Religion, according to the Talent we have
received. It must be known, First then, that it is of another Nature than those
outward things we converse with; That is, It is not of the World, nor according
to the fashion of the World; Neither does it agree or associate with any thing
that is external, but it is opposite and contrary thereto, even to all Forms of
Worship of what kind soever; All Ceremonies and Constitutions of Men be they of
what kind they will, But much more to the enjoyments of the present Life,
Riches, and Honors, and the like; To all designs of getting a Name, Dominion,
Power, Estates, etc. This manifestly appears throughout the Scripture,
especially the New Testament. Hence this pure Doctrine is called a New
Creation, Regeneration, New Birth, etc. To show that there is something old that
must be shaken off, even the things of this world, which this is to succeed;
For we cannot be said to be born again, or Created again, unless that first
Creation be made null and void, and brought to nothing, and this substituted in
the room thereof: A man cannot Re-build his House that has not first pulled
down the old one. Hence our Lord makes it the first step to come to him, to
deny our selves, and take up our Cross; That is, to cast away all concern for
the things of this Life, any desire after them or satisfaction in them, and to
be esteemed nothing, of no account; yea Fools and Mad for his sake: Hence also
we may observe a perfect opposition in Scripture, between the Kingdom of Christ
and of this World; those things are called Spiritual, Heavenly, not Fading:
Whereas in Contradiction to them, are Put Earthly, Carnal, Corrupt, etc. Love
not the World, nor the Things of the World; if any man Love the world, the Love
of the Father is not in him. Says St. John, the Carnal man Savoureth not the
things of God, they are Spiritually discerned; where we may observe that
Contrariety which Logicians call Contradictorie opposita: Our Savior also very
diligently seperats them; ye cannot serve God and Mammon, bidding us take no
care What we shall Eat, or What we shall Drink, or What we shall Put on: But
bids us in opposition to these things, seek First the Kingdom of Heaven and its
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added. I might be large in
Collecting to this purpose, but let it suffice to observe: That we cannot
imagine the Scripture to be more express then it is, supposing it had been in
the Mind of the Lawgiver to make us fully sensible of the Contrariety and
Inconsistency of outward enjoyments, with the Purity of a Christian life; and
had he not designed to Caution us diligently in this respect, it were
impossible there should be found such expressions in his Will revealed: But
here it must be noted, that the opposition is not of that nature; as that he
that has the Blessings of Wealth or Honor must presently throw them away, but
he Must throw them out of his mind, that his heart and affections be not set
upon them, which may be obtained by earnest Prayer, and doing some good to
others with the Enjoyments we possess: We must note farther, that if there be a
Divine Command for forsaking of them, as in Abraham and the Apostles, or what
is Equivalent thereto, as suffering the Will of God in times of Persecution;
they must be actually forsaken and thrown away: Farther, we must note as to our
present design, that this opposition so far prevails, as that it will be
hardly or not at all possible for us to partake of this Heavenly Life, and be
true Disciples of Christ, if we make it our design and business to seek after
and fill our selves with earthly enjoyments; if we use them to the oppression
of others, to an unjust Dominion over our Brethren, if they are made the chief
thing in our aim, sought with Care, Deceit, Flattery, Lying, Freeing, etc. If
we prostitute all our Actions, and Conscience it self for an empty Tittle, and
transient Revenue: And Generally (in the words of Solomon) he that makes haste
to be Rich cannot be innocent. So that then this Contrariety between Flesh and
Spirit, between Religion and the World, is such as they exclude each other: The
man whose mind is taken up with Religion, values not the World, nor any thing
therein; he wants them not, he desires them not, he seeks them not: The man
whose mind is taken up with the Affairs of the World, values not the things of
Christ, they are foolishness unto him. Which thing also may be evinced by
natural Light or Reason: For we see men that are given to Vices, run on without
Deliberation, or regard of any other thing, to that immense degree, after
satisfaction in their Vices; as not only to consume their Patrimony, though a
Princely Revenue, but the Health of their Bodies, and even the World it self,
to be satisfied in their desires; thus the desires of Drunkenness and Lust,
being infinite and never to be satisfied, but rather irritated by the fullness
of Enjoyment; the desires tending vehemently to the fruition, the fruition
giving birth to new desires: That if men were permitted to act in their full
carier, and prosecute these Vices without restraint of Divine and Humane Laws,
how soon would it run the World in Confusion and Ruin, and yet not a stop put
to these desires, for they are Infinite. Thus the Covetous man desires to gain
more and more from others and enclose to himself all things, till at length all
things else (if his desires be fulfilled) must perish for want of subsistence:
So the Ambitious man will have all things subjected to himself, and if the
whole world be his Vassallage; yet his desires carry him still to grasp more
Power and Dominion, as is reported of Alexander: Thus we see Vice in its true
nature, tends to the destruction of all things, and consists in an
inordinateness of the mind, whereby its desires are infinite, and not to be
satisfied: The mind having forsaken God, and set up it self in its place, will
thus have all things subservient to it, and is carried forth infinitely to
obtain this end: And this inordinate mind and unlimited desiring and Lusting
after that which it takes to, is that Corruption which was brought in by Adam's
Transgression, which we call O^iginal Sin; which is no other then this
inordinate mind forsaking God and lusting infinitely after its own fancies and
devices. Now to help lost man, and free him from this Slavery of an inordinate
mind, was the business of the second Adam; who came down from Heaven, took our
Nature upon him in the form of a Servant, suffering upon the Cross that he
might destroy the works of the Devil, and establish an ordinate regular mind in
those that believe in him: That is the Divine Nature whereof he was partaker,
by his taking our Nature, is communicated to all Men that believe, which
rescues them from this slavery of their inordinate mind, and by virtue of which
they subdue all those desires which were introduced by Adams transgression;
where we must take notice that we said Christ in the Divine Nature was united
with our Nature; and that by virtue of this Union it is communicated to all Men
that believe, in opposition to Adam, whose transgression redounded to all by
not believing, or disobedience; in which it must be farther noted, That it
being a Divine Nature united to Christians by Faith, 1. It is no other than the
third Person in the Trinity the holy Ghost, which proceeds from the Father
and the Son, because he operates this work in us. Observe 2dly. That we cannot
do any good work of our selves, for our Regeneration and new Life, is this
Union of the Divine Nature, the holy Spirit in our hearts, our good actions
coming from the Principle of Life, must also be from him who is that life. Now
we may see clearly what our Savior says, they that worship the Father, shall
worship him in Spirit and in Truth, even in the Spirit which is communicated to
all Flesh by the union of the Divine and humane Nature.

To speak all in a word; Adams transgression lusting after the forbidden Fruit,
opened the door to a lusting and inordinate mind in all his Posterity, tending
to subvert all things; This was taken away by the word becoming Flesh, uniting
the Divine and humane Nature, and thereby communicated to all men that believe,
that the Sons of Adam in the power thereof might become the Sons of God, In the
strength of this Divine Nature to them that ask it, they are able to subdue
those inordinate insatiable desires of the mind, which are propagated from Adam
to all Posterity. Now we see what Religion is, even an imploring the Gracious
Spirit to subdue these Corruptions we were addicted to, and a living in the
exercise of this strength and power against all assaults of our spiritual
Enemies. Religion then is an internal exercise to keep the soul pure, and free
from inordinate desires, clean and immaculate from all pollution, and so is the
Mother of all moral duties; It is an Internal life whereby it does deny an
external life, and abandons not only the enjoyments of the external life, but
even the desires of them, which it only and principally aims at. Now let us
consider what is Antichristian or Antichrist; The Name shows that it is
opposite to Christ, and something set up instead of him, or against him; And
sure if he will answer his name, he must overthrow that which Christ has done
and appointed, and set up something else in the room thereof, whatever he has a
mind to, or his pleasure is to set up that is contrary thereto, which he has no
other way to accomplish, but by bringing this Internal exercise of the Mind to
some External exercise and performance; For thereby the Mind will forget the
Internal work, being amused and taken up with External duties. Now that he may
bring may bring Religion to an external performance, he needs no more then with
some show of zeal to excogi^a^e certain Forms and Ceremonies, to set aside such
Persons, such Places, such Times for Religious Duties; and when he has done
this, he may excogitate other things at pleasure, and go on till he be able to
trample upon the necks of Kings, and pretend to dispose of the whole Earth at
his command: For from wha^ we hove said, Religion being an Internal Exercise,
and lying in every man's breast to Repent and Believe; It will follow, there is
no necessity to set aside Men for Religions sake, though perhaps it may be
done; But if Men shall make it necessary, then these things will follow, that
there must be Places for them wherein to officiate necessar^ly, and there ^s as
much necessity that as these men increase in number, that these Places also
increase; But these men being idle, must have some outward Employment, where we
have a foundation for M^ssals, Rosaries, Prayings to Saints, Purgatory, etc.
Likewise they must have a mantainance, and will look out to be Great and
Glorious as other men; and will perhaps as the nature of Men is, use deceitful
arts for this purpose; There is now a neces^ity this purpose; There is now a
necessity that their Places of Officiating be adorned also with Rich and
Magnificent Building, with Gold and Silver, Pictures and Images; Their Worship
must be suitable to their State and Pomp in other things. Thus shall we have in
that also a great deal of stateliness and Ceremonious Intricacies to amuse men's
minds; And lastly, the Doctrine must not be dissonant from all this, but suited
to uphold the Fabric; This will bring on such a Council as that of Tr. to
establish such exorbitances by a Law.
Likewise it will be highly necessary to appoint some days to appear more
gloriously than others; All men cannot attend every day an external Worship;
Therefore let some days be set apart, wherein it may be cloathen in its best
Robes. Now in the truth of Religion, no Chr^stian is free from the duty of
keeping his mind pure, in any day, or time of the day, nor in any Place; much
less ought we to think it is more tied to one person than another; Or that by
studying in the Universitiy, where foolish Philosophy does add to the
corruption of men's minds: Men should be freer from this Pollution, or fitter to
free others therefrom; and what will follow, but that they endeavor to
confirm their own Authority and Constitutions by all means possible, and avenge
the violation of a Crime against this external show of Worship, with the
greatest punnishments and rigor; But let every one contemn the Internal
Worship as he will, and be be guiltless: So that all External Worship is in
some degree or other Antichristian; But the least evil is to be chosen in the
Constitution of the Church, and all things so appointed, that there may be
least occasion for the growth of this mischief, and all things (as nearly as
may be) so ordered, as Religion may appear in its native beauty, divested of
the outward Man in its too much redundancy; and thereby somewhat pressed and
urged more fully to seek the Righteousness of Christ, that inward power which
works all in all.

These things being thus laid down, we shall find what a Christian Church is,
even the Assembly of such Persons, who denying the World and its corrupt
Inclinations, have believed in Christ, and are Regenerate by his Spirit,
keeping their minds regular and pure from the inclinations to vanity: Their
Union is Internal through the Spirit of God, They are of one mind, and in
perfect Love, being all cemented together by that one Spirit, built upon the
Corner Stone, which is Christ; Their Government also must be according to that
Spirit, being nothing but Unity, Love, Peace, Mutual Assistance, and delighting
to benefit each other, in meekness submitting to each other; every Man is
Servant to his Brother for his good; and he that is greatest, is he that is
most serviceable; All things are done not only with Decency and order, but with
the greatest sweetness, candor, and integrity that may be. Now because of
humane infirmity, there will be Lapses; Charity will oblige that the offense be
covered, and the Person offending upon his Repentance (privately manifested to
any of the Company) be restored; But if after private and particular
admonitions he continue pervicacious and impenitent, he is to be secluded, and
cast off from the Company: Here is no External Violence to be used, no
assistance from the secular arm, no employment for the Mastistrates Sword, but
a plain and simple shutting him out of the Society, that will not be guided by
the Laws of it, and thereby it becomes his own act and not theirs* But our
Savior has given a greater Power with the Keys, not External concerning Wills
and Testamen^s, etc. but Internal by the operation of his Spirit, whereby any
Two of his Disciples agreeing together concerning any matter, whatever they
establish on Earth, shall be confirmed in Heaven, be it what it will; So that
if they ask in Faith; of which we have not found any instances as yet, we may
hereafter: The Word is sure, and the Promise firm, but requires Faith in them
that ask it. Thus it must needs be, that all its Jurisdiction and Power must be
Internal, since the very design of Christian Religion, is to deny outward
things; But we have been long trained up in a contrary Doctrine, the Ministers
still placing themselves in the room of Christ, will be heads when they ought
to be but Members, and rule such whom they ought to serve, seeking rather the
Substance and Goods of the Flock, than the good of their Souls. This Society
then being met together, their Exercise and Worship will be as agreeable as may
be to their Religion; that is, Internal, I mean there will be not be need of
any great pains or study to prepare for to entertain the Company with a studied
Discourse of an hour long, but rather all being partakers of, and Regenerated
into the Divine Nature, as was said, it will be necessary to act suitable
thereto in all plainness and simplicity; And further, this being that Life from
whence all a Christians actions flow, let every one submit to the direction and
guidance thereof; and so whoever has a word of Exhortation, let the rest hear
it, as coming from the same Spirit which is given to all: Let him that has a
mind to speak, speak freely, but humbly also, and willing to forbear if it
shall be signified to him; This Paul calls Prophesying, 1 Cor. 14.31, For they
may all Prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted. and
the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. As for the Minister or
Bishop, if this practice be mantained, it may soon be decided who he is, or
ought to be, even he, whose Gifts, whose Zeal, whose Piety and wisdom shall be
noted as chief amongst the rest, and Honored among them with general consent
as deserving the first Rank: Now if there be dissent in this regard, the best
way to avoid strife, is to decide it by Lot. According to what we have said,
his business will not be much, in regard of study, but in pains and labor, in
causing them often to meet together, to exhort them earnestly and diligently,
to heal those that are fallen, visit the sick, comfort the weak, take care for
the poor, instruct the Ignorant, with many such duties which accompany this
weighty Charge. He earnestly endeavors to build up the Inward man, and is so
far from admitting Ceremonies in Religion, that he wishes them far excluded
from the civil practice of men. There are but two appointed and those only
necessary, Baptism or washing with Water, to show our being cleansed by the
Holy Ghost from Adams sin, rendered pure from all Pollution, and is the
admission into this Holy Society: The other is the Supper, signifying to us,
and also conveying to us by Bread and Wine, the fruit of our Lords being
bruised for us, and farther confirming and strengthening of us in his Power to
resist all Corruption; both which he will administer to such as understand what
they do, and are sincere in the doing thereof: All that we have said may easily
appear to be the Constitution of the Primitive Church: They were so united in
the Spirit of Love and Peace as to have all things common, and to be a wonder
to the Heathens; who would say of them, see how these Christians Love one
another. Likewise that every man had liberty to speak in the Congregation,
appears by what St. Paul says of Prophesying; also the Apostles as they
removed from place to place, took care to appoint such Pastors or Bishops in
Church they were about to leave title to, as being Pious, Elderly and Zealous;
might thereby have the best take care of the rest, and to serve them in that
Office: But when large Revenues came to be annexed to these Places; he was the
fittest man among many pretenders, whom the Secular Authority did commend
whether a Shepherd or a Wolf, 'twas not regarded, But thus much to show what
is truth in Religion, and in its practice thereof, which we are gone so far
from as to be Ignorant of the notion, but much more of the Actions agreeable to
it. But it si good to know it, though we do not for the present embrace it; yet
to look whence we are fallen, may be some means of amendment, and to consider
well thereof is the first step to it. At least from hence it will appear very
Just and Reasonable, to remove those unnecessary Additions, to cut off those
superflous Branches, those redundant Revenues of Clergy, which tend to destroy
Religion: It will also appear, that in proposing a Hundred Pounds a year to the
Clergy; I am so far from being beyond the mark, that I am short of it, and the
danger is still more in the largeness of the Revenue, then in the shortness of
it. But it will be said Ministers will not be satisfied therewith. Neither will
unreasonable men be satisfied with any thing. Bishops were never yet satisfied
with the Power and Revenues they had unjustly obtained, but were continually
Proling for more: Their Grand Captain the Pope, will not easily say it is
enough: Should his Greatness be more widely extravagant then it is? In the mean
time let the Magistrate take care to give such limits to their desires, as may
come nearest to the bounds of Truth; and since they cannot govern themselves in
the Fortunes they enjoy, he shall do well to place them in such Fortunes, as
they shall have least opportunity to abuse; such as may have a tendency to
cause them to reflect and consider who they are, and what they are set about.
Thus not only the necessiy of the Civil State require that the Lands of the
Clergy be alienated, but likewise the Truth of Religon does more pressingly
urge it: The best means to secure and establish which, if any outward means
will do it, is to allow the Officers and Min^sters thereof such advanges from
the World, as that they prove not Temptations to draw them aside to a disregard
of their Office, to Pride, Malice, Covetousness, etc. And on the other hand may
keep them from being burdensome to themselves by the straitness of their
Fortune, or to their Neighbors for Relief: I have known a Minister, his Wife
and Children Maintained out of Thirty Pound a year, with that Contentment to
themselves, and with such esteem amongst their Neighbors: That though other
Clergy men exceed him in Wealth, yet he much exceeds them in the abundance of
his Enjoyments; if they are before him in Honor and large Possessions; he is
much before them in Happiness and Content, which is the fullness that all things
tend to administer. For these men whilst they teach others, are themselves yet
to learn what it is to live Well and Happily; it is not to have much or Great
things, which with their increase, increase the desires of them, and so there
is no rest, and consequently no satisfaction: But it is to have a mind
sufficient to it self, and well governed, making use of the present enjoyments,
without anxiety for the future, and cutting off these restless desires in the
bud, which if prosecuted serve only for a snare and torment, as Heathens have
observed: For a conclusion we shall propose these particulars.

1. From what has been said, it appears that Christian Religion is best upheld
by small Revenues in the Ministers of it; because its design is to shake off
all the outward things of this World.

2. Thing, that no Pomp or Ceremony, no Altar, no Surplice, etc. are required
in the Christian Religion: The reason is, Religion being an Internal work, and
a change of the mind from outward things, and inconsistant therewith: To what
purpose are these outward forms and Ceremonies? what Reference have they?
Unless it be to amuse the mind, and frame a belief in men that Religion (quite
contrary to the nature of it) consists in externalls, whereby (to the
destruction of Religion) the mind shall be drawn forth into external
appearances, to cause it delight in that Pomp and Vanity which it should
forsake; and by this means it will be blinded so much, as not once to look
within it self, but thinks all is well where there is nothing but rottenness
and Corruption. If you say that these externals are representations of the
Internal, work, and serve to lead us to them. I answer, it is a Preposterous
and indirect means; for what is so near me as I am to my self? And why cannont
I descend into my own mind every moment, without taking that for an advantage
which brings ruin with it? As Crosses, Garments, etc. For Ceremonies are not
only needless, but mischeivous, cheating and blinding the World, whereby they
let go the substance and embrace the shadow.

3. Ministers or Bishops have no concern in public Affairs, or in Secular
Jurisdiction; their business is to press Faith in Christ, both in themselves
and others; to remove the Corruption fallen upon men's minds: what duty then
lies upon them for Secular business, or what claim have they to it? The nature
of their Profession and Doctrine does divest them thereof as much as is
possible, being quite opposite to it; forbidding even too much concern for
their Private Affairs in the World; which shows that it is their extravagancy
and degeneracy when they thrust themselves into public Employment, which has
such tendency to overcharge their minds with that which they should be
altogether cleansed from, as we have before showed.

4. It is almost needless here to say there is no such Power of Excommunication
as is now in use, being made to uphold a lie and an unjust usurpation in
Secular Affairs, to lacky after Fees, and to serve the Secular Interest of the
Clergy: which according to the Truth of their Employment is none at all; we
have showed before, what this Excommunication is: And certainly the true Church
as well as the Government thereof being Internal and Spiritual, not External
and Secular, all the Acts of its Jurisdiction must be agreeable thereto.

5. That Method of Preaching, is a prejudice to the Life and Power of Religion,
wherein men set forth themselves by Studied Discourses, with Ornaments of
History, Rhetoric, subtle Disputations, nice Distinctions, etc. For by these
things the mind is taken up with things that are Circumstantial and External,
and thereby lets slip those things that are Internal and of nearer Concernment,
and therefore has a stamp of of the Beast upon it; tending to inhance the value
of all other External things which men ought to deny, causing them to love and
embrace what they should cast away, to desire more earnestly such things as
they should be mortified unto; and consequently they will run more swiftly then
before to the pit of Destruction, where Antichrist and the false Prophet is: So
that at the end, these men are worse then at the beginning they might have
been; had they not been trained up in such a Religion as this, and it were
better for them not to have known the way of Truth, then having known it, to
make it the Instrument of more enlarged wickedness; and of going yet farther
from God then at first.

6. The Minister or Bishop takes no honor to himself; all that he is or has,
he has received it, it is the purchase of the the blood of Christ, exhibited
according to the word in the second Covenant to all that belive; he seeks not
reward nor labors for gain, having divested himself of Worldly and outward
things: He Governs the people, ^e is set over, not with force but meekness; he
uses no means of Compulsion, but draws them gently; he pretends not power
over their Wills, but an Office to persuade, but if men will destroy
themselves, he is guiltless, doing what is suitable to his Office, to reclaim
them, always willing to help them, always with open Arms to receive such as
come to the Church, and restore such as are fallen, Lamenting and Praying for
such whose Miscarriages are from their own Wills, and not in his power to help.

7. The last thing we observe from what is said before, is that it is
impossible there should be any Difference or Sect in the Christian Religion;
and if you find any amongst them, say assuredly Inimicus homo fecit hoc, it is
a stranger to the Truth and proceeds from some other cause. The reason is
plain, for what occasion can be imagined of Division or Schism amongst those
who all conspire only in this, to keep their minds Pure and clean from
Corruption, by Faith in Jesus Christ, and in the power of that Holy Spirit,
which is one in all of them: From which oneness divided through many members,
there must needs be unity: But you will say, the present time testifies the
Division that is among Christians. I answer, that such as are Christians in
pretense only, may divise a hundred more Sects and Parties: They are men that
will inspite of the Scriptures serve two Masters, God and Mammon; the Lord and
Baall. Men who are Christians by the halfes, that will serve the Lord, yet not
without a Babel of their own setting up. In Brief, the Presbyterians,
Independants, Anabaptists, etc. Will add to the Scriptures something that is
merely of their own fancies, imagining the Scripture to sound according to
their prejudice and preconception, Now if one man will set up one thing, and
say this is according to Scripture; another man with the same reason may set up
another thing of his own hatching and framing, and say the like, and so we may
go on in Infinitum: If the Bishops say, such and such Ceremonies are to be used
in the Church, seeming to them decent and according to Scripture. The
Presbyterians are not obliged to think as they do, nor take the same measures
of Decency as they do, and therefore may claim Privilege as well as the other
of a second Constitution, which perhaps will not so well agree with
Independants; and therefore with as much Right may they set up a third, and so
every man as his Fancy leads him: In the mean time this difference is not in
Religion it self, but in the Brains and Fancies of men, that love to cloth and
dress Religion according to their own fashion; and there cannot be a unity till
men shall come to throw away all these their delightful Imaginations, and
return to the obedience of that Spirit of Life and Truth, which proceeds from
the Father and the Son, and is only able to make us wise unto Salvation. There
is no unity but in this; the occasion of our divisions, was by departing
therefrom, and our returning to it, will be our advancement to our right minds,
to live in unity, in love, in Peace, in serving the Lord our God with one
heart, and one mind, rejoicing before him continually.

Now it should methinks shame these Teachers of what denom nation soever, that
set up a Doctrine of their own framing though out of the Litteral Word; if they
consider, that after all their contrivances and designs, their study and
labor, and spending so much sweat and words in the Pulpit; it is as impossible
for them to make men Believe, or Holy, or Powerful to resist the least
Temptation, as it was in the Priests of Baall after their Bellowings and
howlings to obtain the pure fire from Heaven to consume the Sacrifice; and I
wish they would no longer (with them) halt between two opinions; But if God be
to be Worshipped, let him be only Worshipped and entirely Worshipped; and made not
only the object, but to fill all Circumstances of his Worship.

Thus I have endeavored according to my Talent to show, with what plainness I
could the nature of Christian Religion, and to preserve it from the mistakes it
lies under at this day, by Episcopal Government, and shown that the necessity
of the Affairs of the Nation conspire with Religion to abolish it; and let us
understand the voice of God and what he requires, when he has thus hedged in
our way, that we cannot divert to any other path, but with great Detriment: He
has proclaimed the Truth of his Religion and Worship, which he will no longer
suffer to be oppressed with unjust usurpation: If the Government shall think good
to interest themselves in his cause, it will be well for them, but if not, he
will find other means and make way for the accomplishment of his will. And let
not the Bishops and their Party say, that every dangerous change in the
Commonwealth, still makes them the first objects of the assault, and begins
through their sides to ruin the Commonwealth. For the thing is contrary, and
he that will bring any Reformation in Church or State, must begin with them who
generally have been the disturbers of both, and always the strongest opposers
of any thing that tended much to the benefit of either; so that any thing that
is good and truly Profitable, must needs call for their removal, as its first
step to advancement.

How great the benefit would be of casting off the Bishops Courts, and that
unsupportable Yoke the Subject is enslaved to by means thereof; though all men
are in some measure sensible, yet those only can fully understand who have felt
the Lash of it; and I think, there is no man that considers the abominable
Corruption in those Courts, that any thing is carried which way the man desires
that gives the most Money, that all such persons as are of any Rank, or
Fortune, or Esteem in the World are freed from the molestations of these
Courts, only such as are poor and have little, must have this addition to their
Misery, to maintain the Credit of this unjust Authority, by the expense of
their time, and that little livelihood they have; whereby it is plainly to be
seen, that they are not keept to rectify Disorders, or ill Manners, as they
pretend; but purely for support of Episcopal Authority without any farther end,
or which is worse, to Grind the poor, and to rob such as are ready to starve.

And after all that has been said, shall we imagine that the Magistrate does
ill to take away Bishops Lands, or is their any cause to doubt what he ought,
or what is his duty to do in this case; rather do not the rules of Justice, and
Conscience oblidge him thereto, with the strongest obligation; for what greater
obligation can there happen to a Magistrate than to honor his Creator, to
obey him from whom he has received that trust he is invested with, and to take
away all remainders of an unsavory Idolatrous Worship What can oblige him more
then to procure the Happiness and welfare of his Subject in all cases, where it
may be done with safely to himself and his Government, with Justice and Piety,
and without injury to any, ought he not in Conscience to establish a Harmony
and Concord amongst his people, tending to their peace and settlement and
manifold satisfaction. Ought he not like a good Physician, to take away that
ill humor that has layne so long corroding upon their Bowels: Or is there any
other or better means of laying a solid foundation of durable empire and
undisturbed Government, then in the prosperity and contentment of the people:
Do not all our Laws and degrees of Magistracy, and even Civil Society it self
tend to this end; is not this that bond that at first linked men into Civility,
made them reasonable and sociable, and void of this, they slide insensibly into
confusion, and return to the Savage nature of such as Prey upon their own kind:
For such is said to be the condition of our Ancestors before they understood
the benefit of concord, and usefulness of well ordered Government; which
restrains Injustice by Laws, and gives Life to whatever may benefit mankind.
But I cannot think that barbarous Age so bad, when force prevailed and strength
of Arm bore down all before it, when nothing could be called a man's own longer
then the absence of a more puissant Champion gave him leave to enjoy it; when
weakness and innocence was the greatest calamity and occasion and suffering
continual Insolences and outrages: When Robbery and Stealing gave a just Title
to all things a man could Possess, and the security thereof lay only in the
strength of Possessour, if we compare these times with what has succeeded under
Episcopal Jurisdiction, we shall find the same exorbitances, but perhaps more
grievous coming upon the Stage, the Scene only altered; since unrighteousness
was established by a Law, and backed with Religion; since Piety and the fear of
God was thought worthy the greatest Punishment, Innocence and Humility the
greatest guilt; to open the mouth against vanity and wickedness was the
greatest Heresy: Since men have acted Lies with Applause, and Deceit with
Honor and Remuneration, professing Christ, yet trampling him under their feet,
renouncing the World, yet insatiable in their desires after it, pretending
Humility, yet insulting over the greatest Princes: Encouraging a contempt of
the Almighty their Creator and Redeemer, filling their Coffers by Indulgences
and Pardons thereof, and in the mean time the violation of the least Punctilio
enjoined by them, must be worthy of death: I could enlarge upon these things,
but why should I do it: To thee, O Lord Vengeance belongs: Show thy self, O
God of our Salvation.

There are two things more (which are wanting) to give us a vigorous and
lasting health? one is the Regulating the Laws, and the abuses of the numerous
pretenders to it. For the first, in my Apprehension, it were necessary that the
beginning of every Kings Reign, should be accompanied with a Cleansing,
Digesting and Gompiling a certain Perfect Body of the Law, that it might be
something certain, and that it might not be liable to the Quirkes and Fallacies
of so many busy Deceivers, and also that it may be brought as near as may be
to the present Genius and Humor of men, by that means that we be not governed
by an Antique Humor, as we would not be clothed in their fashion. To Regulate
the abuses therein, and hinder Multiplicity of Suites; the means may be to
appoint Arbitrations, that no Suit shall be in any of the Kings Courts under a
hundred Pounds: But that the Parties at variance for any value under that, be
made to choose each his Arbitratour, and to enter into bond, to approve the
Arbitrators shall determine, only this bond in case Covenants be not performed,
to be brought into the higher Courts and Sentence strictly passed thereupon;
also in case one Party refuse this Arbitration, that then the other proceed in
the Kings Court, and that the refuser be proceeded against upon Evidence given,
as Nonsuited. Some such effectal application the Corruption of Judicature and
increase of Law Suites do seem to require. The Benefits whereof will be, 1.
That people shall in a manner decide themselves their disagreements, it being
done by those whom themselves choose. 2. The Case may be more fully known, being
near the place and Justice more exactly rendered by that means. 3. It saves
great Expenses and long Journeys. 4. It may be a means that men run not out of
their Estates by long Suits. 5. It may keep a good Balance of Money in the
Pockets of meaner men, which tends to the advancement of Trade, and so Lawyers
may be prevented of drawing too much thereof into their Pockets, where it is
either useless to the public, or manifestly prejudicial by Usury and exaction.

Likewise it were highly requisite the Universities were looked into, which are
become Seminaries of Debauchery, rather then good Learning or good Manners to
the Nation. They have too great a Temptation to Debauchery from the too large
Beneficence of their Founders, which would be Retrenched, and part of the
Revenues, and also of their Colleges better settled, upon another design viz.
for maintaining Professors in all manner of Gentile Heroic exercises, that
young Gentlemen may not only know Arts and Sciences, but also to Fence, Ride,
Marshall an Army and the like; continual reading flats and deads the mind,
makes it unfit for Action: But this exercise will whet and enlarge it, and make
men capable of being employed in the Commonwealth, and I persuade my self that
these two being conjoined, Reading and Exercise would make a wise active
people. It were advisable that Tutours trouble not their Pupills with an
uncertain and Pedantick Philosophy, and with the Fabulous and Futilous Authors
of Hethenisme. But rather wi^h History, Sacred and Profane: Mathematics,
Sacred Philology; Languages, Policy, etc. But above all to instruct them in
Religion and matters of the Bible, and of Salvation.

The difference of Habit in their degrees, serve to puff them up, and cause
them to carry a Magisterial Pride throughout their Lives, every little adds to
a mind already corrupted.

For a Conclusion, let Politicians enquire whether it be safe and requisite in
a Commonwealth to allow of two Authorities and two distinct orders of
Government in the same body Politic, I suppose they will find it noxious, if
the consider that the Stability and Perpetuity of a Common wealth depends upon
its oneness or unity, It is Commonwealth in a Commonwealth explained by the
general consent of all Politicians.
which is like the straight line of the Mathematicians, the foundation of all
other their operations; now this oneness is so near the foundation of a
Commonwealth, that any receding from it, most needs have a dangerous influence
upon the whole Fabric, being a weakening and loosning the Foundations; and the
effects must follow that a violent Push of Storm and Wind will through this
defect endanger its overthrow: For this Episcopal Government being established
upon on different principles and different Interest to the rest of the
Government, with another Authority then that of the supreme Authority, it will
follow, that though it may agree well for a time in subordination to the
supreme Authority, yet there is a gap open for Division, which will not be
without its evil effects; when any unusual accident shall happen in the
Commonwealth to its disturbance; thus we know by virtue of this Authority, and
from this principle of Division in the Government, our Kings to have been
thrown off, the whole Kingdom disturbed and made Feudatary to a Foreign
Authority, There is no Kingdom in Europe that has not some time or other tasted
the ill effects of it.
as in King John: In those times it played with its Batteries upon our Kings,
but since the Reformation it has turned the Engines of Malice upon the People,
and cause them to begin a War. In brief, Episcopacy being a Government of it
self, distinct from the supreme and lawful Authority, without any just Title or
pretensions (all which come within the verge of the Civil Magistrate) it must
needs (to support it self, for it cannot be idle) trouble the Waters that it
may have the better Fishing: If you say it is necessary for Maintaining
Religion, the Answer is, I have showed before that Religion needs no such
supports: And further, that the first Instituters of our Religion, never used
nor claimed any such Authority, but with the greatest submission yielded to the
Secular Power in all things. The Christian Religion tends to benefit mankind
with all good things temporal and eternal; it is perfect goodness and perfect
unity, and it is impossible a principle of Division should proceed from it: And
therefore, those Divisions in Commonwealths can proceed from no other cause
then the author of Division, who having at first separated from the Holy God,
makes it his business to fill all things with the effects of that Division. But
you will say, the Church under Christ and his Apostles was persecuted and
hated. The Answer is, that the Tempter made the first proffer, the Kingdoms of
the earth, and the Glories of them, to our Savior if he would fall down and
Worship him, which our Savior refusing to do and his Apostles; he was forced
to keep them till he met such as admiring the beguiling Temptation; would
submit to the Condition.

But Politicians will tell us, that all mutation in Government goes not
unaccompanied with danger; to which we may Answer: That this happens when
Circumstantials are changed for other Circumstantialls, as I may call them: As
the danger is nothing so much in taking away any thing in a Commonwealth that
is superfluous, but in the bringing in a thing superfluous. (Thus the taking
away the Ceremonies in Scotland at the Reformation, was without any great
noise, but the obtruding a new Lyturgy was not without Tumult and War; the like
we have seen in England, the pulling down of Abbeys and Monasteryes in the time
of Henry the 8th. and alienating the Lands of the Church, was done with safety
and silence enough: But the practices of bringing in new Ceremonies in the time
of Charles the first, was followed with a Bloody War, and wonderful change of
Affairs, whereas the contrary Acts were a kind of Stability to the Kings
Throne; and generally it may be observed throughout Europe in France, Germany,
and other places that the Reformation, and taking away what was superfluous in
the Government, was not only done peaceably, but also without the least change
of Government, only perhaps it was better secured thereby; whereas all attempts
of bringing in, or re-establishing those Futilous Ceremonies and Devices, were
always accompanied with long and Bloody Wars.) Or when a part of the
Government is changed, and something put into the room of it of a different
Nature. 2. Not when Circumstantials are abolished without addition or
Substitution of others. 3. Not when it is to the gust and liking of the
greatest part of the Nation. 4. Nor when it is recompensed with great advantage
to all the people. And besides, let us consider what Henry the 8th. has done in
this kind, being in far worse Circumstances, and in much more dangerous
Condition then we are: As first very Potent Adversaries abroad, the Pope, the
Emperor, the King of Spain. 1. This whole Nation had sat down a long time
under that belief which he opposed, and sucked it in with their milk, that
this change must needs appear monstrous and formidable; which would not only
bring a change upon the outward Condition of the Nation, but men's minds also:
They must change those thoughts and opinions which were almost as natural to
them, as the Air they Breathed in: Whereas in our Condition, there is nothing
to be feared upon this account from a Foreign Enemy: Neither shall we have
need oppose any Preconceptions, or row against the tide of the common
sentiments of the Nation: Add to this the benefit we may reap by it, whereas
the former Reformation was effected by a bare pre-eminence of Power and
Dominion: and so looked something like Tyranny. Farther, we want not instances
in the Churches of the Reformation that were in Bohemia and those parts, how a
Christian Church may most fully agree with a submission of all external
Jurisdiction to the Magistrate, and live in excellent Harmony with the
Commonwealth, of which they are Members, their Interest (not differing
therefrom as in the Episcopacy) but bound up in all things that concern the
external Government with it. Which is done, 1. By giving them a competent
maintenance equally divided to all. 2. Let them choose one of the most sober and
wise amongst them (for such a time) to have the Inspection over them and the
affairs of the Church. 3. In their Confistories or public Meetings, let a
Secular employed by the King be always present. 1. To see they meddle not with
State Affairs. 2. To provide that no damage redound to the Public by Heates
or Controversies. Thus shall we have a truer and more perfect Religion, a surer
foundation of Peace, a firmer Establishment of Government, and lasting support
of Unity and Commerce in all degrees amongst us, Now the Author all Blessings,
public and private, grant us Grace to open our Eyes, that we may see the
things that belong to our Peace, which is thus conjoined with the Honor of his
Name; and let him that is as great in power as goodness, strengthen our Hearts
and our Hands, that all of us may confer our assistance to the pulling down
that great Babylon of Rome, and this of our own Nation, which are as well a
dishonor to him, as the Obstacles of our Peace

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. line 31. read at another, p. 3. l. 24. r. substituted, p. 5. l. 18. r.
or thus: In, and l. 30. for And r. But, p. 6. l. 2. for And r. That p. 9. l. 7.
r. Recovery, p. 10. l. 19. r. care Disbursed, l. 12. r. employed, p. 13. l. 1.
r. is Right, p. 18. l. 1. r. things concerning, l. 16. r. Receding there with
p. 19. l. 3. r. last, abused, l. 24. r, be adhered to, l. 30. r. Wives and
Child, p. 24. l. 24. r. Feeing, p. 28. l. 13. r. clothed, l. 33. thereby men
may be somewhat, p. 29. l. 31. r. that they ask in Faith: Of which, if l. 33.
r. But thus, p. 30. l. 8. r. will not be, p. 33. l. 19. Leave, as, l. 20. r.
best title to take, l. 25. r. in the Prac. p. 40. l. 22. r. safety.


