ONE SHEET, Or, if you will A Winding Sheet For the Good Old Cause, IN ORDER TO
A Decent Funeral, in case of a second DEATH.

By W. P. Philopolites.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1659.

A Winding Sheet, etc.
I Would not have any to imagine that my design is to expose this sheet to
public view, as a Trophy of the pretended Good Old Cause its Resurrection;
neither would I have it do penance therein, lest the products of its Sanguine
Complexion, should prove worse then Menses Profluvium, and consequently leave
such an illutable stain, that instead of a Sheet, it should deservedly be
called Pannum menstrualem; but my intention, rather is to have it in a
readiness at the time of its Funeral Solemnities; for it is much suspected,
that though our new imagined Commonwealth may have Twins struggle in its Womb,
yet that it will at last only bring forth a single person (which single
product, (the Relics being more dangerous then Mola in utero) may well cause
the death of the Mother) for the ^ffecting of which there will not be wanting
such Mercenary Midwives, as will put to their helping hands, for the production
of any thing though never so monstrous. Now what greater Monster can be
produced, then a new Protector of another Family and Interest then what we have
already? But when this Tympanie of Pride and Ambition is swelled to the height,
we shall have the bowels of our Good Old Cause break into a Protectorship, or
some other title equivalent, and more Tyrannical. OF P. was as much for this
Good old Cause as our new Pretenders, till he saw an opportunity of settling
himself in the Saddle, and then the Keepers of the Liberty of E^gland might
lead his horse, but Death dismounting this Champion, his Son according to the
Humble Petition and Advice assumed his Fathers Room, to whom (as is obvious
enough) Addresses were made from most Counties and Corporations in England;
looking upon him as their lawful and supreme Govenour (the family of the
Stewarts being extirpated by these continual new Modellers,) But Astra regunt
homines, and M^^ being most predominant, at that very time when the sign was
in the stomach, down goes Richard without an aspect of Opposition. It is very
probable, that had his little finger been heavier then his fathers loins, he
had not so easily been heaved out; for Similis simili gaudet, and one oppressor
would help to maintain another, especially whilst their interrest run
parallel; but he seeming, to decline oppression, Oppressors decline him, and
make bold to practice that in their own Names, which they cannot have license
to act under the Protection of another, so that now every private Soldier
aspires to the dignity of Dux omnium malorum, and blushes not to affront such,
as maintain them and their blush colored Coats.

But it seems the days of mourning are over, and their black buttons, will no
longer put them in mind of their old Benefactor; the old King-killing Cause
standing in Competition with his posterity, so that now it is as bad to be a
Protectorian, as it was in the days of yore to be a Cavalier.

And thus are we emptied from Vessel to Vessel, and every day more and more
slaves to our own Countrymen, which is as base in us to suffer, as it is in them
to impose: And yet all must be done Machivilian like under a pretense of
Religion, and the liberties and privileges of the people, when as dalie
experience teaches us, that nothing less is intended, every plain Countryman,
being so far become a Politition, as that he can easily discern the face of
these fallacies in the glass of his own woes, and Geographer like will give you
a shrewd description of most of the highways, at Westmister, in which though
he never wrought or traveld, yet he has faith enough to believe, that they are
well mended in time of year of a long Parliment where there has not heretofore
wanted workmen, that would take more then ordinary pains in the Pit^ of other
men's p^cke^s, so that they might save their own soil.

And seeing they have an opportunity offered of making Hay whilst the sun
shines, let us go into the shade that have nothing else to do, but to sing
Solamen miseris etc. which doleful ditty is the only solace as I know now
extant, and is like to continue till we turn our swords into plough-shares,
and our spears into pruneing hooks; which is not like to come to pass, whilst
some of us are so prone to dissentions, that we must needs create disturbances
in the Nation, on purpose to render the sword useful and necessary: Whereas we
were in a fair way of safety, and might very well have put our selves into a
posture of defense according to our old Method, without that intolerable and
needless burden of a constant Army, which would be insupportable to any but
Asses backs.

But we see Customs in Martial affairs, as well as Law, are not so easily
broken, where uses are transferred ipso facto into possession, without help of
the Statute of 27. H 8, and a piece of a long Parliament Feoff^s in trust,
which are as Conduit pipes; I cannot say to lead the uses, because the uses
lead them; But however they serve to convey the sweet honey from the laborious
Be to the idle Drones, and if themselves get a taste by the way, it is only in
Correspondence to the Proverb, That it is an ill Cook that will not lick his own
fingers.

But no more of that least I should set them on a stomach, that never had an
appetite, for we have Taskmasters enough who will expect their tale of Bricks,
though they allow no straw, and will exact taxes, though they distract Trading;
who, so that they may make themselves great, care not how despicable, or to
what extremities they expose others: But sure such have little reason to
promise themselves safety, in their private Cabbins, when the Ship is in danger
of sinking, or to dream of a perpetuity in that, wherein others have had so
small a continuance, the Wheel of Fortune being apt to turn, when it stands
most steady: our late trans^ctions testify as much, and may tend to the
setting the right Spoke uppermost.

It Is an undeniable Maxim in Divinity; That whatsoever is of God shall stand:
And most true it is, Si Deus nobiscum quis contra nos! but yet he may suffer
many things which he does not allow, and then they must needs fall; the
pleasant success not deciphering the goodness of a cause, though it be never so
old: For I never thought good and old Correlatives, because I have often
observed that the older the worse, and we all know that a thing relinquished
and forsaken, being new swept and garnished, is fitter for the reception of
more Devils then ever.

I must really confess that I am so much, what I profess my self in the front
of this sheet (and I wish for quietness sake we were all of the same mind) that
for the welfare of my native Country, I could think a Republique good, so that
it did not degenerate from a Commonwealth, and a Protector better, so he parted
not with that like a fool, which some say (his father got like a knave, and a
King best of all, that title being most agreeable to our Laws and Nation) so he
were not a Tyrant and nullified all good Votes, with his Negative voice, or
stand so much upon his Prerogative till he loses his place: but from a
Democracy Libera nos Domine, that our Parliaments may be no longer over awed
with swords, like a dog with a Cudgel, nor take any more such strong Potions,
as so purge out the Members instead of the Humors, which must needs render them
an imperfect body, not worthy the name of the peoples Representatives, but
rather the stawking horses of some preticular persons, to catch their prey the
more easily.

We use to say of two evils the least is to be chosen: I wish our new created
Parliament may observe the same method, and seeing in this juncture of
aff^ires, they could do no less then what they have done: I hope that in their
progress they will make choice of Aristocracy, rather then an Oligarchy, that
an executive power (seeing it may not be in one) may be committed to a few of
the best, though not for the present of the strongest, and that such whose
breeding and parts makes them only guilty of multilequence, may not be
impeached by bones only rattling with Magnanimity, which have nothing in them
but the downright language of the Sword, whose Ignorance makes them despise
that which they understand not, and whose Covetousness makes them desire that
which others possess, who delight in nothing less than peace, because it is no
time for Plunder, and care not what confusions they introduce, so they produce
their profit and keep the Nation still (Monster like) with the Tail where the
Head should stand, which sight has cost every English man a vast deal more,
then many a Show that is not worth two pence: I speak not this to extenuate the
honor due to Martial Discipline, which may tend much to the glory of a Nation,
nor to derogate from the worthiness of such Martigons whose merits may
sufficiently manifest that my speech is not intended of them, though it be in
some sort directed to them, only to this end that it may the more conspicuously
appear that they have drawn the Sword for their Countries good, by being
willing to lay it down for their advantage; and as opportunity shall offer it
self, to send those Mercinaries under their command (that will fight on any
side for 6. d. odds) to their quondam employments, whose desire is only to make
a Trade of War, and to live upon the ruins of others, being not willing to be
accounted non-proficients under their late grand Tutor, who was so well
experienced in the Game at Put; that by the advantage of a few spots, cunningly
rendered the King an inconsiderable Card; and these illegitimate Births of that
corrupted Parent are grown to that maturity that they are ever ready to run the
hazard of a forcible entry, and in imitation of their old Gamester put honest
men out of doors, though they have nothing but a Knave to show fort. But we are
now at One and thirty, a Game that (without disparagement) may be played at a
Council Table, where if the Gamesters be not self-seekers, this miserable
cheated Nation may be the greater Winners.

But now to turn to our Good Old Cause, which being new come to Town, may
justly take exceptions, that I have been so long averse, and not exercised
toward her Ladyships those common civilities, that are usual to all Strangers,
as to solicit their stay, though they never desire it, etc. But I must beg an
excuse, not being bred up in the Academy of Complements; therefore not apt to
flatter, neither can I speak Ironically, though I have learned the Figure,
being more apt to Tom Tell-Troths Dialect, and to speak what I think. But to
tell you true, and which is a bad Omen, there are so many Anabaptists,
Familists, S^^kers, Quakers, Cum multis aliis, that rejoice at this new Ghuest,
that I thought my entertainment would not be acceptable; and another notorious
Company of Gotamites, which notwithstanding I had almost forgot, viz. our
Church Antagonists, that cannot endure the sight of a holy Sister in a
Steeple-house, but forsooth they must have a convenient meeting place, where
they may mingle together in Friendship to beget Reformations. These senseless
brood of Hypocrites, or (at best) blind Zealots, together withal the spurious
issue of Jesuitical impostors; bearing, as one says in another case) a sacred
hatred to whatever is comely and decorous, do in a perpetual scorn to it
distort all their Actions to the contrary Mode, applauding themselves only in
an unlimited liberty, and of doing whatever either their fond or foul
imaginations suggest to them. As for their outward garb, it is a cloak of
Religion, lined through with fair hypocrifie which Irishman like, is never off
in the basest employments; their Conscience they carry in their pockets loco
crumenae, which they can stretch upon all covetous occasions, even to the
Reception of all Revenues, that tend to the encouragement, either of learning
or Religion. But to hang by these Idiots, let us wish this Good Old Cause
better Favorites, that seeing there is such fair pretenses we may see some
performances equivalent, and that those in Authority may more regard the
Public than their private Commodity: that so the good People of this Nation
may be as much satisfied with the effects of this Change, as they are for the
present discontented. That a Learned and Godly Ministry may be countenanced: so
that Court and Church be not at once destroyed, nor the Universities be forced
to follow Whitehall, which (they say) is to be purchased by Jews, and I hope no
true Christians will meddle with the other.

To conclude, If this GOOD OLD CAUSE puts us not into a bad new Case and
Condition worse then ever, we might well forget the fifth of November, if the
greater deliverance, might justly obliterate the less.

FINIS.

